 i 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
  
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
           (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2024-25’ of the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
NINTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
AUGUST, 2025/ SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
09 

 ii 
 
CC&F NO. 189 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2024-25’ of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20 August, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
AUGUST, 2025/ SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 


 iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies  
 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 18th August, 2025. 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Third Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘Demands for Grants 2024 -25’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
 

 iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Subhash Barala 
23. Dr. Bhagwat Karad* 
24. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
25. Shri Naresh Bansal& 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
28. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
29. Shri Arun Singh 
30. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
31. Shri Tejveer Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3. Shri Nagendra Suman - Deputy Secretary  

 v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf 
this Ninth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Third Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2024 -25’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
2.  The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 16 th December, 2024. The Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers furnished their replies on 13 th March, 2025 indicating 
Action Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third 
Report. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their Sitting 
held on 18th August, 2025. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
18 August, 2025 CHAIRPERSON, 
27 Shravan, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 

 1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on ‘ Demands for Grants (2024 -25).’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
1.2  The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
16.12.2024. It contained 14 Observations / Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as follows: 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the                                                           
Government: 
Rec. Sl. No. 1,3,4,5, 9,11,12 and 13    
           (Total =08) 
           These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
Rec. Sl. No.8,10 and 14     
            (Total-03)                                         
 These may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report.  
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Rec. Sl. No. 2 and 6                                      
              (Total-02)     
These may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.  
 (iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are of interim nature: 

 2 
 
                 Rec. Sl. No. 7         
                (Total-01)  
    These may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and 
the final replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter IV for which interim reply has been furnished by the Ministry may be 
furnished to them at the earliest.  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further 
comments. 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 2 
  
1.5  Stressing the need to consider the feasibility of acquisition of mining lease 
with raw material rich countries and placing Fertilizer Sector back in the ‘Strategic 
Sector’, the Committee recommended as under: - 
        “The Committee are dismayed to find that the position of preferential 
allotment of mineral mines in favour of fertilizer PSUs for exploration of raw 
materials changed with the recent notification of the Ministry of Mines incorporating 
phosphatic and potassic minerals in the list of “Critical and Strategic Minerals” 
opening them for auction to maximize revenue for the State necessitating fertilizer 
companies to participate in the auction process for acquisition of any new mines.   
Intriguingly while F ertilizer Sector was placed in the ‘Non -Strategic Sector’ 
necessitating disinvestment of the Fertilizer PSUs, other  notified phosphatic and 
potassic minerals was placed in the list of “Critical and Strategic Minerals”. The 
Committee find this apparently contradictory. Keeping in view the historical role of 
Fertilizer PSUs in the production of fertilizers for the Country, the Committee desire 
that they may be given preference in the allotment of mineral mines.   The 
Department of Fertilizers should accordingly impress upon the Ministry of Mines for 
a preferential consideration of Fertilizer PSUs in auction of mines. The Committee 
further find that no significant progress has been made in signing mining lease 
agreements with the raw material rich countries for extraction for refining / 
manufacturing of fertilizers.   The Committee expect the Government to actively 

 3 
 
consider the feasibility of acquisition of mining lease with raw material rich 
Countries.  The Committee further stress on the utmost need of the hour for 
consideration of placing Fertilizer Sector back in the ‘ Strategic Sector’ giving due 
importance to the strategic role that the Sector plays in ensuring food security to 
the Nation.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.6  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“D/o Fertilizer has taken the matter with M/o Mines and M/o Mines has 
informed that  Glauconite, Phosphate and Potash were notified as `Critical and 
Strategic Minerals' under Part -D of First Schedule to the MMDR Act through the 
MMDR Amendment Act, 2023 with effect from 17.08.2023. For the 'Critical and 
Strategic Minerals', the Central Government is empowered to conduct their auction 
for grant of mineral concessions. The fertilizer minerals are critical for ensuring food 
security of the country and at present the demand for these minerals is being mostly 
met from imports. It was observed that many States were not notifying fertilizer 
mineral blocks for auction. Therefore, with an objective of increasing production of 
these minerals, the Central Government has placed fertilizer minerals under 'Critical 
and Strategic Minerals' category. As regards allotment of mines in favor of PSUs, 
Section 17A of the MMDR Act provides for reservation of areas in favor of PSUs. 
The said provision continues and is equally applicable for 'Critical and Strategic 
Minerals' as well. However, the reservation of any area in favor of a PSU depends 
on several factors such the capability of the PSU for mine development and the 
consent of the State Government for allocation of mine to PSU through reservation 
route. 
            A D.O. letter dated 24.03.2021 from the Hon’ble Minister (C&F) to Hon’ble 
Minister of Finance  was sent requesting for inclusion of “Fertilizer” among the 
strategic sector in the New Public Sector Enterprises Policy for Atmanirbhar Bharat. 
Further, the Department of Fertilizers vide DO letter dated 09.04.2022 also referred 
the matter to DIPAM for inclusion of Fertilizer sector in the Strategic Sector.  
In response, Secretary, DIPAM vide DO letter dated 19.04.2022 informed that while 
approving New PSE policy, Cabinet has considered the justification given by DIPAM 
for keeping the ‘Fertilizer’ as Non -Strategic Sector. The comments of DIPAM given 
in the Inter-Ministerial Consultation (Annexure-II of the Cabinet Note) is reproduced 
below: 

 4 
 
“There are many private fertilizer manufacturers in the country. CPSEs 
account for only 25% and 11% of urea and non -urea fertilizers respectively. 
Most of the CPSEs are running in losses and their continuation neither 
justifies fiscal prudence nor address the criteria applied for strategic sectors. 
Therefore, there is no justification for keeping the ‘Fertilizer’ sector in strategic 
sectors. In view of this, fertilizer has not been categorized as strategic sector. 
However, ‘in-principle’ approval from the CCEA for strategic disinvestment of 
a specific PSE will be obtained from time to time, on a case -to-case basis. 
The timing for specific transactions will, however, be contingent, inter alia, on 
the considerations of appropriate sequencing, sectoral trends, administrative 
feasibility, investors’ interest, etc.”  
Department of Fertilizers supports and facilitates Indian fertilizer companies 
for exploring the opportunities of entering into mining lease agreement with 
the raw material rich countries for extraction for refining / manufacturing of 
fertilizers.” 
    
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.7 One of the aspects of the Committee's recommendation dealt with 
securing mining lease agreements with raw material rich countries in order to 
attain self-sufficiency in the field of fertilizers. In this regard, the Department 
of Fertilizers have contended that the Department was supporting and 
facilitating Indian fertilizer companies in exploring opportunities for entering 
into mining lease agreements with raw material -rich countries for extraction, 
refining, and manufacturing of fertilizers.  However, the Committee finds that 
not much progress has been made in this direction. While India and Togolese 
fertilizer companies are reportedly finalizing a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) for the supply of Rock Phosphate to India and Rashtriya Chemicals and 
Fertilizers Limited (RCF) is exploring the possibility of sourcing the required 
grade of Rock Phosphate from Mauritania, much more needs to be done in 
terms of proactively exploring and securing long -term mining lease 
agreements directly with resource -rich countries. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation to impress upon the Government to support 
and facilitate the Indian Fertilizer Companies both public and private in their 

 5 
 
endeavors to obtain mining lease agreements with raw material rich countries 
rather than sub contractual agreements with foreign fertilizer companies. 
The other aspect of the recommendation laid emphasis on the 
importance of placing fertilizer sector in the ‘Strategic Sector’ giving due 
importance of its role in ensuring food security to the Nation.  In response, the 
Department have merely conveyed about the previous efforts made during the 
year 2022 and the communication by the Secretary DIPAM in April, 2022 about 
decision of the Cabinet on placing Fertilizers in the Non-Strategic Sector in the 
New Public Sector Enterprise (PSE) Policy  on the basis of justification made 
by DIPAM. The Committee express concern on the visible response of the 
Department of Fertilizer of simply communicating the efforts made and 
decisions taken previously without taking fresh initiative to place the concern 
of the Committee with the Government on the crucial role of the sector in the 
nation’s agricultural sustainability.  The delay in acknowledging strategic 
necessity undermines national preparedness in the face of global supply 
disruptions and escalating input costs  The Committee, therefore, stresses 
upon the need for placing the Fertilizer Sector in the 'Strategic Sector', in view 
of its pivotal role in ensuring food security of the Nation.  
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 6 
  
Commissioning of New Plants and Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme 
to boost Nano Urea Production  
 
1.9   Highlighting the need to boost the production of Nano Urea and other 
Nano-Fertilizers, the Committee recommended as under: - 
 
      “The Committee note that the production capacity of 27.62 crore bottles of 
nano urea by (07) Nano Urea Units may further be enhanced to 54.22 crore once 
12 (twelve) more plants slated for commissioning by 2025 -26 are completed.   
Further, Fertilizer PSU M/s Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF) and 
M/S National Fertilizer Limited (NFL) are due for commercial production of Nano 
Urea by December 2025 at Trombay Plant and Nangal, Punjab Plant 

 6 
 
subsequently.  The Committee appreciate the steps to boost Nano Urea 
production and hope that the Department will gear up their mechanism in the right 
perspective to achieve the time -lines set for completion of the projects and 
initiation of commercial production. The Committee are, however, disheartened to 
find that the Department does not currently administer any PLI Scheme despite the 
earlier recommendation of the Committee made in their 39th Report, 17thLok Sabha 
for implementation of a PLI Scheme for production of Nano Urea and other Nano -
Fertilizer for boosting production and availability of Nano Fertilizers.   The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation in this regard.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
1.10  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
“The Government of India is not directly involved in setting up of Nano Urea 
Plants. As of now, there is no PLI scheme administered by Department of 
Fertilizers for production of Nano Urea and other Nano -Fertilizer. However, 
Department of Fertilizers (DoF) is actively encouraging entrepreneurs to establish 
Nano Fertilizer Projects.” 
 
 OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.11  The Committee find that though the Government of India may not be 
directly involved in setting up of Nano Urea Plants, one of the prime function 
of the Department  of Fertilizers include planning, promotion and 
development of Fertilizer Industry. The  Department, therefore, cannot shy 
away from their responsibility. The Committee in their recommendation had  
firstly desired that the Department may work out a mechanism to achieve the 
time-lines set for completion of the ongoing Nano Urea Projects for timely 
initiation of commercial production and secondly, introduce a Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) for incentivizing production of Nano Urea and 
other Nano -Fertilizers for boosting production and  availability of Nano 
Fertilizers.  The Committee therefore are dismayed to note that the 
Department instead of giving assurance to persuade the Fertilizer 

 7 
 
Companies to complete their Nano Urea Plants and start production in time, 
have merely denied their involvement in setting up of Nano Urea Plants and 
also stated that  no PLI S cheme has been put in place for Nano Urea and 
other Nano Fertilizers. The Committee, therefore, takes a very strong view  
and reiterate their recommendation that the Department should persuade the 
Fertilizer Companies to finalize their Nano Fertilizer Projects as per their 
timelines and introduce a PLI Scheme for incentivizing production in the field 
of Nano Urea and other Nano-Fertilizers so as to boost production as well as 
attract investment in Nano Fertilizers by the Fertilizer Companies. 
  

 8 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Fertilizer Planning and vision  
  
2.1 The Committee observe that the Department of Fertilizers has the important 
mandate of achieving fertilizer security for sustainable agricultural growth of the 
nation. Statedly, the Mission of the Department is to ensure adequate and timely 
availability of quality fertilizers at affordable prices in each cropping season to the 
140 million farmers across the country through planned production, imports and 
timely distribution of fertilizers and attaining self sufficiency in urea production.   
The Committee find that admittedly a number of steps have been taken by the 
Department to promote growth of fertilizer industry viz. granting permissions to 
Fertilizer Companies for enhancing their manufacturing capacity; induction of new 
P & K Companies under Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Promotion of Potash under 
NBS regime with effect from 13.10.2021; Freight Subsidy on Single Super 
Phosphate (SSP) since kharif 2022; etc. The Committee also find that in order to 
ensure sufficiency of raw materials/intermediates and finished fertilizers the 
Government facilitates Indian fertilizer companies to sign agreements, MoUs and 
establish joint ventures with fertilizer companies in resource rich countries. 
Accordingly, the Department of Fertilizers have initiated interactions with 
representatives from various countries viz. Togo, Nauru, Russia, Belarus etc. to 
explore potential agreements for the procurement of raw materials at competitive 
prices. For instance, India and Togoiese fertilizer Companies are finalizing a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for supply of Rock Phosphate to 
India; Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF) is exploring the possibility 
of supply of required grade of Rock phosphate from Mauritania to India.  
The Committee observe that despite the laudable initiatives put in by the 
Government, the BE (2024 -25) of the Department have allocated Rs. 18,500.00 
Crore towards ‘Payment for Imported P & K Fertilizers and Rs.22,634.00 Crore 
towards ‘Payment for Import of Urea’ totaling to a huge amount of Rs.41,134 
Crore.  The Committee are, therefore, constrained to observe that much more 
concerted efforts from the Government is called for urgently to achieve their stated 
Mission of Self Sufficiency in the Fertilizer Se ctor.  To this end, the Committee 
impress upon the Department to review their Mission Plans holistically towards a 
stringent time bound achievement of their overall goal by putting in new Policies; 
tweaking their existing Policies; and corrective mechanisms to overcome extant 

 9 
 
constraints and challenges faced in this very important Sector which directly or 
indirectly impacts the whole population of the Country.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.2 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
 
“D/o Expenditure vide OM dated 01.02.2022 has apprised this Department 
that Cabinet has approved continuation of NBS scheme till 31.03.2026 or till 
further review. 
  
To reduce import dependence on fertilizer products, Government has taken 
measures to boost domestic production, Government has taken measures 
to increase the number of P&K fertilizers under NBS. As a result, the 
number of P&K fertilizers covered under NBS policy has increased from 22 
grades in 2021 to 28 grades at present with a view to  boost manufacturing 
and make country self -reliant in fertilizer production. The 06 new grades 
added are NPK 08 -21-21, NPK 09 -24-24, Potash Derived from 
Molasses(PDM) (0-0-14.5-0), NPK 11-30-14 fortified with Magnesium, Zinc, 
Boron and Sulphur, Urea -SSP Complex 5 -15-0-10 and SSP 0 -16-0-11 
fortified with Magnesium, Zinc and Boron. Freight Subsidy on SSP, which is 
an indigenously manufactured fertilizer, is applicable since Kharif, 2022 to 
promote SSP usage for providing Phosphatic or 'P' nutrient to the soil. 
During the year 2024, total 05 companies have been inducted under NBS 
Scheme as manufacturers of Urea-SSP, 04 units have been inducted under 
NBS as manufacturers of PDM manufacturers and 3 units have been 
inducted under NBS as SSP manufacturers. In case of SSP, the country is 
self reliant to meet demand of SSP fertilizer with nil imports. 
  
The Government had announced New Investment Policy (NIP) – 2012 on 
2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7th October, 2014 to facilitate 
fresh investment in the urea sector and to make India self -sufficient in the 
urea sector. Total 6 new urea units have been set up under NIP -2012 which 
includes 4 urea units set up through Joint Venture Companies (JVC) of 
nominated PSUs and 2 urea units set up by the private companies. The 
units set up through JVC are Ramagundam urea unit of Ramagundam 
Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd (RFCL) in Telangana and 3 urea units namely 
Gorakhpur, Sindri and Barauni of Hindustan Urvarak  & Rasayan Limited 
(HURL) in Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and Bihar, respectively. The units set 

 10 
 
up by private companies are Panagarh urea unit of Matix Fertilizers and 
Chemicals Ltd. (Matix) in West Bengal; and Gadepan -III urea unit of 
Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (CFCL) in Rajasthan. Each of these 
units has installed capacity of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonne per annum (LMTPA). 
These units are highly energy efficient as they are based on latest 
technology. Therefore, these units have together added urea production of 
76.2 LMTPA thereby total production urea production capacity (RAC) has 
increased from 207.54 LMTPA during 2014 -15 to 283.74 LMTPA in 2023 -
24.  
  
In addition, the Government also notified the New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 
on 25th May, 2015 for the existing 25 gas -based urea units with one of the 
objectives of maximizing indigenous urea production and achieving energy 
efficiency. The NUP -2015 has led to additional production of urea by 50.8 
LMTPA as compared to the production during 2014-15. The duration of New 
Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 is until 31st March 2025. Thereafter, the energy 
norms for urea manufacturing units  w.e.f. 1st April 2025 will be determined 
based on the recommendations of the Expert Group under NITI Aayog, 
which are currently under progress. 
  These steps together have facilitated the increase of Urea production from a 
level of 225 LMT per annum during 2014 -15 to a record Urea Production at 
314.07 LMT during 2023-24.” 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 3 
  
Examination of Demands for Grants  
2.3     The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers (DoF) had projected 
an outlay of Rs. 2,23,158.15 crore for the year 2024-25 which has been drastically 
reduced by 24.4% to Rs. 1,68,130.81 crore by the Ministry of Finance(MoF).  The 
reduction has been made in both Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Scheme and 
Urea Subsidy Scheme of the Department. Further, the Committee find that the BE 
allocation for Major Head 2401 Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy which includes 
payments for both indigenous and imported urea has been reduced by Rs. 40,302 
Crore than the projected requirement. For Major Head 2852 Urea Subsidy (MH 
2852-Industries) which include payment for both indigenous and imported urea, 
MDA subsidy, R&D for MDA, DBT in Fertilizer Subsidy, Subsidy support to Indian 
Shipping Companies etc has been reduced by 14,72.92 Crore.   The Committee 
has been apprised that the budget proposals sent to M/o Finance in September - 
October of every year is an estimate of the expenditure to be incurred on Fertilizer 

 11 
 
subsidy which depends on factors like previous year’s consumption, rate of gas 
and other commodities etc. Admittedly, actual requirement of funds is assessed 
based on actual consumption and rates of commodities and accordingly, 
additional funds are sought from M/o Finance during the FY, as and when required 
at RE stage or as supplementary grants. The Committee, however, find that 14% 
reduction in the budgetary allocation for 2024 -25 in comparison to the actual 
expenditure during 2023 -24 stands in contradiction to this submission of the 
Department. Keeping in view the importance of accurate budget estimates for 
expenditure of the Department and also the fact that curtailment of allocation will 
definitely impact the smooth execution of different subsidy schemes, the 
Committee stress that the Department  take adequate steps for more accurate 
budget estimates and also timely seeking of funds at RE stage so that the subsidy 
schemes meant for farmers do not suffer.   The Committee urge the Department to 
project its demands of fund requirement for payment of subsidies in respect of 
Urea and P&K fertilizers (both indigenous and imported fertilizers) at BE/RE stage 
in a more convincing manner to get adequate allocations to ensure timely payment 
of subsidy. 
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.4 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
 
           “The scheme -wise Budget Estimates(BE), Revised Estimates (RE), Final 
Allocation and Actual Expenditure(AE) in the scheme during 2023 -24 and 
204-25 are as under:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Schem
e 
2023-24 2024-25 
  BE RE Final 
Allocatio
n 
AE BE RE Actual 
upto 
07.03.202
5 
P&K  44000.00 60300 65200 65199.56 45000.00 52310 49881.24 
Urea 135063.1
8 
13212
1 
130221 130220.9
4 
122974.0
0 
122307.
5 
119428.72 
MDA         100.00 35 18.62 
  

 12 
 
The BE is finalized by the Budget Division, Ministry of Finance, after 
discussions with the Department of Fertilizers after taking into 
considerations the past trends and assessment on various parameters.  The 
Budget requirements for the year are subsequently reviewed by the Ministry 
of Finance at RE Stage in October -November based on actual expenditure 
and accordingly budget allocation is enhanced on re -assessment of various 
parameters. The Finance Ministry further review the budget requirements 
after the Revised Estimates and provide additional fund through 
supplementary grant, as evident from the table above.   Thus, the 
Department is getting adequate budget allocation to e nsure timely payment 
of subsidy”. 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 4 
  
Recoveries and Carry over Liabilities 
2.5.         The Committee are surprised to find recoveries to the tune of Rs. 3980 
Crore during the year 2023 -24 that have occurred due to expenditure incurred @ 
Rs. 4974/PMT on anticipated urea import. Admittedly,   recoveries cannot be 
avoided since import of Urea is controlled and all expenses have been incurred 
from the Subsidy head of account. The Committee also find placement of an 
unrealistic anticipated requirement of urea to the tune of 80 LMT to which the 
Department clarified that it was based on the month -wise assessment of inputs 
from Departments of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) of the State 
Governments. It has further been clarified that the actual import of Urea depends 
upon the gap of Demand and indigenous production.   The Committee observe 
apparent gaps in acquiring inputs, assessments and demand for imports vis-à-vis 
indigenous production figures and do not find the explanation rendered by the 
Department to be convincing. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
extant strategy for raising anticipated requirement for urea import based on inputs 
from the DA&WF and indigenous production capacity need a review for requisite 
restructuring to avoid excess imports and avoidable unnecessary burden on the 
exchequer. The Committee are, however, happy to note that there is no carry -over 
liability in respect of Indigenous Urea.   The carry -over liabilities in respect of 
Indigenous P&K and Imported P&K; and imported urea stood at Rs.3726 Crore 
and Rs. 881 Crore as on 01.04.2024 which may be due to balance claims that 
could not be settled due to various reasons.   The Committee desire that 
responsibility may be fixed for recurrent carry over liabilities and concrete 
measures may be introduced to ensure timely settlement of claims besides 
clearing all the pending carry-over liabilities within the current fiscal.    

 13 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.6 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
 
     “Carry over liabilities in respect of Indigenous P&K and Imported P&K as on 
01.04.2024 was Rs. 3726 Crore and for Imported Urea the figure was Rs. 
881 Crore. Most of the claims have been settled. The remaining ones are 
under process and are likely to be paid in the remaining period of the 
financial year.  
In most of the instances, complete bills with requisite documents from the 
fertilizers companies to process the claims were missing. As measures to 
ensure on time settlement of claims and residual bills, advisories have been 
issued to companies for timely submission of claims, complete in all 
respect. Deadlines are also mentioned for strict compliance and are being 
followed.        
  The detail of carry over liabilities in respect of indigenous Urea as on date is 
NIL. “ 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 5 
  
Continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme 
 
2.7.     The Committee note that a proposal for continuation of Urea Subsidy 
Scheme over the 15th Finance Commission Cycle, until 31st March 2025, was 
submitted for appraisal by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) which 
approved the Scheme for one year until March 2022. The Committee find that 
subsequently, the proposal to continue the Scheme till 31st March 2026 was 
however approved by CCEA only upto 31st March, 2025 causing a lot of anxiety 
among the farmers as well as urea suppliers. Keeping in view the essentiality of 
urea in meeting the food -grain production of the Country, the Committee observe 
that the Subsidy Scheme for urea need to be continued further.  The Committee 
were apprised that the proposal for extension of urea subsidy from 1st April, 2025 
to 31st March, 2026, was in Inter -Ministerial Consultation (IMC) Stage. The 
Committee desire that the process of issue of extension Orders of the Urea 
Subsidy Scheme may be expedited so that extension of the present Urea subsidy 
beyond 31st March, 2025 may be issued before the date. 

 14 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
2.8 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“Vide OM dated 15th January, 2025, a Note for Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) for Continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme beyond 
31.03.2025 for a period of one year w.e.f. 01.04.2025 to 31.03.2025 has 
been sent to Department of Expenditure for taking up the appraisal of the 
Scheme for its continuance from 01.04.2025 till 31.03.2026”. 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 9 
 DIRECT BENEFIT TRANSFER (DBT) 
2.9         The Committee find that the Department has been implementing DBT in 
fertilizers on PAN India basis since 2018 which entails 100 percent payment of 
subsidy to fertilizer manufacturing companies on the basis of actual sales through 
POS machines by the retailer to the beneficiary.   The Committee, however, find it 
strange that buyer identification is established only through Adhaar authentication 
on ‘no denial basis’ and therefore the actual beneficiary is not defined.   
Furthermore, each beneficiary is authorized a quota of 50 bags per month 
obviating scope for leakage of fertilizers especially urea hands for hoarding, black -
marketing and for other industrial purposes such as resin/ adhesives, 
plastic/foams, textile/leather industry, paper/pulp industry etc. The Committee find 
that apparently this lacuna not only stands in the way of bringing down the burden 
of urea subsidy on the exchequer, but also poses as a major factor behind 
demand and supply gaps of Urea or other NPK fertilizers sold through PoS.   The 
Committee, therefore, appreciates the steps taken to explore possibility of using 
the PM -KISAN database which culminated from a suggestion from DA&FW to 
implement a pilot Direct Cash Transfer project in selected Districts based on their 
Data on Farmers' Registration as maintained by them. The DoF has asked 
DA&FW to develop a module for entitlement using land, cropping pattern, soil 
health data of the farmer during July, 2024. The Committee are also of the 
considered view that the drawbacks of the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) system 
viz network issues faced during Aadhar based authentication in hilly and remote 
areas leading to delays in disbursement of DBT should be addressed. To the end, 
the Committee desire that necessary changes designed to ensure percolation of 
the benefit direct to farmers without undue delays and harassment in the process.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 15 
 
2.10 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
 
“Fertilizers are declared as an essential commodity under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and notified under Fertilizer Control Order, 1985. 
State Governments are empowered to take action against persons involved 
in black -marketing, hoarding and smuggling as per provisions of EC Act. 
Any complaint received at Department of Fertilizers level regarding black 
marketing/over-pricing of fertilizers is sent to concerned State Government 
to take appropriate action under Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and 
Fertilizer Control Order, 1985.  
 The Department has not received any complaint from any State 
Government regarding network issues faced during Aadhaar based 
authentication in Hilly and Remote areas.  
In the beginning, when DBT in fertilizers was implemented, there was issue 
of Aadhaar implementation in some areas. Therefore, as per the provisions 
of Aadhar Act, non -Aadhaar sale via EPIC (Electors Photo Identity Card) 
and Kisan Credit Card (KCC) was considered for identity of farmers to 
smooth the process of sale of fertilizers under DBT project in the ca ses of 
J&K and Assam where Aadhar was not available. Gradually, as informed by 
the Cabinet Secretariat vide DO dated 05.10.2023, Aadhar saturation for 
adult population was estimated at 100%.  
Aadhaar based DBT system enables accurate, real -time and cost -effective 
identification, authentication and de -duplication of beneficiaries with the 
robust UIDAI system in place. Department of Fertilizers has enabled 100% 
Aadhar based authentication of beneficiaries  w.e.f. 01.01.2024 as per the 
instructions of DBT Mission, Cabinet Secretariat. Beneficiaries are being 
identified based on biometric authentication as well as OTP based Aadhar 
authentication. This helps in removing delays and harassment (if any) in the 
process of percolation of benefits of subsidized fertilizers to the farmers”. 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 11 
  
2.11       The Committee was apprised that the reduction in imports of fertilizers 
was to be attributed to geopolitical reasons and cost parameters.   The Committee 
feel that fertilizer shortage caused by external supply shocks warrants a deeper 
review of the existing subsidies and pricing policy. For instance the Committee find 

 16 
 
price cap of ₹27,000, coupled with an additional subsidy of ₹21,911, has rendered 
imports unviable as the actual landing cost of importing DAP reportedly exceeds 
the combined amount of the maximum retail price (MRP) and the subsidy. The 
Committee, therefore, observe that the existing pricing and subsidy policies are 
apparently prone to external shocks and market inefficiencies often leading to 
acute shortages of DAP and other essential fertilizers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend a thorough relook into the existing pricing and subsidy policies of 
fertilizers so that the subsidy benefits to farmers do not hinder the smooth supply 
of fertilizers. Notably, reforms in the pricing and subsidy policies should strive to 
increase domestic availability via less restrictive imports, reduction in diversion, 
increased production efficiency, and reduced overuse of urea.   To this extent, the 
Committee desire that the recommendation given in the Economic Survey 2015 -16 
on increasing domestic availability via less restrictive imports (“decanalisation”) 
and providing benefits directly to farmers using JAM ((Jan Dhan Aadhaar Mobile) 
or similar mechanisms where the subsidy benefits are directly provided to the 
farmers may also be considered so as to ensure that any mechanism providing 
direct benefits to farmers is inclusive and accessible to all farmers.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.12 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under  
“Government has implemented Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy w.e.f. 
1.4.2010. Under the policy, a fixed amount of subsidy, decided on annual/bi-
annual basis, is provided to manufacturer / importer on subsidized P&K 
fertilizers depending on their nutrient content i.e. Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus 
(P), Potassium (K) and Sulphur (S) to improve availability of fertilizers to 
farmers. Import of P&K fertilizers is decontrolled and companies are free to 
import / produce fertilizer raw materials, intermediaries and finished 
fertilizers as per their business dynamics. In view of price volatility in 
international prices of key fertilizers and raw materials, the Government has 
subsumed fluctuations, if any, while fixing NBS rates for P&K fertilizers bi -
annually.    
In wake of recent geopolitical crisis which led to major disruption in supply 
of fertilizers, pro -active steps were taken in Kharif 2024 to ensure smooth 
availability of P&K fertilizers  to the farmers. In July 2024,  the Government 
took immediate measures to ensure regular imports through a one -time 
special package on DAP beyond the NBS rates for the period from 
01.04.2024 till 31.12.2024 @ 3,500 per MT which has now been extended 

 17 
 
till 31.03.2025 to ensure sustainable availability of DAP at affordable price 
to the farmers. 
  
 The Government had announced New Investment Policy (NIP) – 2012 on 
2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7th October, 2014 to facilitate 
fresh investment in the urea sector and to make India self -sufficient in the 
urea sector. Total 6 new urea units have been set up under NIP -2012 which 
includes 4 urea units set up through Joint Venture Companies (JVC) of 
nominated PSUs and 2 urea units set up by the private companies. The 
units set up through JVC are Ramagundam urea unit of Ramagundam 
Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd (RFCL) in Telangana and 3 urea units namely 
Gorakhpur, Sindri and Barauni of Hindustan Urvarak  & Rasayan Limited 
(HURL) in Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and Bihar, respectively. The units set 
up by private companies are Panagarh urea unit of Matix Fertilizers and 
Chemicals Ltd. (Matix) in West Bengal; and Gadepan -III urea unit of 
Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (CFCL) in Rajasthan. Each of these 
units has installed capacity of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonne per annum (LMTPA). 
These units are highly energy efficient as they are based on latest 
technology. Therefore, these units have together added urea production of 
76.2 LMTPA thereby total production urea production capacity (RAC) has 
increased from 207.54 LMTPA during 2014 -15 to 283.74 LMTPA in 2023 -
24.  
  
In addition, the Government also notified the New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 
on 25th May, 2015 for the existing 25 gas -based urea units with one of the 
objectives of maximizing indigenous urea production and achieving energy 
efficiency. The NUP -2015 has led to additional production of urea by 50.8 
LMTPA as compared to the production during 2014-15. The duration of New 
Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 is until 31st March 2025. Thereafter, the energy 
norms for urea manufacturing units  w.e.f. 1st April 2025 will be determined 
based on the recommendations of the Expert Group under NITI Aayog, 
which are currently under consideration. 
 These steps together have facilitated the increase of Urea production from 
a level of 225 LMT per annum during 2014 -15 to a record Urea Production 
at 314.07 LMT during 2023-24. 
  
Fertilizer is declared as an essential commodity and is notified under 
Fertilizer Control Order, 1985 and Fertilizer (Movement Control) Order, 
1973. State Governments are adequately empowered under FCO to stop 
diversion of fertilizers for non -agriculture purposes and to take punitive 

 18 
 
action against any person / Fertilizer company involved in black 
marketing/smuggling/diversion of fertilizers violating the provisions of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Fertilizer Control Order 1985(FCO).   
 
Any complaint received at Department of Fertilizer level regarding 
diversion of urea    is sent to concerned State government, to take 
appropriate action under Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Fertilizer 
Control Order, 1985. 
  
Department of Fertilizers (DoF) is engaged with Department of Agriculture 
and Farmer Welfare (DA & FW) to integrate the Farmers' data with iFMS.   
It has been agreed by DA&FW that Agristack will share the available data 
with DoF to facilitate integration between Agristack and iFMS data sets.   
Integration of the farmers data through Agristack with iFMS is dependent 
upon the timely sharing of data by DA & FW”.  
  
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 12 
 
 Tax variation on Raw materials/ Intermediates and Finished Fertilizers 
2.13       The Committee are surprised to note that there appears to be a big 
variation in the GST levied on two raw materials used in production of fertilizer 
products.  While all the other raw materials required in production attract 5% GST, 
Ammonia and Sulphuric Acid attract 18 % GST.   The Committee find that 
Ammonia and Natural Gas are the major inputs required in production of Urea.   
Sulphuric Acid is the key ingredient in production of Ammonium Sulphate;   Single 
Superphosphate and Triple Supper phosphate are essential for crop growth and 
are widely used in agriculture. Keeping in view the wide usage of these two 
essential raw materials in the fertilizer industry, the Committee desire that the 
Department to take appropriate action to bring down their GST rates to 5% which 
will in turn bring down input cost and give relief to the fertilizer industries, farmers 
and agricultural sector as a whole. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.14 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under  
“D/o Fertilizer has taken up the matter with D/o Revenue for taking 
appropriate action with regard to tax variation on raw 
materials/Intermediates and finished fertilizers”.  

 19 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 13 
 Reduce Dependency on Imported Inputs 
2.15       The Committee find that on the issue of import dependence on the raw -
materials used in the Fertilizer sector, the Department admitted to the fact that the 
Urea plants require hugely imported natural gas both as a feedstock and fuel. The 
Committee note that India has vast coal reserves including over one billion tonns 
of coal which could be utilized through coal gasification —a process that 
transforms coal into syngas. The Committee desire that feasibility of using this 
versatile gas to replace imported natural gas can be explored for a sustainable 
solution for fertilizer production industry. The Committee find that the Talcher 
project remains one of the pioneering example of using coal gasification to 
produce urea which has the potential to address the challenges of gas imports. 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that this technology can be a model for 
scaling up other urea, DAP, and NPK projects, helping make the sector more self -
reliant (Atmanirbhar). The Committee is of the view that Talcher should be 
leveraged as a pilot for further technology upgrades, ensuring long -term cost 
efficiency and energy security.   The Committee recommend that the Talcher 
Project execution may be expedited with strict time -lines and regular progress 
review. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.16 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under  
“Coal gasification technology is the process of converting Coal to produce 
syngas- a mixture consisting primarily of carbon monoxide (CO), Hydrogen 
(H2). The syngas also contains some amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) and 
methane (CH4). 
  
The carbon monoxide is ultimately converted to carbon dioxide(CO2) in 
synthesis section and exported for use in Urea Production. In the ammonia 
synthesis, the hydrogen reacts in the presence of a catalyst with nitrogen, 
generated from the air separation unit, to form ammonia. 
  
For manufacture of DAP/NPK, major raw materials required are Ammonia, 
Phosphoric acid and Muriate of Potash (MoP) as per the NPK grade to be 

 20 
 
produced. The Ammonia required for manufacture of new DAP/NPK plants 
can be produced by setting up Coal gasification unit along with Air 
separation unit. The other raw materials such as  phosphoric acid and 
Muriate of Potash shall have to be imported as these are not available 
domestically. 
  
It may be noted that at this stage the Talcher project is still under execution 
and the process is yet to be commercially established. Also, Indian Coal has 
higher ash content and poses challenges in the Coal gasification process. 
As a result, it is opined that Indian Coal shall have to be blended with either 
imported coal or petroleum Coke (available from refineries) to bring down 
the ash content. 
  
Government mandated revival of Talcher unit of M/s FCIL, located in Angul 
district, Odisha. Accordingly, a Joint Venture Company named M/s. Talcher 
Fertilizers Ltd. (TFL) has been incorporated for setting up Coal Gasification -
based Ammonia Urea Plant of 12.7 LMTPA capacity, which is first of its kind 
in India. 
  
The proposed TFL project has been envisaged for utilizing the abundantly 
available domestic coal for Urea production as it has emerged as the best 
possible option since the country is endowed with rich reserves of coal. On 
completion of the project, the production of urea in the country will increase 
by 12.7 LMTPA and will assist in maximizing the indigenous production of 
Urea and provide security in feedstock supply as coal would be sourced 
domestically and providing alternate route of urea production to diversify the 
feedstock risk in the sector.  
  
       The project has been affected due to Covid -19 Pandemic and subsequent 
disruptions. The project has further been impacted due to the pending 
issues of engineering, procurement, erection of equipment and deployment 
of manpower by M/s WECL. The overall progress as on 31 stDecember, 
2024 is 64.43 %. 
  
The Department is continuously monitoring the progress of TFL project on 
regular basis.  However from January, 2025 as a result of concerted efforts 
most of the challenges have been successfully resolved and the project is 
achieving acceleration”.  
 
  

 21 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 8 
Availability of Drones for Application of Nano-Fertilizers  
3.1         The Committee find that though the Scheme for distribution of 10 drones 
per village in more than 6 lakh villages of the Country pertains to the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, the Namo Drone Didi (NDD) Scheme where target for provision of 
15,000 drones to women members of Self Help Groups (SHGs) during 2023 -24 to 
2025-26, is being implemented by the DoF. Admittedly, the drone distribution is 
presently at the initial stage and as on 11 th March, 2024 only 1094 drones have 
been distributed to women members of SHGs by the Fertilizer Companies.   
Further, Government of India has decided to distribute 3090 drones in the FY 
2024-25 and remaining drones by the end of FY 2025 -26 to the women members 
of SHGs.  Keeping in view that availability of drones for spraying of nano fertilizers 
is essential for promotion of its use over conventional urea, the Committee stress 
upon the Department of Fertilizers to oversee the programme of drone distribution 
in totality and ensure that necessary coordination is made with the concerned 
agencies including the Ministry of Civil Aviation . The Committee further desire that 
efforts should be made for time bound achievements of targets fixed under the 
NDD Scheme. The Committee also desire Fertilizer PSUs be encouraged to 
provide funds for more Drone distribution from their Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) Fund.   The Committee, further recommend that the 
Department of Fertilizers should explore new and more affordable ways for 
spraying of nano fertilizers  in agricultural fields so that  small and marginal farmers 
can also accrue the benefits of nano-technology. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.2 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under  
“The ‘Namo Drone Didi Scheme’ is being administered by the Department 
of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare(DA&FW). DA&FW has constituted an 
Inter-Departmental Committee (later renamed as Implementation and 
Monitoring Committee of the Central Sector Scheme – ‘NAMO DRONE 
DIDI’) under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, D/o. Rural 

 22 
 
Development, having representation from all Stakeholder 
Ministries/Departments including Department of Fertilizers. 
            As the Scheme is being administered by DA&FW, the responsibility for 
monitoring the scheme/co -ordination with concerned agencies and time 
bound achievement of the targets rest with them. 
The Fertilizer companies only provided the initial supply of 1094 drones to 
women members of SHGs.   The provision of remaining  drones is being 
done by DA&FW. 
At present, the usage of drones for spraying nano fertilizers has been 
observed to be the most efficient and effective option available. Drones 
ensure precise application, reduce wastage, and enhance productivity by 
covering larger areas in less time compared to traditional methods. Fertilizer 
companies have informed that drones enhance safety by minimizing risks 
from wild animals and hazardous field conditions.   Spraying of Nano 
fertilizers through drones has emerged as a cost effective method. During 
the Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra, farmers had shown interest in adopting this 
new technology of spraying”. 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 10 
  
Di-Ammonium Phosphate (DAP) Demand – Supply Gap 
  
3.3.       The Committee are concerned to note the issue of the DAP crisis 
highlighted in the electronic media during November, 2024 reportedly compelling 
farmers to shell out Rs. 250 to Rs. 350/ - beyond the MRP of Rs. 1350/50 Kg bag. 
The Department, however, contended that availability of DAP in the Country 
remained comfortable during the month of October 2024. Against the monthly 
requirement of 18.69 LMT of DAP assessed by Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare, the availability of DAP was 22.88 LMT. Further, the sales of DAP 
during October 2024 was only 11.48 LMT. The Committee observe that low sales 
of DAP itself, point towards veracity of the news report indicating that despite 
availability of stock, farmers faced problems in procurement.   The Committee, 
therefore, strongly emphasize that the Department should review their supply and 
distribution mechanisms to ensure that the fertilizers reach at the allocated 
destinations in all the Districts of the States/UTs well I advance and not less than 
15 days before the start of the Rabi and Kharif seasons. The Committee desire 
that supplies be spruced in the cropping seasons through buffer stock in States 
itself to obviate scope for such incidents in future.  

 23 
 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.4 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under  
“India is dependent on imports of finished fertilizers such as Urea, DAP, 
MOP and raw materials like Rock Phosphate, Phosphoric Acid & Natural 
Gas for domestic production of Urea, DAP, NPK fertilizers. There have been 
challenges because of the geo political situation, viz. Red Sea crisis, due to 
which DAP and raw material shipments were rerouted via the Cape of Good 
Hope, resulting in longer voyage times and higher freight costs. Further, 
decline in DAP imports from certain sources and high volatility in prices also 
caused disruptions in the supply chain of fertilizers.  In addition to it, there 
was reduction in exports to India from the major suppliers in the region.   
  
 Despite these delays, Government of India has ensured continuous supply 
of Di-Ammonium Phosphate (DAP) in the country as per the requirement of 
these States. Further, the distribution of fertilizers within the State is done 
by the respective State Government. Any complaints regarding district -wise 
shortage raised by farmers are to be addressed by respective State 
Governments”. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 14 
  
 Focus on Revival and Modernization of Fertilizer Plants:  
  
3.5       The Committee are pained to note that there is no proposal under 
consideration of the Government for revival of Durgapur and Haldia units of HFCL 
which are under handing over/surrender to Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port, 
Kolkata. The Committee find that essential resources like Damodar Valley 
Corporation, Eastern Coalfields Limited, and Bharat Coking Coal Limited are in 
close proximity to these units besides the logistical advantage of Shyama Prasad 
Mukherjee Port Trust and low -cost land availability from the State Government. 
The Committee are of the view that the revival of the Durgapur and Haldia plants 
through coal gasification offers a strategic solution to reduce India’s dependency 
on imported natural gas, significantly easing the burden on the exchequer. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department must reassess 
the potential for reviving the Durgapur and Haldia units with updated feasibility 

 24 
 
studies, given their strategic importance. The Committee feel that leveraging the 
technology being considered for the Talcher project revival, Durgapur and Haldia 
plants can utilize the abundant local coal reserves to produce syngas, serving as a 
sustainable feedstock for manufacturing urea, DAP, and NPK fertilizers. The 
Committee, therefore, observe that reviving these plants not only aligns with the 
vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat but also ensures cost efficiency, energy security, and 
regional economic development. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.6 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under  
“The Government of India mandated revival of Ramagundam (Telangana), 
Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh), Sindri (Jharkhand) and Talcher (Odisha) units 
of Fertilizer Corporation of India and Barauni (Bihar) unit of Hindustan 
Fertilizer Corporation Ltd. through Joint Venture Company of nominated 
PSUs for setting up new ammonia -urea plants of 12.7 LMTPA capacity 
each. The Ramagundam, Gorakhpur, Barauni and Sindri units have been 
commissioned and started urea production. These four plants have added 
50.8 LMT of domestic production capacity in the country. Talcher unit isin 
execution phase. After operationalization of Talcher unit, a total of 63.5 
LMTper annum of domestic production would be added leading to reduction 
of equivalent amount of import of urea in the country.  In addition, there is a 
budget announcement in the budget of 2025 -26 to set up a new fertilizer 
plant at Namrup, Assam with 12.7 LMTPA capacity. 
 
  Any future revival of Durgapur  and Haldia plant will depend upon the 
decision at appropriate level  taking all relevant factors into consideration in 
view of the gap between domestic production and total demand of urea 
which is at present (2024 -2025) is approximately 364.01 LMT. Also, the 
total consumption of Urea is 345.86 LMT till January, 2025”. 
 
 
 
  

 25 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 2 
  
4.1   The Committee are dismayed to find that the position of preferential allotment 
of mineral mines in favour of fertilizer PSUs for exploration of raw materials 
changed with the recent notification of the Ministry of Mines incorporating 
phosphatic and potassic minerals in the list of “Critical and Strategic Minerals” 
opening them for auction to maximize revenue for the State necessitating fertilizer 
companies to participate in the auction process for acquisition of any new mines.   
Intriguingly while Fertilizer Sector was placed in the ‘Non -Strategic Sector’ 
necessitating disinvestment of the Fertilizer PSUs,   other notified phosphatic and 
potassic minerals was placed in the list of “Critical and Strategic Minerals”. The 
Committee find this apparently contradictory. Keeping in view the historical role of 
Fertilizer PSUs in the production of fertilizers for the Country, the Committee desire 
that they may be given preference in the allotment of mineral mines.   The 
Department of Fertilizers should accordingly impress upon the Ministry of Mines   
for a preferential consideration of Fertilizer PSUs in auction of mines. The 
Committee further find that no significant progress has been made in signing 
mining lease agreements with the raw material rich countries for extraction for 
refining / manufacturing of fertilizers.   The Committee expect the Government to 
actively consider the feasibility of acquisition of mining lease with raw material rich 
Countries.  The Committee further stress on the utmost  need of the hour for 
consideration of  placing Fertilizer Sector back in the ‘Strategic   Sector’ giving due 
importance to the strategic role that the Sector plays in ensuring food security to 
the Nation. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under  

 26 
 
“D/o Fertilizer has taken the matter with M/o Mines and M/o Mines has 
informed that  Glauconite, Phosphate and Potash were notified as `Critical and 
Strategic Minerals' under Part-D of First Schedule to the MMDR Act through 
the MMDR Amendment Act, 2023 with effect from 17.08.2023. For the 
'Critical and Strategic Minerals', the Central Government is empowered to 
conduct their auction for grant of mineral concessions. The fertilizer minerals 
are critical for ensuring food security of the country and at present the 
demand for these minerals is being mostly met from imports. It was observed 
that many States were not notifying fertilizer mineral blocks for auction. 
Therefore, with an objective of increasing production of these minerals, the 
Central Government has placed fertilizer minerals under 'Critical and 
Strategic Minerals' category. As regards allotment of mines in favor of PSUs, 
Section 17A of the MMDR Act provides for reservation of areas in favor of 
PSUs. The said provision continues and is equally applicable for 'Critical and 
Strategic Minerals' as well. However, the reservation of any area in favor of 
a PSU depends on several factors such the capability of the PSU for mine 
development and the consent of the State Government for allocation of mine to 
PSU through reservation route. 
            A D.O. letter dated 24.03.2021 from the Hon’ble Minister (C&F) to Hon’ble 
Minister of Finance was sent requesting for inclusion of “Fertilizer” among the 
strategic sector in the New Public Sector Enterprises Policy for Atmanirbhar  
Bharat. Further, the Department of Fertilizers vide DO letter dated 09.04.2022 
also referred the matter to DIPAM for inclusion of Fertilizer sector in the 
Strategic Sector.  
In response, Secretary, DIPAM vide DO letter dated 19.04.2022 informed that 
while approving New PSE policy, Cabinet has considered the justification 
given by DIPAM for keeping the ‘Fertilizer’ as Non -Strategic Sector. The 
comments of DIPAM given in the Inter -Ministerial Consultation (Annexure-II 
of the Cabinet Note) is reproduced below: 
“There are many private fertilizer manufacturers in the country. CPSEs 
account for only 25% and 11% of urea and non -urea fertilizers respectively. 
Most of the CPSEs are running in losses and their continuation neither 
justifies fiscal prudence nor address the criteria applied for strategic sectors. 
Therefore, there is no justification for keeping the ‘Fertilizer’ sector in strategic 
sectors. In view of this, fertilizer has not been categorized as strategic sector. 
However, ‘in-principle’ approval from the CCEA for strategic disinvestment of 
a specific PSE will be obtained from time to time, on a case -to-case basis. 
The timing for specific transactions will, however, be contingent, inter alia, on 

 27 
 
the considerations of appropriate sequencing, sectoral trends, administrative 
feasibility, investors’ interest, etc.”  
Department of Fertilizers supports and facilitates Indian fertilizer companies 
for exploring the opportunities of entering into mining lease agreement with 
the raw material rich countries for extraction for refining  / manufacturing of 
fertilizers”. 
    
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 6 
  
Commissioning of New Plants and Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme 
to boost Nano Urea Production  
 
4.3         The Committee note that the production capacity of 27.62 crore bottles of 
nano urea by (07) Nano  Urea Units may further be enhanced to 54.22 crore once 
12 (twelve) more plants slated for commissioning by 2025 -26 are completed.   
Further, Fertilizer PSU M/s Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF) and 
M/S National Fertilizer Limited (NFL) are due for commercial production of Nano 
Urea by December 2025 at Trombay Plant and Nangal, Punjab Plant 
subsequently.  The Committee appreciate the steps to boost Nano Urea 
production and hope that the Department will gear up their mechanism in the right 
perspective to achieve the time -lines set for completion of the projects and 
initiation of commercial production. The Committee are, however, disheartened to 
find that the Department does not currently administer any PLI Scheme despite the 
earlier recommendation of the Committee made in their 39th Report, 17thLok Sabha 
for implementation of a PLI Scheme for production of Nano Urea and other Nano -
Fertilizer for boosting production and availability of Nano Fertilizers.   The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
4.4 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under  

 28 
 
“The Government of India is not directly involved in setting up of Nano Urea 
Plants. As of now, there is no PLI scheme administered by Department of 
Fertilizers for production of Nano Urea and other Nano -Fertilizer. However, 
Department of Fertilizers (DoF) is actively encouraging entrepreneurs to 
establish Nano Fertilizer Projects. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

 29 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No. 7 
  
Dedicated funds for R&D in Nano-Technology for Nano-Fertilizer Efficacy 
augmentation 
 
5.1       The Committee are of the firm opinion that nano -technology remains a 
promising field for developing innovative nano fertilizers to address the challenge 
of low or declining nutrient use efficiency (NUE) while minimizing the 
environmental footprint.   The Committee had, therefore, in their 39 th Report of 
17thLok Sabha recommended for allocation of dedicated funds for nanotechnology 
research in fertilizer sector.   The Committee find that while Rs.20 crore has been 
allocated in BE 2024 -25 for R&D for MDA, there appears to be no dedicated R&D 
Fund allocation specifically for Nano Technology in Fertilizer Sector.   While the 
Committee acknowledged the ongoing research efforts in this critical Sector by 
way of steps initiated on assessing the efficacy of the Nano Urea through research 
and field trials done by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR). 
The Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare (DA&FW) approves the product 
under Fertilizer Control Order (FCO) -1985 on the basis of the findings. The 
Committee are happy to note that the Department has assigned a study titled 
‘Effect of Nano Urea and DAP and popularization of its use in crop production’ to 
ICAR which will evaluate the impact of Nano Urea and DAP on crop growth, soil 
health, and nutrient uptake across various agro -climatic zones in India. 
Furthermore, another study has been assigned to the National Productivity Council 
(NPC) for undertaking the study of Nano Urea to evaluate efficacy.   The 
Committee hope the new studies will provide insights on the effects of the nano 
fertilizers on crop growth, its nutrient absorption in various agro -climatic zones in 
India, its utility and impact in comparison to conventional Urea so as to enable 
policy makers to come out with new strategies to popularize use of Nano Urea 
over convention urea amongst the farmers. The Committee desire that the findings 
of both the Studies may be furnished to the Committee as and when the Reports 
and Findings on these Studies are complete.   Notwithstanding these studies, the 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation for dedicated funds for R&D in 
Nano-Technology in Fertilizer Sector.   The Committee may be apprised of action 
taken in this regard.   
  

 30 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
5.2 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under  
“In context of the findings of the study of the nanotechnology research in 
fertilizer sector, the Department will ensure that the reports and findings 
from both studies would be shared with the Committee as soon as they are 
finalized. 
Furthermore, it may be mentioned that Fertilizer companies in India are 
driving significant R&D initiatives through self -funded efforts, particularly in 
the development and production of Nano Fertilizers. IFFCO has established 
a Nano DAP plant at Kalol with a capacity of 6 crore bottles (500 ml each) 
annually and plans two more plants at Paradeep and Kandla with similar 
capacities. Coromondal International Limited (CIL) has also set up a Nano 
DAP plant in Kakinada (70 lakh bottles of 1 litre each annually). IFFCO is 
also advancing Nano Zinc, and Nano Copper, with proposals reviewed and 
recommended under clause 20(D) of the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO). 
These investments demonstrate the fertilizer industry's commitment to 
innovation and sustainability through self -funded efforts in developing and 
producing Nano Fertilizers”. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
18 August, 2025 CHAIRPERSON, 
27 Shravan, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
 

 31 
 
 
APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-25) 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th August, 202 5 from 1 500 hrs.  
to 1700 hrs. in the Committee Room ‘2’, EPHA, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
 
     SHRI AZAD KIRTI JHA -    CHAIRPERSON 
 
     MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Shri Praveen Patel  
9. Dr. Sambit Patra  
10. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
11. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
12. Shri Eatala Rajender 
13. Shri Nalin Soren 
14. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Subhash Barala 
16. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
17. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
18. Shri Naresh Bansal 
19. Shri Sanjay Raut 
20. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
21. Shri Arun Singh 
22. Shri Tejveer Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT  
4. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 

 32 
 
6. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
7. Shri Nagendra Suman  - Deputy Secretary 
8. Shri Panna Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
9. Shri Abhishek Kumar  -  Deputy Director 
10. Ms. Neelam Bhave   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following 
Draft Reports:  
 
(i) Ninth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observation s/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024 -
25)’ pertaining to the Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers. 
(ii) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX   XXXX  
(iii) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX   XXXX  
(iv) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX   XXXX  
(v) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX   XXXX  
(vi) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX   XXXX  
(vii) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX   XXXX  
(viii) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX   XXXX  
 
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of 
the Members. 
 
4.      After some deliberation s the Committee decided to Adopt five (05) Draft 
Reports viz, 03 ATRs and 02 subject Reports i.e, the Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, 
Twelfth and Thirteenth draft Reports. The Committee then authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present/lay the Reports  in the ongoing 
Session in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
5.  The Committee decided to consider Draft Report No. Fifteenth and 
Sixteenth for adoption in the next Sitting of the Committee to be held on 
19.08.2025 at 1600 hrs. onwards. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

 33 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD  REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-25) ON ‘ DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2024-25)’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
Total No. of Recommendations 14 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 9,11,12 and 13   )  
 
08 
Percentage of Total: 57 % 
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
(Sl. Nos. 8, 10 and 14  )  
 
03 
Percentage of Total:  22% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given 
by the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:  
(Sl. Nos. 2 and 6)  
 
 
02 
Percentage of Total: 14%  
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of 
the Government are still awaited:  
(Sl. Nos. 7)  
 
10 
Percentage of Total:  7%  
 
 