Page 1 of 37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Insecticides & Pesticides – promotion and development including safe usage – 
licensing regime for insecticides’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2024/Agrahayana 1946 (saka) 
 1 

Page 2 of 37 
 
 
CC&F NO. 181 
FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Forty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Insecticides & Pesticides – promotion and development including safe 
usage – licensing regime for insecticides’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16 December, 2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 December, 2024 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2024/Agrahayana 1946 (saka) 


Page 3 of 37 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on  12 December, 2024. 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Sixth Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘ Insecticides & Pesticides – promotion and 
development including  safe usage – licensing regime for 
insecticides’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
 

Page 4 of 37 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-2025) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Shri Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Subhash Barala 
23. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
24. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
25. Shri Sanjay Raut 
26. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
27. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
30. Shri Tejveer Singh 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Smt. Suman Arora  - Additional Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3.  Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  

Page 5 of 37 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairpers on, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Sixth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Insecticides & Pesticides – promotion and 
development including safe usage – licensing regime for insecticides ’ pertaining to 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals,  Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers. 
2.  The Forty Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 19th December, 2023. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  furnished their replies on 15th July, 2024 
Indicating Actio n Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-Sixth Report. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their 
sitting held on 12th December, 2024. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
12 December, 2024 CHAIRPERSON, 
21 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 

Page 6 of 37 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the  Forty-Sixth Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Insecticides &Pesticides- Promotion and Development 
Including Safe Usage- Licencing Regime for Insecticides’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
1.2 The Forty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok  Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabh a on 
19.12.2023. It contained  20 Observations / Recommendations. Replies  of the 
Government in respect of all the recommendations  have been received and are 
categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the                                                           
Government: 
   Rec. Sl. No. 1,4,5,6,7,8,10,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19 and 20         
(Total =16)     
 Chapter II  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
Rec. Sl. No. Ni             (Total-00) 
          Chapter III  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
   Rec. Sl. No. 2,3,9 and 11                                        (Total-04)     
 Chapter IV  
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are of interim nature: 
  Rec. Sl. No. Nil              
                                                                         
(Total-00)  
Chapter V 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest.  

Page 7 of 37 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with  some of  their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which  either require reiteration or merit further 
comments. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
Development of pesticides  
1.5 Regarding development of pest icides in the country, the Committee had     
recommended as follows: 
 
“The Committee note that Pesticides prevent the loss of agricultural products 
from diseases and attack of pests. The locusts attack in the year 2019-20 and 
2020-2021 was  controlled successfully when HIL (India) Ltd supplied 
approximately 600 KC of Malathion Technical to the Ministry of Agriculture 
for locust control programme. The  Committee have been informed that the 
food-grain production has increased from 52  million tonnes in the year 1951-
52 to 300 billion tonnes in 2021 -22 and among various  factors which have 
helped in increasing the agriculture  production in the country, pesticides 
have played a vital role. The Committee appreciate that the Department has  
been taking various measures for promotion and development of pesticides 
like (i) playing the role of promoters for growth of the Industry (ii) taking up 
inter-ministerial coordination to sort out the problems of chemicals and 
petrochemicals sector (iii) extending ﬁnancial support un der Chemicals 
Promotion Development Scheme(CPDS)  for organizing seminars, 
conferences and training programmes to create awareness  among the 
farmers about the  judicious use  of agrochemicals  and fertilizers. ” The 
Committee take note of the fact that while pe sticides play a vital role in 
increasing the agricultural production, their extensive use can, directly or 
indirectly, pollute air,  water, soil and overall ecosystem thereby causing 
serious health hazards for living beings. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that measures being taken by the Department for the promotion 
and development of pesticides should be stringently implemented for the  
balanced growth of pesticides in the country.” 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note to the Committee the Department of Chemi cals 
and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertili zers have submitted as 
follows: 
 “It is informed that the Department intends to promote judicious and safe use 
of Pesticides by  conducting farmers training and sensitization programmes. 
Since 2016, Department has been organizing farmer training programs under 
the Chemical Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS).” 
The details of Farmers Training Programmes conducted by the Department 
during 2021-22 to 2023-24 are given below:  
 

Page 8 of 37 
 
S.No. Financial Year No. of Training 
Programmes 
No. of Participants 
1. 2021-22 22 6678 
2. 2022-23 35 7484 
3. 2023-24 25 9972 
 
1.7  The Committee had noted earlier that the Department had initiated 
various measures for promotion and development of pesticides like (i) playing 
the role of promoters for growth of the Industry (ii) taking up inter-ministerial 
coordination to sort out the problems of chemicals and petrochemicals sector 
(iii) extending ﬁnancial support under Chemicals Promotion Development 
Scheme(CPDS) for organizing seminars, conferences and training 
programmes to create awareness  amongst the farmers about judicious use of 
agrochemicals and fertilizers.  However, in the Action Taken Reply the 
Department has submitted that it intends to promote  judicious and safe use of 
Pesticides by  conducting farmers training and sensitization programmes. 
Since 2016, Department has been  organizing farmer training programs under 
the Chemical Pro motion and Development Scheme (CPDS). The Department 
has furnished details of Training programmes organised for farmers during the 
last three financial years and the number of Participants too. However the 
Action Taken Reply is silent about the other two m easures initiated by the 
Department for promotion and development of pesticides like playing the role 
of promoters for growth of the Industry and taking up inter -ministerial 
coordination to sort out the problems of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
sector. The Committee desire that the Department should also furnish the 
details of steps taken or proposed to be taken under these two measures also.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
Less consumption of pesticides  
1.8 The Committee made the following recommendation  regarding less  
consumption of pesticides: - 
“The Committee note that the Pesticide Industry in India has a size of 50,000 
crore and generic Pesticides are in demand worldwide. There is tremendous 
potential in the Pesticides industry, which needs to be tapped. The Committee, 
however, regret to note that consumption of the pesticides in the country is 0.5 
kg per hectare whereas the consumption in some other countries is as high as 
17 Kg per hectare, even though India  is the second largest producer of 
agricultural products. The Department has clariﬁed that countries like China and 
Japan have intensive agriculture —green house as well as poly  house 
agriculture in which a  number of crops are grown in and due to intensiﬁcation 
of agriculture and the ‘spring technology’ . These countries have a lead over 
India. Besides,  the management of intensive agriculture in these countries is 
relatively better. Therefore, these countries use more pesticides. The 
Committee feel that signiﬁcantly lower penetration levels of pesticides in India 

Page 9 of 37 
 
as compared to other countries like China clearly suggest that the market for 
pesticides is still largely unpenetrated with huge room for  future growth in the 
country. Furthermore, with rising population, food demand is  expected to 
continue to increase in the coming years and pesticides will play a key role in 
increasing the average crop yields per hectare. 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that it is high time that the 
Department acts promptly to enhance the use of agrochemicals/pestici des in 
the country. The Committee recommend that the Department should study the 
agricultural practices of countries like Japan and China for suitably adopting the 
same in India. There is an urgent need for the Government to take initiatives to 
give a boost to the Pesticides industry. Increasing availability of pesticides and 
low interest rates of farm loans would encourage farmers to use more 
pesticides in order to improve crop yields. Initiatives should be taken to increase 
awareness of Pesticides among f armers. Farmers should be educated on the 
right usage  of Pesticides in terms of quantity, the right application 
methodology and appropriate  chemicals to be used for  identified pest 
problems, etc.” 
 
1.9  In their Action Taken Note to the Committee the Depar tment of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertili zers have submitted as 
follows: 
“The Department of  Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has informed that the 
use of Pesticides depends  on several factors like area under cultivation, type 
of crop, cropping intensity, agro climatic  conditions, soil condition, pests (e.g. 
weed, insect and disease) situation etc. However, with the objective of 
educating, orienting and training of farming community about the judicious use 
of pesticides and use as per the prescriptions given in the label and leaﬂets, 
Central and State Governments through Central Integrated Pest Management 
Centres (CIPMCs) of the Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & 
Storage (DPPQ&S) and Farmers Field Schools,  ensure that farmers are 
provided right knowledge/ information about recommended pesticides use. 
Further, State Governments and Union Territories report data related  to 
consumption of pesticides to Central Government. As per the provided data, 
the trend of consumption of chemical pesticides has varied from year to year 
and State to State. The state wise details on  consumption of chemical 
pesticides and bio-pesticides is attached at Annexure-I and II, (quantities are 
in MT) respectively.” 
Also, Department of Chemicals an d Petrochemicals has been organizing 
Farmers Training Programme with the objective of increasing awareness 
about the efficacy of pesticides and the need for their increased usage 
judiciously to boost productivity of the crops.” 

Page 10 of 37 
 
1.10 The Committee recommended th at in the view of  the huge difference 
between the co nsumption of pesticides in our Co untry and the quantity of 
pesticides being consumed by other C ountries that the Department should 
study the a gricultural practices of other C ountries for sui tably adopting the 
same in our C ountry. However, the Department in its Action Taken Reply has 
merely submitted information  on responsible use of pesticides and farmers 
training program mes and is silent on th e specific recommendation of the 
Committee on adaptation of  agricultural good practices from other countries 
after a study. The Committee therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation 
for a detailed research on the aspect and proposed action taken of the 
Department in this regard. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
Indian Chemical Industry 
1.11   The Committee made the following with regard to Indian Chemical Industry: 
“The Committee note that the Indian Chemical Industry stands 6th globally in 
sales values, its present market size is around US $ 220 billion and it is 
expected to reach US $  300 billion by the year 2025. Further, in the 
agrochemicals sector, India is the 4 th largest producer and exporter and in  
dyes-stuﬀs India is 2 nd largest producer and exporter.  Moreover, it 
contributes 9.40% of manufacturing gross value added and 1.69 % of  
National Gross value added. Also, it employs around four million people 
directly and indirectly. However, it is worrisome that Indian Chemical Industry 
is the net importer and in ﬁnancial year 2020-21, the trade deﬁcit stood at Rs. 
1.75 lakh crore. The main reason was the  non-availability of feedstocks and 
mining agents. 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee believe that Indian Chemical Industry 
has a potential to grow further and therefore would earnestly desire that the 
Government should extend all possible help and assistance to resolve the 
issues being faced by the Indian Chemical Industry. Though the Department, 
in order to reduce dependence on  imports, is working on introducing the PLI 
scheme in the chemicals sector for those  chemicals which are majorly 
imported from a single source and have multiple uses, the  Committee 
recommend that the Government act with urgency to  minimize the trade  
deficit in the near future.” 
 
1.12 In their action taken note of the Committee the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers have stated as follows: 
“In order to promote the manufacturing of chemicals and petrochemicals in 
the C ountry, Department has set up three Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemical Investment Region  (PCPIR) in the S tate of Gujarat,  Andhra 
Pradesh and Odisha. These PCPIRs have attracted  investment of Rs. 
2,43,027 Crore. 

Page 11 of 37 
 
In order to protect the domestic industry from the unfair trade practices, 
Department of  Chemicals and Petrochemicals makes BIS Standards 
mandatory. Also, in consultation with  domestic industry, Department 
recommends to rationalize the duty to D/o Revenue on imported products for 
providing level playing field to the domestic industry” 
1.13 The Committee had noted that the Indian Chemical Industry has a 
potential to grow further and had requested the Department to extend all 
possible help and assistance to resolve th e issue being faced by the Indian 
Chemical Industry. The Committee had also noted that in order to reduce 
dependence on imports, the Department was working on introducing the PLI 
scheme in the Chemical Sector for those chemicals which are majorly 
imported from a single source and have multiple uses. In their Action T aken 
Reply, the Department has submitted that for  the promotion of manufacturing 
of Chemic als and Petrochemicals in the C ountry, the Department has set up 
three Petroleum, Chemicals and Petroche micals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) 
besides making BIS S tandards mandatory and rationalizing the duty on 
imported products. However, the Department has not briefed the Committee of 
the steps taken by them to reduce dependence on imports and also about 
introducing the PLI Scheme in this regard.  The Department’s reply is silent on 
any action/initiative proposed to be taken by the Department to minimize the 
trade deficit of Rs. 1.75 Lakh Crore. The Committee reiterate its 
recommendation and desire that the Comm ittee may be apprised of the 
concrete steps taken/ proposed to be taken to minimize the trade deficit in the 
timelines thereof. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
Consumption of Agrochemicals  
 1.14  The Committee made the following regard ing the Consumption of 
Agrochemicals:  
“The Committee note that Agrochemicals are chemicals that are used to 
control pests, pathogens, etc. and supply nutrients to the soil. Further, 
Insecticides/Pesticides are broadly termed as Agrochemicals and play a vital 
role in increasing agricultural productivity by protecting crops from insects, 
pests, fungi, weed etc. Agrochemical sector is also contributing in a big way to 
the GDP as well as to gross value addition manufacturing. The global market 
of agrochemicals is 4,50,000 crore. Howe ver, the  Indian size of the 
agrochemicals market is about Rs. 50,000 crore. India is a net exporter of 
agrochemicals. A perusal of the country-wise consumption of Agrochemicals 
inter-alia reveals that the consumption of Agrochemicals in Kilo tonnes by 
China is 1763, USA 407, Brazil 377, Argentina 172, Canada 90, France 85, 
Russia 76 and their world share are 43 percent, 10 percent, 9 percent, 4 
percent, 2 percent, 2 percent, 2 percent respectively,  whereas the 
consumption of Agrochemicals in India in Kilo tonnes is just 58 and its world 
share is just 1 percent. The Committee desire to know the reasons for this 
huge diﬀerence in consumption of Agrochemicals between India and other 
countries. The Committee  would further like to be apprised of the concrete 

Page 12 of 37 
 
steps being taken to increase the  consumption of agrochemicals in India and 
to increase its world share.” 
1.15   In their action taken note, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as Under: 
“The Government has implemented several measures to reduce the 
consumption of chemical  pesticides and instead promote Integ rated Pest 
Management (IPM) techniques, emphasizing  the use of bio pesticides and 
organic farming methods, providing training and extension  services to 
farmers on sustainable  agriculture practices, incentivizing the adoption of 
eco- friendly pest control methods, and strict enforcing regulations on the 
sale and use of pesticides to ensure their judicious application. Additionally, 
the government encourages research and  development efforts towards 
developing safer and more effective alternatives to chemical  pesticides, 
aiming to safeguard public health and the environment while promoting 
sustainable agricultural practices nationwide. 
Government of India has taken various steps to promote the use of bio 
pesticides. Simplified  guidelines have been formulated by  Registration 
Committee (RC) for the registration of bio  pesticides. For bio- pesticides, 
provisional registrations are being granted under Section 9 (3B) of the Act, 
along with the permission for commercialization during the provisional 
registration period of two years based on the confirmation of molecular identity 
of the strain from ICAR  National Bureau of Agriculturally Important 
Microorganisms (ICAR -NBAIM) and quality  verification of the product from 
Central Insecticide Laboratory (CIL). These strategic initiatives underscore the 
commitment to accelerating the adoption of biopesticides in Indian  agriculture, 
aligning with the broader goal of sustainable and eco-friendly farming 
practices.” 
1.16 The Committee had specifically desired to know about the co ncrete 
steps taken by the Department to increase the consumption of agrochemicals 
in India and also to increase its world share. In their reply the Department has 
submitted that they are promoting Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
techniques, emphasizing the use of bio -pesticides and organic farming 
methods etc. The reply, however, does not mention any concrete steps taken 
by the Department . The Co mmittee therefo re reiterate  their recommendation 
and desire that they be apprised of the steps taken  or proposed to be taken to 
increase the share of India not only in agrochemicals  sector, but also in the 
area of bio pesticides and organic farming methods etc.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 13 of 37 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
    Administration of Insecticides Act, 1968 
2.1 The Committee note that Pesticides are regulated in the country through 
the Insecticides Act, 1968 and the Insecticides Rules, 1971 framed 
thereunder. The Act is a  comprehensive legislation as it regulates the 
import, manufacture, sale, transport, distribution and use of Insecticides 
with an objective to prevent risk to human beings or  animals. Further, the 
administration of the Insecticides Act, 1968 is with the Department of 
Agriculture and F amily Welfare (DA & FW) and kept outside the purview of 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC). The DA & FW 
uses its attached oﬃces like Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and 
Storage (DPPQS) for registration of Insecticides, inclusion of 
Chemicals/Insecticides etc. under the Act. 
Keeping in view the significance of the role of DCPC in regulation of the 
Insecticides and Pesticides, the Committee apprehend that keeping 
administration of the Insecticides Act, 1968 outside the purview o f the DCPC 
may act as a deterrent for regulation of the Insecticides and Pesticides. Also, 
DCPC is to take up matters of agrochemicals Industry with the DA & FW from 
time to time. It is, therefore, warranted that there is a requirement of close 
coordination between DCPC and DA & FW for the expeditious  resolution of 
all the issues of the agrochemicals industry. The D/o Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals needs to take up the matter at the appropriate forum, to get 
allocated the administration of at least those provisions of the Insecticides 
Act, 1968, which are directly linked to the agrochemical industry. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the decision taken in this regard. 
Reply: 
The   pesticides   are    regulated    through a comprehensive legislation, 
Insecticides Act, 1968 and the Insecticides Rules, 1971 which are administered by 
Ministry of Agriculture and  Farmers Welfare. The objective of the legislation is as 
under: 
“An Act to regulate the import, manufacture, sale, distribution and use of 
insecticides with a  view to prevent  risk to human or animals,  and for  matters 
connected there with.” 
For eﬀective implementation of the provisions of the Act, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare through its attached oﬃce Directorate of Plant Protection, 
Quarantine and Storage(DPPQ&S) administers the various functions under the 

Page 14 of 37 
 
Insecticide Act, 1968 li ke Registration of Insecticides, inclusion of 
chemical/insecticides in the schedule to the Act,  notiﬁcation of Insecticides 
Inspectors, amendments in Insecticides Rules etc. 
As per the Allocation of Business Rules 1961(As amended upto Amendment 
Series no. 376, dated 3rd April, 2024), the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has been assigned the following business : 
“2. Insecticides (excluding the administration of Insecticides Act, 1968(46 of 1968)” 
Therefore DCPC promotes the agro-chemical industry and takes up its 
matter with Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and M/o 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change on  various issues raised by the 
industry for the resolution of the same. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
Phasing out of hazardous insecticides and Pesticides 
2.2 The Committee are aware that Pesticides are inherently hazardous, and 
among them, a relatively small number of Highly Hazardous Pesticides 
(HHPs) cause disproportionate harm to environment and human health with 
acute and chronic toxicity. The Committee are happy to learn that HIL (India) 
Ltd along with UNIDO is currently  taking up the project titled “Promoting 
eco- friendly crop protection solution for persistent organic pollutant and 
highly hazardous Pesticides reduction in Asia” un der a  programme named 
as Financing Agrochemicals Reduction and Management (FARM)  
programme of the Global environment Facility with the objectives (i) to 
minimize the use of highly hazardous Pesticides and persistent organic 
pollutants in agriculture (ii) t o catalyze investment in the agriculture  sector 
etc. 
The Committee hope that HIL(India) Ltd. will take all advance measures to 
execute the aforesaid project under FARM programme with all seriousness 
so that its objectives are  achieved. The Committee would also like the 
Department to extend its full support to HIL (India) Ltd. in this regard. 
Reply: 
The Government of India has been taking all efforts to promote use of Eco -friendly 
crop protection solutions to replace hazardous pesticides which may cause 
disproportionate harm to environment & human health. Accordingly, HIL (India) Ltd, 
in collaboration with UNIDO, is  actively engaged in the “Promoting Eco-friendly 
crop protection solution for persistent organic pollutant (POP) and highly hazardous 
Pesticides ( HHP) reduction in Asia" project under the Financing Agrochemicals 
Reduction and Management (FARM) programme of the  Global Environment 
Facility (GEF). 
The objectives of these programmes are: 

Page 15 of 37 
 
(i) to minimize the use of highly hazardous Pesticides and persistent organic 
pollutants in agriculture 
(ii) to catalyse investment in the agriculture sector etc. 
(iii) to detoxify the sector by eliminating the use of the highly hazardous 
pesticides in agriculture. 
HIL has prepared the required baseline data for the preparation of the project 
document. The  project document is being prepared by the Global Environment 
Facility and upon completion  and its approval, the contract shall be made. The 
expected budgetary support for this project is USD 3.5 million. 
HIL targets to reduce the use of HHPs and POPs in agriculture and replacing with 
safe alternatives such as Bio-pesticides, Neem based pesticides, etc. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
Regulation of Pesticides by the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
2.3 The Committee note that Pe sticides are being regulated by the 
Department of  Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) under the 
Insecticides Act, 1968 and the  Insecticides Rules, 1971 framed thereunder. 
The DA & FW also reviews the use as well as banning of pesticides, which are 
reported to pose harm to human health and environment, through its 
Registration committee and has so far banned or phased out as many as 46 
pesticides and 04 pesticides formulation besides withdrawal of registration of 
08 pesticides and placing 09 pesticides u nder restricted use. Further, D/o 
Chemicals and  Petrochemicals (DCPC) plays the role of promoter for the 
agrochemicals. The Committee are of the strong conviction that DCPC and DA 
& FW need to work in close coordination to avoid instances where the former 
promotes the pesticides and the later ban/discontinue their use depending 
upon their toxicity and harmful eﬀects. The Committee recommend  that 
adequate safeguards should  be exercised by both the Departments engaged  
in regulation and promotion of pesticides and would like to be kept informed 
on this aspect. 
Reply: 
The Government of India, from time to time keeps reviewing the continued use or 
otherwise of those pesticides which are banned/severely restricted in other 
Countries of the world due to  their toxic concerns or have been reported to pose 
harm to human health or environment in our country or other countries of the world. 
These reviews are undertaken by constituting special  committees or through the 
Registration Committee(RC). Based on the recommendations of  such expert 
committees and after due consultati on with Registration Committee(RC), the  
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has so far banned 49 pesticide 
molecules and 5  pesticide formulations for import, manufacture or sale in the 
country and one pesticide formulation is under phase out being in the category. In 

Page 16 of 37 
 
addition, 8 pesticide registrations have been withdrawn and 9 pesticides have been 
placed under restricted use. 
It is this Department’s endeavor to work in a closely coordinated manner with D/o 
A&FW to harmonize the actions with respect to the harmful effect of pesticides and 
their banning/regulations. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
Organic pesticides 
2.4 Organic pesticides are the pesticides derived from things in nature, 
which can be  used to control pests. Neem based pesticides are the pes t 
control agents manufactured  from Neem extracts. The Committee note that 
organic and Neem based pesticides do not leave any synthetic residue in the 
crop produce and soil whereas the synthetic chemical  pesticides leave a 
certain amount of pesticide residu e after their application. Besides,  these 
pesticides are usually inherently less toxic and aﬀect only the target pest as 
compared to the conventional pesticides which are more toxic and may 
aﬀect organisms,  birds, insects and mammals as well. The Committee  are 
deeply concerned to note that  Neem based pesticides are currently 
manufactured by only a few organizations in the  country and speciﬁc 
information with respect to companies in private sector planning to  produce 
bio- pesticides is not even available with the Department. However, the 
Committee ﬁnd some relief to learn that HIL (India) Ltd. is in the process of 
setting up neem based pesticides with the support of UNIDO, though initially 
HIL (India) Ltd. is  targeting mosquito control with the purpose of vector 
borne diseases management including malaria. While observing the 
promising properties of organic and neem based  pesticides, the Committee 
strongly desire that the Department should realize the need of  the hour and 
explore ways and means to overcome the  limitations and impediments for  
eﬀective large-scale use of these pesticides so that their full potential can 
be realised and they are put to use by the farming community. The process 
of setting up of neem based  pesticides by HIL (India) Ltd should be 
expedited and the Company with time should endeavour to diversify 
development of all types of organic and neem based pesticides. 
 
Reply: 
D/o Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has informed that Bio-pesticides are used as 
an alternative to chemical pesticides for promoting a sustainable method o f 
development in the  agriculture sector, while  also reducing pollution caused by  
chemical pesticides. 
Promoting use of Bio pesticides  among the farming community is the major 
objective of  Integrated Pest Management (IPM). The Indian government has 

Page 17 of 37 
 
encouraged the use of bio - pesticides by taking various steps. The  details are  
given below: 
 
 Regular promotion of use of various bio - pesticides and bio -control agents. 
During survey and training programmes such as Farmer Field schools and 
Human Resource  Development programmes bio -control agents are 
released in field which helps in management of various pest and pathogen. 
 
 The bio-pesticides such as Beauveria bassiana, Trichoderma spp, 
Metarhizium anisopliae, Metarhizium acredium, Metarhizium rileyi, Pochonia 
chlamydosporia, Paecilomyces lilacinus, Pseudomonas fluorescens, Isaria 
fumoscorosea, Bacillus spp, Lecanicillium lecanii and various biocontrol 
agents such as Trichogramma spp., Chilonus blackburni, Reduviid bug, 
Rhynocorism arginatus, Rhynocoris fuscipes, Chrysoperla carnea, 
Chrysoperla zastrowisillemi, Cryptolaemus montrouzeri, Goniozus 
nephantidis, Sycanuscollaris, Pseudomonas Zygogramma bicolorata, 
Aphelinusmali, Assassin bug, Blaptostethus pallescenceare also multiplied 
in the Central Integrated Pest Manag ement Centres (CIPMCS) bio -control 
laboratories and distributed to farmers. During last five years, 13122 millions 
of bio -control agents are  produced, 6.49 lakh ha area is augmented and 
37.78 lakh ha area is conserved for bio- control agents. 
 Various bio -pesticides are registered and approved by Registration 
Committee (RC) which promotes availability of quality  bio-pesticides to the  
farmers. 
 Different alternative measures are also promoted to reduce the use of 
pesticides. Such  measure includes use of bio-pesticides, use of 
entomopathogenic fungus like Metarhizium & Beauveria to control various 
insect pests, use of Plant Growth Promoting Rhizobacteria (PGPR) such as 
Pseudomonas spp. to control various plant pathogens, training to use insect 
parasitoids like Trichogramma spp. to manage lepidopteron pests, use of 
NPV (Nuclear Polyhydrosis Virus) to control cotton bollworm, use of natural 
substances such as NSKE (Neem Seed Kernel Extract) mineral oils, neem 
oil, herbal extracts (e.g. Neem, Tobacco, Ginger, Parthenium, Turmeric etc.) 
to manage various pests, use of traps such as sticky traps, pheromone 
traps and light  traps which act as a barrier to protect the  crop field by 
controlling the adult insects and to keep the pest population below Economic 
Threshold Level, thus reduce the usage of chemical pesticide. 
 
Simplified guidelines have been formulated by Registration Committee (RC) for the 
registration of bio pesticides. For bio- pesticides, provisional registrations are being 
granted under Section 9 (3B) of the Act, along with  the permission for 
commercialization during the provisional registration period of two years based on 
the confirmation of molecular identity of the strain from ICAR -National Bureau of 

Page 18 of 37 
 
Agriculturally Important Microorganisms (ICAR - NBAIM) and quality verification of 
the product from Central Insecticide Laboratory (CIL). 
HIL(India) Ltd. is in the process of setting up neem based products with the support 
of UNIDO. Initially HIL(India) Ltd. is targeting to launch mosquito control products 
with the purpose of  vector borne diseases management including malaria, and 
later to pesticides for agricultural  use. The process of setting up of neem based 
products for vector borne diseases management  is in process. HIL(India) Ltd. is 
targeted to commercialize the project in Dec-2024. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
Declining use of DDT 
2.5 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the global use of 
DDT for  vector-borne diseases has declined due to availability of new 
insecticide products with  long r esidual activity periods for indoor residual 
spraying and next generation bed nets  etc. Presently, HIL(India) Ltd. is the 
sole manufacturer of DDT and supplies it to the M/o Health and Family Welfare 
as per their requirement. Further, DDT is regulated as a  Persistent Organic 
Pollutant (PoP) under the Stockholm Convention which has been  ratiﬁed by 
India. This Convention has mandated the elimination of DDT from our  
country by December, 2024. In order to phase out DDT, UNIDO is supporting 
HIL (India) Ltd. in setting up of commercial manufacturing facilities for long 
lasting Insecticidal Net s (LLINs), Bti based bio -larvicides as well as Neem 
based botanical insecticide, larvicide, repellent and insect growth regulation 
(IGR). HIL (India) Ltd. is  also the commercial manufacturing partner for the 
UNIDO project on “Development and Promotion of N on-PoPs” as an 
alternative to DDT and committed to complete the neem  project and Bti 
Project before December, 2024. Moreover, DPR for Bti project is being  
prepared and would be completed by December, 2023 itself and expected to 
be commercialized in 2024. 
The Committee trust that the Department/ HIL(India) Ltd. will give their 
utmost attention   for   elimination   of   DDT   as   well   as   preparation   and 
commercialization of Bti project within the prescribed timelines. Further, 
commercial manufacturing  facilities for long lasting Insecticidal Nets 
(LLINs), Bti based bio-larvicides as well as Neem based botanical insecticide, 
larvicide, repellent, insect growth regulation (IGR) and development of other 
alternatives to DDT would be expedited so that their beneﬁts reach society in 
a given timeframe. 
Reply: 
Global use of DDT for vector -borne diseases has declined due to its regulation as 
a Persistent Organic Pollutant (POP) under the Stockholm Convention. Presently, 
HIL(India) Ltd. is the sole manufacturer o f DDT and supplies it to the M/o Health 
and Family Welfare as per their requirements. 

Page 19 of 37 
 
The Stockholm Convention has mandated the elimination of DDT from our country. 
In order to phase out DDT, HIL(India) Ltd. with the support of UNIDO, is setting up 
of comm ercial manufacturing facilities for long lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLINs). 
Bacillus thuringiensis  israelensis (Bti) based biolarvicides as well as Neem 
based botanical products, under the  project "Development and Promotion of Non -
PoP alternative to DDT" are targeted to be commercialized by Dec-2024. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
Resolving the issues of Agro-chemicals industry 
2.6 The Committee note that the Department has constituted an Advisory 
Forum in  July, 2019 to identify the issues of agrochemicals indu stry that 
hinder its growth and  development through policy interventions. The 
Advisory Forum provides a platform to  the industry associations for raising 
their grievances and problems and also to boost the  'Make-in-India’ initiative 
promotion of investment s in chemicals and petrochemicals  sector to meet 
the growing domestic demand and promote export. Though the role of the 
Advisory Forum thus constituted is laudable, the Committee are dis-satisﬁed 
to note that only a single meeting of the Advisory forum is being held in a 
calendar year. The ﬁrst,  second and third meetings of the Advisory forum 
were held on 27 August, 2019, 25 June, 2020 and 20 September, 2022, 
respectively. The Committee are of the view that the  frequency of meetings 
of the Advisory forum sh ould be increased to enable the industry  
associations to put forth their grievances related to agrochemicals industry. 
This will be of great help in identifying the impediments aﬀecting the growth 
of the Industry, ﬁnding  the solutions to such impediments and achieving the 
objective of constituting the Advisory Forum in a true sense. 
Reply: 
The Advisory Forum provides a platform to the industry associations for raising 
their grievances and problems which is resolved in coordination with other 
ministries and policy measure recommendations. The main objective of the 
Advisory Forum is to boost ‘Make in  India’ initiative by promotion of investments in 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals sector in order to meet the growing domestic demand 
and boost exports. 
Efforts will be  made to organize the meeting of Advisory forum on regular basis. 
Also, from time to time, various stakeholders meeting are being conducted by the 
Department with various associations of Industry representing to agrochemical 
sectors such as Crop Care Feder ation of  India, Pesticides Manufacturers and 
Formulators Association of India (PMFAI), Crop Life  India, FICCI, CII, Indian 
Chemical Council, Alkali Manufacturers Association of India(AMAI), Dyes and 
Pigments Manufacturers of India (DPMAI), Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
Manufacturers Association (CPMA) etc. 
 

Page 20 of 37 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
Development of new generation pesticides formulation technology by IPFT 
2.7 The Committee have been informed that IPFT is the only Institute of its 
kind devoted for the  development of state -of-the-art user  and environment 
friendly new generation pesticides formulation technology and has 
established a healthy support with  the agrochemical industry and transfer 
technologies for safer, eﬃcient and environment  friendly formulations etc. 
Further, IPFT has also conducted field trials for bio -efficacy and 
phytotoxicity evaluation etc. However, it conducted 14, 15 and 18 such tria ls 
during the year 2020 -21, 2021 -22 and 2022 -23, respectively in the State of 
Haryana only. The  Committee are, however, disappointed to note that IPFT 
has no further plans to conduct ﬁeld trials in other States/UTs. The 
Committee are of the opinion that ﬁe ld trials at  diﬀerent places may show 
diﬀerent results and would be useful for development of new  generation 
pesticides formulation technology. Hence, the Committee recommend to the  
Department/IPFT to conduct field trials accordingly. 
 
Reply: 
IPFT is actively engaged in the development of user and environment friendly 
pesticide formulations since its establishment in May 1991. Till date, 80 pesticide 
formulations were  developed and many of which  are transferred to pesticide 
industries for commercialization. 
Further IPFT conducts ﬁeld trials for generation of bio -eﬃcacy and phyto -
toxicity data  for registration of new pesticide formulations. During 2023 -24, the 
IPFT has conducted as many as 31 ﬁeld trails, out of which, 24 are completed and 
07 in progress and a re nearing completion including drone based pesticide spray 
field trials. Presently IPFT is having experimental farm for ﬁeld trials at IPFT, 
Gurugram only. As advised, IPFT will explore further collaboration to expand field 
trials to other areas. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
Development of safer pesticides formulation by IPFT 
2.8 The Committee are pleased to note that IPFT has developed 80 user and 
environment friendly pesticides formulation technologies. They have 
developed water  disposable granules, contr olled-release formulations, 
concentrated emulsions and micro  emulsions which are being used by the 
industry. Apart from that, IPFT provides training on various aspects of 
formulation to technical personnel from pesticides industry, scientists, 
students, et c. Further, in collaboration with ICAR, IPFT has developed two  
formulations of management of orbanche weed and during the last three 
years, 28  research papers on formulations, analytical, chemistry and 
persistence studies have been published in reputed nat ional and 

Page 21 of 37 
 
international journals. While appreciating the eﬀorts  of the IPFT, the 
Committee would earnestly desire that IPFT should make consistent  eﬀorts 
to develop new pesticide formulations for the beneﬁts of farmers, registering 
a bumper crop production in the country and keep the committee informed in 
this regard. 
Reply : 
IPFT is making consistent eﬀorts to develop newer pesticide formulations for 
the beneﬁt of farmers for crop protection and enhancing the crop yield. During 
2023-24, five (5) formulations have been developed for the management of insects 
in diﬀerent crops. The bio - eﬃcacy studies are in progress. The IPFT is committed 
to provide utmost support to Agrochemical Industry and making consistent efforts 
to develop newer pesticide formulations for the benefit of farmers. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
Promoting the use of Bio-Pesticides 
2.9 The Committee note that IPFT is making continuous eﬀorts for 
promoting bio - botanical bacterial pesticides. Besides developing various 
technologies of diﬀerent bio - botanical pesticides bacterial formulations, 
IPFT is also conducting training programmes for farmers to promote the use 
of botanical based crop protection products. The Committee feel that there 
is a considerable need to promote the use of bio-pesticides/bio botanical 
pesticides to address the serious concern posed to human life and 
environment by the use of non-target toxicity, residual consequences and 
challenging biodegradability  of the synthetic pesticides. The Committee 
therefore, impress upon the Department/IPFT to vigorously take up training 
programmes for the farmers to educate them in this regard accordingly. 
Reply: 
IPFT is making continuous eﬀorts for development of bio - botanical based 
formulations as safer alternative to synthetic chemical pesticides for safety of 
human being and the environment and minimization of pesticide residues in food 
products. Two bio-botanical formulations for management of insects in seed spice 
crops have been developed. Three new  research projects with a duration of 3 
years from March 2024 have been sanctioned by ICAR - National Agricultural 
Science Fund for development of Bio-botanical formulations for agricultural 
applications, weedicide formulations  for management of Orobanche weed in  
mustard crop and microbial based formulations for agricultural waste management. 
To educate the farmers, the  IPFT has conducted  training programmes 
across the country. During the year, 2023-24, a total of twenty farmers awareness 
programs were arranged at diﬀerent States Andhra Pradesh, Ka rnataka, Orissa, 
Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, Rajasthan,  Meghalaya, Mizoram, Assam, Ladakh to 
make them aware about the good agricultural practices, integrated pest 
management, safe and judicious use of pesticides for agricultural  applications as 

Page 22 of 37 
 
well as to ma ke them aware about the preparation of pesticide formulations  from 
the locally available plants for quick application in crop protection. More than 9000  
farmers participated in these awareness programs. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
Setting up of four Advanced Research Centres (ARC) of IPFT 
2.10The Committee note that IPFT proposes to set up four advanced 
research centres (ARCs) in the state of Assam, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh and 
Gujarat. A concept note in  this connection, for obtaining in -principle- 
approval from the respective states, has been  submitted to the Department. 
Only after the approval of the Government, ARCs can be  set up and further 
action would be taken accordingly in the matter. The Committee  recommend 
to the Department to expedite the examination and processing of the 
proposal received from IPFT and take up the matter at highest level with 
Government of India, for its approval. 
Reply: 
The Department is examining  the proposals and would  take a decision 
expeditiously. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
Sanctioned and Actual Strength of IPFT 
2.11 The Committee note that out of the total sanctioned strength of 40, the 
working staﬀ strength of IPFT is just 19 which is less than 50% of the total 
sanctioned strength.  The posts are lying vacant for various reasons, one 
superannuary post of establishment  oﬃcer is lying vacant, 07 vacant posts 
have been advertised, 02 post became vac ant due  to retirement of 
incumbents of Group ‘C’ oﬃcers in December, 2022 and 01 post of  specialist 
(Bioscience) is under litigation. The Committee urge the Department to take  
immediate steps to ﬁll all the vacant posts in IPFT on priority basis so as to 
enable IPFT to discharge its function in an efficient and time bound manner. 
Reply: 
IPFT have initiated the process of revival of the posts as well as to fill the 
existing vacant posts. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
Loss of Rs. 30 crore to Rasayani Unit of HIL (India) Ltd. during 2021-22. 
 

Page 23 of 37 
 
2.12 The Committee are concerned to note that the Rasayani unit of HIL 
(India) Ltd.  suﬀered a massive loss of Rs. 30 crore during 2021-22. The 
Committee are, however, not convinced with the reply of the Government to 
justify the loss of Rs. 30 crore. It has been informed that order of DDT which 
was, Rs. 79.41 crore in the year 2020 -21 declined to Rs. 43.91 crore, that is, 
by 50% of order value in 2020 -21 resulting in reduction of sales  by Rs. 35.50 
crore. Similarly, the export order of DDT during 2020-21 which was Rs. 
24.70 crore too declined to Rs. 6.48 crore resulting in reduction of sales by Rs 
18.22 crore. As such the total reduction in sale of DDT was Rs. 53.72 crore. 
The Committee are unable to understand how Rasayani unit incurred a loss 
of Rs. 30 crore during 2021 -22 when there was a reduction in sale of DDT by 
Rs. 53.72 crore in 2020-21. The Committee would expect factual information in 
this regard. 
Reply: 
In this regard, it is submitted that sale of DDT has been reduced by Rs.53.72 crore 
in the year 2021-22. Global use of DDT for vector-borne diseases has declined due 
to its regula tion as a  Persistent Organic Pollutant (POP) under the  Stockholm 
Convention. 
The trends of sale of DDT and other products of Rasayani unit are given below: 
 
(In Rs. 
Cr.) 
Year Sale of 
DDT 
Sale of 
other 
Products 
Total 
Sale 
Profit/(Loss) 
2019-20 94.07 2.45 96.52 14.30 
2020-21 104.11 3.75 107.86 19.27 
2021-22 50.39 7.03 57.42 (30.71) 
 
It is evident from the above table that Rasayani unit majorly depends on the 
production and sale of DDT. Due to reduction in sale of DDT in the F.Y. 2021-22, 
Rasayani Unit has incurred a loss of Rs. 30 Crore  in the F.Y. 2021-22. Details of 
year wise sales of DDT is as follows: 
(In Rs. 
Cr.) 
Particulars F.Y. 2020-
21 
F.Y. 2021-22 Reduction in 
Sale 
DDT Domestic 
Sale 
79.41 43.91 35.50 

Page 24 of 37 
 
DDT Export Sale 24.70 6.48 18.22 
Total 104.11 50.39 53.72 
    
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
2.13 The Committee further take note of the steps taken by HIL(India) Ltd. to 
overcome the loss generated in the year 2021 -22 in Rasayani unit. The 
company is  focusing on utilization of idle production capacity of 
agrochemicals plants besides increasing the production of LLINs and also 
persuading the major vendors to supply new materials to streamline the 
production. The Committee would like to be assured that the  Department/HIL 
(India) Ltd. would take all cor rective measures to avoid recurrence of  such a 
huge loss in future. 
Reply: 
Due to decline in the DDT demand and export orders in 2021-22, sales of DDT was 
drastically decreased. Rasayani Plant suﬀered a Rs.35.56 crore loss in 2022 -23 
due to factors like DDT order delays and production disruptions. 
Now, company has received the approval for closure of two loss making units i.e. 
Udyogamandal unit at Kerala and Bathinda unit at Punjab. Further, Agrochemicals 
plants like  mancozeb, Pendimethalin and Glyphosate p lants will be shifted from 
Udyogamandal unit to  Rasayani unit to strengthen the  production capacity and 
viability of Rasayani unit. 
In F.Y. 2023 -24, company has earned a profit of Rs. 4.73 crore (provisional) as 
compared to loss of Rs.68.70 crore in the F.Y. 2022-23. 
In FY 2024-25, the company is  planning to diversify to other business verticals of 
the organisation like marketing of bio-pesticides & bio-fertilizers. The company has 
also strengthening its Seed business vertical through expansion of product l ine by 
venturing into the hybrid seed as well as fodder seeds. HIL(India) Ltd. has signed 
MoU with leading hybrid  seed manufacturers in India. The company has also 
strengthen the product line of agrochemicals by including new  generation 
pesticides. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
Non-Payment of salaries/arrears to employees of HIL (India) Ltd. 
2.14 The Committee, during their study visit to Kochi in May, 2023 learnt that 
the Udyogamandal Unit of HIL (India) Limited had been closed down due to 
operational losses because of increase in production cost at the plant as raw 
materials were brought  from far-oﬀ places, which made its products 

Page 25 of 37 
 
unviable. The Committee regret to note that due to paucity of funds, salary 
and other dues could not be provided to their employees  for the past several 
months. Even  the retired employees are not given gratuity and  pension. 
Further, Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS)/ Voluntary Separation Scheme  
(VSS) has been oﬀered to the employees of the unit. Though the Committee 
were assured during the study visit in May, 2023 that utmost eﬀorts would be 
made by the Department to get the dues of HIL of Rs. 96 crore pending with 
the Ministry of Health and Family  Welfare, which will facilitate payment of 
salary and other dues to its employees, the  position as is learnt remains the 
same even after considerable lapse of time with no  resolution to the crisis. 
The representatives of the Department during evidence on 28 July, 2023 
submitted that the employees are being given some advances to take care of 
their day- to-day needs. Further, a proposal for the closure of two units will 
soon be sent to DPE for ﬁnal approval of the administrative mechanism. Out 
of Rs. 401 crore that has  been sought, Rs. 56 crore will be for meeting the 
expenditure arising on account of VRS/VSS and also, for payment of pending 
salary dues. The remaining amount will  be used for making payments to the 
vendors and also for the loans. 
The Committee would like to be assured that the Department would 
vigorously pursue  the matter with the Ministry of Finance and get the 
required amount of Rs. 402 crore for expending the sa me on account of 
VRS/VSS, for payment of pending salary dues to the  employees, etc. The 
Committee hope that the matter will get a favorable response from  the 
Ministry of  Finance. The  Committee would like to be kept  updated on the 
matter. 
Reply: 
D/o Expenditure and Deptt. of Economic Affairs have approved budgetary support 
to release  Rs.486.74 crore to the company as fresh loan. Government made a 
provision of Rs. 399.18 Cr. in 2 nd Supplementary Grant for FY 2023 -24 to 
Udyogmandal and Bathinda Units to clear the liabilities on account of bank loan, 
statutory dues and employees liabilities of outstanding dues including VRS/VSS of 
Udyogmandal and Bathinda Units. The amount of Rs. 399.18 Cr. was  released to 
HIL (India) Ltd. to clear the bank loan and liabilities of employees of 
Udyogamandal and Bathinda Units. On 09.05.2024, Dept. of Economic Affairs has 
also approved the proposal for contingency advance of Rs. 87.56 Crore for closure 
of two units at Udyogmandal and Bathinda. An amount of Rs.87.56 Crore has also 
been released as 2nd Installment of loan to HIL (INDIA) Limited during 2024 -25 for 
settlement/clearance of liabilities of Udyogamandal and Bathinda Units on account 
of Vendor Dues, payment of 2007 Pay Revision Arrears and Shifting of Plant 
from Udyogamandal  and Bathinda Units to Rasayani Unit of HIL (India) Limited. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
Training programmes for farmers for judicious use of Fertilizers 

Page 26 of 37 
 
2.15 The Committee note that the D/o Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) 
extends financial support under Chemicals Promotion Development Scheme 
(CPDS) for organizing seminars, conferences and training programs to 
create awareness among the farmers about judicious use of agrochemicals  
and fertilizers. The Committee also note with satisfaction that HIL (India) Ltd. 
as well as  IPFT organize training programmes under CPDS to enhance 
awareness among the  farmers to judicially use pesticides and for helping 
them in addressing the problems such as soil degradation, damage to the 
underground water bodies, human life and environment due to the adverse 
eﬀect of residual pesticides, etc. Farmers are also sensitized through video 
clips and PPE kits are also given to the farmers. 
Taking cognizance of the fact that the increased use of chemical fertilizers in 
the country would consequently translate into enhanced crop production, the 
committee feel that training to the farmers is the need of the hour to educate 
them about the judicious use of  fertilizers to reduce their harmful eﬀects on 
the environment and other forms of life. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that pan-India training programmes should be organized at 
frequent intervals of time with wide publicity so as to engage more and more 
farmers. 
 
Reply: 
Efforts made by the Department in this regard are indicated in reply 
to the 2nd Observation of Hon’ble Committee. 
Steps taken by Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare: 
Steps are being taken for safe and judicious use of pesticides during regular 
ﬁeld surveys in the farmers ﬁelds and also during various training programmes 
(Farmers Field Schools, 2 Days, Safe and judicious use of pesticides programmes 
etc.). 
During 2019 -20 to 2023 -24, DAC&FW has organized 1,781 numbers of 
Farmers Field  Schools in which 57,020 numbers of farmers were trained, 422 
numbers of 2 Days programmes were organized in which 21,326 numbers of 
farmers were trained. 1,591 numbers of Safe and  judicious use of pesticides 
awareness campaigns were conducted in which 53,397 nos. of  farmers were  
trained on reducing the usage of chemical pesticides. 
Apart from this, on regular basis promotion on use of various bio -pesticides 
and bio - control agents and its releases in field during survey and training 
programmes were carried out which helps in management of various pest and 
pathogen. Various bio-pesticides are registered with CIB & RC which promotes 
availability of quality bio -pesticides to the farmers. Thus,  regular promotion of 
above mentioned steps among farming community helps in safe  and judicious use 
of pesticides. 

Page 27 of 37 
 
Further, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, through its autonomous 
Institute, National Centre for Management of Agricultural Extension (MANAGE) 
conducts Diploma in  Agricultural Extension Services for Input Dealers (DAESI) to 
train them in efficient handling  of agri-inputs and laws governing regulation of 
agricultural Inputs. The program aims to equip agro-input dealers to serve as 
effective sources of farm information at the village level, acting  as a one-stop shop 
for farmers. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
Nil import of Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLINs) 
2.16 The Committee are happy to learn that the LLINs have not been 
imported even  once during the last three years as indigenous technology 
has been developed for the commercialization of the LLINs at HIL (India) Ltd. 
The Committee are aware that this  will not only reduce the dependency of 
the country on imports but also save precious  foreign reserves/exchange. 
The Committee would desire the Department to keep up th e good work with 
regard to attaining self -reliance in the manufacture of LLINs in the  future as 
well. 
 
Reply: 
HIL(India)Limited has set up Long Lasting Insecticidal net(LLIN) manufacturing 
facility of capacity 5 lakh net per year with the financial support  of UNIDO in the 
Year 2019 -20. Now  HIL is under process of expanding the production capacity 
from 5 lakh net /year to 10 lakh net/year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 28 of 37 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 29 of 37 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
Development of Pesticides 
1. The Committee note that Pesticides prevent the loss of agricultural 
products from diseases and attack of pests. The locusts attack in the year 
2019-20 and 2020 -2021 was  controlled successfully when HIL (India) Ltd 
supplied approximately 600 KC of Malathion Technical to the Ministry of 
Agriculture for locust control programme. The  Committee have been 
informed that the food grain  production has increased from 52  million 
tonnes in the year 1951 -52 to 300 billion tonnes in 2021 -22 and among 
various factors which have helped in increasing the agriculture production in 
the country, pesticides have played a vital role. The Committee appreciate 
that the Department has  been taking various measures for promotion and 
development of pesticides like (i) playing the role of promoters for growth of 
the Industry (ii) taking up inter-ministerial coordination to sort out the 
problems of chemicals and petrochemicals sector (iii) extending ﬁnancial 
support under Chemicals Promotion Development Scheme(CPDS)  for 
organizing seminars, conferences and training programmes to create 
awareness among the farmers about the judicious use of agrochemicals and 
fertilizers. 
The Committee take no te of the fact that while pesticides play a vital role in 
increasing the agricultural production, their extensive use can, directly or 
indirectly, pollute air,  water, soil and overall ecosystem thereby causing 
serious health hazards for living beings. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that measures being taken by the Department for the promotion 
and development of pesticides should be stringently implemented for the  
balanced growth of pesticides in the country. 
Reply: 
It is informed that the Department in tends to promote judicious and safe use of 
Pesticides by  conducting farmers training and sensitization programmes. Since 
2016, Department has been  organizing farmer training programs under the 
Chemical Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS). 
The details of Farmers Training Programmes conducted by the Department during 
2021-22 to 2023-24 are given below:  
 
 

Page 30 of 37 
 
S.No. Financial Year No. of Training 
Programmes 
No. of Participants 
1. 2021-22 22 6678 
2. 2022-23 35 7484 
3. 2023-24 25 9972 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para no. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
Less consumption of Pesticides 
2. The Committee note that the Pesticide Industry in India has a size of 
50,000 crore and generic Pesticides are in demand worldwide. There is 
tremendous potential in the  Pesticides industry, which needs to be tapped. 
The Committee, however, regret to note  that consumption of the pesticides 
in the country is 0.5 kg per hectare whereas the  consumption in some other 
countries is as high as 17 Kg per  hectare, even though India  is the second 
largest producer of agricultural products. The Department has clariﬁed that 
countries like China and Japan have intensive agriculture —green house as 
well as poly house agriculture in which a  number of crops are gro wn in and 
due to intensiﬁcation of  agriculture and the ‘spring technology’. These 
countries have a lead over India. Besides,  the management of intensive 
agriculture in these countries is relatively better. Therefore, these countries 
use more pesticides. The Committee feel that signiﬁcantly lower penetration 
levels of pesticides in India as compared to other countries like China clearly 
suggest that the market for pesticides is still largely unpenetrated with huge 
room for future growth in the country. Furth ermore, with rising population, 
food demand is  expected to continue to increase in the coming years and 
pesticides will play a key role in increasing the average  crop yields per  
hectare. 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that it is high time tha t the 
Department acts promptly to enhance the use of agrochemicals/pesticides in 
the country. The Committee  recommend that the Department should study 
the agricultural practices of countries like Japan and China for suitably 
adopting the same in India. There is an urgent need for the Government to 
take initiatives to give a boost to the Pesticides industry. Increasing  
availability of pesticides and low interest rates of farm loans would 
encourage farmers to use more pesticides in order to improve crop yields. 
Initiatives should be taken to increase awareness of Pesticides among 
farmers. Farmers should be educated on the right usage  of Pesticides in 
terms of quantity, the right application methodology and appropriate  
chemicals to be used for identified pest problems, etc. 
Reply: 

Page 31 of 37 
 
D/o Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has informed that the use of 
Pesticides depends  on several factors like area under cultivation, type of crop, 
cropping intensity, agro climatic  conditions, soil condition, pests (e.g. weed, insect 
and disease) situation etc. However, with the objective of educating, orienting and 
training of farming community about the judicious use of pesticides and use as per 
the prescriptions given in the label and leaﬂets, Central and State  Governments 
through Central Integrated Pest Management Centers (CIPMCs) of the Directorate 
of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage (DPPQ&S) and Farmers Field Sc hools, 
ensure that farmers are provided right knowledge/ information about 
recommended pesticides use. 
Further, State Governments and Union Territories report data related  to 
consumption of pesticides to Central Government. As per the provided data, the 
trend of consumption of chemical pesticides has varied from year to year and State 
to State. The state wise details on  consumption of chemical pesticides and bio - 
pesticides is attached at Annexure-I and II,  (quantities are in MT)  respectively. 
Also, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has been organizing Farmers 
Training Programme as mentioned in point No. 2 above, with the objective of 
increasing awareness  about the efficacy of pesticides and the need for their 
increased usage judiciously to boost productivity of the crops. 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para no. 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
Indian Chemicals Industry 
3. The Committee note that the Indian Chemical Industry stands 6th 
globally in sales values, its present market size is around US $ 220 billion and 
it is expected to reach US $  300 billion by the year 2025. Further, in the 
agrochemicals sector, India is the 4 th largest producer and exporter and in 
dyes-stuﬀs India is 2 nd largest producer and exporter.  Moreover, it 
contributes 9.40% of manufacturing gross value added and 1.69 % of  
National Gross value added. Also, it employs around four million people 
directly and indirectly.  However, it is worrisome that Indian Chemical 
Industry is the net importer and in ﬁnancial year 2020-21, the trade deﬁcit 
stood at Rs. 1.75 lakh crore. The main reason was the  non-availability of  
feedstocks and mining agents. 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee believe that Indian Chemical Industry 
has a potential to grow further an d therefore would earnestly desire that the 
Government should extend all possible help and assistance to resolve the 
issues being faced by the Indian Chemical Industry. Though the Department, 
in order to reduce dependence on imports, is working on introducing the PLI 

Page 32 of 37 
 
scheme in the chemicals sector for those  chemicals which are majorly 
imported from a single source and have multiple uses, the  Committee 
recommend that the Government act with urgency to minimize the trade  
deficit in the near future. 
Reply: 
In order to  promote the  manufacturing of chemicals and petrochemicals in the 
country, Department has set up three Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemical 
Investment Region (PCPIR) in the state of Gujarat,  Andhra Pradesh and Odisha. 
These PCPIRs have attracted investment of Rs. 2,43,027 Crore. 
In order to protect the domestic industry from the unfair trade practices, 
Department of  Chemicals and Petrochemicals makes BIS Standards mandatory. 
Also, in consultation with domestic industry, Department recommends to rationalize 
the duty to D/o Revenue on imported products for providing level playing field to the 
domestic industry. 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para no. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
Consumption of Agrochemicals in the country 
4. The Committee note that Agrochemicals are chemicals that are used 
to control  pests, pathogens, etc. and supply nutrients to the soil. Further, 
Insecticides/Pesticides are broadly termed as Agrochemicals and play a vital 
role in increasing agricultural productivity by protecting crops from insects, 
pests, fungi, weed etc. Agrochemical sector is also contributing in a big way 
to the GDP as well as to gross value addition manufacturing. The global 
market of agrochemicals is 4,50,000 crore. However,  the Indian size of the 
agrochemicals market is about Rs. 50,000 crore. India is a net exporter of 
agrochemicals. A perusal of the country-wise consumption of Agrochemicals 
inter-alia reveals that the consumption of Agrochemicals in Kilo tonnes by 
China is 1763, USA 407, Brazil 377, Argentina 172, Canada 90, France 85, 
Russia 76 and their world share are 43 percent, 10 percent, 9 percent, 4 
percent, 2 percent, 2 percent, 2 percent respectively,  whereas the 
consumption of Agrochemicals in India in Kilo tonnes is just 58 and its world 
share is just 1 percent. The Committee desire to know the reasons for this 
huge diﬀerence in consumption of Agrochemicals between India and other 
countries. The Committee  would further like to be apprised of the concrete 
steps being taken to increase the consumption of agrochemicals in India and 
to increase its world share. 
Reply: 

Page 33 of 37 
 
The Government has implemented several measures to reduce the consumption 
of chemical  pesticides and instead promote Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
techniques, emphasizing the use of bio pesticides and organic farming methods, 
providing training and extensi on services to farmers on sustainable  agriculture 
practices, incentivizing the adoption of eco - friendly pest control methods, and 
strict enforcing regulations on the sale and use of pesticides to ensure their 
judicious application. Additionally, the gover nment encourages research and  
development efforts towards developing safer and more effective alternatives to 
chemical pesticides, aiming to safeguard public health and the environment while 
promoting sustainable agricultural practices nationwide. 
Government of India has taken various steps to promote the use of bio pesticides. 
Simplified guidelines have been formulated by Registration Committee (RC) for the 
registration of bio pesticides. For bio- pesticides, provisional registrations are being 
granted under Section 9 (3B) of the Act, along with the permission for 
commercialization during the provisional registration period of two years based on 
the confirmation of molecular identity of the strain from ICAR  National Bureau of 
Agriculturally Important Microo rganisms (ICAR-NBAIM) and quality  verification of 
the product from Central Insecticide Laboratory (CIL). These strategic initiatives 
underscore the commitment to accelerating the adoption of bio pesticides in Indian 
agriculture, aligning with the broader goal of sustainable and eco-friendly farming 
practices. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 34 of 37 
 
CHAPTER -V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-NIL-            
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
12 December, 2024 CHAIRPERSON, 
21 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 35 of 37 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMEN DATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FORTY -SIXTH REPORT (SEVENTEETH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  (2023-240 ON  
‘INSECTICIDES &PESTICIDES - PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT INCLUDING SAFE 
USAGE- LICENCING REGIME FOR INSECTICIDES’ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS). 
 
 
 
       
   I. Total No. of Observations/Recommendations                                                    21 
  II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
      Rec. Sl. No. 1,4,5,6,7,8,10,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19 and 20         
                                                                                                                                  
Total:     16  
                                                                            Percentage of Total:     80%     
  III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like to pursue in  
       view of the Government’s reply: 
         Rec. Sl. No. Ni                                          
Total:     00 
Percentage of Total:    0%         
 IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
       have not been accepted by the Committee:  
        Rec. Sl. No. 2,3,9 and 11                                                               Total:   
04                                                                                   
 Percentage of Total:   20%    
 V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final r eplies of 
the Government are of interim nature:                                                                                              
    Rec. Sl. No. Nil                     
                                                  Total:     00 
                                                                         Percentage of Total:  0%
  

Page 36 of 37 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-25) MINUTES OF THE SIXTH 
SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 12 th December, 2024 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1600 hrs. in the Committee Room ‘D’, PHA, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
 
     SHRI AZAD KIRTI JHA -    CHAIRPERSON 
 
     MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Robert Bruce C 
4. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
5. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Dr. Sambit Patra  
9. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
10. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
11. Shri Eatala Rajender 
12. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
13. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
14. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
15. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Subhash Barala 
17. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
18. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
19. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
20. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
21. Shri Tejveer Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT  
4. Smt. Suman Arora   - Additional Secretary 

Page 37 of 37 
 
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
6. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
7. Shri Nagendra Suman  - Deputy Secretary 
8. Shri Abhishek Kumar  -  Deputy Director 
9. Ms. Neelam Bhave   - Committee Officer 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to th e sitting of the  
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft  
Reports:  
(i) First Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observation/Recommendation of the Committee contained in their 
Forty Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Insecticides and Pesticides – 
Promotion and Development including safe usage licensing regime for 
insecticides’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals,  
(ii) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
(iii) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
(iv) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
(v) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the 
Members. 
4.      After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee  
without any amendment. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and 
present/lay the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament in light of fact ual 
verifications received from the concerned Ministry/Departments. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 