i 
 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Health hazards due to use of 
compromised/substandard quality of food -grade plastics and their exposure to 
extreme Indian climatic conditions’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2026/ MAGHA, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
  
18 


ii 
 
CC&F NO. 198 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the Thirteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Health 
hazards due to use of compromised/substandard quality of food-grade plastics 
and their exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10th February, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10th February, 2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2026/ MAGHA, 1947 (SAKA) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
11 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies  
 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 06th January, 2026. 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘Health hazards due to use of 
compromised/substandard quality of food -grade plastics and 
their exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions’  of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals). 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
(2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri G.K. Vasan 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam  - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirteenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Health hazards due to use of 
compromised/substandard quality of food -grade plastics and their exposure to 
extreme Indian climatic conditions’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
2.  The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 20th August, 202 5. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers furnished their replies on 20th November, 2025 
indicating Action Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting 
held on 06th January, 2026. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
06 January, 2026 CHAIRPERSON, 
16 Pausa, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
    CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
            

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with action taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and  
Fertilizers contained in their Thirteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Health hazards 
due to use of compromised/substandard quality of food -grade plastics and their 
exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions ’ pertaining to the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
1.2 The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 20th August, 2025. It contained 1 3 Observations/Recommendations. The 
Replies of the Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been 
received and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Rec. Para No. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9,10, 11,12 and 13   
(Total-09) 
Chapter-II  
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
Rec. Para No. NIL                                                         
(Total–‘NIL’) 
Chapter–III  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration: 
Rec. Para No. 1, 3, 4 and 5 
(Total– 04) 
Chapter-IV  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Rec. Para No. NIL 
(Total-  ‘NIL’) 
Chapter–V  
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I be furnished to them within three months 
of the presentation of this Report. 

2 
 
 
1.4      The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 
STUDY TO DETECT PLASTICS AND NANO PLASTICS 
 
1.5  The Committee note that the Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI) is funding a project w.e.f March, 2024 entitled “Micro and Nano-plastics 
as Emerging Food Contaminants: Establishing Validated Methodology and 
Understanding the Prevalence in Different Food Matrices”. While the objective of the 
project is statedly to develop and validate analytical methods to detect micro and nano-
plastics in various food products and assess their prevalence and exposure levels, the 
duration of the project is t wo years and sanctioned to three (03) research institutes 
namely (i) CSIR -Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow, (ii) ICAR -Central 
Institute of Fisheries Technology (ICAR -CIFT), Kochi; and (iii) Birla Institute of 
Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani. The Committee note that a considerable time 
period of more than one year have already elapsed and while the research project was 
under progress, the method validation for microplastic detection (PC, PET and 
Polystyrene) in packaged animal products,  beverages and packaged drinking water 
was reportedly completed. The Committee, therefore, desire that findings of the 
research projects as and when completed may be furnished by the Department/FSSAI 
highlighting the actionable points thereon for tackling the menace of plastics and nano-
plastics; and protection of human health from the use of compromised/substandard 
quality of food grade plastics and their exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions. 
The Committee find that sampling and analyzing of the packaged food products from 
Rajasthan, Kerala and Uttar Pradesh was under progress. The Committee desire that 
the same may be put to a fruitful completion and findings/recommendations alongwith 
the details of steps taken/proposed to be taken by the Departm ent/FSSAI/BIS in 
pursuance of those findings may be furnished within the timelines set.  The Committee 
further desire that feasibility of adequate publicity of these research findings may also 
be explored so that they are disseminated to all the citizens. 
 
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The project titled “Micro -and Nano -plastics as Emerging Food 
Contaminants: Establishing Validated Methodologies and Understanding the 
Prevalence in Different Food Matrices” was launched by FSSAI in March, 2024 
in collaboration with 3 research institutes v iz. CSIR -Indian Institute of 
Toxicology Research (CSIR -IITR), Lucknow; ICAR -Central Institute of 

3 
 
Fisheries Technology (ICAR-CIFT), Kochi and Birla Institute of Technology and 
Science (BITS), Pilani. The duration of the project is 2 years. The research is 
still in progress and is scheduled to completed by March -2026. FSSAI has 
noted the recommendations of the committee for future compliances. 
 
FSSAI has also submitted that the impact of microplastics on human health are 
not yet known scientifically established. Hence more studies have to be carried 
out to better characterize exposure and link of microplastics from food articles 
and its impact of human health. In this regard, FSSAI is coordinating with ICMR, 
New Delhi, to carry out a study on the risk assessment of the impact of 
microplastics on human health”.  
 
1.7 The Committee in their 13th report had inter-alia desired that the findings 
of the research projects initiated by FSSAI regarding Micro and Nano -plastics 
as Emerging Food Contaminants  as and when completed may be furnished 
highlighting the actionable points thereon. The Committee had further noted 
that the sampling and analysing of the packaged food products from Rajasthan, 
Kerala and Uttar Pradesh may be put to a fruitful completion and the 
findings/recommendations should also be furnished with in the time line set. In 
their action taken replies  with regard to the former , the Department has 
submitted that the project titled “Micro -and Nano-plastics as Emerging Food 
Contaminants: Establishing Validated Methodologies and Understanding the 
Prevalence in Different Food Matrices” was launched by FSSAI in March, 2024 
and the research is still in progress and is scheduled to be completed by March-
2026. The Committee therefore recommend, that as assured to them the project 
may invariably be completed by the deadline set by the Department. With regard 
to the later, the Department has not furnished any information to the Committee 
though the sampling and analysing of the package food products from the 
Rajasthan, Kerala and Uttar Pradesh was in progress. However, the Department 
has submitted that according to FSSAI the impact of micro plastics on human 
health are not yet known scientifically established , as such more studies need 
to be carried out. The Committee therefore also recommend that further studies 
be expedited and all necessary action may be taken in the matter and they may 
be apprised accordingly.    
 
  

4 
 
(RecommendationNo.3) 
 
COORDINATION BETWEEN FSSAI AND DCPC FOR EFFECTIVE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS PACKAGING 
REGULATIONS, 2018 
 
1.8 The Committee note that, there is lack of coordination between Food Safety 
and standards Authority of India (FSSAI) and the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals (DCPC) for effective implementation of the Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging) Regulation 2018. The Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI) was established and entrusted with the responsibility of implementation 
of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 ( FSS Act).  The Committee note that 
though FSSAI was established and entrusted with responsibility of implementation of 
the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 but unfortunately it has a long way to go. 
The Committee note with concern that no other concrete actionable mechanism of a 
robust coordination between the FSSAI and the Department exists. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that the Department and FSSAI should work in close tandem 
and bring out a robust coordination mechanism for effective implementation of the 
Food Safety and Standards (Pack aging) Regulation, 2018. The Committee further 
note that a n expert committee was constituted by FSSAI to develop 
guidelines/advisory document regarding use of safe    food    packaging    materials    
by   various    food     service establishments like hotels/ restaurants / street vendors 
etc. wherein the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals (DCPC) also participated. 
The Committee desire the details of the expert Committee, its mandate, composition, 
work done, recommendations given etc. may be furnish to the Committee.  
 
1.9 FSSAI has notified the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 
2018, which lay down the general and specific requirements applicable to different 
packaging materials. These regulations, however, are primarily viewed as governing 
pre-packaged food commodities. To address is the concerns emerging from the use 
of non-standardised materials, an Expert Committee (EC) was constituted vide order 
dated 03rd May 2023 and subsequently extended vide order dated 09th January 2024, 
with the mandate to dev elop a guideline/advisory document on the safe use of food 
packaging materials by food service establishments such as hotels, restaurants, and 
street vendors. 
 
Expert Committee (EC) members: 
The expert committee comprises the following members: 
i. Prof. Vimal Katiyar, Dean - R&D & Professor, IIT – Guwahati (Chairperson) 
ii. Sh. Avinash Mishra, Former Advisor (Water & Land Resources), Niti Aayog 
iii. Mr Rajeev Kumar Dwivedi, Director, TTRC Lohiacorp 

5 
 
iv. Dr. Rajeshwar Matche, Chief Scientist, CFTRI, Mysore 
v. Dr. Sanjay Kr Chattopadhyay, Convener, Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
Advisory   Forum, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
vi. Dr. Pasupathy  Venkat, National Advisor, Federation of Hotel & Restaurant 
Association of India, Delhi 
vii. Shri Kamlesh Singh, Scientist E & Division Head (DH) of the IPC -III Division, 
Central Pollution Control Board 
 
Mandate: 
The terms of reference/mandate of the Expert Committee is as follows: 
i. To review the definition of food grade packaging materials; 
ii. To examine alternate packaging materials for use by food service 
establishments; 
iii. To develop a guideline document regarding the use of safe & suitable food 
packaging materials by various food service establishments and to suggest 
a list of packaging materials based on the nature of the cooked food product. 
iv. To conduct survey and evaluate the food packaging materials currently used 
by the food service establishment. 
 
Work Done by the Expert Committee: 
Five meetings of the Expert Committee (EC) were held on 26th May 2023, 01st & 
16th June 2023 (2nd meeting in two parts), 11th January 2024, 13th June 2024, 
and 10th January 2025. During the 5th meeting, the EC finalised its 
recommendations on the Terms of Reference and submitted the compiled report. 
  
The report was subsequently placed before the 13th meeting of the Scientific Panel 
on Packaging (SP-20) held on 21st February 2025, where it was endorsed. It was 
further endorsed by the Scientific Committee in its 53rd meeting held on 15th May 
2025. Therea fter, the report underwent stakeholder consultations, during which 
stakeholders appreciated the efforts of FSSAI and raised no objections to the 
proposed guidelines. Consultations with States/UTs were carried out in the Central 
Advisory Committee held on 27th May 2025. 
  
Finally, the report was placed before the 47th Food Authority meeting on 06th August 
2025. The draft of the Final Report of the EC is placed as Annexure –I. 
 
1.10 The Committee note that the Department in the ir action taken notes has 
submitted the composition of the Expert Committee constituted by FSSAI to 
develop guidelines/advisory document regarding use of safe food packing 
materials. The Department has further submitted that five meetings of the Expert 

6 
 
Committee were held and the Expert Committee submitted its report which was 
subsequently placed before Scientific Panel of FSSAI and also before stake 
holders and finally it was placed before the 47 th food authority meeting. The 
Committee do appreciate the work done by the Expert Committee. However, the 
Committee desire to know the impact  of the recommendations of the report of 
Expert Committee which they have  made in minimizing the use of plastic for 
food packaging in the country  and in restricting its harmful effects . The 
Committee also desire to know the steps taken by the FSSAI, the Department 
and all other concerned organizations to minimize the use of plastic and also to 
minimize its harmful effects on human health. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the whole process of constitution of Expert Committee and 
submission of its report would be good in paper only if it fails to minimize the 
use of plastic and its harmful effects. The Committee desire that they may be 
apprised accordingly at the earliest. 
 
 (RecommendationNo.4) 
 
FSSAI’S SCIENTIFIC PANEL ON PACKAGING  
 
1.11 The Committee note that the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) 
Regulations, 2018, focus largely on packaging materials such as glass, metal, paper, 
and plastic. However, a comprehensive framework for safety of biodegradable and 
compostable plastics, testing methods and long-term performance and migration limits 
for em erging chemicals from food packaging, such as: Bisphenol A (BPA), per 
fluorinated Alkyl substances (PFAS), phthalates and other harmful chemicals found in 
plastic packaging were under deliberations of FSSAI’s Scientific Panel on Packaging. 
The Committee desire that the findings of Scientific Panel on Packaging on elimination 
of the harmful effects of plastics on human health be furnished to the Committee at 
the earliest. The Committee further recommend that FSSAI come out with a 
comprehensive framework for zero tolerance of plastic contamination in food 
packaging processes. 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“FSSAI’s Scientific Panel on Food Packaging deliberated on the 
presence of PFAS and BPA in Food Packaging and food contact materials and 
their health effects. To mitigate the risk associated with BPA and PFAS  

7 
 
exposure through the food contact materials, the panel recommended as 
below: 
 
(a)    Polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAs) substances shall not be used in 
manufacturing of food contact materials. 
 
(b)   Food contact materials manufactured with polycarbonate and epoxy resins 
shall be free from Bisphenol A (BPA) and its derivatives. 
 
The above -mentioned recommendations of the panel were endorsed by 
Scientific Committee in its 50th meeting held on 11.12.2024 and approved by 
Food Authority in its 46th meeting held on 7th march 2025.  
 
Currently, the draft notification of FSS (Packaging) amendment Regulation, 
2025 is under process of approval by the ministry. 
 
Further, Scientific Panel on Method of Sampling and Analysis is in the process 
of developing analytical method for both the compounds.     
 
With regards to Phthalic acid, bis (2 - ethylhexyl) ester (DEHP), FSS 
(Packaging) Regulation 2018 specifies that the Maximum Migration Limit 
should not exceed 1.5 mg/Kg. 
 
The comprehensive framework for safety of biodegradable and compostable 
plastics will be deliberated in the upcoming meetings of Scientific Panel.  
Further, FSSAI has given research projects to ICAR -IITR, Lucknow, ICAR -
National Research Centre for Grapes (NRCG), Pune and ICAR - Central 
Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), Cochin under FSSAI -National 
Reference Laboratory (NRL) stream. The project under IITR, Lucknow is for the 
establishment of a state-of the-art Analytical Testing Facility for PFAS and their 
related compounds in food and food packaging materials and Chemical Risk 
Assessment for PFAS and their related compounds. The project under NRCG, 
Pune is to develop and validate the analytical method for multi -residue 
Pesticides (including PFAS compounds) in grapes, pomegranate and citrus. 
The project under CIFT, Cochin is to perform a risk assessment of targeted and 
untargeted PFAS in fish and poultry products.”  
 
1.13 The Committee had desired that the findings of Scientific Panel on 
packaging regarding elimination of the harmful effects of plastics on human 
health be furnished to them and FSSAI should come out with a comprehensive 
framework for zero tolerance of plastic contamination in food packaging 
processes. The Department in their action taken replies have apprised the 

8 
 
Committee at length about the findings of scientific panel. However nothing has 
been mentioned regarding comprehensive framework for zero tolerance of 
plastic contamination in packing process. The Committee therefore desire to be 
apprised accordingly of the changes at the ground level regarding elimination 
of the danger posed by plastic contamination.  
 
(RecommendationNo.5) 
 
MIGRATION OF PLASTIC AND NANO PLASTIC IN THE FOOD CONTENTS 
 
1.14 The Committee find that FSSAI had submitted that inspections are carried out 
on outlets of manufacturer where pickle etc are prepared and food vending 
establishment i.e, Restaurants etc on the 44 List of Points drawn up for inspection of 
these units. The C ommittee are of the considered view that while the pickle 
manufactured may qualify the quality test of the FSSAI but instances of contamination 
may occur while they are packed/stored or transported and exposed to high 
temperature when plastic migration occurs in the pickle from its plastic container. This 
exposure can also affect bottled water etc. The Committee finds that no specific 
authority has been assigned to check contamination when migration of the plastic 
occurs. The Committee, therefore, desire th at a specific authority should ensure that 
the migration was as per permissible limits and the pickle was fit for human 
consumption. The Committee also recommend that foolproof measures need to be 
initiated at the earliest to ensure that pickle stored and sold in plastic containers are 
indeed fit for consumption by human beings. To this extent the Committee desire that 
concrete actionable steps to protect human health from the ill effects of plastic/nano 
plastic contamination be taken at the earliest. The Committee desire that information 
regarding the steps taken firstly by the Department, secondly by FSSAI and thirdly by 
BIS may be furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“Regarding the recommendation that a specific authority should ensure 
that the migration in food products/pickles packed in plastic packaging was as 
per permissible limits and it was fit for human consumption, it is submitted that 
activities related to manu facturing, processing, packaging, storage, 
transportation and distribution of food including quality of plastics material 
coming in contact with food products is regulated by FSSAI.  
 
Regarding the steps taken to ensure that the food products/pickles packed in 
plastic packaging are fit for human consumption, the desired information is as 
given below: 

9 
 
 
➢ Indian Standards on Plastic packaging intended for Food application 
 
BIS has published 14 Indian Standards on plastic packaging intended for food  
contact application that cover aspects such as physical and mechanical 
properties, among other criteria. These Indian Standards also specify 
requirements for overall migration, specific migration, and use of food grade 
additives/colorants and pigments.  
 
➢ Indian Standards on Plastic Resin for Food Contact Application 
 
BIS has published 12 Indian Standards for plastic materials (resins) for its safe 
use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water which 
prescribes the requirements of overall migration, use of colorants and pigments 
and residual monomer content, as applicable. 
 
➢ Indian Standards on Positive List of Constituents of Polymers Suitable for Safe 
Use in Food Contact Application 
 
BIS has published 15 Indian Standards providing positive list of constituents of 
polymers suitable for safe use in contact with foodstuffs. 
 
➢ Indian Standards on Suitability of Plastics for Food Packaging 
 
BIS has published an Indian Standard on guide for suitability of plastics for food 
packaging. Under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) 
Regulations, 2018, FSSAI has made it mandatory that Plastic materials used 
for the manufacturing of containers for packing or storing the food products shall 
conform to either of the Indian Standards specifications as provided in Schedule 
III of the regulation. All packaging materials of plastic origin shall pass the 
prescribed overall migration limit of 60mg/kg or 10mg/dm2 when tested as per 
IS 9845 with no visible color migration. Plastic materials and articles shall not 
release the substances in quantities exceeding the specific migration limits. 
Pigments or Colorants for use in plastics in contact  with food products and 
drinking water shall conform to IS: 9833. 
➢ Study regarding the migration of constituents from plastic packaging to food 
product/pickles when exposed to high temperature while packing/storage and 
transportation 
 
BIS has formulated IS 9845: 1998 titled ‘Indian Standard – Determination of 
overall migration of constituents of plastics materials and articles intended to 
come in contact with foodstuffs – Method of analysis’. BIS has constituted a 
Working Group to under take review of IS 9845. The scope of Working Group 
includes evaluation of the adequacy of the Standard IS 9845 viz-a-viz extreme 

10 
 
Indian Climatic conditions with particular attention given to the extraction 
methodology, the choice and suitability of the simulating solvent or extractant, 
and the time -temperature parameters specified for the migration testing of 
constituents in plastic materials. BIS has also decided to institute R&D projects 
to study overall migration and specific migration from different types of plastic 
packaging materials intended for food contact applications, specifically to 
evaluate the influence of extreme temperature conditions. The findings of these 
R&D projects will be considered by BIS to update and upgrade the existing 
Indian standard IS 9845.” 
 
 
1.16 As regard s recommendation of the Committee regarding a specific 
authority which should ensure that the migration in food products/pickles 
packed in plastic packaging was as per permissible limits and it was  indeed fit 
for human consumption, it was submitted by the Department in the action taken 
replies that activities related to manufacturing, processing, packaging, storage, 
transportation and distribution of food including quality of plastics material 
coming in contact with food products was regulated by FSSAI. The Committee 
do agree with the contention of the Department. However , the Department can 
not absolve of its responsibility to protect human health from the risk of the 
plastic contamination by merely submitting this fact . As such the Committee 
recommend that instead of running away from its responsibilities the 
Department should work in close coordination with FSSAI for eliminating plastic 
migration during transportation of edible items/pickle s etc. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the step taken by the Department in this regard. 
  
  

11 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No.2) 
 
SUBSTANTIVE ROLE OF FSSAI IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF FOOD SAFETY 
AND STANDARDS PACKAGING REGULATIONS 2018 
 
 The Committee note that FSSAI has been entrusted with the responsibility for 
the implementation of the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 
by way of notifying (i) Regulations or by bringing amendments; (ii) by verifying the 
compliance t hrough inspection and surveillance; and (iii) by creating awareness 
through training of food handlers. In this connection, the Committee further note that 
FSSAI through its regional offices was regularly conducting inspections, audits, 
monitoring, random s ampling and surveillance and have trained around twenty -two 
lakhs Food handlers under Food Safety Training and Certifications (FoSTaC) 
program. Though the Committee are of the view that training of food handlers was one 
of the steps which could lead to minimization of harmful effects of use of compromised 
/ substandard quality of food grade plastics and needs more intensification, the 
Committee feels that much more needs to be done by the FSSAI. It appears to the 
Committee that FSSAI has failed to play a su bstantive role in the implementation of 
the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 and the Food Safety 
and Standards Act, 2006 was not enforced effectively and failed to counter use of 
compromised and substandard quality of food grade plas tic. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that FSSAI should come out with a roadmap to implement the Food 
Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 strictly and bring forth requisite 
amendments to the Regulation as may be deemed fit in the interest of  ordinary 
citizens. 
 
2.2 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is mandated to lay down 
science-based standards for articles of food and to regulate their manufacture, 
storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure availability of safe and wholesome food 
for human consumption. To ensure compliance with the set standards, limits, & other 
statutory requirements under the Act and Food Safety & Standards Regulations 
(FSSR), FSSAI, through its four regional offices and State/UT food safety authorities, 
conducts regular surveillance, inspections, sampling, and enforcement activities in the 
country. The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has notified the 
Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018, which set standards and 
migration limits for all food packaging materials, including plastics. Further sub -
regulation 3(14) of the ibid regulation requires every food business operator to obtain 
a certificate of conformity from an NABL -accredited laboratory for any packaging 
material that comes in direct contact with food or is likely to do so. Further, under the 
Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) 
Regulations, 2011, only food -grade materials may be used for primary packaging. 

12 
 
Plastic containers for packing or storing food must also comply with the relevant Indian 
Standards specified in Schedule III of the 2018 regulations.  The recommendation of 
the committee has been noted. The roadmap for the strict implementation of the Food 
Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation 2018 is under consideration by FSSAI”. 
 
 
 (RecommendationNo.6) 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF ALTERNATIVES TO PLASTIC 
 
2.3  As regards development of alternatives to plastic use, the Committee 
find that Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology (CIPET) was 
granted Rs.100 Crore as planned fund for infrastructure development and it has 
authorized three laborato ries. The Committee was apprised that work in this regard 
was in progress in CIPET Bhubneshwar and CIPET, Bangaluru with full support of the 
Department. The Committee desire that the work of developing alternatives to the 
Plastics is very important and imperative to help curb plastic usage and its ill effect on 
human health and therefore urges CIPET to complete the project and comeforth with 
a concrete alternatives. 
 
2.4 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“CIPET under Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers, Govt. of India has established School for Advanced 
Research in Petrochemicals (SARP) at Chennai, Bhubaneswar and Bengaluru. 
To reduce reliance on petroleum -based polymers, CIPET’s R&D centers at 
Bhubaneswar and Bengaluru are actively involved in developing Biodegradable 
and compostable alternative. These compositions include polylactic acid (PLA), 
polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), and  poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) derived 
from agro-waste, seaweed and other bioresources. These bioplastics are being 
formulated to degrade under controlled industrial composting conditions in 
accordance with IS/ ISO 17088 standard, ensuring environm ental safety 
intended for application in the area of Packaging as well as Agricultural sector. 
Additionally, the R&D labs have also developed agro -based biodegradable 
mulch film formulations with improved performance and sustained release 
mulches. Various renewable resources, such as starch, lignocellulosic natural 
fibre, fruit seeds, Sea Weeds, Castor Oil etc. are being utilised to develop eco-
friendly resin systems.  
 
CIPET has completed the following developmental projects: 
• Evaluation of Compostability of biodegradable polymer as per IS 17088: 
for 80 nos. of Industries/Entrepreneurs/start-ups 
• Developed biodegradable stretch film for M/s Hindalco 
• Developed biodegradable seaweed-based biopolymer for M/s Sea6 
• Provided Consultancy services towards the development of 
biodegradable material for M/s Ecocorn Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru; M/s BPC 
Bioproduct, Bengaluru; M/s Earthworks Biomat Private Limited, 
Bengaluru.” 
 

13 
 
 
 (RecommendationNo.7) 
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT TO MINIMISE HARMFUL EFFECTS OF 
PLASTIC AND NANO PLASTICS 
 
2.5  The Committee note that two Centre of Excellence (CoEs ) have been 
entrusted the work of finding alternatives to the plastics. The Committee further note 
with concern that these CoEs were engaged long back about six years ago for the 
purpose but two COEs could manage to come out with only one Polylactic acid which 
was not biodegradable but compostable and indigenous technology have since been 
developed for which pilot scale testing was under progress. The Committee are 
however dismayed that these CoEs have not been able to make any breakthrough 
even after a lap s of a considerable time period of over six years. The Committee 
observe that the slow pace of work being carried out by the two CoEs need thorough 
review as to whether these centres are indeed delivering excellent work as expected. 
The Committee, therefor e, recommends that the functioning of these CoEs may be 
reviewed as per the extant benchmarks set for CoEs. The Committee may be apprised 
of the action taken in this regard. 
 
2.6 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“Out of the 18 CoEs approved, so far, by the Department, three CoEs i.e. IIT, 
Guwahati, CIPET-LARPM, Bhubaneshwar and IIT Madras is working on the 
bio-compostable plastics and applications.  
 
The Centre of Excellence in Sustainable Polymers at IIT Guwahati was 
approved in 2013. The major work done by the CoE so far is as follows: 
 
• Bioplastic plant with 100 Kg Pilot Plant for production of PLA (Poly Lactic 
Acid), PBAT (Polybutylene Adipate Terephthalate), PCL  
(Polycaprolactone production) with fifty Kg per batch Lactide Production 
plant and PLA production in downstream reactor facility was established; 
• monomer production processes for adipic acid, succinic acid, lactic acid 
and butanediol was established; 
• pilot plant to produce compostable bags was established.  
• worked on developing Poly (lactic acid) nanocomposites formulation and 
method of making thereof and has filed patent in this regard.  
• Formulation of heat stable stereocomplex poly (lactic acid) composites 
was developed and got patent for it.  
• The CoE, since inception, has filed 29 patents of which 20 have been 
granted and has transferred 10 new technologies/ products to the 
industry and has also published around 150 research papers.  
The Centre has assisted the industry in NE region for manufacturing various 
biocompostable plastics applications and also has developed new 
technologies.  
 
The Centre of Excellence on Bio -engineered Sustainable Polymeric Systems (CoE -

14 
 
BeSPS) was established in 2019 . The CoE focuses on development of eco - friendly 
formulations derived from renewable resource based polymers like PLA, PBAT, 
PHBH, PCL etc. for application in Packaging and Agricultural Sectors. The CoE has 
developed Sustainable Agri-Mulches from PLA, PBAT & Starch based formulations 
for improved Weed Control, Plant Growth, Inherent Moisture Stability while retaining 
the soil fertility as well as compostability. Additionally, sustained release mulches 
comprising of NPK -fertilizers with reduced quantity for better growth of plants have 
been developed.TheCoE has also developed high barrier compostable overwraps with 
improved heat sealability and other functional properties for packaging sectors.    
 
Further, CoE in Biodegradable Packaging Materials (BioPack) has been approved in 
2024 at IIT, Madras. The Centre aims to develop cost -effective, scalable, and zero -
waste alternatives to conventional plastic applications through biodegradable and 
compostable materials. The research outputs are awaited.” 
 
 
(RecommendationNo.8) 
 
REVISION OF STANDARDS BY Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
 
2.7 The Committee note with serious concern that BIS does not have standards 
governing microwave bowls as admitted by the representative of BIS during oral 
evidence. The Committee, however find that BIS was working to make standards for 
Food grade bowls and sp oons but could not be finalized as it could not pass the 
requirements of requisite safety standards, but on the intervention of the Committee, 
BIS constituted a working panel to revise ISI 9845 standards and also put in its scope 
to study the harmful effects emanating from use of plastics when exposed to extreme 
climatic conditions. The Committee were apprised that the working panel was 
expected to complete its study in about two months time period to revise the standard. 
The Committee, therefore, urges the  BIS to expedite the findings of the panel and 
complete the study within the stipulated time period of two months as assured to the 
Committee. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this matter. 
 
2.8 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“The detailed status of various studies and projects is as follows: 
 
1) Status of formulation of Indian Standard on Microwave Bowls: 
The ‘Plastics Packaging Sectional Committee’, of BIS has taken up formulation 
of Indian Standard on “Plastics Bowls for Microwave Use” by constituting a 
Working Group under Convenorship of CIPET, Kochi to prepare a draft 
standard on the subject. The Workin g Group is currently preparing a working 
draft of the standard focusing on key quality and safety aspects of such product. 
The Working Group is expected to complete the assigned task and submit the 
working draft by the end of December 2025. Subsequently, further actions for 
public consultation on the draft standard and, finalization and publication of the 
Indian Standard will be undertaken on priority. 
 
2) Status of Study regarding the migration of constituents from plastic 

15 
 
packaging to food product/pickles when exposed to high temperature while 
packing/storage and transportation 
IS 9845: 1998 is Indian Standard for Determination of overall migration of 
constituents of plastics materials and articles intended to come in contact with 
foodstuffs and their Method of analysis. BIS has constituted a Working Group 
to undertake review of IS 9845. The scope of Working Group includes 
evaluation of the adequacy of the Standard IS 9845 viz -a-viz extreme Indian 
Climatic conditions with particular attention given to the extraction methodology, 
the choice and suitability of the simulating solvent  or extractant, and the time -
temperature parameters specified for the migration testing of constituents in 
plastic materials.  
Recognizing the diverse environmental stresses across the country, the 
Working Group (WG) identified the need for a systematic and detailed study to 
understand how such extreme climatic conditions affect the safety and 
performance of plastic packaging, particularly in applications such as packaging 
for water and pickles. Upon reviewing the subject, the Working Group 
concluded that the scope of study should not be restricted to specific food 
categories alone. Instead, it shall be broadened to cover a wide range of plastic 
packaging materials used for different varieties of foods. This would ensure a 
more comprehensive assessment of migration behavior and overall suitability 
of plastics under extreme climatic variations. 
 
With the approval of BIS Sectional Committee, the Working Group has prepared 
two Terms of Reference (ToRs) for R&D studies: 
a) Study on Overall Migration from Different Types of Plastic 
Packaging Materials Intended for Food Contact Applications. 
b) Study on Specific Migration from Different Types of Plastic 
Packaging Materials Intended for Food Contact Applications. 
These ToRs  have been prepared specifically to address the influence of 
extreme temperatures on commonly used plastic packaging categories such as 
PET bottles, recycled -PET bottles, polycarbonate cans, laminates with food -
contact coatings, laminates with sealant films, and other packaging types. The 
studies will focus on packaging applications across diverse food matrices, 
including water, carbonated soft drinks, alcoholic beverages, acidic foods, fatty 
foods, snacks, pickles, and hot-filled products.  
 
BIS has invited technical and financial proposals for undertaking the studies 
from eligible academic and R&D institutions by 14 November 2025. Keeping in 
view the extensive work envisaged in the ToRs the maximum duration for 
completion of the R&D projects has been prescribed as 6 months. The report 
and findings of these studies will be put up to the PCD 27 Sectional Committee 
for review of relevant Indian Standard.” 
 
 
(RecommendationNo.9) 
 
2.9 As regard provisions of Penalty/punishment to defaulters/violators of Food 
Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018, the Committee find that 
provisions for penalties have been given in Sections 48 to 67 of the Food Safety and 

16 
 
Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018. The Penalties provided for the production, 
sale, storage etc. of food which was in contravention of the Regulations includes both 
fines as well as imprisonment. For instance under Section 54,55,56,57,58,61 and 63 
of the regulations penalty can be levied for contravention of provisions of the 
Regulation and under Section 59 imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months and also with fine which may extend to three lac rupees can be imposed. The 
Committee des ire that they may be furnished data on levy of 
fine/penalties/imprisonment for violation of these regulations for the last three years. 
The Committee also desire that these provisions of the Regulations may be 
implemented in letter and spirit by the FSSAI. 
 
2.10 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“Packaging Material in direct contact with food product are sampled at pre -
packaging stage at the manufacturing unit of Food Business Operators (FBOs). 
Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 stipulates that 
every manufacturer of food produc ts shall obtain the Certificate of Conformity 
(CoC), issued by NABL accredited laboratory, for the packaging material which 
comes in the direct contact with food or layers likely to come in contact with 
food. All States and Union Territories have been fur ther directed to strengthen 
the monitoring and intensify the sampling and testing of food-contact packaging 
materials to verify and ascertain compliance with the Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018. The details with respect to 
inspection, Non-Compliance and improvement notice issued are as follows: 
 
Year Overall 
Inspection 
conducted on 
Licensed FBOS 
Non-Compliance 
observed 
regarding Food 
grade Packaging 
material 
No. of Improvement 
Notice issued 
2023-24 2,32,534 5453 2732 
2024-25 1,66,943 3442 1540 
 
FSSAI has submitted that details on levy of fine/penalties/imprisonment for the 
last three years is pending with the States/UTs and it will take some time to 
submit.” 
 
 
(RecommendationNo.10) 
 
2.11 The Committee are dismayed to note the figures of inspections of licenced food 
business operators conducted viz-a-viz the figures of non compliance reported as they 
are not proportionate. Out of the overall inspections conducted on 2,32,638 licensed 
food business operators, non -compliance reported was only 4,765 cases during the 
year (2023-24) and only 3,063 cases during the year (2024-25) out of 1,68,000 overall 
inspections conducted on licensed food business operators. The Committee observe 
that the figures sighted on non-compliance does not appear to be realistic for the whole 
country for one full year. The Committee therefore desire that the basis of these data 

17 
 
may be re-visited and reasons furnished for such non-compliance figures be furnished. 
The Committee are of the considered view that adequate number of inspections were 
not conducted specially in those areas/sectors where there is non -compliance to the 
regulations. To this extent, the Committee strongly recommend that a robust 
inspection mechanisam with specific periodicity inspections and stipulated to cover all 
sectors may be put in place to overcome the present lacuna. 
 
2.12 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“To ensure compliance with food quality, packaging standards, and related 
requirements, FSSAI, through order dated 02nd May 2022, implemented 
inspection checklists based on Schedule 4 of the Food Safety and Standards 
(Licensing & Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011. Under this 
mechanism, FSSAI conduct regular inspections of Food Business Operators 
falling under High-Risk category on priority with frequency of inspection at least 
once a year, including checks on food -grade packaging materials. The data 
previously shared was based on records available in Food Safety Compliance 
System (FoSCoS) portal. Further, the parameter/requirement of compliance 
with food packaging material as provided under the Food Safety and Standards 
Regulations has been made as “Critical” parameter in the inspection 
checklists.” 
 
 
 (RecommendationNo.11) 
 
STUDY BY ICMR ON EXPOSURE OF BISPHENOL A (BPA) AND BISPHENOL S 
(BPS) ON RATS 
 
2.13 The Committee note that Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) has 
conducted a preliminary study on Rats exposed to Bisphenol A (BPA) and Bisphenol 
S (BPS) chemicals used in manufacturing plastic and the study found that there were 
serious ill effects of said exposure on Rats to the extent that their metabolic and 
reproductive functions were altered. The Committee have also been apprised that to 
validate the findings of the preliminary study, a bigger study on animals and human 
beings need to be conducted, which has not yet been done. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the harmful effects of exposure to plastic were very serious and 
an imminent danger to mankind as evidenced by the findings of the preliminary study 
on Rats. The Committee, ther efore, recommend that studies be conducted so that 
reliable data on the harmful impacts of plastic contamination be collated. The 
Committee recommend that the Department, FSSAI, BIS should collectively come out 
with a concrete actionable solution to addres s the alarming situation being faced by 
present day citizens. 
 
2.14 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“FSSAI has implemented specific restrictions on Bisphenol A for Foods for 
infant nutrition. In accordance with the Food Safety and Standards (Foods for 

18 
 
Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 2020, the FSSAI has explicitly mandated that the 
packaging materials used for packaging of Foods for infant nutrition shall be 
free from Bisphenol A (BPA). 
Although there are numerous animal studies available, no clinical data are 
available on the potential hazards associated with food grade plastic in India. 
Therefore, the ICMR has initiated research for the risk exposure analysis using 
samples from a pan -India Survey for Assessment of Markers of Population 
Health, Activity, Diet and Anthropometry (SAMPADA). The ongoing study is 
currently analysing Bisphenol A and different derivatives of Phthalates in blood 
samples collected in a nationally representative SAMPADA survey. Preliminary 
information will be available on the exposure risks of BPA and Phthalates with 
this analysis. In addition, ICMR-NIN plans to measure exposure to BPA through 
diet by analysing food samples collec ted from a pan -India SAMPADA survey. 
Currently, ICMR -National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR -NIN) is developing a 
protocol to assess the migration of BPA into foods.” 
(RecommendationNo.12) 
ILL EFFECTS OF PLASTICS ON HUMAN HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENT 
2.15 As regards ill -effects of plastic and nano -plastic on human health, the 
Committee note that in the Country 60% of our food containers have BPA which 
causes not only reproductive and fertility issues but also causes cancer. Further BPA 
was also responsible for obesity particularly amongst children. The Committee further 
finds that “styrene”, a group of 28 carcinogen was apparently responsible for increased 
cases of cancer in the country. In a nutshell, metabolic syndromes like obesity, 
reproductive as well a s fertility issues, cancer may be linked to the consumption of 
microplastics. Apart from these risks studies have shown microplastics being found in 
human placenta indicating wide spread migration of plastics in the human body. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that elimination of the Plastic and nano-plastic from 
our day to day life is the dire need of the hour to tackle the plastic menace which is 
looming large over the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that to curb the 
menace collective wisdom of the Department, BIS and FSSAI may result in a roadmap 
with concrete measures and implementation in letter and spirit of the present 
regulations are required to save the citizens and also their future generations.  
 
2.16 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
“With regard to the issue of BPA causing not only reproductive and fertility issues 
but also causes cancer, it is humbly submitted that DGHS has informed that there 
have been media reports and small studies on these aspects. Scientific largescale 
studies need to be planned/ undertaken for better understanding of health risks. 
FSSAI has implemented specific restrictions on Bisphenol A for Foods for infant 
nutrition. In accordance with the Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant 
Nutrition) Regulations, 2020, the FSSAI has explicitly mandated that the packaging 
materials used for packaging of Foods for infant nutrition shall be free from 
Bisphenol A (BPA). 
Styrene is classified as a probable human carcinogen by the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). It is used as raw material/monomer to 
make Polystyrene (PS). Food contact applications of Polystyrene are regulated 

19 
 
as follows: 
• FSSAI's Packaging Regulations (2018) specify polystyrene (IS 10142, 
revised) standard to ensure its safe use with food, pharmaceuticals, and 
drinking water. 
• The draft revision aligns with international regulations (such as those from 
the US FDA and EU) and emphasizes conformity assessment and quality 
monitoring to ensure consumer safety. 
• Styrofoam cups have been banned for single use under Plastic Waste 
Management Regulation. 
Further some studies have indicated microplastics presence in human body, 
however they did not provide conclusive evidence and establish microplastics 
effects on human health. Although there are numerous animal studies available, 
no clinical data are avail able on the potential hazards associated with food grade 
plastic in India. FSSAI has given research projects to ICAR-IITR, Lucknow, ICAR-
National Research Centre for Grapes (NRCG), Pune and ICAR - Central Institute 
of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), Cochin und er FSSAI -National Reference 
Laboratory (NRL) stream. The project under IITR, Lucknow is for the establishment 
of a state -of the -art Analytical Testing Facility for PFAS and their related 
compounds in food and food packaging materials and Chemical Risk Assessment 
for PFAS and their related compounds. The project under NRCG, Pune is to 
develop and validate the analytical method for multi -residue Pesticides (including 
PFAS compounds) in grapes, pomegranate and citrus. The project under CIFT, 
Cochin is to perfo rm a risk assessment of targeted and untargeted PFAS in fish 
and poultry products. 
The present Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 specify 
requirements for food-grade packaging to minimize health risks. These regulations 
mandate that any material which comes in direct contact with food or likely to come 
in contact wit h food used for packaging, preparation, storing, wrapping, 
transportation and sale or service of food shall be of food grade quality, which 
ensures that the substances used in material are safe and suitable for their 
intended use, and shall not endanger hu man health or result in unacceptable 
change in the composition of the food or organoleptic characteristics in Indian 
climatic conditions. The packaging regulations specifies that all packaging 
materials of plastic origin shall pass the prescribed overall m igration limit of 
60mg/kg or 10mg/dm2 when tested as per IS 9845 with no visible colour migration. 
Further plastic materials and articles shall not release the specified substances like 
Barium, Cobalt, Copper, Phthalic acid etc. in quantities exceeding the  specific 
migration limits.  
Every food business operator shall obtain the certificate of conformity issued by 
NABL accredited laboratory against these regulations for the packaging 
material which comes in direct contact with food or layers likely to come in 
contact with food to be us ed. Schedule IV of these regulations provide the 
suggestive list of the packaging materials for food articles suitable in Indian 
climatic conditions.” 
 
 (RecommendationNo.13) 
 
2.17 The Committee note that the Department is taking steps to minimize the use of 

20 
 
plastic and also to minimize the harmful effects of it by taking a slew of measures 
which include to recycle the plastic, to develop new material which would be non -
plastic and bio -waste green material which could replace plastic, several IITs and 
scientific organisations as well as private industries are also doing research to develop 
a material which would be cost effective and good for environment. Further, the 
Department is taking up t he matter with the Ministry of Environment Forest and 
Climate Change to ban the use of single use plastic.  The Committee are deeply 
concerned to note that nothing concrete has emerged so far from the various steps 
stated to be taken by the Department. The Committee desire that the matter may be 
taken at the highest level a nd vigorously pursued with all concerned 
Ministries/Organisations etc. to find a concrete solution of the plastic menace.  The 
Committee further find that nothing is being done for manufacturing and promotion of 
Jute bags as an alternative to the plastic. The Committee are of the view that Jute 
bags may be an alternative to the plastic. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
2.18 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“Considering the adverse environmental impacts of littered and unmanaged 
plastic waste, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, has 
notified Plastic Waste Management (Amendment) Rules, 2021 on 12th August 
2021, for placing a ban on identified single use plastic (SUP) items, which had 
high littering potential and low utility, with effect from 1st July 2022. The 
notification also prohibits manufacture, import, stocking, distribution, sale and 
use of plastic carry bags having thickness less one hundred and twenty microns 
with effect from the 31st December, 2022.The Central Pollution Control Board  
(hereinafter referred to as ‘CPCB') has inter-alia issued the following directions 
under Section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986: 
i. Directions issued to Plastic Raw material manufacturers to stop 
supplying plastic raw material to manufacturer of banned SUP items; 
ii. Directions issued to SUP users & E -commerce companies to stop 
usage & ensure zero inventory by June 30, 2022; 
iii. Comprehensive Directions issued to all SPCBs/ PCCs to take 
necessary action including to revocation/ modification of Consents/ 
Registration issued to banned SUP Producers; 
iv. Directions issued to State UDDs to take necessary action for 
implementation of SUP ban including action for implementing and 
promoting SUP Grievance app among citizens. 
 
Central Pollution Control Board has also separately issued letter to Custom 
Authorities to stop import of banned SUP item. All thirty -six States/UTs have 
constituted the Special Task Force under the chairpersonship of the Chief 
Secretary / Administrator fo r elimination of identified single use Plastic items 
and effective plastic waste management. A National Level Taskforce has also 
been constituted by the Ministry for taking coordinated efforts to eliminate 
identified single use plastic items and effective implementation of Plastic Waste 
Management Rules, 2016. 
 
The States and Union Territories have been asked to undertake regular 

21 
 
enforcement drives to implement ban on identified single use plastic items and 
on plastic carry bags having thickness less than one hundred twenty microns 
covering fruit and vegetable markets, wholesale markets, local markets, flower 
vendors, units manufacturing plastic carry bags etc. Action have been taken by 
concerned authorities including local bodies on the deviations, which include 
seizure of banned single use plastic items and levy of penalty. As per details 
provided by SPCB/PCC and details available  at SUP compliance monitoring 
portal, a total of 8,61,335 inspections have been conducted across the country 
and 1976 tonnes of banned single use plastic items have been seized and a 
total of Rs19.8 crores of fine has been levied. 
 
For effective monitoring of ban on identified Single Use Plastic items and plastic 
waste management in the country, the following online platforms are in 
operation:  
(a) National Dashboard for monitoring of comprehensive action plan 
implementation,  
(b) CPCB Monitoring Module for Compliance on Elimination of Single Use 
Plastic, and  
(c) CPCB Grievance Redressal App. 
 
Central Government, State Governments and local authorities have taken steps 
on moving towards eco -friendly alternatives. Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change organized the National Expo on Eco alternatives to SUPs 
and Start -up Conference 202 2 during 26th -27th of September 2022 in 
Chennai. The expo provided a platform for around 150 entities who are into 
research and development, manufacture and sale of eco -friendly alternatives 
to plastics. The expo unveiled innovative products in the eco - friendly product 
spectrum covering carry bags, utility items, apparels, footwear, wellness 
products, sanitary pads, cutlery and many more. These products are made from 
varied raw materials such as banana leaf products, fibre, rice bran, rice husk, 
agricultural products, areca leaf, coir, clay, palm leaf, cloth, jute, etc.by 
manufacturers, Self Help Groups and many other start-up firms across India. 
Further, to encourage innovation in development of alternatives to banned 
identified single use plastic items and digital solutions to plastic waste 
management, concerned Central Ministries including Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, Mini stry of MSME and Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs and CPCB, have organized Hackathons. The ban on identified 
single use plastic items has triggered development of innovative eco -
alternatives. In keeping with the development of eco -alternatives, Bureau  of 
Indian Standard has notified Indian Standard IS 18267 for Food Serving Utensil 
Made from Agri By-Products in 2023. 
 
The Ministry had notified Guidelines on Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR) for Plastic Packaging on 16th February 2022, vide G.S.R. 
133(E). The Guidelines stipulate mandatory targets on EPR, recycling of plastic 
packaging waste, reuse of rigid plastic packaging and use of recycled plastic 
content. EPR framework is fully functional and since 2022, a total of 2974 units 
as Plastic Waste Processors (PWP) and a total of 54,423 PIBOs, have 
successfully registered themselves on EPR Portal for plastic packaging. A total 
of 1,64,69,215 tons of plastic packaging waste has been processed by 

22 
 
registered PWPs since 2022. 
 
Keeping in view the focus of the Government on addressing plastic 
pollution, a National Expo on eco-alternatives to banned single-use plastic was 
also organized on the occasion of World Environment Day 2025. The expo saw 
a vibrant participation of start ups, recyclers, and local bodies from across India 
showcasing innovative technologies and best practices on Eco - alternatives 
and plastic waste management. The Expo also had a separate pavilion for 
Mission LiFE. 
 
The ban on identified single use plastic items has triggered development 
of innovative eco -alternatives. Central Government, State Governments and 
local authorities have taken steps on moving towards eco-friendly alternatives. 
Based upon the information provided by State Pollution Control Boards and 
Pollution Control Committees, the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change and Central Pollution Control Board have prepared a “Compendium of 
Manufacturers / Sellers of Eco -alternatives to Banned Sing le Use Plastic 
Items”, which launched on World Environment Day, 2025. The compendium 
provides details of nearly 1000 units spread across the country. 
 
The Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packing 
Commodities) Act, 1987 provides for the compulsory use of jute packaging 
material in the supply and distribution of certain commodities. Under the 
provisions of JPM Act, the Central Government has man dated packaging of 
100% foodgrains and 20% sugar in jute bags in jute year 2024-25.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(RecommendationNo.1) 
 
STUDY TO DETECT PLASTICS AND NANO PLASTICS 
 
4.1 The Committee note that the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) is funding a project w.e.f March, 2024 entitled “Micro and Nano -plastics as 
Emerging Food Contaminants: Establishing Validated Methodology and 
Understanding the Prevalence in Different Food Matrices”. While the objective of the 
project is statedly to develop and validate analytical methods to detect micro and nano-
plastics in various food products and assess their prevalence and exposure levels, the 
duration of the project is t wo years and sanctioned to three (03) research institutes 
namely (i) CSIR -Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow, (ii) ICAR -Central 
Institute of Fisheries Technology (ICAR -CIFT), Kochi; and (iii) Birla Institute of 
Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani. The Committee note that a considerable time 
period of more than one year have already elapsed and while the research project was 
under progress, the method validation for microplastic detection (PC, PET and 
Polystyrene) in packaged animal products,  beverages and packaged drinking water 
was reportedly completed. The Committee, therefore, desire that findings of the 
research projects as and when completed may be furnished by the Department/FSSAI 
highlighting the actionable points thereon for tackling the menace of plastics and nano-
plastics; and protection of human health from the use of compromised/substandard 
quality of food grade plastics and their exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions. 
The Committee find that sampling and analyzing of the packaged food products from 
Rajasthan, Kerala and Uttar Pradesh was under progress. The Committee desire that 
the same may be put to a fruitful completion and findings/recommendations alongwith 
the details of steps taken/proposed to be taken by the Departm ent/FSSAI/BIS in 
pursuance of those findings may be furnished within the timelines set.  The Committee 
further desire that feasibility of adequate publicity of these research findings may also 
be explored so that they are disseminated to all the citizens. 
 
 
4.2 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
 
“The project titled “Micro-and Nano-plastics as Emerging Food Contaminants: 
Establishing Validated Methodologies and Understanding the Prevalence in 
Different Food Matrices” was launched by FSSAI in March, 2024 in 
collaboration with 3 research institutes viz. CSIR -Indian Institute of Toxicology 
Research (CSIR -IITR), Lucknow; ICAR -Central Institute of Fi sheries 
Technology (ICAR-CIFT), Kochi and Birla Institute of Technology and Science 
(BITS), Pilani. The duration of the project is 2 years. The research is still in 
progress and is scheduled to completed by March -2026. FSSAI has noted the 
recommendations of the committee for future compliances. 

25 
 
 
FSSAI has also submitted that the impact of microplastics on human health are 
not yet known scientifically established. Hence more studies have to be carried 
out to better characterize exposure and link of microplastics from food articles 
and its impact of human health. In this regard, FSSAI is coordinating with ICMR, 
New Delhi, to carry out a study on the risk assessment of the impact of 
microplastics on human health.”  
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No:1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
(RecommendationNo.2) 
 
SUBSTANTIVE ROLE OF FSSAI IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF FOOD SAFETY 
AND STANDARDS PACKAGING REGULATIONS 2018 
 
4.3 The Committee note that FSSAI has been entrusted with the responsibility for 
the implementation of the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 
by way of notifying (i) Regulations or by bringing amendments; (ii) by verifying the 
compliance through inspection and surveillance; and (iii) by creating awareness 
through training of food handlers. In this connection, the Committee further note that 
FSSAI through its regional offices was regularly conducting inspections, audits, 
monitoring, random sampling and surveillance and have trained around twenty -two 
lakhs Food handlers under Food Safety Training and Certifications (FoSTaC) 
program. Though the Committee are of the view that training of food handlers was one 
of the steps which could lead to minimization of harmful effects of use of compromised 
/ subst andard quality of food grade plastics and needs more intensification, the 
Committee feels that much more needs to be done by the FSSAI. It appears to the 
Committee that FSSAI has failed to play a substantive role in the implementation of 
the Food Safety an d Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 and the Food Safety 
and Standards Act, 2006 was not enforced effectively and failed to counter use of 
compromised and substandard quality of food grade plastic. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that FSSAI should come out with a roadmap to implement the Food 
Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 strictly and bring forth requisite 
amendments to the Regulation as may be deemed fit in the interest of ordinary 
citizens. 
 
4.4 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is mandated to lay down 
science-based standards for articles of food and to regulate their manufacture, 
storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure availability of safe and 
wholesome food for human consumption. To ensure compliance with the set 
standards, limits, & other statutory requirements under the Act and Food Safety 
& Standards Regulations (FSSR), FSSAI, through its four regional offices and 
State/UT food safety authorities, conducts regular surveillance, inspections, 
sampling, and enforcement activities in the country. The Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has notified the Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018, which set standards and migration 

26 
 
limits for all food packaging materials, including plastics. Further sub-regulation 
3(14) of the ibid regulation requires every food business operator to obtain a 
certificate of conformity from an NABL-accredited laboratory for any packaging 
material that comes in direct contact with food or is likely to do so. Further, 
under the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food 
Businesses) Regulations, 2011, only food -grade materials may be used for 
primary packaging. Plastic containers for pac king or storing food must also 
comply with the relevant Indian Standards specified in Schedule III of the 2018 
regulations. 
The recommendation of the committee has been noted. The roadmap for the 
strict implementation of the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation 
2018 is under consideration by FSSAI.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No:1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
(RecommendationNo.3) 
 
COORDINATION BETWEEN FSSAI AND DCPC FOR EFFECTIVE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS PACKAGING 
REGULATIONS, 2018 
 
4.5  The Committee note that, there is lack of coordination between Food 
Safety and standards Authority of India (FSSAI) and the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals (DCPC) for effective implementation of the Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging) Regulation 2018. The Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI) was established and entrusted with the responsibility of implementation 
of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 ( FSS Act).  The Committee note that 
though FSSAI was established and entrusted with responsibility of implementation of 
the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 but unfortunately it has a long way to go. 
The Committee note with concern that no other concrete actionable mechanism of a 
robust coordination between the FSSAI and the Department exists. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that the Department and FSSAI should work in close tandem 
and bring out a robust coordination mechanism for effective implementation of the 
Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation, 2018. The Committee further 
note that a n expert committee was constituted by FSSAI to develop 
guidelines/advisory document regarding use of safe    food    packaging    materials    
by   various    food     service establishments like hotels/ restaurants / street vendors 
etc. wherein the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals (DCPC) also participated. 
The Committee desire the details of the expert Committee, its mandate, composition, 
work done, recommendations given etc. may be furnish to the Committee.  
 
4.6 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“FSSAI has notified the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 
2018, which lay down the general and specific requirements applicable to 
different packaging materials. These regulations, however, are primarily viewed 
as governing pre -packaged foo d commodities. To address is the concerns 

27 
 
emerging from the use of non -standardised materials, an Expert Committee 
(EC) was constituted vide order dated 03rd May 2023 and subsequently 
extended vide order dated 09th January 2024, with the mandate to develop a 
guideline/advisory document on the safe  use of food packaging materials by 
food service establishments such as hotels, restaurants, and street vendors. 
 
Expert Committee (EC) members: 
The expert committee comprises the following members: 
ii. Prof. Vimal Katiyar, Dean - R&D & Professor, IIT – Guwahati (Chairperson) 
iii. Sh. Avinash Mishra, Former Advisor (Water & Land Resources), Niti Aayog 
iv. Mr Rajeev Kumar Dwivedi, Director, TTRC Lohiacorp 
v. Dr. Rajeshwar Matche, Chief Scientist, CFTRI, Mysore 
vi. Dr. Sanjay Kr Chattopadhyay, Convener, Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
Advisory   Forum, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
vii. Dr. Pasupathy Venkat, National Advisor, Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Association 
of India, Delhi 
viii. Shri Kamlesh Singh, Scientist E & Division Head (DH) of the IPC -III Division, Central 
Pollution Control Board 
 
Mandate: 
The terms of reference/mandate of the Expert Committee is as follows: 
v. To review the definition of food grade packaging materials; 
vi. To examine alternate packaging materials for use by food service 
establishments; 
vii. To develop a guideline document regarding the use of safe & suitable food 
packaging materials by various food service establishments and to suggest a 
list of packaging materials based on the nature of the cooked food product. 
viii. To conduct survey and evaluate the food packaging materials currently used 
by the food service establishment. 
 
Work Done by the Expert Committee: 
Five meetings of the Expert Committee (EC) were held on 26th May 2023, 01st 
& 16th June 2023 (2nd meeting in two parts), 11th January 2024, 13th June 
2024, and 10th January 2025. During the 5th meeting, the EC finalised its 
recommendations on the Terms of Reference and submitted the compiled 
report. 
  
The report was subsequently placed before the 13th meeting of the Scientific 
Panel on Packaging (SP -20) held on 21st February 2025, where it was 
endorsed. It was further endorsed by the Scientific Committee in its 53rd 
meeting held on 15th May 2025. Thereafter, the report underwent stakeholder 
consultations, during which stakeholders appreciated the efforts of FSSAI and 
raised no objections to the proposed guidelines. Consultations with States/UTs 

28 
 
were carried out in the Central Advisory Committee held on 27th May 2025. 
  
Finally, the report was placed before the 47th Food Authority meeting on 06th 
August 2025. The draft of the Final Report of the EC is placed as Annexure –
I.” 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No:1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
 
(RecommendationNo.4) 
 
FSSAI’S SCIENTIFIC PANEL ON PACKAGING  
 
4.7 The Committee note that the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) 
Regulations, 2018, focus largely on packaging materials such as glass, metal, paper, 
and plastic. However, a comprehensive framework for safety of biodegradable and 
compostable plastics, testing methods and long-term performance and migration limits 
for emerging chemicals from food packaging, such as: Bisphenol A (BPA), per 
fluorinated Alkyl substances (PFAS), phthalates and other harmful chemicals found in 
plastic packaging were under deliberations of FSSAI’s Scientific Panel on Packaging. 
The Committee desire that the findings of Scientific Panel on Packaging on elimination 
of the harmful effects of plastics on human health be furnished to the Committee at 
the earliest. The Committee further recommend that FSSAI come out with a 
comprehensive framework for zero tolerance of plastic contamination in food 
packaging processes. 
 
4.8 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
 
“FSSAI’s Scientific Panel on Food Packaging deliberated on the presence of 
PFAS and BPA in Food Packaging and food contact materials and their health 
effects. To mitigate the risk associated with BPA and PFAS exposure through 
the food contact materials, the panel recommended as below: 
(a)        Polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAs) substances shall not be used in 
manufacturing of food contact materials 
(b)        Food contact materials manufactured with polycarbonate and epoxy 
resins shall be free from Bisphenol A (BPA) and its derivatives. 
 
The above -mentioned recommendations of the panel were endorsed by 
Scientific Committee in its 50th meeting held on 11.12.2024 and approved by 
Food Authority in its 46th meeting held on 7th march 2025.  
 
Currently, the draft notification of FSS (Packaging) amendment Regulation, 
2025 is under process of approval by the ministry. 
 
Further, Scientific Panel on Method of Sampling and Analysis is in the process 
of developing analytical method for both the compounds.     
 
With regards to Phthalic acid, bis (2 - ethylhexyl) ester (DEHP), FSS 

29 
 
(Packaging) Regulation 2018 specifies that the Maximum Migration Limit 
should not exceed 1.5 mg/Kg. 
 
The comprehensive framework for safety of biodegradable and compostable 
plastics will be deliberated in the upcoming meetings of Scientific Panel.  
Further, FSSAI has given research projects to ICAR -IITR, Lucknow, ICAR -
National Research Centre for Grapes (NRCG), Pune and ICAR - Central 
Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), Cochin under FSSAI -National 
Reference Laboratory (NRL) stream. The project under IITR, Lucknow is for the 
establishment of a state-of the-art Analytical Testing Facility for PFAS and their 
related compounds in food and food packaging materials and Chemical Risk 
Assessment for PFAS and their related compounds. The project under NRCG, 
Pune is to develop and validate the analytical method for multi -residue 
Pesticides (including PFAS compounds) in grapes, pomegranate and citrus. 
The project under CIFT, Cochin is to perform a risk assessment of targeted and 
untargeted PFAS in fish and poultry products.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No:1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
(RecommendationNo.5) 
 
MIGRATION OF PLASTIC AND NANO PLASTIC IN THE FOOD CONTENTS 
 
4.9 The Committee find that FSSAI had submitted that inspections are carried out 
on outlets of manufacturer where pickle etc are prepared and food vending 
establishment i.e, Restaurants etc on the 44 List of Points drawn up for inspection of 
these units. The C ommittee are of the considered view that while the pickle 
manufactured may qualify the quality test of the FSSAI but instances of contamination 
may occur while they are packed/stored or transported and exposed to high 
temperature when plastic migration occurs in the pickle from its plastic container. This 
exposure can also affect bottled water etc. The Committee finds that no specific 
authority has been assigned to check contamination when migration of the plastic 
occurs. The Committee, therefore, desire th at a specific authority should ensure that 
the migration was as per permissible limits and the pickle was fit for human 
consumption. The Committee also recommend that foolproof measures need to be 
initiated at the earliest to ensure that pickle stored and sold in plastic containers are 
indeed fit for consumption by human beings. To this extent the Committee desire that 
concrete actionable steps to protect human health from the ill effects of plastic/nano 
plastic contamination be taken at the earliest. The C ommittee desire that information 
regarding the steps taken firstly by the Department, secondly by FSSAI and thirdly by 
BIS may be furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
4.10 In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:-  
 
“Regarding the recommendation that a specific authority should ensure that the 
migration in food products/pickles packed in plastic packaging was as per 
permissible limits and it was fit for human consumption, it is submitted that 
activities related to manu facturing, processing, packaging, storage, 

30 
 
transportation and distribution of food including quality of plastics material 
coming in contact with food products is regulated by FSSAI.  
 
Regarding the steps taken to ensure that the food products/pickles packed in 
plastic packaging are fit for human consumption, the desired information is as 
given below: 
 
➢ Indian Standards on Plastic packaging intended for Food application 
 
BIS has published 14 Indian Standards on plastic packaging intended for 
food contact application that cover aspects such as physical and mechanical 
properties, among other criteria. These Indian Standards also specify 
requirements for overall migration, specific migration, and use of food grade 
additives/colorants and pigments.  
 
➢ Indian Standards on Plastic Resin for Food Contact Application 
 
BIS has published 12 Indian Standards for plastic materials (resins) for its 
safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
which prescribes the requirements of overall migration, use of colorants and 
pigments and residual monomer content, as applicable. 
 
➢ Indian Standards on Positive List of Constituents of Polymers Suitable for 
Safe Use in Food Contact Application 
 
BIS has published 15 Indian Standards providing positive list of constituents 
of polymers suitable for safe use in contact with foodstuffs. 
 
➢ Indian Standards on Suitability of Plastics for Food Packaging 
 
BIS has published an Indian Standard on guide for suitability of plastics for 
food packaging.Under the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards 
(Packaging) Regulations, 2018, FSSAI has made it mandatory that Plastic 
materials used for the manufacturing of containers for packing or storing the 
food products shall conform to either of the Indian Standards specifications 
as provided in Schedule III of the regulation. All packaging materials of 
plastic origin shall pass the prescribed overall migration limit of 60mg/kg or 
10mg/dm2 when tested as per IS 9845 with no visible color migration. 
Plastic materials and articles shall not release the substances in quantities 
exceeding the specific migration limits. Pigments or Colorants for use in 
plastics in contact with food products and drinking water shall conform to IS: 
9833. 
➢ Study regarding the migration of constituents from plastic packaging to food 
product/pickles when exposed to high temperature while packing/storage 
and transportation 
 
BIS has formulated IS 9845: 1998 titled ‘Indian Standard – Determination of 
overall migration of constituents of plastics materials and articles intended to 
come in contact with foodstuffs – Method of analysis’. BIS has constituted a 
Working Group to under take review of IS 9845. The scope of Working Group 

31 
 
includes evaluation of the adequacy of the Standard IS 9845 viz-a-viz extreme 
Indian Climatic conditions with particular attention given to the extraction 
methodology, the choice and suitability of the simulating solvent or extractant, 
and the time -temperature parameters specified for the migration testing of 
constituents in plastic materials. BIS has also decided to institute R&D projects 
to study overall migration and specific migration from different types of plastic 
packaging materials intended for food  contact applications, specifically to 
evaluate the influence of extreme temperature conditions. The findings of these 
R&D projects will be considered by BIS to update and upgrade the existing 
Indian standard IS 9845.” 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
06 JANUARY, 2026 CHAIRPERSON, 
16 PAUSA, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
  

33 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS BRANCH  
(2025-26) 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06th January, 2026 from 1100 hrs. to 1130 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha– Chairperson 
LOK SABHA MEMBERS 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C.  
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
7. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
8. Shri Praveen Patel 
9. Dr. Sambit Patra 
10. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
11. Shri Sachithannatham R. 
12.  Shri Eatala Rajender 
13. Shri Rajesh Ranjan  
14. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
15. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA MEMBERS 
 
16. Shri Subhash Barala 
17. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
18. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
19. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
20. Shri Tejveer Singh 
21. Shri G.K. Vasan 
SECRETARIAT 
4. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  - Director 

34 
 
6. Shri Kulvinder Singh                      -         Deputy Secretary 
7. Shri Abhishek Kumar   - Deputy Director  
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft 
Reports:  
i.            XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
ii.            XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  
iii. Eighteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observation/Recommendation contained in Thirteenth Report on 
the subject ‘Health hazards due to use of compromised/substandard 
quality of food-grade plastics and their exposure to extreme Indian climatic 
conditions’ pertaining to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
iv.             XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the Members. 
4.      After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
without any amendment. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and 
present/lay the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament in the budget session of 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

35 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH REPORT ( EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)  OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  (2025-26) ON ‘HEALTH 
HAZARDS DUE TO USE OF COMPROMISED/SUBSTANDARD QUALITY OF FOOD-GRADE 
PLASTICS AND THEIR EXPOSURE TO EXTREME INDIAN CLIMATIC  CONDITIONS’ 
PERTAINING TO THE  MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
Total No. of Recommendations: 13 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13) 
09 
Percentage of Total: 69.23%  
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire  to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
-NIL- 
00 
Percentage of Total: 0% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration: 
(Recommendation Para No. 1, 3, 4 and 5) 
04 
Percentage of Total: 30.78% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
-NIL- 
00 
Percentage of Total: 0% 