EC No. 1420 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (DEPARTMENT 
OF HEALTH) 
 
 
MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA 
 
 
 
     S  
      E  
       A  
        L  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2005 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
    
 
   2 9 th April  ,2005/Vaisakha  9,1927(S) 
_______________________________________________________  
 

CONTENTS 
 
 
          PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES    
 
Chapter I  Introduction   
1.  Introductory 
2. Historical Background 
3. Objectives  
4. Functions 
5. Statutory Functions 
6. Regulatory Functions 
7. Maintenance of Quality of Medical Education 
8.   Relationship between MCI and Ministry of Health 
9.   Accountability of MCI to the Government  
 
Chapter II Organisational Structure  
 
1.   Constitution of the Council  
- Executive Committee 
- President and Vice – President 
- Members of the Medical Council  
2.  Manpower 
 
Chapter III  Finance  
 
1. Budget Allocations 
2.   Continuing Medical Education Programme (CME) 
3.   Indian Medical Register 
4.   Monitoring and  Upkeep of  the State Medical Registers 
5.   New Office and Library Building  
 
Chapter IV Grant of Approval 
 
1.  Criteria for grant of permission 
2. Conditions to be fulfilled by Institutions 
3. Inspection of Medical College  
4. Rectification of deficiencies 
5. De-recognition of Medical College 

6. Annual Seat Capacity 
7. State Government’s Role  in granting of approval 
8. Relationship between MCI and Universities 
9. Recognition of Medical Qualifications 
 
Chapter V  Teaching Faculty  
 
1. Student-Teacher Ratio 
2. Shortage of Teaching staff 
 
Chapter VI  Miscellaneous  
1. Regional Imbalance in setting up of Medical Colleges 
2. Court cases against MCI 
3. Code of Medical Ethics 
4. Commercialization of Medical College 
 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of Sitting  of the Estimates Committee  
held on  16.11.2004………………………………… 
  
 
II. Minutes of Sitting  of the Estimates Committee  
held on  12.1.2005………………………………… 
  
 
III. Minutes of Sitting  of the Estimates Committee  
held on  26.4.2005 
 
 
Annexure………………………………… 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
     Members 
 
2.      Shri A. Sai Prathap 
3.     Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4.   Prof.  Chander Kumar 
5.   Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
6.       Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7.       Shri Anant Gudhe 
8.   Shri Jai Prakash 
9.       Shri N.N. Krishnadas 
10.   Shri Samik Lahiri 
11.    Shri B hartruhari Mahatab 
12.    Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato 
13.    Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
14.   Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15.    Shri Prabodh Panda 
16.    Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.    Shri Sukhdeo Paswan  
18.    Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
19.    Shri Harikewal Prasad 
20.    Prof. M. Ramadass 
21.    Shri K.S. Rao 
22.    Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
23.    Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
24.    Shri Manabendra Shah 
25.    Shri Laxman Singh 
26.    Shri Sartaj Singh 
27.    Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
28.    Shrii Akhilesh Yadav 
29.    Shri V. Kishore Chandra Deo 
30.    Shri Vijay Krishan 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri John Joseph  - Additional  Secretary 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K. Singh  - Prin cipal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
      4.   Shri B.D.  Swan  - Deputy Secretary 
5.  Shri Cyril John  -      Under Secretary 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Eighth Report on the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare (Department of Health) – ‘Medical Council of India’.  
2. The subject, ‘Medical Council of India’  was selected for detailed 
examination by the Estimates Co mmittee (2003-2004).  The Estimates 
Committee examined every as pect of the subject by calling for written 
information and  taking evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare (Dep artment of Health) and Medical 
Council of India on 16.11.2004 and 12.1.2005. The Committee wish to 
express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare (Department of Health) an d Medical Council of India for 
placing before them  detailed wr itten notes on the subject and for 
furnishing information desired in connection with the examination of the 
subject.   The Committee also apprec iate the frankness with which the 
officers shared their views, perce ptions and constraints with the 
Committee. 
3. The Committee would also like to express their gratitude to the  
Estimates Committee 2003-2004 for the able guidance and right 
direction provided by them in obtai ning information for indepth and 
comprehensive study of the subject. 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
 their sitting held on 26th  April, 2005. 

5. The Report consists of  seven chapters including 
recommendations. The Committee have inter-alia made the following  
important observations/ recommendations :- 
(i) MCI should  discharge both regula tory and  advisory roles in 
the sphere of medical education in the country. 
(ii) In view of the manifold increase in the number of medical 
colleges in the country, an independent professional institution 
should be engaged by Government to review the status of 
medical education in the count ry both in qualitative and 
quantitative terms. 
(iii) Instead of making the accreditation process a voluntary one, it 
should be made mandatory in a phased manner to ensure that 
all the medical colleges in the country come upto minimum 
standards of medical education. 
(iv) As MCI is accountable to the Government and to the 
Parliament, whatever comes in the way of a healthy balance 
between autonomy and accountability needs to be rectified. 
(v) A post of Chief Vigilance Officer should be created in MCI who 
will report directly to the Presi dent of the Council and the post 
be filled up expeditiously.  A Public Grievances Redressal Cell 
should also be set up in MCI which should function under the 
Chief Vigilance Officer, who should be a person belonging to 
an organised  service, like the Indian Police Service. 
(vi) The Continuing Medical Educ ation (CME) Scheme should be 
encouraged as the medical pra ctitioners need continuous 
updating of knowledge and skills since  medical science is 
under constant evolution with  new trends and practices 
emerging every day. 

 (vii)  As the publication of IM R for the year 1994 to 2004 in the 
Gazette has been  pending fo r a long time, Government 
should release the grant required for its publication as early as 
possible.  
(viii) A time schedule should be d rawn up by MCI for processing of 
various types of applications  received by the Council. 
(ix) The entire  proce dure for inspection should be clearly laid 
down in the form of a regulati on and a panel of inspectors 
known for their integrity should be drawn up for a specified  
period of time  and they  be deputed for inspection by rotation.  
(x)  State should be asked to f ormulate a perspective plan on 
medical education and health care .  On the basis of the plans 
drawn up by the States, a National Perspective Plan on 
Medical Education should be formulated and regions which 
are lagging behind should be encouraged to come up with 
plans for starting new medical colleges. 
(xi) MCI needs to be vigilant  about  the  complaints being 
recorded against registered medi cal practitioners, check 
malpractices in the medical pro fession and initiate stringent 
action against fraudulent ones.    

6. For facility of reference, th e observations/recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report 
and have also been reproduced in co nsolidated form in the Appendix 
to the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:              C. Kuppusami 
April 27, 2005       C h a i r m a n  
Vaisakha 7, 1927(Saka)              Committee on Estimates 
 
 
 
  
CHAPTER I 
 
Introductory  
 
In a developing nation such as India, medical services play a 
very important role in the well-being of their citizens and indirectly play 
a very important part in the econom ic and overall development of the 
nation. The development of good medica l services in the country is 
almost entirely dependent upon the m edical education imparted in the 
various medical colleges of the country. Also, for the effective 
implementation of the  National  Health Programmes, and research 
work in the field of medicine, m edical colleges and teaching hospitals 
play a very vital role. Thus, the onus of maintenance and development 

of the medical colleges imparting medical education is vested with the 
Medical Council of India (MCI). 
Historical Background 
Prior to 1930, the General Medical Council (GMC) of the United 
Kingdom had accepted for registration of the degrees and diplomas of 
the Universities of Calcutta, Madras, Bombay and Allahabad. As it was 
felt by the GMC that medical education in India was deteriorating, after 
inspection of medical teaching in  India, the GMC came to the 
conclusion that an All India Medica l Council should be established with 
which they could deal directly. Accordingly, the Medical Council of 
India(MCI) was established as a statutory body under an Act of 
Parliament. This Act was brought into force on the 1
st November, 1933 
and the Council was constituted in  February 1934. Under this Act the 
Council was entrusted with the functi ons of (I) establishment of a 
uniform standard of higher qualification of medicine for all provinces 
and (ii) recognition of medical qualification in States and Countries 
outside British India. 
With the increasing number of medical colleges, it was felt that 
the provisions of the 1933 Ac t were not adequate to meet the 
challenges posed by the very fast development  and the progress of 
medical education in the country. As a result, the Act was repealed and 
a new Act called the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 was enacted. 
This Act has also been reviewed and amended in 1964, 1993 and 
2001 keeping in view the development in Medical Education.  
Objectives  
The objectives for which the Medical Council of India came to be 
constituted are as mentioned below: - 

A (I) Maintenance of uniform standards of Medical Education for both 
undergraduate and postgraduate cours es for new colleges and 
continuance of already recognized courses. It also envisages 
inspection/visitations of medical colleges for permission to start 
medical colleges for MBBS course, staring of new Postgraduate 
courses and increase of seats (as p er provisions of section 10A of the 
Act). 
(II) Recommendation to the Central Government, Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, for recognition and de-recognition of medical 
qualifications of medical institutions  (a) within (b) outs ide the country. 
After amendment of sect ion 13(4) which provid es for screening test, 
scope of recognition of foreign me dical qualifications when held by 
Indian nationals has basic more or less met a dead end. In the matter 
of mutual recognition of medical qualifications as per provisions of 
Section 12(2) of the Act, matters can still be considered. 
B   (i)  Maintenance of Indian Medical Register. 
(ii)  Grant of provisional and permanent registration as  
applicable to persons holding recognized medical 
qualifications included in the schedules to the Indian 
Medical Council Act, 1956. 
 (ii)   Issue of g ood standing certificates. 
 
 In this context, it is also st ated that the other inherent objectives 
of the Council are as under :- 
a) Maintain standards of the medical education both 
undergraduate and postgraduate. 
b) Register medical practitioner and maintain All India Medical 
Register. 

c) Recognize medical degrees. 
d) Recognize/de-recognize Indian and foreign medical 
qualifications. 
e) Inspect and visit of medical colleges with a view to 
maintaining proper standard of medical education. 
f) Grant of permission to start postgraduate courses. 
g) Negotiate with other countr ies for reciprocity for the 
recognition of medical qualification. 
h) Register basic and additional  qualifications and issue of 
good standing certificates. 
i) Issue of eligibility certificates and verification of documents. 
j) Lay down standards of professional conduct and etiquette 
and a code of ethics for the medical practitioners. 
Functions 
 In order to achieve the aims and objectives of the Council, the 
following functions are performed by the Council: - 
(i) Inspection/Visitation with a view to maintain  proper standards of 
medical education in India. 
(ii) Permission to start new medical colleges and postgraduate 
medical courses.  
(iii) Recognition/Derecognition of I ndian qualifications and foreign 
medical qualifications. 
(iv) Permanent and Provisional regist rations of doctors, registration 
of additional qualifications and issue of Good Standing 
Certificates. 
(v) Maintenance of All Indian M edical Register of persons who hold 
any of the recognized medical qualifications, who are for the time 
being registered with any of the State Medical Councils or the 

Medical Council of India and print ing of the Indian Medical 
Register; and 
(vi) Continuing Medical Educati on – The Council is assisting in 
organizing Continuing Medical Education programmes to utilize 
the talents of Indian doctors  residing abroad (USA, UK & 
Canada) as well as of the expert faculty in Indian institutions. 
Statutory Regulations 
In furtherance of its objectiv es, the Council has been making 
regulations for the purpose of improvement in the standards of the  
Medical Education which are also reviewed from time to time in order 
to make suitable amendments to br ing them at par with the standards 
set up in developed countries as also  to meet the health needs of 
Indian population. 
The Council has with the approva l of the Central Government 
laid down the following  twelve statutory regulations: - 
1. Regulations on Graduate Medical Education, 1997 dealing with 
the procedure for admission to MB BS course, duration of the 
course, rules regarding migration /transfer of students from one 
recognized medical college to another, broad curriculum 
contents, procedure for appointment of examiners, the scheme of 
examination, details about internship etc. (Published in the 
Gazette of India dated 17 May, 1997). 
2. Postgraduate Medical Education Regulations 2000 indicating the 
various specialties for whic h postgraduate courses may be 
conducted, minimum requirements for postgraduate medical 
education, criteria for selection of candidates, period of training 
and the method of training, appoi ntment of examiners, etc. 
(Published in the Gazette of India dated the 7
th October, 2000). 

3. The Minimum Qualifications for Teachers in Medical Institutions 
Regulations 1998, which prescri bes the minimum qualifications 
required for a person to be appoi nted as Lecturer/Assistant 
Professor, Reader, Associate P rofessor and Professor  to the 
posts of teachers in medical colleges and attached hospitals for 
undergraduate and postgraduate teac hing (Published in the 
Gazette of India on the 5th December, 1998). 
4. Schedules to the I.M.C. Act, 1956 indicating the recognized 
medical qualifications awarded by Universities/Institutions, both 
undergraduate and postgraduate. 
5. Three Regulations on the Mi nimum Standard Requirements for 
the medical college for 50 admissions annually/for 100 
admissions annually/150 admissions annually respectively 
(published in the Gazette of India dated the 29 th April, 1999). 
These regulations provide for details of requirement of 
accommodation, staff, beds, equipment, etc. In addition the 
Council is also formulating the minimum standards for the of 
medical colleges having annual admissions different from 50, 
100 or 150 as and w hen the requests are received from the 
respective colleges. 
6. Regulations for identification of  students admitted in excess of 
the approved admission capacity of medical colleges (Published 
in the Gazette of India dated 23rd August, 1997). 
7. The MCI Election of President, Vice - President, members of the 
Executive Committee and elected members of the Postgraduate 
Medical Education Committee Re gulations, 1998 (published in 
the Gazette of India on the 26
th November, 1998). 

8. Establishment of Medical College Regulations, 1999 (published 
in the Gazette of India dated 28 th August, 1999) providing the 
details to be given in the applicat ion, format of the Essentiality 
Certificate to be issued by the State Government, format of the 
consent of affiliation to be given by the University, etc. Schedule 
for receipt of applications and further processing also has been 
provided under which only applications received between the 1 st 
August to 31st August of any year shall be considered for further 
processing for admission of students in the next academic year. 
9. The Opening of a New or Hi gher course of study or Training 
(including Postgraduate Cours e of study or Training) and 
increase of Admission capacity in any course of study or Training 
(Including a postgraduate course of study or Training) 
Regulations, 2000. (Published in the Gazette of India dated the 
7th October, 2000). Medical Counc il of India Regulations, 2000, 
dealing with procedure for holding meetings of the Council and 
its committees, powers and duties of officers, maintenance of 
Indian Medical Register, pr ocedure for registration etc. 
(published in Gazette of India Extraordinary issue dated 15 th 
November, 2000). 
10. The Screening Test Regulations 2002 published in the Gazette 
of India extra ordinary issue dated the 18 th February, 2002 to 
provide that an Indian citizen po ssessing a primary medical 
qualification (equivalent to MBBS in India) awarded by any 
medical institution outside India, who is desirous of getting 
Provisional or Permanent Regist ration with Medical Council of 
India or State Medical on or after 15 th March, 2002 shall have to 
qualify a Screening Test conducted by the prescribed authority. 

11. The Eligibility Requirement for taking admission in an 
Undergraduate Medical Course in a Foreign Medical Institution 
Regulations, 2002 published for issu e of eligibility certificate by 
the Medical Council of India to an Indian citizen who has passed 
the qualifying examination either  from India or an equivalent 
examination from abroad and is desirous of joining an 
undergraduate medical course in any foreign medical institution, 
on or after 5
th March, 2002. 
12. Indian Medical Council (Professional conduct Etiquette and 
Ethics) Regulations, 2002 published in the Gazette of India dated 
the 6
th April, 2002 provide  for various ethical principles to be 
observed by all medical practitioners and disciplinary action to be 
taken in case of proved contravention of the Regulation. 
 
The Committee enquired whether the regulations have helped in 
improving the standards of medical education in the country. The 
Medical Council of India in its wri tten reply  stated that after the 
notification of these Regulations, a ll the new applicatio ns either for a 
new college, for increase of seat or for opening a hi gher course have 
to be submitted in a prescribed form at alongwith permission from the 
concerned State Government an d affiliating University. A set 
procedure has also been prescribed  under Section 10(A) thereon for 
the evaluation of these proposa ls and recommendations of the 
Council.  
With strict implementation of these Regulations, the Council has 
succeeded in bringing discipline in total number of admissions in all 
Government and private medical colleges, uniform curriculum and 
pattern/system of examination, starting of undergraduate and 
postgraduate courses, etc. through out the country. The Regulations 

have helped in overall improvement of  the standards of medical 
education in the country. 
MCI has notified Medical Council of India Regulation,  2000. The 
Committee  further desired to know in what way has the notification 
helped in improving the functioning of the Council. The Medical Council 
of India in its written reply stated that MCI  Regulations, 2000 have 
prescribed the procedure for conducting the meetings of the Council 
and its Committees, procedure for keeping the minutes of the meeting, 
procedure for resignation and filling of casual vacancies, powers and 
duties of the President and Vice Pr esident, and of  Registrar, Whole 
Time Inspectors and other Officers  of the Council. The procedure for 
inspection of examination and appoin tments of visitors has also been 
prescribed under the Regulations. Provision for maintenance of Indian 
Medical Register and Registration of  the medical graduates are also 
prescribed in these Regulations. 
Regulatory Functions 
Further, the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 mandates the 
Council to discharge regulatory as well as advisory functions. 
Regulatory functions are governed th rough formulation of appropriate 
regulations on Graduate Medical Educ ation notified in 1997, Post 
Graduate Medical Education R egulations notified in 2001 and 
Teachers Eligibility Qualifications R egulations notified in 1998.   In 
terms of Section 33 of the Act wh ereby the Council is required to 
prescribe regulations on such matters that have been delineated 
thereunder namely:- 
(a) The management of  the property of the Council and the 
maintenance and audit of the accounts; 

(b) The summoning and holding of meetings of the Council, the 
times and places where such meetings are to be held, the 
conduct of business there at and the number of members 
necessary to constitute a quorum; 
(c) The resignation of members of the Council; 
(d) The powers and duties of the President and Vice – President  
(e) The mode of appointment of  the Executive Committee and 
other Committees, the summoning and holding of meetings 
and the conduct of business of such Committees; 
(f) The tenure of office, and the powers and duties of the 
Registrar and other officers and servants of the Council; 
(fa) The form of the scheme, the particu lars to be given in such       
scheme, the manner in which the scheme is to be preferred 
and the fee payable with sc heme under clause(b) of sub-
section(2) of section 10A; 
(fb) Any other factors under clau se(g) of sub-section(7) of 
Section 10A; 
(fc) The criteria for identifying  a student who has been granted a 
medical qualification referred to in the Explanation to sub-
section(3) of section 10B; 
(g) The particulars to be stated, and the proof of  qualifications to 
be given in applications for registration under this Act. 
(h) The fees to be paid on ap plications and appeals under this 
Act; 
(i) The appointment, powers, dut ies and proce dure of medical 
inspectors and visitors; 
(j) The courses and period of study  and of practical training to 
be undertaken, the subjects  of examination and the 

standards of proficiency ther ein to be obtained, in 
Universities or medical institutions for grant of recognized 
medical qualifications; 
(k) The standards of staff, equ ipment, accommodation, training 
and other facilities for medical education; 
(l) The conduct of professional ex amination; qualifications of 
examiners and the conditions  of admissions to such 
examinations; 
(m) The standards of professional  conduct and etiquette and 
code of ethics to be observed by medical practitioners; and  
 The modalities for conduct ing screening tests under sub-
section (4a), and under the provis o to sub-section 4(B), and 
for issuing eligibility certification under sub-section 4(B) of 
section 13; 
(n) Any matter for which under th is Act provision may be made 
by regulations. 
The Advisory Function : 
In terms of Section 20, the C ouncil is supposed to prescribe 
standards of graduate an d postgraduate medical education for the 
guidance of universities and is also  supposed to advise  universities in 
the matter of securing unif orm standards for graduate and 
postgraduate medical education throughout India. It is pertinent to note 
that the Hon’ble Suprem e Court has brought out concludingly that the 
regulations prescribed by the Council in discharge of its regulatory 
functions u/s 33 of the Act are binding and mandatory in character. 
Therefore, the functions of the Counc il by and large in detail have thus 
become regulatory in nat ure rather than advisory and mandatory in 
character rather than recommendatory. 

Maintenance of Quality of Medical Education 
One of the objectives of setting up MCI was to ensure 
maintenance of uniform standards of Medical Educ ation in the country 
for both undergraduate and postgraduate courses in the medical 
colleges and  institutions all over the country. There are as many as 
229 Medical Colleges in the country, of which 125 are in the 
Government Sector and 104 in the private sector and about 21,000 
graduates and 10,000 post graduates pass out every year from these 
colleges. 
 Enquired about the mechanism available with  MCI to ascertain 
the efficacy of standards of undergraduate/postgraduate medical 
courses, their syllabi/curricula, system of assessment/examination, etc. 
at the time of granting permissi on and at subsequent stages, the 
Medical Council of India in its written reply  stated that the efficacy of 
standards of undergraduate and postgraduate medical courses 
including the syllabi, curricula, system  of assessment and examination 
are periodically evaluated by the C ouncil through the inspectors of the 
Council who are required to be report ing on these aspects in required 
details. It is pertinent to note that recognition of degree cannot be done 
without the standards of exam ination and scheme thereof being 
evaluated by the Council through its inspectors. As such the inspection 
for recognition of a degree is  required to be caused when the 
University examination is on. 
 The Committee enquired as to how does MCI ensure  uniform 
standards of medical education in all the institutions in the country. The 
Medical Council of India in  a wr itten reply  stated that uniform 
maintenance of standards for  undergraduate and postgraduate 
education throughout the country is evoked by the Council through an 

effective system of monitoring by regular and periodic inspections 
including surprise inspections from time to time. Evaluation of such 
reports are made by the Executiv e Committee and the Postgraduate 
Committee respectively and decisions  thereof are effective both in 
letter and spirit. 
Enquired whether MCI has fulf illed its role of ensuring 
maintenance of uniform standards of Medical Education in all these 
institutions and bringing about qualitative and quantitative 
improvements in the field,  the Medica l Council of India in its written 
reply  stated that  the MCI has fulfilled its role of ensuring maintenance 
of uniform standards of medical education in all these institutions and 
bringing about qualitative and quantitative improvements in the field.  
The activities of monitoring cell in the identification of teachers who 
were claiming employment simultan eously in more than one medical 
college, identification of students who have been admitted after the 
prescribed last date of admissi on in undergraduate and postgraduate 
courses, identification of the colle ges which are admitting students in 
excess and identificatio n of universities and in stitutions where the 
Regulations pertaining to graduate m edical education are not followed 
with the consequential actions, have definitely resulted in improving 
the standards of medical education system in the country. 
Even the National Committee of Foreign Medical Education & 
Accreditation (NCFMEA) of USA at its meeting held in Washington on 
17th September, 2004 after going through all the Regulations and 
documents, appreciated the efforts of the Council and was pleased to 
accept the view points put forth by  the Council. It was also decided by 
the NCFMEA that MBBS degree of India be considered as an 
equivalent degree of MD of USA. 

During the oral evidence a represent ative of the Medical Council 
of India stated as under- 
“Coming to the uniformity of st andards and monitoring, as you 
have rightly said, the Medical Council of India (MCI) 
contemplates on generation of standards and monitoring 
standards. The monitoring of st andards is worked out through 
periodical inspections, which a re carried out by the Medical 
Council of India(MCI). The recognition accorded to an Under-
Graduate Medical College is only for a period of five years. After 
every five years, re-inspections, r e-evaluation of infrastructure, 
recommendation made by the Medical Council of India(MCI), and 
the renewal of that particular recognition for a further period of 
five years will be done. Hence, there is vigilance, which is 
effected by the Medical Council of  India(MCI) periodically. It is 
through this modality that the uniformity is being evoked.” 
 
He further added :- 
“The generation of standa rds has been dealt consistently by the 
Medical Council of India(MCI) through regulations. The 
maintenance and monitoring have also been done up to a 
reasonable degree by the Medical Council of India(MCI).” 
 
The Committee further enquire d whether any survey was 
conducted by the Ministry/MCI to assess the standard of Medical 
education in the country and if so, what were the major findings of the 
survey. In this regard, the Medical C ouncil of India in its written reply  
stated that the  Council conducts peri odical inspections of all the 
recognised medical colleges at an interval of 5 years for continuance of 
recognition of the degree. Whenever,  deficiencies are observed in 
terms of clinical material, teaching faculty, infrastructure and ancillary 
facilities, the findings of the in spection are sent to the concerned 
college and affiliating university for rectification. A copy of the report is 
also sent to the concerned State Government for remedial action. On 
receipt of the compliance, another inspection is carried out to verify the 

compliance. If it is observed that the deficiency  continues to persist for 
a long time in spite of repeated requests for compliance/rectification, 
suitable measures including re commendation for withdrawal of 
recognition u/s 19 of the Act are taken. It may be noted that 
recommendations have been made to Central Government for 
withdrawal of recognition in respect of  8 medical colleges and it is still 
pending with the Central Government. 
The Committee further enquired ab out the terms of reference of 
the study group set up by MCI and when is the study group expected 
to submit its report.  The Medical Co uncil of India in  the written reply 
has stated that the study group is constituted to go into depth in each 
aspect relating to the admission proce ss in  the country including the 
question  of conducting  of en trance examinations. Its unitary 
character, fee structure, the me chanism adopted by the appropriate 
authorities for filling up  various qu otas, either under the laws of the 
State or as per the orders by the Apex Court from time to time and for 
ensuring the required transparency and accountability in the entire 
process. It should also engage itself  for determining effective means 
for the implementation of the time schedule provided in the 
Establishment of New Medical Co lleges Regulations, 1999 and the 
time schedule for admission in the medical courses decided by the 
Council and approved by the Government of India on 14.05.2003. 
The Study Group is supposed to subm it its final report by March, 
2005 so that if any further action is required to be taken by the Council, 
the Council should be able to do so well before the onset of the 
admission process for the next academic session i.e. 2005-06. 
The Committee further enquire d whether any system of 
accreditation of courses/programme s has been adopted by MCI in 

order to give recognition to Me dical colleges which have been 
maintaining higher standards of education and to encourage  others to 
improve the quality of education.  The Medical Council of India in their 
written reply have stated that t he  Council has already undertaken the 
process for accreditation  of the Medical Colleges.  A Committee has 
been appointed to prepare the modalities for the accreditation.  
Request was sent to all the medica l colleges in the country for 
participation on voluntary basis.  28 programmes as a part of pilot 
study and Modalities for accreditation are under preparation. 
Relationship between MCI and Mi nistry of Health and Family 
Welfare  
 
 The Committee enquired about the existing relationship between 
the Medical Council of India and the Department of Health with regard 
to Medical Education including re search and training, continuing 
medical education etc. and the man ner in which the coordination is 
maintained. The Medical Council of Indi a in its written reply stated that 
in terms of  the provisions  in the Act, the Council is supposed to be 
making recommendations to the Government of India in respect of 
starting  new medical colleges, cour ses, increase in intake capacity 
including  postgraduate courses in terms of provisions u/s 10A of the 
Act. Likewise, the recommendations pertaining to the recognition of 
courses for incorporation in the sc hedule are also required to be made 
upon approval of such recommendations  by the General Body of the 
Council. The matters which are required to be regulated through 
issuance of regulations are also  formulated by the Council and are 
affected only with the prior approval of the Central Government. Thus it 
is evident that the Council is required to be making recommendations 
by virtue of the technica l expertise at its disposal to the Government of 

India which is the final executing/no tifying authority including notifying 
the regulations u/s 33 of the Act. 
 MCI further giving the adequacy or otherwise of the existing 
mechanism for coordination between  Department of Health and MCI 
on the one hand and MCI and medical co lleges in different parts of the 
country on the other for maintain ing uniform pattern of medical 
education in the country stated  that  the existing mechanism under the 
Act whereby the Ministry of Health, Government of India and MCI work 
in coordination on the areas that are prescribed under the Act. The 
policy framework prescribed by th e Council through Government of 
India is required to be executed by the various medical institutions in 
various parts of the country so as to ensure that uniform pattern of 
medical education is upheld in the country. The situation as of now is 
satisfactory. The periodic review abo ut the coordinating mechanism is 
evoked by the Council through holding of timely symposia/workshop 
for the purposes of pr ocuring necessary feedback and based on the 
evaluation of the same and appropriate updating is done periodically. 
As of now, a national workshop is scheduled on 18
th & 19 th October, 
2003 at New Delhi under the theme of Crisis in Medical Education 
wherein the thematic exercise is to update the 4 principal regulations 
namely Regulations on Graduate Medica l Education, Regulations on 
Postgraduate Medical Educatio n, Regulations on Minimum 
Requirements for Starting of a Medical College and Teachers Eligibility 
Qualifications Regulations. 
 The Committee further enquired about  the existing level of 
coordination between MCI and the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare(Department of Health).  It was pointed out that though it has 
been stated that the situat ion as of now is sa tisfactory, there were 

media reports about soured relationship between the Ministry and MCI. 
In this regard, the Medical Council of India in their written reply stated 
that the relationship between the Ministry and MCI has been cordial 
and healthy. By and large the Ministry is honouring the 
recommendations of the Council. In the last 17 months, the 
recommendations of the Council have been accepted by the Ministry in 
all the cases except one. 
The Committee during oral evidence  further enqui red about the 
relationship between MCI and Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare 
(Department of Health. In response, a representative of  MCI stated 
during oral evidence  as under:- 
“In all humility, our observation is that, we are totally co-
ordinating with the Government of  India. We have no grievances 
from our side.” 
 
 The President (Acting), MC I also added as under :- 
“I fully endorse the opinion of Dr. Mishra. We do not have any 
problem with the Government.” 
 
The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare(Department of Health) expressi ng  his view in  regard to the  
relationship between MCI and the Ministry stated during oral evidence 
as under :- 
“We have some perceptions about how to improve our interaction 
with the Medical Council. Some amendments are on the way. 
They are in the final stages. They would all come to Parliament 
and Hon’ble Members and Chairman  would all have a chance to 
scruitinise them and advise us. They are not out of dissatisfaction 
per se but because of the situation where vacancies are there 
and we have to find out how to cope with these vacancies and 
reflect your aspirations.” 
 

 The Committee enquired about the suggestions to improve 
the relationship and coordination between the Ministry and 
MCI. The Medical Council of India in their written reply  
suggested that for better coordination between Ministry and 
the MCI, it is desirable that regular joint meetings be held 
between the office bearers and officials of both the 
organizations. 
Accountability of Medical Council of India to Government  
The Committee also enquire d about the autonomy and 
accountability of MCI to the Mi nistry of Health and Family 
Welfare (Department of Health). In this regard, a representative 
from MCI stated during oral evidence  as under :- 
“Sir, accountability of the Medical Council of India to Parliament 
and to the Government is in-built in the Act itself.” 
 
 He further added :- 
“That is precisely the point. It includes the Government because 
ultimately section 3 reads as, “The Central Government shall 
cause to constitute the Council.” Therefore, the constitution of the 
Council is the prerogative right of the Government.” 
 
 Enquired whether more provisions are needed to be incorporated 
to ensure  autonomy and accountab ility, a  representative of MCI 
stated as under :- 
“As of now, from the Council side, the perception is that the 
present mechanism is adequate enough. It has worked well.  
 
 The Committee observed that MCI continuous to enjoy unlimited 
powers and autonomy in the field of medical education in the country 
without much of accountability and enquired about the suggestions to 
ensure better accountability of MCI to the Government. The Medical 

Council of India in its written reply  st ated that it is not  a fact that MCI 
continues to enjoy unlimited power s and autonomy in the field of 
medical  education without much of  accountability. The entire 
functioning of the Council is as per the provisions of IMC Act and the 
Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Act is passed by the 
Parliament of the country. Every Rule and Regulation is notified in the 
gazette of Government of India only  after the approval of Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, and only thereafter, it 
becomes enforceable law. Thus , the question of MCI being not 
accountable or enjoying unlimited po wers and autonomy in the field of 
medical education does not arise. 
CHAPTER II 
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE 
(A) Constitution of the Council  
According to  Section 3(1) of th e Indian Medical Council Act, 
1956 the Council consists of members, as under: 
a) One member from each State other  than a Union Territory to be 
nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the 
State Government concerned.  
b) One member from each University, to be elected from amongst 
the members of the medical faculty of the University by members 
of the Senate of the University or in case the University has no 
senate, by members of the Court.  
c) One member from each State in which a State Medical Register 
is maintained, to be elected from amongst themselves by 
persons enrolled on such Regist er who posses the medical 

qualifications included in the First and Second Schedule or in 
Part-II of the Third Schedule. 
d) Seven members to be elected from amongst themselves by 
persons who possess the medical qualifications included in Part I 
on the Third Schedule. 
e) Eight members to be nominated  by the Central Government. 
The President and Vice – President of the Council shall be 
elected by the members of the Council from amongst themselves. 
The functions specifically a ssigned to the Council under the 
Indian Medical Act, 1956 are as under: - 
 
 
(a) Evaluation of Scheme for maki ng appropriate recommendations for 
permission for establishment of new medical college, new course of 
study etc. including postgraduate courses and increase in the 
annual intake. 
(b) Non-recognition of medical qualification in certain cases. 
(c) Recognition of medical qualific ations granted by Universities or 
medical institutions in India. 
(d) Recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions 
in countries with which there is a scheme of reciprocity. 
(e) Recognition of medical qualificat ions granted by certain medical 
institutions whose qualifications are not included in the 1 st or 2 nd 
Schedule. 
(f) Determination of rights of persons possessing qualifications in the 
Schedules to be enrolled. 
(g) Has power to seek required information pertaining to the courses of 
study and examination conduct ed by the various medical 
colleges/institutions. 

(h) Conferment of recognition and withdrawal thereof. 
(i) Prescribing Minimum Standards of Medical Education. 
(j) Governing Postgraduate Medical Education through Postgraduate 
Medical Education Committee in terms of Section 20 of the Act. 
(k) Governing professional conduct, maintaining Indian Medical 
Register including registration of names and removal thereof. 
(l) Providing provisional registration. 
(m) Registration of additional qualifications; and 
 
(n) Making rules and regulations u/s 32 and 33 of the Act. 
Executive Committee 
The Medical Council of India stated in  written reply  that  according 
to the provisions of the Act,  the Coun cil will constitute of the Executive 
Committee and Officers, Committees and Servants of the Council. 
 Therefore, composition, criteri a for selection/nomination of 
members of the Executive Commi ttee as per section 9(1), 10(1) & 
10(2) of IMC Act, 1956 are as under:- 
9(1) Constitute from amongst its members an Executive Committee 
and such other committees for ge neral or special purposes as the 
Council deems necessary to carry out purposes of this Act. 
10(1) The Executive Committee, hereinafter referred to as the 
Committee shall consist of the Pres ident and Vice – President, who 
shall be members ex-officio and not less than seven and not more than 
ten other members who shall be el ected by the Council from amongst 
its members. 
(4)The President and Vice – President shall be the President and  
     Vice – President respectively of the Committee. 

President and Vice-President 
 The Medical Council of India is  headed by the President and Vice 
– President. The President of the Council is elected amongst the 
members of the Council. The Committee observed that presently the 
Council is being headed by an Acting President who has been 
appointed by the Supreme Court. The Committee therefore, enquired 
about the reasons for the Medical Council of India being looked after  
by an Acting President and as to why a regular President is not being 
appointed in the Council. The President (Acting), MCI stated during 
oral evidence  as under:- 
“Delhi High Court has removed our President on certain charges. 
We went in appeal to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court 
ordered that the Vice – President  be the Acting President. The 
Supreme Court appointed an Ad-ho c Committee consisting of 
four eminent Doctors to supervise the functions of the Act. At 
present, the Vice President and the Ad-hoc Committee consisting 
of three Supreme Court nominees are supervising the functions 
of the Council”. 
 
 The Committee wanted to know  since how long the Acting 
President was presiding over the Council. The President (Acting), MCI 
informed the Committee that this arrangement was going on  since 
November, 2002. 
 The Committee further enquire d about the reasons for the 
removal of the President of Medica l Council of Indi a. The President 
(Acting), MCI clarified during oral evidence as under:- 
“The charges were of corruption”. 
 
He further added:- 
“I do not think there was any pro ven corruption charges. They 
were only allegations against which we have approached the 

Supreme Court. There was a CBI in quiry. I understand that the 
CBI inquiry has not proved any charges of corruption. They were 
only wild allegations. The S upreme Court has appointed me as 
the Acting President reposing full confidence in the Council”. 
 
 
He also stated as under:- 
“I am not expressing any opini on about the case which is 
pending before the hon’ble Supreme Court. I am not expected to 
say anything about it because the hon’ble Supreme Court is 
examining it. But, at present still I can confidently say that there 
is no corruption in the Counc il and the Supreme Court nominees 
are supervising and giving report to the hon’ble  Supreme Court 
once in every three months. We have got the report of the Ad-
hoc Committee also”. 
   
 The Committee, however, note that the High Court of  Delhi had  
in the Judgement dated 23 November, 2001  made the following 
observations about Dr. Ketan Desai, the former President of MCI:- 
 
(i) The President was manipulating the  affairs of the Council 
in such a manner that all maj or decisions were being taken 
by him even though the decisions are required to be taken 
by the Executive Committee. 
 
(ii) The Inspection Reports were manipulated as per the 
dictates of the President of the Council. 
 
(iii)           Retired Teachers were appointed as Inspectors by the 
President of the Council who were  obliged to the 
President for the job. 
 
(iv)           There  were large  scale bunglings in the matter of  
admissions to medical colleges. 
 
 
(v)            There  were a llegations of disproportionate assets  
           amassed by the President. 
 

 
 
The Delhi High Court  had also passed the following orders:- 
  
“To  put the  Medical Council of  India back on its feet the Central 
Government which is enjoined with the task of constituting the 
Council under Section 3 of the Act,  should do its duty.  The 
Central Government is directed to constitute the Council as 
required under Section 3 of the Act as early as possible.  After 
the Council is fully constituted in accordance with the statute, 
election be held for the offices of President and Vice President of 
the Council and the new ly elected persons should take over the  
reins of the Council.” 
 
 
Members of the Medical Council of India  
The Medical Council of India consists of the representatives from the 
State Governments and Members elected under section 3(1)  of the 
IMC Act, 1956, representing St ate Governments –3(1)(a), 
Representing Universities –3(1)(b), Representing Registered Medical 
Graduates –3(1)(c), Licentiate Group -3(1)(d) and Representing 
Central Government  –3(1)(e). 
The position of Council Members as on  04.11.2004 was  as 
 follows:- 
Under Section  Member in Position Vacant  Total 
 
3(1)(a)    23      05     28 
3(1)(b)    32      28     60* 
3(1)(c)    08      07     15 
3(1)(d)    --      07     07 
3(1)(e)    08      --     08 
Total     71      47             118 
 
*As regard membership of universities, the names of 19 universities 
have been deleted vide Central Government Notifications dated  
 
 

 
27.3.2000, 17.5.2000, 25.7.2000 & 19.7.2001 at Sl. No 1, 3, 4, 8, 12, 
14, 20, 28, 30,  38, 41, 45, 48, 52, 57, 60, 61, 62 & 69.  
 
The Committee while observing that  the total vacancy position 
was  47 in the various categories of representatives in the Council,  
enquired about the reasons for not-filling up the vacancies. The 
President (Acting), MCI replied as under:- 
“It is the Government of India which conducts elections for these 
vacancies. We report the vacancies to the Government of India.” 
 
The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(Department of Health) added as under:- 
“We will have to look at the s egmentation of these 118 members. 
Out of the State Government nominees of 28,24 are in position 
and there are four vacancies which we have taken up with them. 
But out of 60 positions for members elected by Universities, there 
are 28 vacancies. That is where the real vacancies have 
occurred. In another category the members with Licentiate 
qualifications – earlier LMPs – that category is vanishing and so 
nominations are not coming forward. That is why, some more 
amendments are contemplated to tackle these vacancies on war 
footing.”  
 
The Committee observed that there are 28 vacant positions in the 
category of representatives to be se nt by various universities all over 
the country. The Committee, therefor e, enquired about the reasons as 
to why representatives are not being sent by the Universities. A 
representative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(Department of Health) clarified during oral evidence as under:- 
 
 
“That is one of the problems. In  the Act, the responsibility for 
filling up of the vacancies is of  the Central Government whereas 

the actual Returning Officers are State Government officials or 
University officials. We are amending that provision also. Right 
now there is no such provision of taking any action.” 
 
A representative of Medical Council of India,   giving the factual 
position on the vacancies  of members of the Council, stated as under 
:- 
“I was to make my observation on  the vacancies. Of course, our 
hon’ble Secretary has dealt with it. The vacancies have to be 
borne in mind primarily because, as you had observed, they are 
coming from the University side.  The situation is that the 
University has to get its nominee through its Senate or the Court, 
and the person who is to be elected ought to be a member of the 
Faculty of Medicine of that Univer sity. Now, in Universities we do 
not have a Senate. There are Universities where the Senate 
meeting is not being held. So there are any number of situations 
which are beyond the authority and ju risdiction of the Council as 
well as the Government of India.” 
 
 The Committee further enquired as to when the vacancy position 
will be filled up. A representative of Mi nistry of Health and Family 
Welfare (Department of Health) replied as under:- 
“Because of the inherent difficulty in filling up of the posts they 
are lying vacant. That is why we have come up with amendments 
so that the filling up of  vacancies will not be as  difficult as it is 
right now. That is why we are coming up with this amendment 
Bill.” 
 
 The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare(Department of Health) further added as under:- 
“We agree with you, Sir, we will have to improve the functioning.” 
 
The Committee enquired about the provision for taking action 
against the Universities if there is inordinate delay in the matter from 
their side. In this connection, the Secretary, Ministry of Health and 

Family Welfare (Department of Health) stated during evidence  as 
under:- 
 “No, Sir, there is no such provision. In the amendment we are  
looking at all this. We have submi tted to you respectfully that we 
are looking at a series of amendments to improve the 
procedures. We are looking for enabling provisions whereby we 
can effectively discharge the rol e which the hon’ble Chairman 
has pointed out.” 
 
A representative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(Department of Health) further added:- 
“As Secretary pointed out, the main problem lies in the  
representation of the Universities . Now each University has to 
send one person to the Medical Council and there the problem 
lies. We have been writing to the Universities but somehow the 
elections have not taken place. Basically in the amendment we 
want to combine all the Universities in one particular State. They 
would elect one person from all the Universities. This is also 
necessary because now in many of the States we have one 
unified Health University. What happens is that those States 
have only one representative whereas a State which has  more 
than 4-5 Universities will have 4-5 representatives. So, there is 
an imbalance there. So, to obviate this problem we want to have 
one representative of all the Universities in one State.” 
 
The Committee further enquire d about the suggestions for 
inclusion  of representatives of management of medical colleges,  
eminent persons, experts in the fiel d etc. on the Medical Council.  The 
MCI in their written reply  stated that the present composition of  
Council is fairly representative of all the stake holders in the field of 
medical education and health care.  As such any change in this may 
not be desirable.  It is also felt that inclusion of the representatives of 
the  management of medical colleges would intrude upon stringent 
actions being planned by the Coun cil for further streamlining and 
improving medical education in the country. 

(B) Manpower 
The work in the Council office is  spread over several sections 
indicated as under:- 
a) Medical Education Section 
b) Registration and Eligibility 
c) Ethics 
d) Monitoring  
e) Administration (Establishment and Accounts ) 
f) Legal 
g) Indian Medical Register 
h) Miscellaneous (Curriculum, Mi gration, Teachers’ Eligibility 
and other matters not covered under any of the above) 
The Committee enquired about the powers, functions, 
 responsibilities and accountability associated with different positions at 
various levels of organisation in MCI. The Medical Council of India in 
their written reply elaborated that as regards the powers and duties of 
officers, these are prov ided in the Medical Council Regulations 2000. 
Broadly, the Secretary who is also  the Registrar is the Principal 
Executive Officer of the Council and is  responsible for the safety of the 
property of the Council and the control and management of the  
office, accounts and correspondence,  attend and take notes of the 
meeting proceeding of  the Council, Executive Committee, Post 
Graduate Medical Education Committee and other Committees 
appointed by the Council or any of its bodies. The other officers of the 
Council discharge such duties as  assigned to them by the 
Registrar/Secretary, President or C ouncil from time to time under the 
overall supervision of the Registrar. 

Enquired about the  sanctioned strength of manpower and  the 
existing vacancies in various cate gories of officers/staff, the MCI 
furnished the following information:- 
Sl. 
No.  
          Post  Number of 
Sanctioned 
Post(s) 
In Position No. of 
Vacant 
Posts  
Remarks 
1 Secretary  
 
      1    1    -- -- 
2 Additional Secretary       1    --    1 DPS has been 
constituted  
3 Joint Secretary  
 
      1    1    -- -- 
4 Deputy Secretary 
(Medical) 
 
      2    2    -- -- 
5 Deputy Secretary (Non-
Medical) 
 
      1    1    -- Presently on 
Deputation 
6 Assistant Secretary        3    2    1 2 are on Deputation. 
DPC has been 
constituted for the 
vacant post.  
7 Whole-time Inspector        3    2    1 Offer of appointment 
has been sent.  
8 Computer Programmer 
  
      1    1    -- -- 
9 Law Officer 
 
      1    --    1 Under process 
10 Administrative Officer  
 
      1    1    -- -- 
11 Section Officer  
 
      2    2    -- -- 
12.  Accounts Officer  
 
      1    1    -- -- 
13 Private Secretary 
 
      1    1    -- -- 
14 Personal Assistant  
 
      1    1    -- -- 
15 Superintendent  
 
      4    4    -- -- 
16 Accountant  
 
      1    1    -- -- 
17 Senior Stenographer 
 
      2    2    -- -- 
18  Head Clerk 
 
     11    11    -- -- 
19 Junior Stenographer 
 
      5    4    1 Under process 
20 Telephone Operator-cum-
Receptionist  
      1    1    -- -- 

 
21 Hindi Translator 
 
      1    1    -- -- 
22 Computer Operator  
 
      2    2    -- -- 
23 UDC/Store Keeper 
 
     17    9    8 Under process 
24 Staff Car Driver Grade-I 
 
      1    1    -- -- 
25 Staff Car Driver Grade-II 
 
      1    1    -- -- 
26 Lower Division Clerk  
 
     29    26    3 Under process  
27 Gestetner Operator  
 
      2    2    -- -- 
28 Record Keeper-cum-
Librarian 
      1    --    1 Under process 
29 Staff Car Driver Ordinary 
Grade  
      2    2    -- -- 
30 Daftary 
 
      3    3    -- -- 
31 Peon  
 
      5    5    -- -- 
32 Messenger 
 
      2    1   1 Under process 
33 Farash 
 
      1    1    -- -- 
34 Safai Karamchari 
 
      1    1    -- -- 
                        Total :      112    94    18  
 
 
 
The Committee observed that in the above statement out of total 
112 posts existing in MCI, 18 posts are lying vacant at various levels 
including that of Additional Se cretary. The Committee enquired about 
the reasons as to why so many pos ts are lying vacant in MCI and the 
steps taken by the  MCI to fill up the various posts. The Medical 
Council of India in its written reply stated that after the report  was 
submitted, 11 posts have been fi lled following the due process of 
selection. The 7 posts which are still vacant are as under:- 
a) Additional Secretary 
b) Law Officer  

c) Jr. Stenographer(OBC) 
d) UDC(4 posts) 
These posts have remai ned vacant inspite of several attempts 
made towards filling the said posts . The posts of UDC have remained 
vacant, as they have to be filled through promotion as per Recruitment 
Rules, and as on date no eligible de partmental candidate is available 
for promotion. 
The Committee further enquired whether the sanctioned number 
of posts are sufficient to meet the present work load in the Council in 
the scenario of increasing number of  Medical Colleges and whether 
any work study was conducted to asse s the latest requirement of staff 
in MCI. The Medical Council of In dia informed that the last cadre 
review for different posts was done in 1997.  A cadre review for 
different posts done  in the Coun cil Office was placed before the 
Executive Committee at its meeting held on 28.03.2004 and thereafter 
the recommendations of the Executive Committee were placed before 
the Council at its General Body meeting held on 12.10.2004. 
The Council approved the followi ng new  posts which are 
required for carrying out the work of the Council effectively :- 
 
S. 
No.  
Post. Grade Existing 
No. 
Additional 
No. 
required 
1. Deputy Secretary 
(Medical) 
Rs.12000-375-18000/- 3 1 
2. Assistant Secretary Rs.10000-325-15200/- 3 2 
3. Stenographer Grade –II Rs.5500-175-9000/- 2 2 
4. Computer Operator  Rs.4000-100-6000/- 2 4 
5. U.D.C Rs.4000-100-6000/- 16 1 
6. Stenographer Grade-III Rs.4000-100-6000/- 15 2 

7. Telephone Operator  Rs.4000-100-6000/- 1 1 
8. Electrician Rs.4000-100-6000/- Nil 1 
9. Lower Division Clerk  Rs.3050-75-3950-80-
4590/- 
29 1 
10. D.G. Set Operator Rs.3050-75-3960-80-
4950/- 
Nil 1 
11. Peon Rs.2550-55-2660-60-
3200/- 
5 3 
12. Messenger  Rs.2550-55-2660-60-
3200/- 
2 1 
 
The Committee also observed that the post of Law Officer in MCI 
is being kept vacant for quite long time. The Committee enquired the 
date from which the post is lying vacant and the reasons for non-filling 
up of the post and the steps  taken by MCI for fillin g up the post of law 
officer.  
  
 
The Medical Council of India in their written reply have stated 
that after the creation of post of Law Officer in Medical Council of India, 
the post was advertised on 23.10.20 00 and 28.12.2001 and interviews 
were held on 23.04.2001 and 16.07.2002 respectively but no candidate 
was found suitable for the above said post. 
 As the Council could not appoint Law Officer, a retainer advocate 
was appointed to look after day to day legal work of the Council so that 
it is not hampered. The incumbents appointed as retainer advocate are 
as under :- 
S. No.  Name  From   To  
1 Sh.  Navin Prakesh  January, 1992 July, 2002 
2 Sh. Vivek Singh July, 2002 August, 2002 
3 Sh. Ankur Talwar  Dec., 2002 Dec., 2003 
4 Sh, Kirtiman Singh  January, 2004 Still Working 

 
In this connection, a  representative of Medical Council of India  
stated during oral evidence  as under :- 
“As I said earlier regarding the post of Law Officer, the post was  
advertised by the Council, ap plications were received and 
interviews were conducted but, for want of eligible/suitable 
person, we could not make any appointment. As far as the 
number of posts that have been f illed in by the Council are 
concerned, I would like the Sec retary to collect exact number on 
that, and then make  appropriate observations to the hon. 
Members of Committee.” 
 
The Committee enquired about the de tails of training imparted to 
officers/staff of MCI during the last three years. The Medical Council  of  
India in its   written reply   stated that no   officer was  
imparted specialised training during the last three years.  However 
during the year 2003, one of staff member was provided training in 
Hindi translation for a period of thre e months.  This training has helped 
in getting Hindi translations of general correspondence work as per 
instructions of Government of India.   During the current year, training 
to officers and staff in the use of computer has been planned. 
The Committee further enquired abou t the number of complaints 
received against officers and staff of MCI in each of the last five and 
the action taken against the employees on the basis of complaints. The 
Medical Council of India in their wr itten reply have stated that no 
complaint has been received against any officer in the last 5 years. In 
respect of staff, the Council has rec eived an intimation form Delhi 
Police that one of the UDC’s  namely Sh. Raj Kumar Dogra was 
required for investigation for case no. FIR –283/03. for Order to require 
attendance at investigation  under Section 160 and 175, Criminal 
Procedure Code. As per t he available records Delhi Police is still 

investigating the case. The Medica l Council of India stated that  no 
complaint has been referred to CVC/ CBI.   There is no post of Chief 
Vigilance Officer in MCI. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
FINANCE 
(A) Budgetary Allocation 
The original grants-in-aid  revised estimates and actual 
expenditure incurred by the Medica l Council of India both under Plan 
and Non-Plan during the last five years are as below:- 
    GRANT-IN-AID(PLAN) 
         (Amt. in Lakhs)  
YEAR   ORIGINAL   REVISED   ACTUAL 
ESTIMATE   ESTIMATE EXPENDITURE 
 
1999-00   73    73  29.68   
2000-01   80    55  86.30 
2001-02   80    57*  73.64  
        *(since Unspent Grant of  previous year was  
available, so Govt. did not release the Grant 
for this year.) 
2002-03   100    90.58  136.69 
2003-04   100    75.00  78.87 
 
Note : It may be observed that the Actual Expenditure for the year  
1990-00 was far less than the revised estimates while it is more 
during the year 2000-01, 2001-02 and 2002-03. This is due to the 
fact that the bills from the Hosting Institutions conducting 
Continuing Medical Education programmes were not received on 
time and  hence the expenditure was to be postponed to the later 
years. Further, the revision and printing of IMR could not be 

completed during the Ninth Plan period due to non receipt of 
complete information from the State Medical Councils and non 
receipt of latest information from the registered doctors with 
regard to their address and additional qualification. 
 
   GRANT-IN-AID(NON-PLAN) 
          
       (Amount in lakh) 
 
YEAR   ORIGINAL   REVISED   ACTUAL 
ESTIMATE   ESTIMATE EXPENDITURE 
 
1999-00   56    61  283.46  
2000-01   60    55  354.13 
2001-02   60    58  379.59  
2002-03   60    60  442.46 
2003-04   60    60  685.85 
 
Note : The Actual Expenditure is more than the Non Plan Grant from  
the Government and the excess ex penditure beyond the Grant is 
met from its own-resources like insp ection fee, registration fee, 
etc. 
 
 The Medical Council of India in its written reply  stated that the 
Non-Plan income of the Council includes Grant-in-aid from  
Government of India (Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare), 
inspection fees charged from medical institutions (for establishment of 
new medical colleges, periodical ins pections, increases of seats both 
undergraduate and postgraduate, openi ng of new postgraduate 
courses, etc.), fees charged for Re gistration for Medical Practitioners, 
issue of Good Standing Certificates, fees  for  Eligibility Certificates for 
students going abroad for Medical Education, sale of publications, etc. 
the expenditure on Non-Plan side is mainly incurred for meeting, the 
salaries of offices and staff of the Council, TA/DA of the President and 
Vice President and Members of the Council, purchase of assets, 
stationery, etc., telephone  charges, repair and ma intenance, petrol oil 
and lubricant charges for staff car, printing charges, purchase of 

computers and maintenance charges, legal charges, electricity, water 
and postage charges. 
 Enquired whether the scarcity of f unds really come in the way of 
functioning of MCI the Medical Counc il of India in its written reply  
stated that the Non-Plan income of the Council generated mainly from 
two sources (1) Grant-in-aid towards (i) Non-Plan Scheme for day to 
day expenditure of Council (ii) Plan Scheme for reimbursement of bills 
of CME programmes to the CME hosti ng Institutions and revision & 
printing of Indian Medical Register.  (2)Income from own receipts, as 
inspection fees from medical colleges, fee charged for issuing 
Registration Certificate, Certificate of Good Standing, Eligibility 
Certificates, etc. 
The income from Non-Plan Grant-in-aid of Rs. 60 lakhs from 
Central Government to the Council is hardly sufficient to meet  the 
expenditure  on salaries of staff & officers of Council which comes to 
more than of Rs. 190 lakh per year.  The expenditure of  about Rs. 530 
lakh per year, on travelling allowance stationary, postage, legal 
charges, electricity & water charg es, purchase of computers and 
assets etc. are met out of the Council’s own receipts.  According to 
MCI,  the income from issuing the Registration Certificate to Medical 
Graduates has been reducing every year because the R egistration of 
Medical Graduates has been started by the State Medical Councils 
too. The income from inspection fee for starting of New Medical 
Colleges, New Post Graduate courses and increase in intake Capacity 
is temporary source of income whic h can get stagnated at any point of 
time and then  the annual inspection f ee & registration fee in addition 
to the Grant-in-Aid will be the only sourc e of income to meet the day to 
day expenditure. Such inco me depends upon the receipt of 

applications from the parties wh o want to start new medical 
college/courses. 
The income from Grant-in-aid – under Plan Scheme having 
approved outlay of Rs. 100 lakhs per year is mainly utilized for 
reimbursement of bills of CME Pr ogrammes and needs Rs. 50 lakhs 
more every year for revision, printing & publication of IMR in Gazette of 
India. The cost of revision, printing & publication in Government 
Gazette of each year’s IMR comes to Rs. 40-50 lakhs which is being 
charged by the Government Press for the same. Therefore, the sum of 
Rs. 500 lakhs is immediately required for printing & publication of IMR 
for the years from 1994 to 2004 in gaz ette of Government of India.  
Thus, the funds allocated under Grant-in-aid (Non-Plan & Plan) needs 
to be enhanced to meet the growi ng expenditure & for smooth working 
of the Council. 
The Medical Council of India in their written reply also added that 
the projecting the need of more funds under Grant-in-aid is being 
submitted to the Ministry of Heal th & Family Welfare every year 
through the Annual Budget Estimate  & Revised Budget Estimate. 
However, no enhancement has so far been made. 
A representative of the MCI added during oral evidence  as 
under: - 
“There was a proposition on whic h the budgetary allocation was 
sought to be worked out. In nutshel l, although I have tried to 
incorporate the detailed estimates of the last five years, I would 
like to put across two important things here. 
  
If you take the total budgetary estimates of the Medical 
Council of India, seven percent of its receipt revenue comes as 
an aid from the Government and 93 p ercent of it is generated by 
its own resources. 
  

The two major heads on which the Government is granting aid 
to the Medical Council of I ndia is under Plan and Non-Plan. 
Under Non-Plan, the aid is to the extent of  Rs. 60 lakh per year 
which includes payment of sa lary and other contingent 
expenditure and the Plan category pertains only to Continuing 
Medical Education(CME) where th e outlay is on Plan basis and 
Rs. Five crore is the allocation for the entire Plan on which we 
are expected to be using on an average about Rs. One crore on 
Continuous Medical Education eac h year. I have tried to present 
the details thereof.” 
 
The Committee also enquired about the project wise annual budget 
and actual expenditure of  MCI for the last two Five Year Plans and 
whether it was as per  the approv ed plan allocation. The Medical 
Council of India in their written reply furnished  the following details 
pertaining to 8th  & 9th Five Year Plans :- 
Statement showing the project wise annual budget and actual 
expenditure of Medical Council of India for last two five years 
plans – Year 1992-97 & 1997-2002 
          
(A) 8 TH FIVE YEAR PLAN(1992-97)PLAN SCHEME 
(Amt. In Lakhs) 
YEAR   CME Scheme Total Amount   Grant 
          R e c d . 
 
1992-93 
Budget  10.00   10.00   10.00  
Actual Expd.   2.62    2.62      
   
1993-94 
Budget   8.00   8.00   08.00 
Actual Expd.  6.81   6.81     
 
1994-95           
Budget   20.00   20.00   20.00  
Actual Expd.   5.12    5.12       
1995-96 
Budget   20.00   20.00   20.00  
Actual Expd  12.92   12.92      
     
1996-97    

Budget   20.00   20.00   20.00  
Actual Expd.  14.46   14.46   
 
 
 
(B)       9 TH FIVE YEAR PLAN (1997-2002)(PLAN SCHEME) 
 
            CME    Revision &    Establishment   Const. Of MCI    Total     Grant 
      Printing       of Library Office Building          Recd.  
                  Or IMR                      
 
1997-98   
Budget  40.00     5.00       --        40         85.00 65 
Expd.  15.28     --                   40         55.28  
 
1998-99 
Budget  40.00     25.00       10       10         85.00 65 
Expd.  19.73     --        --       10         29.73  
 
1999-00 
Budget  40.00      25.00        03        05          73.00 73 
Expd.  21.67     3.01        --        05          29.68  
 
2000-01 
Budget  40.00     25.00        5        10           80.00 55 
Expd.  50.33     25.97        --        10           86.30  
 
2001-02 
Budget  80.00     --         --         --           80.00 NIL 
Expd.  73.64     --          --         --           73.62   
    
*(Since Unspent Grant of last years was available, so Govt. did not release the 
Grant for this year.)  
 
Continuing Medical Education Programme (CME) 
 
 The Medical Council of India in t heir written reply hav e stated that in 
consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,  
Government of India, it had been decided in 1985 to utilize the services 
of Indian Physicians settled in USA in continuing medical education 
and patient care in India. Two sch emes were planned – (1) Continuing 
Medical Education Scheme (C ME) and (2) Equipment Donation 

Scheme (EDS). The Medical Council  of India was named the nodal 
agency for collaborating these schemes and a CME Cell was set up in 
the Council Office in December, 1985 for this purpose. These schemes 
have been extended by the Central Government, Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare in 1993 to involve Indian doctors from United 
Kingdom and Canada also. 
The Medical Council of India in their written reply have further 
stated that during the 8 th Five Year Plan Grant-in-aid by Government 
was provided only to meet the expenditure on CME Programme under 
which the Council used to release Grant of Rs. 50,000/- to the hosting 
institutions conducting the CME Programme to meet the expenditure 
for internal travel, of foreign  faculty Programme to meet the 
expenditure for internal travel, of foreign faculty (Indian doctors settled 
in USA, UK & Canada), contingent expenditure like rent of venue, 
printing of proceedings etc. Duri ng the Ninth Plan period, the grant 
from MCI was increased to Rs. One lakh for CME Programme 
involving foreign faculty and further, the scheme was extended to CME 
Programmes involving Indian Faculty for which the financial assistance 
provided was Rs. 50.000/- per programme. 
 The Financial assistance provided by MCI for approved CME 
programme and the total number of  CME programme held during each 
of last three years was as follows :- 
 
 
S l. NO. YEAR  TOTAL       TOTAL            MONEY  
 PROGRAMMES   PARTICIPANTS   SPENT 
   
1.  2002  147    22957  70.15 
           L A K H S   
 
2.  2003  153    24662  66.98 

           L A K H S  
 
3.  2004  148*    11189*  52.73 
           L A K H S  
 
*Provisional information as the reports and bills from some hosting 
institution are awaited.   
 
The Committee further enquired to what extent the CME Programme 
facilitated continuing medical education, among registered medical 
practitioners of various disciplines an d whether MCI has taken  steps to 
ensure that registered medical practition ers in all disciplines participate 
periodically in CME programmes. In th is regard MCI stated  in a written 
reply  that the CME Programmes have facilitated the dissemination of 
knowledge and information pertaining to the newer developments in the 
field of Medicine to the Registere d Medical Practitioners as a part of 
continuos professional update. 
Indian Medical Register 
One of the major functions of Medical Council of India is to 
maintain and update Indian Medical Register(IMR) and monitor the State 
Medical Register. The President of MCI(Acting) elaborated this role during 
oral evidence as under :- 
“Now, another important function of the Medical Council is the 
maintenance of the Indian Medica l Register, then  the grant of 
provisional and permanent registrati on as applicable to persons 
holding recognised medical qualifications included in the Schedules to 
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 , then the issue of good standing 
certificates.”  
 
Monitoring  and upkeep of the State Medical Registers. 
 The provisions in the  IMC Ac t, 1956, regarding the maintenance 
of Indian Medical Register is as follows :-. 

(1) The Council shall maintain in the prescribed manner a register of 
medical practitioners to be known as the Indian Medical Register, 
which shall contain the names of all persons who are for the time being 
enrolled on any State Medical Register and who possess any of the 
recognized medical qualifications. 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar of the Council to keep the 
Indian Medical Register in accordance  with the provisions of this Act 
and of any orders made by the Council, and from time to time to revise 
the register and publish it in the Gaze tte of India and in such other 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) Such register shall be deemed to be public document within the 
meaning of the Indian Evidence Ac t, 1872 and may be proved by a 
copy published in the Gazette of India. 
 The Committee during oral evidence enquired about  the 
updation of the Indian Medical Register. A representative of MCI  
stated as under :- 
“The question of update of Indian Me dical Register was also raised. I 
would like to deal with the finance part of it because even the 
Government of India has allocated an amount for updating of the 
Indian Medical Register. The updat ing of the Indian Medical Register 
has to be viewed in two contexts.” 
 
 
The witness continued :- 
 
“There are regional registration by  the medical graduates which 
are made with the Medical Council of India and the bulk of the 
entries are expected to be passed on to us from State Medical 
Councils because every State has  got a State Medical Council 
and it is supposed to maintain a State Medical Register. So, the 
Indian  Medical Register is expected to be having common 
entries borne out of regional registrations with the Medical 
Council of India and the registrations which are coming from 
State Medical Councils. We are required to be pursuing with the 

States for getting  those entries and getting them updated 
including the removal of the nam es of the deceased and various 
other situations. So, it is a Hercul ean exercise, but I can put it to 
you that particular exercise is almost on the verge of its 
completion and we will be able to compete this job in the shortest 
possible duration.” 
 
 The Committee further enquired as to which year Indian Medical 
Register has been printed by Medica l Council of India and whether  it 
was desirable to have the Register printed annually. The Medical 
Council of India in its  written reply  stated that the MCI has printed the  
IMR upto the year 2002. It is notifie d in the Gazette up to the year 
1993. MCI has already written to t he Central Government several 
times for additional grant for the Gazette notification of IMR. As 
regards IMR for 2003 and 2004, data entry is in  progress and printing 
of IMR would be taken soon after it is completed. 
New Office and Library Building 
 The Committee noted that there were proposals for constructing 
a new Library Building and also the office building in Dwarka. The 
Committee, therefore, enquired ab out the present stage of the 
proposal for establishing a Library by  MCI and what steps are  being 
taken by MCI to establish the Library as early as possible. A 
representative of MCI stated during oral evidence as under :- 
 
“There are two allocations which w ere pointed out by one of the 
Hon’ble Members. The first allocation is to the tune of Rs. 13 lakh 
for the library which is unutilised. The only problem is, since we 
have created a new building for t he Medical Council of India, the 
library will be in that new build ing and therefore that particular 
amount is expected to be used for the library. The library is 
located in the new building becaus e the space in the old building 
is very much insufficient even for our record keeping. Hence, it is 
not an unutilised amount. It is expected to be utilised. The 

second allocation which was pointed out was to the tune of Rs. 
40 lakh which was made for th e purpose of creation of the 
building. It has already been availed when the piece of land was 
purchased from the Delhi Development Authority for the new 
building of the Medical Council of India. “ 
 
  The MCI in their written repl y have further added that MCI has 
constructed its own building in Dwarka, which has been completed and 
the finishing work is going on. On the ground floor of the building, a 
provision has been made for establis hing a library covering an area of 
1431 Sq. ft. All the modern books, journals, periodicals, newspapers, 
etc. will be kept in the proposed library. 
 The Committee further enquired abou t the original specification, 
cost and time of completion of the project and whether there has been 
cost and time over-run in the project. The MCI in its written reply stated 
that the civil work of Council buildin g is mostly completed by all the 
agencies. The civil work of Council building was awarded to  M/s L&T 
Ltd. for Rs. 8,10,00,000 on 28.01.2000. The time limit for completion of 
the civil work of the building wa s nine months. However, there had 
been considerable delay in starting the project due to several reasons 
including (a) approval from the Airport s Authority of India regarding the 
height of the building, (b) approval from Delhi Urban Arts Commission, 
subsequent to in-principle approval by  the authorities of DDA, (c) final 
approval by the authorities of DDA and (d) delay in finalization of 
electrical work. The building wa s handed over by the contractor in 
August, 2004. 
 Clearance from various agencies is still awaited for water 
connection, sewer connection, fire figh ting, etc. for which the office is 
pursuing the matter with the Delhi Government for getting Building 
Completion Certificate. Otherwise the building is ready for occupation. 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Grant of Approval 
As per the Regulations notified by the MCI, under the IMC Act 
1956, it is mandatory for all medical colleges/institutions in the country 
including the private organizations to take approval of the MCI to start 
new medical colleges/institutions and to start new medical  courses.  
As regard to time-frame laid down for disposing of applications  
and granting of approval, the Medical C ouncil of India  stated that the 
grant of approval to the Medical co llege/institutions is a detailed 
process involving careful coordinati on and consultations with various 
agencies such as State Governments, Universities, etc. 
Enquired whether  granting of permission to the Medical 
 Colleges is time bound, the Medical Council of India in its written reply  
stated that  granting of initial permission to the medical college is a 
time bound phenomena as prescribed u/s 10A (5) which reads as 
under :- 
“…..10A(5) Where, within a period of one year from the 
date of submission of t he scheme to the Central 
Government under sub-section (1), no order passed by the 
Central Government has been communicated to the person 
or college submitting the schem e, such scheme shall be 
deemed to have been approved by the Central 
Government in the form in which it had been submitted, 
and accordingly, the permission of the Central Government 
required under sub-section (1) s hall be deemed to have  
been granted…” 
 
The Committee further enquired about the parameters 

 considered by the Medical Council  of India for granting/according 
permission and the time taken to accord such permission. The Medical 
Council of India in its written reply  stated that the MCI carries out 
inspection of the college at the time of application and thereafter every 
year till the degree awarded by the College is recognized. The criteria 
taken into consideration by the Council for granting/according 
recognition are as per the provisions of the regulations for 
requirements to be fulfilled by the applicant colleges for obtaining 
Letter of Intent and Letter of Perm ission for establishment of new 
medical colleges and yearly renewals u/s 10A of the I.M.C Act, 1956 
and the Minimum Standard Requirements for the Medical College. 
When the college informs the Council t hat it has satisfactorily provided 
all the requirements, the inspection is carried out at the earliest. The 
inspection report is considered at the next meeting of the Executive 
Committee scheduled to be held after the inspection (on an average 
the Executive Committee meets 8-9 times in a year) and if the college 
has provided the requirements satisf actorily, as shown in the 
inspection report, the Executiv e Committee takes decision for 
recommending permission/recognition and the decision is 
communicated to the Central Government immediately thereafter. The 
time interval between the information provided by the college that it 
has satisfactorily provided all the requirements and is ready for 
inspection and the final communication of the decision of 
recommendation for permission/recogniti on is sought to be kept to a 
minimum. It is also on record that the meetings of the Executive 
Committee have  been scheduled at f requent intervals in order to meet 
the deadline for admissions prescri bed by various authorities. For 
instance during the months of Ju ne, 2003  to Septem ber 2003 – i.e. 

only within a period of 4 months – a total of more than 100 inspections 
were carried out and 7 joint meetings of the Adhoc Committee and 
Executive Committee were held in order to consider these inspection 
reports. The decisions of the Adhoc Committee and Executive 
Committee were communicated to the Central Government within a 
maximum of one week of such  decision  being taken. 
Conditions to be fulfilled by Institutions 
 The Committee enquired about th e details of conditions which 
are required to be fulfilled by an inst itution for getting recognition from 
the MCI. The Medical Council of India in its written reply stated that the 
applicant for establishing a medical coll ege in India is r equired to fulfill 
the qualifying criteria prescribed in the Establishment of Medical 
College Regulations, 1999 and in addi tion shall also have the full 
complement of staff of the said regulations at the time of MCI 
inspection for consideration of a request for issu e of Letter of Intent or 
Letter of Permission(LOP). Once LOP is issued, the college is 
permitted to admit the First batch of students. Thereafter, the applicant 
also has to fulfill the year wise targets beginning from the first 
admission till the recognition of de gree with regard to  the construction 
of buildings, composition of staff, be d strength in the teaching hospital 
and other infrastructural and equipment facilities every year for which 
annual inspections are carried out by the Council and the permissions 
renewed by the Government following the recommendations of the 
Council. The inspection for recognition is conducted under the 
provisions of Section 11(2) of the Act at the time of final MBBS Part – II 
examination of the first batch of students and if the infrastructure, bed 
strength, equipments and staff comp lement etc. in terms of the 
Minimum Standard Requirements as pr escribed under the regulations 

are satisfactorily provided, the decision to recommend to the 
Government for approval and recogniti on of the degree is taken by the 
Executive Committee of the Council based upon the inspection report 
of the inspection carried out at the ti me of examination. This decision 
of recommending the approval is then  submitted to the General Body 
of the Council and after approval by the General Body, it is sent to 
Central Government for further necessary action. 
 
Inspection of Medical Colleges 
 To assure whether the requirements are being fulfilled by the 
applying medical colleges, the MC I conducts periodical inspections. 
The provisions of conducting inspections of the Medical 
colleges/institutions according to the I.M.C Act,1956 is as follows :- 
(1) The Committee shall appoint such number of medical  
inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical 
institution, college, hospital or examination held by any University 
or medical institution for the purpose of recommending to the 
Central Government recognition of medical qualifications granted 
by the University or medical institution. 
(2) The medical inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of  
any training or examination, but shall report to the committee on 
the adequacy of the standards of  medical education including 
staff, equipment, accommodation, training facilities prescribed for 
giving medical education or on  the sufficiency of every 
examination which they attend. 
(3) The Committee shall forward a copy of any such report to  the  

university or medical institution concerned and shall also forward 
a copy with the remarks or the University or institution thereon, to 
the Central Government. 
The Medical Council of India in their written reply gave in detail of 
the process of inspections f or undergraduate and postgraduate 
courses, as under : - 
a) Initially, inspection for the es tablishment of a Medical College or 
a new medical course for the p urpose of grant of letter of 
intent/letter of permission is carried out. In case of 
undergraduate courses, renewal are conducted every year till the 
first batch appears at the final MBBS Part-II examination. 
b) Inspection for the recogn ition of Undergraduate/Postgraduate 
courses which are conducted at the time of examination. 
c) Periodical inspection which are co nducted at the interval of 5 
years to review the infrastructure, equipment, staff, etc. for 
continuance of recognition of t he degree.  If, during any of these 
inspections the deficiencies are observed the same are 
communicated to the college. When the college submits the 
compliance of rectification of these deficiencies, the same is 
verified by way of compliance verification inspection. For 
Undergraduate courses the inspection is carried out by a team of 
three inspectors out of whom one is either a whole time or a 
regional inspector of the Counc il and the remaining two persons 
are drawn from a panel of inspectors which is regularly updated. 
For Postgraduate courses, the inspection is carried out by one 
member who is selected from among the panel of inspectors 
available at the relevant point of time. The panel of inspectors 

include principals, senior officers of the medical colleges spread 
all over India. 
d) Once the inspection report is received the same is placed before 
the Executive Committee or Postgraduate Committee. The 
decision taken in these meetings is communicated to the Central 
Government at the earliest. 
 Asked about the number and perio dicity of inspections carried 
out in the last five years,  the Medical Council of India in its written 
reply furnished the following number  of inspections carried out during 
last 5 years upto October, 2004 :- 
(i)  For recognition of Graduate Courses in MBBS-30 
 (ii) For continuance or recognition of MBBS courses-34 
 (iii) Compliance verification inspection -285 
 (iv) For establishment of new medical colleges including  
renewal of permission –196 
(v) For increase of seats incl uding renewal of permission –95 
(vi) As per court order –17 
(vii) Starting of various pos tgraduate medical courses –572 
(viii) Recognition of postgradu ate medical courses –862 
The Committee pointed out that  there have been reports of high-
handedness on the part of MCI team  while conducting inspections. 
Therefore, the Committee enquired about the steps being taken to 
ensure that MCI streamlines its role and functions in a manner befitting 
a dignified regulatory body. The Medica l Council of India in its written 
reply clarified that the Council has  not received any complaints 
regarding  high - handedness on the part  of MCI team in conducting 
inspections. The format of inspection report has been standardized 
and the same format is used by all the inspectors. The inspections are 

carried out for verification of informat ion supplied by the institution in 
Forms (A), (B) &(C) in which the in formation has to be supplied by the 
institution in a standardized format and verification of teaching faculty 
as per the information supplied by th e teacher in the declaration form 
which is counter signed by the D ean/Principal of the college. The 
teams of inspectors include Director of medical education/Vice-
Chancellors & Deans/Sr. Professors  in Government medical colleges. 
The inspections are being carried ou t in a manner befitting a dignified 
regulatory body.  However, it may be pointed out that in case the 
requirements in terms of staff, teachi ng faculty, clinical material and 
infrastructure etc. are not met with by the college, the deficiencies have 
to be pointed out by the inspectors. Similarly, in case it is found that a 
teacher has supplied wrong information/incomplete information in his 
declaration form and this has been counter signed by the 
Dean/Principal of the college which clearly amounts to an attempt to 
mislead/defraud the Council, this act of omission or commission has to 
be pointed out. Such an act of pointing out defects in declaration 
forms, clinical material, infrastructure & ancillary facilities, etc. cannot 
be considered as high – handed behavior on the part of the MCI team; 
on the contrary, it amounts to dispensation of duty bound obligation. 
 
Rectification of Deficiencies   
 The Committee enquired that after an inspection is carried out by 
the MCI both at the undergraduate/postgraduate levels and some 
defects and deficiencies are detected by the Council, then how much 
time is given to the Medical College for rectification of defects/removal 
of the deficiencies. The Medical Coun cil of India in its  written reply 
stated that the inspection report of  a college is placed before the 

Executive Committee/Postgraduate Committee and if certain 
deficiencies are pointed out by  the Committee, the same are 
communicated to the college concer ned alongwith the decision of the 
Committee. If the deficiencies are fo und to be too glaring which would 
hamper the teaching and training of the relevant course of study, 
college is issued a show cause notice to reply/comply with the 
deficiencies within three months from the date of receipt of the letter. 
Even after that also, college is g ranted time to comply with the 
deficiencies beyond the period of three months if the college even 
attempts to rectify the deficiencies partly. Once the college submits the 
information  that the deficienc ies have been complied with, the 
compliance verification inspection is carried out of which the report is 
placed before the Executive Committee/Postgraduate Committee for 
consideration. This process is repeated till the college removes the 
deficiencies to the satisfaction of the Council. 
 The Committee further enquired about the action taken against 
Medical Colleges which have failed to rectify the deficiencies during 
the stipulated time period. The Medical Council of India in its  written 
reply  stated that  despite communication of decision of the Executive 
Committee/Postgraduate Committee to rectify the deficiencies pointed 
out in the inspection report, and  subsequent reminders over the 
months, sometimes even more than a y ear, the college fails to rectify 
the deficiencies, the Council rec ommends for disapproval of the 
scheme/non-renewal of permission or de-recognition of the college for 
degree awarded by the affiliating university in respect of students being 
trained at the college. If the Central Government agrees with the 
recommendations of the MCI, it iss ues notification; otherwise gives 

opportunity to the college to rectify the deficiencies pointed out in the 
inspection report. 
The Committee further enquired as to what action is taken by the 
Executive Committee of MCI if t he Expert Committee finds that 
minimum standards prescribed by the Section 11(12) of Act are not 
fulfilled by the college. The Medical Council of India in its written reply 
stated that Executive Committee of  the Council recommends to the 
Central Government not to approve the college if the Expert 
Committee finds that minimum standards prescribed under the 
Regulations are not fulfilled by the college. If the deficiencies are of 
grave nature, which would affect the medical education, it is further 
recommended that  the college ma y not be granted permission to 
admit any further batch of students. 
The Committee during the eviden ce further enquired about  the 
process of de-recognition of the Medical colleges by  MCI due to failure 
to  rectify deficiencies pointed out during the inspections. A 
representative of the Medical Council of India replied as under:- 
“There was an observation by the Committee pertaining to de-
recognition of college and stoppage  of admissions. Ultimately, 
whenever the Council is requir ed to be coming across the 
situation of major violation of minimum norms, and I would like to 
make one thing very clear to t he hon’ble Committee, the Council 
is ultimately with the Government of India prescribing minimum 
requirements and the caption of t he regulation itself is minimum. 
This is something which is requi red to be fulfilled for the purpose 
of fetching recognition. As far as maximum requirement is 
concerned, there is no limi t. Therefore, when we say that 
evaluation for a PG institution is made, it is made over and above 
the minimum requirements for an UG institution. De-recognition 
is never worked out on the basis of an isolated non-compliance. 
If a Professor is not there, that will not merit de-recognition. 
Informally, I can share with this Committee that the Council has 
consistently taken a view that 5 per cent deficiency in the 

teaching staff, as against the minimum prescribed, is a 
condonable deficiency.” 
 
He further added :- 
 
“De-recognition is never done in one  stroke. The process of de-
recognition is statutory in nat ure. Whenever there is a necessity 
of de-recognition, a recommendation to that effect is made to the 
Government of India. The Government of India invariably grants 
hearing to the concerned college , to the concerned University 
and to the concerned State Gov ernment. Therefore, all the 
authorities which are major players in the domain of medical 
education are invariably heard.  It is only on hearing and 
assessing the reply – whether it is satisfactory or otherwise – that 
the matter of de-recognition is decided. Therefore, any authority 
which is giving recognition will always be very keen and 
conscious in resorting to a step like de-recognition. It is because, 
ultimately, the victims are the students. Therefore, that view is 
always there. It is never  abrupt and one time. It is always subject 
to compliance of the prescribed procedure in which the principles 
of natural justice, including grant of hearing of all the concerned 
authorities, are in-built. Only in such situations the question of 
de-recognition materializes and develops. De-recognition is 
never retrospective. Tomorrow, if an institution is de-recognized, 
it will be through a Notification which will be prospective in 
character. Another important thing is that de-recognition 
contemplates stoppage of admission at the point of entry. The 
interests of all those student s who are there during the 
interregnum are kept in mind. W henever they pass out, they are 
deemed to have passed out with that recognized degree. De-
recognition is always effected prospectively, in phases, and 
without even adversely affecting the fate and future of students 
who are already doing the course during their period of that 
particular study.” 
 
The Committee further enquired about the future of the students 
who are in the final stages of MBBS course in the colleges not fulfilling 

the required conditions, and enqui red as to how  MCI ensures  
protection of interests of the students.  
The Medical Council of India in it s written reply  stated that MCI, 
as per Regulation, permits the st udents of the MBBS course to 
continue since they had initially been  admitted with the permission of 
the Central Government on the rec ommendations of the MCI. Further, 
if the deficiencies are grave in nature, then MCI recommends stoppage 
of further admissions and gives opportuni ty to the college to rectify the 
deficiencies. However, in an ex treme scenario where the college 
closes down, as per the conditions of the Essentiality Certificate 
prescribed under establishment of Medical College Regulations, 1999, 
in case the college fails to create in frastructure for the medical college 
as per MCI norms and fresh admissions are stopped by the Central 
Government, the State Government takes over the responsibility of the 
students already admitted in the co llege with the permission of the 
Central Government. Thus, the interest  of students already admitted in 
such colleges are fully safeguarded. 

 
In this connection, a representative of Medical Council of India 
stated during oral evidence as under :- 
“What we are contemplating in the scheme which is there is 
renewal and not recognition. Whenever a college is permitted, 
the eligibility for recognition comes at the end when the first 
admitted batch appears for the examination. Therefore, the 
recognition includes the sta ndards created during the period of 
study, for the period of study, and also for the conduct of 
examination including the standards of examination. The 
renewals, which are contemplated, are on year to year basis. 
The scheme does not say that once permission is granted, it is 
permission for a period of five years. The permission is for one 
year. Admissions in that partic ular year are made. A newly 
started college ought to have four re newals. It is the eligibility for 
recognition. Once it is recognized,  it is recognized for a period of 
five years. Recognition is given at the time when the boy appears 
for the MBBS final examination. “ 
 
 He further added:- 
“The difficulty will be that at  the end of four-and-a-half years 
when the recognition part comes, we  find that this college is not 
up to the mark for recognition. But the conditions are satisfied for 
admission to the next batch. No w, here lies the catch. The 
college is not recognized at the time of the end of the first batch. 
But the situation are not such that you will be in a position to stop 
admissions for the next admitted batch. Therefore, there will be a 
batch of students which will be unrecognized, but the renewal is 
there. Hence, it is in the interest of the college and in the interest 
of everybody to ensure that t he recognition is procured at the 
time when it is required to be procured.” 
 
 The Committee further enquired abou t the fate of the students  in 
a college in case it closes down.  A  representative of the MCI  
 
 
replied as under :- 

 
 “Those students will be accommodated in other colleges for the 
purposes of carrying on their rem aining terms. The expenditure 
which will be invoked on those particular students will be drawn 
out of the bank guarantee. We do not take  bank guarantee from 
the State. Whenever a private institution applies, we invariably 
take a bank guarantee of substantial quantity from it.” 
 
The Committee asked whether there is a provision for other 
colleges to accommodate them for the remaining  two years.  A 
representative of the MCI stated  as under :- 
“There is a provision. They will not be required to bear the 
expenditure thereof and that exp enditure will be sustained from 
the bank guarantee which has been worked out for the previous 
applicant college.” 
 
Annual Seat Capacity 
 According to the MCI  provis ion regarding the annua l capacity of 
seats is being formulated at the minimum standards at  different levels 
from 50, 100 or 150 as and when t he requests are received from the 
respective colleges. MCI is also in the process of formulating 
regulations for identification of st udents admitted in excess of the 
approved admission capacity of medical colleges. 
 The Committee enquired about  issuance of guidelines with 
regard to the quota and fixation of  quota of seats. A representative of 
Medical Council of India replied as under:- 
“Sir we have issued guidelines. On 14 th May, 2002, the 
Government of India has given a detailed circular on this. It has 
been adopted by the Medical Council of India(MCI), and 
guidelines to that effect have been circulated to all concerned.  
The merit of the Common Entr y Test(CET) will be the only 
criterion in regard to the fixation of seats. The eligibility criteria 
prescribed in the Graduate Medical Education cannot be vitiated. 
The sanctioned intake has been notified by the Medical Council 

of India(MCI), and it will be binding. The Medical Council of 
India(MCI)  has not absolved of  that responsibility; on the 
contrary, it has monitored that admissions have been made in 
terms of eligibility, in terms of percentage basis, and before cut-
out date.” 
 
 The Committee during the oral evidence enquired about the 
regulations for limiting the annual seat capacity in the medical colleges. 
A representative of MCI  replied  as under: - 
 “We have got a regulation on the minimum requirements for 
starting a medical college. As of now, the three annual intake 
capacities that have been catalogue d are: a medical college with 
50 seats capacity annually, a medical college with 100 seats 
annually and a medical college with 150 seats annually. So, with 
these regulations, one thing which is poignantly coming is that 
we do not contemplate a college to have more than 150 seats 
especially after the incorporation of Section 10A into the Medical 
Council of India Act, 1956.” 
 
 The Committee also enquired abou t the proposals pending with 
MCI for granting approval/recognition  for new courses/enhancing the 
intake in respect of graduate level and  postgraduate level courses, 
separately at end of each year in the last three years. Medical Council 
of India in its written reply  st ated that there was no proposal pending 
with MCI for granting approval/recognition for new courses or 
enhancing the intake capacity in respect of graduate level courses for 
the academic year 2002-03, 2003-04 & 2004-05. In those cases, 
where the colleges fail to come up  to the expected standards as 
prescribed under the Regulations, the Council had recommended for 
disapproval of the scheme in case of new college. 
 The number of proposals pending with MCI for granting 
approval/recognition for new courses/ enhancing the intake in respect 
of postgraduate level courses are as follows :- 

 Year    No. of Pending Proposals 
2002 Nil 
2003 Nil 
2004 12 
As regards 12 proposals which are shown to be pending,  their 
break up together with the reasons for pendency are as given below :- 
1. For 4 proposals, Inspec tors have been appointed and 
report is awaited.  
2. Files for 4 proposals w ere returned to the Central 
Government disapproving the propo sals as the institutions 
had failed to allow the inspections to be carried out. Central 
Government has granted one months’ time to the college 
authorities for getting the inspections carried out.  
3. For rest of the 4 proposals Information/clarification/ 
documents with regard to essentiality certificate, consent of 
affiliation, feasible and time  bound programme, etc. sought 
for from the concerned colleges have not been provided 
despite letters and their subsequent reminders by MCI.  
The Committee enquired about the number of requests for 
opening medical colleges  accepted/rejected alongwith reasons for  
 
rejection for graduate  as well as  post graduate medical courses. The 
MCI in its written reply gave detai ls of the number of requests for 
opening medical colleges and the number of requests 
accepted/rejected alongwith reasons f or rejection for the graduate as 
well as post graduate medical course s.  Requests for establishment of 
the medical colleges received d uring the year 2002-03 were as 
follows:- 

1. GSL Medical College, Rajahmundhry 
2. Instt. Of Postgraduate Medical Education & Research, Kolkata 
3. Jubliee Mission Medical College, Thrissur 
4. M.E.S. Medical college, Calicut 
5. Maharaja’s Instt. Of Medical College, Nellimarla, Vizianagaram 
6. M.M. Instt. Of Medical Sciences & Research, Mullana 
7. Warrangal Instt. of M edical Sciences, Warrangal 
8. NRI Medical College, Chinakakani 
9. Dr. Pinnamaneni Siddhartha Instt. of Medical Sciences & 
Research , Foundation, Chinoutpalli 
10. Vardhaman Medical college/C halmeda Ananda Rao Instt. of 
Medical Sciences, Karimnagar 
11. Arogyavaram Instt. of Medica l Sciences, Madanepalle, Chittor 
12. Konaseema Instt. of M edical Sciences, Amalapuram 
13. Amala Cancer Medical College, Amalanagar 
14. Medical College at Vikarabad by Bhagwan Mahavir Memorial 
Trust, Hyderabad 
15. Medical College at Shillong 
16. Midnapore Medical College, West Bengal 
17. Mennonite Medical Board, Dhamtari 
18. Meenakashi Medical College & Research Institute, Enathur, 
Kancheepuram, Chennai 
19. SBKS Medical Instt. & Research Centre, Piparia 
20. Mohammadiya Educat ional Society, Cuddapah 
21. Tesla Medical College,  Hyderabad 
22. Medical College at Davangere by  Bapuji Educational Association 
23. Kalinga Instt. of Industria l Technology, Bhubaneswar. 
 

Letter of permission issued by the Central Government for 
establishment of the college & admission of students for the academic 
session 2003-04 is as follows:- 
1. GSL Medical College, Rajahmundhry 
2. Jubliee Mission Medical College, Thrissur 
3. Maharaja Instt. of Medical Sciences, Vizianagaram 
4. M.M. Medical College, Maulana Ambala 
5. NRI Medical College, Chinnakakani  
6. Dr. Pinnaswami Siddhartha Instt. of Medical Sciences, 
Chinoutpally 
7. Amala Cancer Medical College, Amalanagar 
8. Meenakashi Medical College & Research Institute, Enathur, 
Kancheepuram, Chennai 
9. SBKS Medical Instt. & Research Centre, Piparia 
10. Vardhman Medical college, Karimnagar 
Medical Colleges recommended to the Central Government for 
issuance of LOI for the academic session 2004-05 is as follows:- 
 
 
1. Instt. of Postgraduate Medical Education & Research, Kolkatta 
LOI – 2004-05 
2. MES Medical College, Calicut 
3. Midnapore Medical College, West Bengal 
4. Medical College at Dhamtari. 
Medical Colleges recommended for dis approval of the scheme in view 
of the deficiencies pointed out in th e inspection reports carried out  by 
the inspection team of the MCI is as follows:- 
1. Warrangal Instt. of  Medical, Warrangal 

2. Arogyavaram  Instt. of Medical Sciences, Chittor 
3. Medical College at Vikarabad by Bhagwan Mahavir Memorial 
Trust, Hyderabad 
4. Medical College at Shillong. 
Application returned to the Central Government in view of the 
deficiencies pointed out in the project report or unwillingness of the 
college to get the inspections carried out is as follows:- 
1. Konaseema Instt. of Medical Sc iences, Amalapuram – In view of 
the deficiencies pointed out in the MCI inspection report it was 
recommended to the Central Government not to issue LOI for 
establishment of the college. On receipt of the compliance 
through the Central Governm ent another inspection was 
arranged to be carried out by th e Council. However the college 
authorities were not ready for inspection. Being a time bound 
matter, the application was return ed to the Central Government 
on 6.8.2003 for taking further necessary action at their end. The 
Central Government has also returned the proposal to the 
applicant authority. 
2. Mohammadiya Education Society, Cuddapah – The time bound 
submitted by the college authoriti es required under the qualifying 
criteria for establishment of medical college Regulations and 
other infrastructure facilitie s were not provided as  per MCI 
norms. Hence application was returned to the Central 
Government on 25/4/2003. The Central Government has also 
returned the proposal to the applicant authority. 
3. Medical College at Davangere by Bapuji Education Trust, 
Davangere – College authorities were not able to provide time 
bound programme as per re gulations of the Co uncil.  Application 

was returned to the Central Government on 30.6.2003. The 
Central Government vide its letter dated 7.7.20 03 has also 
returned the proposal to the applicant authorities. 
4. Tesla Medical College, Hyderabad – The college authorities 
failed to get the college inspected within the  permissible time. 
Application was returned to the C entral Government on 9.6.2003 
the Central Government vide its letter dated 13.6.2003  has also 
returned the proposal to the applicant authority. 
5. Kalinga Instt. of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar – The 
college authorities were not able to provide  documents required 
under the qualifying criteria for Establishment of Medical College 
Regulations. Application was returned to the Central Government 
on 3.1.2003. The Central Governm ent vide letter dated 7.1.2003 
has also returned the proposal to the applicant authority.                                      
 
 
 
State Government’s Role in granting of approval 
 The Committee enquired about the provisions in the IMC Act, 
1956 regarding consultation with State Government for granting 
permission to open medical colleges in the State. The Medical Council 
of India in its written reply  stated that starting of new medical college is 
regulated in terms of provisions u/ s 10A of the I.M.C. Act, 1956 under 
the Provisions of which the role of State Government is limited to the 
issue of Essentiality Certificate required at the time of making an 
application. Thereafter, the applicatio n is processed as per provisions 
of Section-10A under which no consultation with the State Government 
is required. A structured formal consultation with the State Government 

is not provided either in the Act or in the Scheme favoured under the 
regulations. 
The Committee further  observed that opening of a medical 
college has much impact on the development of a region and 
therefore, enquired whether there wasn’t   need to have more 
meaningful consultation with the State Government and Universities. 
The Medical Council of India in its written reply  stated that the 
recognition of a medical college is primarily a function based upon the 
regulations prescribed for setting up of medical college. These 
Regulations have been prescribed on  a national basis in order to 
achieve a uniform standard of  medical education throughout the 
country. However, it may be noted that whenever withdrawal of 
recognition is recommended by the C ouncil, it is sent to their 
observations and rectification of defic iencies. Further ac tion on these 
proposals is only taken after due cons ideration of the response from 
the concerned universit y and the State Government. Thus, there is 
meaningful consultation with the University or State Government 
before final decision of recommending withdrawal is taken.  
The Committee also observed th at some of the medical 
colleges/institutions have not been given recognition by the MCI but 
the State Council has given the recognition. The students studying in 
Sate recognised Medical Colleges ar e then limited to the state where 
they are being admitted and they are restricted to study or practice in 
other parts of the country. Comment ing on this, a representative of 
MCI stated during evidence as under :- 
“I got your point. Your observat ion is absolutely well-founded. 
The point is that when you are admitting 15 per cent students 
from the all-India quota, it means person from outside the State 
is coming. If that outside man is coming, he would like to be 

getting back to his place of w ork. Therefore, the registration, 
which is entitled to him, will not be available in case it is not 
recognized by the Medical Council  of  India. It will  be taking care 
of only the students belonging to that particular State. But 
beyond that, a student coming from  outside the State will be left 
high and dry.” 
   
 The witness added:- 
 “The State will be in a position to give recognition limited to the 
State in as much as the juri sdiction will be the geographical 
jurisdiction of the State. There have been situations where a 
college is not recognised but the graduates coming out of that 
particular college are permitted to practice in that State through 
registration by the State Medical Council. So, as it was pointed 
out, in the federal structure, the State has that autonomy.” 
 
 Enquired  as to how many m edical colleges are there in the 
country which are  recognized by the State Medical Council and not  
by MCI, a representative of MCI stated as under :- 
“There will be a reasonable number of colleges in that category. 
There would be colleges which may be in the pipeline for  
admission because all those 10 A permitted colleges at the 
various stages might not have reached the level of recognition. 
That could also be a major category.” 
 
Relationship between MCI and Universities 
 
 During oral evidence the Committee sought  clarification 
regarding the relationship between M edical Council of India and the  
Universities. A representative of MCI  stated as under: - 
“There was an observation vis-à-vis the relevance of universities 
and the Medical Council of India. Medical Council of India has 
consistently taken a view that universities are ultimately expected 
to be one of the significant ex ecuting agencies with Medical 
Council of India. Just as the Medical Council of India is conscious 
of its autonomy and, therefore, res ponsibilities, so also various 

universities, being creations of the States and other enactments, 
are also equally autonomous. Hence,  without transgressing their 
autonomy, the execution part of the various universities are well 
regulated under our regulations. It  has gone well as far as the 
execution of the academic syllabi are concerned. An exercise 
has been undertaken to calculate the work load at under 
graduate and postgraduate le vels. By virtue of that, we are in a 
position to bring out uniformity in terms of hours  of teaching 
workload for every subject an d that is another avenue of 
uniformity which has been work ed out through the affiliating 
universities in the country.” 
 
The Committee also note that  it is proposed to set up Medical 
University in every State, but many States have not taken any action in 
this regard.  The Committee, theref ore, enquired about the reasons as 
to why many of the States have not followed the directions of MCI        
 
to set up Medical Universities. A rep resentatives of Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare (Department of Heath) stated during evidence  as 
under:- 
“We have requested to all the States to form Health Universities, 
but till now only 5-6 states have set up the Medical Universities. 
In rest of the states it has not been set up yet. We have taken up 
with the State Governments but  in this regard Medical 
Universities have been successfully set up in 5-6 states.” 
 
Giving clarification on this, the Secretary, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare(Department of Health)  stated as under: - 
“Sir, it is a desirable goal. We are working on it. But in federal 
structure, states have to work in their own terms.” 
 
 
 

Recognition of Medical Qualification  
 
 Through the Act, the Medical Council  of India  is entrusted with 
the mandate of  giving recognition to medical degree awarded by 
various universities both in India and abroad. 
 The Committee enquired about the procedure  followed by MCI 
to accord recognition to a degree ac quired  by an  Indian National  
from abroad. The MCI in its written repl y  stated that the Council in its 
Screening Test Regulation, 2002 has prescribed that an Indian citizen 
possessing a primary medical qualif ication awarded by any medical 
institution outside India who is desirous of getting provisional or 
permanent registration with the Medical Council of India or any State 
Medical Council on or after 15.03 .2002 shall have to qualify a 
Screening Test conducted by the pr escribed authority for that purpose 
as per the provisions of section 13 of the Act : Provided that  
a person seeking permanent registration shall not have to qualify the 
screening test if he/she had already qualified the same before getting 
his/her provisional registration. As per the Screening Test Regulation, 
2002 the Eligibility Requirement of taking admission in an 
undergraduate medical course in a f oreign medical institution is 
prescribed as under :- 
(1) He/she is a citizen of In dia and possesse s any primary 
medical qualification either whose name and the institution 
awarding it are incl uded in the World Directory of Medical 
Schools, published by the World Health Organization; or 
which is confirmed by the Indian Embassy concerned to be 
a recognized qualification for enrolment as medical 

practitioner in the country in which the institution awarding 
the said qualification is situated ; 
(2) He/she had obtained ‘Eligibility Certificate’ from the Medical 
Council of India as per the Eligibility Requirement for taking 
admission in an undergraduate medical course in a Foreign 
Medical Institution Regulations, 2002. This requirement 
shall not be necessary in respe ct of Indian citizens who 
have acquired the medical qual ifications from foreign 
medical institutions or have acquired the medical 
qualifications from foreign medical institutions or have 
obtained admission in foreign medical institution before 15th 
March, 2002.  
The Committee further enquired about the adequacy  of the 
provision and modification if any, envisaged to be carried out to make 
the screening policy more stringent to curb the entry of fraudulent or 
unregistered degree holders in the country. The Medical Council of 
India in its written reply  stated that the Screening Test Regulations, 
2002  in force is adequate in itself. It is conducted by the National 
Board of Examinations, New Delhi. T he entry of the persons entering 
with fraudulent certificates is checked through verification of 
documents by the Parent institutes/bodies issuing such certificates. 
Only when the certificates are cert ified as genuine by the concerned 
institution/body,  the registration ce rtificate is issued. When such 
fraudulent certificates are detected,  FIR is lodged with the police for 
necessary action.  Commenting on this, a  representative of MCI stated 
during oral evidence  as under :- 
“Any Indian student now required to be going for any foreign 
qualification undergraduate outside the country,  is required to be 
obtaining an eligibility certificate from Medical Council of India. 

Therefore, the question of anybody without conforming to that 
eligibility being admitted is ruled out. Secondly, whenever such a 
graduate has come down with the degree under his belt, he will 
be required to be appearing for the screening test. Passing the 
screening test, he will be entitle d for internship. Satisfactory 
completion of the internship w ill result in according of the 
permanent registration and then only  he will be in a position to 
put himself into practice. Theref ore, these two modalities have 
already been taken note of and they stand covered.” 
 
The Committee also raised concern about the fate of Indian 
 students  in Russian Medical Colleges and recognition of their Medical 
qualifications in India. A representative of Medical Council of India 
explaining the situation during oral evidence stated as under:- 
“There has been an observation ab out the Russian students’ 
problem. I would not like to go into the details of it. But two things 
need to be noted here. These matt ers were under a series of 
litigations before the various courts and ultimately the matter 
came up before the Supreme Court.” 
 
 He further added :- 
“Apart from that, still there were certain set of students who went 
through series of litigation before the court of law. The court 
directed that the Government of India and the Medical Council of 
India should come out with a solution to that particular problem. 
Accordingly, a scheme which was worked out by Medical Council 
of India in consultation with the Government of India was 
presented to the Supreme Court. It has been approved by the 
Supreme Court, vide which the number of papers from three 
have been brought down into a cu mulative paper one. Passing 
separately each of the paper ha s been waived, wherein now the 
boy is expected to be answering one paper in which he is 
expected to be getting 50 percent of marks as passing marks 
and he is entitled to have cleared the screening test and will be 
cleared off. The chance limit has also been altered. Therefore, 
the Russian problem per se as it  was before the Supreme Court 
and before the various authorities have come to an end, bulk of 
it, I can say 100 percent of it stands sorted out amicably under 

the aegis of the court with the intervention of the Government of 
India. The scheme worked out and that particular problem, in my 
humble little opinion, is taken care of.” 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
TEACHING FACULTY 
The quality of the education ostensibly depends upon the 
teaching faculty in various Medical institutions all over the country. 
Student - Teacher Ratio 
According to MCI, the student-t eacher ratio in a class for 
awarding recognition to  medical colleges/institutions for 
undergraduate medical education through the minimum requirement 
regulations and for the postgradu ate courses under the Postgraduate 
Medical Education Regulations, genera lly  varies from 1:10 to 1:15 in 
each subject for undergraduate cours es and 1:1 in Postgraduate 
courses. Through regular  periodic in spections, the Council ensures 
that the said ratio is strictly adhered to. Whenever any violation in 
regard to the same is noted by the Council Inspectors,  it is brought out 
in their report on the basis of wh ich necessary action is initiated 
against  such colleges by the Executive Committee in respect of the 
undergraduate courses and Postgraduate Committee in respect of 
postgraduate courses.  
The Medical Council of India stated in its written reply  that the 
Council in terms of its regulations  have prescribed the requisite 
number of teaching facu lty required for each subject including the 
levels for graduates and also the minimum eligibility in terms of 
academic qualifications and teaching experience. The Postgraduate 

Medical Education Regulations govern these propositions for 
postgraduate teachers in medical colleges. 
On being asked whether minimu m educational requirements for 
teaching faculty is being strictly verified before awarding recognition to 
an institution the Medical Council of I ndia in a written reply stated that 
the minimum educational requirements for teaching faculty is being 
strictly verified before recognizing such a teacher as a member of the 
teaching faculty. Only when the st rength of the teaching faculty as 
prescribed under the Minimum Requ irements for the Medical College 
is satisfactorily provided, the college is recommended for grant of 
permission/renewal/recognition. When it  is observed that a particular 
faculty member does not meet the prescribed standards either by way 
of inadequate educational qualif ication of inadequate teaching 
experience, such a person is not considered as a teacher and it is 
shown as a deficiency in the teaching  faculty of the particular medical 
college. When such deficiency exc eeds 5% of the teaching staff 
strength required for the particular stage of the development of the 
college, such a college is not recommended for 
permission/renewal/recognition till the deficiencie s are met with and 
are verified by way of inspection.  
A representative of MCI clarified during oral evidence  as under:- 
“…….If a Professor is not there, that will not merit de-recognition. 
Informally, I can share with this Committee that the Council has 
consistently taken a view that 5 percent deficiency in the 
teaching staff, as against the minimum prescribed, is a 
condonable deficiency.”  
 
Enquired whether any institute was  de-recognized on account of 
inadequacy of teaching faculty in bo th its qualitative and quantitative 
dimensions in last five years, the Medical Council of India in its written 

reply  stated that there are m any institutions to which  
permission/renewal/recognition was not  recommended on account of 
inadequacy of teaching faculty in both  qualitative and quantitative 
dimensions. The following  colleges  were recommended for de-
recognition  because of the inadequacy of the teaching faculty and 
various other factors:- 
1. B.R.D. Medical College, Gorakhpur 
2. Kasturba Medical  College, Manipal 
3. Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore 
4. G.R. Medical College, Gwalior * 
5. Gandhi Medical College, Bhopal * 
6. MGM Medical College, Indore* 
7. NSCB Medical College, Jabalpur * 
8. S.S. Medical College, Rewa * 
* The members of Adhoc Committee and Executive Committee 
have decided at the meeting held on 28.7.2003 to recommend 
the de-recognition of the degree. This item is being placed before 
the General Body at its meet ing Scheduled to be held on 20 th 
and 21st October, 2003. If the decision of Executive Committee is 
approved by the General Body, the same will be communicated 
to the Central Government.  
  
The Executive Committee along with  the members of the Adhoc 
Committee appointed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court opioned that 
enough opportunities were given to all these five Government medical 
Colleges which are now falling short of staff and infrastructural facilities 
for which they were originally recognized by the Medical Council of 
India. All these colleges are also running postgraduate courses without 
adequate staff.  
Noting the above facts, the Executive Committee and members  

of the Adhoc Committee decided to – 
1. recommend to the Council to withdraw the recognition of 
MBBS degree granted by respective Universities in respect of 
students being trained at the above mentioned medical 
colleges of the State of M.P. u/s 19 of the Indian Medical 
Council Act, 1956. 
2. refer these reports to the Postgraduate Medical Education 
Committee of the  Council for f urther consideration regarding 
postgraduate courses. 
The Committee further enquire d whether MCI had withdrawn 
recognition of MBBS in the above mentioned 5 Medical colleges in 
Madhya Pradesh. The Medical Council of India in its written reply 
stated that the Council, in it s General Body meeting held on 
20.10.2003, had approved the recomm endations of the Executive 
Committee to withdraw the recognition of 5 medical colleges in 
Madhya Pradesh. The said recommendation has been submitted to the 
Central Government for approval, which is pending. 
The Committee enquired whether the Medical Council of India 
has  conducted any  evaluation of  teaching/non-teaching faculty in 
various recognized institutes acros s the country and their level of 
expertise in their respective areas. T he Medical Council of India in its 
written reply stated that there has not been any formal evaluation of 
teaching/non-teaching faculty in various recognized institutions across 
the country and the level of expertise in the respective areas. However, 
strict adherence is ensured by the Council in respect of the fulfillment 
of the minimum requirements as prescribed through its regulations 
pertaining to  infrastructural facilities and eligible teaching and non-
teaching personnel. 

Keeping in view  the increas ed number of medical colleges 
coming up in the country the Committee further enquired whether it is  
not desirable to conduct a survey to make a qualitative and quantitative  
assessment of the existing  teachi ng faculty in medical colleges.  The 
Medical Council of India in its written reply  stated that it may be  noted 
that the Council is aware of this  issue.  In the year 2003 and 2004, 
three workshops were organised at Kolkata, Mumbai and Bangalore 
and a National Workshop was organised in New Delhi, wherein  the 
requirements of each department in a medical college  was discussed 
in detail by the Experts  in the field of medical education viz. 
Deans/Principals of the medical colleges, representatives of the 
Central Government and the State Governments etc. and overall 
comprehensive view about the qualitative and quantitative assessment 
of the existing teaching faculty in the medical colleges has been taken.  
The recommendations  at these w orkshops for amendments in the 
existing  Regulations of the Mi nimum requirements were approved by 
the Executive Committee and the General Body of the Council and 
have been submitted to the Central Government for approval under 
Section 33 of the Act.  In these  amendments reduction in the teaching 
faculty has also been proposed to th e extent of 10-15 per cent in each 
department.  
Shortage of Teaching Staff 
 The Committee observed that there is  shortage of teaching staff 
in various Medical colleges. Keep ing in view the  shortage of 
professors the Committee enquired as to what  steps have been taken 
by  MCI  to solve the problem. A representative of Medical Council of 
India stated during evidence as under :- 

“There were the contexts which were taken note of in our 
workshop and recommendations we re made. For example, even 
the minimum requirements have b een shelved. I would like to 
inform that prior to 1997, for a college, for 100 seats, the 
requirement was a 700-bedded hospital. That has been brought 
down. Now, for 100 seats the number of beds required is 500, 
and for 50 seats the number of beds required is 400. Similar is 
the case with the staff requirement. Earlier, a unit which  
comprises of 1 Professor, 3 A ssociate Professors, 6 Lecturers, 
etc., now requires 1 Professor, 2 Associate Professors and 4 
Lecturers. It has now been reduced to 1:2:4.” 
 
 The Committee further enquired about the age limit of the 
teaching staff and  the possibilit y of increasing the age limit of 
teachers/professors by another five  years. A representative of Medical 
Council of India clarified during evidence  as under :- 
“The Council has prescribed that a medical teacher can work up 
to the age of 65. But, we are not in a position to prescribe service 
conditions for medical teachers. It  is because it is the 
prerogative and the privilege of t he employer. The Council has 
permitted teachers in all subjects and they are counted towards 
compliance of the minimum requirem ents of the regulation, up to 
the age of 60.” 
 
He further added :- 
 
“We are always open to it. If it is in the interest of medical 
education, and if it is going to cater to the cause of the medical 
education, absolutely the Council is always open. The Council is 
responsive to the contemporary requirements as and when they 
arise. As I said , in Government colleges, the deficiency of staff, 
which we condone, is up to the extent of 10 per cent, and that is 
all the cadres taken together. This is my perception and my 
office-bearers will share it with  me. Superannuation is a part of 
the service condition, which is to be prescribed by the employer. 
Therefore, in a Government coll ege, if the superannuation 
prescribed by the competent auth ority is 65, the Council cannot 
have any objection. We will be validating those teachers up to 
the age of 65.When we say teachers up the age of 65, what we 
contemplate is full-time teachers. It is because that is the 

definition of the word ‘teacher’. H ence, as far as the observation 
made by the hon’ble Members of the Committee as to whether 
we will be in a position to permit  a visiting teac her, an honorary 
teacher, or a part-time teacher is concerned, I would like to say 
that the Council does not contempl ate that position as of now. 
We only recognize full-time teachers.” 
 
When Committee enquired whether MCI have any suggestion to 
change the age limit to overcome the shortage of teaching staff, a 
representative of  MCI  replied as under :- 
“As of now, a study group has been constituted by the General 
Body of the Council.” 
 
 To a query whether the change of age was not  the prerogative 
of MCI, a representative of MCI follows :- 
“We will take this as a term of reference. The Council is in a 
committed position that we will be counting medical teacher up to 
the age of 65 on full-time basis.  Therefore, they are counted up 
to the age of 65, whether it is a Government college or a private 
college – for PG purposes also – in commensurate with the 
guidelines which are authoritatively  made on this count. It is 
because the established authori ty is the University Grants 
Commissions. The University Grants Commission has 
contemplated it. They have prescribed the age of superannuation 
as 62, but the computation is up to the age of 65. The Council 
has adopted the calculation of workload, and the age of 
superannuation on the basis of the recommendation and the 
guidelines that have been prescrib ed by the University Grants 
Commission on this particular count.” 
 
 
The Committee enquired whether there have been some 
instances,  when Professors were fo und to be on the pay  rolls of more 
than one college at a time  and what was the action taken against such 
individuals and colleges by the MCI.  The Medical Council of India 

stated in their written reply  that in this connection  the General Body of 
the Council in its meeting held on 12.10.2004 had decided as under :- 
“Over a  period of la st 1-2 years by considering the inspection 
reports of various medica l colleges seeking 
permissions/renewals under Section 10A of the Act, it was felt 
and observed that a large number of doctors are claiming re-
employment as medical teache rs in more than one medical 
college at the same time. It was being observed that the names 
of the doctors shown as medical teachers in a particular medical 
college were getting repeated in the inspection reports of certain 
other medical colleges, in the same proximity of time. 
Apparently, the medical colleges and  the medical teachers were 
indulging in such activities only to show to the inspection team of 
the Council that the colleges concerned are fulfilling the minimum 
requirement for the teaching staff for seeking 
permission/renewals under Section 10A of the Act.” 
 
The Council, therefore, to curb such unscrupulous tendencies, 
started adopting new methods in th is regard. Declaration forms were 
introduced to be signed by the doctors claiming employment as 
medical teachers in any given m edical college and that they also 
remain present along with their declarat ion forms, at the time of the 
conduct of the inspection of the college. 
Subsequently, a provision for endorsement by the Dean/Principal 
of the medical college was also introduced in the declaration form that 
in the  event of any declaration made by a particular medical teacher 
turns out to be unt rue and incorrect, the Dean/P rincipal of the college 
putting signatures as endorsement of the truthfulness of the statement 
made in the declaration would be held responsible in that event. 
MCI stated that the Council has always tried to improve in this 
regard by ensuring that such misdeclarations/misstatements are 
completely eliminated or minimized to the extent possible with the clear 
perception that the Council should take appropriate action against such 

erring doctors whenever it is f ound that the particular doctor has 
furnished more than one declaration form.  
This problem has engaged attenti on of the Council continuously 
during the last 1-2 years. The case s have also been considered by the 
Ethics Committee of the Council. Whenever it has been found that a 
particular doctor is claiming employ ment as medical teacher at the 
same point of time in more than one medical colleges, show cause 
notices had been issued seeking their replies. They were given due 
opportunities to present their explanation before the Ethics Committee. 
Before the General Body of the Council, cases of such 
misdeclarations and misstatements by the medical teachers  have 
been placed for consideration. The Ethics Committee of the Council, 
after granting opportunity of being heard, has recommended imposition 
of punishment of removal of their names from the Indian Medical 
Register maintained by the Council. 
This issue was  considered by the General Body of the Council 
with all required seriousness. Undoubtedly, such kind of misconduct is 
much more serious than the alleged negligence in cases of treating the 
patients by doctors. Such misdeclarations/misstatements are made to 
cause deception not only to the Council but also on the Central 
Government for extracting permissions/renewals under Section 10A of 
the Act. 
The Council, therefore, without any ambiguity unanimously 
decided as under :- 
a. The names of the following teachers be erased temporarily 
upto 31st July, 2007. 

b. He/She will not be eligible to be counted as a teacher at the 
inspections to be carried out by MCI for the academic years 
2005-06 and 2006-07. 
c. The names of all such teachers be published on the 
website and a circular be sent  to all the Directors of 
Medical Education of all the States, all the Universities and 
all the Medical Colleges/Institutions. 
It was further decided that in case of non-medical teachers who 
are not possessing a medical degree or a registration certificate, 
he/she will not be eligible to be counted as a teacher at the inspections 
to be carried out by MCI for the academic years 2005-06 and 2006-07. 
The Council further decided that a circular be issued to all the 
D.M.Es., Universities and Medical Coll eges/Institutions that the list of 
such defaulting teachers has been published on the website of the 
Council. It was further decided that this decision would be applicable 
mutates mutandis to all the teac hers who have been found employed  
in more than one medical college for the academic year 2003-04 and 
whose case has not been finalized  as yet due to non-appearance or 
any other reason. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
Miscellaneous 
 
I. Regional Imbalance in Setting up of Medical Colleges 
The Committee noticed that there is persistent phenomena of  
regional imbalance in the field of medical education. There is a high 
concentration of medical institut ions/ colleges in the Western and 
Southern parts of India and the N orth and Eastern parts are lagging 
behind. The Committee also observ ed from the information on the 

number of doctors registered in each State Medical Register, that there 
is wide variation in the number of do ctors registered with State Medical 
Councils, viz. in Maharashta there ar e as many as 90,855 doctors and 
in Karnataka 65,789, but in Jharkhand there were only 135, in 
Chattisgarh 213 and in Haryana 1326. 
Explaining the procedure followed for setting up new medical  
colleges in the country, the Medica l Council of India stated in a note 
that in the present scheme of t he Act and the Regulations framed 
thereunder the proposal fo r setting up of a new medical college is 
received by the Central Government . The Central Government, after 
due scrutiny, sends the proposal to the Council for evaluation in case it 
is found in order. These proposals have to be accompanied by an 
Essentiality Certificate issued by the State Government stating inter-
alia that it is not only desirable but also essential to open a medical 
college in the State. Once a proposal, which is complete in respect of 
documents and certificates as required, is received in the Council, 
there is no option for the Council but to evaluate and to submit its 
recommendations to the Central Go vernment based upon the findings 
of the inspection reports. It may also be observed that the number of 
Doctors registered with the State Medical Councils in itself does not 
reflect regional imbalances. For instance, as Jharkhand State has 
come into existence only in 2000 and Jharkhand Medical Council has 
been established only in Ja nuary, 2003. It is likely that all the Doctors 
particularly in this region woul d be registered with Bihar Medical 
Council or any other Council before that date. 
During evidence Committee enquired about the reasons for  

regional imbalances in respect of setting up of medical colleges and 
the steps envisaged to check the regional imbalance. A representative 
of the Medical Council of India  stated as under :- 
“…relating to imbalance criteria which has been there in regard 
to health manpower and the location of medical colleges. 
Although we do not have a statutory say on this yet there was an 
attempt made by the Council. Te chnical evaluation of any 
application, received by the Go vernment of India from any 
person who is eligible under t hat category, comes under Section 
10(A). It is not open for us to say anything because there are 
three things – No Objection Certific ate of affiliation is to be given 
by the affiliating university, Essentiality Certificate is to be notified 
by the concerned State Government; technical evaluation is to be 
done by the Medical Council of India. Therefore the issue – 
which application should come from which place based on 
unequal distribution or mal-distributio n – it is not open to us. We 
will not be able to entertain an application on the ground that 
there is saturation of medical colleges in a particular place or 
State, and there is want of medical colleges in another State. 
Hence, it is a natural consequenc e of imbalance, which is getting 
created. The Council per se under statue does not have a say on 
this. Therefore, we had suggested that we should have a national 
perspective plan on opening of medical colleges for duration of 
five years. That period is expected to be the plan period vis-à-vis 
statutory agencies in this country  taking into consideration the 
required manpower, geo-concentration and deficient colleges 
inter alia such unequal criterion.  Such provision already exists in 
the Acts of a good number of universities. Universities have a 
section, which says that there has to be a perspective plan for 
opening of new colleges, and based on that there has been a 
Study Group that has been constituted. I do not know whether 
this particular recommendation by the Council will be binding or 
otherwise but, taking into conside ration this particular aspect, the 
Study Group is working on it f or making its recommendations to 
the General Body. Likewise, not  only on the inequalities of the 
distribution of medical colleges and the available manpower but 
another area, which the Study Group has been entrusted with, is 
the admission procedure and vari ous variants thereof including 
fee and other things, on which Committee have expressed their 
anguish. The Council has suo motu ta ken note of it. We intend to 

make a comprehensive document to be passed on to the 
Government of India on this particular count so that on that basis, 
systems or modalities could be st reamlined in order to curb the 
abnormal variations whatever exist there, and an objective 
transparent policy could be worked out.” 
 
The witness added :- 
“That issue is wide open. We are not averse to it. We want to 
absolutely adopt a national perspective taking the requirements 
of the entire country as a unit and taking into consideration the 
existing number of colleges and manpower to population ratio in 
every State. It is not only that there has to be an equal 
distribution between the States but it should be equal distribution 
within the States also. T he Study Group which we had 
constituted is expected to take stock of this. The idea is to have a 
national perspective plan for five years. If that is the 
recommendation of the Council and  given a binding force, we 
would be able to find a solution to the concerns ventilated by the 
Hon’ble Committee.” 
 
The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
 
 
(Department of Health) also ex pressed his views on regional 
imbalance during oral evidence  as under :- 
“In the case of regional imbal ances, these are perhaps policies 
which they cannot address; but if the Government creates a set 
of policies, they are expected to implement them. The policies 
here would also not be a bureaucratic set of policies. They would 
be under the scrutiny of hon’ble Members of Parliament. These 
are very sensitive matters.” 
 
II. Court Cases against MCI  
 Medical Council of India in it s written reply  informed the 
Committee that there are 1584 court ca ses pending against MCI in last 
five years. The Committee further observed that many of the cases 

relate to areas such as  Registration and Fee structure, admission in 
MBBS and PG courses,  etc.  
 The Committee, therefore, enquired about the reasons for the 
large number of court cases being filed in these specific areas. The 
Medical Council of India in its  writte n reply  stated that majority of this 
litigation cases relate to registra tion, fee structure, admission etc. 
wherein MCI is a proforma party. It may be noted that out of 1548 
cases, as on 12 th January 2005, as many as 911 cases have been 
disposed off. With new cases being fi led, the total number of pending 
cases on as on 12 th January 2005 is only 749, out of which MCI is first 
respondent in only 152 cases, and in the remaining 597 cases i.e. as 
many as 80% of total pending ca ses, it is only a proforma party 
respondent. 
 Asked about the steps being ta ken by MCI for settlement of 
cases out of court and early disposal of pending cases, the MCI in its  
written reply stated that the Council has engaged a Panel of  
Advocates for defending its stand before the various Hon’ble Courts. It 
may be noted that  in a majority of cases, the first respondent is usually 
a State Government or a University and it is the action of a State 
Government or a University which is primarily under challenge. As 
almost all the cases pertain to the Regulations which have been 
notified in the Gazette and which are binding in character, out of Court 
settlement is not possible. 
III. Code of Medical Ethics 
 In the present day, the Consumer Protection Act has been made 
applicable to the practicing Physici ans and complaints  against doctors 
have increased manifold. In this scenario, the work of Ethical 
Committee has increased many times over. In this regard, the MCI 

have stated that as a matter of rule, Council is required to refer the 
matter to concerned State Medical Council for investigation and 
punitive action, if any, where the doctor against whom a complaint is 
registered. 
 Asked whether the Ethical S ub-committee is now being burdened 
with increasing number of cases being registered against the doctors 
and punitive action being taken against the erring doctors, the Medical 
Council of India in its written reply  stated that the number of 
complaints against doctors being received by the Council has 
increased over a period of last several years. The details of the 
complaints received, disposed of and action taken in each of the last 3 
years is as follows :- 
 
Year  Cases lodged  Cases 
disposed off 
Pending cases 
as on date. 
2002 262 255 7 
2003 373 370 3 
2004 529 474 55 
Total  1164 1099 65 
 
    On being asked  about the details of the action taken in the 
medico-legal cases, a representative of MCI stated during oral 
evidence  as under :- 
“There is an observation made about Code of Medical Ethics. 
The Code of Medical Ethics has  been notified, it has been put 
into practice and quite a number of cases which have been 
referred to the Medical Council of India have been dealt with. The 
statistical figure has been incorpo rated in the circulated report, I 
am happy to share with the Hon’ble Members of the Committee 
that of the 1,752 cases that were received in totality, Council has 
been able to dispense of 1,523 as  of now ands 229 cases are 
pending at various levels.” 
 

Enquired about the action taken against the erring doctors,  a 
representative of MCI stated during oral evidence as under :- 
“The action contemplated is under the Code of Medical Ethics 
regulation itself. There are three actions which are permissible 
at the level of the Council.  One, you can suspend the 
registration. Two, you can issue a censure to be recorded 
against the IMR and make a wide notification of it. Three, you 
can permanently remove the name of the person from the 
register, resulting or disentitiling him from practising the 
profession.” 
 Asked if such information is made  public and is uploaded on the 
website of MCI, a representative of MCI stated as under :- 
“It has been given. We have put it in the leading newspapers also 
for publication because that is a condition precedent which is 
mandated in the regulation. Regul ation says that whenever you 
are removing the name or making an adverse entry against him, 
four things are binding on your part to be done. One, you will be 
issuing notification to all concerned, including Government, all 
universities, all registrars of the universities, all State Medical 
Councils, which are associated with  the registering part of it. You 
will be making a wide publicity of it through approp riate media, 
including placement of our website.”  
 
The Committee further enquired ab out the measures taken or 
contemplated to check frauds and malpractises by Medical 
Practitioners registered wi th MCI. The MCI in its  written reply  stated 
that whenever a complaint is receive d pertaining to fraudulent activity 
or malpractice by Medical Practitioners registered with MCI, an enquiry 
is conducted by the Ethics Committee of the Council. Suitable action is 
taken if the concerned Doctor is found guilty after giving him a personal 
hearing in the matter before the Ethics Committee. 

Enquired about the regulations being la id down by the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare(Department of Health) or MCI detailing the 
code of conduct of registered medical practitioners in  country,                   
the MCI stated in its written reply  stated that MCI has prescribed 
Professional Conduct Etiquette and  Ethics Regulations, 2002, which 
have been notified in the Gazette of India on 6 th April 2002. These 
Regulations have been further amended in Fe bruary 2003 and in May 
2004, wherein the procedure for co mplaint against a delinquent 
physician, which is not being decided by the State Medical Council, 
has been prescribed. These Regulations have been widely circulated 
to all the State Governments, State Medical Councils, Medical 
Colleges, Universities, etc.  
IV Commercialization of Medical Colleges 
 
 The Committee observed that th ere have been complaints of 
exorbitant capitation fee/tuition fee being charged by private medical 
colleges. The Committee enquired about the mechanism available with 
MCI to ensure compliance of prescribed fee structure for merit, 
payment, NRI and management quota seats in the medial colleges and 
how many complaints were received by MCI in each of the last five 
years in this regard. The Medical Council of India in its written reply  
stated that fee structure for medical courses in private colleges in each 
State is prescribed,  regulated and monitored by the Fee Committee 
appointed by each State Government which is headed by a retired 
High Court Judge. All the complaints in this regard have to be referred 
to  this Fee Committee and it is for the State Government to look into 
the matter. 
 The Medical Council of India nominates its representative on the 
Committee for determining fee stru cture and regulating admission 

procedure in private medical colleges in different States as and when 
such committees are constituted by the State. This has been done 
following the directions issued by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in WP(c) 
No. 350/1993 – Islamic Academy of E ducation & Another’s Vs State of 
Karnataka & others. 
 During evidence a representative of the Medical Council of India, 
explaining the fee structure in medical colleges stated as under :- 
“Sir the Hon’ble Supreme Court  of India gave a landmark 
judgment on 31 October, 2002. An 11- Judge Bench ordered as 
to what would be the modality of the medical education in terms 
of the unaided institutions. After that, a Five-Judge Bench gave a 
clarificatory judgment thereon. This has brought out that two 
Committees have been constituted in each State. The First 
Committee was constituted under th e Chairmanship of a retired 
High Court Judge of that particul ar State, with the representative 
of the Medical Council of India(MCI), with the representative from 
the Ministry of Finance, and wi th the representative from the 
Ministry of Education. The entire onus of monitoring the fee 
structure, in a way, has been vested with the Statutory 
Committee, which has been constituted under the Chairmanship 
of a retired High Court Judge. It  has been applicable to every 
State. It will be defining the fee structure in that particular State 
for, at least, three years at any given point of time, and the 
review will be done at the end of every three years. 
 
Sir, we ought to take note of it because the Judgment has 
resulted in the repealing of the Unnikrishnan Judgment. From 
1991 onwards, there was a subsid ized fee structure. The fee 
structure was divided into three categories. This subsidized fee 
structure was in vogue in co lleges, which were run by the 
governmental institutions. Private institutions had three patterns 
of chargeable tuition fee. The fi rst one was the subsidized fee 
structure, that is, on 50 percent basis. The second one was the 
extra or the additional cost-basis fee structure. The third one was 
the NRI quota where the chargeable tuition fee was payable in 
foreign currency, and it was usually five times the original 
chargeable tuition fee. By virt ue of repealing this particular 
Judgment, one thing we ought to take note is that nowhere in the 

country there is anything called NRI quota where the fee was five 
times the chargeable tuition fee.” 
 
 He further added as under :- 
“The uniformity of the structure has already been envisaged by 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s ord er. The Supreme Court of India 
ordered that irrespective of the modality of admission, the 
chargeable tuition fee would be on  parity basis. The Government 
will be fixing the chargeable tuition fee in the Government 
colleges where 100 percent admissi on will be done on the basis 
of securing 50 percent marks in the All-India Entrance Test. The 
remaining admissions will be done on the basis of Common 
Entrance Test conducted by that particular State. Fifty percent 
seats – I am talking of the previous year – was fixed by the 
Committee, which has been consti tuted by the Supreme Court of 
India. Every State has the fixed quota. The procedure of 
admission and conduct of the Common Entrance Test(CET) will 
be notified by that particul ar State Government through an 
appropriate notification. The Common Entrance Test(CET) is 
conducted for purpose of getting admission in unaided medical 
colleges. Through this Common Entrance Text, we pool all the 
private colleges together, and the merit of the Common 
Entramce Test(CET) is the qualifying criterion for getting 
admission.” 
 
The Committee also raised concern over unduly large sums of 
capitation fee being charged speciall y by private medical colleges. In 
this regard,  a representative of M edical Council of India stated during 
evidence as under :- 
“The issue of capitation fee has been raised.  The question is, 
all the judgements have barred that there is nothing like 
capitation fee and charging of c apitation fee is not  permitted. 
What you can charge is only the prescribed fee which includes 
a quotient of development fee which will be notified to that 
particular student in unaided inst itutions. Otherwise, there no 
other fee which is chargeable from  the student in the name of 
any other thing other than the tuition fee which is expected to 
be  paid by the student.  Hence the question of capitation fee, 
if at all is being charged, it is absolutely violative and vitative 

of the norms or rules prescr ibed anywhere either by the 
Council or by the Government of India or by any regulating 
agency, be it the concerned universities or the State 
Government. Therefore, the concept of capitation fee should 
not exist at all. That is the view of the Medical Council of 
India.” 
 
He further added :- 
“As I said, just as there is no concept of capitation fee presently, 
there has to be no concept any NRI quota in any of the situation. 
Therefore, admission to be made under NRI quota is absolutely 
obsolete and it is not permissible after the Supreme Court 
judgment which I have referred to. 
 
The Committee also enquired about  the monitoring by the MCI 
on the fee charged by the Medical Colleges/Institutions. A 
representative of  MCI stated during evidence as under :- 
“The monitoring part, in context of the factual position, was 
emanated out of the Unnikr ishanan Judgment. From 1991 to 
2002, the Medical Council of India was monitoring in terms of 
the scheme, which was in force, generated by the Unnikrishan 
Judgment.” 
 
When the Committee wanted to know  the specific role of MCI 
and the Fee Committee appointed by State Governments in checking 
irregularities like charging of huge amounts of money for admission by 
some private colleges, MCI state in a written reply as follows :- 
It is submitted that the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Writ 
Petition No. 305 of 1993 Islamic Academy of Education and 
another –Vs-State of Karnatak a and others had passed the 
orders for setting up of a Fee Committee as under :- 
“………We direct that in order to gi ve effect to the judgment in 
TMA PAI’s case the respective State Governments concerned 
authority shall set up, in each State, a Committee headed by a 
retired High Court judge who shall be nominated by the Chief 
Justice of that State. T he other member, who shall be 
nominated by the Judge, should be a Chartered Accountant of 

repute. A representative of the Medical Council of India (in 
short ‘MCI’) or the All India Council for Technical Education (in 
short ‘AICTE’), depending on the type of institution, shall also 
be a member. The Secretary of the State Government in 
charge of Medical Educ ation or Technical Education, as the 
case may be, shall be a member and Secretary of the 
Committee. The Committee should be free to nominate/co-opt 
another independent person of repute, so that total number of 
members of the Committee shall not exceed 5. Each 
educational Institute must place before this Committee, well in 
advance of the academic year,  its proposed fee structure. 
Along with the proposed fee stru cture all relevant documents 
and books of accounts must also be produced before the 
committee for their scrutiny. The Committee shall, then 
decided whether the fees proposed by that Institute are 
justified and are not profiteering or charging capitaiton fee. 
The Committee will be at liberty to approve the fee structure or 
to propose some other fee which can be charged by the 
institute. The fee fixed by the committee shall be  binding for a 
period of three years, at the end of which period the institute 
would be at liberty to apply for revision. Once fees are fixed by 
the Committee, the institute cannot charge either directly or 
indirectly any other amount  over and above the amount fixed 
as fees. If any other amount is charged, under any other head 
or guise e.g. donations the same  would amount to charging of 
capitation fee. The  Government/appropriate authorities 
should consider framing appropriate regulations, if not already 
framed, whereunder if it is found that an institution is charging 
capitation fees or profiteeri ng that institution can be 
appropriately penalised and also face the prospect of losing its 
recognition/affiliation……”. 
 
It is further submitted that in accordance with the above stated 
directions of the Hon’ble Apex Court, a representative of the 
MCI is nominated as a member of the Fee Committee 
whenever such a request is received from the State for setting 
up of such a Committee. It is also submitted that in 
accordance with the directions given by the Apex Court, all 
matters pertaining to the fees including charging huge 
amounts, capitation fees or any such irregularities are within 
the jurisdiction of the Fee Committee, constituted by the 
respective State Government. It may please be noted that no 

other specific guidelines have been issued by the Government 
in this regard. It is therefore suggested that the Council should 
be empowered whereby it would be ab le to invoke disciplinary 
jurisdiction in these areas, f or much desired streamlining in 
larger interests.  
 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
1.  The Medical Council of Indi a was constituted in February 
1934 as a statutory body under an Act of Parliament. With the 
increase in the number of medical  colleges, the Act was repealed 
and a new Act called the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 was 
enacted to meet the challeng es posed by the very fast 
development and progress of medi cal education in the country. 
As envisaged in the Act, th e mandate of maintaining uniform 
standards of medical education both for undergraduate and 
postgraduate courses for new co lleges and continuance of 
already recognized courses vests with the Medical Council of 
India. After going into the wo rking of MCI, the Committee are of 
the view that there is sufficient scope for improvement in several 
spheres of its working. These aspects have been dealt with by the 
Committee in detail in the subsequent paragraphs.  
 
2.   The Medical Council of In dia (MCI) has both regulatory and 
advisory roles to play for im proving the standards of medical 
education in the country. As part of its regulatory functions, the 
MCI has issued 14 Statutory Regulations for regulating medical 

education in the country, prescrib ing minimum qualifications for 
teaching staff in medical colleges, procedure for conducting 
screening test for Indian citizens possessing medical degrees 
awarded by foreign institutions , etc. With the ruling of the 
Supreme Court that the Regulati ons prescribed by the Council 
under Section 33 of the IMC Act, 1956 are binding and mandatory 
in character, the functions of the Council seem to have become 
more regulatory in nature r ather than advisory. Although 
according to the IMC Act, MCI is expected to render advice to the 
Government, universities, etc. in  the matter of securing uniform 
standards for graduate and postgraduate medical education 
throughout India, the Committee have gathered an impression 
that the Council has not done much  to achieve its advisory role. 
They, therefore, suggest that MCI should take corrective 
measures and discharge  both regul atory and  advisory roles in 
the sphere of medical education in the country. 
 
3.  There are as many as 229 Medi cal Colleges in the country of 
which 125 are in the Governmen t Sector and 104 in the Private 
Sector. About 21,000 gradu ates and 10,000 postgraduates pass 
out every year from these coll eges. According to MCI, the 
standards of undergraduate and postgraduate medical courses 
including the syllabi, curri cula, system of assessment and 
examination are periodically evaluated by the Council through its 
Inspectors who are required to be  reporting on these aspects in 
required details. Although MCI has made loud claims that uniform 
standards of medical education in all the institutions in the 
country is ensured through an effective system of monitoring by 

regular and periodic inspections, including surprise inspections 
from time to time, it is not fully convincing to the Committee.  The 
Committee note to their dismay  that there are only three 
sanctioned posts of Inspectors in MCI of which one post has been 
lying vacant. Moreover, it ha s emerged that MCI conducts 
inspection mostly once in five years for renewal of recognition for 
the degree courses. With the mani fold increase in the number of 
medical colleges in the country, th ere is a need to review the 
qualitative and quantitative growth of medical education in the 
country. However, MCI has limited time and infrastructure to carry 
out a comprehensive review of the medical education scenario in 
the country. The Committee, ther efore, recommend that a study 
should be got done by the Government on the status of medical 
education in the country both in qualitative and quantitative terms 
by engaging an independent professional institution. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the follow up action taken 
by Government in this regard and the findings of such a review. 
 
4.  A Study Group was consti tuted  by MCI to go into 
admission process, including conducting of entrance 
examinations, mechanism adopted for filling up various quotas, 
etc. with a view to ensuring the required transparency and 
accountability in the entire process. The Study Group was 
expected to submit its final report by March, 2005. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the major recommendations of the 
Study group and the follow up action taken by the Council on the 
recommendations.  
 

 
 
5.  To a specific query made by the Committee, MCI informed 
that the Council has undertaken th e process of accreditation of 
courses conducted by medical colleges. A Committee has been 
constituted to prepare the modalities for accreditation and 
request has been sent to all the medical colleges in the country to 
participate in it on voluntary basi s. It is surprising to note that 
even after several decades of its existence, MCI had not 
introduced the system of accreditation of courses by medical 
colleges with a view to encour aging higher standards of medical 
education in the country. The Counc il is still in the initial stages 
of working out the modalities of  accreditation. The Committee are 
of the view that grading and accr editation of courses by medical 
colleges will go a long way in promoting healthy competition 
among the institutions. They also  stress that instead of making 
the accreditation process a voluntary one, it should be made 
mandatory in a phased manner to  ensure that all the medical 
colleges in the country come upto minimum standards of medical 
education.  
 
6.  Although the IMC Act, 1 956 has made adequate provisions 
for autonomy and at the same time  accountability of the MCI to  
Government, there are reports abou t soured relationship between 
the Ministry and the MC I.  Despite the denial  by the Ministry and 
the MCI, the Committee have gather ed an impression that there is 
much more than meets the eye.  An effort seems to have been 
made to cover up the strained relationship between the Ministry 

and the MCI before the Committee. The candid admission of the 
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of 
Health) before the Committee : “W e have some perceptions about 
how to improve our interaction with the  Medical Council. Some 
amendments are on the way” confir ms that view. While enjoying 
the autonomy as envisaged in th e IMC Act, 1956, the Council, no 
doubt, is accountable to the Government and to the Parliament. 
Whatever comes in the way of a healthy balance between 
autonomy and accoun tability needs to be  rectified. The 
Committee would expect the Ministry to apprise them of the steps 
taken by Government in this direction.  
 
7.  The Committee are constrained to note that the Vice–  
President of MCI has been functi oning as the Acting President of 
the Council  since November, 2002 as per the orders of the 
Supreme Court. The Supreme Cour t also appointed an Ad-hoc 
Committee consisting of four eminent doctors to supervise the 
functioning of the Council. The Committee are surprised to note 
that the President  of the MCI wa s removed by Delhi High Court 
on corruption charges and MCI went  in appeal to the Supreme 
Court against the orders of Delh i High Court. The Supreme Court 
ordered that the Vice- President be  the Acting President of MCI 
since then. The  Committee note that  the High Court of  Delhi had 
pointed out several irregularities in the style of functioning of the 
President of MCI, in the manner in which inspectors were 
appointed, decisions were taken and approvals were given to 
colleges.  There were also corr uption charges against him.  The 
Committee are distressed to note the state of affairs in MCI.  They 

also note with concern that even after such glaring instances of 
misuse of office by the Presi dent of the Council have been 
brought out, no steps have b een taken by Government to 
streamline the working of  MCI and to put the house in order.  
While expressing their serious displeasure, the Committee desire 
that Government should take corr ective measures to ensure that 
there is more transparency in th e functioning of the Council and 
the  President of the Council does not assume all powers and 
misuse his position for vested interest. The Committee are 
constrained to note that although the Delhi High Court had 
directed the Government on 23 November, 2001 to take necessary 
action to constitute the Council under Section 3 of the IMC Act 
and hold election to the Offices of President and Vice-President of 
the Council, no follow-up action has been taken in this regard.  
They, therefore, stress  that step s should be taken for filling up 
the vacancies in the Council and holding election to the Offices of 
President and Vice-President of the Council without any further 
delay. 
 
8.  It is distressing to note that out of the total strength of 118 
members in the Medical Council, only 71 were in position as on 
4
th November, 2004 and there were  as many as 47 vacancies. The 
Committee were informed that ab out 28 vacancies on the Council 
were of representatives of differen t Universities. The Secretary, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health) 
informed the Committee that in  view of the difficulties 
experienced in getting the repres entatives of Universities elected 
by the Senate, the provisions in the Act are being amended to 

deal with the situation more effecti vely. It is also proposed to 
have one combined representative of all the Universities in a 
particular State to be represented  on the Council in the future. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken and 
the results achieved in this regard.  
 
9.   The total sanctioned ma npower strength of MCI was 
112 out of which 18 posts were ly ing vacant when the Committee 
called for the information. However, subsequently they were 
informed that 11 of the vacant posts were f illed up through the 
normal process of selection. Seve n posts including that of the 
Additional Secretary and the Law Officer were still lying vacant. 
The Committee specifically enquired about the vacant post of Law 
Officer against whom a retainer advocate was engaged to look 
after day to day legal matters in MC I. It is surprising to find that 
despite advertising and holding in terviews for the post twice, no 
candidate was found suitable for the post. The post seems to 
have been kept vacant for extraneous reasons  which are 
incomprehensible.   The Commi ttee, therefore, desire that the 
post should be advertised and f illed up within a period of three 
months and the Committee be apprised of the same. The 
Committee also desire that the 20 newly created posts including 
that of one Deputy Secretary and two Assistant Secretaries 
should also be filled up expeditiously. 
 
 
10. It is pertinent to note that there is no vigilance section or 
post of a Chief Vigilance Officer in an organisation like MCI that is 

engaged in granting of approval to courses in medical colleges 
and monitoring of medical educati on in the country where there 
are ample opportunities of red tapism, corruption and favouritism. 
It is astonishing to note that even  a Public Grievances  Redressal 
Cell does not exist in MCI.  A person who has a grievance has no 
proper  channel to get it redr essed.   Moreover, there is no 
mechanism for an ongoing surv eillance on the functioning of 
officials of MCI.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a 
post of Chief Vigilance Officer sh ould be created in MCI who will 
report directly to the President of the Council and the post be 
filled up expeditiously.  A Publ ic Grievances Redressal Cell 
should also be set up in MCI which should function under the 
Chief Vigilance Officer, who should  be a person belonging to an 
organised  service, like the Indian  Police Service.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken for implementation 
of these recommendations. 
 
11. The grant-in-aid under the Plan Scheme was Rs. 73 lakh in 
1999-00, Rs. 55 lakh in 2000-01, Rs . 90.58 lakh in 2002-03 and Rs. 
75 lakh in 2003-04.  In  the year 2001-02 Government did not 
release the grant as unspent am ount of previous year was 
available.  During the 8th Five Year Plan, grant-in-aid was provided 
by Government only to meet the exp enditure for  Continuing  
Medical Education Scheme (CME) and the Council used to release 
grant of Rs. 50,000/- to the  hos ting institutions conducting the 
CME programme. During the Ninth Plan period, the grant from 
MCI was  increased to Rs. on e lakh for CME programmes 
involving foreign faculty and fu rther the scheme was extended to 

CME programmes involving Indian faculty for which the financial 
assistance provided was Rs. 50,000/- per programme.  This 
scheme, started in 1985, is intended to utilise the services of 
Indian physicians settled in USA, UK and Canada in  continuing 
medical education and patient  care in India. The Committee note 
with satisfaction that MCI has been  made a nodal agency for 
conducting CME programmes with the objective of updating the 
knowledge and skills of registered medical practitioners. During 
the last 3 years i.e. 2002, 2003 and 2004, grants of Rs. 70.15 lakh, 
Rs. 66.98 lakh and Rs. 52.73 lakh  respectively were given to 
various hosting institutions and the number of participants  who 
attended the programmes during th ese years were 22,957, 24,662 
and 11,189 respectively. The Committee feel that with  lakhs of 
doctors registered with MCI and the present trend of participation,  
it will take 15 to 20 years to co ver all the registered medical 
practitioners.  The Committee also  regret to note that although 
sums amounting to Rs. 78 lakh a nd Rs. 240 lakh were allocated to 
MCI for  CME programme during 8
th and 9 th Five Years Plans 
respectively,  the actual utilisation  was only Rs. 41.93 lakh and 
Rs. 180.65 lakh respectively. No reasons for under-utilisation 
have been furnished to the Committee. The Committee, therefore, 
emphasize that specific steps should  be taken by MCI for gearing 
up the machinery for proper and optimum utilisation of funds.  
The CME Scheme should be en couraged as   the medical 
practitioners need continuos updating of knowledge and skills 
since  medical science is unde r constant evolution with new 
trends and practices emerging every day and many of the 

doctors, due to various reasons, ar e not able to keep pace with 
the latest developments. 
 
12. The  Committee   note  that  on e   of    the    important 
functions of MCI is the maintenance of IMR. Regulation 63 of MCI 
provides that supplements to the Indian Medical Register (IMR) 
shall be published every year an d the IMR shall be revised and 
published every five years. Accord ing to MCI, the IMR has been 
printed upto the year 2002 and not ified in the Gazette upto the 
year 1993 and the reason for the inordinate delay is stated to be 
financial constraint for which MCI has written to the  Government 
several times for additional grant. MCI further stated that Rs 500 
lakh is immediately required for printing and publication of IMR in 
the Gazette. The Committee  trust that IMR for the years 2003 and 
2004 would be printed without an y further delay.  As the 
publication of IMR for the year 1994 to 2004 in the Gazette has 
been  pending for a long ti me, the Committee recommend that 
Government should release the gran t required for its publication 
as early as possible. They also stress that MCI should ensure that 
there is no lapse on its part in  printing and publication of IMR 
which being a Statutory  requirement, viz. supplements to the IMR 
to be published every year and revision  and publication of the 
Register to be undertaken once in five years.  
13. MCI had received an allocation of Rs. 13 lakh for setting up a 
Library, which has remained unutilised.  The reason for non-
utilisation of the amount is that the space in the old building  is 
not sufficient for setting up the Librar y.  The Library, therefore, is 
to be set up in the new office building of MCI. The Committee fail 
to understand as to why an allocation for establishing a new 

Library was sought from the Government when there was no 
space available for setting it up in the present office building.  The   
Committee deprecate such bad planning and lack of vision on the 
part of MCI.  However, the Comm ittee trust that the Library will  
now be set up on the ground floor of the new office building as 
assured by  MCI.  The civil work  for the new office building for 
MCI was awarded to M/s. L&T Ltd. on January 28, 2000 for 
completion within nine months . On account of a number  of 
factors, there was undue delay and the civil work was completed 
only in August, 2004. Even after s even months of   handing  over 
of the building by the contractor, clearance from various agencies 
for water connection, sewer connection, fire fighting, etc.  is still  
awaited.  The casual approach on th e part of MCI in getting the 
office project completed is quite evident.  The Committee cannot 
but  condemn such apathy on the pa rt of  MCI and desire that the 
Council should obtain the Completion Certificate and   shift its 
office to the new building without any further delay.  
 
14. As per regulations notified by MCI under the IMC Act, 1956, 
it is mandatory for all medical co lleges/institutions in the country 
including  private organisations to   take approval of MCI to start 
new medical colleges/institutions and also new medical courses.  
To ensure that all the requiremen ts are fulfilled, MCI carries out 
inspection of the colleges at the time of application and 
thereafter, every year till the degr ee awarded by the college is 
recognised.   The Committee wanted to know specifically how 
much time is taken between the application submitted  by the 
college stating  that it has satisfact orily provided all the minimum 

standard requirements and the fi nal communication issued by 
MCI granting permission for the cour se.  MCI merely informed the 
Committee that the time gap between the intimation received by 
the college and the  intimation sent by MCI is kept to a minimum.  
However, keeping in view  the feedbacks  the Committee  received 
from various sources, they have arrived at the  conclusion that it 
is important that a specific time-fr ame is fixed for various stages  
of consideration of applications received by MCI to make the 
process smooth and time-bound.  
 
15.  The Committee note that on an average, MCI has been 
conducting about 400 inspecti ons per year for granting 
permission for new medical colle ges, renewal of permission, 
starting new courses, etc.  As th e entire process of approval 
depends on the report of th e inspection team, the inspection 
turns out to be of  much signi ficance for the institution inspected.  
It goes without  saying that in th e process  there is ample scope 
for resorting to corrupt practices  a nd  nepotism.  It is, therefore, 
appropriate  that the entire  procedure for inspection should be 
clearly laid down in the form of a regulation and a panel of 
inspectors known for their integri ty should be drawn up for a 
specified  period of time  and they  be deputed for inspection by 
rotation.  
 
16.  The Committee note that MCI has proposed that every State 
should set up a Medical University .  However, acco rding to the 
Council only 5 or 6 States have so far implemented the proposal 
and  set up Medical Universities.  The Committee expect the 

Ministry and the MCI to follow up  the proposal with individual 
States that all States may initi ate action for setting up Medical 
Universities. 
 
17. According to MCI,  the pr escribed teacher - student ratio 
varies from 1:10 to 1:15 in each subject for undergraduate 
courses  and is 1:1 in postgraduate courses.  When enquired by 
the Committee  whether MCI has conducted any evaluation of 
teaching/non-teaching faculty in various recognised institutions 
in the country and their level of expertise in  the respective fields, 
the Council admitted that no such evaluation has been 
undertaken.  However, the Council maintained that strict 
adherence  is ensured by the Council as far as fulfilment of the 
minimum requirements prescribed through the regulations 
pertaining to  infrastructural  facilities and teaching and non-
teaching personnel by the colleges is concerned. The  Council 
also admitted that there is acute shortage  of qualified teaching 
staff  in the country.  This is  al so one reason why names of the  
same Professors are found on the pay rolls of more than one 
college at a time.  Taking a seri ous note of this, MCI has taken the 
decision to remove the names of  such Professors from the IMR 
maintained by the Council.  On the basis of three regional and  
one national workshops organised for experts in the field of 
medical education, recommend ations were drawn up for 
reduction  of teaching faculty in the medical colleges to the extent 
of 10 to 15% in each department.  Amendments to the existing  
Regulations  in this regard  du ly approved by  the Executive 
Committee and the General Body  of the Council have been 

submitted to the Government for approval.  In view of the 
shortage of teaching staff in the medical colleges, a suggestion 
emerged that their retirement age should be increased.  The 
Committee suggest that Government should weigh the pros and 
cons  of enhancing the retirement age of teaching staff in the 
medical colleges and take a deci sion in this regard in 
consultation with UGC. 
 
18.  The Committee find that there is much regional imbalance in 
the number of medical colleges set up in the country which has 
an impact on the availability of re gistered medical practitioners in  
different  regions.  There is a high concentration of medical 
colleges in the Western and Southern parts of the country 
whereas the North and Eastern regions are lagging behind.  
According to the State Medi cal Register, there were 90,855 
doctors in Maharashtra and 65,789 in Karnataka, but only 135 in 
Jharkhand, 213 in Chattisgarh  and 1,326 in Haryana.  Although 
Jharkhand and Chattisgarh are newl y formed States, the disparity 
between the States is quite alarmi ng.  The MCI admitted that its 
role was limited as far as starti ng of new medical colleges is 
concerned as it depends on new applications  coming from a 
State. This being a wider issue, the Committee feel that it needs to 
be addressed by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(Department of Health). Each State should be asked to formulate a 
perspective plan on medical educati on and health care.  On the 
basis of the plans drawn up by the States, a National Perspective 
Plan on Medical Education should be formulated and regions 
which are lagging behind should be  encouraged to come up with 

plans for starting new medical colleges and strengthening the 
existing ones. Another disturbing trend noticed in certain States 
like Orissa, West Bengal and Assam is that freshers have ample 
opportunities to get admission in postgraduate medical courses, 
but they go abroad in search of  better prospects. On the other 
hand, those who are already worki ng in rural areas do not have 
the avenues to join postgraduate courses. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that steps s hould be taken to correct this 
trend in order that medical  graduates who  volunteer to work in 
rural areas get sufficient opportunities for doing post graduate 
courses so that  services may be available to the rural masses.  
 
19. MCI has notified  Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics 
Regulations, 2002 in the Gazette of India to regulate the practice 
of medical practitioners.  Un der the regulations, anyone can 
register a complaint against a delinquent medical practitioner.  
From 2002 to 2004, 1164 cases were lodged with MCI against 
medical practitioners of which 1,099 cases have been disposed 
off and 65 cases are pending.  The Ethics Sub-Committee of the 
Council conducts enquiry into the complaints and the action 
taken against delinquent medical practitioners is notified to the 
State Medical Councils, Universities, etc.  The Committee take a 
serious note of the complaints lodged against medical 
practitioners which rose from 262 in 2002 to 373 in 2003 and 529 
in 2004.  MCI needs to be vigila nt about  the complaints being 
recorded against registered medical practitioners check 
malpractices in the medical pr ofession and initiate stringent 
action against fraudulent   ones.  The Committee also express 

their concern about  as many as 1,548 cases of litigation relating 
to registration, fee structure, admission, etc.  pending against MCI 
which, of course, were brought  down to 749 in  January, 2005.  
The Committee urge that efforts sh ould be made to minimise 
litigations and also for early settlement of pending cases. 
 
20. During evidence of the repr esentatives of Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare (Departmen t of Health), the Committee 
expressed their concern about ex horbitant capitation fee/tuition 
fee  being charged by some of  the privately owned medical 
colleges in the country.  The MCI stated that on the basis of 
landmark judgement of the Supreme Court of India  on October 
31, 2002 fee structure of unaided institutions in the country is 
regulated and monitored by the Fee Committee appointed by each 
State Government headed by a retire d High Court Judge.    All the 
complaints in this regard are re ferred to the Fee Committee and it 
is for the State Government to look  into the matter.  MCI held out 
firmly that under the scheme of  things charging of capitation fee 
for admission  in medical colleges is not permitted.  However, it is 
a matter of common knowledg e that private medical colleges 
charge huge funds for admission, especially in the management 
quota. The Committee note that in this regard the Supreme Court 
had directed that “the Government/appropriate authorities should 
consider framing appropriate regulations, if  not already framed, 
whereunder if it is found that an  institution is charging capitation 
fees or profiteering that institution can be appropriately penalised 
and also face the prospect of losing its recognition/affiliation……” 
The MCI has also expressed the view that the Council should be 

empowered to take disciplinary action in such matters for 
streamlining the system. The Commi ttee, therefore desire that 
regulations should be framed  authorising MCI to take penal 
action against  institutions which are flouting the norms under fee 
structure finalised by the F ee Committee  in each State. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:     C. KUPPUSAMI 
April 27, 2005     Chairman,   
Vaisakha 7, 1927(S)    Committee on Estimates          
 
 
             
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2004-2005) 
 
 
    S E V E N T H  S I T T I N G 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday the 16 th  November, 2004 
from 1100 to   1130  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2.   Shri B. Vinod Kumar  
3. Shri  Chander Kumar      
4. Shri Lalmuni Chaubay   

5. Shri Anant Gudhe     
6. Shri Jai Prakash 
7. Shri Samik Lahiri 
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
9. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal     
10. Shri Prabodh Panda   
11. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
12.   Shri Harikewal Prasad     
13.   Shri M. Ramadass    
14. Shri K.S. Rao             
15.   Shri Laxman Singh   
16.   Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
17.   Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu    - Joint Secretary 
2.      Shri A.K. Singh                        - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
3. Shri Cyril John         -  Under Secretary 
 
 
2.      As per the agenda for the sitting a briefing was to be given by the 
representatives of Medical Council of  India on subject ‘Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare (Departm ent of Health) – ‘Medical Council 
of India’. However, at this sitting the Medical Council of India was 
represented by Lt. Col. (Retd.) Dr. A. R.N Setalvad, who is Secretary of 
the Council.  Dr P.C. Kesavankutty  Nayar, who is the President of 
Medical Council of India, neither attended the sitting nor took prior 
permission for his absence during the sitting. The Committee 
expressed their strong displeasure ov er the absence of the President, 
MCI during the sitting and also condemned his casual behaviour 
towards the Committee. 
 

3.   The Committee decided to send a communication seeking 
explanation from the President, Medica l Council of India for his wilful 
absence during the above meeting. It was also decided that the matter 
be brought to the kind notice of Hon’ble Speaker. 
 
4.  It was decided to postpone the briefing  and  to  fix the  next 
date for briefing after receiving writ ten explanation from the President 
of MCI.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2004-2005) 
 
 
    ELEVENTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 12 th January, 2005 
from 1100 to 1410  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2. Shri. B. Vinod Kumar 
3. Prof. Chander Kumar 
4.  Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
5. Shri Anant Gudhe 
6. Shri  Jai Prakash 
7. Shri. N.N. Krishnadas 
8. Shri Samik Lahiri 
9. Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 

10. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
11. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
12. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil  
13. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
14. Prof. M. Ramadass 
15. Shri K.S. Rao 
16. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
17. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
18. Shri Sartaj Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
3. Shri Cyril John   -      Under Secretary  
Witnesses 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH) 
 
1. Shri P.  Hota    -  Secretary 
2. Shri B.P. Sharma   - Joint Secretary 
3. Sh. A.K. Jha    - Director 
 
MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA 
 
1. Dr. P.C. Kesavankutty Nayar  - President(Acting) 
2. Dr. Ved Prakash Mishra  - Chairman, 
Postgraduate Medical 
Education Committee 
 

3.  Lt. Col. (Retd.) Dr. A.R.N. Setalvad- Secretary 
4. Dr. P. Kumar      - Joint Secretary 
 
2.   *     *          *   *   * 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee to ok oral evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of H ealth and Family Welfare(Department 
of Health) and Medical Council of I ndia on the subject ‘Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare(Department of Health) – ‘Medical Council of 
India’. The evidence was concluded. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2004-2005) 
 
 
    FIFTEENTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 26 th April, 2005 from 
1500 to 1610 hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2. Prof. Chander Kumar 
3. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 

4.  Shri Anant Gudhe 
5.  Shri  Jai Prakash 
6.   Shri Samik Lahiri 
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 
8. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato 
9.   Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
10.   Shri Harikewal Prasad 
11.   Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
12.   Shri Laxman Singh 
13.   Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
14.   Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
3. Shri B.D. Swan   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Cyril John   -      Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.   The   Committee considered  the draft Report on Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health) – ‘Medical Council 
of India’  and adopted the same with some modifications/additions as 
given in the Annexure.  
 
3.  The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Report in 
the light of verbal and other consequ ential changes, if any, arising out 
of factual verification by the Ministry and present the same to the 
House. 
 
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Amendments/Modifications made by the Estimates Committee in 
the Draft Report on Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(Department of Health) –‘Medical Council of India’   
     ***** 
 
Para No.      Amendments/Modifications  
 
2    Delete With the…….country, etc 
 
2       For fulfill 
 Substitute achieve 
 
3      For The Committee……. terms 
 Substitute The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a study 
should be got done by the 
Government on the status of 
medical education in the country 
both in qualitative and quantitative 
terms by engaging an independent 
professional institution. 
 
6       Delete media 
  
6                  For  the Committee’s view point        
      Substitute that view 
  
7 For The Committee fail……the 
Supreme Court .  
Substitute The  Committee note 
that  the High Court of  Delhi had 
pointed out several irregularities in 
the style of functioning of the 
President of MCI, in the manner in 
which inspectors  were appointed, 
decisions were taken and approvals 

were given to colle ges.  There were 
also corruption charges against him.  
The Committee are distressed to 
note the state of affairs in MCI.  
They also note with concern that 
even after such gl aring instances of 
misuse of office by the President of 
the Council have been brought out, 
no steps have been taken by 
Government to streamline the 
working of  MCI and to put the 
house in order.  While expressing 
their serious displeasure, the 
Committee desire that Government 
should take corrective measures to 
ensure that there is more 
transparency in the functioning of 
the Council and t he  President of 
the Council does not assume all 
powers and misuse his position for 
vested interest. The Committee are 
constrained to note that although 
the Delhi High Court had directed 
the Government on 23 November, 
2001 to take necessary action to 
constitute the Council under Section 
3 of the IMC Act and hold election 
to the Offices of President and Vice-
President of the Council, no follow-
up action has been taken in this 
regard.  They, therefore, stress  that 
steps should be taken for filling up 
the vacancies in the Council and 
holding election to the Offices of 
President and Vice-President of the 
Council without any further delay. 
 
8 For  The Committee…... Council. 
Substitute The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action 
taken and the results achieved in 
this regard.  

 
9 For intentionally. 
Substitute for extraneous reasons.   
 
12 After as early as possible.  
Add They also stress that MCI 
should ensure that there is no lapse 
on its part in printing and publication 
of IMR which is a Statutory 
requirement, viz. supplements to 
the IMR to be published every year 
and revision  and publication of the 
Register to be undertaken once in 
five years.  
 
13 For callousness 
Substitute casual approach 
 
14 Delete Therefore,…..information. 
 
1 8       After medical colleges 
Add and strengthening the existing 
ones. Another disturbing trend 
noticed in certain States like Orissa, 
West Bengal and Assam is that 
freshers have ample opportunities 
to get admission in postgraduate 
medical courses, but they go 
abroad in search of better 
prospects. On the other hand, those 
who are already working in rural 
areas do not have the avenues to 
join postgraduate courses. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend 
that steps should be taken to 
correct this trend in order that 
medical  graduates who  volunteer 
to work in rural areas get sufficient 
opportunities for doing post 
graduate courses that their  
services may be available to the 
rural masses.  

 
 
19 For MCI needs ……profession.  
Substitute MCI needs to be vigilant 
about the complaints being 
recorded against registered medical 
practitioners, check malpractices in 
the medical profession and initiate 
stringent action against fraudulent 
ones.  
 
2 0       For amounts of capitation fee  
Substitute funds    
 
2 0       For The Ministry…. of the same. 
Substitute The Committee note 
that in this regard the Supreme 
Court had directed that “the 
Government/appropriate authorities 
should consider framing appropriate 
regulations, if not already framed, 
whereunder if it is found that an 
institution is charging capitation fees 
or profiteering that institution can be 
appropriately penalised and also 
face the prospect of losing its 
recognition/affiliation……” The MCI 
has also expressed the view that 
the Council should be empowered 
to take disciplinary action in such 
matters for streamlining the system. 
The Committee, therefore desire 
that regulations should be framed 
authorising MCI to take penal action 
against institutions which are 
flouting the norms under fee 
structure finalised by the Fee 
Committee in each State. The 
Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this 
regard.  
 

   