         E.C. No. 1430 
 
 
 FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE  
(2007-08) 
 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
  
NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL COOPERATIVE MARKETING FEDERATION 
OF INDIA LTD. 
 
 
    S  
 
     E  
 A 
   
 L 
 
   
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.8.2007 
 
 
 
      LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                       NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
   August, 2007/Sravana, 1929(S) 

Contents 
 
           Page  
Composition of the Committee on Estimates  
 
Introduction 
 
Chapter I AIMS, OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS 
 
1. Aims and Objectives 
2. Functions 
3. Fulfillment of functions, responsibilities  
and activities 
4. Changes in the functions of NAFED after  
Multi-State Cooperative Society (MSCS) Act, 2002 
 
 
Chapter II ORGANIZATIONAL AN D ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS   
 
1. Organization   
2. Regional and Branch Offices 
3. Administration and Manpower  
4. Training 
5. Complaints and Vigilance Cases 
 
 
Chapter III     FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE  
   
  1. Financial Resources 
  2. Financial Performance 
  3. Return on Investment 
  4. Tax Liability of NAFED 
   
Chapter IV   PRICE SUPPORT OPERATIONS  
 
1. Price Support Scheme (PSS) 
2. Procurement of Oil seeds 
3. Procurement of Pulses 
4. Funding of Price Support Operations 
5. Revolving Fund 
      6. Market Intervention Scheme(MIS) 
 7. Disposal of Procured Stocks  
  8. Loss in disposal of stocks 
  9. Other Government Operations 
(i) NAFED as a canalizing agency for onion export 
(ii) Proposal to declare NAFED as nodal agency  
for procurement of jute.  

 
Chapter V  COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES 
 
 1. Commercial Operations 
2. Marketing of agricultural commodities on  
commercial  basis:- 
 (i) Pulses 
 (ii) Potato 
3. Retail Marketing Operations  
 4. Joint Ventures with State-Cooperative/Marketing  
Federation/Marketing Cooperative Societies 
5. International Trade by NAFED  
6. NAFED Operations in North - Eastern Region 
7. Industrial Units 
(i)  Konark Jute Limited(KJL) 
(ii)   NAFED Bio-Fertilizer Units in Indore and  
Bharatpur 
(iii)  NAFED Processed Foods 
(iv)  NAFED Warehousing and Processing Industries  
Vashi 
(v)    NAFED Krishi Yantra Udyog, Bhiwadi 
(vi)  Raichur Cooperative Oil Complex, Raichur 
(vii)  NAFED Kinnow-grading-waxing and precooling  
cum cold storage, Maujgarh, Punjab 
 
  8. Unsteady Performance of Industrial Units 
9. Cold Storage and Warehouses of NAFED  
 
 
Chapter VI          MISCELLANEOUS 
 
  A. New Business Ventures  
   i) Bio Fertilizers 
   ii) Seeds  
   iii) Distribution of Chemical Fertilizers 
   iv) General Insurance 
 
B.  Research and Development Activities 
C. Collection of Information and its dissemination  
D. Vision Statement. 
 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
    

ANNEXURES  
 
 I. Board of Directors in NAFED 
 
II. Financial resource(s) base of NAFED at the end of  
financial year 
 
III. Commodity-wise foreig n trade of NAFED during  
the year 2000-01 to 2004-05  
 
IV. Business handled in the Easter n Region during the last 5 years 
 
      
APPENDICES 
 
1. Minutes of Sitting of t he Estimates Committee held  
on 11.8.2005 
 
2. Minutes of Sitting of t he Estimates Committee held  
on 14.10.2005 
 
3.   Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held  
on 8.9.2006 
 
4. Minutes of Sitting of t he Estimates Committee held  
on 16.8.2007 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE  
    (2007-2008) 
 
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, MP  - Chairman 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
2.  Shri Lal  Muni Choubey 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Anant Gudhe 
5. Shri Anwar Hussain 
6. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain 
7. Shri P. Karunakaran 
8. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal 
9. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
10. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
11.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
12. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
13.  Shri Zora Singh Mann 
14. Shri Hemlal Murmu 
15. Shri D. Narbula 
16. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
18.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan 
19. Shri Sachin Pilot 
20. Shri R. Prabhu 
21. Shri Tufani Saroj 
22. Smt. Tejaswini Seeramesh 
23. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi 
24. Choudhary Bijendra Singh 
25. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
26.  Shri Lakshman Singh 
27.   Kunwar Manvendra Singh 
28.   Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
29.   Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
30.   Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri C.V. Gadgil  - Director (I) 
 4. Smt. Manju Chaudhary - Deputy Secretary II 
 5. Shri C.  Kalayansundaram  - Committee Officer 
 

INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairman of the Estimates Commi ttee, having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the repor t on their behalf present this  Fourteenth Report on the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Ag riculture and Cooperation) – ‘National 
Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Ltd.’.  
 
2. The subject was selected for detailed examination by the Estimates Committee 
(2003-2004). The Estimates Committee (2004- 2005) heard the  brie fing on the subject 
on 11 th August, 2005 and  the Estimates Committ ee (2005-2006) took evidence of 
representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and NAFED on 14 th October, 2005 and 8 th 
September, 2006. The Committee wish to expre ss their thanks to the officers of the  
Ministry of Agriculture and NAFED for plac ing before them the det ailed written notes 
on the subject and for furnishing info rmation desired in connection with the 
examination of the subject. The Committee also appreciate the frankness with which 
the officers of the Ministry of Agricultur e and NAFED shared thei r views, perceptions 
and constraints with the Committee while tendering oral evidence.   
 
3. The Committee  considered and adopted th e report at their sitting held on 16 th 
August, 2007. 
 
4. The Report is divided into six ch apters. The Committee have inter alia made the 
following important observations/recommendations: 
 
(i) Focus on agricultural and allied activities should not be lost even in the 
post MSCS Act, 2002 scenario whic h allows NAFED to undertake 
business in non-agricultural and non-traditional items.  
 
(ii) NAFED should functi on in a manner to become a commercially viable 
organization. 
 
(iii) Bye-laws of NAFED should be su itably amended so that  all the States 
will have equal opportunity to participate in the administration of NAFED. 
 
(iv) There is a need to plan for the in digenous production of various oil seeds 
of the desired quality and quantity to m eet the edible oil requirements of 
the country.  Research and developm ent activities should also be 
encouraged for producing better quality of seeds for oil crops. 
 
(v) Government should put in place a revolving fund for financing the price 
support operations. 
 
(vi) Government and NAFED should act pr omptly  and in close coordination 
as far as decision making process and implementation of the market 
intervention scheme are concerned in order to ensure that the schemes 

such as Price Support Scheme and Ma rket Intervention Scheme actually 
benefit the farmers. 
 
(vii) Government should have effect ive regulation over the export of 
agricultural commodities including onio n and for this purpose they may, 
among other measures, consider appointing NAFED as the sole 
canalizing agency for the export of onion.  
 
(viii) Branch offices of NAFED may be ope ned in all the States  of North-East, 
Union Territories and the States and t hey should chalk out action plans 
for further expansion of its operations in Northern, Eastern, Southern and 
North-Eastern regions and implement them effectiv ely for the benefit of 
farmers of all the regions of the country. 
 
(ix) NAFED should play a leading role in  creating a network of cold storages 
to preserve harvested vegetables and fr uits by setting up cold storages 
by itself or in cooperation with the Union/State Governments.  
 
(x) Several industrial units set up by NAFED were closed on becoming sick 
and unviable.  NAFED should evaluate the performance of such units.  
NAFED should draw a specific plan of action with regard to each unit and 
implement the same after in-depth study about their feasibility. 
 
(xi) NAFED should set-up a separate re search and development division for 
undertaking applied research and development in grading and 
standardization, post harvest technol ogy including handling storage, 
transport and packaging.  NAFED should draw-up an action plan to step-
up its research and development activi ties to provide support to other 
agricultural cooperatives and marketing federations. 
 
(xii) NAFED should take up production of  bio-fertilisers in a big way and 
market them throughout the country.    
 
5. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold type in the body of the report.  
 
 
    NEW DELHI; 
August   20, 2007 
Sravana  29, 1929(S) 
C. KUPPUSAMI,
Chairman,
Committee on Estimates.

 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
      
  AIMS, OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS OF NAFED 
 
1.1 National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Ltd., 
popularly known as NAFED, was established on 02 nd October, 1958 with 
its headquarters at New Delhi NAFE D is an Apex National level 
organization of the Marketing Cooperative in the country.  
1.2 NAFED was registered under the provisions of Bombay Cooperative 
Societies Act (VII of 1925) as extended to the state of Delhi. Presently, it is 
deemed to be registered under Multi- State Cooperative Societies Act 
1984(since replaced by the Multi-St ate Co-operative Societies Act, 2002), 
rules made thereunder and its bye-laws.  
 
Aims and Objectives  
1.3 According to the information made available to the Committee the 
objectives of NAFED are: 
i) to organise, promote and develop  marketing, processing and 
storage of agricultural, horticultural and forest produce; 
ii) to distribute agricultural machinery, implements and other inputs; 
iii) to undertake inter-state, intra-state, import and export trade, 
wholesale or retail as the case  may be;  and 
iv) to act and assist in the matter of technical advice in agricultural 
production for the promotion and the working of its members and 
cooperative marketing, processing and supply societies in India. 

1.4 NAFED was established with the aim of promoting cooperative 
marketing and ensuring that farmers  get ready market and remunerative 
prices for their produce. It was also  aimed that price spread between 
producer and consumer be reduced.  
1.5 The Committee wanted to know the extent to which NAFED had 
succeeded in providing ready market and remunerative price to farmers 
for their produce through its network. NAFED in its written reply stated that 
it undertakes purchase of farmers’ produce under the following schemes:- 
a) Procurement of Oilseeds and Pulses under Price Support 
Scheme as a nodal agency of the Government of India.  
b) Procurement under Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) being 
nodal agency of the Government of India.  
c) Procurement of agricultural  commodities under its own 
commercial account.  
Functions 
1.6 In order to achieve the aims and obj ectives, the following functions, 
responsibilities and activities are carried on by NAFED according to new 
Bye-Laws incorporated by NAFED :- 
(i) To facilitate, coordinate and promote the marketing and trading 
activities of the partners and associate cooperative institutions in 
agricultural, non-agricultural, non-traditional and other 
commodities, articles and goods; 
(ii) To undertake or promote on its own or on behalf of its member 
institutions of the Government  or Government organizations, 
inter-State, intra-State and international trade and commerce and 
undertake, wherever necessary, sale, purchase, import and 
export and distribution of agricultural commodities, non-

agricultural and non-traditional, horticultural and forest produce, 
other articles and goods from various sources for pursuing its 
business activities and to act as the agency for canalization of 
export and import and inter-state trade of agricultural, non-
agricultural and non-traditional and  other commodities or articles 
under any scheme formulated by t he Government of India or 
other Government agencies and to fa cilitate these activities 
wherever necessary, to openi ng branches/sub-offices and 
appoint agents at any place within the country or abroad; 
(iii) To undertake purchase, sale and supply of agricultural, non-
agricultural, non-traditional produ cts, marketing and processing 
requisites, such as manure, seeds, fertilizer, agricultural 
implements and machinery, pa cking machinery, construction 
requisites, processing machiner y for agricultural commodities, 
forest produce, dairy, wool and other animal products; 
(iv) To act as warehouseman under Warehousing Act and own and 
construct its own godowns and cold storages; 
(v) To act as insurance ag ent of any Government agency or 
cooperative institution, for the purchase, sale, storage and 
distribution of agricultural, horticultural, forest and animal 
husbandry produce, wool, agricul tural requisite s and other 
consumer goods; 
(vi) To act as insurance agent and to undertake all such work which 
is incidental to the same; 
(vii) Organize consultancy work in various fields for the benefit of the 
cooperative institutions in general and for its members in 
particular; 

(viii) To undertake manufacture of agricultural, non-agricultural and 
non-traditional, machinery and implements, processing, packing, 
etc. and other production requisites and consumer articles by 
setting up manufacturing units either directly or in collaboration 
with or as a joint venture with any other agency, including import 
and distribution of spare-parts and components for up-keep of the 
machinery/implements; 
(ix) To set up storage units f or storing various commodities and 
goods, by itself or in collaboration with any other agency in India 
or abroad; 
(x) To maintain transport units of its own or in coll aboration with any 
other organization in India or abr oad for movement of goods on 
land, sea, air, etc; 
(xi) To collaborate with any inter national agency or a foreign body for 
development of cooperative mark eting, processing and other 
activities for mutual advantages in India or abroad; 
(xii) To undertake marketing researc h and dissemination of market 
intelligence; 
(xiii) To subscribe to share capital of  other cooperative institutions as 
well as other public, joint and pri vate sector enterprises if and 
when considered necessary for fulfilling the objectives of NAFED. 
(xiv) To arrange for the training of employees of 
marketing/processing/supply cooperative societies; 
(xv) To maintain common  cadres/pools of managerial/technical 
personnel required by the m arketing/processing/supply 
cooperative societies; 

(xvi) To establish processing units for processing of agricultural, 
horticultural and forest produce and wool; 
(xvii) To undertake grading, packing and standardization of agricultural 
produce and other articles; 
(xviii) To acquire, take on lease or hire, lands, buildings, fixtures and 
vehicles and to sell, give on leas e or hire them for the  business 
of NAFED.  
(xix) To advance loans to its members and other cooperative 
institutions on the security of goods or otherwise;  
(xx) To guarantee loans or advances or give undertakings to any 
Society or Company in which the Federation has a shareholding 
or financial involvement as a prom oter to be able to assist its 
development or expansion or for starting any industrial 
undertaking by such societies/companies; 
(xxi) To guarantee loans or advances or give undertakings on behalf 
of any such society or company as mentioned above to any 
financing institutions; 
(xxii) To do all such things or  undertake such other business or 
activities as may be incidental or  conducive to the attainment of 
any or all of the above.  
 
Fulfillment of Functions, Responsibilities and Activities  
1.7 Keeping in view the increasing role of NAFED in procurement, 
marketing, price support and market intervention schemes in agriculture 
sector as well as its status as the apex level organization of the Marketing 
Cooperatives of the country, the Minist ry of Agriculture constituted an 
Expert Group headed by Shri Paul Joseph, then Joint Secretary 

(Cooperation and Trade) in the D epartment of Agriculture and 
Cooperation to examine and report on the functions of NAFED. The 
Expert Group submitted its report on “Organisational Structure and 
Perspective Plan for NAFED” in December, 1997. According to the Expert 
Group, a review of the functions, responsibilities and activities enumerated 
in the bye-laws vis-à-vis activities undertaken by NAFED revealed that 
these objectives were fulfilled in varying degrees as follows :- 
 a) Activities fully carried out :  
  i, ii, v, viii, ix, xi, xiii, xvii, and xviii.  
 b) Activities partially attempted/achieved : 
  iii, iv, vii, xii, xiv, xvi, xx and xxi.  
 c) Activities not attempted at all : 
  vi, x, xv, and xix.  
 
1.8 The Expert Group recommended t hat management of NAFED may 
decide whether it is possible to initiate and undertake (c) category 
activities mentioned above and (b) category activities may also be 
reviewed and modified according to the requirements.  
1.9 When asked about the decision taken on bye laws 3(x) and 3(xv) 
relating to maintenance of tran sport units and common cadres, 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in a written note stated that it 
was decided to delete the activities  3(x) and 3(xv) as NAFED does not 
have much units and maintaining common cadre would  not be possible. It 
is, however, seen from the latest bye-laws of NAFED incorporating 
amendments registered by the Central Registrar (upto 17.12.2004) that 
both the aforesaid activities conti nue to remain in the bye-laws and the 
same have not been deleted. On the other hand, the scope of the activity 

at bye-law 3(x) has expanded to in clude operation of freight station, 
container depot and other incidental activities. In this regard NAFED 
further clarified as follows:- 
“The bye-laws 3(x) and 3(xv) have  not been deleted as NAFED 
wanted to retain these two clauses to assess the situation for some 
more time and take decision accord ingly. However, now it has been 
decided to delete these two clauses and action is being initiated for 
amendment of the bye-laws.” 
 
1.10 Earlier, a study was conduct ed by Indian Instit ute of Management, 
Ahmedabad. In its report titled “Organi sational study for Preparation of a 
Perspective Plan for NAFED”, IIMA has suggested that NAFED should 
have a sharp focus on what it should be doing in the changed 
environment. Accordingly, a clear visi on for NAFED should be thought of 
for achieving the following objectives: 
 
(i) to become a strong marketing organization dealing with 
agricultural commodities produced by  primary members of the 
member societies; 
(ii) to help member societies to develop market orientation skills 
and organization so that they could deal with commodities 
within their area of operations;  
(iii) to promote cooperation  among different marketing 
societies/federations in managing the flow of commodities 
across the boundaries; 
(iv) to deal with commodities of large volume and sold all over 
India;  

(v) NAFED should be the expert  agency for t he cooperative 
marketing sector, looking f or markets, guiding members on 
quality of specific commodities, procuring from members 
across the country and exporting to overseas markets.  
In regard to above recommendations, the Expert Group 
recommended that NAFED should explore the possibilities of 
implementing strategies recommended by IIMA.  
 
Changes in the functions of NAFED after Multi State Cooperative 
Society (MSCS) Act, 2002 
 
1.11 Multi State Cooperative Society (MSCS) Act, 2002, came into force 
w.e.f 19th August, 2002. This Act primarily aims at removing the restrictive 
provisions in the repealed MSCS Act, 1984. This Act envisages greater 
operational and administrative autono my to cooperatives like NAFED in 
respect of elections to the B oard, appointment of auditors and 
professionalism in their operations. After the enactment of MSCS Act, 
2002 NAFED has carried out some amendments in its bye-laws which 
have been registered with  Central Registrar. The amendments were 
approved by the General Body of NAFED on 1
st August 2003 and 27 th 
September 2004.  These were registered by the C entral Registrar on 3 rd 
June 2004 and 17 th December 2004. It is clarified that the amendments 
passed by General Body on 1 st August 2003 were registered on 3 rd June 
2004 by virtue of the order of the Appellate Authority. 
1.11 (a) The Committee enquired about the rationale for making the 
amendments to MSCS Act 1984 and new amendments und er MSCS Act 
2002 and NAFED in its written reply have stated as follows :-  

“With liberalization in Government policies and integration of Indian 
economy with world economy, NA FED would be required to be 
competitive to survive. MSCS Act 2002 would help NAFED to carry 
out its activities with greater au tonomy in the changed business 
scenario.”  
 
In this regard Managing Director, NAFED during evidence stated as 
under :- 
“The NAFED has been functioning under the Multi-State 
Cooperative Societies Act since 1984. The Act was amended in 
August 2002. After its amendment, certain amendments to the bye-
laws has to be made to make the bye-laws in consonance with the 
new Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act. This was carried out by 
NAFED. The new amendments were registered by the Central 
Registrar in December, 2004.” 
 
He further added :- 
 
“Primarily, there are not too many amendments to the bye-laws that 
were required as a consequence of this.  …….. the amendments to 
the MSCS Act were brought to give  more functional autonomy in the 
working of the Cooperatives.” 
 
 
1.12 When asked , in what manner the amended rules and bye-laws have 
helped/would help NAFED in achieving greater operational and 
administrative autonomy so as to enable NAFED to be a commercially 
viable organization in the change d business scenario in the post 
liberalization policies of Government, the NAFED in their written reply 
have stated :-  
“the Act provide functional aut onomy and democratic management 
of NAFED as in case of all Mult i-State Cooperative Societies coming 
with in purview of the Act. The amendments in the bye-laws of 
NAFED have helped in achiev ing greater operational and 
administrative efficiency.  Down – sizing the Board from 45 to 21 

excluding co-opted Directors, ha s led to meaningful and focused 
discussions and prompt policy deci sions with consensus emerging 
fast on important issues of organization’s interest.  The increased 
share money and admission fee of  member Federations/Societies 
has helped NAFED in strengthening its share capital base 
considerably.  Further, defining the role of Finance, Accounts & 
Audit and Project & Development Committees in the bye laws of the 
Federation with statutory status has resulted in better management 
and monitoring of various projects and financial matters.” 
 
1.13 When the Committee further enquired, how the changes in the bye-
laws in the pursuance of MSCS  Act 2002 have enabled NAFED in 
protecting the interests of the farmers and in serving its member 
cooperatives, NAFED in their written reply have stated :- 
“The changes brought in the bye-laws in pursuance of the MSCS 
Act, 2002 will enable NAFED to render better services to the 
member cooperatives/farmers.  Besides undertaking business 
activities through the member societies, NAFED may provide 
specialized training/education to them.  In addition, study tours can 
also be organized for the benefits of the member societies.  To meet 
the challenges in the changed liberalized policies and to give wider 
scope for accumulating additional income, NAFED has entered into 
non-traditional sectors like seed, f ertilizer, insurance, warehousing, 
public private partnership etc.  NAFED also entered into contract 
farming which would enable it serve farmers and members more 
effectively and efficiently”. 
 
1.14 Prior to MSCS Act, 2002 NA FED could undertake manufacture, 
purchase, storage, sale, supply, dist ribution, import and export of only 
agricultural, horticultural and forest items and related items such as 
agricultural machinery, animal husbandry  etc. As per amended bye-laws 
after the enactment of MSCS Act, 2002, NAFED can undertake business 
in non-agricultural and non-traditional  items. When asked, what non-
agricultural and non-traditional item s are proposed to be taken up by 

NAFED or in what manner the inclusio n of such items will affect the 
activities of NAFED in realizing its objectives, NAFED in their written reply 
stated that:-  
“in order to meet the challenges of liberalized economy, NAFED had 
to diversify its business activiti es by undertaking trade in non-agro 
and non-traditional items, i.e.  other than agro items/commodities, in 
association with various corporate houses under Public Private 
Partnership/tie-up basis. Keeping in view the domestic and 
international economic viability, NAFED had undertaken business 
with the participation of its business associates in the areas such as 
chemical products, iron ore, stee l and ceramic tiles etc. and 
inclusion of these items has no t affected the normal business 
operations of NAFED.” 
 
 
1.15 Managing Director, NAFED during evidence further elaborated as 
under :- 
“….Regarding the Multi State Cooperatives Act, 2002, we have 
started thinking so much in this area of commercial operations. 
Having got this autonomy, through the policies laid down by our 
Board of Directors, we are trying to intervene in various other areas 
as was highlighted in our pres entation like warehouse financing, 
going in for infrastructure projec ts, cold storages and even packing 
and other things. We would even go into areas of agriculture like 
seeds, fertilizers, marketin g and also in a big way in the area of 
biofertilisers. These are some of the new avenues of business that 
we are opening up.”  
  
1.16 NAFED has added a new clause of objects relating to functions of 
Federal Cooperative at 3(B) of the amended bye-laws. This clause 
stipulates that NAFED may discharge the functions to facilitate the 
voluntary formation and democratic functioning of cooperative societies as 
federal cooperative or multi-state cooperatives based on self-help and 
mutual aid. 

1.17 When Committee enquired wh ether NAFED had requisite 
infrastructure to discharge the additi onal functions of Federal Cooperative 
and what specific steps had been contemplat ed to initiate activities in this 
regard.  
NAFED in their written reply stated as under :- 
“Its headquarters at New Delhi and four Regional Offices located at 
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai with back up of branches 
located in the state capitals a nd other important cities and also 
through the network of state leve l marketing federations, commodity 
federations and member cooperative societies has the requisite 
infrastructure to discharge the additional functions of Federal 
Cooperative. The present infrastructure can fu rther be strengthened 
as and when needed.” 

CHAPTER II 
ORGANISATIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS 
1. Organisation   
  
2.1 The membership of NAFED as on 31 st March, 2005 consisted of 775 
cooperative marketing federations and cooperative marketing/processing 
societies. The membership of NAFED c onsists of the following categories 
:- 
i. State level General purpose co operative marketing federations 
excluding UTs; 
ii. Apex level cooperative marketing organizations of Union 
Territories;  
iii. State and Regional(inter state) level cooperative institutions 
like special commodities federations, tribal cooperative 
development corporation engaged or designed to engage 
primarily in the marketing, processing or distribution of 
agricultural requisite and consumer goods; 
iv. Cooperative marketing/processing societies other than those 
covered under items i), ii) & iii) above, engaged in the 
marketing and/or processing of agricultural, minor forest and 
allied produce and/or agricu ltural inputs and  having a 
minimum sales turnover of Rs.50 lacs or above in these 
activities; 
v. Government of India; 
vi. National Cooperative Development Corporation; 
vii. Other organizations/undertakings; 

viii. National cooperative cons umer’s federation and any other 
national level cooperative organization.  
2.2 Membership of NAFED as on 31 st March, 2005 is as follows:- 
Sl No.  Category of Members 2004-05 
1. State Level Marketing Federations 25 
2. Apex Level Marketing Federations 3 
3. State Level Tribal and Commodity Federations 23 
4. Primary Marketing/Processing Societies 722 
5. Government of India -- 
6. NCCF & Other National Level Coop. Organisations  
 
2 
 Total  775 
 
2.3 The criteria for acquiring/granting membership is that the application 
for admission as member of NAFED is  made to the Managing Director in 
the proforma alongwith the required documents i.e Bye-laws of the 
society, Registration Certificate, Profit & Loss account and trading account 
duly audited and attested by the Chartered Accountant, Resolution of their 
competent authority and the amount towards share capital and 
membership fee through demand draft.  
The Annual General Body of NAFED in its meetings held on 
16.9.1998 and 12.9.2000 revised the sh are capital contribution from the 
member societies in order to strengthen its share capital base. The 
amendments to that effect have been registered by the Central Registrar 
vide his letter dated 21 st January, 2001. In a ccordance with the above 
amendments the share capital contribution by various categories, which 
makes them eligible to have the membership of NAFED, is as under: 
2.4 The share capital to be contributed by the state level general 
purpose cooperative marketing federations under bye-law 4(a) (i) shall be 

Rs.20,00,000/- and for North Eastern States including Sikkim shall be 
Rs.2.5 lacs.  
2.5 The share capital to be contributed by the Apex level Union 
Territories as well as Primary Societies under bye-law 4(a) (ii) & (iv) shall 
be Rs.40,000/- and for North Eastern States including Sikkim shall be 
Rs.20,000/- 
2.6 The share capital to be contri buted by State Level commodity 
Federation and other organizations eligib le for membership under bye law 
4(a)(iii) & (vii) shall be Rs.2,00,000/- and for North Eastern states including 
Sikkim shall be Rs.1,00,000/-. 
2.7 Under bye-law 4(a) (viii) one nominee each of the NCCF, Bharat 
Krishak Samaj and other national level cooperative organizations that may 
be admitted to membership of NAFED,  provided that such representation 
on the Board of NAFED shall be on a reciprocal  basis. Presently only 
NCCF is representing on the Board of  NAFED on reciprocal basis as 
NCCF is having the required share capital in NAFED.  
2.8 Each application is disposed of by the Board of Directors of NAFED 
who is the competent authority to grant or refuse the membership.  
2.9 The management of NAFED vests in the Board of Directors. Before 
the enactment of MSCS Act, 2002 there were 44 me mbers in the Board of 
Directors. The Expert Group appointed by  the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) had recommended that size of 
the Board should be reduc ed from the level of 44 to 17. The matter was 
further examined and th e Board size was reduc ed as per MCSC Act, 2002 
to 21 and with co-ption and special in vitees the Board now consists of 25 
members. The composition of the Board of Directors in line with MSCS Act, 
2002 and MSCS Rules and bye-laws of NAFED is as under :- 

i) Ten members from State Marketing Federations; 
ii) One member from North East States including Sikkim, if eligible; 
iii) One member from Commodity Federation; 
iv) Seven members from Primary Societies;  
v) One Government Nominee;  
vi) One member from National Level Consumer Federation.  
vii) Managing Director as ex-Officio member. 
 
2.10 As per bye law no. 20 of NAFED, the Board of Directors elected by 
the General Body shall consist of one nominee each of the State Level 
General Purpose Cooperative Marketin g Federations excluding UTS 
admitted under Bye-law 4(a)(i) as per Annexure I.  
 
2.11 The Board of Directors is headed by the Chairman who is elected by 
the members of the Board of Direc tors from among themselves. The 
Chairman shall preside over the m eetings of the Board of Directors, 
General Body, Executive Committee and the Business Committee. In his 
absence one of the Vice-Chairmen shall preside over the meeting. 
Chairman shall have general contro l and overall supervision over the 
affairs of the Federation and its officers with the object of ensuring 
implementation of all the policies laid down by the Board of 
Directors/Executive Committee and Business Committee. Chairman shall 
be competent to take decisions as are of an urgent na ture affecting the 
policy of the Federation on behalf of the Board of Directors, Executive 
Committee, and any other committee, which may be deemed urgent on 
the advice of the Managing Director.  

2.12  The members of the Board are  elected by the members of the 
General Body of NAFED as per the provis ions of the bye-laws of NAFED. 
The Chairman and Vice-Chairman are el ected by the members of the 
Board. The tenure of the Board is for five years. Hence the term of the 
Chairman and Vice-Chairman is co-terminus with the Board.  
 
2.  Regional and Branch Offices 
2.13 Apart from its head quarters at New Delhi, NAFED has four Regional 
Offices located at New Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai and 31 
branches located all over India.  
 
2.14 For North Eastern Region, th e activities are looked after by 
Guwahati branch in Assam, besides a liaison office is being operated from 
Agartala.  With regard to Union T erritories of Andaman Nicobar, the 
activities are being looked after by regional office at Kolkata. Similarly, for 
Lakshadweep and Goa, t he work is being monitored by Bangalore and 
Pune branches respectively.      
 
2.15 On being asked whether it was not desirable to open branches in 
Goa, Union Territories such as Andaman and Nicobar,  Lakshadweep and 
in the newly formed states, the Managing Director of NAFED replied 
during evidence as under :-         
“Regarding branches, as I said, we  have got about 30 branches all 
over the country….. About Andaman and Nicobar Islands, we are 
working through cooperative society whic h is a very active society. 
We have not yet opened a branch t here but our Kolkata branch is 
monitoring it. We have not yet taken a decision on opening a branch 
there. But our cooperative society is working well there. As regards 

Goa, we do not have a branch there at the moment because there is 
no business in the area.” 
 
2.16 The Committee further enqui red whether it was not desirable to 
open new branch office in these places for more efficient field operations, 
NAFED in a written reply have stated that it being an apex organization at 
the national level of marketing cooperat ive of agricultural commodities in 
the country, undertakes its busine ss operations through its four Regional 
Offices and the branches functioning under it. These field units in turn, 
operate through the fed erations. In order to determ ine the desirability of 
opening new branches at places where NAFED units are presently not in 
existence as well as to have effect ive representation of  the Federation in 
such places, information has been s ought from the concerned Regional 
and Branch Managers under whose jurisdiction places like Andaman & 
Nicobar, Lakshadweep and Goa are located. The successful functioning of 
a Branch depends upon commercial viabi lity. Besides a comprehensive 
Study on all aspects of procurement, storage, marketability as well as 
other logistics would be required for opening new offices.  
 
2.17 NAFED in a written reply stated that consequent upon formation of 
new States viz., Uttranchal, Jhark hand and Chattisgarh, NAFED opened 
its branches in Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh and the activities in Uttranchal 
were to be looked after by Lucknow branch till such time a full fledged 
branch office is opened in the State, for which the approval was given  by 
the Board of Directors of NAFED in  the year 2002. Ever since opening of 
the branches, NAFED entered the local m arkets of respective States for 

procurement of various agricultur al commodities both under commercial 
account and Price Support Scheme declared by the Government of India. 
 
2.18 Updating further on Uttaranc hal, the Managing Director, NAFED 
stated during evidence as follows:- 
 “Recently, we have opened the branch in Uttaranchal. Earlier, it was 
a part of Uttar Pradesh Branch. This has been done only a few 
months ago. Once the branch is opened, now we are in touch to see 
what activities can be extended th ere. In Rudrapur, we are having 
seed production. That work is going on. We are also thinking in 
terms of setting up of a bio-fertilizer unit in Uttaranchal. We have 
asked the Uttaranchal Marketing Federation to have a joint venture 
with us on that. We are waiting for their response. Thirdly, we have 
even made a proposal to them if they have organic produce - 
naturally a lot of organic produce is there - we can do the marketing 
of that organic produce in States like Delhi”.  
 
2.19 When the Committee pointed out that branch offices are situated in 
the State capitals with only a few exceptions, the Managing Director of  
NAFED clarified as under:- 
“Our branch offices are mostly in the State capitals, except some 
offices in some of the major cities like Pune, Nasik, Rajkot, etc. We 
work through our branch offices, bu t the agencies which help us 
reach the farmers are our primary A gricultural Marketing Societies. 
We work through the State Marketing Federations and through the 
primary Agriculture Cooperative Mark eting Societies. We use their 
services for all the procurement ac tivity that we do there. Therefore, 
we are able to do more work in  the areas where the societies are 
strong, and we face s light hindrance w here the societies are not so 
strong”.  
 
2.20 Elaborating   NAFED’s   initiatives for    the   development    of 
infrastructure facilities in Eastern Zone, it was stated in a note furnished to 
the Committee as follows:- 

“Looking into the needs of development of infrastructure facilities 
relating to the marketing of agricultural produce, consumer 
marketing and other related infrastr ucture, NAFED took up project 
for constructing Multi-stori ed Super Market and Controlled 
Atmospheric Storage on the outer fringe of Kolkata (New Township, 
Rajarhat) under Public-Private Partn ership basis.  NAFED has also 
acquired land measuring 2 acres from West Bengal Government for 
setting up the above project.  Plans have also been submitted for 
constructing Multistoried Super Market.” 
 
3. Administration and Manpower 
2.21 The Chief Executive of NA FED is designated as the Managing 
Director is also the ex-officio member of the Board and is appointed by the 
Board of Directors. The Managing Directo r is responsible for day to day 
functioning of NAFED. He is assisted by a team of Additional Managing 
Directors, Executive Directors, General Managers, Managers, Deputy 
Managers, Assistant Managers and other supporting staff for carrying out 
the functions of NAFED.  
 
2.22 On being asked whether the pr esent organizational set up is 
adequate to cater to the functional requi rement of NAFED, it was stated in 
a written reply that the present or ganizational set up in NAFED is 
considered adequate and appropriate to  handle the existing business. 
NAFED also makes periodical review of its requirements and with a view 
to prune the organizational strength, Vo luntary Retirement Scheme has 
been kept open. Further, to effectiv ely cope with business requirements, 
officials at suitable levels are also taken on deputation.   
 
2.23 The existing regular staff str ength of NAFED is 772. The Committee 
enquired about the number of vacancies in various grades both at the 

Headquarters and regional level. Va cancies to the senior post of 
Additional Managing Direct or and  Executive Directors, whose functions 
relate to policy formulation, constant  interaction with Chairman, MD and 
Governmental authorities, are generally filled-in at Headquarters. While 
Regional Managers are drawn from t he cadre of General Manager and 
Branch Managers are posted from the Managers/Deput y Managers level, 
other supporting officers and staff are posted in Branches depending upon 
the volume of business being carried out  in the respective field level units. 
Currently, efforts are also underw ay for manpower planning and 
rationalization of staff posted in Head Quarters and branches.  
2.24 In the year 2005-06, vacancies in  senior posts were as indicated 
below:- 
S.No.  Name of the Post  Sanctioned  Vacancy 
       P o s t    P o s i t i o n  
-------               -----------------------                    ---------------         ------------- 
 
1.  Executive Director   7   6 
2.  General Manager(FA)   4   2 
3.  Manager    26   3 
4.  Manager(AI)    1   1 
5.  Deputy Manager   33   7 
6.  Deputy Manager (A/cs)  26   1 
7.  Civil Engineer    1   1 
8.  Asstt. Manager   68   19 
9.  Asstt. Manager(A/cs)   21   4 
                 180    3 8  
 
2.25 It has been observed that in the year 2005-06, there were 38 
vacancies as against the sanctioned  strength of 180 senior posts. There 
were as many as six posts lying vac ant against the sanctioned strength of 
seven posts in the grade of Executive Directors. NAFED in a written reply 
has also informed the Committee that no separate vacancies are 
earmarked in various grades at either Head quarters or regional level 
offices.   

 
2.26 When enquired whether the poor state of manpower planning and 
shortage of manpower had adversely affected the functioning of NAFED,  
NAFED in their written reply stated that:- 
“In NAFED, senior posts are cons idered to be from the cadre of 
General Manager and above.  As agai nst the sanctioned strength of 
29 senior posts in the year 2005-0 6, the vacancies prevailing then 
was 08, which included 06 vacant positions of Executive 
Directors(ED) as well.  The changing business scenario and 
technological advancement necessi tated induction of skilled and 
professionally qualified personnel in to the organization from reputed 
Management Institutes.  Therefore, it was not considered necessary 
to retain a relatively large number of positions sanctioned at the 
senior level of Executive Director in NAFED.  In the staff budget for 
the year 2006-07, three posts of ED were, therefore, abolished.  The 
present sanctioned posts of ED are four in NAFED as against which 
two are filled up and two are vacant. The manpower planning in 
NAFED  both in headquarters an d in the branches are made 
according to the volume and nature of business being handled.  The 
system of manpower planning be ing adopted and followed in 
NAFED has been found to be conduc ive to the business growth and 
not in anyway detrimentally affecting the progress of work. Primarily, 
there is no shortage of manpower in NAFED and the present staff 
strength is adequate to cope with the commercial activities in a 
systematic and planned way.” 
 
2.27 The Committee further enquired about the steps taken by NAFED to 
fill up the vacancies of staff and whether any percentage had been 
prescribed for various methods of recruitment of staff in NAFED. NAFED 
in a written reply stated that the vacancies had occurred due to retirement, 
voluntary retirement of employees from  service, resignati on, death, etc. 
and had accumulated over a period of se veral years. Even as the pruning 
of staff has been considered the need of the hour, so as to make the staff 
strength compatible with the workload  in the Federation, occasionally the 

vacancies are filled up  by following the prescribed methods in the rules 
through advertisement in the news papers. NAFED’s Board of Directors 
had also taken a decision on 05.06.1999 that further recruitment in Class-
III & Class-IV posts need not be made in order to reduce overstaffing. 
Therefore, induction of fresh personnel in  these cadres is on a slow pace. 
However, professionalisation of t he organization being the keyword for 
progress, campus recruitment of MB A Graduates in Agri-Business, 
International Trade and Financial st ream as Management Trainees is 
resorted to from reputed institutions. 
 
2.28 In regard to transfer policy, NA FED in a written reply stated that 
NAFED being a commercial organization, d eployment of staff on transfer 
from one place to another within and outside the region is normally 
resorted to from time to time as per requirement. 
 
 
4. Training 
 
2.29 The Committee observed tha t, since functioning and management in 
NAFED require knowledge and skill in sp ecialized areas of operational 
aspects of business, the Committ ee enquired about t he efforts being 
made to impart long term and short term  training to keep officials abreast 
with latest trends and developments in the areas of business operations of 
NAFED. NAFED in a written reply stated that it had organized the 
following short term and long term training programs f or its officials during 
the period from April 2003 to March 2006.  
 
i) Short Training Programme:- 325 Officers and employees  from 
Head Office  and different branches were deputed to various training 

institutions for attending programmes in Marketing & Foreign Trade, 
Finance, Accounts, Vigilance, Human Resource, Future Trading, 
Contract Farming and other related areas in which their exposure 
was considered to be useful. 
 
ii) Computer Training Programme:- 94 employees attended 
computer training programmes in di fferent batches in HO and in 
Branches. 
 
iii) Long Term Training Progra mme:- Three employees (one in 
each year) were deputed to 9 months Diploma in Cooperative 
Business Management at Vikunth Mehta National Institue of 
Cooperative Management, Pune. 
 
iv) International Training:- Three employees were deputed to ICA, 
Japan, “Management of Agricultural Cooperativies in Asia” Training 
Programme which was conducted in three countries for a period of 
six months.” 
 
 
5. Complaints and vigilance Cases  
 
2.30 The Committee enquired about the types of complaints generally 
received relating to the working of NAFED’s Regional and Branch offices 
and units. NAFED in its written reply stated that all efforts have been 
made to keep transparency in the fu nctioning of the Federation through 
periodical inspection by supervisory level officers and other measures of 
checks.  However, complaints on th e working of NAFED’s Regional and 
Branch Offices originate from two sourc es – (i) Internal sources and (ii) 
External sources. The natu re of complaints can be broadly classified as 
under :- 
1. Forgery of official documents for personal gain of the employees.  
2. Lodging false claims by the employees on the Federation for 
gaining undue monitory benefits.                                                                  

3. Complaints of mis-conduct involving moral turpitude on the part of 
employees. 
4. Complaints of administrative lapses. 
5. Complaints of theft against employees. 
6. Complaints of showing favoritism  to specific parties in the matter 
of purchase and sale of stocks by NAFED employees for gaining 
undue pecuniary benefits. 
7. Irregularities in the purchases of packing material, etc. (purchase 
from irregular sources, purchases at higher prices than market 
rates, purchases of inferior quality, etc.) 
8. Payment of freight for transportation of goods at rates higher than 
the prevalent market rates for gaining personal undue advantage. 
9. Complaints of extortion of m oney from farmers for purchase of 
stocks under the Price Support Scheme. 
10. Favoritism to some mills hi red for processing of mustard seed 
procured under PSS. 
11. Complaints of irregularities in purchase of raw material for 
production of bio-fertilizer.  
 
2.31 NAFED furnished the followi ng statement regarding complaints 
received during the last 5 years:- 
 
S.No Year No. of Complaints 
received  
Type of Complaints 
1 2000-01 2 Malpractices in business activities of the procuring 
agencies relating to Mustard seed and Gram. 
 
2 2001-02 2 Demand of illegal money, mis-behaviour with 
private party and irregularities in the supply of 
Masoor Dal.  
 
3. 2002-03 6 Irregularities in purchase of Mustardseed at lower 
prices, malpractices in sale of Copra, corruption in 
the purchase of Groundnut, Misuse of official 

position, irregularities in award of contract for 
transportation of Ball Copra, favoritism to  private 
party in award of Contract of FCI Rice.  
 
4 2003-04 3 Irregularities in award of contract for 
transportation, irregularities in sale of bird eye 
Chillies, irregularities in disposal of Gram. 
 
5 2004-05 8 Illegal financing of commodities and dis-
proporationate income, corruption and mis-
behaviour, irregularities in purchase of 
Mustardseed and Castorseed, corruption in 
purchase of Gram, irregularities in award of 
contract for transportation of Mustardseed. 
 
 
2.32 On the grievances redressal me chanism available in NAFED, the 
Federation informed the Committee th at grievances from the general 
public and farmers are dealt with in Vigilance section. The Committee 
enquired about the steps taken by NAFE D to curb instances of corruption 
both internally and externally and bri ng down the number of complaints 
against NAFED’s Regional and Branch offices and  units. NAFED 
informed the Committee that the follow ing steps have been taken  to curb 
instances of corruption both internally and externally and to bring down the 
number of complaints:- 
(a) A full-fledged Vigilance Section is working in NAFED which 
is headed by Chief Vigilance Officer of the level of 
Additional Managing Director. T he Vigilance Section works 
towards detection and investigation of the cases of 
corruption and other malpractices in the Federation besides 
advising the management on preventive actions so as to 
reduce the chances of corruption and malpractices. 

(b) Officers from Vigilance Se ction undertake anonymous visits 
to procurement/disposal area for understanding 
problems/grievances of farmers/general public.  
(c) Complaint boxes have been placed in Head Office and 
branches for use by complainants who may put their 
grievances in a sealed cover and drop it in the box. Such 
boxes are opened fortnightly by the authorized officers and 
action is taken at Head Office level on complaints received, 
if any. 
(d) A devoted site named “Com plaints” has been created on 
NAFED’s internet system for receiving complaints 
electronically. 
(e) Vigilance Section involves itself in the tender process and 
information is also obtained in Vigilance Section from 
branches/Head Offices in respect of all transactions above 
Rs. 50 lacs.  
(f) Action taken on the complaint is reported back to the 
complainant if the complaint bears his complete name, 
address and signature. Even anony mous complaints are 
examined by a committee of s enior officers and corrective 
action taken, wherever required.  
 
2.33 The Committee enquired about th e number of corr uption charges, 
malpractices, etc. which were registered with the vigilance cell in each of 
the last five years and present status of the cases. NAFED in its written 
reply has given the details as under:- 
 

S. 
No 
Name & 
Designation of 
employee 
involved  
Nature of complaint 
 
Source of 
complaint 
Date of 
complaint  
Final outcome/present status of 
the case 
1. Shri H.D. Singh, 
Ex-General 
Manager 
Irregularities in purchase 
of residential flats at 
Kolkata 
 
Internal 
vigilance 
machinery 
22.02.96 He was exonerated of the charge 
based on the finding of the enquiry 
reports. 
2. Shri S.C. Khullar, 
Asstt. Manager 
Irregularities committed 
while functioning as 
Branch Manager at 
Jammu 
 
Internal 
vigilance 
machinery 
18.05.96 Charges proved in the enquiry and 
he was awarded penalty of 
reduction of grade and post. 
3. Shri D.N. Gupta, 
Ex-Manager 
Irregularities in supplies of 
food grains and pulses to 
Army Purchase 
Organisation 
Internal 
vigilance 
machinery 
and CBI, 
Delhi 
26.12.97 Charges proved in the 
departmental enquiry and he was 
dismissed from the service. CBI 
has separately instituted 
prosecution. 
 
4. Shri A.K. Rastogi, 
Ex-AAO 
Irregularities in supplies of 
food grains and pulses to 
Army Purchase 
Organisation  
Internal 
vigilance 
machinery 
and CBI, 
Delhi 
26.12.97 Charges proved in the 
departmental enquiry and he was 
dismissed from the service. CBI 
has separately instituted 
prosecution. 
 
5. Shri Sushil Khanna, 
Ex-Manager 
Irregularities committed 
while functioning as BM, 
Indore  
 
Internal 
vigilance 
machinery 
13.06.01 Enquiry was conducted in which 
charges were proved. Shri Khanna 
was permitted to resign and 
relieved from the services. 
 
6. Shri S.K. 
Gumastha, Ex-
Addl. M.D. 
Alleged irregularities in the 
procurement of Onion 
during 1998 Onion crises  
 
CBI, Delhi 2001 Enquiry conducted but charges not 
substantiated. Hence exonerated 
and CBI informed. 
7. Shri S.K. Kuchhal, 
Manager 
Alleged irregularities in the 
procurement of Onion 
during 1998 Onion crises 
 
CBI, Delhi 2001 Enquiry conducted but charges not 
substantiated. Hence exonerated 
and CBI informed. 
8. A group of 22 
employees of 
NAFED’s Southern 
Region branches 
Irregularities in 
procurement in Copra 
during PSS 2001 in 
Tamilnadu 
 
Dte. Of 
Vigilance 
and Anti-
corruption, 
Chennai 
2003 Prosecution has been sought by 
T.N. Vigilance Commission against 
one employee on which action is in 
progress. Reports on others are 
awaited. 
 
9. Officials of NAFED 
in general.  
Regarding Tie up 
business with M/s Earth 
Tech. Enterprises Ltd. 
 
CVC, 
Delhi 
4.4.05 As per the advise of CVC, matter is 
under investigation.  
10. Shri C.S. Jha, Jr. 
Asstt. 
Complaints regarding 
purchase of Urad during 
PSS-2005 in Maharashtra 
 
State 
Govt. of 
Maharasht
ra 
May-2005 Matter is under investigation.  
11. Shri Subhash 
Singh, GM(U/S) 
Raid by Anti Corruption 
Bureau, Jaipur on the 
residence of Shri Subhash 
Singh and case filed 
against him regarding 
corruption in award of 
contracts for processing of 
mustardseed.  
 
Anti-
Corruption 
Bureau, 
Jaipur 
May-2005 Matter is under investigation by 
ACB, Jaipur 

12. NAFED in general  Tie up business with M/s 
Swarup Group of 
Industries  
 
CBI, 
Mumbai 
4.7.05 Reply to the queries of CBI sent.  
13. Shri R.P. Gaba, 
GM/Ex-BM, 
Ahmedabad 
Irregularities in purchase 
of Mustard Seed under 
Price Support Scheme 
Dept. of  
Agriculture 
& 
Cooperati
on, New 
Delhi 
12.09.05 Present BM Ahmedabad has  been 
asked to meet the complaint M.P. 
and seek details from him. Reply 
awaited. 
14. NAFED 
Management in 
general 
Dismal management of 
NAFED’s affairs  
Dept. of 
Agriculture 
& 
Cooperati
on, New 
Delhi 
 
26.09.05 Matter examined and complaint not 
substantiated. Reply sent to DAC.  
15. NAFED in general  Tie up business with M/s 
Swarup Group of 
Industries  
CBI, Delhi 30.09.05 Matter is under examination.  
 
2.34 It has been observed from the written information submitted to the 
Committee that CBI (Delhi & Mumbai) has registered cases of 
malpractices in general against NAFED. In this context, the Committee 
enquired about the nature of cases registered in Delhi and Mumbai. It was 
further enquired whether NAFED has filed any affidavit in these cases.  If 
so, what are the relevant details of  the same and what is the present 
status of these cases.  Also the reasons for NAFED’s second time 
business tie-up with the Swarup Group of Industries after few months of 
investigation by CBI. 
 
2.35 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) in their written reply stated as follows : 
“The case registered by CBI as referred in above mentioned para 
pertain  to the commercial activities  of the NAFED which are totally 
separate from the operations of  NAFED undertaken under the Price 
Support Schemes (PSS).  The NAFED has undertaken such 
commercial activities with their tie up associates.  For such 
commercial activities, NAFED does  not require any approval or 
guidelines from the Government and, therefore, NAFED undertakes 

such activities at its own.  However, the NAFED while replying to this 
question has furnished the following information: 
 
These cases are not registered again st NAFED but for the purpose 
of verifying a secret source of information, the CBI, Mumbai had 
rendered to M/s. Swarup Group of I ndustries, who are the tie up 
associate of NAFED in export of iron ore from the country.  The 
investigation was relating to c ertain issues not  connected with 
NAFED nor against NAFED but with the financial matters of M/s. 
Swarup Group of Industries for which the CBI had elicited NAFED’s 
assistance, which has been duly rendered.   Therefore, it is clarified 
that CBI Delhi or CBI Mumbai ha s not registered any case of 
malpractices in general against NAFED and the present status of 
CBI enquiry into the secret source of information of the financial 
affairs of M/s. Swarup Group of Industries is not known to NAFED.” 
 

CHAPTER III 
       FINANCIAL RESOURCES FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
 
Financial Resources  
3.1 Financial Resource base of NAFED consists of Paid-up Share 
Capital, Reserves and Funds created out of profits earned over a period of 
time and loans raised for working capi tal requirements from various banks 
and NCDC as required from time to time. In addition, NAFED has been 
taking loans from NCDC to finance its various projects, i.e., construction of 
warehouses/godowns/cold st orages/daal mill, etc. Since NAFED is not 
authorized, it has not secured market  borrowings. The year wise details of 
various financial resource(s) base of NA FED and loans availed during the 
last ten years is given at 
Annexure II. 
3.2 NAFED in a written reply further st ated that in order to strengthen its 
capital base, NAFED deploys profits generate d out of its activities as per 
provisions of Multi State Cooperative Societies Act 2002 in the following 
manner: 
1. Transfer of an amount not le ss than 25% to the reserve fund; 
2. Credits one percent to cooperat ive education fund maintained by 
National Cooperative Union of India, New Delhi in the prescribed 
manner.  
3. Transfer of an amount not less than 10% to a reserve fund for 
meeting unforeseen losses. 
3.3 The funds thus created are also utilized by NAFED in carrying out its 
mandated activities.  
3.4 The Committee, therefore, enquired about specific reasons for 
increase in secured loans in the year 2004-05 at Rs. 1,33,470 lakh as 

compared to pervious y ear 2003-04 at Rs. 42,011.02 lakh. NAFED in the 
written reply has stated that the quantum of raising secured loans 
depends upon the quantum of business handled during a particular year. 
The reasons for a quantum jump of se cured loans in the year 2004-05 as 
compared to the previous year 2003-04 were as under : 
i) NAFED procured 3.83 lakh MTs of mustard valued at Rs. 698.55 
crores under Price Support Schem e of Government of India 
during the year 2004-05 as compared to previous year i.e., 2003-
04 when only 0.18 lakh MTs mustard seed valued at Rs. 31.80 
crore was procured.  
ii) NAFED in its commercial operati ons also undertook public/private 
partnership business to the tune of Rs. 887.75 crore and earned 
an income of Rs. 30 crore duri ng the year 2004-05 as compared 
to previous year, i.e. 20 03-04 when NAFED had undertaken 
business to the extent of Rs. 343.15 crore and earned an income 
of Rs. 10 crore only.  
 
3.5 On the query of the Committee regarding the steps taken by NAFED 
to repay and bring down the amount of secured loans, NAFED in the 
written reply submitted that the secured loans are  being repaid on 
disposal of the commodities procured against such loans depending upon 
economic viability. A constant vigil is  maintained to reduce the burden of 
loan/interest thereon to the extent possible from disposal of stocks as and 
when undertaken.  
Financial Performance 
3.6 In response to the enquiry of  the Committee about the turnover of 
NAFED during the last five years, NAFED in a written reply has stated that 

NAFED undertakes its business operat ions through its branches and 
network of its Member Cooperative M arketing Societies in the entire 
country. Its domestic operations consist of business on outright basis, joint 
venture business with Member State Federations/Societies, agency and 
consignment business besides pr ocurement of commodities under PSS 
and MIS. NAFED’s overseas operati ons comprise export of various 
agricultural and horticultural items like foodgrains, pulses, spices, onion, 
potatoes, etc. The turnover of NAFED during the last five years is as given 
below :- 
Year  Total 
Turnover (In 
Crores) 
Internal 
Trade (In 
Crores) 
% of Total 
Turnover 
Export (In 
Crores)  
% of Total 
Turnover  
2000-01 1077.42 903.62 84% 173.80 16% 
2001-02 1665.91 1364.16 82% 301.74 18% 
2002-03 2311.82 1966.92 85% 344.90 15% 
2003-04 1412.14 850.60 60% 561.54 40% 
2004-05 
(upto 
31.12.04) 
2265.00 
         (P) 
1187.00 52% 1078.00 48% 
3.7 Explaining the reasons for low turnover in  2003-2004 and the 
corrective measures taken thereon, the Managing Director, NAFED stated 
during evidence as under :- 
“….The decline is from Rs. 2300 crore to Rs. 1400 crore and that 
was mainly because the price support  operations in that year were 
totally insignificant. In fact, in the current year, when the turnover 
went down, we only got Rs. 4 crores  of income from price support 
operations. Most of the prices in the market of oil seeds, pulses, etc. 
that year ruled above the MSP. So, that brought down the turnover. 
We then realized that we cannot rely upon the price support 
operations and we have to widen our commercial activities and 
diversify. Otherwise, our turnover will  always fluctuate. That is why, 
we took a lot of steps in the c urrent year and from Rs. 1400 crore, 
we went upto Rs 2294 crore in th e current year. And in the year 
which is going on, we are sure that this will cross Rs. 3000 crore”.  
  
3.8 Profit earned by NAFED in the past five years was as under :- 

              (Fig. in Rs crore)  
Year Share Capital Turnover  Profit 
2000-01 8.55 1077.42 4.81 
2001-02 8.91 1665.9 3.54 
2002-03 9.26 2311.82 4.14 
2003-04 10.09 1412.13 3.18 
2004-05 10.69 2293.16 11.48 
 
3.9 On the negative trend in marketing operations it was stated in a note 
furnished by NAFED as follows:- 
“NAFED has been undert aking procurement of various agricultural 
commodities in peak arrival period and disposal in the lean season. 
This marketing practice used to yield positive margins earlier, 
however, off late due to opening of Indian economy now it hardly 
holds good.” 
 
3.10 Explaining the losses incurred on certain commodities like pulses, 
the Managing Director, NAFED stated during evidence as follows :- 
“There are two aspects of losses. One is loss with regard to the price 
support operations, and another is with regard to losses of profit in 
NAFED..…It also depends upon the difference in market prices 
during procurement – which was there at  the time of procurement – 
and the prevalent prices at the time of disposal. For example, this 
year the edible oil market is depressed. The seed m arket is not at all 
picking up. Therefore, it all depe nds on the market situation. 
However, we have earned profit for our commercial success, and 
our profits are going up with the help of diversification of our 
activities. We are taking commercial approach in our operations, and 
as far as possible professionalizing our management.” 
 
 
 
3.11 The witness further stated as follows :- 
 
“In price support operations, the profit or loss made by us goes to 
the Government account. I would lik e to mention that we have made 
profits also, and I can give you an example for it. In this very 
year(2005) we are going to earn prof its worth Rs. 20 crore in grand 

procurement, but it will go to the Government account. But the profit 
that we are talking about is all from our commercial activity. We only 
get service charge from the Government. Only the service charge 
goes into our account, and we have to earn profits from our 
commercial activities, and this is all that we have earned.” 
 
3.12 To a specific query of the Committee about the steps taken by 
NAFED to make up losses in the operation, NAFED in a written reply 
stated that although losses cannot be entirely ruled out in any commercial 
operation, the same are taken care of by cutting costs or by diversifying 
into other income generating activities.  
 
Return on Investment 
 
3.13 The total investment and the dividend earned from 1998-99 to 2003-
04 are as follows :-  
        ( R s  i n  l a k h s )  
 Year  Total investment   Dividend on Investment 
  
 1998-99  141.15   1.74 
 1999-00  142.01   1.63 
 2000-01  142.01   1.18 
 2001-02  142.01   0.95 
 2002-03  420.72   1.61 
 2003-04  429.12   10.54 
 
 
 
3.14 When asked the reasons for ve ry low dividend on investments, 
NAFED in a written reply informed the Committee as follows:- 
“As per NAFED Bye-laws vide Clause 29 Sub Clause(IX), Board has 
power to decide on investment in the share capital of other 
Cooperatives/institutions/bodies. NAFED has invested its funds 
judiciously and is receiving dividend on amount invested with 

IFFCO, KRIBHCO, NCCF, Laddakh Foods Ltd., Multi Commodity 
Exchange of India Ltd. and Konark  Jute Limited. Dividend earned 
depends upon the rate declared based on the quantum of profit 
earned by them Investments are made only in those 
organizations/cooperatives which are required either as per the 
cooperative structural requirement s or organizations which can 
prospectively render good returns. No dividend has been earned on 
the investment made in Konark Jute Ltd., which was jointly promoted 
by NAFED and Industrial Developmen t Corporation Ltd. , Orrisa as 
the unit could not turn out to be economically viable.”  
 
3.15 Commenting on dividend earned on investment, the Managing 
Director, NAFED stated during evidence as follows :- 
“About dividends, we have a seven per cent dividend last year and 
this year we have paid 10 per cent  dividends. Regarding the return 
on investment, many hon. Members pointed out that the return on 
investment is 1.25 per cent or 1.75 per cent. I w ould like to submit 
for the consideration that in agriculture business, our experience has 
been that the profit margin is very low. It is o ne per cent to 1.5 per 
cent. It is not really possible to go for a higher profit. Our secured 
loans have gone up. We have increased our commercial activity. 
Whatever borrowing limit was availabl e to us, we have utilized that 
and invested that money. The return that we are getting is in the 
range of 1.25 to 1.75 per cent. We ar e conscious of that and we are 
doing in-house study also as to how to diversify our activities 
whereby our rate of return can be increased and we should take up 
where we will have higher rate of  returns. We are having joint 
ventures with State Federations.” 
 
3.16 Elaborating on this, a repres entative of NAFE D stated during 
evidence as under :- 
“As we said, we responded to this by realizing that we have to 
depend on our commercial activities , and price suppo rt operations 
are not going to be consistent ov er time.  By doing this, our turnover 
as well as profit have gone up considerably”. 
 
3.17 NAFED has taken the following steps to overcome losses :- 
 

1. Organizational overheads are be ing controlled to reduce 
expenditure.  
2. Business model for procurem ent/disposal being made more 
flexible to include procurement during lean season also and 
simultaneous disposal of procured stocks.  
3. NAFED is expanding its activities in warehousing including 
general purpose, cold storage and custom bonded 
warehouses.  
4. Emphasis has been given on business on agency basis e.g. 
marketing of IFFCO fertilizer, non-life insurance etc. 
5. Business on tie-up/Back-to-back basis: The business risk is 
borne by the Business Associate. Tie-up business is being 
undertaken both in domestic and international marketing.  
 
Tax Liability of NAFED 
  
3.18 It was stated in a written repl y that Cooperative Income Tax from 
retrospective effect has been impos ed on NAFED like other co-operatives 
engaged in marketing of Agricultural produce other than the Primary 
Agriculture Cooperative Marketing Societ ies. Earlier it was exempted from 
payment of income tax on its e arnings. Further, as per the recent 
Government decision, cooperatives have to pay income tax not only every 
year from now onwards but have to pay arrears of past 18 years also. This 
has come as a serious blow to the organizations, which came into being 
primarily to secure the farmers’ interest. Cooperatives with their 
comparatively smaller and weaker capital base fi nd it hard to bear this 
additional financial burden of payment of income tax. Cooperatives 
including NAFED intend to plough ba ck the earnings for providing better 
infrastructural facilities to the farmers so that their interests are protected. 
There is a need to consider roll back of this provision and exempt 
cooperatives from payment of income tax. At least t he arrears should not 
be charged. 

 
3.19 The Committee further enquire d about the total tax liability of 
NAFED per annum on account of imposit ion of tax on cooperatives and 
also on account of past arrears. NAFED in a written reply stated that the 
total tax liability of NAFED per annum on account of imposition of tax on 
cooperatives is 33.66% of the in come earned. The payment of tax on 
account of past arrears is Rs. 61 crore since 1984-85 to 2004-05.  
 
3.20 The Committee enquired whether the matter was taken up with the 
Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry  of Finance. NAFED has stated in a 
written reply that it has taken up the matter with the Ministry of Agriculture 
and the Ministry of Finance and has pleaded that the amendment in the 
Income Tax Act should be with prospecti ve effect instead of retrospective 
effect. Their final decision in the matter is awaited.  
 
3.21 Finance Minister in his budget  speech of 2007-08 has made the 
following reference to the income tax liability of cooperative banks :- 
“Profit-making cooperative banks, other than primary societies and 
primary banks (i.e., PACs  and PFARDBs), have been brought on 
par with other banks. However, I have noticed some anomalies and I 
propose to correct them in the interest of the cooperative banks. 
Accordingly, the benefit of Sectio n 36(I)(viii) will be available to 
cooperative banks. Likewise, coopera tive banks will also be allowed 
deduction in respect of provis ion for bad and doubtful debts under 
section 36(1) (viia). Amalgamation and de-merger of banking 
companies is tax neutral and this benefit will be extended to 
cooperative banks.” 
 
 Section 36(I)(viii) of the Inco me Tax Act deal with deductions 
provided for organizations engaged in agricultural development etc.  

CHAPTER IV 
      PRICE SUPPORT OPERATIONS 
4.1 In recognition of the import ance of assuring reasonable produce 
prices to the farmers, and motivati ng them to adopt improved technology 
in farm enterprises, the Governmen t of India implements Price Support 
Scheme and Market Intervention Scheme.   
Price Support Scheme (PSS) 
4.2 NAFED is the nodal agency of Government of India to undertake 
procurement of oilseeds and pulse s, under its Price Support Scheme, 
whenever the market rates of these commodities go below the declared 
Minimum Support Price(MSP). NAFED is implementing the PSS since 
1976-77. Under PSS, NAFED procures commodities like Urad, Gram, 
Masoor, Groundnut Pods, Mustardseed, Safflower seed, sunflower seed 
and Copra. During the year 2004-05, NAFED for the first time had been 
entrustsed with an additional responsib ility in the area of procurement of 
cotton under PSS in addition to cotton corporation of In dia. Procurement 
of commodities notified under PSS is arranged at APMC yards directly 
from the farmers as and when rates in the open market rule below or at 
the MSP declared by the Go vernment from time to time. The activity of 
purchases under this scheme indicates clearly that there is a difference 
between the MSP and the ruling market  rates and farmers instead of 
going to other buyers for selling at low er rates, come to NAFED for selling 
at MSP. Hence, the farmer is benefited  through the system directly. In this 
process, there is no role for the middl emen to play since all purchases 
under PSS/MIS are undertaken by NAFED branches through State 
Cooperative Marketing Federation and Local Cooperative Marketing 

Societies. MSP operations implemented through NAFED give an incentive 
to the growers to produce more oilseeds and pulses.  
4.3 When asked whether NAFED had made any study regarding response 
of the farmers to the prices being of fered by NAFED, NAFED in a written 
reply furnished to the Committee stated as follows :- 
“Although no formal study has been made regarding response of the 
farmers to the prices offered by  NAFED for their produce, NAFED 
while making procurement of oilseeds and Pulses under Price 
Support Scheme, offers Minimum Support Price declared by the 
Government of India for the crop season. In the event of price 
difference between the market rat es and the MSP, farmers prefer to 
sell their stocks to NAFED through its State Federation/Societies 
working as NAFED’s agents instead of selling in the market. During 
Rabi, 2005, quantity over 21 lakh MTs Mustard seed has been 
procured against the produ ction of 82 lakh MTs which worked out 
around 25% of the production. Obviously, farmer have opted selling 
their produce to NAFED at MSP (Rs.1700/- per qtl.) against the 
prevailing market rates of Rs.1555/1600 per qtl during the season.” 
 
Procurement of Oilseeds  
 
4.4 NAFED in a written reply has  stated that the magnitude of 
procurement of oilseeds under the Sc heme until 1999 was very limited 
and sizeable stocks were required to be procured on very few occasions 
and that too mainly in Soyabean, Mustardseed and Copra. From 1976-77 
till 1998-99 the procurement was of t he order of Rs. 380 crores only. Due 
to liberalized imports and higher global  production of oilseeds, huge 
quantity of edible oil was imported into India at cheaper rates. Resultantly, 
the rates of oilseeds in the domestic markets remained depressed and 
heavy procurement under PSS had to be undertaken since Kharif 1999 till 
Kharif 2004. in regard to import duty on edible oils, the Finance Minister 
announced the following concessions in his budget speech, 2007-08 :- 

“In order to make edible oils m ore affordable, I propose to exempt 
crude as well as refined edible oils from the additional CV duty of 4 
per cent. I also propose to reduce the duty on sunflo wer oil, both 
crude and refined by 15 percentage points.” 
 
4.5 The following table shows the procur ement of oilseeds and their sale 
from 2000-01 to 2004-05 :- 
(Quantity in Metric tones and value in Rs. 
Lakhs) 
Year    Crop  Oty. Procured   Value  Qty. Sold Value  
 
2000-01 Safflower  6534.76  718.83  6516.508 689.33  
Seeds  
  
  Mustard 242055.6  26956.18 245764.6 31513 
  seeds 
 
  Sun flower  19502.61  2281.8  19165.25 3056.46 
  Seeds    
  
  Groundnut 1559.28  17.47  1553.15 26.16 
  Pods  
 
  Groundnut 28707.81  3502.35 23055.37 3376.46 
  Pods 
 
  Soyabean 54745.21  4733.68 54427.49 5986.86 
 
  Copra  235474.8  75697.35 227558.1 5069.34 
 
2001-02 Sunflower 25.696   3.01  25.952  4.26 
  seeds 
 
  Safflower 3201.715  384.2  3216.339 396.32 
  Seeds 
 
  Groundnut 163493.6  21908.13 162511.3 25439.91 
  Pods 
 
  Copra  50300.26  17032.69 48386.55 14130.51 
 
  Mustard 329524  39542.87 327636.1 46739.49 
  Seeds 
 
2002-03 Mustard 467629.5  60791.83 476257.8 76198.03 
  seeds 

 
  Sunflower 28.867   3.42  38.732  4.7 
  Seeds 
 
  Safflower 2020.259  262.63  2017.371 297.01 
  Seeds 
 
  Copra  7468.326  2189.73 7220.395 2285.43 
 
2003-04 Copra  787.105  223.54  755.609 280.04 
  
  Mustard 18577.23  2972.36 13963  2583.3 
  Seeds 
   
2004-05 Mustard 403122  71306  NA  NA 
  seeds 
 
  Sunflower 2393   315  NA  NA 
  seeds 
 
  Safflower 8942   1506  NA  NA 
  Seeds 
   
Groundnut 418   69  NA  NA 
 
 
4.6 The above table shows the large scal e procurement of Mustard seed 
since 2000-01. During evidence, Managi ng Director of NAFED further 
informed the Committee that NAFE D had undertaken record procurement of 
20.93 lakh metric tonnes of Mustard seeds worth about Rs.4000 crore during 
Rabi season of 2005.  
   

Procurement of Pulses  
4.7 The details of the Pulses pro cured by NAFED under PSS from 2000-01 
to 2004-05 are given below :- 
       (Qty. in MTS and 
 Value in Rs. LAKHS) 
S. No. Year/Crop  
Season 
Commodity Quantity  
Procured 
Value Quantity  
Disposed  
Value 
1. 2000-01 
(Kharif) 
 
Arhar 98.014 12.32 97.639 13.2 
2. 2001-02 
(Kharif) 
 
Arhar 3776.243 525.69 3781.221 564.21 
3. 2002-03 
(Kharif) 
 
Arhar 50.649 7.03 50.668 7.45 
4. 2003-04 
(Kharif) 
 
Urad 152388 23498.24 108762 14478.82 
 2003-04 
(Kharif) 
 
Moong 2488 383.65 2488 340.12 
5. 2004-05 
(Rabi) 
 
Gram 282540 44076.24 189479 27000.24 
6. 2004-05 
(Kharif) 
 
Urad 280 44.41 0 0 
 
4.8 It is reported that the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) 
has entered the area of procurement and marketing of oilseeds since mid 
1980s. This has financial support from the Government of India under 
different market intervention schemes.  It is also understood that NDDB 
has promoted parallel co-operative societies of seed growers for this 
purpose. 
4.9 When the Committee enquired about the difference between the 
procurement made by NAFED from t he farmers belonging to various co-
operatives and the procurement made by NDDB from farmers’ co-
operatives supported by them, NAFED in a written reply stated that:- 

“NAFED was entrusted with procure ment of oilseeds under Price 
Support Scheme of Government of India since 1976-77.  In the initial 
year only two Oilseeds were coverer under PSS i.e. Groundnut and 
Sunflower seed.  Subsequently mo re oilseeds were brought under 
PSS and presently NAFED is responsible for implementing 
procurement of nine oilseeds under PSS.   NAFED had been 
implementing PSS operations thr ough state level marketing 
federations who in turn utilize prima ry marketing societies at mandi 
level.  However, from mid 1980 when Oilseed Growers Federations 
promoted by NDDB were in existence, their services were also 
utilized to procure oilseeds under PS S.  Out of nine State oilseeds 
Growers’ Federations promoted by NDDB, six are members of 
NAFED. Procurement operations under PSS are required only when 
the prices of notified oilseeds fall below the declared minimum 
support price fixed by the Gove rnment from time to time.  
Procurement operation by NDDB  is a commercial operation on 
Anand pattern of cooperation through the Oilseed Growers’ 
Federations promoted by them.  Besi des utilizing the services of 
oilseeds growers federations prom oted by NDDB for procurement 
under PSS, NAFED had been utilized t he processing infrastructure 
available with them whenever a de cision was taken to arrange 
processing of oilseeds procured u nder the scheme.  NAFED also 
utilizes the storage space available with oilseed growers federations 
whenever there is pressure on t he storage space with CWC/SWC 
during heavy procurement under the scheme.” 
 
Funding of Price Support Operations 
  
4.10 NAFED in a written reply to a query on budget expenses, stated that 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperat ion(DAC), Government of India 
makes provision for a grant to NA FED in their budget under non-plan head 
for reimbursement of losses fully, if any, incurred by NAFED during disposal 
of the stocks procured under PSS/MIS. No  other grant is made available by 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperat ion to NAFED. Detail of Budget 
allocations, and the amount utilized by NAFE D in the last five years is given 
below:- 

       (Amount in Rs. Crore) 
Year BE RE Amount released 
NAFED for  
Balance if any  
   PSS MIS Total   
1999-2000 1.00 1.00 0.99 0.01 1.00 NIL 
2000-2001 1.00 26.00 25.00 1.00 26.00 NIL 
2001-2002 25.00 353.00 340.55 12.45 353.00 NIL 
2002-2003 100.00 300.00 298.48 1.52 300.00 NIL 
2003-2004 294.02 156.00 156.00 -- 156.00 NIL 
2004-2005 192.53 171.88 120.00 -- 120.00 51.88 
 
4.11 In regard to non release of grant to the tune of Rs. 51.88 crore in the 
year 2004-05, NAFED in a written reply stated that RE of Rs.171.88 crore for 
the year 2004-2005 could not be fully ut ilized as the Ministry of Finance did 
not allow the release in full due to c ap on release in the last quarter of the 
year confining to 33% of RE. NAFED f urther clarified in this regard that the 
procurement of oilseeds and pulse s depends upon the product ion, domestic 
and international market rates and domestic market surplus etc. The 
procurement under PSS is not certain, and as such  the actual amount of 
losses likely to be incurred by NAFE D cannot be estimated at the time of 
Budget Estimates of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in the Union 
Budget. On submission of the Accoun ts by NAFED to Department of 
Agriculture and Coopration, the budget estimates are revised based on the 
losses incurred by NA FED in that particular year. From the above table it 
may be seen that NAFED had utilized revised budget provis ions on account 
of losses in the PSS Operations in the last five years ex cept the year 2004-
05. However, no procurement under PSS had suffered on account of low 
utilization of budget allocations in the year 2004-05.  
4.12 In regard to budget allocations  a representative of NAFED further 
clarified during evidence as under:- 

“Sir, the first question that came up was about shortage of funds or 
budgetary allocation relating to NAFE D to carry out its price-support 
operations. I would just like to point out that we get the funds in the 
Budget and it is true. It is always from the non-plan and it is not from 
the plan. The money that we are gett ing under non-plan is only to the 
extent of reimbursement of losses,  that the commodity we buy under 
price-support operations. We store and then we dispose of. If we incur 
a loss on that, then the Government reimburses these losses. So, the 
budgetary provision that is  made is mainly for rei mbursement of those 
losses and then along with that we get our service charges. So, these 
are the only two elements, whic h are covered, in the budgetary 
allocation that is made under non-plan.” 
 
4.13 Due to large scale procurement of oil seeds under PSS since Kharif 
1999, Government of India could not make higher budgetary provision at 
short notices matching the size of procurement. This has resulted in shortfall 
of funds as can be seen from the table given below:- 
 
Year Budgetary Provision  Value of Procurement at           MSP 
 Value in Rs. Crores Value in Rs. Crores 
1999-2000  1  457 
2000-2001  26  1161 
2001-2002  353  786 
2002-2003  300  633 
2003-2004  156  269 
2004-2005  72  691 
  
4.14 NAFED further informed the Committee that finance for procurement 
of oilseeds and pulses is made av ailable by way of Cash Credit 
Limit(CCL) sanctioned by RBI to be operated through SBI, on the 
recommendation of Government of India, upto 75% on hypothecation of 
stocks keeping a margin of 25% as  per banking norms. The remaining 
25% can be drawn only after Government guarantee in lieu of margin 
money is furnished.  
 

4.15 NAFED enjoys this Cash Credit Limit to the extent of Rs. 1631 crore 
against Government guarantee. During Rabi, 2005 season, the Cash 
Credit Limit to the above extent got exhausted in view of unprecedented 
procurement of mustardseed and puls es undertaken by NAFED. As SBI 
rate of interest was higher than the other commercial banks, funds were 
borrowed from other commercial banks by the Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation. As a result funds  could be arranged at the average rate 
of interest of 7% from other commercial banks as against 10.25% being 
charged by SBI. Thereafter, SBI has also agreed to reduce the interest 
rate downward to 7%. In this rega rd, the Managing Director, NAFED 
further informed the Committee during evidence that reduction of rate to 
7% means a reduction in the loss to the Government exchequer by around 
Rs.150 crores to Rs.175 crores.  
 
4.16 In the absence of sufficien t budgetary provisi on for reasons as 
stated above, NAFED could not meet t he guidelines stipulated by RBI for 
servicing of interest and losses due to which PSS accounts were declared 
as “irregular” by RBI. NAFED informed that sufficient budgetary provision 
has been made by Government of  India for the year 2003-04 and 2004-
05.  
 
4.17 Further it has been stated that  no advance funds are provided to 
NAFED for preparatory arrangement for PSS for items like packing 
material, reservation of warehouse space etc. As the PSS /MIS operations 
are meant to provide remunerative price  support to farmers in time, 
NAFED is required to invest money from its own sources for such 

preparatory arrangements, which is s ubsequently reimbursed to NAFED 
by Central Government.  
 
Revolving Fund 
4.18 The Committee enquired w hether NAFED had approached 
Government of India on the delay in allocation of funds which was 
affecting the commercial ventures of NAFED. NAFED in a written reply 
stated that NAFED had taken up the following issues with the Government 
of India from time to time:- 
i) Adequate fund be provided in the Union Budget of the Ministry of 
Agriculture under Price Support Scheme and be made available 
to NAFED for meeting losses. 
ii) Creation of a Revolving Fu nd for PSS operations which will help 
in drawing funds for preparatory  arrangements such as purchase 
of packing material, booking of storage space, etc. 
iii) Department of Agriculture and C ooperation has proposed R.E. of 
Rs. 890 crores against the B.E. of Rs. 260 crores for the year 
2005-06 to meet the losses on P.S.S. operations.  
 
4.19 In regard to Revolving Fund,  NAFED further stated that the 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) has already been 
requested to make for provisions for Revolving Fund so that NAFED can 
undertake procurement no sooner the prices of oilseeds fall below the 
MSP. Under the present system, paym ent is released to the procuring 
agencies on receipt of WHRs (Warehous e receipts). Revolving Fund is 
required for making preparatory arr angements like purchase of packing 

material, booking of storage space, publicity, etc. besides releasing timely 
payment of farmers.  
 
4.20 Justifying the need for setti ng up a Revolving Fund, the Managing 
Director, NAFED stated during evidence as under :- 
“This need was there because we ha ve to do publicity before the 
price support operation. In addition , we must pay the farmer on the 
same day. If we are able to pay him on the same day, then he will 
bring his crop to us. What happens t oday is that we purchase and 
then we hypothecate the stock to th e State Bank or whatever  bank 
it is, and from them we take money  and then send it. Sometimes the 
payment is between 3, 4 and 7 days. This is the time gap. So, if we 
have a Revolving Fund, we can give this as an advance to our 
cooperative societies and State Federations. So, this cycle is 
maintained whereby payment is given on a same-day-basis.” 
 
4.21 Regarding the proposal for creation of a Revolving Fund, the 
Managing Director, NAFED stated during the briefing as follows :- 
“This has been debated several times at the  Government of India 
level also that some kind of an institutional mechanism for funding of 
the price support operations of NAFED has to be worked out and 
this under active consideration at the moment also to see how some 
kind of a mechanism can be evolved.” 
 
4.22 NAFED has also requested the Government of India to sanction 
them lump sum compensation for maintaining the infrastructure to be in 
readiness irrespective of actual purch ases. The expert group in its report 
had 
inter-alia, recommended that “NAFED should continue 
implementation of the Government  policies for undertaking purchases 
under Price Support Scheme (PSS) and Market Intervention Scheme 
(MIS). For monitoring and giving publicity of the scheme, expenses should 
be borne by the Government even when there are no purchases. In their 

follow-up note dated 28 th July 2006, the Depart ment of Agriculture and 
Cooperation had stated that “NAFED effectively implemented PSS/MIS as 
and when situation warrants as per the guidelines of the Government. For 
compensating NAFED in the event  there is no procurement or less 
procurement, the Government of India,  has been request ed to consider 
allowing reimbursement of such expenses.” 
 
4.23 The following table shows the revenue earned by NAFED through 
Government sponsored business :- 
       (value in Rs. crore) 
 Year 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
 
1 Turnover 1077.42 1665.91 2311.82 1412.14 2293.16 
 
2 Total Service 
Charges 
(NOC+PSS+MIS)
 
22.01 21.22 15 6.39 21.23 
3 Administrative 
Overheads 
excluding 
fanancial 
Charges and 
depreciation  
 
29.56 29.38 29.15 29.83 31 
4 Net Profit 
 
4.81 3.54 4.14 3.18 11.48 
 
Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) 
4.24 Market Intervention Scheme (M IS) is an ad-hoc scheme. Agricultural 
commodities generally perishable in  nature and which are not covered 
under the Price Support Scheme are eligible for coverage under the MIS. 
The main objective of MIS is to prevent the farmers from making distress 
sale of their produce particularly when the rates fall below the uneconomic 
level. The scheme also envisages prot ecting the farmers from exploitation 

by the middlemen. The underlying obje ctive of the scheme is to stabilize 
the prices at reasonable level to sustain the production.  
 
4.25 NAFED is the Nodal agency of Government of India for 
implementation of MIS. So far, it has been asked by the Government to 
implement MIS in onion, potato, ging er, kinnow, malta, naspati, apple, 
black pepper, red chilliies, coriander seed, eggs and palm oil bunches.  
 
4.26 The prices under MIS are decided by the Government of India in 
consultation with the respective State Governments by taking into 
consideration the cost of production and the ruling market rates or the 
average of the ruling market rates for the previous three years. The 
scheme is generally for a fixed period during a given year and for 
procurement of a targeted q uantity only or till the pri ces stabilize in favour 
of the growers. The scheme ensures that  remunerative price is paid to the 
farmer and he is prevented from going for distress sales.  
4.27 The details of the agricultu ral commodities procured by NAFED 
under MIS since 1992-1993 are as under :- 
Commodity 
Procured 
 
Year 
 
 
Qty  
in MTs 
Value Rs. 
in Lakhs 
Major State 
of Procurement 
1. Potato 
  
1997-98 
2003-04
  
4697  
733 
159.27 
21.48 
UP, Karnataka. 
UP 
2. Onion 1996-97 60 1.98 Karnataka. 
 
3. Eggs 
(Qty. in Lac 
No.) 
1992-93 
1993-94 
1994-95 
1995-96 
1996-97 
1999-2000 
2000-01 
2001-02 
26.99 
91.02 
28.21 
34.82 
141.43 
85.89 
34.93 
31.75 
17.19 
61.63 
37.61 
32.96 
137.51 
87.00 
31.20 
32.70 
AP. 
AP. 
AP. 
AP, Punjab 
AP, Punjab. 
AP. 
AP. 
AP. 
 

4. Kinoo/Malta  1992-93 
1993-94 
1703 
3133 
46.88 
49.49 
Punjab, Haryana. 
HP, UP, Haryana. 
 
5. Black Pepper 1993-94 1491 495.25 Kerela. 
 
6. Chillies 1993-94 
1996-97 
1997-98 
5000 
126 
8123 
806.64 
29.48 
190.01 
AP. 
AP. 
AP. 
 
7. Coriander 
    seed 
1998-99 378 45.88 Rajasthan. 
 
The above statement shows that NA FED operations under MIS are not a 
regular phenomena. Except eggs, ot her commodities are not regularly 
procured under MIS.  
 
4.28 In regard to effectiveness of MIS, the M anaging Director, NAFED 
stated during evidence as under :- 
“The State Government has to give a proposal and the State 
Government proposal comes late and that is why the intervention is 
not very effective. The fact of the matter is that for the market 
intervention scheme, as it exists , basically agriculture is a State 
subject. Whenever the commodity  prices or anything, or any 
agriculture commodity is falling in a particular State, normally it is the 
State Government which comes out and intervenes on its own. They 
have their own State marketing federations and ow n agencies to do 
this. But only when they find that, may be, things are going beyond 
the control that they do send the proposal to Government of India for 
intervention under the MIS scheme. Then a meeting is held in the 
Government of India where all agencies are involved. The cost of 
production and all other aspects are taken, a price fixed and market 
intervention done. Normally, the Market Intervention, whenever it is 
implemented, does lead to the price stabilizing or at least the 
farmers getting a better return to th e extent of procurement that is 
done from them. This is the same thing about the perishable 
commodity”. 
 

4.29 In accordance with latest guide lines prescribed by the Government of 
India, the losses, if any, under the MIS are to be shared on 50:50 basis 
between Central and State Government c oncerned. In case of North-Eastern 
States it would be 75:25 basis respectively. The Government shall, however, 
bear its share of loss incurred in the market intervention operations upto an 
extent of 25% of the procurement cost which shall include the Minimum 
Support Price paid to the farmers, the statutory taxes i.e. the 
market/mandi/purchase tax, commissi on payable to the agents, grading 
labour and packing charges, labour charges, etc. If there is any loss beyond 
the above limit the same shall be borne by the procuring agencies. In case of 
eggs, the loss is shared on 25:75 ba sis between Central Government and 
National Egg Coordination Committee (N ECC). The entire operation is (by 
both Central and State agencies/NECC) treated as one for the purpose of 
sharing loss under the scheme even if one agency does not procure the 
indicated quantity. 
4.30 The Managing Director, NAFED draw the attention of the Committee to 
the following difficulties faced by NAFED in MIS:- 
“Regarding market interventions, we have pointed out some problems 
in market intervention scheme, an d that it has to come through a 
procedure. The State Government wr ites to the Central Government 
and then the rate is approved. Then, onl y 25 per cent of the losses are 
reimbursed. Initially, 100 per cent of the losses were reimbursed, but 
since 2001, only 25 per cent of the procurement cost is being 
reimbursed. So, that does create a little problem because many of 
these commodities are of a perishable  nature and losses tend to be in 
the region of 50 per cent to 60 per c ent in these cases. Normally, we 
intervene when there is a distress sale. When we intervene in the 
distress sale, the market price is already ruling so low that there is a big 
differential between the market price and the price that you are likely to 
get, that is, the price fixed by you a nd the price you are likely to get in 
the market.”  

 
Disposal of Procured Stocks 
 
4.31 NAFED informed the Committee in  a note that after the procurement 
operations are over, NAFED keeps a close watch on the market and when 
price in the market tends to s how an upward trend, NAFED with GOI 
approval starts disposal. Though there is no ready market for disposal of 
the procured stocks, NAFED resorts to different channels of disposal like 
selling in the local market, moving stocks to other terminal markets and 
resorts to processing, if required.  The disposal is arranged as per 
NAFED’s time tested business pro cedure drawn for its commercial 
activities for maximization of sale earnings. The salient features of the sale 
procedure are as under :- 
i) Disposal is arranged by NAFED branches for a commodity 
held by them based on the bes t prevailing available market 
rates after proper negotiation.  
 ii) Disposals are arranged on  cash and carry basis.  
iii) All statutory charges are pai d as per the state rules and 
regulations.  
iv) In order to get best rates NAFED branches counter check the 
rate with other branches, traders/bro kers and different locations 
in the state. 
 
Loss in disposal of Stocks 
4.32 NAFED in a written reply has further stated t hat under both the 
schemes(PSS and MIS), the losses are i nherent due to the fact that the 
purchases of the commodities are undertaken by giving the Minimum 

Support Price to the farmers when the prices are ruling below the 
Minimum Support Price in the market. The disposal of the commodities is 
undertaken soon after the procurement  operation is over at the best 
prevailing market prices, after watching the market situation, i.e. market 
rates domestic and global, assessment of  production for the next season, 
market surplus, etc. 
 
4.33 On Committee’s enquiry about  the losses being incurred in PSS 
operations. The Managing Director, NAFED stated during evidence as 
under :- 
“In price support operations, the losses vary from 10 per cent, 20 per 
cent, 25 per cent, etc. depending upon the market situation”.  
 
4.34 When the Committee enquired about the disposal of record quantum 
of Mustard seeds procured during Rabi 2005, the Managing Director, 
NAFED stated during evidence as under :- 
“About Rabi-2005 mustard, yes Sir,  a record procurement has been 
there – 20.93 lakh metric tones, about Rs. 4,000 crore. Now disposal 
is a big task before us. The Government of India has already formed 
a high-power Committee also which is reviewing this disposal. The 
objective is that we should minimize the losses, if any. First of all, let 
us come at least to a position where there is no profit and no loss; if 
there are any losses at least they should be minimized to the 
maximum extent. For that, already  steps have been taken. On 
reduction in storage costs, we are having special negotiations with 
CWC and SWC and these steps have been  taken up which will also 
bring down the quantum of loss in this.”  
 
4.35 According to NAFED, with regard to MIS operations its past 
experience of handling various agricultural commodities including 
perishables under MIS such as onion,  potato, apples, kinnow, malta, 

orange, red chillies, etc. suggested that the losses incurred under the 
Scheme have  mostly been higher than 25% in all the cases.  
 
OTHER GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS 
(i) NAFED as a canalizing agency for onion export 
 The Committee enquired about NAFE D’s role in the export of onion 
from the country. NAFED stated in its  written reply that India has been an 
important supplier of onion to world m arkets for a long time, exporting on 
an average, around 52,000 tonnes per annum even in 1950s. Exports 
have increased significantly over the years crossing 9,41,448 tonnes mark 
in 2004-05 earning Rs. 817.49 crore in foreign exchange for the country.  
 
4.37 NAFED was the sole canalizing agency of the Government of India 
for export of onion from the country to permissible destinations without any 
quantitative restrictions from 1974 -75 to 1998-99. In  February, 1999, the 
Exim Policy related to export of onion was amended. According to this 
policy NAFED and some of the State Trading Enterprises(STEs) were 
allowed to export onion with separate  quotas assigned to each canalizing 
agency. Later further ame ndments in the Exim Policy 1997-2000 were 
made. The export of onion is presently allowed through NAFED and 12 
State Trading Enterprises without quantitative restrictions on all varieties 
of onion.  
 
4.38 Though Government of India has allowed export of onion under the 
liberalization policy through NAFED and other 12 State designated 
agencies, the actual direct major ex port is undertaken by NAFED only. 
The rest of the agencies are only issuing NOCs to the 

Associate Shippers who are actually undertaking export of onion.  
 
4.39 The Managing Director of NAFED added during evidence as under:- 
“We have been one of the agencies involved in canalization of onion 
exports. Our main role has been in in creasing the export of onions. 
In 1974, we were the sole canalizing agency for onion exports. We 
have increased the exports, which was not even worth Rs. 50,000 at 
that time. Last year, Rs. 8.50 crore worth exports took place. Onion 
is the major export in our horticul ture sector. NAFED has played a 
major role in this. We set up an agency called NHRDF which came 
out with new varieties. We give advice to the farmers on production 
of onions for the export market. We see that the right quality is 
procured and dispatched. Of course , now, our role has got limited 
because now, along with NAFED, as many as 12 other agencies 
have been nominated. This was our major business. At one time, we 
were getting 5 per cent commission  on this. Today, we are getting 
only one per cent commission. Our acti vity in this sector has come 
down significantly”.  
 
 The witness added:- 
 “We are the only one agency which is actually exporting. That is the 
point we have made. Others are only issuing No Objection 
Certificates but we are doing expo rts on our own also. Apart from 
acting as a canalizing agency, we are also doing exports on our 
own. This is the point we have made out there”.   
 
4.40 The Secretary, Ministry of Agri culture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) gave further clarification on the issue as under :- 
“I would like to further clarify one issue here….It is not the Ministry of 
Agriculture which is designating these trading houses or canalized 
agencies. That is with the Ministry of Commerce. Why articles or 
commodities are canalized is because some of them are deemed, 
either imports or exports, to be a littl e sensitive. Since onion is such 
a product where there have been shortages, we do try to have some 
canalized agencies so that we kn ow what is the quantum of the 
export that we want to do. If we take this year’s (2005) case itself 

into consideration, you will see that the prices of onion had risen 
considerably because of severe fl oods and other natural disasters 
that happened in Maharashtra and other parts of the country. To that 
extent, if we do not have these ca nalized agencies, a lot of export 
will be happening but our own people will not have sufficient onions 
at affordable prices available. So, the Government has to do a very 
tight balancing act. If we do not have canalized agencies, everybody 
will start exporting. In that situat ion, probably people will have to buy 
onions at very high rates. So, t here needs to bring some kind of a 
balance which we need to maintain because these are perishable 
items. Since this year( 2005) itself we saw that the onion prices hit 
almost Rs. 16 to Rs. 17 in many m arkets of the metropolises, I think 
it is not a bad idea to really  have canalized agencies”.  
 
4.41 In a written note NAFED suggested that  in view of NAFED’s past 
experience in own export and also through its associates by providing 
remunerative prices to the onion growers, the Government of India may 
like to reconsider appointing NAFED as the sole canalizing agency in 
order to have better control to boost the export of onion as also to 
regulate, systematize and discipline through the means of canalization. 
 
(ii) Proposal to declare NAFED as nodal agency for procurement of 
jute 
 
4.42 In regard to NAFED’s proposal  for declaring NAFED as a nodal 
agency for procurement of jute, NAFED has stated in a written note that 
for providing remunerative prices to the growers, Jute Corporation of India 
Ltd. has been designated as the noda l agency for purchases under MSP. 
NAFED gets suggestions from its member societies every year in the 
General Body meeting that the jute and mesta farmers in the remote areas 
are yet to get the benefits of Minimum Support Price and therefore, 
NAFED should also purchase raw jute at those centres where the benefit 
has not percolated to the farmers . During the year 2004-05, the Jute 

Corporation of India allotted some cent res to NAFED for purchases of jute 
under Minimum Support Price in Bihar. Although, all arrangements were 
made by NAFED for purchases, no purchases were necessitated, since 
the  prices in the centres allott ed to NAFED were ruling above Minimum 
Support Price.  
4.43 When the Committee further enquired whether NAFED could 
procure gunny bags and other proces sed jute material and whether 
NAFED could play a vital role in revival of jute mills and boost international 
trade, NAFED in a written reply stated that it procures gunny bags for its 
own requirement as well as for some institutional buyers who place their 
indent on NAFED. National Jute Manufacturing Corporation and Jute 
Corporation of India (both Government organizations under Ministry of 
Textiles) are the nodal agencies to look after the problems of jute mills and 
promote international trade.  
 

 
CHAPTER V 
COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES 
 
1. Commercial Operations  
5.1 Besides, Price Support Operatio ns, NAFED undertakes commercial 
operations in view of the following reasons:- 
(i) NAFED is a revenue based organisation. 
(ii) No financial aid or subsid y from Government of India. 
(iii) NAFED has to earn profits in  order to sustain its network of 
branches and manpower throughout country for providing 
marketing support to farmers. 
(iv) Uncertainty in PSS/MIS Operations. 
(v) Substantial reduction in service charges on canalized exports 
due to policy changes. 
5.2 The following are the commercial activities of NAFED :- 
• Domestic and International Marketing of Agricultural 
Commodities; 
• Industrial and Infrastructural Activities; 
• Consumer Marketing; 
• Marketing of Agriculture Inputs – Seed and Fertilizer; 
• Multi-Purpose Cold Storage and Custom Bonded 
Warehouses; 
• Corporate Agent of IFFCO-Tokyo General Insurance (ITGI); 
• Warehouse Receipt Based Financing; 
• Futures Trading; 

• Public Private Partnership.  
 
5.3 In a note furnished to the Commi ttee, NAFED stated that budget for 
the commercial operations is prepa red based on suggestions received 
from members, branches and also keeping previous experience which is 
approved by the AGM of NAFED. This budget is bifurcated on commodity-
wise and state-wise basis. The budget is given to branches for 
implementation. Procurement of budget ed commodities is undertaken in 
APMC markets during peak arrival period depending upon availability of 
Fair Average Quality stocks and prices. Selection of procurement centres 
is based on quality/quantity of stoc ks arriving, rates, proximity to the 
warehouses/disposal markets etc.  Procured stocks are stored in 
CWC/SWC godowns.  Normally the pri ces of the procured commodity 
tend to improve during the lean season. Disposal of procured stocks 
commences when the same is at t he level cost plus. The sales are 
arranged as per NAFED Business Proc edure on cash and carry basis. 
Due to inherent nature of agricultural marketing, markets are not always 
favourable and NAFED branches some times have to arrange disposal 
below cost if markets are depressed and prospects of profitable disposal 
are bleak due to factors like rulin g domestic and international market 
prices and imports, storage period, lik ely arrivals during next season etc. 
Commenting on the operations of NAFED, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) stated during 
evidence as follows :- 
“NAFED undertakes its commercial ac tivities on its own without any 
policy guidance, approval or monito ry assistance from the Central 
Government. There is no role of the Central Government in the 
business programmes of NAFED for marketing of various agriculture 

and non-agriculture products on commercial considerations and 
under public-private  partnersh ip business with its business 
associates.” 
 
• Domestic marketing as well as foreign trade on back-to-
back/tie up basis with its business associates. 
• Marketing of nectar of Seabuc kthorn fruit under “Leh Berry” 
brand. 
• Insurance business as corporate agent of IFFCO TOKIO. 
• Expansion of warehousing activities including general 
purpose, cold storage and custom-bonded warehouses. 
 
2. Marketing of agricultural commodities on commercial basis 
 
(i)  Pulses  
5.4 The position of profit/loss incurred by NAFED in handling pulses in 
its commercial account since 2001-02 to 2004-05 is as given below: 
         (P/L in Rs. Lakhs) 
Commodity 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
Arhar 56.44 51.19 -12.21 61.24 
Assorted Pulses  7.95 12.47 7.76 13.70 
Gram 612.92 99.83 -416.80 14.16 
Masoor -25.82 34.36 108.61 117.29 
Moong 33.11 -82.55 -26.21 18.26 
Moth 23.53 4.00 -21.46 17.23 
Peas 34.12 96.99 58.35 196.30 
Rajmah 0 1.33 0 -3.55 
Urad -68.02 -229.94 -74.08 1.28 
TOTAL 674.23 -12.32 -376.04 435.91 
 
 
5.5 When asked the reasons for lose s in trade of pulses, NAFED in a 
written reply stated that it is not incurring losses continuously in pulses 
trade. In the trade of agricultural commodities, the element of profit and 

loss is not certain. However, based on the recommendations of the 
Regional Managers and Branch Managers of NAFED and also experience 
of previous years in hand ling various agricultural commodities, the annual 
business budget is drawn. While preparing the budget, the economic 
viability of the particular commodity is  evaluated by keeping in view the 
production, ruling market rates bot h domestic and global and the quality 
etc. 
 
5.6 NAFED further stated that it procures various agricultural 
commodities of fair average quality du ring peak season from the farmers 
directly at regulated mandis in open auction through its cooperative 
network. It undertakes disposal of the procured stocks during lean period 
when the prices of the commodities im prove. The prices of agricultural 
commodities are governed by the demand and supply factor. But in certain 
cases, external factors such as im port at cheaper rates also affect the 
market rates adversely.  
 
(ii) Potatoes 
5.7 NAFED stated in a note that NAFED has been procuring potato in 
the main producing States, viz. Utta r Pradesh, West B engal, Bihar, etc. 
during peak arrival period on commercial basis when prices of potato rule 
low which helped the growers to get remunerative price of their produce. 
The procured stock is either exported or disposed of locally when no fresh 
crop is available in the market and pric es of potato tend to increase during 
the lean period, which ultimately protects the interest of the consumers.  
5.8 Out of total production of around 244 lakh MTs of potatoes in India 
hardly 0.12% potato is exported which is mainly carried out from the 

States of MP, UP and other producing area s.  The export of potato from 
the country during the last three year s and NAFED’s share of export is as 
under:- 
(Qty. in MTs) 
Year Total Export Export by NAFED 
2002-03 24365 1037 
2003-04 67340 3760 
2004-05 61000 3175 
 
5.9 NAFED’s export of potato was main ly to Mauritius and recently to 
Schychelles also.  NAFED’s export of potato marginally declined during 
the year 2004-05 as Mauritius imported comparatively lower quantity. 
 
3. Retail Marketing Operations 
5.10 The Committee enquired about the details of retail outlets and the 
commodities available at the retail outlets. NAFED in its written reply 
stated that at present there are three retail outlets running under 
Consumer Marketing Division (CMD), Lawrence Road at Krishi Bhavan, 
NCERT Complex and NAFED Complex,  Lawrence Road. These shops 
were established around one and a half decades ago at the instance of 
Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India with  a view to safeguarding 
the interests of consumers. In the beginning, the grocery items such as 
rice, sugar, pulses, eggs, etc. were so ld. At later stage, for increasing the 
turnover so as to make the outlets economically viable, a range of items 
was added.  
5.11 The Committee enquired about NA FED Bazaars started by the 
Federation. NAFED in its written repl y stated that with the change of 
market scenario, it was felt that NAFE D should also diversify its activities 

and enter into consumer marketing in a better way. Hence, it was decided 
to go in for a chain of NAFED Bazaars. To begin with, firstly in June, 1999 
NAFED opened a bazaar (self-service supermarket) at Ashram Chowk, 
New Delhi, so as to facilitate the consumers to meet their daily needs 
under one roof at reaso nable prices. The se cond NAFED BAZAAR was 
opened in October 1999 in the rented premises of Delhi Federation, 
Nangloi. The said bazaar was closed  down after a period of three years 
since it was not economically viable, specially due to high rent.  
 
5.12 When the Committee further enqui red whether there were plans to 
open new NAFED Bazaars in other parts of the country, NAFED stated in 
its written reply that apart from NAFED Bazaar, it is also running two retail 
outlets in Shimla, one each at Jai pur and Hyderabad. The retail outlet at 
Hyderabad is being run in Rythu Bazaar. NAFED may open more retail 
outlets or utilize the existing franchis ee outlets distributi ng fertilizers for 
distribution of its consumer products.  This may, however, depend upon 
economic viability. 
 
5.13 The Expert Group set up by  the Government had identified 
consumer marketing as a potential area for NAFED for increasing turnover 
and higher price realization of the produce by value addition. The group 
had also recommended that NAFED’s ac tivities in this area should be 
enlarged establishing linkages with consumer marketing organizations and 
others promoting “NAF ED” brand name. The retail marketing in the 
Northern Zone amounted to Rs. 2291.45 la kh with a profit of Rs. 85.89 
lakh and in South Zone it was Rs. 261. 22 lakh with a profit of Rs. 12.64 
lakh in the year 2003-04. The presence of NAFED Bazaars and retailing 

has been comparatively less in the Southern States in comparison to the 
Northern States. Explaining the phenomenon, the Managing Director, 
NAFED stated during evidence as follows :-  
“Our presence is less in Southern States and that profits in Southern 
States are lower than in other States . We are in four zones, that is, 
South Zone, North Zone, East Zone  and West Zone. It is true that 
maximum profits come from the West  Zone and that is because of 
the nature of our operations. Mumbai branch gives us the maximum 
profits because most of our exports  are routed through Mumbai and 
much of our commercial business is handled by that region. 
However, we are developing South also. We have a lot of branches 
in South. We have branches now in Chennai, Hyderabad, Tuticorin, 
Cochin, Calicut and Bangalore. We have opened full-fledged 
branches there; we have got staff and we are working out in these 
areas. We have prepared a plan of acti on also. The profits in South 
Zone have gone up over the last few ye ars. Even this year, so far, in 
the first six months, South Zone is showing good profits”.  
 
5.14 In the written reply NAFED furt her stated that the margin of profit in 
Northern Zone works out to 5.05% a nd in Southern Z one the margin of 
profit is 4.83%. Thus, the margin of  profit earned in North and South 
Zones is by and large the same. However,  the slight variation in margin of 
profit was due to nature of commodities  handled and the market situation. 
NAFED’s operations in Southern States as compared to Northern States 
are low key because NAFED started consumer marketing in Southern 
States recently. Moreover, the pr oduct mix being handled in Southern 
zone is also limited. Efforts are being made to further expand the 
marketing operations in Southern States by tapping institutional supplies 
by strengthening local sourcing of products.  
 
 
 

 
4. Joint Venture with State Cooperative Marketing Federation/ 
marketing Cooperative Societies 
 
5.15 The Committee enquired about NAFED’s Joint Venture activities 
with State Cooperative Marketing Federations/Marketing Cooperative 
Societies. NAFED in its written reply stated that depending upon 
commercial viability, procurement  and marketing by agriculture 
federations/cooperative societies is undertaken on the following grounds: 
1. To pool resources and take advantage of expertise available 
with the joint venture partner.  
2. To extend help to such co operatives which are ill-equipped in 
terms of either finance or marketing knowledge. 

5.16 The details of joint venture business by NAFED in last five years 
was as given below:- 
PURCHASE      
AQTY. IN MTS 
       V A L U E  I N  R S . L A K H S  
Commodity 2000-01 
Qty. Value 
2001-02 
Qty. Value 
2002-03 
Qty.     Value 
2003-04 
Qty.  Value 
2004-05 
Qty.      Value 
Paddy Nil Nil Nil Nil  2041.00   233.00
  
Nil    Nil Nil      Nil 
Soyabean 
(Yellow) 
Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil       Nil Nil    Nil 2148.00    267.20
  
Turmeric Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil       Nil 669.00    38.30 Nil        Nil 
Potato Seed Nil  Nil Nil Nil 132.00       8.00 228.00   13.00 Nil        Nil 
Total    2173.00  241.00
    
897.00     51.30 2148.00       267.20 
 
    SALES     
        A Q T Y .  I N  M T S  
                 VALUE IN RS.LAKHS 
Commodity 2000-01 
Qty. Value 
2001-02 
Qty. Value 
2002-03 
Qty.     Value 
2003-04 
Qty.  Value 
2004-05 
Qty.      Value 
F.G. 127.00   9.40 127.00   9.35 Nil        Nil Nil    Nil Nil        Nil 
Pulses Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil       Nil Nil    14.25 Nil        Nil 
Potato Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil       Nil Nil    21.70 Nil        Nil 
Turmeric 210.00  24.11 149.00  14.31 Nil       Nil Nil     Nil Nil        Nil 
Potato Seed  Nil Nil Nil          Nil 132.00      12.74 Nil      Nil Nil        Nil 
Others  Nil Nil Nil          Nil Nil        Nil Nil            76.04 Nil        Nil 
Total  337.00   33.51 276.00   23.66 132.00         12.74 Nil         111.99 Nil        Nil 
 
5.17 When enquired about the need for strengthening of joint ventures 
among cooperatives in the country, the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperatio n) during evidence stated as 
under:- 
“We are very conscious of the fact that we do not want to give up our 
advantage that we have, as a coun try, in terms of the large co-
operative network that is there. But there are some problems insofar 
as the co-operative segment is co ncerned. A lot of them are sick, a 
lot of them need to be revived and we are taking all steps to ensure 
that the sick banks, district bank s and the banks which are not in 
healthy condition, are given rehabilitation package. We do believe 
that after the Vaidyanathan Committee Task Force Report is 
accepted by the Government, a lo t will be done by rehabilitating co-

operative sector within the coun try. Since, these are multi-
dimensional institutions, if we rev ive them, then we not only will be 
able to provide greater credit to the farming community  but also all 
these issues regarding proper ma rketing, manpower, networking, 
etc. would also be taken care of.”  
 
5. International Trade by NAFED 
5.18 NAFED’s overseas operations comprise export of various agricultural 
and horticultural items e. g. foodgrains, pulses, sp ices, onion, potatoes, 
etc. The Committee enquired about t he value of import and export and 
percentage of growth in the exports. NAFE D in its written reply stated that 
NAFED has been a regular exporter of agricultural commodities since 
1962-63. During 2003-04 NAFED achieved an export turnover of the order 
Rs. 561.54 crore. Major commodities exported are rice, wheat, sugar, 
onions, potatoes, nigerseed, spices, et c. Details of various commodities 
exported during the years 2000-01 to 2004-05 are given in Annexure III.  
5.19 When it was observed that quan tum of foreign trade by NAFED 
declined from 5,76,636 MT in 2003-04 to 3,02,026 MT in the year 2004-05 
and the value from Rs. 56,154.15 lakh in 2003-04 to Rs. 27,618.11 lakh in 
the year 2004-05, the Committee enquired  as to what were the precise 
reasons for substantial decline in ex port trade during 2004-05. In a written 
reply NAFED clarified as under :-  
“A comparison of exports made in terms of quantity and value during 
2003-04 to 2004-05 is given below as per the audited figures in the 
NAFED Annual Report 2004-05:- 
    (Qty. in MTs/Value in Rs. Lakhs) 
2003-04 2004-05 %age increase 
Qty. Value Qty. Value Qty. Value 
576636 56154.15 765969 61465.57 32.83 9.46 
 
The figures given under the caption of International Trade of the 
Questionnaire for the year 2004-05 were upto December 2004.  

Comparison for the full year is give n as above.  Hence, there is a 
32.83% increase in quantity and 9.46% increase in value of exports 
in 2004-05 over 2003-04.” 
 
5.20 The Committee further enquired as to how does the export by 
NAFED during the year 2005-06 compare with the preceding years. In this 
regard, NAFED in a written reply stated that:- 
“exports of NAFED have been incr easing steadily but during 2005-
06, exports have declined margina lly which is evident form the 
following table: 
 
2002-03 345 Crores 
2003-04 562 Crores 
2004-05 614 Crores 
2005-06 602 Crores 
 
5.21 The reasons quoted by NAFED f or decline in exports during 2005-06 
were :- 
 
“NAFED has been exporting onion which is traditionally a strong 
commodity amongst other commodities from the past several years.  
There was a decline in the overall ex port of onions f rom the country 
because a conscious decision was taken to divert onions in the 
domestic market instead of exports in order to make available 
onions to the consumers at reasonab le prices.  Hence, there was a 
slight decline in the exports of NAFED also during the year 2005-06 
in comparison with the exports of 2004-05.” 
 
5.22 The Committee enquired as to  what extent NAFED has been 
successful in building up foreign marketing channels for agricultural 
produce. NAFED in its written reply stat ed that in order to remain in the 
international market for export of agriculture produce such as onion 
potato, groundnut kernel s, de-oiled cake, rice and wheat, etc., the 
contracts with overseas buyers/agent s are established on regular basis. 
For this purpose, regular visits of senior officers of NAFED are 

necessitated from time to time as per the requirements. Similarly, the 
foreign buyers are also invited to see the infrastructure of NAFED and 
other related facilities and for one to one discussion so that the buyers can 
rely upon NAFED as a dependable suppli er. Such contacts have been 
established in Mauritius, Malaysia, Singapore, Sudan, etc. NAFED gets 
response from time to time from these countries. Efforts are being made to 
develop such channels in other countries also.   
5.23 In this regard, the Managing Director, NAFED stated during 
evidence as under:- 
“As regards the export of crops.… We have gone in for more than 
Rs. 600 crore worth of export, and every year the graph is going up. 
We had a problem in the organization with regard to responding to 
the export market quickly. I did point out last time that they gave us 
only a couple of hours to respond, and give our rates. But we have 
taken appropriate action to resolve this issue. We have a very active 
Export Cell in the head office, and we  have also trained the Branch 
Managers (BM) of various branches in the export market. In addition 
to this, all the branches and head offices have been in terlinked with 
computers. As a result, we are corresponding with them via e-mail 
itself. This has enabled us to respond to the challenges of the export 
market.”  
 
5.24 The Expert Group appointed by the Government had recommended 
that NAFED should study prospects of expansion and diversification of 
business in international trade by crea ting a full fledged international trade 
division in Head Office and also part icipation in international fairs and 
exhibitions. As a follow up an International Trade Division has been 
created in NAFED which assists the commodity divisions in increasing the 
exports of commodities. NAFED also  participates in International 
exhibitions and Trade Fairs. 
 

5.25 In its report, the expert group also suggested that in the new 
changing scenario, NAFED has greater role to play in strengthening 
India’s agro-export potentials for which NAFED may identify potential 
commodities for exports; establish grades/standards commensurate with 
international requirements; plan procurement, grading/storing of identified 
commodities; explore avenues for value addition; promote NAFED’s 
products in potentially large market s and establish as  a quality product 
exporter.  Also, in the interest of members/farmers NAFED should explore 
joint venture/collaboration in agricultural commodities with cooperatives in 
other countries by entering into buy back or market support arrangements. 
 
5.26 The Committee enquired whether NAFED has taken any concrete 
steps to improve their functioning in pursuance of the aforesaid 
suggestions of the expert group.  If so, what are these and how the same 
have helped them in improving their f unctioning. NAFED in their written 
reply stated:- 
“In line with the recommendation of the Expert Group NAFED 
developed a strategy for enhancing its export and import activities.  
In the area of export NAFED made a broad based approach for 
inclusion of several commodities which were undertaken for the first 
time or resumed its activities undertaken in the past. NAFED has 
been regularly in dialogue with APEDA and other organizations for 
developing grades/standards of agricu ltural commodities for export 
commensurate with international requirements.  NAFED planned its 
program for procurement directly from the market arrivals and also 
under PPP arrangements at competitiv e prices.  In this process 
value addition also was undertak en wherever needed. During the 
course of interaction with cooperatives in other countries, 
possibilities were explored for entering into joint 
venture/collaboration for export of  agricultural commodities from 
India.  Efforts are still on to achieve the above line of business 
activities.” 

 
5.27 NAFED undertakes im port of agricultural commodities, both in the 
Government account and also in its own commercial account. NAFED 
imported maize, dry fruits, pulses and fertilizers from time to time. Imports 
are aimed at primarily augmenting supplies to stabilize the domestic 
prices. During the year 1998-99,  1999-2000, no imports were undertaken 
by NAFED.  
 
6. NAFED’s operations in the North Eastern Region  
5.28 The Committee enquired about NA FED’s activities in the North  
Eastern region of the country. NAFE D stated in its written reply that 
despite a number of constraints NAFED has been fully committed to the 
task of providing Market support to the farmers of  North Eastern States. 
NAFED through its branches at Guwahati an d Siliguri has effectively tried 
to promote and extend business activities in this Region. For the last three 
years NAFED has been making efforts to enhance the volume of its 
business in the North Eastern Region. With the setting up of liaison office 
at Agartala, it further intensified it s efforts to develop the marketing of 
agricultural and horticulture produce in the state of Tripura and other 
states of North Eastern Region. Details of business handled in the last five 
years are given in Annexure IV.  
5.29 An amount of Rs. 2354 lakh was earmarked in the budget of 2004-
05 for various commodities in North Eastern region. This included bulk 
share of Fertilizers. Every effort is made to increase the turnover in North 
Eastern States by doing business of items like Pineapple, Orange, 
Passion Fruit, Ginger, Arecanuts, etc. in the near future.  
 

5.30 NAFED in a written reply furthe r stated that in the North Eastern 
States, the cooperatives are weak in  terms of organizational set up and 
financial conditions. Despite these constraints, NAFED earnestly makes 
efforts to extend its network par ticularly among small and marginal 
farmers of North Eastern States. The main commodities handled by 
NAFED during the last five years in the North Eastern States are 
mustardseed, mustard oil and tea.  NAFE D also issues NOC for export of 
onion, potato, arjun flower, black pipple and handles distribution of 
fertilizer. As regards future programme of activities, NAFED contemplates 
to market mustard oil, fertiliser, seeds, potato, pineapple suckers and 
takeup jatropha cultivation, etc.  
 
5.31 The Committee further enquired  about NAFED’s future plans for 
extending its activities in the North Eastern region. NAFED in its written 
reply stated that NAFED maintains lia ison with various departments of 
North Eastern states, c ooperatives, etc. and coord inates and carries out 
various business activities through its branch office located at Guwahati.  
NAFED also opened a sub office at A gartala to oversee its operations in 
Tripura. NAFED also has an office at  Siliguri which is considered as 
gateway to the North Eastern  states.  
 
5.32 The Expert Group appointed by the Government had recommended 
that Government of India should create  a corpus fund to be placed at the 
disposal of NAFED for developing marketing activities in the North Eastern 
region, which are likely to result into  losses. The action taken by NAFED 
on the recommendation is that Technology Mission on Horticulture for 
North East Region is already actively  working on this project. Regarding 

enhancement in NAFED’s activities in  NE Region, NAFED has taken up 
several programmes of supply of seed,  fertilizer and sourcing of planting 
material from the Region. Close monitoring is being done to take up 
business activity in the region as and when opportunity arises. 
 
7. Industrial Units  
NAFED furnished details of its following industrial units :- 
(i) Konark Jute Ltd (KJL)  
5.33 The Committee observed that f or the benefit of jute growers Konark 
Jute Ltd(KJL) was set up in Orissa in 1975. However,  the unit could not 
turn out to be economically viable. The Committee further enquired about 
the reasons due to which Konark Jute Limited could not become 
economically viable. NAFED stated in the written reply that Konark Jute 
Ltd., jointly promoted  by  NAFED and Industrial Development Corporation 
of Orissa Ltd. (IDCOL) was incorp orated on 27.01.1975 with an estimated 
project cost of Rs. 425 lakh. This project was approved by the Board of 
Directors of NAFED in its Meeting held on 19.12.1974. The need to set up 
jute mill in Orissa was felt to help jute growing farmers as there was no 
jute mill in the State of Orissa at that time. The commercial operation of 
the mill started in November, 1979. Due to non-completion of project in 
time, inclusion of some new items co nsidered necessary for functioning of 
the project efficiently, sharp increase  in labour and material cost coupled 
with increase in excise duty, CST revis ion, etc the original cost of project 
went up from Rs. 425 lakh to Rs . 802 lakh. KJL approached financial 
institutions from time to time for meeting cost over run and a loan of Rs. 
438 lakh was sanctioned to KJL on the guarantee of promoters. The 
increase in the cost of the  projec t and levy of interest on the loan taken 

from financial institutions increa sed the cost of production and KJL 
became unviable since its inception.  
 
5.34 The Committee further enquired whether the feasibility report on 
Konark Jute Ltd was not prepared before investing funds by NAFED in the 
unit. NAFED stated in its written repl y that feasibility report was prepared 
before taking a decision to invest funds by NA FED. But due to reasons 
mentioned above, the cost of produc tion went up. Further due to erratic 
electricity supply, labour problems and sluggish market, KJL could not 
achieve break-even point since beginni ng. Continuing losses eroded the 
share capital of the company and as su ch became a sick unit, which was 
referred to BIFR. Although a scheme f or modernization/rehabilitation was 
sanctioned by BIFR on 12.4.1994, ev en by implementation of the scheme 
operational efficiency of the company  could not be improved due to 
continued labour problems and sluggish market conditions. Resultantly the 
company continued to incur operational losses.  
(ii) NAFED Bio-fertilizer Units in Indore and Bharatpur  
5.35 The NAFED Bio-fertilizer unit at Indore was established in the year 
1984. The annual production capacity of this  Unit is 150 MT. This Unit is 
concentrating in the manufacturing and trading of bio-fertilizer products 
viz., Rhizobium , Azatobactor, Super Culture, Flowercare and PSM 
(Phosphate Solubilising Micro Organi sms), etc. The product PSM being 
manufactured from this Unit enhances the effectiveness of expensive 
chemical fertilizers like Singl e Super Phosphate and DAP and has 
excellent market potential. Another NAFED Bio-fertilizer Unit which has 
been set up by NAFED at Bharatpur (R ajasthan) started its production 
during May 2001 which mainly aimed at the manufacturing of new 

products viz., Azatobactor, Tricho derma, Urea Coating Agent and 
Composting Culture besides the products of Rhizobium, Azotobactor, etc. 
The performance of these two Units is satisfactory. These units are also 
generating reasonable profits. 
 
5.36 The NAFED has stated that its Bio-Fertilizer (NBF) products are 
marketed through branches/centres at Jaipur, Lucknow, Pune, 
Hyderabad, Bhopal, Sagar and Ujjain. T he major sale of NBF products is 
done in the State of Madhya Pradesh through the Cooperative 
structure/Government Depart ments. The business of bio-fertilizer mainly 
depends upon the support of promotion activi ties of the State Agricultural 
Departments, awareness of the products, etc.  
 
(iii) NAFED Processed Foods  
5.37 The NAFED Processed Foods Unit was set up by NAFED at Delhi in 
the year 1977 for the manufacture/trading of processed food items. Due to 
incurring of continuous and heavy losse s since inception, this Unit has 
been closed down. Voluntary Retirement  Scheme has been introduced in 
the unit. There are, at present, 20 employees on the strength of this Unit.  
iv) NAFED Warehousing and Processing Industries, Vashi  
5.38 This Unit is utilized for st orage of agricultural commodities and 
processing of oil-seeds, pulses and  foodgrains for internal trade and 
cleaning for export. Besides addition of more agencies and inclusion of 
trade in export of Nigerseed, the revenue being generated in this Unit from 
processing work has gone down. With a view to reducing the incidence of 
heavy expenditure on wages, Voluntary Retirement Scheme was 
introduced in this Unit during the year 2002-2003 and work force has been 

considerably reduced. A part of NWPI  Complex has been converted into 
Bonded Warehouse.  
 
5.39 The Committee enquired about the reasons for continuous decline 
of business handled by the NA FED Warehousing and Processing 
Industries, Vashi from Rs. 124.25 la kh in 2000-01 to Rs 52.21 lakh in 
2004-05 and the steps taken by NAFED to arrest the decline of business 
and to improve its operations. NAFED in its written reply stated that the 
warehouse and milling facilities at NAFED Warehouse and Processing 
Industrial Unit at Vashi (Navi Mumbai ) were set up primarily with the 
objective of processing and storage of Nigerseed, which was canalized for 
export through NAFED. With the change in export policy, the export of 
Nigerseed by NAFED sharply declined. Therefore, the business handled 
by the Unit declined in the years 2001-02, 2002- 03 and 2003-04 as 
compared to the year 2000-01 due to  lesser capacity utilization. 
Thereafter, NAFED started utilizing the capacity by offering storage space 
in the open market. In the Vash i Complex, there are Bonded Godowns 
also besides the General Godowns. T he inflow of goods in the Bonded 
Godowns varies depending upon the mark et conditions, financial crunch 
of the importers, etc.  However, effo rts are on to increase the volume of 
business of the bonded godowns also.  
v) NAFED Krishi Yantra Udyog, Bhiwadi  
5.40 The Unit, NAFED Krishi Yantra Udyog at Bhiwadi (Rajasthan), was 
set up by NAFED in the year 1984  for undertaking  production of 
agricultural implements. Due to la bour and other problems, this unit was 
closed down in 1990. From April 01, 2004 a part space has been let out. 
Efforts are on to let the rest of space to CWC/SWC. 

 
5.41 The Committee subsequently enquired  about extant status of letting 
out of space at NAFED Krishi Yantra Udyog, Bhiwadi to CWC/SWC and 
plans to utilize the space in a more  beneficial manner. NAFED in its 
written reply stated that the off ers received from CWC are not adequate 
for economic viability of NAFED Krishi Yantra Udyog Unit at Bhiwadi. 
However, one business associate has approached NAFED to take the 
entire premises of Bhiwadi Unit on lease and licence fee basis for 
manufacturing plastic products un der the brand name of NAFED. The 
supply of these products is ma inly meant for Government 
Departments/Institutions/Cooperative Soci eties etc. The o ffer of the party 
consists of paying licence fee for th e usage of the premises, royalty for 
using the brand name of NAFED and service charges for supplying the 
products through NAFED. NAFED is  working on these arrangements, 
which is a profitable venture.  
vi) Raichur Cooperative Oil Complex, Raichur  
5.42 This Unit was purchased by   NAFED from the local Cooperative 
Society in the year 1986. It was having oil mill, vanaspati plant, cattle feed 
plant and solvent plant. Due to incu rring of continuous losses, it was 
closed down and all the Plant and Machinery were disposed off. A portion 
of this Unit has been given to the State Warehousing Corporation on 
rental basis for warehousing purpose.  
vii) NAFED Kinnow – Grading – W axing and Precooling-cum-Cold 
Storage, Maujgarh, Punjab  
5.43 This Unit is having an area of  two acres of land. There are separate 
buildings for grading and waxing plant as well for Precooling-cum-Cold 

Storage Plant. This Unit has been set up for enhancing the shelf life of 
fruits particularly kinnow.  
 
5.44 The Committee further enquired abou t the reasons for the decline in 
the business handled in Maujgarh Unit from Rs.4.35 lakh in the year 2000-
01 to Rs.1.10 lakh in 2004-05 and th e steps taken by NAFED to improve 
its operations and make the plant commercially viable. NAFED in its 
written reply stated that in the Maujgarh Complex, there are separate 
buildings for grading and waxing plant  and a separate building for Pre-
cooling-cum-Cold Storage Plant. Rev enue generation from the Grading 
and Waxing Plant meant mainly for Ki nnow grown locally is seasonal for 
two months in a year (i.e.  January  and February). Further, due to the 
distant location of Maujgarh Unit, farmers/traders of Punjab/Rajasthan 
other than Kinnow growers are not coming to store their produce. This has 
led to poor revenue generat ion in this Unit. For better utilization of 
Precooling plant, the ent ire pre-cooling and Cold Storage plant has been 
shifted to Pimpalgaon Unit in Nasik District (Maharashtra). Now, efforts 
are on to explore the possibilities of generating more revenue from 
Maujgarh Unit. A Cooperative Society has approached NAFED to the take 
entire Maujgarh premises on lease a nd licence fee basis, the proposal of 
which is under active consideration.  
 
8. Unsteady Performance of Industrial Units 
5.45 The Committee further enquired about the overall reasons for the 
unsteady performance of most of the i ndustrial units of NAFED. NAFED in 
a written reply stated that performance of industrial units largely depends 

upon overall business activities of trade and industries in the country 
which vary from time to time.  
 
5.46 The Expert Group appointed by Government had recommended that 
if the industrial units are not likel y to be useful or are generating losses, 
they may be let out or disposed off. It had also recommended that an 
Action Programme for five years may be prepared for each unit for 
implementation in phased manner. It th is regard NAFED has stated that it 
has closed down certain units which were incurring continuing losses after 
carefully examining the prospects f or continuation of various industrial 
units. NAFED has also let out stora ge space available after closing the 
units for earning more revenue. Cold storage and open space in Navi 
Mumbai have been rented out for container freight station to generate 
revenue from them. 
 
9. Cold Storage and Warehouse of NAFED 
5.47 NAFED has a Cold Storage with a capacity of 2500 Metric Tones in 
Delhi and Cold Storage-cum-Pre-cooling facility in Nasik with a capacity of 
30 MTs, 35 MTs of capacity in Ma ujgarh, Punjab. The Cold Storage at 
Delhi is used on regular basis whereas the other units are utilized 
depending on local needs and  on seasonal basis. 
 
5.48 NAFED has warehouses and go downs in various parts of the 
country. They are of different types depending upon local needs, 
requirement and demand. NAFED w arehouses of general purpose are 
located in Vashi(Maharashtra) and  Chennai(Tamil Nadu). NAFED also 
has godowns in Delhi, Raichur(K arnataka), Cochin, Bharatpur/Bhiwadi 

besides conventional type godowns f or storage of onion in Lasalgaon and 
Pimpalgaon(Nasik). The overall st orage capacity is around 22,000 MTs 
and the space in warehouses/godowns is utilized for storing all agricultural 
commodities including perishables ei ther on regular basis or on seasonal 
basis as per demand and local requirement.  
5.49 The Committee enquired whet her space in warehouse/cold storage 
is given out on rent and if so, th e income generated by renting of 
warehouse/cold storage during the last five years. In this regard, NAFED 
in a written reply furnished the details  of income generated by renting out 
spare capacity of cold storage and w arehouse/godown in the last five 
years are as under:- 
Year     Income (Rs Lakhs) 
2000-01 199.32 
2001-02 203.11 
2002-03 162.70 
2003-04 155.20 
2004-05 
(upto 31.12.04) 
 
99.67 
 
5.50 When it was further enquired about the expenditure incurred by 
NAFED on maintenance of Cold Storage/Warehouse/Godowns during the 
last five years, NAFED stated t hat expenses incurred by it on  
maintenance of Cold Storage/Warehouse/Godown from 2000-01 to 2004-
05 is as under:- 
Year  Amount (Rs. 
Lakhs) 
2000-01 5.44 
2001-02 4.00 
2002-03 4.17 
2003-04 9.26 
2004-05 
(upto 31.12.04) 
 
3.43 
  

5.51 The Committee enquired about th e need for setting additional cold 
storage/cool chains in different parts of the country apart from the existing 
cold storages. The Managing Directo r, NAFED replied during evidence as 
under:- 
“We should increase our presence in warehousing and cold-storage. 
We have gone into this infr astructure area also to expand 
warehousing and cold-storage. We have warehouses with a capacity 
of 4,400 MT for onions. We have other general warehouses with a 
capacity of 27,900 MT. We have expanded our activity in this area. 
We are currently constructing wareho use with a capacity of 24,000 
MT which will be ready this y ear. A warehouse with 4,000 MT 
capacity is coming up in new Ganj Vasoda Madhya Pradesh; a 
warehouse with 10,000 MT capacity is coming up in Devas in 
Madhya Pradesh, and an other warehouse with 10,000 MT capacity 
is coming up in Sriganganagar in Rajasthan. We are adding another 
24,000 MT capacity this year. We propose to add more to this. We 
have written to all the State Governments. We have asked them to 
give us possible locations where we can set up warehouses. We are 
negotiating with many State Governments. I think, every year, we 
will keep adding to our warehouse capacity. Of course, there is a 
point that there are already a lo t of warehouses which are existing. 
The Central Warehousing Corporation has got a lot of warehouses. 
Even the State Warehousing Corporatio ns and the State Marketing 
Federations have a lot of wareho uses. We have to see where 
exactly the need is th ere and whether it is viable. We have this 
scheme and we are going a head with constructing more 
warehouses. Similarly, we have co ld-storages of 5,565 MT capacity, 
and another one is being constructed in Lawrence Road, Delhi, 
which is of 4,000 MT capacity. F or further cold-storages, we have 
written to the State Governments that we would examine their 
viability. Wherever it is required, we can certainly go in for more 
cold-storages. Wherever it is possible for us, we will try and do that.” 
   
5.52 The Secretary, Ministry of Agri culture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) added during briefing as  under:- 
“….About setting up Cool Chain, we feel that it is the most efficient 
deficiency that we have in the whole system as it were because after 

the corps are harvested or produce is harvested, there is no place 
where it can be kept in a non -perishable manner. There is no 
infrastructure or no supply chain which we have built up. We have 
actually been looking at each an d every State according to its 
potential and according to its com parative advantage. We are trying 
to build hopes in a manner where there will be lot of support from the 
markets where the goods will be collected.  Next, they will be 
brought to these terminal markets to ensure that we have a decent 
price which our farmers get and also that the produce which they are 
producing does not become a loss. Right now, we are running huge 
losses, what we call post harvest losses of nearly about Rs. 60,000 
crore which we are losing by wa y of post harvest losses. Just 
because we do not have supply chain or cool chain, a lot of 
concentration now is being given to this scheme. We feel that in the 
coming few years, we will be able to build up a lot of marketing 
infrastructure which is today really  not adequate to take proper care 
of all that our farmers are producing.”  

     CHAPTER VI  
        MISCELLANEOUS  
 
A. New Business Ventures 
 
6.1 NAFED have stated in a note t hat the globalization of world 
economy has posed new challenges.  The dynamics of business 
under the open business environmen t requires new and pro-active 
marketing strategies to tide over the challenges. New environment 
created a situation of uncertainty. In order to survive and develop in 
this situation of uncertainty, NAFED made foray into other business 
including infrastructure (wa rehousing, cold storage, pack houses, 
etc.), insurance, fertilizers, seeds,  jute, consumer marketing, public 
private partnership, etc. to sustain it’s income level to not only meet 
the administrative overheads but also to generate surpluses.  
 
6.2 The Committee enquired about the new business ventures 
undertaken by NAFED. NAFED stated in the written reply that as 
part of the diversification plan based on the recommendations of the 
Expert Group set up by Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation), it identified seed and fertilizer as 
potential areas and started encourag ing its Agro Service Centers 
and branches to take up the business in a systematic manner. In the 
last few years, NAFED has started supplying certified TL seed of 
various agricultural commodities to a number of State Governments 
and their designated agencies, although, in a limited manner.  
The following are the major ar eas of diversification by 
NAFED:- 

 i)  Bio Fertilizers 
6.3 The locations such as U ttranchal, West Bengal, Bakshi-ka-
Talab (in Lucknow) have been identified for setting up of Bio-fertilizer 
Units for which proposals are being examined and will be 
implemented subject to availability of land and joint venture partners.
 The Committee enquired about the time by which the new 
units will become operational. NAFED stated in its written reply that 
the proposed units are likely to be set-up and become operational 
during the next 2-3 years. After seeing the commercial viability of 
these and demand for Bio-fertilizer Unit in other States, NAFED may 
consider to set-up similar units in other States also. NAFED further 
informed the Committee that all out efforts were being made to 
increase the volume of sale of  Bio-Fertilizer products. Establishment 
of Liquid Bio-Fertilizer, Vermi-Compost and Bio-Compost 
manufacturing units is also under process.  
  ii) Seeds 
6.4 The business of seed has been envisaged as one of the most 
important thrust areas of NAFED.  NAFED had entered the business 
in the year 1996. The business has since then grown manifold. 
Seeds of various grains are being  produced at locations spread 
across the country including seeds of paddy, mustard, toria, wheat, 
peas, groundnut, soyabean, gram, moong, urad and toor and seeds 
of fodder varieties like Bers ee, Dhaincha and green fodder. The 
seeds production programme is s pread across the states of 
Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Raja sthan, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat and Maharashtra and is undertaken 
through tie up with farmers, St ate Seed Corporations and reputed 

private seed producing companies . Seeds are being supplied to 
various state governments including states of Jammu & Kashmir, 
Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Ma dhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh,  and Chattisgarh. Efforts are 
also being made to reach the farmers of the North Eastern states 
through the cooperative network in the respective states. NAFED 
has also entered into tie up with reputed seed producing companies 
in the private as well as in the publ ic sector for marketing their range 
of seeds in the certified and in the hybrid category across the 
country.  
6.5 The seed turnover achieved  in the year 2004-05 was around 
Rs. 26 crore which was expected to reach the level of around Rs. 70 
crore in 2005-06. Major thrust is being given to the states in the 
North Eastern sector and Konkan and Southern belt.  
6.6 In this connection, the M anaging Director, NAFED informed 
the Committee during evidence as under:- 
“We have just started seed busin ess. We did business of 
about Rs. 35 crore the year before and this year(2005), we are 
confident of doing almost Rs . 60-65 crore seed business. We 
have a vision that the year which is coming after that, we will 
go to about Rs. 100 crore of bu siness. Now, keeping that in 
mind, we are working on our strategy. Similar is the case of 
fertilizers. We distributed two la kh metric tones of fertilizers 
last year. This year, we are going to distribute about four lakh 
metric tones. We are thinking of raising it to about six lakh 
metric tones in the year which is going to come. In each area, 
we are trying to expand in this manner.”  
 

6.7 The Committee further enquired NAFED’s ventures in 
production of seed. A representativ e from NAFED replied during the 
evidence as under :- 
“Now our focus is that we w ant to move towards seed 
production. Our experience was that unless we go into the 
seed production, we will not be fully confident about the quality 
of seeds that we are market ing. We have taken up over the 
last one year an ambitious plan of the seed production in the 
last Kharif season and again in the Rabi season. We are trying 
to  have a direct dialogue with farmers and do our own seed 
production in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Maharashtra and Gujarat so that we can come up with our 
own seeds and market them in the States. This is an area 
where we are going into seed production as well as marketing 
the seed. We want to expand in this area.”  
  
iii) Distribution of Chemical Fertilizer  
6.8 NAFED started marketing of IFFCO Fertilizer initially in the 
year 1999 in the States of Bihar, Assam, UP and thereafter 
Uttranchal and Jharkhand through its own centres/franchises and 
also through dealers. NAFED is also in the process of starting 
marketing of IFFCO Fertilizer in  other States like Maharashtra, 
Chattisgarh, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. 
 
 
6.9 The business of fertilizer has grown from Rs.26.56 crore in 
1999-2000 to Rs.113.70 cr ore in the year 200 4-05. During the time 
span of 6 years, the total handling of  fertilizer of NAFED has been of 
the order of Rs.561.17 crore. NAFED is also in touch with KRIBHCO 
to source fertilizers for distribution among framers. 
 
 

iv) General Insurance 
6.10 General insurance business was one of the activities opted by 
NAFED under the diversificat ion programme. IFFCO-TOKIO 
General Insurance Co.(ITGI) wh ich was promoted by IFFCO, 
KRIBHCO and IPL besides TOKIO Marine and Fire Insurance Co. 
as foreign partners has got core strength of cooperatives. NAFED 
was approached by ITGI to becom e the Corporate agent and serve 
the farmers and cooperatives. It was also envisaged that NAFED will 
not be required to put any money in the insurance business and 
claims will be settled by ITGI. With this object in mind NAFED 
obtained Licence from IRDA on 3 rd March, 2004. It was planned to 
insure NAFED stock kept in different SWC, CWC, State Cooperative 
Marketing Federation godowns as NAFED is involved in 
PSS/Outright purchase operations . NAFED had been successful in 
insuring NAFED stock kept in SWC of Rajasthan, UP and 
Maharashtra and NAFED’s godown in Haryana. NAFED also 
insured stocks stored in CWC godowns spread all over the country. 
Member Cooperative Societies/Federations are also being 
encouraged to act as Insurance advi sors for getting  the insurance 
business from the farmers and Cooperative Organisations.  
 
6.11 NAFED made some beginning in  this new area of business. 
NAFED has done an insurance turnover of Rs. 145 lakh and earned 
a profit of Rs. 12.5 lakh during 2004-05. During 2005-06 till 30 th 
September, 2005, NAFED had made a turnover of Rs. 7 crore and a 
profit of approximately Rs. 70 lakh. It is expected that NAFED may 
touch a profit figure of Rs. 1 crore by the end of 31
st March, 2006.  

  
B. Research and Development activities 
6.12 The Committee enquired about  the research and development 
activities of NAFED and its impact. NAFED in its written reply stated 
that NAFED’s research and development activities are carried out 
through National Horticultural Research and Development 
Foundation (NHRDF) at Nasik, which was established by NAFED on 
3rd November, 1977 for carrying out Research and Development 
activities in various export oriented horticultural crops with a view to 
increasing the yield and quality for meeting domestic and export 
requirement. Onion and garlic are tw o major crops in respect of 
which NHRDF has taken up research for the last two and a half 
decades. These crops have cons istent demand in export and 
domestic markets. The major t hrust areas for R & D programs of 
NHRDF have been increasing produ ction, productivity, quality and 
increasing shelf life of perishable consumer products so that farmers 
could get better returns while consumers are benefited by availability 
of these commodities at reasonable prices and the country is able to 
earn more foreign exchange from exports. This has enabled NAFED 
to fix Minimum Export Price (MEP) for export of onions as directed 
by Ministry of Commerce. The new varieties of onion 
developed/released by NHRDF are Agrifound Dark Red (Kharif 
variety), Agrifound Light Red (Rabi variety), Agrifound Rose (Pickling 
type), Agrifound Red (Multiplie r Onion), Agrifound White (For 
dehydration).  

6.13 NAFED’s Research and Development activity also includes 
building of data base on the activi ties of NAFED. The activities 
undertaken are : 
1. Preparation of export-import data. 
2. Data on prices of different commodities in domestic as well as 
international markets.  
3. Data on production of different commodities, domestic and 
international. 
4. Data on activities of NAFED’s i.e. NAFED statistics. 
5. Preparation of different papers on cooperative movements and 
agricultural activities. 
6. To provide information and prepa re papers for different national 
and international seminars. 
7. Supply of information/stat istics to various Government 
departments/cooperative organizations.  
 
6.14 Both IIM, Ahemdabad and t he Expert Group appointed by the 
Government had recommended that a separate research and 
development division should be set up to undertake applied research 
and development in grading and st andardization and post harvest 
technology including handling, stor age, transport and packaging. The 
Division will also be responsible fo r marketing research and developing 
quality improvement programmes. In its follow up action NAFED stated 
that R&D in the case of onion and other horticultural produce, input 
from National Horticulture Research and Development Foundation, 
Nasik is taken. All respective Comm odity Divisions in Head Office 

having adequate knowledge of the re spective trade, provide technical 
input to strengthen R&D for the subject. 
 
C.    Collection of Information and its Dissemination 
6.15 NAFED has been collecting market  information from various sources 
for analyzing and disseminating it  amongst its branches, members 
societies and State Federations in the following manner :- 
 (i) Weekly price bulletin; 
 (ii) Extraction service (fortnightly); 
 (iii) NAFED Marketing Review (bi-monthly); 
 (iv) Hindi Samachar Saransh (forthnightly). 
 
D.    Vision Statement  
6.16 NAFED has informed the Committee that the following 
activities will form part of its future vision :- 
• Contract Farming for Institutional Buyers; 
• Retailing Farm Produce and Food Products through 
channel or own outlets; 
• Farm Produce Supplier; 
• Reputed Agricultural Input Supplier; 
• Logistics Provider (War ehouse, Cold Storage and 
Movement Services) 
• Futures Trading of Agricultural Commodities. 
In regard to contract farming, the Managing Director of NAFED had 
stated during the briefing that NAFE D had made initial foray into contract 
farming.  

 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.    The National Agricultural  Cooperative Marketing Federation 
of India Ltd (NAFED) was established on 2 nd October, 1958 with 
the twin objective of promoting cooperative marketing to reduce 
the price spread between the pr oducer and consumer and to 
ensure that farmers get ready ma rket and remunerative prices 
for their produce. NAFED thus acts as the Central nodal agency 
of Government of India for u ndertaking purchases of notified 
commodities in the case of oil seeds, pulses and cotton under 
Price Support Scheme (PSS) and procurement of other 
agricultural commodities of pe rishable nature under Market 
Intervention Scheme (MIS). Further, NAFED is one of the 
canalizing agencies for export of onion. Apart from the 
Government operations, NAFED is also engaged in domestic 
and international marketing of agricultural commodities under 
its own commercial operations and industrial or infrastructural 
activities in the field of agricult ure. After examining the working 
of NAFED, the Committee are of the view that there is sufficient 
scope for further improvement in various spheres of its working. 
These aspects have been dealt-wit h in greater detail by the 
Committee in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2. The Committee note that NAFED was established under 
MSCS Act in 1984 with the ai m of promoting cooperative 
marketing and ensuring remuner ative prices to the farmers for 

their produces and price sp read between producer and 
consumer be reduced. MSCS Act,  2002 came into force w.e.f. 
19th August, 2002 with the objective of greater operational and 
administrative autonomy to co operatives like NAFED. As per 
amended bye laws after the enactment of MSCS Act, 2002 
NAFED can undertake business in non agricultural and non 
traditional items to meet the ch allenges of liberalised economy. 
The Committee are of the view that the inclusion of non 
traditional and non agricultur al items should not affect the 
primary functioning of NAFED and therefore recommend that the 
focus on agricultural and allied activities should not be lost and 
NAFED should function in a manner to achieve operational and 
administrative autonomy. It should also be ensured that it 
becomes a commercially viable  organization in the changed 
business scenario in the post liberalisation era and protects the 
interests of the farmers.  

 3. NAFED undertakes various activities to fulfill the aims and 
objectives for which it has b een established. Twenty two 
activities have been enumerated in the bye-laws of NAFED for 
the purpose. The Expert Group appointed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture categorized these activities into three groups viz. the 
activities that were fully carried  out, the activities that were 
partially attempted/achieved and the activities that were not 
attempted at all. According to th e Expert Group, eight activities 
of NAFED pertain to the second  group of partially achieved 
activities and four pertain to th e third group of activities not 
attempted/achieved at all. Hence, out of twenty two activities, 12 
activities are either partially attempted or not attempted at all. 
The Expert Group desired that these activities may be reviewed 
and modified according to the requirements of NAFED. In 
Committees’ view, some of th ese activities such as advancing 
loan to its members and other cooperative institutions, 
undertaking marketing research and dissemination of market 
intelligence, acting as warehouseman and constructing its own 
godowns and cold storages, orga nizing consultancy work in 
various fields for the  benefit of the cooperative institutions and 
training of employees of cooperative societies are very 
important. These activities, if un dertaken by NAFED, will be 
beneficial to the development of  agriculture in the country and 
for the progress of the cooper ative institutions engaged in 
agriculture sector. Moreover, NAF ED should have a clear vision 
for the future as suggested by IIM, Ahmedabad. Particular 
attention should be given by NAFED to the objectives such as (i) 

helping member societies to develop market orientation, skills 
and organization so that they could deal with commodities 
within their area of operations and (ii) promoting cooperation 
among different marketing societies/federations in managing the 
flow of commodities across State borders. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that NAFED should examine at its highest 
level the feasibility of carrying out the above activities/objectives 
in order to achieve fully the ai ms and objectives for which the 
federation came into being.  
4. The Board of Directors of  NAFED consists of 21 members 
and with cooption and special in vitees, the total membership of 
the Board now stands at 25. The  Committee were informed that 
previously the Board consisted of 44 members but after the 
enactment of the Multi State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002, the 
size of the Board has been reduced to 21 as per clause 41(3) of 
the Act. Out of 21 members of the Board 10 are from State 
Marketing Federations. At present 25 state level cooperative 
Marketing Federations are members of NAFED. As per bye-law 
20(a) of NAFED, only first 10 in descending order of their ranking 
are eligible to nominate one director each to the Board of 
NAFED. The ranking is based on weighted average of the 
percentage equity share capital of the concerned state in total 
issued share capital of NA FED and average business with 
NAFED excluding business of Go vernment Schemes. In 
accordance with bye-law 20(b), one  director from North-Eastern 
States including Sikkim can be nominated if eligible under this 
bye-law. The Committee have the a pprehension that only first 10 

states whose share capital is mo re and whose business is more 
with NAFED can become directors of the Board. Other states will 
only be on-lookers and they will no t be able to put forward their 
views in the Board even thou gh they are members. The 
Committee are of the view that this unequal representation of 
states in the Board should be corrected and NAFED being an 
apex level marketing federation should accord equal opportunity 
to all the states to become memb ers of the Board. Commercial 
viability and profit making may be one of the goals of NAFED but 
overall development of agricultur e sector and welfare of farmers 
all over the country should be the main focus of the activities of 
NAFED. Instead of expecting th e States to do more business 
with NAFED, it should identify specific crop potential of the 
states and take proactive steps for the development of the same. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that bye-laws of NAFED 
should be suitably amended so that all the states will have equal 
opportunity to participate in the administration of NAFED.  
5. NAFED is the nodal agency of the Government of India for 
undertaking procurement of oilseeds and pulses under its Price 
Support Scheme(PSS) whenever the market rates of these 
commodities go below the decl ared Minimum Support Price 
(MSP). NAFED is implementing PSS since 1976-77. Under PSS, 
NAFED procures commodities like urad, gram, masoor, 
groundnut pods, mustardseed, safflower seed, sunflower seed 
and Copra. The Committee were in formed that the magnitude of 
procurement of oilseeds under the scheme until 1999 was 
limited and sizeable stocks were required to be procured on very 

few occasions. From 1976-77 till 1998-99, the procurement was 
of the order of Rs.380 crores only. However, since 1999, heavy 
procurement of oilseeds particul arly that of mustard seeds had 
to be undertaken by NAFED unde r Price Support Scheme. The 
Committee note that liberalized  imports and higher global 
production of oil seeds resulted in import of huge quantity of 
edible oil into the country at cheaper rates. Due to this the prices 
of oilseeds in the domestic markets remained depressed and 
heavy procurement of oilseeds under PSS had to be undertaken 
by NAFED. Finance for procur ement of oilseeds and pulses 
under PSS is made available to NA FED by way of Cash Credit 
Limit sanctioned by RBI. The Committee note that the losses 
incurred by NAFED in Price Support Operations are reimbursed 
through budget provisions (non-p lan) by the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation. In both PSS and MIS schemes 
losses are inherent due to th e fact that the purchases of the 
Commodities are undertaken by giving the MSP to the farmers 
when the prices are ac tually ruling below the MSP in the market. 
In this regard, NAFED informed  the Committee that loss in Price 
Support Operations varies from 10 % to 25%. During the period 
2000-2005, NAFED had utilized an amount of Rs.955 crore from 
the budget provisions on account  of losses in PSS operations. 
This is a huge loss to the excheq uer by any reckoning. This loss 
is mainly due to the liberalized  import policy. The Government 
has announced further reduction in import duty on crude as well 
as refined and edible oils in the budget 2007-08. This may 
increase the availability of edible o il and make it more affordable 

but such adhoc measures will not serve the interest of the 
country in the long run. The Comm ittee are of the firm view that 
need of the hour is the holistic planning for the indigenous 
production of various oil seed s at the desired quality and 
quantity to meet the edible oil needs of the country. Research 
and development activities should also be encouraged by the 
Government for producing better  quality seeds for oil crops 
which can provide more yield. Farmers should also be given 
incentives for cultivation of  oil seeds crops. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that a study should be 
conducted on present and future edib le oil needs of the country, 
current production and its deficiencies, quality of seeds 
available in the country and their yi eld position, import of edible 
oil and its impact on the economy and suitable measures should 
accordingly be initiated to incr ease the production of oil seeds 
in order to make the country self sufficient in meeting the edible 
oil needs of the people. Action taken in this regard should be 
conveyed to the Committee.  
6. The Committee note that the funds for Price Support 
Operations are made available by way of Cash Credit Limit (CCL) 
sanctioned by RBI to be operated through SBI on the 
recommendations of the Government of India up to 75% on 
hypothecation of stocks keeping a margin of 25% as per banking 
norms. The remaining 25% can be drawn only after Government 
guarantee in lieu of margin mone y is furnished. NAFED enjoys 
this Cash Credit Limit to th e extent of Rs.1631 crore. The 
Committee were informed that during Rabi, 2005 season, the 

Cash Credit Limit to the abo ve extent got exhausted in view of 
unprecedented procurement of  mustardseeds and pulses 
undertaken by NAFED. As th e SBI rate of interest was higher 
than the other commercial banks, funds were borrowed from 
other commercial banks at the instance of Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation. As  a result, funds could be 
arranged at an average rate of interest of 7% from other 
commercial banks, as against 10.25% being charged by SBI. 
Thereafter, SBI has also agreed  to reduce the interest rate 
downward to 7%. In this manner,  a reduction in the loss to the 
Government exchequer by around Rs.150 crores to Rs.175 
crores was achieved. The Committee are of the view that last 
minute rush like this should be avoided as such tendencies 
often result in huge loss to the Government. They, therefore, 
urge the Government to create a flexible mechanism for such 
situations and to take timely and suitable steps in advance. 
Further, NAFED has suggested to create a Revolving Fund for 
PSS and MIS operations which would help it in drawing funds for 
preparatory arrangements, public ity and making timely payment 
to the farmers. At present, procured stock is hypothecated to the 
banks to arrange money for payment to farmers which takes 3 to 
7 days. The Expert Group ha d also recommended that for 
effective implementation of Price Support Scheme, Government 
should create an interest free Revo lving Fund. The proposal is 
said to be under active consider ation of the Government. It is 
quite obvious that for the effecti ve implementation of PSS and 
MIS some institutional  mechan ism for funding  has to be 

worked out. The Committee, ther efore, desire that Government 
should pursue the proposal with all seriousness and should put 
in place an institutional mechanism for funding the price support 
operations.  
7. NAFED is also the nodal agen cy of the Government of India 
for implementing the Market Interve ntion Scheme (MIS). As per 
the provisions of this scheme, the Federation undertakes 
procurement of perishable items which are not covered under 
the PSS such as onion, potato, ginger, kinnow, malta, naspati, 
apple, black pepper, red chillies, coriander seed, eggs and palm 
oil bunches. In accordance with the guidelines prescribed by the 
Government of India, the losses under the MIS are to be shared 
on 50:50 basis between Central and State Government 
concerned. In case of North-Eastern States it would be 75:25 
basis respectively. However, NAFED informed the Committee 
that previously 100% of the losses incurred by it under MIS were 
reimbursed by the Government bu t since 2001, only 25% of the 
losses are reimbursed. The Committee would like the 
Government to examine this aspect and come out with a formula 
to compensate suitably the lo sses incurred by NAFED under 
MIS. According to NAFED th e intervention under Market 
Intervention Scheme is not always very effective, because the 
proposal from the State Governmen t is often received late. In 
order to achieve the objective of market intervention scheme for 
stabilizing the prices at reasonable level, preventing the farmers 
from distress sale and for sustaining production, it is imperative 
that the decision on market inter vention is taken promptly and 

NAFED initiate action without loss of time. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that both th e Government and NAFED should 
act promptly and in close coordination as far as decision making 
process and implementation of the market intervention scheme 
are concerned in order to ensure that the schemes such as Price 
Support Scheme and Market Intervention Scheme actually 
benefit the farmers. 
8. The Committee note that  the export of onion is presently 
allowed through NAFED and 12 State Trading Enterprises 
without quantitative restrictions on all varieties of onion. NAFED 
informed the Committee that it w as the sole canalizing agency 
from 1974 to 1999. According to Exim Policy, 1999 State Trading 
Enterprises were also allowed to act as canalizing agencies for 
export of onion. However, NAFED is the only actual direct major 
exporter of onion. Others only issue NOCs to the Associate 
Shippers who actually undertake expor t of onion. In this regard, 
the Committee note that the very purpose of having canalizing 
agencies is to have a control o ver the export of onions which 
would otherwise result in price ri se of onion due to uncontrolled 
export. NAFED’s request to be d esignated as the sole canalizing 
agency merits consideration as it  will provide a single window 
clearance for export and will facilitate effective control over the 
exports. The Committee are concer ned to note that the prices of 
onion escalate very often which affects the people particularly 
the poor people very much. Export of agricultural commodities 
including onions may be en couraged but the domestic 
availability and price situation should be the prime consideration 

before the Government while a llowing such exports. They, 
therefore, recommend that th e Government should have 
effective control over the export of agricultural commodities 
including onion and for this purpose they may, among other 
measures, consider appointing NAFED as the sole canalizing 
agency for the export of onion. 
9. Head Quarter of NAFED is located at New Delhi. It has four 
regional offices in New Delhi, Mu mbai, Kolkata and Chennai and 
31 branches located all over India. The Committee were informed 
that steps have been taken to open  branch offices in the newly 
created states of Uttarachal, Jharkhand and Chattisgarh. 
However, it was found that there is no branch office of NAFED in 
Goa, Pondicherry, Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep. The 
business of Andaman & Nicobar is being looked after by Kolkata 
Branch, that of Lakshadweep by Bangalore Branch and of Goa 
by Pune Branch. For the North E astern region, its activities are  
being coordinated by Guwahati and Siliguri Branches in Assam 
and a liaison office being operated from Agartala. The reason 
quoted by NAFED for less number of offices in the North East 
was the weak condition of cooperati ves in the region in terms of 
organizational set up and financial conditions. In this regard the 
Committee are of the view that NA FED should have more offices 
in the region to cater to the n eeds of farmers directly and for the 
development of agriculture in that region. Interests of farmers of 
union territories may also su ffer due to absence of NAFED’s 
office there. The Committee, ther efore, recommend that Branch 
offices of NAFED may be opened in  all the states of North East, 

all the union territories and the states where there is no office at 
present so as to take care of the needs of the farmers of these 
regions. The Committee also find that the business operations of 
NAFED are not uniform through out the country. Operations of 
NAFED are concentrated in Western region and the maximum 
profit of NAFED comes from th is region. Operations of NAFED 
are relatively less in Southe rn and Eastern regions. The 
Committee were informed that NA FED has prepared an action 
plan for the development of its operations in the South. They 
recommend that NAFED should chalk out action plans for 
further expansion of its oper ations in Northern, Eastern, 
Southern and North Eastern re gions and implement them 
effectively for the benefit of farme rs of all the regions of the 
country.  
10. The Committee note that the retail marketing operations of 
NAFED are limited to the thr ee retail outlets in Delhi. These 
outlets were established around one and a half decades ago at 
the instance of the Ministry of Agriculture with a view to 
safeguarding the interests of consum ers. It is also running two 
retail outlets in Shimla and one each at Jaipur and Hyderabad. 
Although it was decided that with the changes in market 
scenario, NAFED should enter into consumer marketing in a 
better way by going in for a ch ain of NAFED Bazaars, only two 
such outlets were opened in Delhi. One of them had to be closed 
down as it was not economically viable.  The Expert Group had 
identified consumer marketing as  a potential area for NAFED for 
increasing turnover and for higher price realization of the 

produce by value addition. The Group had recommended that 
NAFED’s activities in this area should be enlarged by 
establishing linkages with consumer marketing organizations 
and others by using NAFED bra nd name. In this regard, the 
Committee are of the view that NAFED’s presence in the field of 
retail marketing will make ava ilable quality agricultural 
commodities at lower prices to  consumers. NAFED’s present 
retail marketing network is very much limited and there is much 
scope for expansion. As recommended by the Expert Group, 
NAFED may enlarge its retail ma rketing operations either by 
itself or through the outlets  of Agricultural Marketing 
Federations and Cooperatives by using its brand name. 
Moreover, the Committee are of th e view that there should be a 
central mechanism to inform the consumers about the retail 
marketing prices of agricultural commodities on a daily basis 
with its regional variations due to various factors. Being an all 
India agricultural marketing fed eration NAFED can be the most 
suitable organization in this regard. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government and NAFED should work out a 
central mechanism for bringing ou t a price bulletin by NAFED of 
various agricultural commodities on a daily basis. This would be 
very useful to consumers as it would indicate the actual retail 
prices of various agricultural  commodities and may check the 
artificial price hike by private tr aders/trading companies and the 
subsequent inflationary tendencies.  
11. NAFED has cold storages,  warehouses and godowns in 
various parts of the country. The Federation has cold storages 

of 5,565 MT capacity and another one with 4,000 MT capacity is 
being constructed in Lawrence Road, Delhi. NAFED informed the 
Committee that the Federation has gone into the area of 
infrastructure in a big way and has plans to expand its cold-
storage chain. In this regard , the Committee are concerned to 
note that there is no infrastructure or supply chain at present for 
preserving agricultural produce in a non-perishable manner after 
these are harvested. The Ministry of Agriculture has proposed to 
set up a network of marketing infr astructure in the coming few 
years as the post-harvest losses on account of lack of 
infrastructure as of now is to the tune of Rs 60,000 crore per 
annum. The Committee take a serious view of such huge 
economic loss to the country due to lack of infrastructure 
facilities particularly due to insu fficient number of cold storages 
to preserve agricultural produce fr om perishing. They urge the 
Government to take immediate steps including provision of 
funds to create a network of cold  storages in th e country using 
cost-effective, appropriate and indigenous technology which is 
suitable to the conditions existi ng in the country. NAFED is the 
apex level organization engaged in marketing of agricultural 
commodities. The Committee expect that NAFED would play a 
leading role in creation of a network of cold storages to preserve 
harvested vegetables and fruits by setting up cold storages by 
itself or in cooperation with the Union/State Governments.  
12. The Committee note with concern that many of the 
industrial units set up by NAFED were failed ventures due to 
poor planning, delay in execu tion and consequent cost 

escalation, labour problems and seasonal nature of commodities 
handled. Many of them were alr eady closed on  becoming sick 
and unviable. The NAFED Processed  Foods Unit, Delhi, Raichur 
Cooperative Oil Complex, NAFED  Warehousing and Processing 
Industries, Vashi (for processing of Niger seeds for export 
purpose), NAFED Krishi Yantra Udyog, Bhiwadi. NAFED Kinnow 
Grading, Waxing Precooling-cum-cold storage, Maujgarh, 
Punjab were all failed ventures. All these units were closed 
down. Premises of these units are either let out for warehousing 
or proposed to be leased out to others. The Committee were 
informed that the premises of NAFED Krishi Yantra Udyog, 
Bhiwadi are proposed to be leased on licence fee basis for 
manufacturing plastic products under the brand name of 
NAFED. Utilization of brand name  of NAFED for production of 
plastics is a matter to be consid ered seriously.  In Committee’s 
view brand name of NAFED should only be utilized for 
production in agriculture and allied fields.  The Committee are 
concerned to note the condition of Konark Jute Limited (KJL) 
which became unviable since its inception.  Even on 
implementation of BIFR’s rehabilitation scheme, operational 
efficiency of the company could not be improved due to labour 
problems and sluggish market conditions.  The Committee 
recommend that NAFED should evaluate the performance of this 
unit at the highest level and immediate steps should be taken for 
its successful running.  The reas ons put forth by NAFED that 
performance of industrial units largely depend upon overall 
business activities of trade and industries in the country which 

vary from time to time, are not acceptable to the Committee.  The 
Committee are of the view that wi th such mind set, NAFED will 
not succeed in any new venture.  Instead of depending on 
external factors for the performance of industrial units floated by 
NAFED, it should first carefully choose a project.  Secondly, it 
should undertake feasibility studies before starting any 
industrial unit.  Seasonal nature of agricultural products should 
also be taken into account.  On ce any unit is started, NAFED 
should not spare any effort fo r the successful running of the 
unit.  The Committee expect that professionalism and proper 
planning and implementation will help NAFED in successful 
running its industrial ventures. The Committee recommend that 
NAFED should tie-up with soci al welfare schemes for setting up 
food processing units in backward districts for benefits to 
accrue to small farmers. The Committee also recommend that 
NAFED should draw a specific plan of action with regard to each 
unit and implement the same after  in-depth study about their 
feasibility.  
13. The Committee note with concern that despite the 
existence of a wide network of cooperatives in the country, 
NAFED’s own joint venture initiatives with State Cooperative 
Marketing Federations and Ma rketing Cooperative Societies 
have been very few. The purchases were nil in 2000-01 and 2001-
02, Rs 241 lakh in 2002-03, Rs 51.30 lakh in 2003-04 and Rs 
267.20 lakh in 2004-05. The reasons  adduced for low level of 
joint ventures with State Cooperative Marketing Federation was 
the large number of problems crippling the cooperative sector in 

the country. Several cooperative  units are sick and need to be 
revived. The Committee take a serious view of this situation. 
Unless cooperative societies and State Level Marketing 
Federations are strong, Apex Marketing Federations like NAFED 
may not be able to reap the benefits of the vast network of 
cooperatives in the country. In this regard the Committee note 
that a Task Force headed by Sh ri Vaidyanathan had made 
certain suggestions to revive the cooperative sector in the 
country. The Committee urge upon the Government to consider 
the suggestions of the Task Force and take all the steps to find 
out the reasons for sickness of the cooperative sector in the 
country and revive them in a time bound manner. The State 
Governments may also be involved in this process.  
14. The Committee note that research and development 
activities are carried out through National Horticultural Research 
and Development Foundation (NHRDF) at Nasik which was 
established by NAFED in 1977 fo r carrying out research and 
development activities on various export oriented horticultural 
crops with a view to increase th e yield and quality for meeting 
domestic and export requirements. Major thrust areas of 
research and development programmes of NHRDF are 
increasing production, productivi ty, quality and increasing shelf 
life of these perishable consumer products. The Committee are 
not satisfied with the research and development activities of 
NAFED and recommend that bei ng a premier agricultural 
cooperative marketing institution, NAFED should have played a 
distinct and leading role in r esearch and development in post 

harvest research, quality im provement and marketing. A 
separate research and developmen t division should be set up 
for undertaking applied research and development in grading 
and standardization, post harvest technology including 
handling, storage, transport and packaging. The division should 
also be made responsible for marketing research activities. The 
Committee also recommend that NAFED should draw up an 
action plan to step up its research and development activities to 
provide support to other agricultural cooperatives and marketing 
federations.  
15.  The Committee note that NAFED’s future vision includes 
contract farming for institutional buyers, agricultural input 
suppliers etc. The Committee consider that contract farming by 
NAFED would benefit small far mers, serve as a model farming 
for farmers and boost the development of agriculture in the 
country. The Committee would li ke to suggest that NAFED may 
either enter into contract far ming on its own or have joint 
ventures with the State Cooper ative Marketing Federations and 
Primary Cooperative societies who are members of NAFED. The 
selection of agricultural commodities for contract farming 
should be done very carefully. Preference should be given to 
essential commodities which are in short supply such as pulses, 
oil seeds, onion and garlic. The other thrust area for NAFED for 
future concentration is seed supply which is the prime 
agricultural input. In Committee’ s view, NAFED should supply 
high breed varieties of seeds which will boost the per hectare 
yield of various agricultural commodities. At present, NAFED 

supply seeds in a limited way.  The Committee recommend that 
NAFED should take up quality seed  production in a big way and 
supply the seeds to all the states through its network of 
cooperatives. The Committee consider bio-fertilizer as the 
another thrust area that should relieve immediate attention of 
NAFED. Bio-fertilizers such as vermi-compost and bio-compost 
are safe for human beings and ar e relatively cheaper than the 
chemical fertilizers. On the other hand chemical fertilizers are 
harmful when they enter food chain through the crops. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that NAFED should take up 
production of bio-fertilizers in a big way and market them 
throughout the country. The Co mmittee may be appraised of the 
action taken in this vital area.  
16. NAFED have pointed out that although it was exempted 
from payment of income tax on its earnings in the past, 
cooperative income tax from retr ospective effect has since been 
imposed on the Federation. The tax liability per annum would be 
33.66% of its income and the past a rrears liable to be paid for 18 
years from 1984-85 to 2004-05 amount to Rs.61 crore. It was 
pointed out that this has come  as a serious blow to the 
cooperatives which came into existence primarily to secure the 
interests of farmers. With th eir comparatively smaller and 
weaker capital base they would find it hard to bear this 
additional financial burden of pa yment of income tax especially 
the arrears for the past 18 years.  According to NAFED there is 
need to consider roll back of this provision and exempt 
cooperatives from payment of income tax. In this regard, the 

Committee note that the benefit of deductions under section 
36(1)(viii) of Income Tax Act h as been extended to cooperative 
banks by the Government in the budget 2007-08. NAFED has 
reportedly taken up the matter with  the Ministry of Agriculture 
and the Ministry of Finance for an  amendment in the Income Tax 
Act to the effect that the income tax may be paid prospectively. 
The Committee suggest that the Ministry of Agriculture should 
take up the matter with the Finance Ministry for waiving the tax 
liability of Cooperatives, or at least ensure that it is imposed with 
prospective effect instead of retrospective effect. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the outcome of the efforts made by 
the Ministry of Agriculture in this regard.  
17. NAFED has a full-fledged Vi gilance Section headed by the 
Chief Vigilance Officer in the rank of Additional Managing 
Director. Complaints of all sorts are dealt with in the Vigilance 
Section. Besides trying to detect and investigate cases of 
corruption and other malpractic es, the Vigilance Section also 
advices the management on preventive action so as to reduce 
the chances of corruption and malpr actices. In spite of this, the 
Committee note with concern th at 21 complaints against the 
employees of NAFED during the period 2000-05 regarding 
procurement of commodities etc. and 15 vigilance cases against 
them during the same period have been filed. An organization 
like NAFED which is engaged in procurement of agricultural 
commodities under Price Support operations of the Government, 
and dealing in cooperative mar keting for fetching remunerative 
prices for farmers needs to have a team of upright, dedicated 

and loyal workforce. The Federation, therefore, needs to 
discipline its employees, strengthen its vigilance mechanism 
and deal firmly with those who i ndulge in any kind of irregular 
practice.  The pending vigilan ce cases should be pursued to 
their logical conclusion and penal action initiated against 
delinquent employees.  
 
 
    NEW DELHI; 
August   20, 2007 
Sravana  29, 1929(S) 
C. KUPPUSAMI,
Chairman,
Committee on Estimates.
 

      ANNEXURE I 
 
20 BOARD OF DIRECTORS   20. BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 The Board of Directors    The Board of Directors elected 
elected by the General Body,    by the General Body shall consist 
once in three years shall consist of:  of: 
 
a) One representative each of State  20(a) one nom inee each of the State 
level general purpose cooperative  Level General Purpose Cooperative 
marketing federation admitted under  Ma rketing Federation excluding UTS 
bye-law 4(a)(i);     admitted under Bye-law 4(a)(i) which  
has contributed atleast Rs.20 lakhs 
individually as equity through 
admission/additional contribution. 
 
In case there are more than 10 
such member federations then the first 
10 in descending order of their ranking 
would be eligible to nominate one 
director each to the Board of NAFED. 
The ranking will be based on weighted 
average of the percentage equity share 
capital of the concerned State in the 
total issued share capital of NAFED 
and the average business with NAFED 
excluding PSS/MIS or any other 
business of Government Scheme in 
that State as a percentage of the total 
business with NAFED in equal 
proportion.  
Such nominee shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of the 
Act/Rules 2002. 
 
20(b) one representative to be elected   O ne Director, if eligible from North- 
by the members admitted under bye law  Ea stern States including Sikkim to be  
4(a)(ii) from amongst themselves elected on the basis of the criteria 
laid down at (a) above and if none 
qualifies then vacancy will be 
filled up by the eleventh 
candidate from the list prepared 
in para(a) above. 

            
         ANNEXURE - II 
 
FINANCIAL RESOURCE(S) BASE OF NAFED AT THE END OF 
FINANCIAL YEAR 
            
          ( R s .  I n  L a k h )  
          T e n t a t i v e   
PARTICU
LARS 
1993-
94 
1994-
95 
1995-
96 
1996-
97 
1997-
98 
1998-
99 
1999-
2000 
2000-
01 
2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
             
AUTHORI
SED 
SHARE 
CAPITAL 
558.91 558.91 558.91 2058.91 2058.91 2058.91 2058.91 2058.91 2058.91 2058.91 2058.91 2058.91 
             
PAID UP 
SHARE 
CAPITAL 
324.18 407.76 409.36 498.63 624.43 719.08 839.18 855.43 891.41 926.46 1009.31 1070.18 
             
RESERVE 
AND 
OTHER 
FUNDS 
4298.81 6668.29 8380.97 8854.77 9778.21 10611.3
9 
10117.9
9 
10277.7
3 
10691.1
5 
10918.74 11007.2
8 
11204.0
6 
             
BUDGET
ARY 
SUPPORT  
NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
             
SECURED 
LOANS 
621.04 7505.23 92.56 55.07 17.68 13.79 48974.0
2 
105681.
6 
97596.3
4 
12166.56 42011.0
2 
133470.
00 
             
UNSECUR
ED 
LOANS 
1105.46 2145.75 184.98 607.88 631.03 616.3 594.62 21.41 9.63 9.63 - - 
             
MARKET 
BORROW
INGS  
NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
 

         Annexure - III 
COMMODITY-WISE FOREIGN TRADE OF NAFED DURING THE  
YEAR 2000-01 TO 2004-05  
 
                      (QTY IN M.TONNES/VALUE IN RS. LAKHS) 
COMMODITY      2000-01       2001-02      2002-03 2003-04        2004-05 
 Qty.  Value Qty  Value  Qty  Value Qty  Value Qty  Value 
1. Outright Export    
  
Oilseeds/Extracti
ons 
      
Cotton -- -- 70 22.11 1431 457.44 709 524.18 -- -- 
Nigerseeds 684 158.74 108 18.39 72 19.06 274 68.23 228 53.56 
Sunflowerseed 13 6.10 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Groundnut  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Total 697 164.84 178 40.50 1503 476.50 983 592.41 228 53.56 
 
2. Horticulture         
Onion 38941 3453.25 23903 2449.72 14242 1660.19 15797 2167.80 10774 1412.23 
Garlic -- -- 15 7.53 -- -- -- -- 151 48.79 
Potato 1450 178.28 25 3.40 1037 132.67 3760 567.02 1988 378.34 
Total  40391 3631.53 23943 2460.65 15279 1792.86 19557 2734.82 12913 1839.36 
 
3. Foodgrain and    
    Pulses 
          
Bajra -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Rice  -- -- 127639 8582.76 24850
6 
15242.49 8535 5962.38 5000 242.65 
Gram -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Wheat & wheat 
flour 
-- -- 109894 5397.33 10277
2 
4982.56 82226 5482.95 -- -- 
Total  -- -- 237533 13980.0
9 
35127
8 
20225.05 16760
1 
11450.6
0 
5000 242.65 
 
4. Spices           
Turmeric 686 168.17 451 109.34 445 152.17 425 179.20 296 103.39 
Chillies -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 95 30.87 
Other Spices 190 437.14 160 303.06 -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Total  876 605.31 611 412.0 445 152.17 425 179.20 391 134.26 
 
Other Miisc.  -- -- -- 274.18 21564 2201.30 4517 1114.95 396 205.72 
Outright Total 41964 4401.68 262265 17167.8
2 
39006
9 
24847.88 19308
3 
16071.9
8 
18928 2475.55 
b) Exports by 
Associate 
Shippers  
          
Onion 14258
6 
12978.7
5 
165157 13006.7
3 
13718
9 
9642.39 23180
0 
21686.3
9 
283098 25142.56 
Nigerseed -- -- -- -- -- -- 759 268.89 -- -- 
c) Tie-up -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 18126.8
9 
 16200.00 
Total Foreign 
Trade 
18455
0 
17380.4
0 
427422 30174.5 52728 34490.27 57663
6 
56154.1
5 
302026 27618.11 
 

          
         Annexure IV 
 
            
        Qty. in MTs. Value in Lacs. 
Sl. 
No. 
Commodity  2000-01 
Qty.      Value 
 2001-02 
Qty.         Value 
 2002-03 
Qty.   Value 
 
1. 
 
Tea 
 
28 
 
21.00  
 
65.00 
 
46.15 
 
154.00 
 
102.00 
2. Fertilizer 17543 854.17 44305 1973.69 53865 270.00 
3. Mustard Oil 64.54 21.28 670.00 231.68 1767 218.00 
4. Onion - - 2276.00 155.00 - - 
5. Potato 126.00 7.00 - - 68.00 4.32 
6. Phool Jharu - - 50.00 6.12 101.00 15.00 
7. Black Pipple 91.00 203.00 4.02 7.64 - - 
 
 
          Qty. in MTs. Value in Lacs. 
Sl. 
No. 
Commodity         2003-04 
Qty.       Value 
 2004-05(upto 31.12.04) 
Qty.     Value 
 
1. 
 
Tea 
 
136 
 
8.46 
 
105.12 
 
73.87 
2. Fertilizer 27410 1453.62 24960 1397.36 
3. Mustard Oil - - 164 9.63 
4. Urad 2603 258.02 - - 
5. Paddy 93 4.67 358 21.50 
6. Mustartseed 31 5.34 12 2.29 
7. Rice 400 20.00 - - 
8. Sugar - - 494 52.47 
9. Jute - - 460 44.61 
10. Pineapple Sucker 
(Lac. Pcs.) 
 
(7.28) 
 
8.15 
 
(6.45) 
 
7.09 
 

MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2005-06) 
 
 
NINTH  SITTING 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 11thAugust, 2005 from 1500 hours to 
1710 hours in Committee Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
     Present 
 
 Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman 
  
         Members 
 
2. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
3. Shri Anant Gudhe 
4. Prof. Chander Kumar 
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Sukhdeo Paswan  
8. Prof. M. Ramadass 
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
10. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
11. Shri Manabendra Shah 
12. Shri M.A.  Kharabela Swain 
13. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.  Shri A.K. Singh  - Pr incipal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
2.      Shri B.D. Swan  - Deputy Secretary 
3.      Shri Cyril J ohn  -  Under Secretary 
 
  

WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
1. Smt. Radha Singh  -  Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Additional Secretary  
 
 
NATIONAL AGRICUTLURAL COOPERATIVE MARKETING FEDERATION OF 
INDIA LTD. (NAFED) 
 
1.      Shri Alok Ranjan   -  Managing Director 
2.      Shri U.P. Singh    -  Additional Managing  
 Director 
 
 
2.    The Committee took briefing by the representatives of Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agricultur e and Cooperation) and NAFED on the 
subject, ‘National Agricultural Cooperativ e Marketing Federation of India Ltd. 
(NAFED)’.  The briefing was concluded. 
 
3.   A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2005-06) 
 
 
ELEVENTH  SITTING 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 14 th October, 2005 from 1100 hours to 1300 
hours in Committee Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
     Present 
 
 Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman 
  
         Members 
 
1. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
2. Shri Anant Gudhe 
3. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4. Prof. Chander Kumar 
5. Shri Samik Lahiri 
6. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda  
8. Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
9. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil  
10. Prof. M. Ramadass 
11. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
12. Shri Manabendra Shah 
13. Shri M.A.  Kharabela Swain 
14. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1.      Shri B.D. Swan  - Deputy Secretary 
2.      Shri Cyril J ohn  -  Under Secretary 
 
  

WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
1. Smt. Radha Singh  -  Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Additional Secretary   
 
 
NATIONAL AGRICUTLURAL COOPERATIVE MARKETING FEDERATION OF 
INDIA LTD. (NAFED) 
 
1.       Shri Alok Ranjan   -  Managing Director 
2.      Shri U.P. Singh    -  Additional Managing  
 Director 
 
 
2.    The Committee took oral evidence  of the representatives of Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Agricu lture and Cooperation) and NAFED on the 
subject, ‘National Agricultural Cooperativ e Marketing Federation of India Ltd. 
(NAFED)’.  The oral evidence was concluded. 
 
4.   A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF SEVENTH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2006-07) 
 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 8th September, 2006 from 1100 to 1245 
hours. 
 
Present 
 
       Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman 
  
         Members 
 
2. Shri Lal Muni Choubey  
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Anant Gudhe 
5. Shri P. Karunakaran 
6. Shri Vijaykumar Khandelwal 
7. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
8. Prof. Chander Kumar 
9. Shri Samik Lahiri 
10. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
11. Shri Prabodh Panda  
12. Shri Sukdeo Paswan 
13. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat 
14. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi 
15. Shri Manabendra Shah 
16. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
17. Shri Lakshman Singh 
18. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
19. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
20. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1.      Shri  Rajeev S harma   - Deputy Secretary 
2.      Smt. Manju Chaudh ary  - Assistant Director 
 
    

 
            WITNESSES  
 
    Ministry of Agriculture  
   (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Special Secretary  
2. Shri Satish Chander  - Joint Secretary  
 
 
National Agriculture Co-operative Marketing Federation of India Ltd. (NAFED) 
 
      1. Shri Alok Ranjan  - Managing Director 
      2. Shri U.P. Singh   - Additional Managing Director 
 
 
 
2.   The Committee took further oral evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of Agriculture (Departm ent of Agriculture and Cooperation) and NAFED 
on the subject – ‘National Ag ricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India 
Ltd. (NAFED)’. The evidence was concluded.  
 
3.            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
               The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF SIXTH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
   (2007-08) 
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 16th August, 2007 from 1500 hours to 
1600 hours.  
  
    
  Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  -  Chairman 
  
Members 
 
 
2.  Shri Lal  Muni Choubey 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri P. Karunakaran 
5. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
6. Shri D. Narbula 
7. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi 
8. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
9.  Shri Lakshman Singh 
10. Kunwar Manvendra Singh 
  11. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
 
 
 Secretariat  
 
 
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C.V. Gadgil   - Director (I) 
3. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman on his behalf and on behalf of the Committee 
placed on record their profound sorrow on the sad demise of Shri Ajit Singh, Chairman 
of NAFED and also a sitting Member of Parliament.  
 
3. The Committee consider ed and adopted the following dr aft Reports with some 
modifications  as given in Annexures I and II:- 
 
(i) **   **   **    ** 
 

(ii) Report on the Ministry of Agri culture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) - ‘National Agri cultural Cooperative Market ing Federation of India 
Ltd. (NAFED)’ 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of 
modifications and also to make verbal an d other consequential changes, if any, arising 
out of factual verification by the concerne d Ministries and present the same to the 
House.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned.  

        
     Annexure  II 
 
Modifications made by the Estimates Co mmittee in the Draft Report on Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) – ‘National 
Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Ltd. (NAFED)’ 
 
 
Para No.  Page No.  Line   Modification 
 
     12            122            2 nd   After : industrial ventures. 
 
Insert: The Committee recommend that  
NAFED should tie-up with social 
welfare schemes for setting up food 
processing units in backward districts 
for benefits to accrue to  small farmers.   
  
 