E.C.  No. 1414 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS – BANKING DIVISION) 
 
 
Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report of Estimates Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
Ministry of Finance and Company Affairs (Department of Economic Affairs 
– Banking Division) - `Regional Rural Banks’ 
 
 
     S  
      E  
       A  
        L  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   2.12. 2004 
 
 
Lok Sabha Secretariat 
New Delhi  
  
 
 
December   ,  2004/Agrahayana     ,1926 
 

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE(2004-2005)  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION         (v) 
 
CHAPTER  I  Report       1  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of Sitting  of the Estimates Committee   
held on……..        
 
II. Analysis of the action  taken by Government on  
the recommendations/observations contained in  
the 16th Report of Estimates Committee 
 (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)  
 

COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
     Members 
 
2.      Shri A. Sai Prathap 
3.     Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4.   Shri Chander Kumar 
5.   Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
6.       Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7.       Shri Anant Gudhe 
8.   Shri Jai Prakash 
9.       Shri N.N. Krishnadas 
10.   Shri Samik Lahiri 
11.    Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 
12.    Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato 
13.    Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
14.   Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15.    Shri Prabodh Panda 
16.    Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.    Shri Sukhdeo Paswan  
18.    Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
19.    Shri Harikewal Prasad 
20.    Prof. M. Ramadass 
21.    Shri K.S. Rao 
22.    Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
23.    Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
24.    Shri Manabendra Shah 
25.    Shri Laxman Singh 
26.    Shri Sartaj Singh 
27.    Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
28.    Shrii Akhilesh Yadav 
29.    Shri V. Kishore Chandra Deo 
30.    Shri Vijay Krishan 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri John Joseph  - Additional  Secretary 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K. Singh  - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
4. Shri Cyril John  -      Under Secretary 
5. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Assistant Director 

     
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Second Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained  in the Sixteenth  Report of Estimates 
Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs – Banking Division) – ‘Regional 
Rural Banks’. 
 
2.  The Sixteenth Report (Thi rteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 29 th April, 2003. The Government furnished their  
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in 
that Report on 4 th December, 2003.  The Draft Report was 
considered and adopted by the Estimates Committee(2004-2005) at 
their sitting held on 27th September, 2004. 
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following Chapters:- 
 
I. Report; 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
 III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies; 
 
IV.   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee; and 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
4.   An analysis of action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of Estimates 
Committee (13
th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix II.  It would be 
observed therefrom that out of 34 observations/recommendations 

made in the Report, 21 recommendations i.e. 61.76% have been 
accepted by Government. Replies of Government in respect of 5 
recommendations i.e. 14.71% have not been accepted by the 
Committee and replies in respect of 8 recommendations i.e. 23.53% 
are still awaited. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                  C. KUPPUSAMI 
December   1, 2004                       Chairman 
 Agrahayana   10,1926(S)                    Committee on Estimates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHPATER I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1        This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken 
by Government on the recommendations  contained in their Sixteenth 
Report(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the Mi nistry of Finance and Company 
Affairs(Department of Economic Affa irs-Banking Division) – `Regional 
Rural Banks’. 
 
1.2. The Committee’s Sixteenth Re port (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 29 th April, 2003.  It contained 34 
observations/recommendations.  Action Taken Notes on all these 
observations/recommendations  have been  received from the Ministry of 
Finance and Company Affairs(Depart ment of Economic Affairs-Banking 
Division). 
 
1.3. Replies to the observations  and recommendations contained  
in the Report have broadly been categorised as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by  Government: 
 
S.No. 1 to 3,  7, 10, 12, 14 to  18, 20, 22, 23, 25, 27, 29, 30 
and 32 to 34 
(Total  21, Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
 
NIL 
(Total   NIL, Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee: 
 
S. Nos. 9, 11, 13, 21 and 31 
(Total  5, Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited: 
 
S. Nos. 4 to 6, 8, 19, 24, 26 and 28 
(Total  8, Chapter  V) 
 

1.4  The Committee will now deal  with the action taken by 
Government on some of the recommendations. 
 

  Appointment of Chairmen in RRBs 
Recommendation/Observation(Sl. No. 9 Para No. 1.41) 
1.5 Noting that in many cases, Chairmen of RRBs who 
are appointed to serve the institution for a short span of 
time resulting in poor performance of RRBs, the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“It is an established fact that success of an 
institution, to a large extent, depends upon the 
proficiency and the interest shown by the person 
who is at the helm of affairs.  The Chairman of  
RRB, being the Chief Executive of  the institution, 
has an important role to play in the efficient 
functioning of the RRB and fulfilling the mandate 
given to it.  It is distressing  to note that in many 
cases people who are on  the verge of retirement 
and those who lack interest and initiative are being 
appointed as the Chairmen of  RRBs.  It is also a 
matter of concern  that many of them serve the 
institution for  a very short span of time. The 
average tenure of Chairmen of RRBs has been less 
than twenty-one months as against the provision in 
RRB Act, 1976 that the tenure  of the Chairman 
should not exceed five years. The Committee are of 
the firm view that in such a short span of  time the 
Chairman would not even  be able to  acquaint 
himself with the working of the RRB.  Needless to 
point out that during their short tenure, most of the 
Chairmen are unable to make any contribution  to 
the institution.   The poor performance of many of 
the RRBs with regard to different  parameters bears 
eloquent testimony to this.  The Committee desire 
that only officers having at least five years of service 
left should be considered for appointment to the 
post of  Chairman of RRB.  Officers on the verge of 

retirement, having adverse report or any adverse 
comment from vigilance/administration should not 
be considered for the post of Chairman.   The 
appointment should invariably be for a term of 
minimum three years and not exceeding five years.  
The proposed amendment to Section 11(6) of RRB 
Act, 1976 authorizing the sponsor bank instead of 
Central Government to appoint Acting Chairman of 
RRB during the absence  or inability of the 
Chairman to carry out his duties  due to any reason 
should also be got incorporated in the Act without 
further delay.  The Committee also desire that 
necessary amendments should be made in the RRB 
Act expeditiously so that working of RRBs gets 
streamlined without further loss of time.” 
 
1.6 In their action taken reply the Ministry of Finance  
and Company Affairs (Department of Economic Affairs – 
Banking Division) has stated as follows:- 
“So far as appointment of Chairman and his tenure 
is concerned the matter has already been taken up 
with the sponsor banks vide this Division letter D.O. 
No. 3/(5)/2001-RRB dated 7.10.2002.  The 
CMDs/MDs of all sponsor banks have been advised 
that they should play more effective role in 
improving the management and operations of the 
RRBs sponsored by them. 
 
 The Committee has desired that Section 11(6) of 
RRBs Act, 1976 needs to be amended.  The 
recommendation will be considered alongwith 
Chalapathi Rao’s recommendation for amending the 
RRBs Act, 1976.” 
 
1.7 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply 
furnished by the Government.  During their 

interaction with the RRBs, the Committee had 
found that one of the main factors responsible 
for their  poor functioning was frequent change 
of the Chief Executive in ma ny of the Banks.  It 
was noticed that people on the verge of 
retirement with no  interest and  initiative and 
even sometimes officers who do not enjoy good  
reputation were being appointed in some of the 
RRBs.  The Committee were of the firm view that 
only officers having at least five years of service 
left and with good reputation should be 
considered for appointment to the post of 
Chairman of a RRB.  The Committee had also 
recommended that the appointment should be 
for a minimum term of three years and not 
exceeding five years. 
1.8 The Ministry in their reply have stated that they 
have taken the matter with sponsor banks vide  
letter no. 3(5)/2001-RRB dated 7.10.02 advising 
them to play a more effective role in improving 

the management and operations of RRBs 
sponsored by them.  The Committee are 
surprised to note that th e letter which has been 
referred to by the Government in support of the 
reply is silent about th e term of Chairmen of 
RRBs. While reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee recommend 
that appointment of Ch airmen of RRBs should 
invariably be for a  minimum term of  three years 
and not exceeding five years and the proposed 
amendment to Section 11(6) of RRB Act, 1976 
authorising the sponsor bank instead of Central 
Government to appoint Acting Chairman of  
RRBs during the absence or inability of the 
Chairman to carry out  his duties due to any 
reason should  be got incorporated in the Act.  
The Committee should be apprised of the action 
taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
 

 
Low CD Ratio and High ID Ratio in RRBs 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 11 and 13, 
Para No.  2.35 and 2.37) 
 
1.9 Taking serious note of the low CD ratio and high ID 
ratio in RRBs, the Committee had stated as follows:- 
“The Committee note that out of 196 RRBs only in 
41 RRBs the Credit-Deposit ratio is higher than 
60%.  The CD ratio in RRBs declined steadily at the 
rate of 3 to 4 per cent in a year from 1992 to 1999 
due to stringent asset classification and income 
recognition norms.  It is quite alarming to note that 
while the CD ratio in the RRBs in 1992 was 69.3%, 
it dipped to 41.2% in  1999.  In 2002, the CD ratio 
was  41.3%.  The Committee would like to stress on 
the need for higher CD ratio  for the sustainability, 
strength and viability of RRBs.   The continuous 
decline from 1992 to 1999 in CD ratio and its 
remaining almost static thereafter indicate that 
RRBs need to carefully appraise their credit and 
deposit policy.  The fact that Investment Deposit 
ratio in RRBs is  very high, viz. 67.05% as on 
31.3.2001 indicates that RRBs are heavily investing 
their deposits and thus deviating from their primary 
responsibility of providing credit to small and 
marginal farmers and weaker sections of the society 
in rural areas.  The Committee are not convinced 
with the contentions of the Secretary, Ministry of 
Finance (Department of  Economic Affairs – 
Banking Division)  that lack of flow of credit due to 
non-availability of bankable projects and borrowers 
was the major cause of low CD ratio.  The very fact 
that CD ratio among the  banks varied from 14.46% 
to 122.66% is a clear indication that there is ample 

scope for improvement by RRBs with  lower CD 
ratio. South Malabar Bank  and North Malabar Bank 
with CD ratios of  119.41% and 122.66% 
respectively should be taken as model RRBs and 
other RRBs should take a clue from the  operations 
of these banks.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that in RRBs which are making 
absolute profit, the CD ratio should be as high as 
75%. In RRBs, which are, making profits but still 
have  accumulated losses, an increasing trend of 
CD ratio should be ensured and their investment 
portfolio should get  reduced accordingly.  Thus, the 
Committee desire that a two-tier system of CD ratio 
should be allowed. 
 
In 1995, the RRBs were allowed  to invest  their 
surplus funds in specified avenues of Non-SLR 
investments to reduce the losses and eliminate their 
accumulated losses.  As  on 31.3.2001, SLR 
investments by all RRBs was Rs. 10259.73 crore 
and Non-SLR investment was Rs. 15461.84 crore.  
The SLR investment by the RRBs in  UP alone was 
Rs. 2730.90 crore and Non-SLR investment was  
Rs. 4762.30 crore.  The ID ratio in RRBs  which was 
60.37% as on 31.3.1999 went up to 67.05% as on 
31.3.2001. It is distressing to note that in some 
RRBs the ID ratio went up to 96% at a certain  point 
of time.  The Committee hold the firm view that 
there is no justification for allowing those RRBs 
which have already eliminated the accumulated 
losses to continue to do  investment banking.  They 
desire that the Reserve Bank of India should review 
the trend of ID ratio among the RRBs and certain 
restrictions should be imposed on those RRBs 
which have eliminated the accumulated losses, but 
are still  focussing on the investment route with low 
CD ratio.  Those RRBs which are investing their 
funds   for earning  profit and thereby have low CD 
ratio should be identified and, as suggested by the 
representative of  NABARD, there should be some 

kind of penalty attached to them.  The Committee 
are of the view that the option  of investment 
portfolio should not be allowed to go on for a longer 
period as it encroaches  on  rural lending.  The 
Committee recommend that the investment portfolio  
should be resorted to  at a minimum level and for a  
short period of time  to make a particular RRB 
viable and after  that they should revert back to  
lending portfolio.  The endeavour should be to attain 
viability through lending and not through 
investments. The guidelines  stipulating that 
Government deposits be made only  in nationalised 
banks  should be reviewed  and suitably modified so 
that such funds could also be deposited in RRBs as 
the Committee feel that RRBs are in no way less 
safe than the sponsor banks.” 
 
1.10  In their action taken reply the Ministry of Finance  
and Company Affairs (Department of Economic Affairs - 
Banking Division) has stated as follows:- 
“There is ample scope  for improvement in the CD 
ratios of RRBs.  However, the CD ratio of 75% 
appears to be high taking into account the SLR and 
CRR requirements.  The ceiling should at best be 
between 60% to 70%. 
 
RBI has already issued a circular to all RRBs 
emphasizing the need to improve their CD ratios.  
NABARD has also reiterated the instructions.  It has 
been observed that the CD ratio has improved from 
41.83% as on 31
st March, 2002 to 44.23% as on 
31st March, 2003. 
 
The Government (DO No. 3/(5)/2001-RRB dated 
7.10.2002) and RBI (circular no. RPCD.RRB.BC. 
30/ 03.05.80/2003-2004  dated 29
th September, 

2003) have issued necessary instructions to 
sponsor banks and RRBs that the RRBs should 
concentrate more on lending than on investments 
and improve their CD ratio. 
 
NABARD also through various forums keeps on 
impressing upon the sponsor banks and RRBs to 
concentrate more on financing than on investments.  
We agree with the observations of the Committee 
that RRBs, which have already eliminated their 
accumulated losses, should not continue to follow 
investment route.  This is being impressed upon by 
NABARD in its regular meetings with the sponsor 
Banks and RRBs.” 
  
1.11 The low credit-deposit ratio and  the increasing 
trend in investments by the RRBs is a matter of 
serious concern for the Committee. The  way 
RRBs were resorting to investment route rather 
than lending for their viability was not at all 
healthy.  Allowing the RRBs the option of 
investment portfolio for a longer period would 
result in encroaching on rural lending.  The 
Committee had recommended that it should be 
made mandatory for those RRBs which are 
making absolute profit to  revert back to 
lendings portfolio and achieve higher CD ratio.  

However, in the case of other RRBs also 
increasing trend of CD ratio and proportionate 
reduction in ID ratio needs to be ensured. 
1.12 The Committee are constrained to note that their 
recommendations  have not received the kind of 
attention they deserved fr om the Government.  
They find that the reply furnished by the 
Government is a mere reiteration of what was 
stated by the representative of the Ministry 
during oral evidence.  They expected the RBI, 
NABARD and the sponsor banks to ensure 
better compliance of the recommendations of 
the Committee.  While reiterating their earlier 
recommendations, the Committee desire that 
suitable guidelines should be issued to those 
RRBs which have elimin ated their accumulated 
losses but are still focusing on the investment 
route with low CD ratio.  The Committee also 
desire that pro-active measures should be taken 
to improve the CD ratio in RRBs and the 

outcome of the measures taken in this regard  
be intimated to the Committee. 
High Level of NPAs in RRBs 
 
Recommendation/Observation (Sl. No.  21 and Para 
No. 2.45) 
 
1.13   Expressing their concern regarding the  high 
level of NPAs in RRBs, the Committee recommended as 
under:- 
“The Committee note that several factors  contribute 
to the accumulation of  NPAs.  Factors external to 
the banks and borrowers, such as change in 
Government’s policy, natural calamities, could 
cause default in loans.  Besides this, non-repaying 
capacity of farmers in the event of adversity, lack of 
infrastructure leading to poor marketability of 
products, non-remunerative prices prevailing in the 
period immediately following the harvesting of 
crops, direct credit in Government Sponsored 
Schemes, wilful defaults, etc. are  other reasons for 
high NPAs.  The Committee note that several steps 
in the form of close monitoring and supervision, 
interaction with the borrowers to assess the 
hardships experienced by them in  repayment of 
loans, compromise settlements, pre-determined 
policy, legal proceedings, etc. have been initiated by 
RRBs to bring down the NPAs.  NABARD has also 
given the guidelines for One Time Settlement of 
NPAs on the lines of the  guidelines issued by the 
RBI to the commercial banks.  The Committee 
desire that all these measures should  be pursued 
with utmost  earnestness to bring down the NPA 
level to tolerable limits.  It needs no  emphasis that 
NPAs,  in addition to adversely affecting the 

profitability of the banks, deprive  other eligible 
borrowers from availing bank credit.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that RRBs should 
seriously address the question of   reduction of 
NPAs through well-defined policies and strategies.” 
 
1.14 In their action taken reply the Ministry of Finance 
and Company Affairs (Department of Economic Affairs - 
Banking Division) has stated as follows:- 
“The NPAs position of RRBs is being reviewed by 
NABARD as well as by Sponsor Banks periodically.  
NABARD has issued instructions to RRBs to initiate 
concrete steps to improve the recovery performance 
and thereby reduce level of NPAs.  Further RBI has 
proposed that the revised compromise settlement 
schemes for Commercial Banks upto outstanding 
balance of Rs. 10 lacs should be extended to RRBs 
also.  The proposal is  under active consideration 
with the Government.  NABARD had also issued 
guidelines under one time settlement compromise 
through Lok Adalat.  The recovery has started 
showing signs  of improvement and the same has 
increased from 68.20% as on March 31, 2001 to 
71.52% as on March 31, 2003.” 
 
1.15 The Committee note that although the recovery 
position has started showing signs of 
improvement in most of  the RRBs, the position 
of NPAs is above the tolerable level.  It is quite 
evident that the Government has not taken 
adequate steps to monitor reduction in the level 

of NPAs in  RRBs.  A final decision should have 
been taken by the Government regarding the 
proposal for  extension of the  revised  
Compromise Settlement  Scheme upto 
outstanding balance of Rs. 10 lakh now being 
implemented by  commercial banks to RRBs 
before furnishing the acti on taken replies to the 
Committee.  The Committee are of the view that 
operational and manageri al organization of 
RRBs should be strengthened and 
accountability  should be fixed for  lapses in 
sanctioning and post-disbursement supervision 
of loans.  While reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee urge that all 
possible measures should be initiated to reduce 
NPAs as it adversely affects recycling of funds, 
thus depriving the eligible beneficiaries, 
especially rural masses, from availing bank 
credit. 

 
Follow-up on the Inspection Reports 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 31, Para No.  
3.41) 
 
1.16 Noting that there was no proper follow-up on the 
inspection reports by many RRBs, the Committee 
observed as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the performance of RRBs 
is reviewed by the Government of India through half 
yearly review meetings conducted by the Banking 
Division wherein all sponsor banks, RBI and 
NABARD participate.  NABARD also reviews the 
performance of RRBs through its Regional Offices 
and the nominee Director on the Board. NABARD 
also conducts inspection of the RRBs once in two 
years.  The sponsor banks which hold full 
responsibility in respect of operational and 
managerial matters of the RRBs, hold review 
meetings with the RRBs on a quarterly basis.  They 
also conduct Management Audit of the RRBs.  
While NABARD and the  sponsor banks are 
expected to ensure follow-up action in respect of  
major findings of their audit, the Committee during 
on the spot visit to various RRBs were constrained 
to note that there was no proper follow-up on the 
inspection reports by many RRBs.  Many of the 
RRBs were flouting RBI guidelines with impunity 
and the sponsor banks and the NABARD were not 
initiating any corrective measures. The Committee 
desire that an inbuilt system of checks be evolved 
by the sponsor banks within a period of three 
months to ensure  adherence of Government of 
India/RBI guidelines by the RRBs  from the time of 
presentation of the Report  and regular follow-up  on 

the observations made by  supervisory authorities 
like NABARD.  The Committee also recommend 
that NABARD should conduct inspection of RRBs 
once in a year instead of two years.  As stated in 
Chalapati Rao Committee Report, the supervisory 
authority may develop a set of model internal audit 
and inspection guidelines through a consultative 
process.  Based on this model, the RRBs should 
frame a manual of guidelines for the internal 
inspection of their branches that may encompass 
the contents, coverage, periodicity, reporting, 
compliance, follow up action in case of non-
compliance, etc.  These guidelines must cover all 
aspects of the functioning of the RRBs including 
inter alia the general audit, concurrent audit, 
revenue audit, management functions at the level of 
Head Office, Chairman and ev en the Board.    The 
guidelines should provide for computer-based  
branch surveillance through processing of data 
periodically called from branches and this exercise 
and the regular inspection of branches should  
supplement each other.    RBI may  have a fresh 
look at the guidelines for conducting inspection 
more meaningfully by NABARD which may include 
financial inspection.  A provision may also be made 
available as part of the regulations for internal and 
concurrent audit in the RRBs.” 
 
1.17 In the action taken reply,  the Ministry of Finance  
and Company Affairs (Department of Economic Affairs - 
Banking Division)  stated as follows:- 
“The conduct of a quick inspection of RRBs every 
year  instead of  existing system of once in every 
two years is under  consideration of NABARD in 
respect of weak RRBs.  The sponsor banks have 
their own system of internal audit/ inspection and 

the same system has been adopted by the 
concerned RRBs.  The NABARD is  in the process 
of studying the system obtaining in sponsor 
banks/RRBs and will be developing model 
guidelines based on such a study.” 
 
1.18 The Committee note  with dissatisfaction that 
the reply furnished by Government does not   
mention  any specific action taken by the 
Government to  improve supervision of RRBs by 
NABARD and the sponsor banks.  During the 
Committee’s interactions with RRBs, it  came 
out quite forcefully that ther e is the need for a  
more meaningful  review and inspection of 
RRBs both by the sponsor  bank and  NABARD.  
The inspections should be more comprehensive 
and follow-up  of findings of inspection more 
stringent and time-bound.  The system of 
internal and concurrent audit by RRBs should 
also be made more effective to ensure that 
guidelines issued by Government/RBI are not 
flouted by the RRBs.  The Committee expect the 
Government to implement their 

recommendations with utmost sincerity.  The 
Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendations and desire that specific 
action taken on their recommendations be 
furnished  expeditiously. 
 
Implementation of Recommendations 
 
The Committee would like to emphasise that 
they attach the greatest  importance to the 
implementation of  recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  They would, therefore, urge that the 
Government should keep a close watch so as to 
ensure expeditious implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by them. In case it is not 
possible to implement the recommendations in letter 
and spirit for any reason,  the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. 

The Committee desire that replies in respect of  
the recommendations contained in Chapter V of the 
Report may be finalised and final replies of the 
Government furnished to the Committee 
expeditiously. 

 
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE   
(2004-2005) 
SECOND SITTING 
  The Committee sat on Monday,  the 27th September, 2004 
from 1100 hours  to 1250 hours. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
2.       Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
3.       Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
4.       Shri Jai Prakash 
5.       Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
6.       Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
7.       Shri Prabodh Panda  
8.       Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
9.       Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
10.   Prof. M. Ramadass 
11.   Shri K.S. Rao 
12.   Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
13.   Shri Laxman Singh 
14.   Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt.P.K. Sandhu   -  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri  A.K. Singh   -  P.C.P.I.  
3. Shri Cyril John   -  Under Secretary 
4.      Shri  M.K. Madhusudan -  Assistant Director 
5. Smt. Manju Chowdhary -  Assistant Director 

 
2.  XXX    XXX    XXX 
  
3. The Committee then considered and  adopted the following 
draft Reports   with/without  modifications as given in the  Annexure :- 
 
 
(i) Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report  of 
Estimates Committee (13 th Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs – Banking Division) – 
‘Regional Rural Banks (without any modification). 
 
(ii)          XXX    XXX    XXX 
 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports 
in the light of  modifications and also to make verbal and other 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of factual verification by the 
Ministry and  present the same to the House.    
 
5.  XXX   XXX    XXX 
 
The  Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
APPENDIX II  
(Vide Introduction to Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT 
OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i)  Total Number of Recommendations/Observations   34 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted  by  Government: 
 
(Nos. 1 to 3,  7, 10, 12, 14 to 18, 20, 22, 23, 25, 27, 29,   21 
30 and 32 to 34) 
 
 P e r c e n t a g e            6 1 . 7 6 %  
 
(iii)    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
 
NIL 
  
 Percentage              N I L  
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
Government’s replies have not been accepted  
by the Committee:         
 
(Nos. 9, 11, 13, 21 and 31)       5 
 
P e r c e n t a g e           1 4 . 7 1 %  
 
(v)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
final replies of Government are still awaited: 
 
(Nos. 4 to 6, 8, 19, 24, 26 and 28)      8 
P e r c e n t a g e          2 3 . 5 3 %  
 

 