      
 
    E.C. No. 1416 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION) 
 
‘ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION’  
 
 
Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report of Estimates Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on 
the  Ministry   of   Human  Resource   Development   (Department of 
Secondary and Higher Education) – ‘All India Council for Technical 
Education’ 
 
 
     S  
      E  
       A  
        L  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2.12.2004 
 
 
Lok Sabha Secretariat 
New Delhi  
 
  
December   ,  2004/Agrahyana     , 1926 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE(2004-2005)(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION         (v) 
 
CHAPTER  I Report        
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of Sitting  of the Estimates Committee  
held on 14th October, 2004 
 
II. Analysis of the action  taken by Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in  
the 19th Report of Estimates Committee 
 (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
 
_________________________________________________________ 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
  
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
     MEMBERS 
 
2.    Shri A. Sai Prathap 
3.    Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4.    Shri Chander Kumar 
5.    Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
6.      Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7.      Shri Anant Gudhe 
8.    Shri Jai Prakash 
9.      Shri N.N. Krishnadas 
10.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 
12.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato 
13.  Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
14.  Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
16.  Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.  Shri Sukhdeo Paswan  
18.  Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
19.  Shri Harikewal Prasad 
20.  Prof. M. Ramadass 
21.  Shri K.S. Rao 
22.  Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
23.  Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
24.  Shri Manabendra Shah 
25.  Shri Laxman Singh 
26.  Shri Sartaj Singh 
27.  Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
28.  Shrii Akhilesh Yadav 
29.  Shri V. Kishore Chandra Deo 
30.  Shri Vijay Krishan 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   - Additional Secretry 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K. Singh  - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
4. Shri Cyril John  - Under Secretary 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Fourth Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained  in the Nineteenth  Report of Estimates 
Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (Department of Secondary and Higher 
Education) – ‘All India Council for Technical Education’. 
 
2.  The Nineteenth Report (Thi rteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 4 th February, 2004. The Government furnished their  
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in 
that Report on 3 rd September, 2004 .  The Draft Report was 
considered and adopted by the Estimates Committee(2004-2005) at 
their sitting held on 14th October, 2004. 
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following Chapters:- 
 
I.        Report ; 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by Government; 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies; 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
 Committee; and 
 
V.      Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
 
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report of Estimates Committee (13 th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix II.   
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
It would be observed therefrom that out of 25 
observations/recommendations made in the Report, 14 
recommendations, i.e. 56% have been accepted by Government. Replies 
of Government in respect of 6 rec ommendations, i.e. 24% have not been 
accepted by the Committee and  replies  in respect of 5 
recommendations, i.e. 20% are still awaited. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 C. KUPPUSAMI 
December    1, 2004                     Chairman 
 Agrahayana   10 ,1926(S)                    Committee on Estimates 
 
 
 

CHPATER I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1        This Report of the Committee deals with the action 
taken by Government on the recommendations contained in their 
Nineteenth Report(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (Department of Secondary and Higher 
Education) – ‘All India Council for Technical Education’. 
 
1.2 The Committee’s Nineteenth Report (Thirteenth Lok 
Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 4
th  February, 2004.  It 
contained 25   observations/recommendations.  Action Taken 
Notes on all these observations/recommendations have been 
received from the Ministry of  Human Resource Development 
(Department of Secondary and Higher Education). 
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and recommendations 
contained in the Report have broadly been categorised as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by  Government: 
 
S.No. 1,4,6 to 12,15,20 to 22 and 24  
(Total  14, Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s reply: 
 
S.No. NIL 
 (Total NIL, Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
 
S. No. 16 to 19, 23 and 25 
(Total  6, Chapter IV) 
 
 
 

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final replies of Government are still awaited: 
 
S. No. 2,3,5,13 and 14 
(Total  5, Chapter  V) 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by 
Government on some of the recommendations. 
 
 

Teacher-student ratio 
 
Recommendation/Observation (Sl. Nos. 16 & 17 Para No. 8.16  
& 8.17) 
 
1.5  Commenting on the teacher-student ratio, the Committee 
had stated as under:- 
“The Committee note that in several institutions, particularly 
the newly established technical and management 
institutions, the prescribed teacher-student ratio is not being 
maintained.  The Committee are not satisfied with the 
Ministry’s evasive reply that shortage of faculty is a common 
problem and that fulfillment of exact teacher-student ratio 
cannot be strictly insisted upon as appointment of teachers 
is a post approval activity. The Committee, therefore, insist 
that teacher-student ratio should be made a very important 
indicator in the accreditation process of programmes and 
compliance of  prescribed teacher-student ratio should be 
ensured in all the institutions.  
 
It has come to the notice of the Committee that in places 
where a number of institutions are located, faculties of those 
institutions have the same staff.  This is done mainly to 
satisfy the requirement of the AICTE Act, which stipulates 
that there should be required number of qualified teachers.  
There is a general tendency amongst the newly set up 
colleges not to engage qualified and experienced staff to 
minimize expenditure.  To reduce expenditure they engage 
part-time teachers, thereby seriously compromising on the 
quality of teaching standards. The Committee also expect 
that AICTE would evolve a suitable mechanism to avert such 
malpractices with respect to teaching faculty.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that AICTE should take 
all necessary steps to ensure prescribed teacher-student 
ratio in all the technical institutions in their purview.” 
 

1.6  In the action taken reply, the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Secondary and Higher Education) 
has stated as under:- 
 
“The National Board of Accreditation duly recognizes the 
importance of the staff-student ratio. In the accreditation 
process, the human resources:  faculty and student 
component is assigned 200 marks and teaching & learning 
skills is awarded 350 marks.   Each discipline under 
accreditation is required to get a minimum score under 
human resources. When a discipline fails to secure the 
specified marks under this, it is not awarded the Accredited 
Status, even if the total number of points exceeds 650. 
 
The Council takes cognizance of the student staff ratio while 
granting extension of approval/ introduction of new courses / 
programmes, etc.” 
   

 
1.7  It goes without saying that the quality of technical  
education in the country cannot be  improved without ensuring  
well qualified and experienced teaching staff in the institutions.  
The Committee are deeply concerned about the non-compliance of 
prescribed teacher-student ratio in several technical and 
management institutions in the c ountry.  Engaging  of part-time 
and non-qualified teachers has tremendous  adverse effect on the 
quality of education imparted by  institutions.  The reply given by 
the Ministry that AICTE takes cognizance of the student-staff ratio 
in the  accreditation  process and  while granting extension of 
approval/introduction of new courses/programmes, etc. is not fully 
satisfactory.  The Committee, therefore, again recommend that 
AICTE should evolve a suitable m echanism to ensure compliance 
of prescribed teacher-student ratio and to avert malpractices 
resorted to  by  technical and management institutions such as, 
engaging part-time  and inexper ienced teachers to reduce the 
salary bill.  AICTE should take stringe nt measures to identify such 
erring institutions and to have pe nal measures initiated against 
them so as to ensure that all technical and management 
institutions  scrupulously comply with the prescribed norms by 
ensuring  qualified and experienced  teaching faculty. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Payment of Salary 
 
Recommendation/Observation (Sl. No.  18, Para No. 8.18) 
 
1.8  On the payment of salary to the  teaching staff by  privately  
run technical and management institutions, the Committee had 
observed  as under:- 
“The Committee express their concern over the flouting of 
norms and guidelines with respect to payment of salaries as 
per prescribed pay scales to the teaching staff by the private 
run technical and management institutions.  This is despite 
the fact that AICTE had notified revised pay scales for all 
technical institutions in the country.  The Committee are told 
that in case of private self-financing institutions the visiting 
Expert Committee examines pay scales and salaries given 
to staff members by checking salary record registers and 
cases of non-compliance are brought to the notice of the 
State Government and the institution concerned for initiating 
remedial measures.  According to the AICTE there is a 
“Malpractice Cell” in the Council, which looks into complaints 
regarding non-payment of pay scales and salaries in 
consultation with respective State Governments.  The 
Committee note with concern that despite well laid down 
guidelines and norms regulating payment of salaries to 
teaching staff, these norms are being flouted by a number of 
institutions. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
AICTE should constantly monitor the cases regarding 
violation of payment of salaries according to prescribed pay 
scales and should doggedly pursue the matter with 
concerned State Governments and also impose stringent 
penal measures against those institutions violating the 
norms. The Council should also  ensure that salaries to the 
teaching staff should be paid only by cheque and the 
Vigilance Cell during their inspection should cross-check 
from the Bank account  whether the payments have been 
debited in full as per the prescribed pay scales.”  
 

1.9  In the action taken reply, the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Secondary and Higher Education) 
has stated as under:- 
 
“AICTE visiting expert committees which visit institutions for 
various purposes such as grant of extension of approval 
/accreditation are entrusted with the responsibility of 
verifying the authenticity of payment of AICTE scales of pay 
to the teaching staff. Institutions have been directed to 
maintain TDS Certificates against the salary of Faculty.” 

 
1.10   While taking note of the steps taken by AICTE to  
check flouting of norms and guidelines with regard to 
payment of salary as per pr escribed pay scales to the 
teaching staff by the private run technical and management 
institutions, the Committee h ave the impression that these 
measures are not adequate to  fully check the existing  
malpractices.  Despite the  notification on revised pay scales 
for all technical institutions in  the country, the norms are 
being flouted by many private run technical and management 
institutions.  The Committee had  recommended that AICTE 
should constantly monitor the cases regarding violation of 
payment of salaries according to prescribed pay scales and 
should earnestly pursue the matter with concerned State 
Governments and also  impose stringent penal measures 
against those institutions violati ng the norms.  There is  need 
to deal with the problem more stringently.   The Committee, 
therefore, would like to stress  once again  that the Council 
should ensure that salaries to the teaching staff is paid only 
by cheque  and the vigilance  cell  during their inspection will   
cross check from the bank acc ount that  payments have been 

debited in full as per the prescrib ed pay scales.   Further, the 
AICTE should constantly moni tor  cases of  violation in 
payment of salaries to staff  according to prescribed pay 
scales  so as to ensure that  private run institutions do  not 
flout the norms and guidelines in this regard.  

Research and Development 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 8.19) 
1.11  The Committee, while commenting on the pace Research 
and Development in the field of technical education had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are unhappy with the slow pace of 
Research & Development in the field of technical education 
in the country.  There is a gradual decline in RID funds 
allocated for various research schemes.  The decline in RID 
funds was attributed to the fact that unlike in the initial stages 
when all technical institutions were given funds for RID 
activities, AICTE presently gives funds only to Government 
and accredited technical institutions.  It has also been stated 
that since R&D is a specialised activity, only small range of 
institutions possessing necessary infrastructure are given 
funds. The Committee are of the view that R&D in the field of 
technical education has gained paramount importance with 
rapid growth of new technologies in the field of Telecom and 
Information Technology. Therefore budgetary outlay for RID 
should be increased and more number of institutions should 
be encouraged to undertake research in technical education 
in the country.” 
  
1.12  In the action taken reply, the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Secondary and Higher Education) 
has stated as under:- 
“Within the available funds, the Council would make 
optimum utilization towards promoting R&D in technical 
institutions.”  
 
 
 
 
 

1.13  It is distressing to note that Government has not  
taken the recommendation of the Committee with the seriousness 
it deserved. Undoubtedly, Research and Development in the field of 
technical education has gained ut most importance  with the rapid 
growth of new technologies. The Committee note that recognising 
the urgent need to ensure coordinated and integrated development 
of technical education in the country, the National Policy on 
Education, 1986 had stipulated that “ The AICTE will be vested with 
statutory authority for planning,  formulation and maintenance of 
norms and standards, accreditation, funding of priority areas, 
monitoring and evaluation, maintai ning parity of certification and 
awards and ensuring coordinated and integrated development of 
technical and management edu cation.” As such, the onus for 
ensuring integrated development of technical education in the 
country and funding of priority ar eas lie with AICTE. The declining 
trend in the allocations made by AICTE for Research and 
Institutional Development (RID) Sc hemes is a matter of serious 
concern to the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that AICTE should draw up  a long term plan for accelerated 
Research & Development in the fiel d of technical and management 
education.  They also  recommend that allocations for RID 

Schemes should be suitably increased and more number of 
institutions  be encouraged to undertake research in technical 
education in the country. 

Redressal of Grievances of  Lady Officers 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 8.23) 
  
1.14  Taking note the complaints made by women employees  
working  in AICTE, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are distressed to learn that some lady 
officers working in AICTE were subjected to sexual and 
mental harassment by certain senior officer in AICTE.  
Though an Internal Complaints Committee was constituted 
by AICTE at the direction of the National Commission for 
Women (NCW), it is learnt that the Committee was 
ineffective and unresponsive as it was not impartial.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development should constitute an Enquiry Committee 
comprising of lady members to look into the entire episode 
and initiate disciplinary action against the person concerned, 
if found guilty.  The Committee are of the view that such 
instances will have an unholy effect on the institution and 
also denigrate the prestige of the institution.”  
 
1.15  In the action taken reply,  the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Secondary and Higher Education) 
has stated as under:- 
 
“The AICTE will ensure protection and redressal of 
grievances of women employees through appropriate 
measures.”   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.16  The Committee express their displeasure at the  
manner in which a specific recommendation made by the 
Committee on a very sensitive issu e like sexual and mental 
harassment of  women employ ees by a senior officer in 
AICTE has been dealt with. The matter was brought to the 
notice of the Committee during examination of the subject. It 
was also pointed out that an  Internal Complaints Committee 
constituted by AICTE on the directions of the National 
Commission for Women was not effective and responsive to 
the problem as it did not fun ction impartially. It was after 
considering these factors that the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry of Human Resources 
Development should constitute an Enquiry Committee 
comprising of lady members to look into the entire episode 
and initiate disciplinary action against the officer concerned, 
if he is found guilty. The Committee deplore the inaction on 
the part of the  Ministry despite the recommendation made  by 
them. The Committee, therefore,  desire that a proper inquiry  
be conducted into the episode  and the guilty be punished. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the findings of 
the enquiry and the action taken th ereon.  They also desire  

that in order to investigate th e matters  of harassment of 
women employees, a  permanent  Committee should be  
constituted by AICTE. 
 

Management Courses to be looked after by a separate body 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl.No. 25, Para No. 8.25) 
 
1.17  Stressing on the need to set up a separate body to look after 
management courses, the Committee had recommended as 
under:-  
“According to the AICTE Act, the main objectives and 
functions of AICTE are to ensure planned and coordinated 
development of technical education, promotion of qualitative 
improvement and regulation and proper maintenance of 
norms and standards in the area of technical education.  
Since management education is entirely different from 
technical education and also given the fact that AICTE is 
over-burdened with the work relating to granting of approval, 
recognition, accreditation of programmes of technical 
education, etc. the Committee are of the considered view 
that  AICTE should be divested of the responsibility relating 
to grant of approval and recognition to management 
courses.  The powers relating to grant of approval and 
recognition of management courses and programmes and 
their regulation should, therefore, be entrusted to a separate 
body.”  
  
1.18  In the action taken reply,  the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Secondary and Higher Education) 
has stated as under:- 
“As per the AICTE Act, 1987 the definition of technical 
education includes management education. However, in 
view of the Estimates Committee’s recommendation, the 
Government has decided to consult the major stakeholders 
on the issue.” 
 
 
 

1.19  The Committee note that AICTE was established  in  
1945 keeping in view the need for planning technical  
education on all India basis a nd to ensure uniform and 
speedy growth of  technical education for bringing about 
necessary industrial development.    Primarily the role of 
AICTE is to  promote technical education throughout the 
country, maintain high standards and  constantly update 
course curricula in  consonan ce with rapid developments in 
the  fields of  science and technology and teaching standards.  
It is a fact that as per the AICT E Act, 1987 the definition of 
technical education includes management education also .  
However, with the recent growth in the number of institutions 
imparting technical education a nd  expansion  of operations 
of AICTE, the Council is over- burdened with the work relating 
to granting of approval, recogni tion, accreditation, etc.   In 
view of these factors, the Committee had recommended that 
AICTE should be  divested of the responsibility relating to 
granting of approval, recogni tion,  accreditation, etc. of 
management courses.  The Committee stress that  the 
recommendation should be given due weightage and 
considered at the highest l evel  before arriving at a 

conclusion.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
decision taken in the matter. 
 
Implementation of Recommendations 
 
1.20  The Committee would like to emphasise that they  
attach greatest importance to th e implementation of  
recommendations accepted by the Government.  They would, 
therefore, urge that the Go vernment should keep a close 
watch so as to ensure exped itious implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by them. In case it is not possible 
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason,  the matter should be reported to the Committee with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
1.21  The Committee desire that replies in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter V of the Report may 
be finalised and final replies of the Government furnished to 
the Committee within three m onths from the date of 
presentation of the Report. 
 
 
 

  CONFIDENTIAL 
 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2004-2005) 
 
 
    SIXTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 14 th  October, 2004 from 
1100 to   1200  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2.   Shri Anant Gudhe  
3. Shri  Sunil Kumar Mahato 
4. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
5. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
8. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
9. Shri K.S. Rao 
10.   Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
11.   Shri Sartaj  Singh 
12. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
13. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh       - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
3. Shri Cyril John         -  Under Secretary 
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan          - Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 

2. The Committee considered and a dopted the following draft Reports 
with/without modifications :- 
 
(i) XX   XX    XX  
 
(ii) Report on action take n by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of 
Estimates Committee (13 th Lok Sabha) on Ministry of 
Human Resource Development (Department of Secondary 
and Higher Education)-‘All I ndia Council for Technical 
Education’(with minor modification as indicated in the 
Annexure).  
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in 
the light of modifications and also to make verbal and other 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of factual verification by the 
Ministry and present the same to the House.  
4.   XX   XX    XX 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

    ANNEXURE 
 
 
Modification made by the Estimate s Committee in the Draft Report on 
action taken by Government on the  recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report of Estimates Committee (13th Lok Sabha) on Ministry of 
Human Resource Development(Depar tment of Secondary and Higher 
Education) – ‘All India Council for Technical Education’ 
 
 
 
Para No.  Line    Modification  
 
1.21  At the end  For :   The Committee…..expeditiously.  
      
Read: The Committee desire that replies in  
respect    of the recommendations 
contained in    Chapter V of the Report 
may be finalised   and final replies of the 
Government  furnished to the Committee 
within three  months from the date of 
presentation of the Report. 
 

 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction to Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH REPORT 
OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i)  Total Number of Recommendations/Observations   25 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted  by  Government: 
 
(Nos. 1, 4, 6 to 12, 15, 20 to 22 and 24)          14    
 
 Percentage                     56%
  
 
(iii)    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
 
NIL 
  
 Percentage               N I L  
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
Government’s replies have not been accepted  
by the Committee:         
 
(Nos. 16 to 19, 23 and 25)       6 
 
 Percentage                 24% 
 
(v)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
final replies of Government are still awaited: 
 
(Nos. 2,3,5, 13 and 14)        5 
 
    Percentage               20%  
 