1
TWENTIETH REPORT
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION)
[Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) – National
Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India
Ltd.]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930(S)
________________________________________________________


2
CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE (2008-09)                     (ii)
INTRODUCTIO
N
(iii)
Chapter I        Report 1
ANNEXURE
Letter No. H-11011/14/2007-MPS dated 7 th
April, 2008 of Ministry of Agriculture addressed
to NAFED
24
APPENDICES
I Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee
held on 30th September, 2008
26
II Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee
held on 15th October, 2008
28
III Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee
held on 27th November, 2008
30
IV Analysis of the action taken by Government on
the recommendations/observations contained
in the Fourteenth Report of Estimates
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
32

3
Composition of the Committee on Estimates 
(2008-2009)
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, Chairman
Members
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale
3. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan
4. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
5. Shri Lal Muni Choubey
6. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
7 Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
8. Shri Anant Gudhe
9. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
10. Shri P. Karunakaran
11. Shri Vijoy Krishna
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
14. Shri Zora Singh Mann
15. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
16. Shri G. Nizamuddin
17. Shri Prabodh Panda
18. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
19. Shri D. Vittal Rao
20. Dr. R. Senthil
21. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi
22. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
24. Vacant#
25. Shri Lakshman Singh
26. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
27. Shri Jagdish Tytler
28. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
29. Shri K. Virupakshappa
30. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT

4
           1.       Shri U.S. Saxena                 -          Joint Secretary
 Joint Secretary
 2. Shri V.S. Negi  - Director
 3. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Committee Officer
___________________________________________________________
# Vacant since 20.11.2008 due to resignation of Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh, M.P.
INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman of Estimates Committee (2008-2009)  having been
authorized by  the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this
Twentieth Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Fourteenth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co-operation) – National
Agricultural Co-operative Marketing Federation of India Ltd. (NAFED).
2. The 14 th Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 st August, 2008.  The
Government furnished their replies indicating action taken on the
recommendations contained in that Report on 16 th May, 2008 and further action
taken notes on
14th October, 2008. The Committee also took the oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and NAFED on 15 th October, 2008.
The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting
held on 27th November, 2008.
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the 14 th Report of Estimates Committee (14 th Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix II. 
    NEW DELHI;
December 10, 2008__
Agrahayana 19, 1930(S)     
C. KUPPUSAMI
Chairman,
Committee on Estimates

5
REPORT
CHAPTER- 1
1.1. This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) “National Agricultural
Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Ltd.”
1.2 The Fourteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to
Lok Sabha on 21 st August, 2007.  It contained 17
observations/recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all these
observations/recommendations were received from the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and cooperation) on 16 th May,
2008.  The Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry were
examined by the Committee at their sitting held on 30 th September,
2008.  Since the replies furnished by the Ministry were evasive, the
Committee decided that the representatives of the Ministry and NAFED
be asked on 15 th October, 2008 to explain the reasons for such

6
lackadaisical approach towards their recommendations and also to
apprise the status of implementations  of the recommendations.
Subsequently, the Ministry submitted a further action taken notes on the
recommendations on 14 th October, 2008.   The Committee took the
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry  and NAFED on 15 th
October, 2008. 
1.3 Based on the replies, further action taken notes and the evidence
of the representatives of the Ministry, the following categorization has
been made:-
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government:
 Sl. Nos. 1,3,9,15 & 17   (Total 5, Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply:
 Sl. Nos. 6,8,11 & 12     (Total 4, Chapter-III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl Nos. 2,4,5,7,10,14 & 16               (Total 7, Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply
of Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos.   13          (Total 1, Chapter V)

7
1.4 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the
recommendation for which only interim reply has been given by the
Government should be furnished to them expeditiously.
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the recommendations.
FOCUS  ON AGRICULTURAL AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES 
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.6 The Committee noted that NAFED was established under MSCS
Act in 1984 with the aim of promoting cooperative marketing and
ensuring remunerative prices to the farmers for their produces and price
spread between producer and consumer is reduced.  As per amended
bye laws after the enactment of MSCS Act, 2002 NAFED can undertake
business in non-agricultural and non traditional items to meet the
challenges of liberalized economy.  The Committee were of the view
that the inclusion of non traditional and non agricultural items should not
effect the primary functioning of NAFED and, therefore, recommended
that the focus on agricultural and allied activities should not be lost and
NAFED should function in a manner to achieve operational and
administrative autonomy.  It should also be ensured that it becomes a
commercially viable organization in the changed business scenario in
the post liberalization era and protects the interests of the farmers.
1.7 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Agriculture have stated
as under:-

8
“Necessary directions have been given to NAFED to focus on
agricultural and allied activities vide letter no.
H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated April 7, 2008 (Annexure-I)”.
1.8 In their further action taken notes submitted to the Committee, the
Ministry of Agriculture have stated as under:-
“NAFED is a national level cooperative society registered under
the Multi State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002.  Under the
provisions of the Act, NAFED is an autonomous organization and
have full autonomy in its operational and administrative matters to
conduct its business, as per its Bye-laws.  The Government does
not interfere in their day today functioning.  Further, NAFED has
never lost the focus on its prime responsibility towards farmers
and cooperative societies.  The business in agricultural and allied
activities had been always the main focus of NAFED. NAFED did
venture into non-agricultural activities to diversify its business
activities to sustain itself but this activity was very limited, which is
 evident from the fact that during the year 2007-08 only business
worth Rs. 35.19 lacs have been done for non agricultural as
compared to the total business of Rs. 4706 crore”.
1.9 During the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry and
NAFED on action taken replies furnished by them on the
recommendations of the Committee, the Managing Director of NAFED
informed the Committee about the financial difficulties faced by NAFED
due to locking of funds in various private partnership business as
under:-
“Today the main problem facing NAFED is paucity of funds.  Even
 though we have reached a turnover of Rs. 4,707 crore in the last
year we closed with net loss of Rs. 56.69 crore.  This is despite
the fact that we made a gross profit of Rs. 88.94 crore.  This loss
happened on account of interest liability which resulted from
locking of funds in various private partnership business.  This has
considerably affected the performance of NAFED.  Today we
have to collect something like Rs. 1400 crore from various
parties. Because of delay in getting this money, we are in a very

9
tight financial position.  We are not able to do business which we
have projected.  This also explains the main reasons why we are
not in a position to implement some of the excellent suggestions
which the committee has made.”
1.10 In response to a query of the Committee as to where from the
money is to be collected, the witness further elaborated as under:-
“From the year 2003 we entered into some kind of private
partnership business called the ‘tie up business’.  We invested
something like a total of Rs. 3,962.24 crore and as on 31.8.2008
we collected a sum of Rs. 2886.06 crore from this and today we
have to get another Rs. 1429.87 crore.  This has to be recovered.
We are taking earnest steps to get back this money.  We have
taken strong steps and we are hopeful that we would recover this
money”.
1.11 On being asked whether NAFED is still doing business with them,
the Managing Director, NAFED stated that they are not doing any
business at present with them.  In regard to the steps that are being
taken to recover the money, he submitted as under:-
“In all these cases we have taken arbitration proceedings.  We
have filed cases in the Economic Offences Wing.  We also have
filed cases in CBI.  We have taken all possible steps.  There is an
additional managing Director in NAFED who has exclusively been
given the job of following up these cases so that we get back the
money.  In view of the blocking of funds we have to pay
something like Rs. 120 crore by way of interest in a year.  We are
not making sufficient money to even off set this interest burden.
That is our problem.  Because our balance sheet is today made
public, all the bankers know about our financial problems and they
are not coming forward to lend us any money and therefore you
could notice that our business substantially has come down.
Because of this we are not in a position to implement many of the
suggestions.”

10
1.12 The Committee were also informed that accumulating of losses
started from 2004 onwards and before that NAFED was making profit.
When asked about the action taken on those who were at the helm of
affairs at the time of taking decisions regarding private partnership
business, MD, NAFED stated as under:-
“There is a CBI enquiry going on.  An enquiry has been
constituted by central Registrar of Cooperative Societies. A retired
Judge of the High Court and a former Law Secretary is enquiring
into the misdeeds that have happened in the last few years.  They
have to give a Report by the end of October.  Based on that
serious action will be taken.”
1.13 In this regard, the Central Registrar of Cooperative Societies
informed the Committee during evidence as under:-
“This matter came up to the Central Registrar only sometimes last
year when we received the audit report of the organization.  Then
it was found that this business which is known as tie up business
where large amounts of funds have been stuck up…. The enquiry
is in progress.  We have asked them to expedite the inquiry.”   
Supplementing this the Additional Secretary (Agriculture &
Cooperation) informed the Committee that the last date for submission
of enquiry report is 31st October, 2008. 
1.14  The Committee note that primarily the role of NAFED is to
promote cooperative marketing and ensure remunerative prices to the
farmers for their produces.  Private partnership business was started by
NAFED in the year 2002 after making amendment in its bye-laws to
undertake business in non-agricultural and non-traditional items.  The
Committee recognizing the objective of the role of NAFED had
recommended that inclusion of non-traditional and non-agricultural
items should not affect the primary functioning of NAFED.  They are

11
constrained to note that NAFED has suffered a net loss of Rs. 56.69
crore on account of interest liability which resulted from locking of funds
in various private partnership business. The Committee, therefore,
would like to stress once again that NAFED should function in
such a manner that it becomes a commercially viable organization
in the changed business scenario without losing the focus on
agriculture and allied activities and protect the interest of farmers.
1.15 The Committee are concerned to note that NAFED has to collect
about Rs. 1429 crore which was locked in Private Partnership business.
In this regard, they note that NAFED has taken arbitration proceedings
in all these cases and also filed cases in Economics Offences Wing
and CBI. The Committee expect that expeditious steps will be
taken to recover the money from private parties and the progress
made in this regard should be intimated to the Committee.
1.16 The Committee further note that an enquiry by a retired judge of
the High Court and a former Law Secretary has been constituted  by
Central Registrar of Cooperative Societies to enquire into the role of
those who were at the helm of affairs in NAFED at the time of taking
decisions regarding private partnership business.  The enquiry report
was to be submitted  by 31 st October, 2008. The Committee are
deeply concerned that findings of the enquiry were not furnished
to them and hope to be informed of the same.  They expect that
expeditious and stern action would be taken against those who are
responsible for the present state of affairs of NAFED particularly

12
for locking of huge amount of money in the hands of private
parties.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF NAFED
  Recommendation (Para No. 4)
1.17 The Committee found that as per bye-law 20 (a) of NAFED, only
first 10 State Marketing Federations in descending order of their ranking
are eligible to nominate one Director each to the Board of Directors of
NAFED.  The ranking is based on weighted average of the percentage
equity share capital of the concerned State in total issued share capital
of NAFED and average business with NAFED excluding business of
Government Schemes.  Under bye-law 20 (b) one Director from North
Eastern States including Sikkim can be nominated if eligible.  The
Committee had the apprehension that if only first 10 States whose
share capital is more and whose business is more with NAFED are
made eligible to become Directors of the Board, then other States will
only be on-lookers and they will not be able to put forward their views in
the Board even though they are members. They, therefore,
recommended that bye-laws of NAFED should be suitably amended so
that unequal representation of States in the Board corrected and all the

13
States will have equal opportunity to participate in the administration of
NAFED.
1.18 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Agriculture have stated
as under:-
"the provisions of Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002
provide for maximum number of directors on Board of NAFED not
exceeding 21.  Hence, NAFED provided in their bye-laws, the
criterion for representation on Board based on the equity held and
transaction undertaken with NAFED.  NAFED has been directed
vide letter No. H 11011/14/2007-MPS dated April 7, 2008
(Annexure-I) to give attention to other State members also who
are not representing on the board of NAFED.
1.19 The Ministry in the further action taken notes submitted to the
Committee have stated as under:-
“NAFED has reported that in view of the provisions of the Multi
State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002, the strength of the Board
has to be restricted to 21.    However, all the state Federations are
members of the general Body of NAFED.  State Federations give
their suggestions/view point during the General Body Meeting and
the same is incorporated at the time of finalization of Business
Plan of the Federation, wherever feasible”.
1.20 When enquired by the Committee as to whether  bye-laws of
NAFED  can be amended to give membership to all the States on
rotational basis, the Additional Secretary (Agriculture & Cooperation)
stated during evidence as under:-
“With regard to the change in the byelaws, the NAFED will have
to take up this matter in their regime and come up with firm
proposals.  From the Government side, we have already
conveyed that these recommendations should be taken into
consideration which we have conveyed to you.  Hopefully, the

14
NAFED will now take up this matter most seriously to see that
there is equitable representation in the Board.”
1.21 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply that the
suggestions/view points given by the State federations during General
Body Meeting are incorporated wherever feasible,  at the time of
finalization of Business Plan of the Federation.  As there are about 775
members in NAFED, the Committee are pessimistic about
incorporation of view points/suggestions of State Federations in  the
business plan of NAFED.  Being the national level federation, the
Committee expect  NAFED  to  chalk out its business plans in such a
manner that it benefits all the members States. Further, the Committee
find that with regard to the amendment of Bye-Laws so as to give equal
representation to States, no serious consideration has been given by
NAFED to the recommendation of the Committee as would be noted
from the above reply that no firm proposal in this regard has been taken
up by the NAFED so far. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
recommendation that Bye-Laws of NAFED should be suitably
amended so that all the States will have equal opportunity to
participate in the administrative decisions of NAFED.  They would
also desire that final status in this regard be intimated to them
without delay.
PRODUCTION OF OIL SEEDS
      Recommendation (Para No. 5)

15
1.22 NAFED is the nodal agency of the Government of India for
undertaking procurement of oilseeds and pulses under the Price
Support Scheme (PSS) whenever the market rates of these
commodities go below the declared Minimum Support Price (MSP). The
Committee inter alia found that since 1999, NAFED had undertaken
heavy procurement of oilseeds particularly that of mustard seeds under
Price Support Scheme (PSS). In this regard, the Committee noted that
liberalized imports and higher global production of oilseeds resulted in
import of huge quantity of edible oil into the country at cheaper rates.
Due to this the prices of oilseeds in the domestic market remained
depressed and heavy procurement of oilseeds under PSS had to be
undertaken by NAFED. During the period 2000-2005, NAFED had
utilized an amount of Rs. 955 crore from the budget provisions on
account of losses in PSS operations.  This loss was mainly due to the
liberalized import policy.  The Committee were of the firm view that
need of the hour is the holistic planning for the indigenous production of
various oilseeds at the desired quality and quantity to meet the edible oil
needs of the country.   The committee, therefore, recommended that a
study should be conducted on present and future edible oil needs of the
country, current production and its deficiencies, quality of seeds
available in the country and their yield position, import of edible oil and
its impact on the economy and suitable measures should accordingly
be initiated to increase the production of oil seeds in order to make the
country self sufficient in meeting the edible oil needs of the people. 
1.23 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as under: -
“The recommendation of the Committee was examined in
consultation with the Department of Food & PD, being the subject

16
matter Department.  The Department of Food & PD is of the view
that the annual requirement/demand of edible oils was 113.00
lakh MT in 2004-05, 118.50 lakh MT in 2005-06, 124.10 lakh MT
in 2006-07 and projected 127.57 lakh MT for 2007-08 against
availability of edible oils in the country from all domestic sources
at 72.47 lakh MT in 2004-05, 83.16 lakh MT in 2005-06, 72.43
lakh MT in 2006-07 and projected 76.68 lakh MT for 2007-08.
The gap between demand and availability has been filled through
import of edible oils.  Edible oils have been imported to the tune
of 45.42 lakh MT in 2004-05, 42.88 lakh MT in 2005-06, 42.17
lakh MT in 2006-07 and 26.29 lakh MT in 2007-08 (upto
September 2007).  Progressive changes have been made in the
Import Policy in respect of edible oils.  The Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation is implementing a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme namely Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oilpalm
and Maize (ISOPOM) for increasing the production and
productivity of oilseeds, pulses and maize in the country.  The
scheme has been modified with regard to norms and pattern of
assistance for 11th Five Year Plan to make it more effective and
result oriented.”
1.24 During evidence, when the representatives of the Ministry were
asked by the Committee to explain why no action was taken on the
recommendation, the Additional Secretary (Agriculture & Cooperation)
assured the Committee as under:-
“We have not taken a firm decision about conducting the study.
Importance of the study is well appreciated and I will certainly take
back the suggestion once more to our Secretary and I am sure
that a favourable view will be taken in this matter.”
1.25 The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry have not
taken a firm decision even after the lapse of a year since the
recommendation was made by the Committee to conduct a study on

17
present and future edible oil needs of the country, quality of seeds
available in the country and their yield position, import of edible oil and
its impact on the economy etc. even though the Ministry have
appreciated the importance of the study.  The Committee find that lakhs
of metric tones of edible oil are imported every year to meet the gap
between the demand and availability of edible oil in the country.  At the
same time a large amount is spent to compensate the losses incurred
due to procurement of oil seeds under price support schemes which
have to be implemented as a result of depression of prices of oil seeds
in the domestic market due to import of large quantity of edible oil at
cheaper rates. The Committee once again express their grave
concern for not carrying out the study by the Ministry as the need
of the hour is the holistic planning for the indigenous production
of various oil seeds at the desired quality and quantity to meet the
edible oil needs of the country.  The Committee therefore, hope
that the Ministry will act expeditiously in conducting the study as
recommended by the Committee earlier and appropriate follow-up
steps would be taken as per the outcome of the study. They would
await response of the Ministry in this regard.
MARKET INTERVENTION SCHEMES
         Recommendation (Para No. 7)
1.26 The Committee found that in accordance with the guidelines
presented by the Government of India, the losses suffered by the
NAFED under MIS are to be shared on 50:50 basis between Central
and State Government concerned.  In case of North-Eastern States it is
75:25 basis respectively.  They also found that earlier 100 percent of

18
the losses incurred under MIS used to be reimbursed to the NAFED but
since 2001, only 25 percent of the losses incurred are reimbursed.  The
Committee desired that the Government should examine this aspect
and a formula be brought out to compensate suitably the losses
incurred by NAFED under MIS.  The Committee further observed that in
order to achieve the objective of market intervention scheme for
stabilizing the prices at reasonable level, preventing the farmers from
distress sale and for sustaining production, it is imperative that the
decision on market intervention is taken promptly and NAFED initiate
action without any loss of time.  The Committee, therefore, desired that
both the Govt. and NAFED should act promptly and in close
coordination as far as decision making process and implementation of
the market intervention schemes are concerned in order to ensure that
the schemes such as Price Support Scheme and Market Intervention
Scheme actually benefit the farmers.
1.27 In their action taken reply, the Ministry stated as under:-
“The Committee on Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) revised
the MIS guidelines with effect from 30.7.2001 restricting the
losses eligible for reimbursement to procuring agencies to
25% of total procurement cost. Actual losses were
reimbursed under old MIS guidelines.  The proposal to
reimburse losses is being examined.  NAFED has been
directed to ensure that the genuine farmers get benefit of
the price support scheme and market intervention scheme”.
1.28 In their further action taken notes, the Ministry have stated as
under:-

19
“The Department act promptly as and when the MIS proposal is
being furnished to the Department.  Further, the MIS is
implemented with the sole aim that farmers are not forced for
distress sale due to glut in the market.  From the year 2006 to
2008, the MIS has been implemented for various agricultural &
horticultural commodities like onion, apple, malta, ginger, chilly,
passion fruit, potato etc. in the States like Rajasthan,
Uttarakhand, Mizoram, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, U.P and
West Bengal. ”
1.29 When the Committee enquired whether the Ministry have
completed the examination of the proposal to reimburse the losses to
NAFED on account of MIS operations, the Additional Secretary
(Agriculture & Cooperation) during evidence informed the Committee as
follows:-
“With respect to price support operations and MIS operations that
have been undertaken on behalf of the government.  We have not
done any study as such as to why the losses, if at all, have taken
place but we will certainly do so in due course of time.”
1.30 The Committee asked to explain how promptly the Ministry act in
Coordination with State Governments and NAFED in regard to decision
making process and implementation of MIS, the Additional Secretary
(Agriculture & Cooperation) explained as under:-
“You have asked for information as to how the whole system of
deciding on what commodities and when these commodities
should be purchased will start under the MIS system.  In the
Ministry we have a Committee headed by the Joint Secretary.  As
soon as the proposal comes from the State, immediately a
meeting is taken and the committee is fully empowered to take a

20
decision of how much to purchase and at what price to purchase.
That is the mechanism we presently have.  At the moment it is not
just the NAFED which is responsible for undertaking this
operation.  Even the State Government organizations are in a
position to take up the procurement of such items.  Under the MIS
they are also empowered.  As we have mentioned in the reply, in
the last few years have undertaken MIS operations in a number of
States where actually the actual operation of purchasing these
items have been taken up by the respective State Government
organisation”. 
1.31 The Committee are concerned to note from the submission made
during evidence that the Ministry have not done any study as to why
NAFED incurs losses in MIS operations.  Since the NAFED had
submitted that only 25 per cent of the losses incurred by it are
reimbursed to it, the Committee had recommended that the
Government should examine this aspect and a formula be brought out
to compensate suitably the losses incurred by NAFED under MIS.
Unfortunately recommendation of the Committee has not received
the kind of attention it deserved from the Government and no
action has been taken by the Ministry so far.  While expressing
their displeasure on the casual approach of the Ministry towards
their recommendation, the Committee  expect that the Ministry will
take immediate steps as desired by the Committee and report back
to them.
1.32 The Committee note that there is a Committee headed by a Joint
Secretary in the Ministry to take decision on quantity and price of the
purchases to be made under MIS.  The recommendation of the

21
Committee was about prompt action by the Ministry and NAFED in
close coordination so far as decision making   process   and 
implementation   of   the   market  intervention schemes are concerned
to ensure that the schemes actually benefit the farmers.  This important
aspect was not adequately addressed by the Ministry in their action
taken replies. The Committee while reiterating their earlier
recommendation urge the Ministry to set up a separate
Commission which include the representatives of the NAFED and
the State Governments instead of the present Committee for the
purpose of deciding what commodities and when these
commodities to be purchased under MIS.  They further stress that
the decisions on MIS be taken within a definite time frame so as to
achieve the objectives of the scheme effectively.
RETAIL MARKETING BY NAFED
     Recommendation (Para No. 10)
1.33 The Committee taking note of the consumer marketing a potential
area for increasing turn over of the NAFED had inter-alia opined that
NAFED’s presence in the field of retail marketing will make available
quality agricultural commodities at lower prices to consumers.
However, they found that NAFED’s present retail marketing network is
very much limited and there is much scope for enlarging the retail

22
marketing operation.  They, therefore, desired that NAFED should
enlarge its retail marketing operations either by itself or through the
outlets of Agricultural Marketing Federations and Cooperatives by using
its brand name. 
1.34 In this regard, no reply was furnished by the Ministry in their action
taken and further action taken replies.
1.35 The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry have
ignored their observation and reply is silent on the above aspect. The
Committee feel that NAFED’s presence in the field of retail
marketing,  particularly at district and block levels, will make
available quality agricultural commodities at lower prices to
consumers.  They, therefore, expect that the Ministry will initiate
action in this regard and apprise the Committee of the same within
three months. 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BY NAFED
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
1.36 The Committee noted that research and development activities
are carried out through National Horticulture Research and
Development Foundation (NHRDF) established at Nasik by NAFED in
1977 for carrying out research and development activities on various

23
export oriented horticultural crops with a view to increase the yield and
quality for meeting domestic and export requirements.   Not satisfied
with the research and development activities of NAFED, the Committee
recommended that being a premier agricultural cooperative marketing
institution, NAFED should have played a distinct and leading role in
research and development in post harvest research, quality
improvement and marketing.  A separate research and development
division should be set up for undertaking applied research and
development in grading and standardization, post harvest technology
including handling, storage, transport and packaging.  The division
should also be responsible for marketing research activities.  The
Committee also recommended that NAFED should draw up an action
plan to step up its research and development activities to provide
support to other agricultural cooperatives and marketing federations.
1.37 In their action taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under:-
“As reported by NAFED, it was running a separate R&D Division
which has been closed due to paucity of funds. The R&D Divison
was sustaining out of the service charges @ of 5% on canalizing
of export of onion as sole onion export agency.  Now NAFED is
getting 1% service charges and the export of onion has been
de-centralized by adding 12 other agencies.  However, taking
note of the recommendation of the Committee, NAFED vide letter
No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated April 7, 2008 (Annexure-I) has
been advised to take up R&D with aim to quality improvement
and to provide support to other agricultural cooperatives and
marketing federations.  However, it will depend on the financial
resources available with NAFED for the purpose”.

24
1.38 In their further action taken notes, the Ministry have stated as
under:-
“It has been reported by NAFED that due to financial paucity,
NAFED is not in a position to run Research and Development unit
of its own as R&D activity requires specialized manpower and
funds to conduct research and consequential developmental
activities”.
1.39 On being asked by the Committee during evidence, as to why the
Ministry have not taken some pro-active steps such as providing
financial assistance to NAFED, the representative of the Ministry replied
as under:-
“The issue regarding undertaking of research activities and
market studies, as recommended by the Committee, we have
asked NAFED to take up this matter. As mentioned earlier,
presently because of the financial difficulties they were not able to
take it up seriously.  However, I have noted the suggestions that
the hon. Committee has made that they could probably examine
and look at the opportunities of trying to tap funds from various
sources to undertake this activity.  We shall certainly look into this
aspect where various sources of funds which are available can be
tapped for undertaking these kinds of studies.”
1.40 The Committee are constrained to note that NAFED had closed
down its only R&D Division due to paucity of funds and is not in a
position to run Research and Development unit of its own as R&D
activity requires specialized manpower and funds to conduct research
and consequential developmental activities. The Committee are
distressed to note that the Ministry instead of taking proactive steps to
encourage R&D in the field, has just ended up their responsibility by
advising NAFED to take up the R&D activity on top priority by tapping
funds from various sources. While reiterating their earlier

25
recommendation, the Committee stress that the recommendation
made earlier by them be examined by NAFED as well as the
Ministry and necessary funds be provided by the Ministry to
NAFED in this regard.  They also desire that the Ministry should
assist NAFED in its efforts to mobilize funds from various sources
for setting up of separate research and development division. The
Committee also suggest that the assistance/collaboration of Indian
Council of Agricultural Research and other such organizations
should be sought by the Ministry and NAFED in this regard.  They
expect the Ministry to respond in this regard without any further
delay. 
TAX LIABILITY OF COOPERATIVES
       Recommendation (Para No. 16)
1.41 The Committee noticed that although NAFED had been exempted
from payment of income tax on its earnings in the past, cooperative
income tax from retrospective effect has since been imposed on the
Federation. According to NAFED with their comparatively smaller and
weaker capital base, it is hard to bear this additional financial burden of
payment of income tax especially the arrears amounting to Rs. 61 crore
for the past 18 years.  Therefore, there is a need to consider roll back of
this provision and exempt cooperatives from payment of income tax.
The Committee, therefore, suggested that the Ministry of Agriculture
should take up the matter with the Finance Ministry for waiving the tax
liability of Cooperatives or at least ensure that it is imposed with

26
prospective effect instead of retrospective effect and the outcome of the
efforts made in this regard be intimated to them.
1.42 In their action taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under:-
“As recommended by the Committee, the matter is being
taken with the Ministry of Finance”.
1.43 In their further action taken notes, the Ministry stated as under:-
“The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance in the past
also, which was not agreed to.  However, the matter has been
taken up once again as fresh with the Ministry of Finance to
exempt the NAFED from payment of Income Tax on 10.7.2008
and their response is still awaited.”
1.44 During evidence, the Committee enquired for reasons for delay of
almost a year in taking up this matter with the Ministry of Finance.  The
Additional Secretary, (Agriculture & Cooperation) replied as under:-
“I do admit that after receiving the Committee report, there was
this delay.  But although I do not have the dates with me yet I can
convey it to the Committee that we have taken up this matter
earlier, on the request of NAFED, with the Ministry of Finance.
The initial reactions to that were negative.”
1.45 When asked whether Ministry of Finance reacted negatively in the
matter, the representative of the Ministry further stated as under:-
“We had taken up this matter once again and also brought to the
notice of the Ministry of Finance that this is a point on which the
Estimates Committee of the Lok Sabha has taken a very serious
view and they have also recommended that we should take up
this matter very firmly with the Ministry of Finance.  If it is not
completely possible for removing the need of paying income-tax,
at least, they should not be asked to pay the tax on a
retrospective basis. We are still awaiting the reply from that
Ministry.”

27
1.46 The Committee are concerned to note that the matter relating to
waving of tax liability of cooperatives was taken up with the Ministry of
Finance by the Ministry of Agriculture only in the month of July, 2008
after a lapse of about one year since the report was presented to the
House and the response of the Ministry of Finance is still awaited. The
Committee while taking a serious view of such delay on the part of
the Ministries in taking decision on such welfare measures, urge
the Ministry of Agriculture to take up the matter at highest level
with the Ministry of Finance and the final outcome thereof may be
intimated to them within three months.
1.47 The Committee further would like to emphasis that they
attach the greatest importance to implementation of the
recommendations accepted by the Government.  They would,
therefore, urge that the Government should keep a close watch so
as to ensure expeditious implementation of the recommendations
accepted by them.  A report on action taken on the
recommendations categorized as accepted by the Government in
Chapter-II of this Report should be furnished to the Committee
within three months alongwith the action taken replies to
recommendations in chapter-I and the final replies to
recommendations included in chapter-V of this report.  In case it is
not possible to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation.

28
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1)

29
The National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of
India Ltd (NAFED) was established on 2nd October, 1958 with the twin
objective of promoting cooperative marketing to reduce the price spread
between the producer and consumer and to ensure that farmers get
ready market and remunerative prices for their produce. NAFED thus
acts as the Central nodal agency of Government of India for
undertaking purchases of notified commodities in the case of oil seeds,
pulses and cotton under Price Support Scheme (PSS) and procurement
of other agricultural commodities of perishable nature under Market
Intervention Scheme (MIS). Further, NAFED is one of the canalizing
agencies for export of onion. Apart from the Government operations,
NAFED is also engaged in domestic and international marketing of
agricultural commodities under its own commercial operations and
industrial or infrastructural activities in the field of agriculture. After
examining the working of NAFED, the Committee are of the view that
there is sufficient scope for further improvement in various spheres of
its working. These aspects have been dealt-with in greater detail by the
Committee in the succeeding paragraphs.
   Reply of the Government
Accepting the recommendations of the Committee, corrective
measures have already been taken to make working of NAFED more
transparent and cost effective. NAFED has been directed vide letter No.
H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated April 7, 2008 to expand its business
activities.
(Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)

30
Further Action by the Government
Complying with the recommendation of the committee, as
conveyed by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, NAFED
has taken following measures:-
i)   Conducted timely internal audit of all the branches and Head
Office at regular   intervals.
ii)    NAFED has directed all the branches to follow and adhere to
the CVC guidelines and Business Manual of NAFED.
iii)     NAFED has inducted qualified MBAs in order to bring
efficiency and professionalism in the management and business
of NAFED.
iv)       NAFED gives wide publicity regarding the rate, FAQ norms
etc. for procurement under Price Support Scheme (PSS).
NAFED gives this publicity through meetings, seminars, review
meetings, media, exhibitions etc. for its commercial operations.
 NAFED has also entered into various new business activities like
insurance, distribution of seeds, fertilizer, organic farming, etc. The
NAFED has undertaken the business for new ventures like Bio Fertilser
for Rs. 2.28 crores, Export Rs. 542.30 crores and Future Trading
319.00 crores during 2007-08. 
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM  No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3)
 NAFED undertakes various activities to fulfill the aims and
objectives for which it has been established. Twenty two activities have
been enumerated in the bye-laws of NAFED for the purpose. The
Expert Group appointed by the Ministry of Agriculture categorized these

31
activities into three groups viz. the activities that were fully carried out,
the activities that were partially attempted/achieved and the activities
that were not attempted at all. According to the Expert Group, eight
activities of NAFED pertain to the second group of partially achieved
activities and four pertain to the third group of activities not
attempted/achieved at all. Hence, out of twenty two activities, 12
activities are either partially attempted or not attempted at all. The
Expert Group desired that these activities may be reviewed and
modified according to the requirements of NAFED. In Committees’
view, some of these activities such as advancing loan to its members
and other cooperative institutions, undertaking marketing research and
dissemination of market intelligence, acting as warehouseman and
constructing its own godowns and cold storages, organizing
consultancy work in various fields for the  benefit of the cooperative
institutions and training of employees of cooperative societies are very
important. These activities, if undertaken by NAFED, will be beneficial
to the development of agriculture in the country and for the progress of
the cooperative institutions engaged in agriculture sector. Moreover,
NAFED should have a clear vision for the future as suggested by IIM,
Ahmedabad. Particular attention should be given by NAFED to the
objectives such as (i) helping member societies to develop market
orientation, skills and organization so that they could deal with
commodities within their area of operations and (ii) promoting
cooperation among different marketing societies/federations in
managing the flow of commodities across State borders. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that NAFED should examine at its
highest level the feasibility of carrying out the above activities/objectives

32
in order to achieve fully the aims and objectives for which the federation
came into being.
Reply of the Government
As reported by NAFED, it has already made some efforts in this
regard like establishing National Horticultural Research and
Development Foundation (NHRDF) for research on horticultural
commodities, NAFED’s website, creation of storage infrastructure and
helping its member societies to develop market orientation. Accepting
the recommendations of the Committee, NAFED has been advised vide
letter No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated April 7, 2008 not to loose its
focus on agricultural and allied activities.
(Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
Though, the object as specified in Bye-laws of NAFED provides
for giving financial assistance to its members, due to financial crunch,
NAFED is not in a position to advance any loans/ financial assistance to
any of its members.  So far helping members societies in respect of
market orientation etc. is concerned, NAFED has been assisting its
affiliate societies through regular interaction in meetings, conferences,
seminars etc. from time to time.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation) OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated
14.10.2008)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9)
Head Quarter of NAFED is located at New Delhi. It has four
regional offices in New Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai and 31

33
branches located all over India. The Committee were informed that
steps have been taken to open branch offices in the newly created
states of Uttaranchal, Jharkhand and Chattisgarh. However, it was
found that there is no branch office of NAFED in Goa, Pondicherry,
Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep. The business of Andaman &
Nicobar is being looked after by Kolkata Branch, that of Lakshadweep
by Bangalore Branch and of Goa by Pune Branch. For the North
Eastern region, its activities are  being coordinated by Guwahati and
Siliguri Branches in Assam and a liaison office being operated from
Agartala. The reason quoted by NAFED for less number of offices in the
North East was the weak condition of cooperatives in the region in
terms of organizational set up and financial conditions. In this regard the
Committee are of the view that NAFED should have more offices in the
region to cater to the needs of farmers directly and for the development
of agriculture in that region. Interests of farmers of union territories may
also suffer due to absence of NAFED’s office there. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that Branch offices of NAFED may be opened in
all the states of North East, all the union territories and the states where
there is no office at present so as to take care of the needs of the
farmers of these regions. The Committee also find that the business
operations of NAFED are not uniform throughout the country.
Operations of NAFED are concentrated in Western region and the
maximum profit of NAFED comes from this region. Operations of
NAFED are relatively less in Southern and Eastern regions. The
Committee were informed that NAFED has prepared an action plan for
the development of its operations in the South. They recommend that
NAFED should chalk out action plans for further expansion of its

34
operations in Northern, Eastern, Southern and North Eastern regions
and implement them effectively for the benefit of farmers of all the
regions of the country.
Reply of the Government
 It is a fact that the major share of NAFED’s business activities in
form of Price Support Operations for oilseeds and pulses are
undertaken in Western and Northern States. Accepting the
recommendation of the Committee, NAFED has been directed vide
letter No. H. 11011/14/2007-MPS dated April 7, 2008 to strengthen the
cooperative infrastructure in NE region and to make efforts to enhance
its business activities in Eastern and Southern region ..
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14//2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
It has been further reported by NAFED that NAFED is ready to
strengthen the cooperative infrastructure in North-Eastern and Southern
region on its own or in association with the existing cooperatives in the
respective States with the guidance and financial assistance from State
Government.  The successful functioning of the branch depends on its
commercial viability taking into account all the relative aspects of
procurement/storage/marketing/logistic support etc. 
However, in reference to the recommendations NAFED has opened a
branch office in Rudrapur and Sub-Office in Dehradun.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)

35
During evidence when the Committee asked whether any
assistance is needed by NAFED for expansion of its activities in various
States, the Managing Director of NAFED stated as under :-
“Right now, we have a Branch in Siliguri which is taking care of
the activities in the North-Eastern area. As I said earlier, paucity of
funds is the main hindrance in expanding the Branches. More
over, I would request you to consider this point that before
expanding further, we need to find out the economic viability of it.
We will study the economic viability and based on it if further
assistance from the Government is required, we will definitely
take it up with the Government.”
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 15)
The Committee note that NAFED’s future vision includes contract
farming for institutional buyers, agricultural input suppliers etc. The
Committee consider that contract farming by NAFED would benefit
small farmers, serve as a model farming for farmers and boost the
development of agriculture in the country. The Committee would like to
suggest that NAFED may either enter into contract farming on its own
or have joint ventures with the State Cooperative Marketing Federations
and Primary Cooperative societies who are members of NAFED. The
selection of agricultural commodities for contract farming should be
done very carefully. Preference should be given to essential
commodities which are in short supply such as pulses, oil seeds, onion
and garlic. The other thrust area for NAFED for future concentration is
seed supply which is the prime agricultural input. In Committee’s view,
NAFED should supply high breed varieties of seeds which will boost the
per hectare yield of various agricultural commodities. At present,
NAFED supply seeds in a limited way. The Committee recommend that

36
NAFED should take up quality seed production in a big way and supply
the seeds to all the states through its network of cooperatives. The
Committee consider bio-fertilizer as the another thrust area that should
relieve immediate attention of NAFED. Bio-fertilizers such as
vermi-compost and bio-compost are safe for human beings and are
relatively cheaper than the chemical fertilizers. On the other hand
chemical fertilizers are harmful when they enter food chain through the
crops. The Committee, therefore, recommend that NAFED should take
up production of bio-fertilizers in a big way and market them throughout
the country. The Committee may be appraised of the action taken in
this vital area.
Reply of the Government
As reported by NAFED it has already undertaken contract
farming, quality seed production and production of bio-fertilizers,
through on a small scale. However, taking note of the recommendation
of the Committee, NAFED vide letter No. H.1101/14/2007-MPS dated
April 7, 2008 has been advised to take further steps to promote contract
farming and production of bio-fertilizer and quality seed through
cooperatives in a big way. 
(Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
 NAFED has reported that they have undertaken business of
fertilizer, distribution of quality seed and  production of bio-fertilizers. 
The business undertaken in these activities during last three years is
given below:
        Value in Rs./lacs
Year  Seed  Bio-Fertilizer  Fertilizers 

37
2005-06 3095.78 256.00  
2006-07 5363.15 210.00   3335.00
2007-08 4224.56 229.00   1624.29
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 17)
NAFED has a full-fledged Vigilance Section headed by the Chief
Vigilance Officer in the rank of Additional Managing Director.
Complaints of all sorts are dealt with in the Vigilance Section. Besides
trying to detect and investigate cases of corruption and other
malpractices, the Vigilance Section also advices the management on
preventive action so as to reduce the chances of corruption and
malpractices. In spite of this, the Committee note with concern that 21
complaints against the employees of NAFED during the period 2000-05
regarding procurement of commodities etc. and 15 vigilance cases
against them during the same period have been filed. An organization
like NAFED which is engaged in procurement of agricultural
commodities under Price Support operations of the Government, and
dealing in cooperative marketing for fetching remunerative prices for
farmers needs to have a team of upright, dedicated and loyal workforce.
The Federation, therefore, needs to discipline its employees, strengthen
its vigilance mechanism and deal firmly with those who indulge in any
kind of irregular practice.  The pending vigilance cases should be
pursued to their logical conclusion and penal action initiated against
delinquent employees.

38
Reply of the Government
As per the provisions of Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act,
2002, the board of directors of NAFED is the competent authority to
make provisions for regulating the service conditions of its employees
including disciplinary action against such employees. The Government
has no power to direct NAFED in this regard. However, in deference to
the recommendation of the Committee, NAFED vide letter No.
H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated April 7, 2008 has been advised to
strengthen its vigilance mechanism by bringing more transparency in its
functioning.
(Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
NAFED has reported that they have designated an Executive
Director level officer as Chief Vigilance officer for vigilance matters, who
functions independently. NAFED has further reported that out of 21
complaints against its employees, 18 cases have been closed as no
material substance was found.   In another one case, punishment was
awarded to the official and  Departmental inquiry is in progress in
another case.  Another case is under examination.
Out of 15 vigilance cases, six cases have been closed due to no
material evidence was found against them, Four cases have been
closed by awarding appropriate penalties like issuance of warning,
reduction in grade/post and dismissal from service.  In one case,
prosecution sanction has been granted by NAFED to the Directorate of
Vigilance and Anti Corruption, Tamil Nadu.  In other four cases,
investigations by CBI/ACB are in progress.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM  No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)

39

40
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S
REPLY
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6)
The Committee note that the funds for Price Support Operations
are made available by way of Cash Credit Limit (CCL) sanctioned by
RBI to be operated through SBI on the recommendations of the
Government of India up to 75% on hypothecation of stocks keeping a
margin of 25% as per banking norms. The remaining 25% can be
drawn only after Government guarantee in lieu of margin money is
furnished. NAFED enjoys this Cash Credit Limit to the extent of
Rs.1631 crore. The Committee were informed that during Rabi, 2005
season, the Cash Credit Limit to the above extent got exhausted in view
of unprecedented procurement of mustardseeds and pulses undertaken
by NAFED. As the SBI rate of interest was higher than the other
commercial banks, funds were borrowed from other commercial banks
at the instance of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation. As a
result, funds could be arranged at an average rate of interest of 7%
from other commercial banks, as against 10.25% being charged by SBI.
Thereafter, SBI has also agreed to reduce the interest rate downward to
7%. In this manner, a reduction in the loss to the Government
exchequer by around Rs.150 crores to Rs.175 crores was achieved.
The Committee are of the view that last minute rush like this should be
avoided as such tendencies often result in huge loss to the
Government. They, therefore, urge the Government to create a flexible

41
mechanism for such situations and to take timely and suitable steps in
advance. Further, NAFED has suggested to create a Revolving Fund
for PSS and MIS operations which would help it in drawing funds for
preparatory arrangements, publicity and making timely payment to the
farmers. At present, procured stock is hypothecated to the banks to
arrange money for payment to farmers which takes 3 to 7 days. The
Expert Group had also recommended that for effective implementation
of Price Support Scheme, Government should create an interest free
Revolving Fund. The proposal is said to be under active consideration
of the Government. It is quite obvious that for the effective
implementation of PSS and MIS some institutional  mechanism for
funding  has to be worked out. The Committee, therefore, desire that
Government should pursue the proposal with all seriousness and
should put in place an institutional mechanism for funding the price
support operations.
Reply of the Government
 This Department arranges working capital through Government
guarantee of Rs.1631 crore given to NAFED. Besides, for large scale of
procurement, Letters of Comfort in favour of banks with the approval of
Ministry of Finance are issued. As such, the existing mechanism is
taking care of requirement of funds.
(Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
The Department is of the view that the existing mechanism to
make available the working capital to NAFED for undertaking PSS
operation is satisfactory to handle the normal situations upto the extent

42
of existing Government guarantee of Rs.1631 crore.  However, in case
the operation exceeds to this amount, the Department issue Letters of
Comfort in favour of NAFED for additional funds. As such, the existing
mechanism is sufficient enough to take care of the requirement of funds
of NAFED to undertake the PSS operation. NAFED. During the year
2005 and 2006, NAFED has to procure record quantity of mustard seed
under PSS and exhausted the existing Government guarantee of RS.
1631 crore and therefore the Government issued Letter of Comfort in
favour of NAFED to the tune of  Rs. 6130 crores to meet out the
additional requirement of working capital of NAFED.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 8)
The Committee note that the export of onion is presently allowed
through NAFED and 12 State Trading Enterprises without quantitative
restrictions on all varieties of onion. NAFED informed the Committee
that it was the sole canalizing agency from 1974 to 1999. According to
Exim Policy, 1999 State Trading Enterprises were also allowed to act as
canalizing agencies for export of onion. However, NAFED is the only
actual direct major exporter of onion. Others only issue NOCs to the
Associate Shippers who actually undertake export of onion. In this
regard, the Committee note that the very purpose of having canalizing
agencies is to have a control over the export of onions which would
otherwise result in price rise of onion due to uncontrolled export.
NAFED’s request to be designated as the sole canalizing agency merits
consideration as it will provide a single window clearance for export and
will facilitate effective control over the exports. The Committee are
concerned to note that the prices of onion escalate very often which
affects the people particularly the poor people very much. Export of

43
agricultural commodities including onions may be encouraged but the
domestic availability and price situation should be the prime
consideration before the Government while allowing such exports.
They, therefore, recommend that the Government should have effective
control over the export of agricultural commodities including onion and
for this purpose they may, among other measures, consider appointing
NAFED as the sole canalizing agency for the export of onion.
Reply of the Government
 The recommendation of the Committee has been examined.
There is a view that the monopolistic situation may adversely affect the
export of onion and restrictive conditions may also not be in favour of
farmers. NAFED has been directed vide letter No. H.
11011/14/2007-MPS dated April 7, 2008 to monitor export of onion in
such a way that the prices of onion in the domestic market remain
beneficial to both producers as well as consumers.
(Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
 Subsequent to the recommendation of the Committee, the matter
was taken up with NAFED.  It has been reported that NAFED reviews
every month the availability of onion in the country for domestic
consumption as well for export and the price trend.  On that basis
Minimum Export Price (MEP) is fixed by NAFED.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)

44
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 11)
NAFED has cold storages, warehouses and godowns in various
parts of the country. The Federation has cold storages of 5,565 MT
capacity and another one with 4,000 MT capacity is being constructed
in Lawrence Road, Delhi. NAFED informed the Committee that the
Federation has gone into the area of infrastructure in a big way and has
plans to expand its cold-storage chain. In this regard, the Committee
are concerned to note that there is no infrastructure or supply chain at
present for preserving agricultural produce in a non-perishable manner
after these are harvested. The Ministry of Agriculture has proposed to
set up a network of marketing infrastructure in the coming few years as
the post-harvest losses on account of lack of infrastructure as of now is
to the tune of Rs 60,000 crore per annum. The Committee take a
serious view of such huge economic loss to the country due to lack of
infrastructure facilities particularly due to insufficient number of cold
storages to preserve agricultural produce from perishing. They urge the
Government to take immediate steps including provision of funds to
create a network of cold storages in the country using cost-effective,
appropriate and indigenous technology which is suitable to the
conditions existing in the country. NAFED is the apex level organization
engaged in marketing of agricultural commodities. The Committee
expect that NAFED would play a leading role in creation of a network of
cold storages to preserve harvested vegetables and fruits by setting up
cold storages by itself or in cooperation with the Union/State
Governments.

45
Reply of the Government
 National Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC), National
Horticulture Board (NHB) and (Agricultural and Processed Food
Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) are providing
financial assistance for construction of cold storages.
 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme on National Horticulture
Mission is being implemented since July 2005 for the holistic
development of horticulture including post harvest management. The
scheme provides end to end approach covering production, post
harvest management, processing and marketing to assure appropriate
returns to producers which include creation of network of infrastructural
facilities for horticulture storages, transportation, packaging/grading etc.
The scheme provides for specific programmes like pack houses,
ripening chambers, cold storages, C.A.S. refer vans and mobile
processing units wit credit linked back ended subsidy @25% of project
cost in general areas and 33% in case of Hilly and Tribal Areas.
Assistance can be provided to NAFED for cold storages under this
scheme. As reported by NAFED, it has set up three cold storages of
total capacity of 5570 MT. Two projects of 500 MT each are under
construction.
(Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
NAFED has reported that 4000 MTs Cold Storage at Lawrence
Delhi has become functional in addition to the existing cold storage
capacity of 5570 MTs enhancing the total capacity to 9570 MTs and it is
constructing two cold storages of 500 MTs each at Umranala and
Sausar, Chindwara Distt., MP.  NAFED has general warehousing
capacity of 51000 MTs and Onion warehousing capacity of 4400 MTs.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008.

46
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 12)
The Committee note with concern that many of the industrial units
set up by NAFED were failed ventures due to poor planning, delay in
execution and consequent cost escalation, labour problems and
seasonal nature of commodities handled. Many of them were already
closed on  becoming sick and unviable. The NAFED Processed Foods
Unit, Delhi, Raichur Cooperative Oil Complex, NAFED Warehousing
and Processing Industries, Vashi (for processing of Niger seeds for
export purpose), NAFED Krishi Yantra Udyog, Bhiwadi. NAFED Kinnow
Grading, Waxing Precooling-cum-cold storage, Maujgarh, Punjab were
all failed ventures. All these units were closed down. Premises of these
units are either let out for warehousing or proposed to be leased out to
others. The Committee were informed that the premises of NAFED
Krishi Yantra Udyog, Bhiwadi are proposed to be leased on licence fee
basis for manufacturing plastic products under the brand name of
NAFED. Utilization of brand name of NAFED for production of plastics
is a matter to be considered seriously.  In Committee’s view brand
name of NAFED should only be utilized for production in agriculture and
allied fields.  The Committee are concerned to note the condition of
Konark Jute Limited (KJL) which became unviable since its inception.
Even on implementation of BIFR’s rehabilitation scheme, operational
efficiency of the company could not be improved due to labour
problems and sluggish market conditions.  The Committee recommend
that NAFED should evaluate the performance of this unit at the highest
level and immediate steps should be taken for its successful running.

47
The reasons put forth by NAFED that performance of industrial units
largely depend upon overall business activities of trade and industries in
the country which vary from time to time, are not acceptable to the
Committee.  The Committee are of the view that with such mind set,
NAFED will not succeed in any new venture.  Instead of depending on
external factors for the performance of industrial units floated by
NAFED, it should first carefully choose a project.  Secondly, it should
undertake feasibility studies before starting any industrial unit.
Seasonal nature of agricultural products should also be taken into
account.  Once any unit is started, NAFED should not spare any effort
for the successful running of the unit.  The Committee expect that
professionalism and proper planning and implementation will help
NAFED in successful running its industrial ventures. The Committee
recommend that NAFED should tie-up with social welfare schemes for
setting up food processing units in backward districts for benefits to
accrue to small farmers. The Committee also recommend that NAFED
should draw a specific plan of action with regard to each unit and
implement the same after in-depth study about their feasibility.
 Reply of the Government
As reported by NAFED, it has made all out efforts to revive the
sick units but was left with no other option but to close the units to avoid
recurring losses.  Taking note of the recommendation of the
Committee, NAFED vide letter No. H. 11011/14/2007-MPS dated April
7, 2008 has been advised to make in-depth study before taking up any
industrial project, to set up food processing units n backward districts
and to use its brand name for production in agriculture and allied fields
on.  The recommendation of the Committee in respect of Konark Jute
Limited has been taken up with NAFED.  NAFED has been advised to
evaluate the performance of Konark Jute Limited at their board level.

48
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14//2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
 NAFED has reported that in future it will start an
industrial/processing unit only after conducting a detailed feasibility
report/economic viability report.  NAFED has to close its existing
processing units due to their non-viability/incurring recurring losses.
Due to non-viability of Konarak Jute Ltd. NAFED has withdrawn its
equity.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)

49
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2)
The Committee note that NAFED was established under MSCS
Act in 1984 with the aim of promoting cooperative marketing and
ensuring remunerative prices to the farmers for their produces and price
spread between producer and consumer be reduced. MSCS Act, 2002
came into force w.e.f. 19 th August, 2002 with the objective of greater
operational and administrative autonomy to cooperatives like NAFED.
As per amended bye laws after the enactment of MSCS Act, 2002
NAFED can undertake business in non agricultural and non traditional
items to meet the challenges of liberalised economy. The Committee
are of the view that the inclusion of non traditional and non agricultural
items should not affect the primary functioning of NAFED and therefore
recommend that the focus on agricultural and allied activities should not
be lost and NAFED should function in a manner to achieve operational
and administrative autonomy. It should also be ensured that it becomes
a commercially viable organization in the changed business scenario in
the post liberalisation era and protects the interests of the farmers.

50
Reply of the Government
 Necessary direction have been given to NAFED to focus on
agricultural and allied activities vide letter No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS
dated April 7,2008.
(Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
NAFED is a national level cooperative society registered under
the Multi State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002.  Under the provisions
of the Act, NAFED is an autonomous organization and have full
autonomy in its operational and administrative matters to conduct its
business, as per its Bye-Laws. The Government does not interfere in
their day today functioning.  
Further, NAFED has never lost the focus on its prime
responsibility towards farmers and cooperative societies. The business
in agricultural and allied activities had been always the main focus of
NAFED.  NAFED did venture into non-agricultural activities to diversify
its business activities to sustain itself but this activity was very limited,
which is evident from the fact that during the year 2007-08 only
business worth Rs.35.09 lacs have been done  for non agriculture as
compared to the total business of Rs.4706 crore.   
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM  No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4)
The Board of Directors of NAFED consists of 21 members and
with cooption and special invitees, the total membership of the Board
now stands at 25. The Committee were informed that previously the
Board consisted of 44 members but after the enactment of the Multi

51
State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002, the size of the Board has been
reduced to 21 as per clause 41(3) of the Act. Out of 21 members of the
Board 10 are from State Marketing Federations. At present 25 state
level cooperative Marketing Federations are members of NAFED. As
per bye-law 20(a) of NAFED, only first 10 in descending order of their
ranking are eligible to nominate one director each to the Board of
NAFED. The ranking is based on weighted average of the percentage
equity share capital of the concerned state in total issued share capital
of NAFED and average business with NAFED excluding business of
Government Schemes. In accordance with bye-law 20(b), one director
from North-Eastern States including Sikkim can be nominated if eligible
under this bye-law. The Committee have the apprehension that only first
10 states whose share capital is more and whose business is more with
NAFED can become directors of the Board. Other states will only be
on-lookers and they will not be able to put forward their views in the
Board even though they are members. The Committee are of the view
that this unequal representation of states in the Board should be
corrected and NAFED being an apex level marketing federation should
accord equal opportunity to all the states to become members of the
Board. Commercial viability and profit making may be one of the goals
of NAFED but overall development of agriculture sector and welfare of
farmers all over the country should be the main focus of the activities of
NAFED. Instead of expecting the States to do more business with
NAFED, it should identify specific crop potential of the states and take
proactive steps for the development of the same. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that bye-laws of NAFED should be suitably
amended so that all the states will have equal opportunity to participate

52
in the administration of NAFED.
Reply of the Government
The provisions of Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002
provide for maximum number of directors on board of NAFED not
exceeding 21.  Hence, NAFED provided n their bye-laws, the criterion
for representation on board based on the equity held and transaction
undertaken with NAFED.  NAFED has been directed vide letter No.
H.11011/14//2007-MPS dated April, 7, 2008 to give attention to other
State members also who are not representing on the board of NAFED .
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14//2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
   Further Action taken by the Government
NAFED has reported that in view of the provisions of the Multi
State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002, the strength of the Board has to
be restricted to 21.  However, all the State Federations are members of
the General Body of NAFED.  State Federations give their
suggestions/view point during the General Body Meeting and the same
is incorporated at the time of finalization of Business Plans of the
Federation, wherever feasible.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM  No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5)
 NAFED is the nodal agency of the Government of India for
undertaking procurement of oilseeds and pulses under its Price Support
Scheme(PSS) whenever the market rates of these commodities go

53
below the declared Minimum Support Price (MSP). NAFED is
implementing PSS since 1976-77. Under PSS, NAFED procures
commodities like urad, gram, masoor, groundnut pods, mustardseed,
safflower seed, sunflower seed and Copra. The Committee were
informed that the magnitude of procurement of oilseeds under the
scheme until 1999 was limited and sizeable stocks were required to be
procured on very few occasions. From 1976-77 till 1998-99, the
procurement was of the order of Rs.380 crores only. However, since
1999, heavy procurement of oilseeds particularly that of mustard seeds
had to be undertaken by NAFED under Price Support Scheme. The
Committee note that liberalized imports and higher global production of
oil seeds resulted in import of huge quantity of edible oil into the country
at cheaper rates. Due to this the prices of oilseeds in the domestic
markets remained depressed and heavy procurement of oilseeds under
PSS had to be undertaken by NAFED. Finance for procurement of
oilseeds and pulses under PSS is made available to NAFED by way of
Cash Credit Limit sanctioned by RBI. The Committee note that the
losses incurred by NAFED in Price Support Operations are reimbursed
through budget provisions (non-plan) by the Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation. In both PSS and MIS schemes losses are inherent
due to the fact that the purchases of the Commodities are undertaken
by giving the MSP to the farmers when the prices are actually ruling
below the MSP in the market. In this regard, NAFED informed the
Committee that loss in Price Support Operations varies from 10% to
25%. During the period 2000-2005, NAFED had utilized an amount of
Rs.955 crore from the budget provisions on account of losses in PSS
operations. This is a huge loss to the exchequer by any reckoning. This

54
loss is mainly due to the liberalized import policy. The Government has
announced further reduction in import duty on crude as well as refined
and edible oils in the budget 2007-08. This may increase the availability
of edible oil and make it more affordable but such adhoc measures will
not serve the interest of the country in the long run. The Committee are
of the firm view that need of the hour is the holistic planning for the
indigenous production of various oil seeds at the desired quality and
quantity to meet the edible oil needs of the country. Research and
development activities should also be encouraged by the Government
for producing better quality seeds for oil crops which can provide more
yield. Farmers should also be given incentives for cultivation of oil
seeds crops. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a
study should be conducted on present and future edible oil needs of the
country, current production and its deficiencies, quality of seeds
available in the country and their yield position, import of edible oil and
its impact on the economy and suitable measures should accordingly
be initiated to increase the production of oil seeds in order to make the
country self sufficient in meeting the edible oil needs of the people.
Action taken in this regard should be conveyed to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee was examined in
consultation with the Department of Food & PD, being the subject
matter Department.  The Department of Food & PD is of the view that
the annual requirement/demand of edible oils was 113.00  lakh MT in
2004-05, 118.50 lakh MT in 2005-06, 124.10 lakh MT in 2006-07 and
projected 127.57 lakh MT for 2007-08 against  availability of edible oils
n the country  from all domestic sources at 72.47 lakh MT in  2004-05,
83.16 lakh MT in 2005-06, 72.43 lakh MT in 2006-07 and projected
76.68 lakh MT for 2007-08.  The gap between demand and availability

55
has been filled through import of edible oils.  Edible oils have been
imported to the tune of 45.42 lakh MT in 2004-05, 42.88 lakh MT in
2005-06, 42.17 lakh MT  in 2006-07 and 26.29 lakh MT in 2007-08
(upto September, 2007).  Progressive changes have been made in the
Import Policy in respect of edible oils.
 The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation is implementing a
Central Sponsored Scheme namely Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds,
Pulses, Oilpalm and Maize (ISOPOM) for increasing the production and
productivity of oilseeds, pulses and maize in the country.  The scheme
has been modified with regard to norms and pattern of assistance for
11th Five Year Plan to make it more effective and result oriented.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14//2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 7)   
NAFED is also the nodal agency of the Government of India for
implementing the Market Intervention Scheme (MIS). As per the
provisions of this scheme, the Federation undertakes procurement of
perishable items which are not covered under the PSS such as onion,
potato, ginger, kinnow, malta, naspati, apple, black pepper, red chillies,
coriander seed, eggs and palm oil bunches. In accordance with the
guidelines prescribed by the Government of India, the losses under the
MIS are to be shared on 50:50 basis between Central and State
Government concerned. In case of North-Eastern States it would be
75:25 basis respectively. However, NAFED informed the Committee
that previously 100% of the losses incurred by it under MIS were
reimbursed by the Government but since 2001, only 25% of the losses
are reimbursed. The Committee would like the Government to examine
this aspect and come out with a formula to compensate suitably the

56
losses incurred by NAFED under MIS. According to NAFED the
intervention under Market Intervention Scheme is not always very
effective, because the proposal from the State Government is often
received late. In order to achieve the objective of market intervention
scheme for stabilizing the prices at reasonable level, preventing the
farmers from distress sale and for sustaining production, it is imperative
that the decision on market intervention is taken promptly and NAFED
initiate action without loss of time. The Committee, therefore, desire that
both the Government and NAFED should act promptly and in close
coordination as far as decision making process and implementation of
the market intervention scheme are concerned in order to ensure that
the schemes such as Price Support Scheme and Market Intervention
Scheme actually benefit the farmers.
Reply of the Government
 The Committee n Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) revised the MIS
guidelines with effect from 30.7.2001 restricting the losses eligible for
reimbursement to procuring agencies to 25% of total procurement cost.
 Actual losses were reimbursed under old MIS guidelines.  The proposal
to reimburse losses is being examined.  NAFED has been directed vide
letter No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated April 7, 2008 to ensure that the
genuine farmers get benefit of the Price Support Scheme and market
Intervention Scheme.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14//2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government

57
This Department act promptly as and when the MIS proposal is
being furnished to the Department. Further, the MIS is implemented
with the sole aim that farmers are not forced for distress sale due to glut
in the market. From the year 2006 to 2008, the MIS has been
implemented for various agricultural & and horticultural commodities
like onion, apple, malta, ginger, chilly, passion fruit, potato etc, in the
States like Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Mizoram, Himachal Pradesh,
Karnataka, U.P. and west Bengal.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)
Recommendation No. (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 10)
The Committee note that the retail marketing operations of
NAFED are limited to the three retail outlets in Delhi. These outlets
were established around one and a half decades ago at the instance of
the Ministry of Agriculture with a view to safeguarding the interests of
consumers. It is also running two retail outlets in Shimla and one each
at Jaipur and Hyderabad. Although it was decided that with the changes
in market scenario, NAFED should enter into consumer marketing in a
better way by going in for a chain of NAFED Bazaars, only two such
outlets were opened in Delhi. One of them had to be closed down as it
was not economically viable.  The Expert Group had identified
consumer marketing as a potential area for NAFED for increasing
turnover and for higher price realization of the produce by value
addition. The Group had recommended that NAFED’s activities in this
area should be enlarged by establishing linkages with consumer
marketing organizations and others by using NAFED brand name. In
this regard, the Committee are of the view that NAFED’s presence in

58
the field of retail marketing will make available quality agricultural
commodities at lower prices to consumers. NAFED’s present retail
marketing network is very much limited and there is much scope for
expansion. As recommended by the Expert Group, NAFED may
enlarge its retail marketing operations either by itself or through the
outlets of Agricultural Marketing Federations and Cooperatives by using
its brand name. Moreover, the Committee are of the view that there
should be a central mechanism to inform the consumers about the retail
marketing prices of agricultural commodities on a daily basis with its
regional variations due to various factors. Being an all India agricultural
marketing federation NAFED can be the most suitable organization in
this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government and NAFED should work out a central mechanism for
bringing out a price bulletin by NAFED of various agricultural
commodities on a daily basis. This would be very useful to consumers
as it would indicate the actual retail prices of various agricultural
commodities and may check the artificial price hike by private
traders/trading companies and the subsequent inflationary tendencies.
   Reply of the Government
The Department of Consumer Affairs monitors the retail prices of
14 essential commodities viz. rice, wheat, gram dal, arhar dal, tea
sugar, salt, potato, onion, vanaspati, groundnut oil, mustard oil, milk
and atta on a daily basis and the wholesale prices on a weekly basis.
Daily retail prices and weekly wholesale from 18 and 37 centres
respectively from the concerned State Governments through fax/E-mail.
 With effect from 12.7.2006; nine additional centers have been included
in the Daily Price Report.
 As the Department of Consumer Affairs is already issuing daily
and weekly wholesale/retail price bulletin and also monitoring price of

59
essential commodities on daily and weekly basis, there seems to be no
need for issuing the similar bulletin by NAFED.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)OM No. H.11011/14//2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
   Further Action taken by the Government
NAFED has reported that it does not have its own price bulletin
mechanism for retail consumer prices due to limited resources.
However, NAFED is providing important market intelligence to the
various agencies such as DMI, Govt. of India.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 14)
The Committee note that research and development activities are
carried out through National Horticultural Research and Development
Foundation (NHRDF) at Nasik which was established by NAFED in
1977 for carrying out research and development activities on various
export oriented horticultural crops with a view to increase the yield and
quality for meeting domestic and export requirements. Major thrust
areas of research and development programmes of NHRDF are
increasing production, productivity, quality and increasing shelf life of
these perishable consumer products. The Committee are not satisfied
with the research and development activities of NAFED and
recommend that being a premier agricultural cooperative marketing
institution, NAFED should have played a distinct and leading role in
research and development in post harvest research, quality

60
improvement and marketing. A separate research and development
division should be set up for undertaking applied research and
development in grading and standardization, post harvest technology
including handling, storage, transport and packaging. The division
should also be made responsible for marketing research activities. The
Committee also recommend that NAFED should draw up an action plan
to step up its research and development activities to provide support to
other agricultural cooperatives and marketing federations.
Reply of the Government
As reported by NAFED, it was running a separate R&D Division
which has been closed due to paucity of funds.  The R&D Division was
sustaining out of the service charges @ of 5% on canalizing of export of
onion as sole onion export agency.  Now  NAFED is getting 1% service
charges and the export of onion has been de-centralised by adding 12
other agencies.  However, taking note of the recommendation of the
Committee, NAFED vide  letter No. H.11011/14//2007-MPS dated April
7, 2008 has been advised to take up R&D with aim to quality
improvement and to provide support to other agricultural cooperatives
and marketing federations.  However, it will depend on the financial
resources available with NAFED for the purpose.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14//2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
It has been reported by NAFED that due to financial paucity,
NAFED is not in a position to run Research and Development unit of its
own as R&D activity requires specialized manpower and funds to
conduct research and consequential developmental activities.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)

61
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 16)
NAFED have pointed out that although it was exempted from
payment of income tax on its earnings in the past, cooperative income
tax from retrospective effect has since been imposed on the Federation.
The tax liability per annum would be 33.66% of its income and the past
arrears liable to be paid for 18 years from 1984-85 to 2004-05 amount
to Rs.61 crore. It was pointed out that this has come as a serious blow
to the cooperatives which came into existence primarily to secure the
interests of farmers. With their comparatively smaller and weaker
capital base they would find it hard to bear this additional financial
burden of payment of income tax especially the arrears for the past 18
years. According to NAFED there is need to consider roll back of this
provision and exempt cooperatives from payment of income tax. In this
regard, the Committee note that the benefit of deductions under section
36(1)(viii) of Income Tax Act has been extended to cooperative banks
by the Government in the budget 2007-08. NAFED has reportedly taken
up the matter with the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Finance
for an amendment in the Income Tax Act to the effect that the income
tax may be paid prospectively. The Committee suggest that the Ministry
of Agriculture should take up the matter with the Finance Ministry for
waiving the tax liability of Cooperatives, or at least ensure that it is
imposed with prospective effect instead of retrospective effect. The

62
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the efforts made
by the Ministry of Agriculture in this regard.
Reply of the Government
 As recommended by the Committee, the matter is being taken
with the Ministry of Finance.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14//2007-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
 Further Action taken by the Government
The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance in the past
also, which was not agreed to.  However, the matter has been taken up
once again as a fresh with the Ministry of Finance to exempt the
NAFED from payment of Income Tax on 10.7.2008 and their response
is still awaited. 
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM  No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)

63
 CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 13)
The Committee note with concern that despite the existence of a
wide network of cooperatives in the country, NAFED’s own joint venture
initiatives with State Cooperative Marketing Federations and Marketing
Cooperative Societies have been very few. The purchases were nil in
2000-01 and 2001-02, Rs 241 lakh in 2002-03, Rs 51.30 lakh in
2003-04 and Rs 267.20 lakh in 2004-05. The reasons adduced for low
level of joint ventures with State Cooperative Marketing Federation was
the large number of problems crippling the cooperative sector in the
country. Several cooperative units are sick and need to be revived. The
Committee take a serious view of this situation. Unless cooperative
societies and State Level Marketing Federations are strong, Apex
Marketing Federations like NAFED may not be able to reap the benefits
of the vast network of cooperatives in the country. In this regard the
Committee note that a Task Force headed by Shri Vaidyanathan had
made certain suggestions to revive the cooperative sector in the
country. The Committee urge upon the Government to consider the
suggestions of the Task Force and take all the steps to find out the
reasons for sickness of the cooperative sector in the country and revive
them in a time bound manner. The State Governments may also be
involved in this process.

64
Reply of the Government
 Government of India constituted a Task Force under the
Chairmanship of Prof. A. Vaidyanathan in 2004 to suggest an
implementable  plan of action to revive the rural cooperative credit
institutions.  Based  on the recommendation of the Task Force,
Government of India has formulated a Revival Package for Short Term
cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS) and circulated to all State
Governments.  This Revival Package aims at improving the functioning
of Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACs),  District Central
cooperative Banks (DCCBs) and State Cooperative  Banks (SCBs)
through certain legal and institutional  reforms and necessary capital
infusion.  Government of India had earlier given the option to all State
Governments to accept the package till 5 th January, 2008.  Till date,
seventeen States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar,
Chattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Nagaland, Rajasthan, Orissa, Punjab, Tamilnadu, Tripura, Uttarakhand,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have executed the MoUs with the
Government of India and NABARD.  This covers 90% of the PACS and
87% of the CCBs in the country.  The Government of India has since
extended the date of acceptance upto 6 th July, 2008.  NABARD has
informed that five more States viz. J&K, Assam, Jharkhand and
Meghalaya would be signing MoU shortly.  Total recapitalisation
assistance of Rs. 3325 crore has been released under the Package to
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Orissa and Uttar Pradesh.  Release of fund in the other States would be
possible after the State Governments promulgate the Ordinance/rectify
the deviations in the Ordinances from provisions of Revival Package
and release their share.
 The same Task Force has also submitted Report for revival of
Long Term Cooperative Credit Structure.  The report has been
forwarded to State Governments for their comments and has been
discussed with Finance/Cooperative Ministers of the State
Governments on 10.10.2007 and 29.1.2008.  Based on the comments
received from the States, the Government is in process of finalizing a
package for revival of Long Term Cooperative Credit Structure.  

65
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007/-MPS dated 13.5.2008)
Further Action taken by the Government
Twenty five States Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Chattisgarh, Gujrat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalay,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Orissa, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura, Uttarakhand, U.P. and West Bengal has signed MOU,
covering 96% of the Short Term Credit Institutions. Upto September,
22, 2008 NABARD has released an amount of Rs. 3,760.20 crores as
Government of India share for recapitalization of Primary Agricultural
Credit Cooperative Societies (PACS) in seven States like Andhra
Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa,
and U.P.
(Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation)
OM No. H.11011/14/2007-MPS dated 14.10.2008)
   NEW DELHI;
December 10  ,2008___
Agrahayana 19 ,1930(S)
C.KUPPUSAMI,
Chairman,
Committee on Estimates.