       EC NO.1415 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE  
(2004-2005) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
(Action taken by Government on the recommendations  
contained in the Seventeenth Report of Estimates 
Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the  
Ministry of Home Affairs –  
‘Relief and Rehabilitation Measures in 
Natural Calamities’) 
 
 
     S  
      E  
       A  
        L  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.12.2004 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December  ,2004/Agrahayana   ,  1926(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
PAGE 
 
Composition of the Estimates Committee (2004-2005) ..................... (iii) 
 
Introduction .......................................................................................  (v) 
 
Chapter I Repor t .........................................................................  1 -13 
 
 
    APPENDICES 
 
I  Minutes of  sitting of the Estimates Committee held on 
  27.09.2004         
 
II  Analysis of the action taken by Government on the   
  recommendations/observations contained in the 
  1 7 th Report of  Estimates  Committee(Thirteenth 
  Lok Sabha). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami     - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2.       Shri A. Sai Prathap 
3.       Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4.       Shri Chander Kumar 
5.       Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
6.       Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7.       Shri Anant Gudhe 
8.       Shri Jai Prakash 
9.       Shri N.N. Krishnadas 
10.       Shri Samik Lahiri 
11.       Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
12.       Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato 
13.       Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
14.       Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15.       Shri Prabodh Panda  
16.       Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.       Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
18.       Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
19.       Shri Harikewal Prasad 
20.       Prof. M. Ramadass 
21.       Shri K.S. Rao 
22.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
23.       Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
24.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
25.       Shri Laxman Singh 
26.       Shri Sartaj Singh 
27.       Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
28.       Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
29.       Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
30.       Shri Vijay Krishan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   -   Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.  Singh   - PCPI 
4. Shri Cyril John   - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Hoti Lal    - Committee Officer 
 
      
(iii) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I,  the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the  Report on their behalf, 
present this Third Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of Estimates 
Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the  Ministry of Home Affairs - 
‘Relief and Rehabilitation Measures in Natural Calamities’. 
2. The  Seventeenth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) was presented 
to Lok Sabha on 30 th April, 2003.  The Government furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in the 
Report  on 7
th January, 2004.  The Draft Report was considered and 
adopted  by Estimates Committee (2004-05) at their sitting held on  27 th 
September, 2004. 
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following Chapters: 
I. Report; 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government; 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies; 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been  accepted by the  Committee; 
and 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which  final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
(v) 

 
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventeent h Report of Estimates Committee (Thirteenth Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix II.  It would be observed therefrom that out of 24 
observations/recommendations made in the Report, 14 recommendations,  i.e. 
58.4% have been accepted by Government  and the Committee do not desire to 
pursue 2 recommendations, i.e.8.4%, in view of  Government’s replies. Replies of 
Government in respect of 4 recommendations, i.e. 16.6% have not been accepted 
by the Committee.  Final replies of Government in respect of 4 recommendations, 
i.e. 16.6%,  are still awaited.  
   
 
NEW DELHI               C.KUPPUSAMI, 
December  1, 2004                                    Chairman, 
Agrahayana  10, 1926(S)   Committee on Estimates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi)

 
CHAPTER   1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals wit h the action taken by Government on 
the recommendations contained in their Seventeenth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) 
on the Ministry of Home Affairs – ‘Relie f and Rehabilitation Measures in Natural 
Calamities’. 
 
1.2 The Committee’s Seventeenth Repor t was presented to Lok Sabha on 30 th 
April, 2003.  It contained 24 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken notes on 
all these recommendations/observations have been received from the Ministry of 
Home Affairs. 
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and re commendations contained in the Report 
have been categorized as under :- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government :  
Sl. Nos. 1 to 6, 9,10,14,15,17,19 ,22 and 23 
      (Total 14,  Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of Government’s reply : 
Sl. Nos. 13 and 16 
      (Total  2, Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee : 
Sl. Nos.  7,8, 21 and 24 
      (Total 4, Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited : 
Sl. Nos. 11,12, 18 and 20 
      (Total 4,  Chapter V) 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal  with the action taken by Government on some 
of the recommendations. 
                    
            
 

- 2 - 
Delay in processing and releasing assistance from NCCF  
 (Observation/Recommendation Sl. No.7, Para No. 6.7) 
1.5 Commenting on the inordinate delay on the part of Central 
Government to release assistance from Natural Calamity Contingency Fund  
during natural calamities, the Committee recommended as under : 
“Inordinate delay on the part of the Central Government to process the 
request and to release the needed assistance would only defeat the 
very purpose of setting up a fund like National Calamity Contingency 
Fund.  When the disaster is of  an unprecedented magnitude, relief is 
needed immediately without which the State Government would not be 
able to cope up with the emergent situation.   The Committee 
deprecate the very approach of the Ministry towards an issue of such 
vital importance in a welfare State.  There is an emergent need for 
attitudinal change and building the culture of quick response to natural 
calamities in the country.  The Committee, therefore, emphasize that 
the guidelines drawn up by the Ministry for operation and management 
of NCCF should be revised suitably to include a time-frame for 
submission of Memorandum by the State Government after the natural 
calamity occurs and deputing the Central Team and sanctioning and 
disbursal of relief from NCCF. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the specific steps taken by the Ministry in this regard within 
three months from the time of presentation of the Report.” 

- 3 - 
1.6  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs has stated as 
follows : 
“It is primarily the responsibility of the State Government concerned to 
provide relief in the wake of natural calamities.  The Ministry of Home 
Affairs, as the nodal Ministry for natural calamities other than drought 
and the Ministry of Agriculture f or drought, remain in constant touch 
with the State Government and provide necessary logistic and 
financial support, wherever needed.  The States take time to submit 
the Memorandum because they need to assess the damage in various 
sectors and the requirement of assistance, after taking into account 
the funds available with them under CRF and other heads.  The 
Central Team is dispatched as s oon as the Memorandum is received.  
At times, in urgency, the Central Team has been deputed without 
waiting for the Memorandum with the instructions that the 
Memorandum be handed over to the Team on arrival.” 

- 4 - 
1.7 The Committee regret to note that  the reply of the Government only 
reiterates the view-point placed before the Committee earlier during the time 
of examination of the subject.  The Committee are not satisfied with the 
reply.  It was with much concern about the delay in processing and releasing 
Central   assistance   for    natural   calamities   that   the    Committee   had 
recommended that guidelines for operation and management of the National 
Calamity Contingency Fund (NCCF) be revised suitably to specify a time-
frame for submission of Memorandum by the State Government after  
occurrence of the natural calamity, deputing Central Team by the Union 
Government, sanctioning and disbursal of  relief from NCCF, etc.  The reply 
is silent about the steps taken by Government on the recommendation of the 
Committee.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and stress that the procedure be streamlined so as to 
ensure prompt Central assistance  in t he case of natural calamities of rare 
severity.  They would like to be appris ed of the action taken by Government 
in this regard. 

- 5 - 
Norms for Assistance from CRF and NCCF 
(Observation/Recommendation Sl. No. 8 Para No. 6.8) 
 
1.8 Expressing their concern that the quantum of assistance prescribed for 
relief in natural calamities is too inadequate,  the Committee recommended 
as follows :-  
“As per the recommendations of the Eleventh Finance Commission, a 
Committee of Experts was constituted by the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) under the chairmanship of 
the Central Relief Commissioner to review and finalise the list of items 
and norms of expenditure to be follow ed for availing assistance from 
NCCF for the period between 2000-2005.  From the norms of 
expenditure for assistance from CRF and NCCF drawn up by the 
Experts Committee, it is seen that the Quantum of assistance for relief 
in natural calamities prescribed is too inadequate.  For example, ex-
gratia payment to families of deceased persons is Rs.50,000/- per 
deceased, for grievous injury requiring hospitalisation for more than a 
week, it is Rs.5,000/- per person, agriculture input subsidy when crop 
loss is 50 % and above for rainfed areas is Rs.1,000/- per hectare, etc.  
The Ministry was candid in admi ssion that “Government is aware of 
the difficulties experienced by the State Governments and feels that 
the  corpus  of CRF and NFCR (now NCCF) for 1995-96 to 1999-2000 

 
- 6 - 
 was inadequate.”  The Committee emphasise that despite the 
resource constraints, disaster mitigation deserves utmost priority and 
should be the concern of one and all.  They desire that the norms of 
assistance from CRF and NCCF should be suitably revised with  a 
view to help the victims of calamity to tide over the hardships at least 
partially”. 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs has stated as 
under :- 
“The Ministry of Agriculture, as a follow up of the recommendations of 
the Eleventh Finance Commission, had constituted a Committee of 
Experts in November, 2000 to review the norms and items of 
expenditure from CRF/NCCF.  Based on the report of the Committee, 
the scale of assistance was laid down. Later, the Home Affairs, now 
the nodal Ministry, had also constituted a Committee of Experts and 
revised the norms 
inter alia in the context of preparedness and 
mitigation.  The revised norms now provide for training to specialist 
multi-disciplinary groups/teams of the State personnel, procurement of 
essential search, rescue and evacuation equipment including 
communication equipment subject to the ceiling 10% of the CRF 
allocation of the year.” 

- 7 - 
1.10 The Committee are constrained to note that the reply of the 
Government is evasive.  The Committee had felt that the quantum of 
assistance prescribed for natural calamities from CRF and NCCF was quite 
inadequate.  On the basis of the recommendations of a Committee of 
Experts, ex-gratia payment being made to families of deceased persons is 
Rs. 50,000/- per deceased, assistance for grievous injury requiring 
hospitalisation for more than a week is Rs.5,000/- per person, agriculture 
input subsidy when crop loss is 50% and above for rainfed areas is 
Rs.1,000/- per hectare, etc.  Therefore, the Committee had desired that the 
norms of assistance from CRF and NCCF should be suitably revised so that 
the victims are able to  tide over the hardships on account of the calamity. 
While expressing their displeasure on the casual approach towards the 
recommendation of the Committee, they desire that the recommendation be 
pursued with the required seriousness and the action taken thereon be 
intimated to the Committee. 

- 8 - 
Measures to Strengthen Advance Warning System 
(Observation/Recommendation Sl. No. 21, Para No. 6.21) 
 
1.11 Emphasizing the need for strengthening Advance Warning Systems 
for natural calamities, the Committee recommended as under :- 
“When the Committee enquired about the disaster forecasting system 
available in the country, the Mini stry informed that a Conference of 
Relief Commissioners of all the States and Union Territories, 
representatives of concerned Ministries, Departments and 
organisations is held annually before the onset of South-West 
monsoon to review the status of preparedness and disaster reduction 
related activities. It has been stated before the Committee that the 
country has elaborate cyclone detection and tracking system and flood 
forecasting and warning systems covering major rivers.  Emergency 
measures taken by the State Governments, after warning about a 
natural calamity is received, include evacuation of the people to safer 
places, identifying safe shelters and keeping the people informed 
about the situation.  While the Committee are in agreement that some 
calamities like earthquake do not give any advance warning, 
Government should take more concrete measures to strengthen 
advance warning systems for other calamities like, cyclone, floods, 
drought, etc.  It may not be possible to prevent some of the natural 
 

- 9 - 
 
 calamities, but there is no denying the fact that their adverse impact 
can be reduced substantially by undertaking adequate disaster 
preparedness and mitigation measures.  The Committee trust that the 
Government will take all possible steps for upgrading and 
strengthening advance disaster warning systems in the country”. 
 
1.12 In the action taken reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated as under:- 
“The recommendations of the Committee have been noted.  The 
Ministry of Home Affairs have discussed the current status of the early 
warning system in the country with the India Meteorological 
Department, Central Water Commission and the National Centre for 
Medium Range Weather Forecasting and requested them to identify 
the areas which need strengthening.” 

- 10- 
 
1.13 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply furnished by the 
Government.  They express their displeasure at the casual manner in which 
recommendation of the Committee on a vital issue like strengthening of 
disaster preparedness and mitigation measures has been dealt with. The 
Ministry of Home Affairs should have identified areas which need to be 
strengthened for advance warning of natural calamities,  upgraded the 
facilities in consultation with the India Meteorological Department, Central 
Water Commission and the National Centre for Medium Range Weather 
Forecasting and  thereafter reported the matter to the Committee.  As 
nothing concrete has been done in this regard, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation and desire that Government take all possible steps for 
upgrading and strengthening advanced disaster warning systems in the 
country and the action taken be intimated to the Committee within three 
months from the date of presentation of the Report to the House. 

- 11 - 
Insurance Scheme for Crops 
(Observation/Recommendation Sl. No. 24, Para No. 6.24) 
1.14 Stressing the need to implement Insurance Scheme for crops, the 
Committee recommended as under :- 
“Although loss of crop and cultivation through pest disease is not 
considered a natural calamity as stipulated by the Eleventh Finance 
Commission, the Committee note with concern that many farmers 
suffer heavy losses on account of pest disease.  The only way to 
safeguard the interests of farmers is by implementing National 
Agriculture Insurance Scheme by all States.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that State Governments should be impressed upon to 
implement Insurance Scheme for crops to provide insurance cover to 
farmers against pest disease.  They also suggest that steps be taken 
to notify disaster prone and hazardous areas and make insurance in 
such areas mandatory.” 
  
1.15 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated as 
follows :- 
 
“The National Agricultural Insurance Scheme for natural calamities 
also covers pest and diseases.  The scheme is optional for the States.  
However, continuous efforts are being made by the Ministry of 
Agriculture to bring all the States in the fold of this scheme.” 

 
- 12 - 
 
 
1.16 Keeping in view the seriousness of the menace of pest disease and 
consequent loss of crop and cultivation, the measures taken by Government 
in this regard are not satisfactory.  The issue needs to be addressed more 
seriously.  As pest disease is not considered a natural calamity, the only way 
to safeguard the interests of farmers from pest disease is by implementing 
Crop Insurance Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that remaining State Governments should be impressed 
upon to implement Insurance Scheme for crops. Steps should also be taken 
to notify disaster prone and hazardous areas in the country.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken by Government in this 
regard.  
 

- 13 - 
 
Implementation of Recommendations 
 
1.17 The Committee would like to emphasise that they attach the greatest 
importance to implementation of the recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  They would, therefore, urge that the Government should keep 
a close watch so as to ensure expeditious implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by them.  In case it is not possible to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. 
  
1.18 The Committee desire that replies in respect of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter V of the Report may be finalised and final replies of the 
Government furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI               C.KUPPUSAMI, 
December  1, 2004                                    Chairman, 
Agrahayana  10, 1926(S)   Committee on Estimates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-14- 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE   
(2004-2005) 
SECOND SITTING 
  The Committee sat on Monday,  the 27th September, 2004 from 1100 
hours  to 1250 hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri C. Kuppusami  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
2.      Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
3.      Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
4.      Shri Jai Prakash 
5.      Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
6.       Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
7.       Shri Prabodh Panda  
8.       Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
9.       Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
10.   Prof. M. Ramadass 
11.  Shri K.S. Rao 
12.  Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
13.  Shri Laxman Singh 
14.  Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt.P.K. Sandhu   -  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri  A.K. Singh   -  P.C.P.I.  
3. Shri Cyril John   -  Under Secretary 
4.      Shri  M.K. Madhusudan -  Assistant Director 
5. Smt. Manju Chowdhary -  Assistant Director 
 

          
      -15- 
 
2.  XXX    XXX    XXX 
  
3. The Committee then considered and  adopted the following draft 
Reports   with/without  modifications as given in the  Annexure :- 
 
(i)          XXX    XXX    XXX 
 
 
(ii) Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report  of Estimates Committee (13 th 
Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of  Home Affairs - `Relief and 
Rehabilitation Measures in Natural Calamities’ (with minor 
modifications as indicated in the Annexure). 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in 
the light of  modifications and also to make verbal and other 
consequential changes, if any, aris ing out of factual verification by the 
Ministry and  present the same to the House.    
 
  XXX   XXX    XXX 
 
5.  XXX   XXX    XXX 
 
The  Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 

   
 
                             -16- 
           
                                        ANNEXURE 
 
Modifications made by the Estimates  Committee in the Draft 
Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report  of Estimates Committee (13th Lok 
Sabha) on  Ministry of  Home A ffairs - `Relief and Rehabilitation 
Measures in Natural Calamities.’ 
 
Para     Modifications 
 
1.10  For  “While expressing their displeasure......... 
    ....................to the Committee. 
 
Read “While expressing their displeasure on the casual 
approach towards the recommendation of the 
Committee,   they desire that the recommendation be 
pursued with the required seriousness and the action 
taken thereon be intimated to the Committee.” 
 
1.16            For         “The Committee, therefore, ..................... this regard.” 
 
  Read  “The Committee, therefore, reiterate  their  
earlier recommendation that remaining State 
Governments should be impressed upon to 
implement Insurance Scheme for crops. Steps   
should also be taken to notify disaster prone and 
hazardous areas in the country.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken 
by Government in this regard.”      
 
 

 
       -17- 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction to Report) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEETH REPORT OF 
THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I. Total Number of  Recommendations/observations 24  
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted   by the Government                                                
(Nos.1 to 6, 9,10,14,15,17,19,22 and 23)   14 
 
Percentage                                     58.4% 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies 
(Nos.13 and 16)         2 
 
Percentage                          8.4% 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which Government’s replies have not been                    
accepted   by the Committee. 
 (Nos.7,8,21and 24)       4 
 
 Percentage        16.6% 
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final replies of Government are still 
awaited.                    
(Nos.11, 12,18 and 20)      4 
 
Percentage        16.6%  
 
 
 
 