     E.C. No. 1426  
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE  
(2006-07) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL 
 
 
    S  
 
     E  
 A 
   
 L 
 
   
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.5.2006 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
May 23, 2006/Jyaistha 2, 1928(S) 

   CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES     (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N           ( v )  
 
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION 
 
- Introductory         1 
- Historical Background       1-3 
- NDMC Act, 1994         3-7 
- Composition of the Council       7-11 
- Framing of  Rules        11 
 
CHAPTER II  FINANCE 
 
- Budget         12-14 
- Property Tax         14-18 
- Tax Due on Hotels        18-19 
- Tax Liability on Government Departments    19-23 
 
CHAPTER III  ORGANISATION , FUNCTIONS AND MANPOWER 
 
- Organisational set up       24-28 
- Functions of NDMC        28 
- Water Supply        28-30 
- E l e c t r i c i t y          3 0 - 3 2  
- Cleanliness in NDMC area       33-36 
- Power Generation out of garbage      36-38 
- Health and Hospitals       38-40 
- Education         40-43 
- Road Surfacing        43-45 
- H o r t i c u l t u r e          4 5 - 4 7   
- Rain Water Harvesting       47-48 
- P a r k i n g          4 8 - 5 2  
- Redressal of Grievances       52-54 
- Manpower/Recruitment       55-56 
 
CHAPTER IV ENCROACHMENTS/UNAUTHORISED  
CONSTRUCTION 
 
- Encroachments/Unauthorised Construction    57-62 
- Slums/Jhuggis        62-66 

 
CHAPTER V MISCEALLANEOUS 
 
 - Representations received from the residents of Park Lane  67-68 
- Misuse of gardens        68-69 
-  
- Corruption Charges        69-70 
- Commonwealth Games 2010      70-71 
 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee……………………..  72-99 
 
     ANNEXURES 
 
I. Details of resource-wise and year-wise revenue     100 
receipts (internal & external) of NDMC during  
last five year ………………. 
 
II. Functions ……..               101-105 
 
III. CBSE Board Examination Re sults for the last five years         106-111 
(not appended) 
APPENDICES 
 
IV. Minutes of Sitting of Estimate s Committee          112-113 
on 31.1.2005………… 
 
V.     Minutes of Sitting of Esti mates Committee          114-115 
    on 19.7.2005……….. 
 
VI.     Minutes of Sitting of Estimates Committee          116-118 
    on 20.7.2005……….. 
 
VII.   Minutes of Sitting of Estimates Committee          119-120  
   on 18.5.2006………… 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE  
 (2006-2007) 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami, MP  - Chairman   
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2.   Shri Lal  Muni Choubey 
3. Shri Adhir  Chowdhury 
4. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
5. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
6. Shri Anant Gudhe 
7. Shri Jai Prakash 
8. Shri P. Karunakaran 
9. Shri Vijaykumar Khandelwal 
10. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
11. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
12. Prof. Chander Kumar 
13.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
14. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
15.  Shri Zora Singh Mann 
16. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
18.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan 
19. Shri K.S. Rao 
20. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat 
21.  Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
22.  Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
23.  Shri Arjuncharan Sethi 
24.  Shri Manabendra Shah 
25. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
26.  Shri Lakshman Singh 
27.   Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
28.   Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
29.   Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
30.   Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
 
     SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Rajeev Sharma   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Cyril John    - Under Secretary 
5. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Assistant Director 
 

    INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the repor t on their behalf present th is Eleventh Report on the 
Ministry of Home Affairs – ‘New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC)’.  
 
2.  The subject was selected for detailed examination by the Estimates Committee 
(2003-2004). The Estimates Co mmittee (2004-2005)  took br iefing on the subject on 
31st January, 2005 and  the Estimates Committee (2005-2006) took evidence of 
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs and NDMC on 19 th July, 2005. The 
Committee wish to express their t hanks to the officers of the  Ministry of Home Affairs 
and NDMC for placing before them the detaile d written notes on the subject and for 
furnishing information desired in connection with the exami nation of the subject. The 
Committee also appreciate the frankness with which the officers of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs and NDMC shared their views, perceptions and constraints with the Committee.  
 
3.  The Committee would also like to ex press their gratitude to the Estimates 
Committee 2003-2004, 2004-20 05 and 2005-2006 for the able guidance and right 
direction provided by them in obtainin g information for in depth and comprehensive 
study of the subject.  
 
4.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Estimates Committee (2005-
2006) at their sitting held on 20 th April, 2006.   Since the report could not be presented 
before 30 th April as the House was not in Session,  it   was placed before the newly 
constituted Committee (2006-2007).  The Committee  considered and adopted the 
report at their sitting held on 18th May, 2006. 
 
5.  The Report is divided into five chapters. The Committee have inter alia made the 
following important observations/recommendations: 
 
     
(i) As the area covered by NDMC includes  about three lakh residents population, 
the recommendation of Balakrishna Commi ttee that NDMC should consist of a 
certain number of members elected on t he basis of adult franchise needs to be 
reconsidered by the Government in all seriousness. 
 
(ii)     Government should review the desirab ility of modifying composition of the Council 
as recommended by Balakrishna Committee keeping in view the basic democratic 
prinicples  and also  granting voting right at the  Council meetings to the Members 
of Parliament representing t he constituencies comprising w holly or partly the area 
under the jurisdiction of  NDMC. 
 
 
 

(iii) In view of the under utilisation of f unds by NDMC, it  should be  ensured that 
the projections made in its Budget Estimates are based on realistic 
assessment of requirement of funds. 
 
 
(iv) Specific time frame should be fix ed for assessment/ reassessment of property 
tax and also for recovery of arrears which has reached Rs. 329.25 crore as in 
2004-05 from Rs. 78.28 crore in 1994-95. 
 
(v) Ministry of Home Affairs should take prompt steps fo r amending the NDMC 
Act for collection of service charges in  lieu of property ta x from Government 
Departments. 
 
(vi) Ministry of Home Affairs should ta ke up the matter at the highest level with 
the Ministry of Urban Development so that Government  Departments are 
directed to comply strictly with the dec ision for payment of license fee at 
CPWD rates. The licensee fee should al so be increased for a period of five 
years at 20% per annum to bring it clos e to the market rates and the position 
should be reviewed after five years. 
 
(vii)    NDMC should make advance planning for modernising and augmenting its 
system of water supply for meeting t he demand in its area in an efficient 
manner. 
 
(viii) To ensure uninterrupted power s upply to the consumers, NDMC should 
motivate its maintenance staff through appropriate incentives  and implement  
short term and long term plans strictly according to time schedules prescribed 
for the purpose. 
 
       (ix)    NDMC should take steps to check over billing and fo r replacing faulty water 
and electricity meters with promptitude.  Programme for modernization of 
water meter workshop should be taken up in  right earnest  and completed in 
a specified time frame. 
 
(x) There is  need for re-organisation and mo tivation of the entire division of 
NDMC that is responsible for ma intenance, cleaning and removal of 
garbage. 
 
(xi) NDMC should pursue the project for setting up state of art compost plant with 
the facility for segregation of all types  of waste and  a Refuse Derived Fuel 
(RDF)  plant within the  time frame worked out for the purpose. 
 
(xii)    There is an imperative need to improve the overall working of the NDMC run 
hospitals, and dispensaries by ensuring pu nctuality of doct ors and staff and 
also by maintaining equipments and providing medicines. 
 

(xiii)   Decision to start the new school  opposite Birla Mandir should be reviewed at 
the highest level after making a realistic assessment of the need of the area.  
 
(xiv)    NDMC should concentrate more on improving the quality of education so that 
the students of its  schools may achiev e standards and gradings comparable 
to public schools. 
           
(xv) Process of mechanisa tion of road repair should be introduced without any 
further delay so as to ensure time and cost effectiveness in maintenance of 
roads.   
 
(xvi)    Horticulture Department s hould draw-up an action plan for imparting 
adequate training to its personnel so as to ensure better up keep of the parks 
and round abouts. 
 
(xvii)   In order to optima lly utilise the rain water for being used for various purposes 
in the city, NDMC should explore the possibility that even the existing 
buildings in the area  are gradual ly made to adopt water harvesting 
techniques. 
 
(xviii)  NDMC should formulate a parking policy to regulate traffic in the NDMC 
area. 
 
(xix)   The public grievances redressal ma chinery in the Counc il should be further 
strengthened and concrete  steps be taken fo r timely redressal of grievances 
of the public. 
 
(xx) NDMC should pursue ear nestly with Delhi Subordinate Service Selection 
Board and get the vacancies filled up at the earliest to ensure smooth 
functioning of NDMC. 
 
(xxi)  An enquiry should  be conducted into missing of records pertaining to 
unauthorized constructions/encroachment s prior to January 2002  and the 
culprits  brought to book.  The files shou ld either be traced or reconstructed 
with in a specified time frame and encroachers dealt with firmly. 
 
(xxii) NDMC must pay specific attention to  removal of  the Jhuggi clusters in its 
municipal area  in view of the forthcoming CommonWealth Games 2010. 
 
(xxiii) In view of the serious problems bei ng faced by nearby residents  of Talkatora 
Indoor Stadium, NDMC should use space inside the Stadium for cooking food 
etc and not use the parking space for such purposes. 
NDMC should frame clear cut guidelines for the users and ensure their strict 
compliance by the users as well as NDMC Staff. 
   

(xxiv) Vigilance mechanism in NDMC should be strengthened and stringent action 
taken against employees who are found indulging in  corrupt practices. 
 
(xxv)    In view of the prestigious CommonWealth Games, 2010 to be hosted in the 
capital. NDMC should formulate an action plan for providing total face lift to 
the city falling within its jurisdic tion and have it impl emented within a 
stipulated and rigid time frame. 
 
 
6.    For facility of re ference, the observations /recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the report and have also 
been reproduced in consolidated from in the Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                      C. KUPPUSAMI, 
May 18, 2006                                                                                     Chairman, 
Vaisakha 28, 1928(Saka)                                           Committee on Estimates. 

Chapter I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Introductory 
  
  New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) has been charged with the 
Municipal Government of New Delhi.  It has a jurisdiction of  42.74 
square kilometers with resident popul ation of about three lakh and  
floating population of around 15 la kh.  The area under NDMC includes 
Rashtrapati Bhawan; Sansad Bhawan; the Prime Minister’s Office and 
residence; Central Government Offices; Foreign Missions; residences of 
Ministers, Members of Parliament, Diplomats and Central Government 
employees; and also  a few private residential properties  and shopping 
complexes. 
Historical Background 
 
 In order to cater to sanita tion needs of workers engaged in 
construction of the new capital,  a Committee called the “Raisina 
Municipal Committee” was constituted in 1916.  In 1925, it was 
upgraded to the level of a second class municipality under the Punjab 
Municipal Act. It consisted of ten Members appointed by the local 
Government either by name or by office. The first Committee so 
constituted included five ex-officio members and five appointed by 
name. Thus, public men were include d to participate in the deliberation 
of local affairs/problems for the first time. On 9 th September, 1925, this 
Committee was empowered to impose tax on buildings thereby creating 
the first source of revenue for the Committee. This was followed by 
transfer of many administrative functions to the   civic  body by the Chief 
Commissioner of Delhi and both it s income and expenditure grew 
noticeably. By a resolution passed by the Raisina Municipal Committee 
on 22
nd February, 1927, the Committee changed its name as “New Delhi 

Municipal Committee” and on 16 th March, 1927 the Chief Commissioner 
conveyed his approval for adoptio n of the new name “New Delhi 
Municipal Committee”. From the ye ar 1916, the Committee looked after 
sanitation needs of the workers engaged in construction of the new 
capital. In 1931, it was decided to transfer the functions relating to 
buildings, roads, sewers, medical and public health  to the Committee. 
After some time, the functions relat ing to electricity and water supply 
were also transferred to it. The Ne w Delhi Municipal Committee was 
upgraded to the level of a 1 st class municipality in 1932 and it was 
entrusted with supervisory powers to look after all the civic amenities.  
In May 1994, the Punjab Municipa l Act 1911 was rep laced by the 
NDMC Act passed by the Parliament  and the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee was renamed as the New Delhi Municipal Council. Under 
Section 418 of the NDMC Act, 1994, the Central Government appointed 
a Special Officer for the period till nomination of the Members. The first 
meeting of the Council took place on 23 rd December, 1995.  In the light 
of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act which dealt with the subject of 
Municipalities and in conformity therewith, the NDMC Act, 1994, came to 
be enacted.  The NDMC Act, 1994 is  stated to have been structured  
especially for New Delhi Area on ac count of the following salient 
features. 
“The New Delhi Municipal Council area comprises the territory that  
has been described as Lutyens ’ Delhi and is historically regarded 
as the seat of Central authority in  Union of India.  It comprises 
important buildings like Rastrapat i Bhavan, Parliament House, 
Supreme Court, North and South Blocks and buildings abutting 
Central Vista and also all diplom atic missions which function as 
territorial entities, under the sovereign jurisdiction of their Flag 

States.  The Government of India is nearly the sole landowner and 
own about eighty per cent of the buildings in the NDMC area. 
 
Private ownership of property in  this area is marginal.  On 
account of these special characteristics, it was felt that any 
scheme for the governance of this area based on conventional 
pattern of representative loca l self-government, would be 
unworkable and out of place, si nce the pre-eminent character of 
this area is that of the seat of the Central Government.” 
 
NDMC Act, 1994 
 
On an enquiry about the sali ent features and improvements 
incorporated in the NDMC Act, 1994 vis-à-vis the provisions contained in 
the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 as ex tended to New Delhi, the Ministry 
of Home Affairs in their written reply  stated as follows:- 
(1) To provide for a new legislati on for the NDMC area in place of the 
Punjab Municipal Act as the amendments therein had become 
archaic.  
(2) To bring uniformity, as far as possible, in building regulations, 
audit, revenue and bu dgetary provisions in the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi and the New Delhi Municipal Council.  
(3) To harmonize the law with the Constitution (74 th amendment) Act, 
1992, with necessary exemptions and modifications under Article 
243(ZB) of the Constitution  wherever depart ure had been made 
from the Constitutional provisions.  
(4) To do away with the conventiona l pattern of repres entative local 
self government for NDMC areas, keeping in view the pre-eminent 
character of this area as it is the seat of the Central Government.  
(5) The Special Legislation governing the New Delhi Municipal 
Council area provides:- 

a) The Chairperson to be  nominated by the C entral Government in 
consultation with the Chief Minister of Delhi. He is to be an Officer 
of the Central  Government or of the Government of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi, being not lower in rank than a Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India. 
b) Three members of the Legislative  Assembly of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi representing whole or part of the New Delhi area; 
c) Five members from the officers of Government to be nominated by 
the Central Government;  
d) Two members to be nominated by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Chief Minister of Delhi to represent 
professionals, like lawyers, doctors, intellectuals, traders, 
labourers, etc. 
e) The Member of Parliament representing constituency which 
comprises wholly or partly the Ne w Delhi area to be the Special 
Invitee without voting right; and 
f) Out of eleven members, there shall be at least three members who 
are women and one member belonging to the Scheduled Castes. 
(6)   Upon dissolution, the new Council  shall continue for a full term of 
five years as in the case of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. 
(7)  The provision of disqualification rel ating to “Office of Profit”, for 
purposes of elections to the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi shall not be made applicable to the 
nominated members. 
(8)  The Finance Commission constituted under the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957 will also wo rk in respect of New Delhi 
Municipal Council. 

As regards the improvement  incorporated in the NDMC Act, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs in their written reply stated as follows :- 
“1. With regard to audit and acc ounts of the NDMC, provisions have 
been made at par with the provisi ons of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957. 
2. A specific provision has been made in the new Act, conferring on 
the Central Government the powers to give directions to the 
NDMC regarding efficient delivery of  services to the public and 
generally regarding the municipal administration. 
3. All other matters such as provi sions relating to taxation, revenue 
and expenditure, municipal officers and other municipal 
employees, budget estimates, property and contracts, street, 
building regulations, sanitation and public health, vital statistics, 
public safety and suppression of nuisances, markets, trades and 
occupations, powers, procedure, offe nces and penalties etc. have 
been uniformly made applicable, as far as possible, between the 
NDMC and the MCD. 
4. The Chairperson has been conferred  with the executive powers of 
the Council. 
5. The term of the Council is five years and when the NDMC is 
constituted upon dissolution of the earlier Council, the new Council 
shall continue for a full term of five years. 
6. Under the new Act, the Cent ral Government alone have the 
authority to inspect or examine any municipal department or office 
or any service or work undertaken by the Council or any property 
belonging to the Council.” 
 

Composition of the Council 
According to the NDMC Act, 1994, t he Council shall consist of the 
following members:- 
1.    (a)  A Chairperson, from  amongst the officers of the  
Central Government or the Gov ernment of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi,  or above the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India to be appointed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Chief Minister of Delhi. 
(b)   Three members of Legisl ative Assembly of Delhi  
representing constituencies which comprise, wholly or partly, 
the New Delhi area; 
(c)   Five members from amongst the officers of the  
Central Government or the Govern ment of NCT of Delhi or 
their undertakings, to be nominated by the Central 
Government, and 
(d)   Two members to be nominated by the Central  
Government in consultation with the Chief Minister of Delhi 
to represent from amongst lawyers, doctors, chartered 
accounts, engineers, business and financial consultants, 
intellectuals, traders, labourers , social workers including 
social scientists, artists, media persons, sports persons and 
any other class of persons as may be specified by the 
Central Government in this behalf. 
2. The Members of Parliament representing constituency which 
comprises wholly or partly the Ne w Delhi area, shall be Special 
Invitees for the meetings of the  Council but without a right to vote. 

3. Out of the eleven members refe rred to in para (1) above there 
shall be at least three members who are women and one member 
belonging to the Scheduled Caste. 
4. The Central Government shall nom inate, in consultation with the 
Chief Minister of Delhi, a Vice Chairperson from amongst the 
members specified in clauses (b) and (d) of para (1) above. 
5. The Council, unless sooner dissolved under Section 398 or any 
other law for the time being in forc e, shall continue for five years 
from the date appointed for its first meeting. 
During evidence, the Committee observed that according to 
NDMC Act, 1994, the Members of  Parliament representing  the 
constituency which comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area, 
shall be  special invitees for the meetings of the Council but 
without a right to vote. Pointing ou t that MLAs who are the elected 
representatives have been given right to vote in the Council but 
the Member of Parliament who is also a elected representative of 
public has not been provided the same right to vote in the Council, 
the Committee asked  whether the Ministry thought that   an 
Amendment in the Act was required.  The Secretary, Ministry of 
Home Affairs in his reply  stated as under:- 
“I would think, we will of course be guided by this Committee.  But 
I think it stands to r eason that members of Parliament should also 
have a voting right.” 
 
Taking note of the fact that  Balakrishna Committee (which was a 
Committee of Experts constituted to look into the manner in which the 
governance  of this Union Territory  should take place and also looked 

into the functioning of munici pal arrangement in the area) had 
recommended that NDMC  should cons ist of a certain number of 
members elected on the basis of adult franchise and an equal number of 
members appointed by the Lt. Gove rnor and the Vice Chairman should 
be elected by the mem bers themselves, the Committee  asked for the 
comments of the Ministry in this regard.  In reply, the Secretary of the  
Ministry during his deposition stated as under:- 
“When the Act per se was conc eived and when the objects and 
reasons of the Act were framed, at that stage itself it was 
deliberated in Parliament at lengt h and it was decided as to how 
the Council should be constituted.   With your permission, I will 
read out the relevant concluding lines.  They have given out full 
reasons as to why it should be  like that. “It was felt that any 
scheme for the governance of this area based on conventional 
pattern of representative loca l self-government would be 
unworkable and out of place si nce the pre-eminent character of 
this area is that of the seat of the Central Government.”  Before 
reaching this conclusion, we will gi ve a formal written statement.  
They have given full reasons as to why it should be like this.  
Notwithstanding that, enough care has been taken that public 
representatives must be part of the Council. 
 
Three MLAs, who represent the area, whose constituencies fall 
either wholly or partly in the 42 sq uare kilometer area are, by rule 
or by convention, members of the Council.  They take the peoples’ 
aspirations to the Council.” 
 
To a specific query regarding t he  attendance of members at 
meetings of NDMC  and the contribu tion of nominated members to the 
working of NDMC, the Ministry in their written reply, inter alia stated as 
follows:- 

“The New Delhi Municipal Counc il presently consists of the 
following members:- 
 
1. Shri D.S. Meshram 
2. Dr. S.R. Shukla 
3. Smt. Kiran Dhingra 
4. Shri Rakesh Mohan 
5. Shri Ravi Kant Chopra 
 
The status of attendance of these official members in the Council’s 
meetings/meetings of the Committee of the Council in the year 1996 and 
1997 are as under:- 
S.No.  Member’s Name Attendance required in meetings & 
attended during 
      1996         1997           
             _____________ _       __________      
        I             I              I              I                     
1. Sh. D.S. Meshram 21        05    16         02         
2. Dr. S.R, Shukla  25            19           21          07         
3. Smt. Kiran Dhingra 22        05           15          02      
4. Sh. Rakesh Mohan      13             06            21         04         
 
Shri Ravi Kant Chopra has been nominated vide Notification  dated 
20.05.98. He has neither attended any meeting nor taken oath so far. 
 
…………………………..The Council  has not been able to take 
advantage of their expertise and experience in the management of 
the affairs of the Council.” 
 

Framing of Rules 
 During the course of evidence, the Committee made some specific 
queries regarding framing of rules, r egulations and bye-laws under the 
NDMC Act, 1994.  The Secretary, Mini stry of Home Affairs stated as 
under:- 
“We are equally concerned  in the Ministry.  First of all, the delay is 
admitted.  There is no excuse.  It should have been done earlier. The 
bye-laws under the earlier Act, wherever applicable, were being used.  
It is not that the functioning was hampered but that is no excuse.  We 
should have had the bye-laws under Act in place.” 
 
When   enquired   about  sp ecific   initiatives    taken   to complete 
and notify the rules, regulations etc.,  the Secretary  stated as under:- 
“A competent consultant has bee n appointed.  He  has been given 
a certain time frame to complete the bye-laws.  I would assure the 
august Committee that the bye-laws shall be in place before the 
end of this year.” 

Chapter II 
 
FINANCE 
Budget 
 
Budget estimates, revised estima tes and actual expenditure of 
NDMC for the last five years are as follows:- 
       (in Rs. Lakhs) 
Year Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Actual 
Expenditure 
Variations 
1999-2000 66,119.00 61,474.38 58,350.01 -3124.37 
2000-2001 73,368.41 82,175.36 74,722.91 -7452.45 
2001-2002 82,871.51 84,064.22 74,367.37 -9696.85 
2002-2003 86,089.64 87,503.33 77,570.36 -9932.97 
2003-2004 88,425.54 88,377.71 80,148.07 -8229.64 
The Committee asked the reasons for variations in Budget Estimates, 
Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure and the Chairperson, NDMC  
during evidence stated as under:- 
“……….unlike Government account, the Council funds are placed 
in a Fund called ‘New Delhi Municipal Fund’.  Any savings 
therefore are not laps ed but remain in th is account.  These 
accounts are maintained  with the State Bank of India as required 
under the NDMC Act.  However, consistently, it has been seen 
that the Revised Estimates which are framed or which are 
projected by the various spending departments are not actually 
spent and which results in a vari ation in the Revised Estimates 
and the actual expenditure.  The C ouncil and the officers  have 
undertaken a very detailed analysis  of the audit reports which 
have been presented as well as the actual trends in these savings.  
We would be taking remedial step s to ensure that such large  
variations do not occur in future.  However,  coming to the reasons 
why they have occurred in the past, it is partly because the capital 
expenditure  is taken from year to year basis and as some of these 
estimates are projected even befo re the projects are properly and 
fully conceptualized and procedures  completed.  In the past, there 
has been an anxiety to make sure that the proposals are 
adequately reflected in the Budget so that in case the project 

comes into being there should not   be problem of provision in the 
budgets.  This year, the advice received  from the Financial 
Adviser has been that there should be a proper project time 
schedule made and  planning fo r projects should receive some 
sort of importance.  We are pay ing adequate attention to  these 
lacunae in the Council’s functioni ng. We hope and expect that the 
results would be seen in the next one or two years and these wide 
variations would be reduced.” 
 
The Ministry of Home Affairs furt her stated that budget estimates 
are based on the trends of receipts a nd expenditure in regard to various 
ongoing activities as well as new services/projects planned during the 
ensuing year.  Similarly revenue estimates are based on   past 
trends/prevailing tariffs. 
On being asked about the revenue resources, NDMC in its  written 
reply stated that it “is  universa lly acknowledged that the municipal 
bodies responsible for pro viding a range of civic s ervices, face shortage 
of resources, making it  difficult even  to maintain the existing level of 
services satisfactorily.  However, unlike other municipalities, which are 
increasingly becoming more an d more dependent on government 
funding for discharging their responsibilities, NDMC is a municipality with 
a difference.  It does not depend on State or Central grants for its 
expenditure.  The revenues  of NDMC consist of pro perty tax, duty on 
transfer of properties, advertisement tax and theatre tax, tax on building 
applications, etc.  In addition, it  has been getting it s share of assigned 
taxes from the Government of Delhi.   The share of assigned taxes are 
given by the State Government as per the formula derived by the Delhi 
Finance Commission.” 

As regards  the major source of reve nue of  NDMC, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in their written reply stated as under:- 
“Major source of revenue relate to sale of electricity, which is 
based on the tariff fixed by NDM C on the lines of tariff fixed by 
Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission (DERC) for MCD and the 
extent of consumption by the c onsumers.  Other major sources of 
revenue are property tax on private  properties and licence fee 
realizable from NDMC’s properties. 
 
For the purpose of development the Planning Commission has 
been sanctioning plan funds in the form  of grants-in-aid as well as 
loans.  Since 2001-02, NDMC has stopped taking loans. Non-plan 
grants for the education sector  are also received from the 
Directorate of Education, Government of Delhi.” 
 
 When asked about the details of the resource-wise and year-wise, 
revenue/receipts (internal and extern al) of NDMC during last five years, 
Ministry of Home Affairs furnished  the  statement  reproduced  at 
Annexure-I. It may be seen therefrom  that grants-in-aid from Union 
Government feature prominently in the receipts of NDMC. 
Property Tax 
 On being asked about the realizatio n of  property tax,  Ministry of 
Home Affairs in their written reply stated as under:- 
“Property tax is the main source of tax revenue of NDMC.  This is 
leviable on private properties.  Most of these  properties have 
been developed/constructed prior to  1960 and their valuations are 
nominal.  The result is that out of demand of Rs. 139 crore, 
demand on 87% properties is only Rs. 23 crore i.e., 16.5%.
 
More than 80% of the properties are Government properties.  The 
properties of the Union co nstructed on or after 26 th  of January, 
1950 are exempted from payment of property taxes and under 
executive instructions, NDMC is bei ng paid service charges in lieu 
of property tax.  The calculation of service charges is on the 

historical cost of the building and as most of Government 
properties are old construction, contribution from old Union of India 
buildings is not more than Rs. 8 crore, which is about 6.7% of 
revenues from property tax and se rvice charges. The method of 
valuation of properties as laid down by the Government  needs a 
revision.” 
 
 When the Committee desired to know about arrears of property tax 
outstanding for the last te n years, Ministry of Ho me Affairs furnished the 
following statement:- 
(Rs. In crore) 
Year Arrear 
1994-95 78.28 
1995-96 100.32 
1996-97 147.46 
1997-98 151.47 
1998-99 172.25 
1999-00 199.95 
2000-01 150.39 
2001-02 188.10 
2002-03 223.30 
2003-04 329.08 
2004-05 329.25 
  
 To a specific query, Ministry of  Home Affairs stated that an amount 
of Rs.1,97,46,32,679 is  outstanding as property tax against 88   
defaulters  above the range of  Rs. 50 lakh  and the recoverable amount 
is  Rs. 20,00,83,833 as on 31.03.2005. 

The Committee desired to know abo ut the steps taken to recover 
the arrears and the Ministry of Home A ffairs stated in a written reply  as 
under:- 
“The Department has been following up the arrear cases.  Action 
is also taken by moving the Es tate Officer for recovery under the 
Public Premises Act and cases of arrears before the various courts 
are also being monitored.  Th e Government departments are 
being reminded for payment of licence fee as per policy of the 
Council including clearance of arr ears of 20% enhan cement since 
1.4.2002. 
 
Wherever possible, the demand is being enforced by attachment 
of rents.  Opportunity is given to the tax payers to clear the dues 
voluntarily before resor ting to the extreme st ep of attaching the 
rents. 
 
In most cases, the demand is locked up in appeal/remand.  Also, 
there has been a slump in rental market and the tax payers are 
claiming benefit of reduction in rateable values where 
assessments have been made on comparable rents. 
 
In a large number of cases, w here the department had assessed 
self occupied properties on comparable rents, property owners 
have requested assessment on st andard rent in view of the 
decision of the Delhi High Cour t.  Department has filed an SLP 
against the order and the cases have been kept pending till the 
issue is finalized.  The demand is  being raised at the existing 
rateable value, however, the ta x payers are paying the admitted 
taxes only, which is very nominal as compared to demand.” 
  
On being asked as to what penalties  are imposed in case of 
default of payment of taxes, the  Ministry of Home Affairs stated   as 
under:- 

“Section 101 provides for 20% penal ty for default on payment of 
taxes.  This penalty is impo sed only where there is no dispute or 
stay from the Court and where  no appeals are pending.  This 
penalty is not being imposed on the cases which have been 
remanded by the Court.  In last five years about Rs. 23.56 crore 
was imposed as penalty U/s-101.” 
 
 To a further query, Ministry of Home Affairs stated as under:- 
“At present a sum of only Rs. 8.87 crore is outstanding as penalty.   
The remaining has been collected or reduced due to corrections of 
assessments/penalties.  The department had launched  a scheme 
for reducing penalty by giving pub licity in news papers.  Many tax 
payers have paid taxes and availe d the benefit  of reduction in 
penalty as covered in the scheme.” 
 
 During the course of oral evidence,  the Committee  drew attention  
to the  audit report of the Chief Auditor, NDMC for the year ending 
March, 2003 regarding a set of properti es located  at  Anant Ram Dairy 
which also received publicity in th e media.  On this,  the Chairperson, 
NDMC stated as under:- 
“These 85 properties which have been named in the audit report 
relate to a set of properties locate d in a place called Anant Ram  
Dairy.  These buildings const ructed on land belonging to the 
CPWD and they were considered to be unauthorized buildings for 
a certain period of time and were therefore not coming under the 
purview of the tax net. However, now, the Council had taken the 
view that without prejudice to thei r status of regular or authorized 
or unauthorized under the law, they shall be assessed and 
assessment notices shall be issued to them as well.” 
 

 On a further query as  to whether the prope rty owners of Anant 
Ram Dairy area have been charged prope rty tax with interest since the 
date or providing basic amenities to them, the Ministry of Home Affairs in 
their post evidence reply stated as under:- 
“The assessment of property  of Anant Ram Dairy have not been 
finalized as this is an unauthorized colony.” 
 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs also stated that in various Annual 
Audit Report  Chief Auditor, NDM C has made observations regarding 
House Tax Department as under:- 
“There were delays in finalisation of  assessment of rateable value of 
properties and tax thereon.  Cases  of incorrect/under assessment of 
tax resulting in loss of revenue were  also noticed.  The progress  of 
recovery of tax was also not satisfactory and there were heavy 
arrears of tax against a large numb er of assesses.  Recovery of 
service charges in respect of Central Government properties was 
also in arrears.  There were abnormal delays in finalisation of remand 
cases in non-recovery of tax revenue.” 
 
Tax due on Hotels 
 
The Committee during evidence enquired about the huge amount 
of arrears due on defaulters.  In reply, the  Chairperson NDMC stated as 
under :- 
“Approximately half of the arrears  which have been referred to 
here relate to those pertaining to hotels. The hotels, before 1994, 
were liable for assessment according to a certain formula, which 
has now been changed by the courts. Now, they would all be re-
assessed and those arrears theref ore have to be brought down or 
written off. This is a matter on which we have been addressing the 

Council and we would also be ret urning to them the reduced 
assessments due to court orders.”  
 
The Committee further enquired as to why hotels are not being 
charged  tax.  Replying to this, the Chairperson, NDMC stated as under 
:- 
“The hotels are paying taxes. They have always been paying 
taxes as assessed. The current dues are being assessed on the 
basis of construction. The issue that was sub judice was for the 
demand raised on them prior to 1994 when they were being 
assessed on room rent basis. Now, some of the hotels had gone 
to court protesting against the assessment on room rent basis. 
That has now been settled. They are all being assessed and 
arrears are being collected on revised assessment based on the 
ruling of the courts. The curr ent dues are being paid and there are 
hardly any defaulters. If there are defaulters then properties are 
attached and recovered as arrears of land revenue as provided in 
the Act. There is no exemption to hotels at all.”  
 
Tax Liability on Government Departments 
On being asked about the large recoveries outstanding against  
Government Departments and reasons f or such large outstandings and the 
steps taken for their early recovery, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that as 
on 31.3. 2005 an amount of Rs. 3410 lakh  is outstanding against Government 
Departments.    It was stated in a written reply as follows:- 
“While the Act does not provide fo r recovery of service charges by 
coercive measures, the fact of  di sobeying the GOI instructions is 
required to be brought to the notice of  Ministry of Finance/Ministry of 
Home.  In case of perpetual defaulters, Ministry of Finance can be 
requested to adjust these amounts from the budget of the concerned 
Ministries.” 
 

To a query, Ministry of Home Affairs in written reply further stated  
as follows:- 
“Railways and Posts and Telegraphs are disputing the tax liability.  
Defence have not paid for the last  three years.  Sucheta Kriplani 
Hospital were disputing the rateable value, it has been corrected 
and now they proposed to liquidat e in 2005-06.  CPWD has made 
the payment partially and are claimi ng that they are liable to pay 
only 75% and not 100% of the serv ice charges.  Some of the 
Divisions have paid 100%, some ar e objecting.  Since the service 
charges are through execut ive instructions, action for the recovery 
by the attachments is not possible.   It is only by persuasion that 
the service charges are collected.” 
 
On   being   asked  about   the  specific   suggestions   for  
levying of service charges, Ministry of  Home Affairs stated  in written 
reply as under:- 
“At present the service charges are being levied through executive 
instructions.  If the service char ges are levied on the basis of an 
amendment in Section 65 of th e NDMC Act to provide for that 
where the properties are exempt from payment of property taxes, 
the properties shall be liable to service charges, th ere will be no 
difficulty in recovery of service c harges.  Similarly, a provision has 
to be made in Section 412 for payment of service charges on the 
properties of Diplomatic Missions.” 
 
In  reply to a question about m easures being taken to revise the 
licence fee by bringing it at par with t he existing market rates in respect 
of the premises occupied by some  of the Government Departments in 
prime locations, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated as under:- 
  
“Licence fee is governed by Section 141 of NDMC Act.  
Immovable properties are to be giv en on licence in normal and fair 
competition.   In August, 2000 the Council decided  to renew the 

licences of the Government  D epartments at CPWD rates or the 
market rates whichever is higher and to increase the L.F. 10% 
every year.  Accordingly, the Government Departments were 
informed of the Council’s decision.   There were discussions with 
the Secretary, Ministry of U.D. Since payment at market rate 
involved sharp increase in licence fee, it was decided that the 
NDMC would be paid the L.F. as per the CPWD rates and the 
licence fee shall be increased for a period of five years at 20% per 
annum to bring it substantially at the market rates and the position  
shall be  reviewed after five years .  However, this decision has not 
been implemented so far by the Dte.  of Estate itself, the MEA, IT 
Department, CBI and others.  Larg e amount of licence fee and 
interest on the late payment s are outstanding.  The MEA made a 
reference to the Ministry of U. D. and are still pursuing the matter 
with the Ministry of U.D. The I.T. Department, made a reference to 
the Law Ministry as to whether the Council can  increase the L.F.  
The NDMC has issued a show cause notice to the CBI as well as 
the IT Department proposing cancellation  of licence.  The CBI has 
promised to liquidate the admitted liability by 30
th of April, 2005.  
However, response from IT Departm ent is awaited.  Time has 
been given upto 30th  of April,  2005.  The Ministry of U.D. is being 
requested to direct the user depart ment to pay the L.F.at 20% 
above the CPWD rates on year to year basis or permit the NDMC 
to raise the demand on market rates  as per provisions of section 
141 of NDMC Act and if the user Departments fail to pay, the 
NDMC would be free to take action under PPAct, 1971.” 
 
Regarding the suggestion made to the Ministry of Urban 
Development for appointing a person or an authority for valuation of 
properties and calculation of service charg es,  Ministry of  Home Affairs  
stated in a written reply  as under:- 
“A letter has been written to Secretary (U.D.) bringing to his notice, 
difficulty in collection of serv ice charges, the lo wer valuation, 
refusal for payment of service ch arges by Railways and Posts and 
Telegraphs and for permitting levy  of service charges on the 
properties of State and the  Diplom atic Missions.  It has been 
suggested that the Ministry of Urban Development may appoint a 
person or an authority for valuation of properties and calculation of 

service charges.   Valuation by such an authority cannot be 
challenged in any Court of law.  The authority has to be appointed 
in consultation with NDMC and M CD and valuations given by the 
Authority should hold good for a period of five years.” 
 
To a   further   query on this aspect,   the  Secretary, Ministry  of  
Home Affairs also stated  during evidence as under:- 
“……..It is a bit of tenuous iss ue.  They have  been operating, 
collection of service charge through executive orders issued by the 
Ministry of Finance or some such things and not through under a 
statute.  That is how the Government Departments and others 
have been kind of finding an  e scape route and not really paying 
the service charges which are  abso lutely and essentially due to 
the Council because services ar e being provided.  So, we have 
advised the Council as well as the Delhi Government that an 
amendment in the Act must be made.  It must become a statute 
and  a statutory provision should be there so that it makes your life 
a lot easier as far as collection of service charges is concerned. I 
am happy to inform this Committee  that perhaps that amendment 
is already under the consideration of the Government of NCT of 
Delhi and once they have done their internal examination, they will 
be sending it to the Ministry of Home Affairs for  passage of the Bill 
etc.” 
 
Elaborating  further,   Principal    Secretary    of     Urban 
Development,    Delhi Government  stated during evidence  as under:- 
“The proposal to amend the NDMC Act to provide for collection of 
service charges in lieu of property  tax on the basis of Mumbai 
pattern; Mumbai Municipal corporation has done it in their  Act and 
that is successfully being implemented there.  We have considered 
it very actively.  Last month it was received and we have consulted 
our Law Department also.” 
 
 

Chapter III 
 
ORGANISATION, FUNCTIONS AND MANPOWER 
 
Organisational set up 
  
Within the parameters laid down under the New Delhi Municipal  
Council Act, 1994, the Chairperson is the head of the organization.  In 
day-to-day functions, he is assisted by  the Secretary, Financial Advisor, 
Engineer-in-Chief and heads of variou s other departments of the civic 
body.  While management and control of the departments rest with the 
respective heads, overall administration of the organization has been 
vested in the Chairperson, who is  assisted by the Secretary.  The 
Secretary is also responsible for coordinating work of various 
departments on behalf of the Chai rperson within the organization, 
improve efficiency in day -to-day working, develop administrative skills, 
which translates into efficient management of the civic body. 
 The details of departments, which contribute towards the 
management of the NDMC in their respective fields, are as under:- 
S. 
No. 
Deptt. Head of 
Deptt. 
Functions 
1 Finance 
Department 
Financial 
Advisor 
Finance & Accounts Department 
is headed by Financial Advisor 
who exercises financial control 
over items involving expenditure 
from the budget of the 
organization including internal 
audit and accounting of 
expenditure of the Council. 
 

 
2 Engineer-in-
Chief Office 
Engineer-
in-Chief 
The Civil Engineering, Electrical 
Engineering, Horticulture, 
Architect Departments, Quality 
Control and Technical Audit are 
put under the control of one 
Engineer, designated as 
Engineer-in-chief. 
3 Vigilance 
Department 
C.V.O. To conduct enquiries etc. and 
assist the disciplinary authority in 
finalisation of vigilance/ 
departmental cases. 
4 Law 
Department 
Legal 
Advisor 
To render legal advice to the 
management. 
5 Audit 
Department 
Chief 
Auditor 
The Audit Department, headed 
by the Chief Auditor, is 
responsible for conducting  
statutory audit of the accounts of 
the Council as per Section 59  of 
NDMC Act and submitting  a 
report on the accounts to the 
Council. 
6 Civil 
Engineering 
Department 
Chief 
Engineers 
(Civil) 
Civil Engineering works are got 
executed by two Chief 
Engineers. The Chief Engineer 
(Civil-I) is responsible for all 
activities connected with 
construction and maintenance of  
roads, water supply, sewerage 
and drainage system.  Chief 
Engineer (C)-II is responsible for 
construction and maintenance of 
municipal buildings. 
7 Electric 
Department 
Chief 
Engineers 
(Elect.) 
This department is responsible 
for all activities relating to 
supply, maintenance and 
distribution of power in NDMC 
area, construction of new 11KV, 
33KV & 66KV works, Planning, 
stores, maintenance of electrical  

installations in municipal 
buildings, road lighting,  
Compost Plant & new projects 
etc.   
8 Health 
Department 
Director 
(Public 
Health) 
and 
Director 
(Medical 
Services 
Health Department has a wide 
network of medical services 
comprising hospitals, allopathic, 
ayurvedic and homeopathic 
dispensaries and maternity and 
child welfare centers  and 
sanitation control in NDMC area, 
prevention and control of 
communicable diseases like 
dengue, malaria, etc. 
9 Architect and 
Environment 
Department 
Chief 
Architect 
This department is responsible 
for Planning and Designing for 
building projects undertaken by 
NDMC, sanctioning of building 
plans within NDMC area 
including removal of 
unauthorized construction and 
misuse of buildings. 
10 Personnel 
Department 
Director(P) The Personnel Department is 
responsible for management of 
various service categories of 
NDMC employees.  This 
Department is also responsible 
for recruitment/promotion etc. 
11 Education 
Department 
Director 
(Edu.) 
Education Department is headed 
by Director (Edu cation).  This 
Department is for imparting 
elementary education through 
Middle, Primary and Nursery 
Schools.  NDMC also runs Sr. 
Sec., Secondary, Middle School. 
12 House Tax 
Department 
Director 
(Tax) and 
Director 
(Recovery)
House Tax Department of 
NDMC deals with assessment of 
house-tax and its collection.  It is 
headed by Director (Tax) who is 
also res
ponsible for the 

realization duties on transfer of 
properties, etc. 
13 Estate 
Department 
Director 
(Estate) 
Director (Estate) is the incharge 
of this department.  The 
department looks after NDMC 
properties and en sures revenue 
realization from these properties, 
etc. 
14 Commercial 
Department 
Director 
(Comml.) 
This department has been 
entrusted with the work of 
realization of revenue from sale 
of electricity and water.  It is also 
responsible for settlement of 
dues in respect of water and 
electricity purchased from Delhi 
Jal Board and DVB (Transco) 
respectively. 
15 Enforcement 
Department 
Director 
(Enf.) 
This department is responsible 
for the removal of encroachment 
from municipal land/public place 
and regulation of parkings in 
NDMC area. 
16 P.R. 
Department 
Secretary/
Dir. (PR) 
Holding of exhibitions, functions, 
press conferences etc. Attending 
to delegations, release of 
advertisements, functioning of 
libraries, attending to civic 
services related grievances, all 
the work relating to publicity and 
organization of cultural 
programmes. 
17 Hindi Section Secretary/ 
Hindi 
Officer 
Official Language 
implementation. 
18 Horticulture 
Department 
Director 
(Hort.) 
All works related to horticulture, 
maintenance of municipal parks 
and gardens. 
19 Welfare 
Department 
Director 
(Welfare/ 
Welfare activities, sport activities 
and allotment of munici pal 

Housing) accommodations. 
20 General 
Administration 
Department 
Dir. (Gn. 
Admn.) 
All works pertaining to General 
Administration, Transport 
Controlling i.e., maintaining and  
up keeping of Municipal 
vehicles, security and fire.  
Council meetings, 
Parliament/Assembly questions 
and other important matters are 
also being dealt by GA 
Department. 
21 I.T. 
Department 
Director 
(IT) 
To formulate policy and to plan 
activities for computerization of 
various departments of NDMC 
by providing hardware and 
software infrastructure support 
including computer training for 
employees. 
 
Functions of NDMC 
On being asked about the function s of NDMC, Secretary Ministry 
of Home Affairs during oral eviden ce stated that as far as the 
mandatory, obligatory and other func tions are concerned, which are 
being given to it, they do not differ from any municipality or any 
corporation in India.  In general term s, the main function of it is to 
provide the basic amenities like wa ter, electricity, scavenging, 
construction of houses, roads, parks,  hospitals, schools, etc., which are 
not being looked after by the State administration. Detailed list of 
mandatory and obligatory functions are given in  Annexure-II. 

Water Supply 
According to Section 147 of NDMC Act, it shall be the duty of the 
Council to take steps from time to time:- 
(a) For ascertaining the sufficiency and wholesomeness of 
water supplies within New Delhi and receiving bulk supplies 
of water from the authority prescribed by the Central 
Government;  
(b) For providing a supply to whol esome water in pipes to every 
part of New Delhi in which there are houses, for the 
domestic purposes of the occup ants thereof, and for taking 
the pipes  affording  that supply  to such point or points as 
will enable the houses to be connected thereto at a 
reasonable cost, so, however, t hat this clause shall not 
require the Council to do anything which is not practicable  at 
a reasonable cost or to provide such a supply to any part of 
New Delhi where such a supply is already available at such 
point or points aforesaid; 
(c) For providing as far as possi ble, a supply of wholesome 
water otherwise than in pipes to  every part of New Delhi in 
which there are houses, for t he domestic purposes of the 
occupants thereof and to which it is not practicable  to 
provide a supply in pipes at a reasonable cost, and in which 
danger to health arises from  the insufficiency  or 
unwholesomeness of the existing supply and a public supply 
is required and can be provided at a reasonable cost, and for 
securing that such supply is  available within a reasonable 
distance of every house in that part. 

On being asked about water supply, Ministry of Home Affairs  in 
their written reply stated as under:- 
“NDMC procures filtered water from De lhi Jal Board and supplies it in 
its area.  Earlier NDMC was getting 140 million litres of water per day.  
In 1998, the supply was reduced to 128 million litres per  day and was 
further reduced to 120 MLD during  last two years.  NDMC generated 
about 20 MLD of water from 137 tube wells  and 500 deep well hand 
pumps.  The demand has been increasing  day by day.  A study was 
got conducted by M/s Tata Consulting Engineers and their 
recommendations have been implem ented by augmentation of 
system and laying of new lines in some areas.” 
 
Electricity 
On being asked about the arrangement  for supply of electricity by 
the Goverment, Ministry of Home Affair s stated in their written reply as 
under:- 
“The Electricity Department, NDMC receives power in bulk from Delhi 
Transco Ltd. in accordance with Se ction 284 of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957, according to wh ich DTL is to supply power in 
bulk to  NDMC as per its demand. NDMC further provides stable and 
reliable power supply to most important buildings like – Rashtrapati 
Bhawan, PM House, Parliament  House, Supreme Court, Major 
Hospitals, Government Buildings, and various Foreign Missions.  It 
provides power supply to above from different sources and keeping full 
spare capacity at each source to e nable the user (mainly CPWD) to 
change over to alternate so urce in the event of any failure.  Accordingly 
NDMC has to ensure installed capacity  of system atleast 1.5 times of 
peak demand.” 
 
To a further query regard ing functions of Electricity Department, 
the Ministry of Home Affairs stated in writing as under:- 
“The main function of Electricity Department is construction, 
maintenance and operation of 66/ 33/11 KV sub-stations including 

distribution network up to the supply point of the consumers in the entire 
NDMC area.  Also the department is responsible for development of 
power distribution system to meet the growing demand of load of various 
categories of consumers.  Various electrical services like internal 
electrical installations, AC Plants, Lifts, Fire Detection System, Public 
Address System and DG Sets etc. in Mpl. Buildings, both residential as 
well as commercial, are looked afte r by the Department.  Besides the 
road lighting on various roads, servic e roads and by-lanes is also 
provided, maintained and operated by the Department.” 
 
When the Committee asked during evidence about the steps taken 
by them to provide  uninterrupt ed power supply, Chairperson, NDMC 
stated as follows:- 
“As far as electricity is concerned, th is time some of the problems were 
due to the tripping of the Grid and some were due to the simultaneous 
burn out of some of our transform ers which needed re placement.  The 
long-term plans  are made in consulta tion with the Central Electricity 
Authority and in consonance with th e National Plan periods, that is the 
Tenth Plan at this moment.” 
 
The Committee desired to  know about the system to rectify over 
billing and faulty working of water and  electricity meters. In this 
connection Ministry of Home Affair s stated in their written reply as 
follows:- 
“Water meter workshop has been set up for rectification of defective 
water meters on day-to-day basis, besides procurement of new water 
meters of international standards.  About 25 water meters are repaired 
daily.  Complaints regarding defective water meters are either received 
from the consumers or the meter re ading section.  Water meters are 
replaced by giving priority as per av ailability of the water meters.  A 
programme for modernization of the existing water meter workshop is in 
hand. 
 

There is an established p rocedure to rectify ov er billing and faulty 
working of water and electricity meters .  Wherever it is felt that the 
meters placed at site are faulty, the officials of the Meter Reading 
Section forward a request in writing to the Electricity Department for their 
checking and replacement.  The meters having been checked by the 
Testing Department, if found faulty, the assessment of consumption for 
the period, the Meter remained effective is made by the Commercial 
Department under the Administrative control of EE(Commercial).  The 
consumption in units found charged in excess is adjusted in the 
subsequent bills of respective consumers allowing credit thereof.” 
 
The Committee desired to know about the electricity tariff in NDMC 
area, the Ministry of Home Affairs  st ated in their written reply as follows 
:- 
“….The revision of electricity tariff from 2001-02 as recommended by the 
DERC for DVB was implemented muta tis mutandis in NDMC. The tariff 
increase ordered by DERC for NDMC wa s higher than th at of the three 
companies created in July 2002 and di stributing electricity in Delhi. 
NDMC successfully contested the matter and succeeded in getting the 
tariff lowered for itself. This has benefited NDMC roughly to the tune of 
Rs 35 crore annually.” 
 
Cleanliness in NDMC area 
 
 The Committee desired to know about  the efforts made to upgrade the 
cleanliness in New Delhi area. The Ministry of Home Affairs in a written reply  
stated that NDMC is constantly making efforts to upgrade the general 
cleanliness in the area. To a further query in this regard, Ministry of Home 
Affairs stated in written reply as under:- 
 
“NDMC has been undertaking night sweeping since 1994 under 
the orders of the Apex Court.  All the market places and their 
adjoining areas along with  office complexes are being cleaned 

and swept in the night shift.  NDM C also made efforts to clean and 
sweep in residential areas in the ni ght shift but due to complaints 
from the residents that their sleep is disturbed due to the noise 
made in sweeping, it was discontinued.  This matter was 
discussed with CPCB who had al so endorsed the view of the 
residents.  Due to this reason, the residential areas have not been 
covered till date.  Moreover, approx. 50% of the staff of the safai 
karamcharis are females, who may find  it difficult to come in the 
night due to family constraints and security reasons.” 
 
On being asked as to whether cleaning and sweeping are done in 
all seven days of the week, Ministry of Home Affairs stated as under:- 
 
“Cleaning and sweeping and removal of rubbish  and filth is being 
undertaken on all days including Sundays and holidays.  6/7th staff 
has been ordered to be  on duty while 1/7 th staff is given weekly 
off………NDMC is putting sustained efforts in improving the 
attendance of safai karamcharies on Sundays and holidays. 
 
Section 261 of NDMC Act envis ages garbage removal by NDMC 
so as to provide neat and clean env ironment and aesthetic look to 
the area within its jurisdiction.” 
 
The Committee also went into  the grievances  of residents 
regarding garbage removal as indicated in the Audit Report :-  
“However, with a view to assess t he efficiency of these services, 
Audit enquired from Presidents/Secretaries of 16 nos. of  Resident 
Welfare Associations about removal  of garbage, daily sweeping of 
roads, etc. through a structured qu estionnaire.  Their responses 
revealed as under:- 
(i) The NDMC staff takes two to six days in attending to 
the complaints. 
(ii) Daily surface cleaning of all the st reets and removal of 
sweepings therefrom is not done. 
(iii) The  NDMC staff does not remove garbage daily.  
Thus provisions of the Act remained on paper only, the 
reality was that the residents were deprived of the neat 
and clean environment due to above deficiencies.” 

 
Audit Report of 2001 on Government  of NCT, Delhi  states as 
under:- 
“The garbage generation in the NDMC area ranged from 221 MT per 
day to 334 MT per day during the five  year period.  As against this, the 
capacity for garbage rem oval using trucks owned by the NDMC alone 
ranged from 240 to 432 MT per day.  Year –wise details are given in the 
table below:- 
 
Total available capacity 
 
Fleet available Year Quantity of 
garbage 
generated/removed 
in MT/day 
2.5MT
 
4MT 
 
 
8 MT
 
Total Capacity 
Available in 
MT/day 
1995-96 264 16 48 25 432 
1996-97 237 16 50 24 432 
1997-98 221 - 50 5 240 
1998-99 284 - 67 5 308 
1999-2000 334 - 67 5 308 
 
Thus the NDMC possessed sufficient number of trucks to transport 
the garbage assuming that one tr uck made only one  trip a day 
during  the five years covered in re view with the exception of year 
1999-2000.  In fact, even with one trip per day norm the NDMC 
acquired larger fleet size than actually required. 
 
Inspite of sufficient fleet capacity the NDMC hired private vehicles 
during 1997-98 to 1999-2000 for lifting of garbage.  The details of 
trips made by the NDMC vehicles and private vehicles, garbage 
lifted etc. during the last five  years ended Marc h 2000 are given 
below:- 
 

Trips made by vehicle and garbage lifted 
 
Year Trips 
made by 
NDMC 
vehicles 
Trips 
made by 
private 
vehicles 
Total Quantity 
of 
garbage 
removed 
(MT) 
No. of 
trucks 
available 
No. of 
trucks 
required 
1995-96 23732 - 23732 96476 89 66 
1996-97 25778 - 25778 86341 90 59 
1997-98 23911 9265 33176 80823 55+26* 55 
1998-99 23923 12331 36254 103767 72+20* 71 
1999-00 23569 13285 36854 122049 72+20* 84 
*Figures represent no. of trucks hired.  
 
The NDMC intimated in July 2000  that their vehicles made only 
one trip each per day while the private vehicles made occasionally 
two trips.  A perusal of the table above revealed that the NDMC 
trucks did not complete even one trip per day.  Thus, the NDMC 
failed to utilize the available fleet capacity of its own to optimum 
level resulting in unnecessary hi ring of trucks during 1997-98 to 
1999-2000 and made payment of hiring charges amounting to Rs. 
2.14 crore during 1997-98 to 1999-2000. 
 
In its reply of January  2001, the NDMC while admitting the facts 
intimated that there were many drawbacks such as number of 
holidays, breakdown of  vehicle, will to work in a Government 
setup, absenteeism, etc.   The reply really bri ngs out the pathetic 
situation prevailing in NDMC superv isory level who admitted that 
they were not able to motivate an d take work from their regular 
staff.  However, this is to be rea lly viewed in the light of the fact 
that even though enough capacit y to remove the garbage was  
available, NDMC paid out hefty sum of Rs. 2.14 crore during 1997-
2000 as hiring charges.” 
 
Power Generation out of garbage 
 
On being asked whether there is any proposal under consideration 
of NDMC to produce power out of garbage, a representative of Delhi 
Government stated during evidence as under:- 

“Actually, Delhi has a number of sanitary landfill sites picking up 
garbage.  Even the garbage of NDMC are a is taken to the sanitary 
landfill sites and the management is participative.  As far as generating 
power from garbage is concerned, I am personally not aware of any 
such project.  Moreover, the plants  which are already generating power 
are either thermal-based in Delhi or gas-based.  To generate power on 
large scale out of garbage I think is not there.” 
 
Further elaborating on the subject, the Chairperson, NDMC stated 
as under:- 
“………..One of NDMC’s constraints is also that we buy bulk electricity 
from outside NDMC.  We buy bulk water from outside NDMC.  We 
generate garbage and we take that garb age to landfill sites outside 
NDMC.  All these services cost us money.  We pay for these services.  
When you are paying for services, th ere is always a tendency for us to 
try and restrict the consumption.  But  that demand restriction is not 
possible within this area given it s special character and its special 
requirement. 
 
So as far as landfill is concerned, we generate about 275 metric tones of 
garbage per day, which we take to t he MCD landfill sites.  We have 
computed it.  We pay somewhere around Rs.  2 crore for that.  Now, the 
landfill sites are going to be filled up very soon.  The MCD has been 
raising the red flag very often that these landfill sites are no longer going 
to be sufficient for the entire Delhi. 
 
So, the first people to be choked off will be those who bring the garbage 
to it from the outside, that is, the NDMC.  They  are looking at certain 
studies for, scientific landfill sites, not necessarily gas generation but 
also scientific state of the art landfills.  We will look at working together 
with the MCD and also take this advice on generation of gas.  The follow 
up on studies is being done by the MCD in the matter.” 
 
To a further query, Ministry of Home Affairs stated as under:- 
“The existing compost plan t has no facility for gene ration of electricity  
from garbage. Moreover, the plant is old and obsolete. NDMC is working 

on new project to set up State-of-art compost  plant wi th facility for 
segregation  of all types of wast e and power generation.  NDMC is also 
in touch with MCD and considering collaboration with MCD in this 
regard.” 
 
In this regard the Chairperson, NDMC  also stated as under:- 
 
“A project report is ready with us for the state-of-the-art compost plant.  
We have also looked into the aspect of setting up a Refuse Derived Fuel 
(RDF) plant at the site after sugg estions were received by us in the 
Briefing Meeting, which was held in January.  Presently, we are looking 
at a proposal for private-public partic ipation in it.  The infrastructure  
Leasing and Finance Services Limited (ILFS) is a section 25 company, 
and it has come before us with a prop osal for inviting private partnership 
to set up a compost plant including a plant to derive some fuel from 
garbage.  The garbage will be soug ht both from the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi and New Delhi Municipal Council.  We expect this 
project report to be ready by this year itself.  The bid managers, who will 
be appointed for the purpose, would manage the bids. 
 
The compost plant project  report wa s analysed very carefully, and it 
was felt that in case the proposal is for compos t plant plus something 
more, then we should consider it.  Therefore, the advice received by us 
has been agreed to, and we expect this plant to be set up in the coming 
year or so.” 
 
Health and Hospitals 
 
According to the information furnished by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, NDMC has one 150 bedded General Hospital and one 50 
bedded Maternity Hospital.  In addition, it has 36 dispensaries of 
different streams of medicine and 13 MCW Centres.  Besides this 
NDMC areas has a tertiary level hosp ital being run by the Central 

Government/Railway Administration. NDMC has been regularly  
expanding and upgrading the facilities at its existing  hospitals as per the 
need of the masses. 
In reply  to a question on the gene ral complaints alleging of non 
availability of doctors and medicines in NDMC run dispensaries and 
hospitals, the Ministry of Home Affa irs in a written reply  stated as 
under:- 
“All the essential and life saving medi cines approved in the formulary of 
NDMC have always been available in sufficient quantities in all the 
dispensaries and hospitals under the administrative control of NDMC.  
Director (Medical Services), Departmental  Vigilance Officer (DVO) and 
the Vigilance  Department of NDMC,  periodically check the attendance 
of the Doctors and the para-medical st aff.   The  Vigilance Department 
alone checked the attendance of the Doctors in the dispensaries and the 
hospitals 15 times during the last one year in addition to the checking by 
the Director (Medical) and the DVO.” 
 
The Committee desired to know about  the findings of the surprise 
inspections. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their reply stated as under:- 
“Action was taken against the defaulters as per CCS Rules in the form of 
advice/warning to be punctual  in future.  A few chronic late comers were 
even transferred and put in under t he direct supervision of Senior 
Officers.” 
  
On being  specifically asked  about the difficulties  usually faced by 
people utilizing medical facilities in NDMC hospitals and dispensaries, 
Ministry of Home Affairs stated as under:- 
“Since NDMC hospitals are district le vel hospitals, the patients at times 
have to be referred to other Governm ent institutions where more 
specialised services are available.  Some inconvenience is faced by the 
people on this account.” 

 
To another related query, Ministry of Home Affairs in their written 
reply stated that 3602 patients w ere admitted in emergency ward and 
21145 patients in indoor ward of Charak Palika Hospital during last three 
years and 1218 patients were referred to  other hospitals for specialized 
services during this period.  
On being enquired about the programme implemented on 
HIV/AIDS as given by National Aids Control Organisation, the 
Chairperson, NDMC stated during evidence as follows:- 
“On HIV/AIDs, we are following a programme given to us by the National 
AIDS Control Organisation through  the Delhi State AIDS Control 
Society.  Blood samples are being co llected at four of the NDMC’s own 
facilities.  They are at Charak Palik a Hospital, Moti Bagh, the Maternity 
Hospital in Lodhi Road, Polyc linic Centre, and Laboratory at Babar 
Road.  The testing and counselling are being undertaken at our center in 
Shaheed Bhagat Singh Marg.  It has received a great deal of 
appreciation within the international b odies at the way the Centre is set 
up and the way it is being run.”  
 
Chairperson, NDMC  further  added as follows:- 
 
“For the limited area within the NDMC, at present this is the one VC TC 
Centre.  If there is a demand or  requirement, we will expand the 
services.” 
 
Education 
The Committee desired to know about the number of schools run 
by NDMC. The Ministry of Home Affairs furnished the following 
information in this regard:- 
( i )   S r .  S e c .        0 6  
(ii)  Secondary      09 

(iii) Middle      10 
(iv) Primary      31 
(v)  Nursery      18 
(vi)  Navyug Sr. Sec.     06 
(vii) Navyug Primary     03 
(viii) Aided Schools (95% aid)   04 
 
Total      87 
       
In addition to the above mentioned schools, there is one training center 
for teachers called the “School of  Science and Humanities Education” 
located at Tughlak Crescent, New Delhi.” 
 
To a further query, they stated that the number of schools is 
satisfactory as per requirement.  
On being asked about expansion  of  facilities,  Ministry of Home 
Affairs  stated as under:- 
“NDMC will lay emphasis on improving school infrastructure by proper 
maintenance of buildings, replacing fu rniture, timely supply of textbooks 
and uniform to students, upgradation and modernization of education by 
way of introducing computer educat ion will continue getting priority. 
Computer labs have already been est ablished in 23 schools and 8 more 
labs will be provided duri ng 2004-05.  With the cooperation of Delhi 
Government, NDMC intends to bring a ll out of schools children in the 
age group 6 to 14 years to mainstream of formal education. 
 
Construction of a three storyed Navy ug school building opposite Birla 
Mandir will be taken up during the current year.” 
 
Pointing out that  there are alre ady a number of schools around Gole 
Market area and NDMC has the content ion that the existing number of 

schools are adequate to cater to the need of population of NDMC area, 
the Committee enquired what necessitated setting up a new school 
opposite Birla Mandir.  The Ministry of Home  Affairs stated in their reply 
as under:- 
“……..the existing number of schools are adequate to cater the needs of 
general public of NDMC area.  Navy ug schools were formulated to 
provide quality education to gifted children of weaker sections.  Already 
there is Navyug Primary school running in a  part of the building of 
NDMC school.  This space is very limited hence school is only upto 
class 5
th.  In order to provide continuous good and proper education to 
these children of Navyug Pry. School, a Sr. Secondary School is under 
consideration for construction for which  a PE amounting to Rs. 6.50 
crore has been approved by the Council.” 
 
To a further  related query, Chairperson, NDMC stated in reply as under:- 
“……………..However, in the last  tw o years, due to the movement  
away from New Delhi area of a large segment of this population, 
enrolments dropped………” 
 
On being asked as to how do the results of class  Xth and XIIth of 
NDMC schools compare with the results of other Public Schools and MCD 
Schools, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated  as under:- 
“The results of Xth and XIIth of NDMC Schools cannot be compared with 
leading Public Schools in Delhi whereas the results can be compared 
with other Governments Schools/MCD Schools.  Average results of 
NDMC Schools are at par with results of other Government Schools and 
even better in some schools.” 
 
To a specific query regarding number of students who scored 
more than 75% and 90% marks in CB SE Board examination during last 
five years, Ministry of Home Affair s in their statement  furnished to the 
Committee stated that out of 30 91 students of NDMC schools who 
appeared in class X during the last five years, 54 students got marks 

between 75% and 89% and 4 students scored above 90% marks. Out of 
2510 students who appeared in class XII during this period, only 39 
students scored marks between 75% and 89% and none of the students 
could score 90%. Statement showing year-wise,  
percentage-wise and school-wise resu lts in CBSE Board examination 
during last five years is at Annexure III.  
The Committee desired to know about  the  efforts made to 
improve the results in NDMC owned schools, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs in their reply stated as under:- 
“Extra classes during autumn and wi nter break has been started to 
improve the board result. Principals and Vice Principals have been given 
additional responsibilities as Zonal Inspectors for conducting inspections 
for “spot academic evaluation/assessment” to improve the quality of 
teaching.” 
 
Road Surfacing 
The Committee desired to know  about the periodicity of 
resurfacing of roads undertaken by NDM C. The Ministry of Home Affairs 
in their written note stated as under:- 
“NDMC has 1290 KM (single lane) of roads in its area and the 
periodicity of resurfacing is as follows:- 
  
(i) Roads with heavy traffic – 5 years. 
(ii) Roads with medium traffic – 6 years. 
(iii) Roads with Crumbled Rubber Mixed Betumen (CRMB) – 7 
years. 
(iv) Lanes/ service road – 5 years.” 
 

The Committee further wanted to kn ow about the efforts made by 
NDMC to maintain good quality of roads especially during rainy season. 
Ministry of Home Affairs stated in written reply as under:- 
“Efforts are being made to mec hanise the patch repair and pothole 
repair of road which will take very less  time for repair.  At present, the 
repairs are being carried out man ually through 18 road service 
centers  spread across entire NDMC area.” 
To a related query in th is regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Home 
Affairs stated during oral evidence as under:- 
“As far as road resurfacing is concerned, firstly there is a basic 
annual plan that is based on the to tal requirement.  Each Department 
prepares a plan.  Of their total rec eipts how much expenditure can be 
done and how much reserves must be kept, that is  there in the 
annual plan.  On all these things th ere are norms.  There is norm on 
road resurfacing also.  There are norms on the kind of road you lay 
and how many years that road must la st before it can be re-laid.  
There are engineering norms.   I think we must be following the 
CPWD Manual on these things.  That is how road resurfacing is done 
as per the CPWD norms.  There may be an emergency.  There may 
be a sudden cloudburst and you find that  the road that was laid is not 
in a position to withstand that  problem.  The common problem in 
Delhi, if you ask me, is services.  There are telephone services, there 
are sewer services and  there are other serv ices where digging of 
road becomes a prerequisite.   Hence, we have to re-lay it and there 
are things like that.  Otherwise, I think, roads in NDMC area are much 
better maintained than in the rest of Delhi.” 
 
In reply to another query in this regard, Chairperson, NDMC stated 
as under:- 
“In addition the signages, the tra ffic roundabouts, the street signs, 
etc. are according to the Indian Road Congress specifications.  We 
take the advice of the Central Road Research Institute at times.  The 
specific norms about the exact proportion for each part of the 
roadwork is  determined by maintenanc e norms of the Ministry of 

Road Transport and Highways, and the process followed is that of the 
CPWD Manual. 
 
The specifications are generally high er in New Delhi area especially 
of the main roads.  As far as  services and co lony roads are 
concerned, we have already draw n up the norms and we expect, as 
the Home Secretary has pointed out, five to seven years.” 
  
Horticulture 
When asked about the activities  of Horticulture Department, 
Ministry of Home Affairs in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Horticulture Department of NDMC is   maintaining about 1,107 acres 
of green area including 6 gardens a nd 49 roundabouts.  In the entire 
NDMC area the Road Berms have been converted into beautifully 
maintained green strips.  The t rees along the roadsides are 75,000 
and in Garden 1,60,000.  Apart from  maintenance works, various 
development and improvement works for environmental improvement 
by way of tree plantation, grassing,  etc. have been taken up  by the 
Department to reduce air pollution.” 
 
According to the information furnished by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, the present strength of staff in Horticulture Department category 
wise is as under:- 
“S.No. Name of Post Group of Post Present Strength 
1 Director(Hotriculture) A 01 
2 Additional Director (Hort.) A 02 
3 Deputy Director (Hort.) A 01 
4 Assistant Director (Hort.) B 12 
5 Section Officer(Hort.) C 13 
6 Pump  Driver C 31 
7 Choudhary C 62 
8 Mason C 02 

9 Carpenter C 01 
10 Hedge man D 05 
11 Machine Man D 08 
12 Single Bull Man D 11 
13 Chowkidar D 09 
14 Mali D 1338 
15 Khallasi D 04 
                                                                 
The duty hours of the horticulture staff are from 9 am to 5 pm.  However as 
per requirement, some malis are required to work in early morning and late 
evening for watering of plants and watch and ward in parks and gardens.  
There are large green areas including  3 large gardens (area : 384.58 
acres), of central vista (area:182 acres), 49 roundabouts, 82 parks in 
residential colonies, green  strips and avenue plants along roadsides.  The 
staff carries out regular maintenance of Parks and Gar dens and plantation 
of trees, shrubs and orna mental plants  in available spaces.  The green 
areas of NDMC are maintained by existing staff in the best possible 
manner.  Work done by Horticulture staff is regularly supervised and 
monitored by senior officers.” 
 
On being asked whether the  staff in Horticulture Department is  
misutilised by NDMC officers as domestic  helps resulting in poor maintenance  
of various gardens and road side trees, Ministry of Home Affairs stated  in 
their reply that it is not correct that malis are being employed as domestic help 
and that no specific case has come to notice in this regard. 
Rain Water Harvesting 
 
On being asked about the rain water harvesting, the Chairperson, 
NDMC stated during oral evidence as under:- 
“As regards rainwater harvesting,  there is a provision in the 
building bye-laws that no new building would be given a 
Completion Certificate unless and until it has rainwater harvesting 

provision in it.  In addition to i t, the NDMC itself has completed 17 
such works in the buildings belonging to the Council. We have 
also referred 85 such projects to  the CGWB for their advice and 3 
works for rainwater harvesting are in progress. 
 
……….We are also looking at rainwat er collection, which is a very 
traditional way of collecting rainwater for being used for various 
purposes.  It  is considered to be  very cost-effective in dry areas 
like Rajasthan.  A number of studi es have been conducted on this 
issue, and we have a report with us on those studies.  We will be 
trying rainwater collection also in some of our own institutional 
buildings.” 
 
To a further  query   about   the  extent   to   which   water  
harvesting helped in overcoming short age of water supply, the Ministry 
of Home Affairs stated as under:- 
“Since this is minuscule as f ar as NDMC is concerned it would be 
difficult to comment on issue of overcoming shortage of water 
supply as same is not connected to the water supply system.  
However, CGWB would be the best source to give details of any 
raise in water table in subsoil strata.” 
 
On   being  asked   about   the    wa ste   water   recycling, Chairperson,  
NDMC stated as under:- 
“………..we will be talking to the building agencies.  Our main 
building owners are the Central Public Works Department (CPWD) 
and we will be talking to them about this aspect.” 
 
Parking 
 
On being asked about the policy for parking  vehicles in  NDMC 
area, Ministry of Home Affairs stated in written reply as follows:- 

“Section 10 of the NDMC Act, 1994 provides that the municipal government 
of New Delhi shall vest in the Coun cil.  The obligatory and discretionary 
functions of the Council have been specified in Se ction 11 and Section 12 
of the Act.  To run the municipal government of New Delhi, the Act provides 
for levy of municipal taxes, rates, cesses, fees and charges.  The functions 
include regulatory and enforcement duties as well.  When the Municipal Act 
was drafted, the modes of conveyance were the vehicles drawn by animals 
and the local bodies were authroised to levy tax on such vehicles and 
animals.  The rate of tax on such vehicles and animals has been provided 
in Schedule II of the NDMC Act.  This was a direct copy from the MCD Act, 
1957. The provisions made had become totally out-dated in the present 
context.  Besides, the levy of taxes on the vehicles drawn by animals, 
rickshaws and animals is redundant as such vehicles are not allowed to ply 
in NDMC area.  The tax is to be levied  on all vehicles whether two 
wheelers or four wheelers drawn by camels, horses, ponies, mules, 
donkeys, bullocks or buffaloes.  Tax is also to be levied on hand drawn 
vehicles.  The Act also provides for levy of tax on cycle rickshaws, bicycles,  
camels, horses etc. and since the mode of transport wa s mainly these 
vehicles and animals, the discretionary  functions of the Council include 
construction and maintenance of garage s, sheds and stands for vehicles 
and cattle biers.  However, no specific provision was made for parking 
space needed for vehicles like motorc ars, motor-cycles and buses to avoid 
congestion on roads.  It is the obligatory function of the  
NDMC to ensure that there is no obstruction on the streets and other public 
places.  The Act also prohibits carryi ng on the trade of business of or any 
operation connected with t he trade of auto car or auto cycle servicing or 
repairing without a license.    Since with the increasing number of motor 
vehicles on roads in Delhi, road usage and parking requirement is on 
increase, it has become necessary to frame a parking policy for the NDMC 
area.” 
 
The Ministry further stated as follows:- 
“The total number of vehicles register ed in Delhi has increased more than 
six times during the last twenty years.   The number of private cars, motor 
cycles and scooters has increased by more than seven times.  In addition 
to this, a large number of vehicles r egistered in nearby States enter into 
New Delhi area from nearby townsh ips like Gurgaon, Faridabad, Noida, 
Ghaziabad and other places.” 

 
On being asked about the allotment of parking lots, Ministry of 
Home Affairs stated as under:- 
“Prior to 1.4.1991, in NDM C the parking lots were be ing allotted on open 
tender basis.  To mitigate the co mplaints, of the public regarding 
misbehaviour, in December, 1990 it  was decided to request Director 
General (Resettlement) Ministry of Defence to sponsor suitable names of 
ex-servicemen for running the parkin g lots at the rate at which the 
allotments were earlier made and accordingly the parking lots were allotted 
to ex-servicemen w.e.f. 1.4.91 by dr aw of lots from amongst the names 
sponsored by DG (R), Ministry of Defence. 
 
Subsequently, the Committee vide Resolution No. 18 dated 15.3.93 revised 
the rates of parking w.e.f. 1.4.93 wi th an enhancement of 10%.  Thereafter, 
appreciating  that the rates of licence fee being  received from the parking 
allotments, were considerably on lower side, the Committee vide 
Resolution No. 15 dated 15.10. 93 de cided that the existing term of 
allotment  of all parking lots be extended up to 31.12.93 and simultaneously  
invite open tenders for allotment.  Fo llowed with the said decision, the 
Council vide item no. 3(xiv) dated 29.4. 97 decided that the parking lots be 
allotted through open tend ers and 50% be reserved for Ex-servicemen, 
15% for SC/ST, 5% for physicall y handicapped and re st to General 
Category.  A Sub Committee was also constituted to decide the offers 
received by way of open tenders. 
 
The NDMC vide its Resolution No. 3(vii) dated 2.11.2001 revised the terms 
& conditions of parking lots.  However, experiencing some practical 
difficulties during the year 2002, certain amendments became necessary 
warranting revision in the said term s and conditions of the NIT governing 
the allotment of parking lots and acc ordingly, the Council vide Resolution 
No. 3(xiii) dated 27.6.2003 while approving the revised terms and 
conditions in addition to the existing ones for the allotment of parking lots in 
NDMC area, also resolved that boards  be displayed at each parking lot 
giving name, designation and tele phone number of the officer whom 
complaint against parking lot can be filed.” 
 

From the Audit Report for the ye ar  2004, on Government of NCT 
of Delhi, the Committee learnt about running of the unauthorized Parking 
Lots. It was pointed out in para 4.2. 25 of the Report as under:- 
“It was noticed in July 2001 that two parking lots located at UCO Bank 
Building, Sansad Marg and E Block, Middle Circle, Connaught Place were 
being run unauthorisedly with the apparent connivance of the field staff who 
had been specifically inst ructed to prevent such unauthorized parking.  No 
action was taken against the erring staff.” 
 
It  has also been pointed out in para 4.2.26 as under:- 
“Allotment of parking lots on short term  basis is to be made on the basis of 
the recommendations of a sub-committee formed for the purpose and  with 
the approval of the competent authority.  However, recommendations of the 
sub-committee or formal approval of the competent aut hority were not 
found on record in respect of such a llotments.  Seven parking lots were 
allotted by the Asstt. Secretary (E nforcement) during October, 2000 to 
September, 2001 without the approval of even the Director (Enforcement).” 
 
In para 4.2. 27 it has been pointed out as under:- 
“Four parking lots, namely H-Block Connaug ht  Circus, E Block, Radial 
Road, Connaught Place, H-Block, Chelmsford Road, Connaught Place  
and A-Block, Middle Circle, Connaught Place were allotted in March/May, 
1995 for three years to different contractors who did not make any payment 
to the Council as of Marc h 2003 except for the initia l deposits.  No efforts 
were made by the Council to demand or pursue the recovery of outstanding 
licence fee of Rs. 13.25 lakh due from the contractors up to July, 1998.” 
 
The Committee asked during the ev idence whether in view of 
introduction of ‘Metro’ railway, NDMC has any plan to set up parking lots 
near Metro Stations and whether there is any proposal for building multi-
level parking areas. In reply, the Chairperson, NDMC stated as follows:- 
“As regards surface parking, as a rule, it  is the lowest priority for the New 
Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC).  Three sites have been given to NDMC to 

develop multi-level parking lots. The first site is behind the Hindustan Times 
Building of Barakhamba Road.  The se cond site is on Baba Kharak Singh 
(BKS) Marg next to the Mohan Singh Place and in between the Gurudwara 
and the Mohan Singh Place.  The third site is  in Saojini Nagar.  The project 
is in a very advanced stage. Bids are goi ng to be invited  very shortly.  Our 
Bid Managers are in the process of finalizing the documents.  Maybe, in a 
month, we will be ready to advertise.” 
 
On being asked  whether these par king areas  will be developed 
on Built Operate Transfer Basis (BOT ), Chairperson, NDMC stated as 
under:- 
“These will be  with private participation on BOT basis.  Land has been 
allotted to us by the Ministry of Urban Development.  It has been agreed, 
with the consent of the Urban Development Ministry, that 30 per cent of this 
area can be utilized  for commercial acti vities in order to make the parking 
areas more lucrative.” 
 
Redressal of Grievances 
 
The Committee enquired about the procedure evolved to register 
complaints/grievances of public and  whether any record of complaints 
registered on telephone and through wr itten communication is being 
maintained. In this connection Ministry of Home Affairs stated in a 
written reply as under:- 
“The grievances redressal system of NDMC is mainly through Central 
Control Room.  All the complaints rela ting to civic services are received in 
the Complaint Room and IVRS (Interact Voice Response System).  HODs 
and Senior Officers meet the public a nd receive complaints for appropriate 
redressal. 
 
Chairman, NDMC, Vice Chairman, NDMC, Members of the NDMC and all 
HODs/Senior officers meet the public  and receive complaints.  These 
complaints are attended to on priority.   These complaints are monitored by 

senior officers.  No separate record was however, being kept of the 
complaints received during public audience but top priority is accorded.  
The complaints received at Central Control Room has proper record and its 
disposal is periodically monitored  by the Chairman himself.” 
 
To a  query, whether senior officers of NDMC meet public in an 
‘open darbar’ for resolving their grievanc es, Ministry of Home Affairs in 
their reply stated as under:- 
“Senior officers of NDMC meet public in an OPEN DARBAR for resolving 
their grievances regularly.  All  the officers are availabl e to the general 
public from 3 to 4 pm everyday.  Senior officers of Health Department i.e. 
all the Chief Medical Officers and Medical Officers of  Health go into the 
field regularly and interact with the public.  Whenever, any market 
association or Resident Welfare Association or any group of people call 
them to address their community and so lve their grievances on the spot, 
they  are always willing to go there. In  JJ Clusters also, the officers go 
themselves and also meet the Pra dhans for community interaction and 
participation.  Open darbars are also being held periodically under 
bhagidari scheme of Hon’ble Chief Minister, Delhi in NDMC area.  Senior 
officers attend these darbars and redress grievances of the public.” 
 
They further stated as under:- 
“Not only this, NDMC also arrange the holdi ng of Lok Adalats from time to 
time for resolving the disputed cases.   From 20.3.1999, in all 238 cases 
have been listed before these Lok Adalats from time to time and out of 238, 
235 cases have been decided/compromis ed and remaining 3 cases have 
been adjourned to.” 
 
 When asked about the nature of complaints received by NDMC, 
Ministry of Home Affairs stated in a written reply as under:- 
“In general complaints relate to no water, low pressure, leakages in water 
lines, contaminated/dirty water, replacement of G.I. Pipe lines of hydrants, 
connections/disconnection etc.  A ll efforts are made to attend to the 

complaints promptly.  Emergent water supply is being supplied through 
water tankers stationed at control room functioning round the clock.” 
 
 On being asked about the redre ssal of grievances of female 
employees, Ministry of Home Affairs stated as under:- 
“In pursuance to the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court and further 
directions received from the Chairman, States Complaints Committee, 
Government of Delhi, a three mem bers Departmental Committee was set 
up in NDMC to look into the cases of sexual harassment of women working 
in NDMC in the year 1999.  The Committ ee is chaired by Chief Auditor and 
has two Senior officers as members.  NGO has also been associated as 
envisaged in the Supreme Court Judgement on Vishaka Dutt case.  The 
committee meets as and when the complaints are received and tries for 
early settlement of cases.” 
 
The Committee desired to know the number of complaints received so 
far from  female employees, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated in their written 
note as under:- 
“The Committee has so far received tota l eight cases. Only in one case, 
charge of sexual harassment was prima  facie established.  Disciplinary 
action has been initiated.  In one ca se  charge of misbehaviour has been 
established.” 
Manpower/Recruitment 
 
In reply to a question about staff strength in NDMC, Chairperson 
NDMC stated during evidence as under:- 
“…..The total sanctioned strength in the NDMC is approximately 18000 of 
which about 364 and odd are Group ‘A’ posts.  Recruitment to these posts 
are made by UPSC and we are actively  pushing and pursuing with them.  
Vacancies in Group A are mainly on a ccount of doctors which is standard 
because of the UPSC combined  recruitment.  To some marginal degree 
there are also in the Engineering D epartment where some issues were 

before various courts because diff erent cadres were agitating for 
promotions to particular posts.” 
 
On being asked about the vacancies as on date, Chairperson 
NDMC stated during evidence as under:- 
“We have only about 1,668 vacancies, as on date, out of almost 18000.  
You would kindly agree that this is not a very large number proportionately.  
However, a number of these vacancie s are with the Delhi Staff Selection 
Board.  The Government has directed th e Council to make  recruitment to 
Group ‘B’ and Group ‘C’ posts only through the Delhi Staff Selection Board.  
We are again pursuing it with them.  They are also continuously making 
efforts to fill these  vaca ncies and we expect that so me of the shortfalls will 
be taken care of.  However, no part of the NDMC is suffering on account of 
vacant posts because the short-term contracts are used extensively in 
anticipation of these vacancies being filled up on a regular basis by the 
Delhi Staff Selection Board.  Wherev er vacancies could be filled by 
promotion, it has been done.  There is hardly any group C vacancy which is 
now available or vacant because promotions have not taken place.  A large 
number of DPCs have been made and these vacanc ies have been filled  
up on regular basis.” 
 
Chairperson, NDMC further stated as under:- 
 
“As far as compassionate appointment s are concerned, we are governed 
by Government of India regulations  where a cap of 5 per cent on overall 
strength is there.  We cannot take m ore people than that cap of 5 per cent.  
The kind of vacancies we have is alwa ys in the Group ‘D ’ category where 
mortality is rather high given the kind of workers that the Municipality has to 
employ.  There is also a lot of dissati sfaction that there is a backlog in the 
category of compassionate appointments.  However, this 5 per cent cap is 
a regulation.  We shall see how we can accommodate  the overall cap that 
has been imposed.” 
 
  

Chapter IV 
 
ENCROACHMENTS  
 
Encroachment/Unauthorised Construction 
 
On being   asked    about  the policy   of   NDMC   against encroachment  
and unauthorized squatters,  Ministry of Home Affairs stated in their written 
reply as under:- 
“ NDMC does not allow any encroachment on municipal land by 
unauthorized squatters.  Regular raid s are conducted under Section 226 of 
the NDMC Act, 1994 and all unauthroised squatters are removed. 
 
A few of hawkers operating in NDMC area filed a petition in Supreme Court 
of India known as “Sodan Singh vers us NDMC & Others” against removal 
by the municipal staff and claiming right to trade on the pavement.  The 
Constitutional Bench vide its judgement  dated 30.8.89 in the above case 
came to the conclusion that right to carry on the trade or  business on street 
pavement, if properly regulated, cannot  be denied to any person on the 
ground that street pavemen ts are not exclusively meant for pedestrian and 
can be put in any use in a regulated manner.  The Hon’ble Court further 
directed the NDMC to formulate a scheme for the rehabilitation of 
squatters/hawkers.  The NDMC accordi ngly in pursuance  of the guidelines 
laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, framed a scheme vide Resolution No. 
28 dated 10.11.89.  The Hon’ble Apex Court furt her appointed a 
Committee, known as Thareja Judicial Committee to verify the claims of the 
hawkers/squatters.  The said Commi ttee invited claims from the 
hawkers/squatters of NDMC area by public advertisement.   Approximately, 
5500 claims were received by the Thareja Committee out of which 760 
claims were verified.  The report was approved by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court and further appointed another Committee known as ‘Chaturvedi 
Committee’ to make allotment to the verified squatters.  The Chaturvedi 
Committee allotted open tehbazari/built up stalls to  725 verified  squatters. 
 

The Hon’ble  Supreme Court vide t heir order passed in  1998, further 
directed the NDMC for eviction of unautho rized squatters so as to protect 
the right of authorized squatters as also to protect the land from any 
encroachment.  Thus at present NDMC is not allotting any tehbazari to 
anyone.  However, people migrate from  the disturbed area of the country 
like Jammu & Kashmir to seek temporar y rehabilitation.  NDMC, at present 
has been tolerating about 200  Kash miri migrants on pavements at Plaza 
Bus Stand, Shankar Market, INA Market, Yusuf Sarai & Palika Bhawan. 
 
On the directions of Hon’ble Prim e Minster of India, a scheme for 
accommodating vendors/squatters was formulated by the NDMC.  One 
Green Zone as envisaged in the letter of Prime Minister known as “Haat” 
was established in Sarojin i Nagar facing Ring Road on  9.10.2001.  Initially 
there was enthusiastic response from t he unauthroised  squatters with the 
impression that they shall be provided alternative site on issuance of 
receipt from NDMC.   In the beginning about 150 unauthorised squatters 
squatting, but thereafter their number started declining.  However, a few 
unathorised squatters dealing in sale of vegetable are squatting at this 
place.” 
 
To another related  query, Ministry of  Home Affairs in their written 
note replied  as under:- 
“The Unauthorized Construction Cell has been divided in 4 areas.  The 
same has now been looked after by 3 J.E.s. Out of them one is looking 
after North area and remaining two are l ooking after the South area.  After  
any unauthorized construction is detected, notice under relevant sections of 
NDMC Act, 1994 are served to the party.  The   details with respect to 
sealing/demolition and the  total number of notice served during last three 
years are as  under:- 
 

North 
 
Total number of premises detected  
since Jan, 2002 to June, 2005    : 172 
 
Total number of premises demolished  :   66 
 
Total number of premises sealed          :   19 
 
South 
 
Total number of premises detected  
since Jan, 2002 to June, 2005  : 246 
 
Total number of premises demolished  :   34 
 
Total number of premises sealed          :   26” 
 
The Committee were informed that   records of unauthorized 
construction  prior to January,  2002  were not traceable.  However, 
efforts were being made to trace  out the records prior to January, 2002. 
On   being   asked   about   the   records   prior   to  2002,   
Chairperson, NDMC stated during evidence  as under:- 
“…with regard to unauthorized construction in buildings, the 
records prior to 2002, are being reconstructed.” 
 
To a specific query regarding stat us of rest of the premises in 
which unauthorized construction has been detected, Ministry of Home 
Affairs in their written reply stated as follows:- 

“The NDMC area has been divided in two zones. In North Zone 172 cases 
of unauthorized construction have be en detected, out of which 85 have 
been demolished/sealed and remaining cases are pending be fore different 
courts including public hearing by competent author ity in NDMC. In South 
Zone 246 cases of unauthor ized construction  have been detected, out of 
which 60 have been demolished/sealed and remaining cases are pending 
before different courts including public hearing by competent authority in 
NDMC.” 
 
When the Committee asked as to whether premises with 
unauthorised constructions were demolis hed completely or partly, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs in their written reply stated that only 
unauthorized portions of the premises have been demolished 
completely.  
  
 Chairperson, NDMC furt her stated as under:- 
 
“……..The unauthorized constructions are of two 
types……………….. that are either agai nst  the building bye-laws  
or building regulations or area not in consonance with the 
sanctioned  building plans.  The other kind that exists is the 
encroachment on public land, public  pathways, roads, footpaths 
etc.  A large number of religious structures exist on public 
pathways, footpaths etc.  In respe ct of these, the Government of 
NCT of Delhi has a Religious Committee under the Principal 
Secretary (Home) before whom most of these issues are placed 
and a very studied decision is conv eyed with regard to the kind of 
action that needs to be taken.  In order to ensure that they do not 
spread and do not proliferate, we have already video-graphed all 
this and these are going to be up- dated every three to six months 
and given for records.  Any respon sibility for the expansion – 
unauthorized expansion – on public  roads will be pinned on the 
official who is in charge of the area.” 
 
On construction of unauthorized re ligious structures,  NDMC 
stated in a written reply as under:- 

“Strict instructions have been issued for ensuring that 
unauthorized constructions don’t take  place on public path-ways.  
The Area Inspectors are respo nsible for ensuring that no 
unauthorized construction takes place.” 
 
The Chairperson, NDMC  further stated during evidence  
as under:- 
“Hearings are being given in cases where complaints subsist.  
Some of these cases are before the Courts.  We are trying to bring 
back the records by reconstructi ng them through various means, 
that is, either on the ground surf ace by the staff or complaints 
received, from time to time, f rom various members of the public 
and others. 
 
………will come to disposal of cases.   As far as the cases 
before 31 March 2004 are concerned, notic es have been issued, 
and hearings are being held on a weekly basis even at my level.  
An attempt is being made to dispose of these cases very quickly.” 
 
The  Committee   enquired    whether   any   norms   have been 
fixed for construction/renovation in buildings in Lutyen Zone area. 
0Ministry of Home Affairs in  their written reply stated that 
construction/renovation of buildings  in Lutyens Bunglow Zone (LBZ) 
area is regulated as per guidelines issued on 8.2.88 by the Government 
of India.  The guidelines hav e been incorporated in the Zonal 
Development Plan of Zone (Division) – ‘D’, New Delhi. 
To a further query, Ministry of Home Affairs stated that a joint 
survey with L&DO was carried out for Luyten Bungalow Zone (LBZ) 
Area in January, 2005 and during this survey out of 771 properties only 
554 were surveyed.   217 properties were either locked or not allowed. 
On being asked about the action  taken/proposed to be taken 
against unauthorized construction, Mini stry of Home Affairs in their 

written reply stated that action against unauthorized construction noticed 
in this area is taken as per the NDMC Act, 1994. 
  
Slums and Jhuggis 
The Committee desired to know whether any survey has been 
conducted to know the exact number of  existing jhuggi clusters and slum 
basties in NDMC area. Ministry of Home Affairs in their written reply stated as 
under:- 
“As  per the survey conducted by the DDA in December, 1990 
there were 56 JJ Cluster in NDMC area.  Thereafter, on 
verification of these clusters by the NDMC staff it was detected 
that there were 5 more clusters.  Hence the total number of JJ 
clusters in 1990 were 61.  Out  of these 61 clusters, 25 clusters 
have since been removed up to 2002.
  
Presently, there are 37  clusters comprising  of approximately 7200 
jhuggies having approximate    population of 30,000 in NDMC 
area.” 
 
On being asked  whether Suprem e Court has given any order 
regarding providing sanitation for slums or else clearing the slum out of 
the city, the Ministry of Home Affairs in their written reply stated as 
follows:- 
“In LPA(W.P.) No. 940 of 2004, the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi in 
the matter of Nafees Ahmed and others vs. MCD & others, has 
taken a view that encroachers and squatters on public land should 
be removed expeditiously without any pre-requisite requirement of 
providing alternative sites. An appe al has been filed against this 
judgement which is pending in the Supreme Court vide SLP No. 
12144-12252/2005. NDMC is pursuing the matter of relocation of 
JJ Clusters existing on NDMC land with Slum & JJ Department of 
MCD. The policy of relocation is in accordance with GNCTD 
guidelines and Slum & JJ Wing of MCD in the nodal agency 

designated for relocation of JJ Cl usters on NDMC land. For other 
clusters, the land owning agency is responsible for the same. 
However, NDMC is extending sani tation services to all slums 
situated in its jurisdiction.” 
 
The Committee further desired to know about the steps  
taken by NDMC for removal of slums and their resettlement and Ministry 
of Home Affairs stated in their written reply as under:- 
 
“Most of the JJ clusters in NDMC area, say 98% are located on the 
land of CPWD, L&DO, Railway, P&T, Defence etc. As per policy of 
the Government, it is the responsibility of the land owning agency 
to remove and relocate the JJ cl uster after observing requisite 
formalities.  For relocation and rehabilitation purposes, the JJ & 
Slum Department of MCD is the nodal agency who receives 
relocation charges and provides plot to the displaced jhuggi 
dwellers.  As per amended polic y of the Government, there are 
two categories of JJ Clusters. 
 
(a) Pre 1990 jhuggies (b) jhuggies in between January 1990 to 
31.12.98.  Different rates of relocation charges viz. Rs. 29,000/- for 
pre 1990 jhuggi and Rs. 20,000/- f or jhuggi between January, 
1990 to 31.12.98 have been fixed. 
 
Under the above scheme, 25 JJ clus ters have been removed from 
the NDMC area and the displaced j huggi dwellers have been 
provided alternative plot by the Slum and JJ Deptt. of MCD. 
 
Regarding remaining 37 clusters the land owning agency has to 
take action for their relocation.” 
The Committee further enquired as to whether there are any 
specific provisions in the NDMC Act, 1994 for checking growth of slums 
in NDMC area, Ministry of Home Affairs stated in their reply as under:- 
“There are no specific provision s in the NDMC Act, 1994 for 
checking growth of slums in NDMC area.  However, Sections 221 

to 227 of NDMC Act, 1994 empow ers the Council to check any 
kind of unauthorized  encroachment  on public place and street.  In 
view of this provision, unauthor ized growth in the form of JJ 
clusters/jhuggies is checked by the Enforcement agency of the 
NDMC. However, land owning age ncies are responsible for the 
protection of their land.” 
 
The Committee desired to know about the  efforts being  
made for removal of encroachment on the land lying unused for 
construction of  electric sub stations at variou s places, where almost all 
the plots allotted by Land and Development Office  are full of 
jhuggies/encroachment. The Ministry of Home Affairs  stated in evidence 
as under:- 
“Action for evictions of land from the Jhuggi dwellers for 
construction of Electric Sub Stat ion at (i) Harish Chander Mathur 
Lane (ii) Red Cross R oad No. 2, Sarojini Na gar, near Vivekanand 
Camp II, Chankaya Puri near Bapu  Dham Service Centre, near 
Sanjay Camp Park, Chankaya Puri is under active consideration of 
the Chief Engineer (Elect.) with concerned authorities.” 
  
The Committee asked as to what e fforts are being made to make 
NDMC area slum free in view of  the forth coming Commonwealth 
Games in 2010 and also the strate gy drawn up to rehabilitate the slum 
dwellers.  The Ministry of Home Affairs replied during evidence as 
under:- 
“There are 41 Jhuggi/Clusters in NDMC area out of which 6 are on 
NDMC land, 2 on Race Course Road, 10 on CPWD land, one on  
NSCI, one on Defence land,  18 on L&DO land, one at Flying Club 
and two on Railways land. 
 
All the 41 No. of  jhuggi cl usters have been recently surveyed 
which fall in NDMC area.  After d epositing compensation, action 
for removal/reallocation of JJ Clusters will be taken by the  owning 

agencies.  It is presumed that  NDMC area will become slum free 
keeping in view the forth coming Common Wealth Games 2010.” 
  
On being asked  about the JJ Clusters, Chairperson  
NDMC stated as under:- 
“………… A survey  was do ne jointly by the Land and 
Development Officer (L&DO) and the NDMC in January, 2005.  
Out of the seven clusters, only five  clusters remain on the land 
which has been allotted to NDMC.   It is the responsibility of the 
land-owning agency – I repeat ‘land- owning agency’ – to remove 
JJ Clusters.  Therefore, all t he concerned agencies have been 
notified.  They are all Central Government agencies.  They have to 
ensure that these remaining clus ters are removed within a time 
frame. 
 
As far as clusters, which rema in on NDMC land, are concerned, 
we have already acquired land from  the DDA.  Money has been 
paid at a place called Bakkarwala.  The Slum and JJ Wing of the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi has been entrusted with the task of 
relocating the eligible members out of these clusters at 
Bakkarwala.” 
 
On being asked as to what action plan is drawn up for 
removal/reallocation of  Jhuggi Clusters from the NDMC area and the 
progress  achieved in this regard and also by when is the NDMC area 
expected to become slum free, Mini stry of Home Affairs stated in a 
written reply as under:- 
“NDMC has been allotted a piece of  land measuring two acres at 
Bakkarwala for relocation and  more sites allowed in case the 
need arises in future. 
 
It has also been decided that a grou nd level survey at the  allotted 
site will be done.  Apart from this, the Slum and JJ Department, 
MCD is being requested to provide infrastructure at the allotted 
land and also intimate NDMC the cost of development charges so 
that all JJ Clusters existing on NDMC land could be relocated. 

 
The relocation of JJ Clusters in  NDMC area on the land owned by 
other agencies/departments is the responsibility of the concerned 
Land Owning Agencies and consultations are being held with 
L&DO also with regard to these.   All efforts are being made for 
making the NDMC area slum-free.” 

Chapter V 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
(i) Representation received from the residents of Park 
Lane 
 
On receiving a representation from the residents of Park 
Lane adjoining Indoor Stadium regarding nuisance caused due 
to misuse of parking area for cooking and catering purpose, 
the Committee asked Ministry of Home Affairs to furnish the 
details in this regard. In their reply, Ministry of Home Affairs 
stated as under:- 
“New Delhi Municipal Counc il is in receipt of 
representation made by the res idents of Park Lane 
adjoining Indoor Stadium, Talkatora  Garden. 
 
Indoor Stadium is given on rent for a variety of functions 
which include programmes org anized by the Central 
Government and the Governm ent of NCT of Delhi, 
National and International Indoor Sports competitions, 
Cultural/Musical programmes, School Functions, 
Seminars, Annual General Meetings, Conferences, etc. 
 
At times, the vacant spac e adjacent to the Indoor 
Stadium is also rented out for cooking and catering 
services for the delegates of  the functions, but not in 
every function.  Generally the vacant space is let out for 
an average of 2-3 days in a month.  Whenever the 
vacant space is let out, the staff of Health Department, 
NDMC clears the left over food by 10 a.m. the following 
morning.  All effort s are made by NDMC to ensure that 
the vacant space is kept cleaned all the time.  During the 
function, in order to meet the demand of water for public, 
additional tankers are deploy ed around the Stadium as 
well as in the Park Lane.  It is  true that at  times vehicles 
are also parked in the Park  Lane by the organizers 

themselves after obtaining permission of DCP (Traffic) 
directly.” 
 
On being asked as to what  are the guidelines under 
which it is ensured that fu nctions organized in the Indoor 
Stadium are done in a   manner which do not cause  noise 
pollution and disturbance to nearby residents, Ministry of 
Home Affairs in their reply stated as under:- 
“Although no guidelines/instructions have been stipulated 
in this regard, the organizers of the functions are being 
asked to clean up the parki ng space immediately after 
the function is over, asked to ensure that residents are 
not disturbed in the night.” 
 
(ii) Misuse of Gardens 
When the Committee invited the attention of the 
Chairperson, NDMC towards the inconvenience caused to the 
public due to misuse of gardens by playin g crickets, hockey, 
etc. in the garden maintain ed by NDMC, Secretary, NDMC 
stated in a written reply as under:- 
“In Talkatora Garden, ther e is an earmarked separate 
area called “cricket ground” w here cricket and football 
playing is officially permitted as per NDMC  policy.  This 
area is also booked for pl aying tournament and matches 
on nominal rates approved by NDMC. 
 
Nehru Park and Lodhi Gardens  are not permitted to be 
used for playing purpose.  The staff at these places are 
cautioned to be extra vigil ant in stopping public from 
playing games like cricket, football, hockey, etc.  Police 
help is also obtained in case of resistance by the public.” 
 

(iii) Corruption Charges 
On perusal of  the list detailing the corruption charges against 
NDMC officers in which CBI has tak en cognizance during the last five 
years and the cases  pending before Court/Special Judge, the 
Committee pointed out that out of the 10 cases, 9 cases were connected 
with accepting illegal gratification and asked about the  steps  being 
taken by NDMC to check demand of illegal gratification by the 
employees. 
Ministry of Home Affairs in their reply regarding   steps taken to  
check demand of illegal gratification by the employees spelled out the 
following measures: wide publicity for rules and regulations is  made 
through hoardings and publication; si mplification of procedure has been 
made and even the tenders are being shown on website; there is 
transparency in transaction s; full information is given as mentioned in 
Delhi Public Information Act and G eneral Public is in formed as per law; 
Public grievances are solved throu gh Janta Milan and all Heads of 
Departments; stringent action against the defaulters; close supervision 
and monitoring of the cases; to check quality control frequent 
inspections are being done, etc. 
 
(iv) Commonwealth Games 
 
On being asked about the role of  NDMC in preparations for the 
prestigious 2010 Commonwealth Games, the Chairperson, NDMC 
stated as under:- 
 

“As regards the organization of  the Commonwealth Games, 
NDMC is one of the team player s in it.  In addition to the 
projects that the Government of Delhi and Government of 
India are going to propose, the NDMC will contribute its bit 
by upgrading the stadia, etc.” 
The representative of U rban Development Division, 
Government of Delhi stated in this regard as under:- 
“As far as Government of Delhi is concerned, we have 
embarked on a very ambitious programme for the 
Commonwealth Games to prepare ourselves and Delhi to 
meet all the requirements of international standards, in 
collaboration with Government of India, Sports Authority of 
India, CPWD and various  other agencies.  There is a 
Standing Committee under the Chairmanship of the Chief 
Secretary, which meets very frequently.  Major Departments 
in Delhi Government like the M unicipal Corporation of Delhi, 
NDMC, Transport Department, Tourism Department are 
called.  They have already decided their schemes.  Those 
schemes have been approved by the Government and we 
are going to take them up. 
 
This is in two parts. One is preparations for inside the stadia 
which are mainly with the Government of India and the 
Sports Authority of India, and which are to be maintained by 
the CPWD or their ow n agencies.  Outside the stadia, the 
parking places, the roads, the ground, parks, meeting 
places, markets, shopping centers, places of tourist interest, 
health and education and comm unity activity will be our 
responsibility.  We have already formulated plans for Rs. 
1,314 crore and they have been di scussed in the Committee 
of Ministers.   These Departments have decided their 
schemes and they have been approved.  We are going 
ahead on this.” 
 
 
 

The witness further stated as under:- 
 
“The DDA, of course, is a very  important partner.  They have 
come up with the games village.  They have engaged 
international consultants to suggest the steps to be taken, 
where the updating is required , which stadia are to be 
changed, etc.  We are going ahead very systematically in 
this area.” 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
1. The Committee took up the subject ‘New Delhi 
Municipal Council’ (NDMC) for  examination  and had 
detailed interactions  with  the representatives of 
Ministry of Home Affairs and New Delhi Municipal 
Council.  In the light of the landmark Constitution (74 th 
Amendment) Act,  1992 which provided  for 
constitutional status   and a distinctive  role to 
municipalities,  the  NDMC Act, 1994 was enacted by 
Parliament providing special status to New Delhi 
Municipal Council. NDMC area comprises  the territory 
that has been described as Lutyen’s Delhi which 
includes Rashtrapati Bhaw an; Parliament House; 
Supreme Court; Central Government Offices; Diplomatic 
Missions; residences of Ministers, Members of 
Parliament, Diplomats and  Central Government 
employees; and also a  few private residential properties 
and shopping complexes.  After going into the working 
of NDMC, the Committee are of the view that there is 
sufficient scope for improvem ent in several spheres of 
its working.  These aspects have been dealt with in 
detail by the Committee in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.  The Committee note that Balakrishna Committee  
constituted to look into  the manner in which the 
governance of the Union Territory  should be carried on, 

also looked into the functioning of the municipal 
arrangements in the area.  That committee had 
recommended that  NDMC should consist of a certain 
number of Members elected on the basis of  adult  
franchise and an equal numb er of members appointed 
by the Lt. Governor and the Vice Chairman, NDMC 
should be elected by members  themselves.    As the 
area covered by NDMC includes not only  Government 
offices, Diplomatic Missions, etc.,  but also  about three 
lakh resident population, th e Committee are of the view 
that the recommendations  of  Balakrishna  Committee 
in this regard need to be reconsidered  by the 
Government in all seriousness.  This attains even 
greater significance in view of poor participation of 
nominated members of the Council in the meetings of 
the Council and its committees.     The Committee also 
note that according to Secti on 4(2) of the NDMC Act, 
1994, the Members of Parliament representing the 
constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the New 
Delhi area, shall be special invitees for the meetings of 
the Council without a right to vote.  On the other hand, 
the MLAs representing  constituencies which comprise 
wholly or partly the New Delhi area enjoy the   right to 
vote in  the Council meetings.  The Home Secretary was    
candid in  admission  during evidence : “I think it stands 
to reason that Members of Parliament should also have 
a voting right”.    The Committee, therefore, stress that 

Government should review the desirability of modifying 
composition of the Council as recommended by 
Balakrishna Committee keeping in view the basic 
democratic principles and also granting voting right at 
the Council meetings to the Members of Parliament  
representing the constituencies  comprising wholly or 
partly the area under the jurisdiction  of NDMC.  
3.  The Committee on Subordinate Legislation in their 
5th Report (Second Lok Sabha) had recommended that 
ordinarily Rules should be framed under an Act as soon 
as possible after the commencement of the Act and in 
no case this period should exceed six months.  The 
Committee take serious note th at though the NDMC Act 
came into force in 1994, NDMC has not framed the Rules 
and Regulations under it even after more than a decade 
of its commencement. Section 24 of the Act provides 
that the quorum necessary fo r transaction of business 
at a meeting  of the Council shall be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  The wo rd, ‘prescribed’ has been 
defined under Section 2 (34)  of the Act as prescribed by 
rules made  under this Act.  The Committee are at a loss 
to understand how the Council has been regulating its 
meetings without prescribing the quorum and how the 
Council  continues to function under the saving clause 
of the Act, i.e. under the Rules and Bye-laws which were 
framed way back in  the year 1911.  The Committee feel 
that the delay in framing the Rules has defeated the very 

purpose of the  Act as its provisions cannot be fully 
implemented as contemplated until  Rules and 
Regulations are put in place.   The Home  Secretary 
admitted during his deposition before the Committee 
that  there has been inordi nate delay in framing the 
Rules under the Act  and assured the Committee that 
the  Bye-laws shall be in place before the end of 2005.  
The Committee trust that Rul es must have been framed 
and notified by  Gover nment by now as per the 
assurance given before the Committee.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Government in this regard. 
4. The Committee find that NDMC receives 
substantial grants-in-aid from Government and the 
deposition by the Chairperson, NDMC in this regard that 
NDMC is a municipality with a difference and it does not 
depend on State or Central gr ants for its operations is 
not fully justified. The Committee also  note with 
concern that the Council has not been able to utilize 
fully the annual budget allocations  since 1999-2000.   
The unspent amount with the Council was Rs. 3,124.37 
lakh, Rs. 7,452.45 lakh, Rs. 9,696.85 lakh, Rs. 9,932.97 
lakh  and Rs. 8,229.64 lakh in each of the succeeding 
years during the period 1999-2000 to 2003-04.  The 
reasons for the under-utilisation of funds put forward  
by NDMC are that :  the capital expenditure is taken from 
year to year basis, so me of these estimates are 

projected even before the projects are  properly and 
fully conceptualized, there are certain procedures before 
the actual expenditure c ould take place, etc.  The 
Committee are not satisfied  with these reasons 
adduced  by the Council for under-utilisation of funds. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Council 
should  ensure that the projections made in its Budget 
estimates are based on  realistic assessment of 
requirement of funds.   A system of development 
accounting based on modern principles of municipal  
management and accounts need s to be  put in place 
which should make  costs of  services transparent for 
both NDMC and the public. The Committee would like to 
be informed about the preci se steps taken by NDMC in 
this regard. 
5.   The Committee are  perturbed to note  the 
staggering amount of outstanding property tax which 
has reached  Rs. 329.25 cror e as in 2004-05 from Rs. 
78.28 crore in 1994-95.  The Co mmittee further note that  
as on 31.3. 2005,   there were 88 major defaulters  of 
property tax whose outstandings were  above the range 
of Rs. 50 lakh each.  While the quantum of arrears of 
outstanding property tax agai nst these defaulters is 
stated to be  Rs. 197 crore, the amount recoverable on 
this account  works out to over Rs. 20 crore as per the 
information furnished to th e Committee.  The measures 
taken by NDMC for recover ing the outstanding dues 

from defaulters, such as  attachment of rent, moving 
Estate Officer for recovery unde r Public Premises Act,  
litigations and reminders have not yielded the desired 
results.  In many cases th e recovery of property 
tax/service charges  is  locked up in dispute, litigation or 
remand.  The Committee are al so deeply concerned to 
note that half of the arrears  for recovery pertain to 
hotels.  The formula under which the hotels were being 
assessed prior to 1994 has been  set aside by the Court 
and the arrears are being reassessed as per Court order.  
The Chief Auditor, NDMC has also  pointed out in the 
Annual Audit Report that there have been cases of 
under assessment of tax resulting  in loss of revenue 
and undue delay in finalization of assessment of 
rateable value of property and tax thereon.   The 
Committee view these facts se riously and  recommend 
that specific time-frame should be fixed for 
assessment/re-assessment of  tax as also  for recovery 
of  arrears and  concerted  efforts should be made for an 
early recovery of the outstanding dues.   
6. The Committee are also constrained to find that 
there were press reports and  audit observations on the  
failure of NDMC in assessing tax  pertaining to  85 
properties located at Anant Ram Dairy, though basic 
amenities were being provided by NDMC to the colony.    
What is more distressing is the fact that NDMC has 
failed to explain before th e Committee as to how NDMC 

was obliged to provide ci vic amenities to these 
buildings considered to be unauthorised and even not 
coming under the purview of th e tax net.   It is also not 
clear on what considerations and at what level it was 
decided to provide civic amenities to these 
unauthorised buildings. Th ese facts  lead to  the 
presumption that NDMC has possibly aided and abetted  
unauthorized constructions by providing them the 
amenities.   Under the circumstances, the Committee 
recommend that an in-depth and thorough enquiry be 
conducted into the entire sequence of events of this 
case and those responsible be brought to book.  
Although the Committee we re informed during 
evidence held on 19 th July, 2005 that the Council had 
taken a decision that without prejudice to the status of 
the buildings, they shall be  assessed and notices shall 
be issued to the owners, it had not been implemented till 
August, 2005.  The Commi ttee trust that NDMC  would 
earnestly pursue  the matter a nd  recover the arrears of 
property tax as admissible under the rules without any 
further delay.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the specific action taken in this regard. 
7.    Government buildings under NDMC Act, 1994 are 
exempt from payment of property tax.  In lieu of property 
tax, NDMC is  levying ser vice charges on these 
buildings through executive in structions issued by the 
Ministry of Finance.  While service charges are being 

paid by some Ministries/Departments, others have 
raised objections to the executive instructions. As a 
result, an amount of Rs. 3410 lakh was outstanding 
against Government Depart ments as on 31.03.2005.   
The Committee also note that at present the service 
charges are being levied on the basis of executive 
orders issued by the Ministry of Finance without any 
statutory  provisions  in this  regard.  In view of the 
constraints being faced in the recovery of service 
charges, NDMC has been ad vised to carry out an 
amendment to the NDMC Act to provide  for collection of  
service charges  in lieu of pr operty tax.  At the time of 
evidence taken by the Co mmittee, the proposed  
amendment was stated to be under active consideration 
of the Delhi Government.  The Committee desire that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs should take prompt steps for 
amending the NDMC Act.     
As stated during the course of examination of this 
subject,  the proposal for appointing a person or an 
authority with statutory powers for valuation of 
properties and calculation of service charges  should  
also be considered seriously so that NDMC is not 
denied of its rightful dues.   Recovery of outstanding 
service charges from Government Departments  should  
also be pursued at the highest level and the Committee  
apprised of the  results achieved in this regard.   
8. The Committee have been informed that it has 

been  decided  that NDMC would be paid licence fee by  
Government Departments at  CPWD rates and  that the 
license fee shall be increased for a period of five years 
at 20% per annum to bring it closer to the market rates 
and the position shall be  r eviewed after five years.  It 
has been pointed out that th e Directorate of Estates 
itself has not implemented the decision so far and 
NDMC is facing difficulties in recovering  huge 
outstandings of license fee from Government 
Departments.  The Committee therefore, desire that 
Ministry of Home Affairs  should take up the matter at 
the highest level with the Ministry of Urban Development 
so that  user Departments  are directed  to comply 
strictly with the decision for payment of  license fee.  
9. NDMC used to  procur e 140 million litres per day  
(MLD) of filtered water  from Delhi Jal Board.   When the 
supply was reduced to 120 ML D, NDMC generated about 
20 MLD water through its ow n efforts by installing 137 
tubewells and 5000 deep well hand pumps to meet the 
short supply.  In order to meet the growing demand for 
drinking water in future and to redress the complaints 
on account of no supply or low pressure in water lines, 
the Committee  suggest that  NDMC should make 
advance planning for  modernising and augmenting its 
system of water supply for m eeting the  demand in its 
area in an efficient manner. 

10.  Electricity Department of NDMC is responsible for 
distribution network upto the supply point of the 
consumers in the entire NDMC area and for 
development of power distr ibution system to meet the 
growing demand of  various categories of consumers.   
The Committee have been info rmed that some of the 
problems of power supply were  due to tripping of the 
grid and burn out of some transformers, which needed 
replacement.   Since it is es sential to ensure  overall 
improvement  in  the servi ces provided by the Council 
as well as  uninterrupted  power supply to the 
consumers, the Committee suggest that NDMC should 
motivate its maintenance staf f through appropriate 
incentives and implement their short-term and long-term  
plans strictly according to time schedules prescribed for 
the purpose. 
11.  As regards over billing and faulty working of water 
and electricity meters, the Committee are informed that 
there is an established procedur e to rectify over billing 
and faulty working of water and electricity meters.  The 
Committee is of the  opinion that this is an area that 
requires utmost attention by NDMC and steps should be 
taken  to check over billing and for replacing faulty 
water and electricity meters with promptitude. They also 
desire that the programme for modernization of Water 
Meter Workshop should be taken up in right earnest and 

completed within a specific time frame. 
12. One of the important statutory functions of NDMC 
is to   ensure daily cleaning of  streets and removal of 
garbage so as to provide n eat and clean environment in 
the areas within its jurisd iction.  According to the 
Ministry, cleaning and sweeping of roads and 
surroundings and removing of garbage are being 
undertaken on all days including Sundays and holidays 
and sustained efforts are bei ng made for improving the 
attendance of safai karamcharies. However,  a study 
conducted by Audit has brought out that the claims 
made by the Ministry have a hollow ring to it as  16 
Resident Welfare Associations had reported that  
cleaning, sweeping and removal of garbage were  not 
attended to by the staff daily and complaints in this 
regard were not attended to promptly.  It is distressing 
to note that Audit Report 2001 pointed out that NDMC 
paid a hefty sum of  Rs . 2.14 crore to private  
transporters for removal of garbage during the period 
from 1997 to 2000, despite  the fact that NDMC had more 
than the required fleet of its own vehicles.  From the 
information  made available to them, the  Committee find 
that NDMC hired private vehicles thus having  at its 
disposal 81 trucks against the requirement of 55 trucks 
in 1997-98, 92 trucks against the requirement of 71 
trucks in 1998-99 and 92 trucks against the requirement 
of 84 trucks in 1999-2000.  NDMC admitted that low 

utilization of fleet of trucks for removal of garbage has 
been on account of number of holidays, breakdown of 
vehicles, lack of will to wo rk in a Government set up, 
absenteeism, etc.  In the opinio n of the Committee   it is 
a clear manifestation  of lack of  supervision, monitoring 
and work culture in NDMC. There is need for 
reorganization and motivation of  the entire division of 
NDMC that is responsible for maintenance, cleaning and 
removal of garbage.  The  Committee, therefore,  
recommend that NDMC should devise a scientific 
mechanism  for  close moni toring and supervision at all 
levels  with a view to ensuring  optimum utilization    of 
manpower and fleet of trucks available for daily cleaning 
and removal of garbage.  
13.  NDMC generates about 275 metric tones of 
garbage per day which is tran sported to  MCD landfill 
sites incurring an expense of Rs. 2 crore per annum. 
The Committee have been inform ed that even the MCD  
landfill sites are going to be  filled up very soon and  
NDMC does  not have any scientific state of the art 
landfill. The Committee, however, note with satisfaction 
that taking clue from a suggestion made by them during 
the briefing, NDMC is presently  working on a new 
project to set up state-of-art compost plant with the 
facility for segregation of all types of waste and a 
Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF) plant with private sector 
participation and the plant is expected to be set up in a 

year. The Committee trust that NDMC would pursue this 
project earnestly and make all out efforts to set up the 
plant within the time frame  worked out for this purpose.  
They expect to be apprised of the progress made by 
NDMC in this regard. 
14.  NDMC has a 150-bed General Hospital, one 50- 
bed Maternity Hospital and 36 dispensaries to cater to 
the health requirements  of the people in the NDMC area.  
Reportedly, there are comp laints that doctors and 
medicines are generally no t available in the NDMC run 
hospitals and dispensaries causing hardships to the 
patients. Despite surpri se checks and action taken 
against absentees and chronic late comers, the situation 
does not seem to be fully satisf actory.  In the opinion of 
the Committee, there is an im perative  need to improve 
the overall working of the hospitals by ensuring 
punctuality of doctors and staff and also by maintaining  
equipments and providing medicines. They, therefore, 
stress that appropriate steps should be taken to 
improve the functioning of NDMC run hospitals  and 
dispensaries. The Committee also recommend that  
complaint/ suggestion boxes be kept at  prominent 
locations  in the hospitals and dispensaries run by 
NDMC and the Health Department should make 
arrangements to collect the complaints and suggestions 
from the  boxes every fortnight and take corrective 
measures for improving the  health services.   

15.   There are as many as 87 schools being run by 
NDMC including 6 Navyug Senior Secondary Schools 
and 3 Navyug Primary Schools.  The Committee are 
surprised to note that insp ite of informing them that 
existing number of schools are adequate to cater to the 
needs of NDMC area, construction of a Senior 
Secondary School opposite Birla Mandir is under 
consideration for which an amount to Rs. 6.50 crore has 
been approved by the Council. During evidence, the 
Chairperson of NDMC inform ed that enrolments in 
NDMC schools have dropped during the last two years.  
In view of the above fact s, the Committee have serious 
doubts whether the decision to start  a new school has 
been taken after making proper assessment of the 
needs of the area. The Commi ttee, therefore, desire that 
the decision to start the new  school should be reviewed 
at the highest level  after making a realistic assessment 
of the need of the area and the Committee be apprised 
of the outcome thereof.  
16. The Committee note with concern that out of 3091 
students of NDMC schools who appeared in class X  
examinations during the  last five years, only 54 
students scored  marks betw een 75% and 89% and only 
4 students scored above 90% marks. Out of 2510 
students who appeared in class XII examinations during 
the same period, only 39 students scored marks 
between 75% and 89% and n one of the students could 

score above 90% marks. It is a clear indication that the 
quality of education being imparted to students in 
NDMC owned schools is not upto the mark. Although 
NDMC has informed the Committee  during evidence 
that it will give  emphasis on improving the  
infrastructure in schools, timely supply of books, 
uniforms and upgradation and modernization of 
education, they would  li ke to be assured in more 
concrete terms of the seriousness  NDMC  attaches to 
achieving these objectives. The Committee would also 
like NDMC to concentrate  more on improving the 
quality of education  so that the students of NDMC 
schools may achieve standards and gradings 
comparable to  public schools. A concrete action plan 
should be drawn up for achieving this end and the 
Committee  be apprised of the same.  
17. At present the repair of roads  is being carried out 
manually through 18 Road Service Centres spread 
across the NDMC area. It is also stated that efforts are 
being made to mechanise p atch and pothole repair of 
the roads.  According to  the Home Secretary, the 
common problem in Delhi is  multiplicity of agencies 
providing various services such as telephones, sewer 
and others where digging of roads becomes a 
prerequisite and NDMC has to  re-lay the roads.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongl y feel that the process of 
mechanization of road repa ir should be introduced 

without any further delay so as to ensure time and cost 
effectiveness in maintenance of roads.  They further 
desire that there should be proper coordination based 
on GIS system and agreement among different service 
providers and it should be ma de mandatory for all such  
agencies to repair the road s immediately after they have 
finished their work. 
18.  The Horticulture Department of NDMC is 
responsible for maintaining 6 gardens, 49 roundabouts 
and 82 small parks in residential colonies for which total 
manpower in the  Department is 1492 out of which 1338 
are Malis.   Although NDMC has claimed that the green 
areas are maintained in the best possible manner, the 
Committee strongly feel th at the maintenance and 
upkeep of parks and round abouts in NDMC area is not 
up to the mark despite having as many as 1338 Malis on 
the payroll of NDMC.  Evidently, the  personnel in this 
Department are not properly deployed and they also  
lack proper training, gui dance and motivation.  
Considering the fact that NDMC area, being the heart of 
the national capital, should receive highest priority as 
far as maintenance and beautification of green areas are 
concerned,  the Committee desi re that  the Horticulture 
Department should accordingly, draw up an action plan  
for imparting adequate training to its personnel so as to 
ensure better upkeep of the parks and roundabouts.  
They would like to be apprised of  follow up action taken 

by NDMC in this regard. 
19.  The Committee express their satisfaction over the 
fact that NDMC has made a provision for  rain water 
harvesting  in its building by e-laws and it does not give 
Completion Certificate to an y new building unless it has 
rainwater harvesting provision in it.  NDMC is stated to 
have completed 17 such works in the buildings 
belonging to it, three works for rainwater harvesting are 
in progress and has also r eferred 85 such projects to 
the Central Ground Water Board  for their advice.  The 
Committee suggest that in order to optimally utilize the 
rain water for being used for various purposes  in the 
city, NDMC should explore the possibility that even the 
existing  buildings in the area are  gradually made to 
adopt water harvesting   techniques.  In order to achieve 
this objective,  the possibility of extending certain 
incentives to such buildi ng owners who go for water 
harvesting works  should also be considered seriously. 
20.  The  total number of vehicles registered in Delhi 
has increased more than six times and the number of 
private cars, motor cycles, etc. has increased more than 

seven times during the past twenty years.  The 
Committee find it astonishing that despite such a 
substantial increase in the num ber of vehicles in Delhi, 
NDMC has not yet framed any “parking policy” to meet 
the requirements of people visiting some of the already 
over-crowded and prominent  places within its area.  
What is more distressing  is the fact that NDMC 
displayed a lackadaisical attitude in the  matters 
connected with allotment of parking lots and could not 
prevent running of  unauthorized parking lots in its area 
as substantiated  by the  in formation furnished to the 
Committee.   Even Audit has brought  out that  as many 
as seven parking lots were allotted in 2000 and 2001 
without obtaining proper approval and two parking lots 
were being run unauthorizedly during the same period. 
Contractors who were allotted four parking lots in 1995 
for three years had not until March, 2003  paid 
outstanding license fee of Rs. 13.25 lakh due upto July, 
1998  and no efforts were made by the Council to pursue 
recovery of the outstandings.  It goes without saying 
that such irregularities cannot be perpetuated without 
the connivance of employees in the Council who are 
responsible for regulating parking lots. The Committee 
take a very serious note of such irregularities in the 
Council and recommend that responsibility should be 
fixed for the irregularities, erring officials punished, 
defaulting contractors black-listed and the overdues 

recovered without any further delay. The follow up 
action taken in this regard sh ould be intimated to the 
Committee. The Committee  also desire NDMC to 
formulate a parking policy to re gulate traffic in  the area 
under its jurisdiction, to  take up the construction of 
proposed  multi-level parking lots at the earliest and 
take steps for setting up more multi level parking lots in 
its area. 
21. Complaints received in NDMC are registered in the 
Central Control Room.  Besi des this,  senior officers 
meet the public  as part of open darbar and bhagidari 
scheme of the Chief Minister  of Delhi. While proper 
record of complaints received  in the Central Control 
Room are being kept, no record of complaints received 
in open darbars is maintained by NDMC.   The 
Committee consider it  important that proper record of 
complaints received during open darbars is also 
maintained for their timely follow-up and redressal. They 
also stress  that keeping in  view the nature of 
responsibilities discharged by NDMC, the public 
grievances redressal machiner y in the Council should 
be further strengthened and concrete steps taken for 
timely redressal of grievances of the public. 
22.  In NDMC there were 1, 668 vacancies in different 
grades in July, 2005  again st the sanctioned strength of 
18,000 employees.  The Comm ittee have been informed 
that the vacancies in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts have been 

intimated to Delhi Staff Se lection Board and that no part 
of the Council has been suffering on account of vacant 
posts as  short-term contracts are resorted to in 
anticipation of the vacancies.  The Committee consider 
that such a large number of vacant posts is a clear 
manifestation of the adverse effect  on the delivery of 
services by NDMC and they, therefore desire that NDMC 
should pursue the matter earnestly with Delhi Staff 
Selection Board and get the vacancies filled up at the 
earliest to ensure smooth functioning of NDMC.  
23. It is disturbing to note that as against 418 notices 
served by the Unauthorized Construction Cell of NDMC, 
follow up action was taken by NDMC only in 145 cases 
for demolition or sealing of unauthorized premises. The 
remaining cases are pending before different courts 
including public hearing by competent authority in 
NDMC. The Committee have also been  informed that a  
number of religious structures exist in NDMC area on 
public pathways, footpaths, etc., and in order to ensure 
that they do not spread, these structures have been 
videographed and will be updated every three to six 
months. The Area Inspectors have been made 
responsible for checking any addition to the existing 
structures. From the d ata furnished before the 
Committee, it is quite evident that the Area Inspectors 
have not been vigilant e nough to check encroachments 
and unauthorized constructions. 

Distressingly, all records pertaining to 
unauthorized constructions/encroachments prior to 
January, 2002 are not traceable. To say the least, it is a 
clear indication of NDMC officials working hand in glove 
with those responsible for such encroachments. The 
Committee deplore such actions on the part of  public 
servants who are respon sible for protecting and 
safeguarding public pr operty. The Committee 
recommend that an enquiry be conducted into the entire 
episode connected with missing  official records 
pertaining to encroachments in NDMC area and the 
culprits be brought to book. The files should either be 
traced or  reconstructed within a specified time-frame 
and the encroachers  dealt with firmly. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of  the results achieved in the 
matter within six months from presentation of this 
Report. 
24. The Committee also note that during the joint 
survey for unauthorized constructions in Luyten 
Bungalow Zone Area condu cted by NDMC and Land & 
Development Office, only 554  out of 771 properties 
could be surveyed as 217 properties were either locked 
or not allowed. The Committee desire that the survey of  
the remaining 217 properties should also be conducted 
expeditiously and  appropriate action taken in cases of 
unauthorized construction noticed in this area. 

25. As per the latest survey  there are as many as 41 
jhuggi clusters in NDMC area of which five are on NDMC 
land and others are on Government owned land 
belonging to different Departments. After 25 jhuggi 
clusters were removed in 2002, there has not been much 
progress in removal and relocation of such 
encroachments in  NDMC area.  As for removal of such 
clusters on NDMC land,  NDM C has been allotted two 
acres of land at Bakkarwala for relocation of the 
jhuggies and the Slum and JJ Wing of MCD has been 
entrusted with the task of relocating the  eligible 
members out of  these cl usters. Since NDMC is 
responsible for monitoring encroachments on its land, 
the Committee desire that NDMC  must draw up a time-
frame for vacating the  jhuggi clusters on its land.   The 
Committee also  expect NDMC to  pay specific attention 
to removal of jhuggi clusters in its municipal area in 
view of the forthcoming Common Wealth Games  2010 
and apprise the Committee of  the progress achieved in 
this regard.  
26.  Talkatora Indoor Stadium is  given on rent for 
holding various functions and the parking space 
adjacent to the Indoor Stadiu m is also rented out for 
cooking and catering services for some of such 
functions.  It has been pointed out in a representation 
submitted to the Committee by the residents of Park 

Lane that  whenever the vacant space is let out, the 
leftover food and other garbage are not cleaned for 
days.  Moreover, tents  and fittings  are erected and 
dismantled late in the night causing  great deal of noise 
pollution and  disturbance to th e residents of Park Lane 
adjacent to the Indoor Stadiu m.   However, Ministry of 
Home Affairs informed th e Committee that efforts are 
made to clear the leftover food by 10 a.m. on the 
following day and the users of the Stadium are also  
being asked to clean up the parking space immediately 
after the functions are over.  In view of the serious 
problems being faced by nearby residents particularly 
during nights, the measures taken by NDMC for timely 
cleaning up, checking noise pollution and disturbance  
to the nearby residents seem to be inadequate.  The 
Committee, therefore,  re commend that NDMC should 
use space inside the Stadium for cooking food etc. and 
not  use the parking space for such purposes.   They 
also desire that NDMC should frame clear cut guidelines 
for users of Talkatora Indoor  Stadium and ensure their 
strict compliance by the u sers as well as NDMC staff. 
The concerned officers/staff should be invariably made 
accountable for any lapses in this regard.  
27. Yet another area requiri ng attention of NDMC  is 
the improper utilization  of the parks for playing cricket, 
football, etc.  Undoubtedly, such activities amount to 

misuse of gardens and inconvenience  to the morning 
walkers.   According to ND MC, an area  in Talkatora 
Garden has been earmarked  as cricket ground  where 
playing of cricket and footba ll is officially permitted.  
The Committee stress that the area meant for cricket 
ground should be clearly de marcated with boundaries 
so that other users of the park are not put to undue 
inconvenience.  
28.  The Committee are pertur bed to note that out of 10 
cases relating to corruption charges  against employees 
of NDMC pending before Courts/Special Judge, 9 cases 
relate to illegal gratification.  It gives an impression to 
the general public that corruption is rampant in NDMC. 
Undoubtedly, NDMC would be able to  improve its 
working only if corrupt practices and  cases of illegal 
gratification are totally weeded out. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that vigilance 
mechanism in NDMC should be further strengthened 
and stringent action  taken against employees who are 
found indulging in corrupt practices. 
29.  In view of the prestigious Commonwealth Games 
2010 to be hosted in the capital, there is an urgent need 
for all agencies of the Gover nment  including NDMC to 
gear up in order to provide infrastructure  on a par with 
international standards. In a ddition to  upgradation of 
the stadia,  parking areas; roads; parks; shopping 

centres; places of tourist interest; etc., are   also 
required to be brought up to the desired standards. 
Making NDMC  area slum free and  rehabilitation of the 
slum dwellers  are also so me of  matters requiring 
prompt attention of the Council.  The Committee, 
therefore, stress that NDMC should formulate an action 
plan for providing total  face lif t to the  city falling within 
its jurisdiction and have it implemented  within a 
stipulated and rigid time-fr ame. The Committee would 
like  to be apprised of specific steps being taken by 
NDMC in preparation for the Common Wealth Games 
2010. 
  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         C. KUPPUSAMI 
May 18, 2006                   Chairman 
Vaisakha 28,1928(S)                     Committee on Estimates 

ANNEXURE I  
DETAILS OF RESOURCE-WISE ANDYEAR-WISE REVENUE/RECEIPTS (INTERNAL & 
EXTERNAL) OF NDMC DURING LAST FIVE YEARS.      
     (Rs. In lac) 
S.No.   Items                         1999-2000       2000-01    2001-02          2002-03          2003-04    2004-05       200 5-06  
1. Tax Revenue 
     House Tax         7071.82    8945.92 11026.36 13281.02        12788.53    13300.00    12700.00 
     Duty on Transfer of        433.82      709.64     609.68     558.28   794.50    1200.00          900.00 
     Properties          11.30           4.44         7.15         5.96        11.37        11.90            12.50 
     Adv.Tax/Show/Theatre 
     Dog Tax etc.         201.92       336.11      428.35      628.48   638.61     1128.62       1252.00 
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----
Sub-Total: Tax Revenue        7718.86    9996.11     12071.54         14473.74         14233.01        15640.52       14864.50 
                                   _______________________________________________________________________________________
2. Non Tax Revenues 
   Building related receipts        107.78       131.54      117.93      139.88     84.32           109.30       81.00 
   Interest on Investments   0.00      3000.00           2454.48    3228.85           2727.75      17873.00 15567.00 
   Sale of Energy         41717.23   47031.98  48370.77            53187.64  53252.54    54000.00 55000.00 
   Sale of Water                  0.61            0.12              202.27                    0.10           1500.00        145 0.00       2000.00 
   Rent/Licence Fee from 
   Commercial Projects             5358.77       7584.31          7942.03              9402.83           7889.22        8000.00        8600.00 
   Fee & Fines   163.96        155.78            205.96                603.59              275.00         311.12          105.6 2 
   Other Misc. Receipts            3681.20     5114.77    3369.03    4922.14  3455.91       4125.44        3922.34 
                                   -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sub-Total:Non Tax Revenue  51029.55  63018.50  62662.47  71485.03   69184.74   85868.86      85275.96 
   _____________________________________________________________________________________ _
 
Total: Internal Receipts        58748.41     73014.61 74734.01            85958.77           83 417.75    101509.38   100140.46 
3.  External Assistance 
     Loan (Plan)                               704.05          75.00         0.00                 0.00                 0.00                    0.00           0.00 
     Grants-in-aid(Plan)                 1041.60      1090.97    1208.63   1016.64  1507.75              1625.00    1475.00 
     Grants-in-aid(Non-Plan)           675.08        770.85          1145.85           1364.64           1409.47              3104.00    2087.00 
  
Total:External Assistance            2420.73     1936.82           2354.48   2381.28          2917.22            4729.00     35 62.00 
Grand Total                                61169.14    74951.43         77088.49        88340.05         86334.97      106238.38   103702.46 
 

 
         A n n e x u r e  -  I I  
Functions 
 
 (1) Obligatory Functions : 
 
1. The construction, maintenance and cleansing of drains and 
drainage works and of public latrines, urinals and similar 
conveniences. 
 
2. The construction and mainte nance of works and means for 
providing supply of water for public and private purposes. 
 
3. The scavenging, removal and dispos al of filth, rubbish and other 
obnoxious or polluted matter. 
 
4. The construction or purc hase, maintenance, extension 
management to: 
  
i) Supply and distribution of electricity to the public; 
ii) Providing a sufficient supply  of pure and wholesome water; 
 
5. The reclamation of unhealthy localities, the removal of noxious 
vegetation and generally the abatement of all nuisances. 
 
6. The regulation of places for the disposal of the dead and the 
provisions and maintenance of place for the said purpose. 
 
1. The registration of births and deaths. 
 
2. Public vaccination and inoculation. 
 
3. Measures for preventing an d checking the spread of  
dangerous diseases. 
 
4. The establishment and maintenance of dispensaries and  
maternity and child welfare centers and the carrying out of 
other measures necessary for public medical relief. 
 
5. The construction and maintenance of municipal markets and  

 
regulation of all markets. 
 
6. The regulation and abatement of offensive or dangerous  
trade or practices. 
 
7. The security or removal of dangerous building and places. 
 
8. The construction, maintenance,  alteration and improvements of 
public streets, bridges, culverts, causeways and the like. 
 
9. The lighting, watering and cleansing of public streets and other 
public places. 
 
10. The removal of obstructions and projections in or upon streets, 
bridges and other public places. 
 
11. The naming and numbering  of streets and premises. 
 
12. The establishment, maintenance of and aid to, schools for primary 
education subject to such grants as may be determined by the 
Central Government from time to time. 
 
13. The maintenance of municipal offices.  
 
14. The laying out or the maintenance of public parks, gardens or 
recreation grounds.   
 
15. The maintenance of monument s and memorials vested in any 
local authority in New Delhi immediately before the 
commencement of this Act or wh ich may be vested in the Council 
after such commencement.  
 
16. The maintenance and development of the value of all properties 
vested in or entrusted to the management of the Council. 
 
17. The preparation of plans for economic development and social 
justice.  
 

18. The maintenance including the expansion and upgradation of 
facilities of the hospitals existing on the date of the 
commencement of this Act.  
 
19. Sanction or refuse erection or re-erection of buildings and 
 
20. The fulfillment of any other obli gation imposed by or under this Act 
or any other law for the time being in force.  
 
II) DISCRETIONARY FUNCTIONS 
 
 Subject to any general or special order of the Government, or the 
Central Government from time to ti me, the Council may provide either 
wholly or in part for all or any of the following matters, namely :- 
1. The furtherance of education including cultural and physical 
education, by measures other than the establishment and 
maintenance of and aid to schools for primary education. 
2. The establishment and maintena nce of, and aid to, libraries, 
museums, art galleries, botanical or zoological collections.  
 
3. The establishment and mainte nance of, and aid to, stadia, 
gymnasia, akharas and places for sports and games.  
 
4. The planting and care of tree s on roadsides and elsewhere.  
 
5. The surveys of buildings and lands.  
 
6. The registration of marriages.  
 
7. The taking of a census of population. 
 
8. The provisions of housing accommodation for the inhabitants of 
any area or for any class of inhabitants.  
 
9. The providing of music or other ent ertainments in public places or 
places or public resort and the establishment of theaters and 
cinemas.  
 

10. The organization and management  of fairs and exhibitions.  
 
11. The acquisition of movable or immovable property for any of the 
purposes mentioned above, including payment of the cost of 
investigations surveys or examinations in relation thereto for the 
construction or adaptation of buildings necessary for such 
purposes.  
 
12. The construction and maintenance of :- 
 
i) Rest-house 
ii) Poor-house 
iii) Infirmaries 
iv) Children’s homes 
v) Houses for the deaf and du mb and for disabl ed and handicapped 
children.  
vi) Shelters for destitut e and disabled persons; and  
vii) Asylums for perso ns of unsound mind.  
 
13. The construction and ma intenance of cattle ponds.  
 
14. The building or purchase and ma intenance of dwelling houses for 
municipal officers and other municipal employees.  
 
15. Any measures for the welfare of the municipal officers and other 
municipal employees or any class of them including the 
sanctioning of loans to such officers and employees or any class 
of them for construction of houses and purchase of vehicles.  
 
16. The organization or management of chemical or bacteriological 
laboratories for the ex amination or analysis of water, food and 
drugs for the detection of diseases  or research connected with the 
public health or medical relief.  
 
17. The provision of relief to des titute and disabled persons.  
 
18. The establishment and maintenan ce of veterinary hospitals.  
 

19. The organization, construction,  maintenance and management of 
swimming pools, public wash houses, bathing places and other 
institutions designed for the improvement of public health.  
 
20. The organization and management of  farms and diaries within or 
without New Delhi for the supply,  distribution and processing of 
milk and milk products for the benefits of the residents of New 
Delhi.  
 
21. The organization and managem ent of cottage industries, 
handicraft centers and sales emporia.  
 
22. The construction and maint enance of warehouses and godowns.  
 
23. The provisions for unf iltered water supply.  
 
24. The improvement of New Delhi in accordance with improvement 
schemes approved by the Council. 
 
25. Any measure not hereinbefore sp ecifically mentioned likely to 
promote public safety, health, convenience or general welfare.  
 
 

     A p p e n d i x  I  
 
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
TWELFTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 31st January,  2005 from 1500 hours to 1730 
hours. 
Present 
 
 Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman 
  
              Members 
 
2. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
3. Prof. Chander Kumar 
4. Shri Anant Gudhe 
5. Shri N.N. Krishnadas 
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
10. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
11. Prof. M. Ramadass 
12. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
13. Shri Lakshman Singh 
14. Shri Sartaj Singh 
15. Shri M.A.  Kharabela Swain 
16. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri John Joseph - Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri A.K. Singh  - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
3.      Shri Cyril J ohn  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
  

     Representatives  
Ministry of Home Affairs  
 
1. Shri Dhirendra Singh    - Home Secretary 
2. Shri K.P. Singh    - Additional Secretary (BM) 
3. Shri K.S. Sugathan   - Joint Secretary (UT) 
 
    New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) 
 
4. Smt. Sindhu Shree Khullar  - Chairperson 
5. Shri U.K. Wohra    - Secretary 
 
    Govt. of NCT of Delhi 
 
6. Shri O.P. Kelkar    - Principal Secretary (UD) 
 
    Ministry of Urban Development  
 
7. Shri M. Rajamani   - Joint Secretary 
 
2.  The Committee was briefed by the repre sentatives of Ministry of Home 
Affairs, NDMC, Ministry of Urban Development and the Government of NCT of 
Delhi on the subject ‘New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC)’. The briefing was 
concluded.  
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
 
   The Committee then adjourned 

 
   Appendix II 
 
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2005-06) 
 
EIGHTH  SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th July,  2005 from 1100 hours to 1315 
hours. 
Present 
 
 Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman 
  
         Members 
 
1.    Shri Lal Muni Choubey 
2.   Shri  Anant Gangaram Geete 
3.   Shri Anant Gudhe 
4. Shri P. Karunakaram 
5. Prof. Chander Kumar 
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
8. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
11. Shri K.S. Rao 
12. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
13. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
14. Shri Lakshman Singh 
15. Shri M.A.  Kharabela Swain 
16. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1.  Smt. P.K. Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri A.K. Singh  - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
3.      Shri B.D. Swan  - Deputy Secretary 
4.      Shri Cyril J ohn  -  Under Secretary 
5.      Smt. Manju C haudhary - Assistant Director 
  

Witnesses 
New Delhi Municipal Council 
 
1.  Smt. Sindhushree Khu llar  - Chairperson 
2. Shri U.K.  Worah   - Secretary 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
 
1. Shri V.K. Duggal   -  Union Home Secretary 
2. Shri K.P. Singh   - Special Secretary(Home) 
3.  Dr. K.S. Sugathan   - Joint Secretary(UT) 
4. Shri I.B. Karn     - Director(Delhi) 
 
Ministry of Urban Development 
 
 Shri P.K. Pradhan   - Joint Secretary  
 
Urban Development, Government of NCT of Delhi 
 
 Shri O.P. Kelkar   - Principal Secretary 
 
 
2.    The  Committee   took oral evi dence of representatives of Ministry of 
Home Affairs and New Delhi Municipal Council on the subject – ‘New Delhi 
Municipal Council (NDMC)’. The evidence was concluded. 
 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
  
3.   The Committee  decided to have the next sitting  on 11 th August, 2005 for 
a briefing by the represent atives of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation) and National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing 
Federation of India Limited on the subj ect – ‘National Agricultural Cooperative 
Marketing Federation of India Limited (NAFED)’. 
 
4.    A verbatim record of the proceedings was  kept. 
   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

       Appendix III 
 
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2005-06) 
 
   TWENTY FIRST SITTING 
 
 
The Committee sat on  Thursday, the 20th   April,  2006 from 1500 hours to 1610 
hours.  
      Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2.       Shri  Lal Muni Choubey 
3.   Shri V.  Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
4.       Shri Anant Gudhe 
5.      Shri  B. Vinod Kumar 
6.   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
7.       Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
8.   Shri Zora Singh Mann 
9.       Shri Prabodh Panda  
10.       Prof. M. Ramadass 
11.   Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
12.       Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
13.       Shri Lakshman Singh 
14.       Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
15.  Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav 
 
 Secretariat  
 
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   - Deputy Secretary 
3.  Shri Cyril John   - Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Assistant Director 
 
2. The Committee considered  the draft Repor t on Ministry of Home Affairs – ‘New 
Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC)’ and adopted the same with some modifications/additions 
as given in the Annexure. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report in the  light of 
modifications and also to ma ke verbal and other consequentia l changes, if any, arising out 
of factual verification by the concerned Ministry and present the same to the House. 

  
4. Being  the last sitting of Estimates Committee (2005-06) , the Chairman thanked the 
Members for the constructive support and c ooperation extended by them for the smooth 
and effective functioning of the Committee in the past one year. 
  
  The Committee then adjourned. 

ANNEXURE  
 
Modifications made by the Estimates Commi ttee in the Draft Report on Ministry of 
Home Affairs – ‘New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC)’ 
 
Para No.   Line   Modification 
 
    2      5     After : Balakrishna Committee 
   (from  bottom)  Add : keeping in view the basic  
democratic  principles 
     
   7           21   For : The Committee trust……….. 
      ……… taken for amending the NDMC  
Act. 
Read : The Committee desire that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs should take prompt steps for 
amending the NDMC Act. 
 
   9   11   For : for augmenting and  strengthening  
its system 
      Read : for modernising and augmenting  
its system. 
 
10   14   For : staff through strict supervision and  
monitoring 
Read: staff through appropriate incentives 
 
  11   last line  For : completed expeditiously 
Read : completed within a specific time- frame. 
 
  17      15   After : coordination 
          Add   : based on GIS system  
 

  
         A p p e n d i x  I V  
MINUTES OF  FIRST SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
     (2006-2007) 
     
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 18th May, 2006 from 1500 to  1545 
hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
2.     Shri Lal  Muni Choubey 
3.  Shri Adhir  Chowdhury 
4. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
5. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
6. Shri Anant Gudhe 
7.  Shri Jai Prakash 
8.  Shri Vijaykumar Khandelwal 
9.  Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
10.  Prof. Chander Kumar 
11.  Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
12.  Shri  Prabodh Panda 
13.  Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
14.  Shri Manabendra Shah 
15.  Shri Lakshman Singh 
16.    Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
17.    Shri  Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
  Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay         -        Joint Secretary 
2.. Shri  Rajeev Sharma    -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Cyril John    - Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Manju Choudhary        -        Assistant Director    
    

  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed t he Members  to the first sitting of the 
Committee and congratulated them on their election to the Committee.  
 
3.   xx                 xx                       xx   
 
4.   xx                    xx                         xx 
 
5.     Thereafter, the Committee consider ed and adopted the  draft R eport on  Ministry of 
Home Affairs – ‘New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC)’ without any  modification as adopted 
by the Estimates Committee(2005-2006)  on 20th April, 2006.  
 
6. The Committee authorized the Chairman to fi nalise the Report in the light of verbal 
and other consequential changes, and present the same to the House.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 