TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2006-2007) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF  ECONOMIC AFFAIRS-         
INSURANCE DIVISION) 
 
 
 INSURANCE SCHEMES FOR WEAKER SECTIONS OF 
SOCIETY 
 
 
 
 
 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 December 18, 2006/Agrahayana  27, 1928(S)
 1

 
CONTENTS 
             Page No.  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES        (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION                (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER-I INTRODUCTORY           1-3 
 
 
CHAPTER-II INSURANCE REGULATORY  
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY          4-8 
   
 
CHAPTER-III INSURANCE SCHEMES FOR WEAKER       9-17 
SECTIONS OF SOCIETY 
 
CHAPTER-IV     OTHER SCHEMES          18-23 
 
HAPTER-V      CHAPTER-V       INSURANCE SCHEMES RUN BY STATE    24-26 
                           GOVERNMENTS 
 
CHAPTER-VI     SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE        27-30 
                           COMMITTEE 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations  of the Committee……   31-40 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
State-wise Statistics of lives covered under        41 
Social Security Schemes in the last five years. 
 
 2

 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2006-2007) 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami, MP  - Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
2.   Shri Lal  Muni Choubey 
3. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
4. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
5. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
6. Shri Anant Gudhe 
7. Shri Jai Prakash 
8. Shri P. Karunakaran 
9. Shri Vijaykumar Khandelwal 
10. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
11. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
12. Prof. Chander Kumar 
13.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
14. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
15.  Shri Zora Singh Mann 
16. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
18.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan 
19. Shri K.S. Rao 
20. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat 
21.  Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
22.  Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
23.  Shri Arjuncharan Sethi 
24.  Shri Manabendra Shah 
25. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
26.  Shri Lakshman Singh 
27.   Dr.  Ramlakhan Singh 
28.   Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
29.   Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
30.   Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Smt. P. K. Sandhu                -         Additional Secretary 
 2.        Shri A. Mukhopadhyay           -         Joint Secretary 
           3.        Shri Rajeev Sharma               -         Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri C.kalyanasundaram        -         Committee Officer 
 3

            
 4

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the C hairman of the E stimates Committee, havi ng been 
authorized by the Committee to su bmit the report on their behalf 
present this Twelfth Report on `I nsurance schemes for weaker 
sections of soci ety’ relating to Mi nistry of  Finance (Department of  
Economic Affairs-Insurance Division). 
2. The subject `Insurance schemes for weaker sections of society’ 
was selected for detailed examinat ion by the Estimates Committee 
(2005-2006).  The Committee heard the views of  the representatives 
of  Ministry of  Finance on 12th September, 2005 and 19th June, 2006, 
Insurance Regulatory and Deve lopment Authority and General  
Insurance (Public Sector)  Association(GIPSA) on 5 th January, 2006, 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and Ministry of  Rural  
Development on 11 th July, 2006.  The Committee further heard the 
views of representatives of  Non-Government Organisations on 29 th 
June, 2006 and took the oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Life Insurance C orporation of  India on 25 th January, 2006 and 
Ministry of  Finance on 17th October, 2006.  The Committee also 
held i nformal discussion on the subj ect  with the representati ves of 
the State Governments of Kerala and  Karnataka and al so Indian 
Institute of  Management, Bangalor e during their on-the-spot study 
visit to Kochi and Bangalore from 18th to 22nd September, 2006.   
 
3. The Report was considered and  adopted by the Committee at  
their sitting held on 14th December, 2006.  
 5

4. The Committee express their t hanks to the representatives  of 
the aforesaid Ministries and Organisations for placing before them the 
detailed information desired in connection with the examination of the  
subject.   
5. For facility of reference, t he observations/recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in  bold type in the body of the 
Report and have also been reproduced in consoli dated form i n the 
Appendix. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI            C.KUPPUSAMI, 
December  14 , 2006           Chairman, 
Agrahayana   23, 1928(S)        Committee on Estimates 
 
 6

CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
1.1 The country’ s population stood at 102.87 crore according to 
2001 Census. Persons belonging  to economically weaker sections of 
the society and those living below the poverty l ine form a signifi cant 
proportion of our population. Incidenc e of poverty in the country i s 
estimated by the Planning Commission on the basi s of the l arge-
scale quinquennial sample s urveys on househol d expenditure 
conducted by the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO). As 
per 1999-2000 survey, an estimate d 25.35% (27.09% of rural and 
23.62% urban population) were below poverty line.  The Planning 
Commission in their Tenth Five  Year Plan (2002-07) document 
highlighted that at the beginning of the new millennium, 260 million 
people in the country di d not have in comes to access a consumption 
basket which defi nes the poverty li ne.  Of these, 75 per cent were 
stated to be in rural areas as agricultural wage earners, smal l and 
marginal farmers and casual work ers engaged in non-agricultural 
activities that constitute the bulk of rural poor . The number of persons  
people living below poverty l ine i s estimated to be in the vi cinity of 
220 millions in 2007.      
1.2 However, the Committee were informed that State 
Governments have different norm s for actual identification of 
households livi ng below the poverty line. State Governments have 
issued separate coloured ration cards to BPL families on the basis of 
such identification .  As such, the number of persons fal ling below the 
poverty line as per the norm s of the State Governments often do not 
 7

match the NSSO estimates.  Persons who belong to margi nally 
above poverty line also form a significant percentage of population.  
1.3  People belonging to the economically weaker secti ons of  
society face hazards and l ive in high-risk environments. Per capita 
income and per capita consumpt ion are low whereas occupational, 
financial and heal th risks are very high. The protection of these 
people from untimely risks has in vited several form s of poli cy 
interventions by the Governments at  the central  and state l evels 
including transfers of cash or food, credit subsi dies and pubic 
employment schemes etc. Insurance cover i s part of the safety nets 
which may be offered to economically vulnerable sections.  
  
1.4 Nationalization of life i nsurance business in 1956 and non-life 
insurance  in 1972 was ai med at “ensuring that the message of 
insurance is carried to every nook a nd corner of the country.” One of 
the obj ectives of Life Insurance Co rporation (LIC) is to spread life 
insurance widely, i n particul ar to the rural areas and to the socially 
and economicall y backward classes.  With a view to reachi ng all 
insurable persons in the country and providing them adequate 
financial cover against death at  reasonabl e cost, a number of 
schemes were introduced to cater e xclusively to these segments of 
society. 
 
1.5 At present LIC is admini stering a social  security group 
insurance scheme, namely, Jana Shree Bima Yo jana for weaker and 
vulnerable sections of the society.   However, LIC has withdrawn a 
few other schemes which were laun ched for the insurance cover of 
 8

the economically weaker sections . These w ere Landless Agricultural 
Labourers Group Insuranc e Schemes, Rural  Group Life Insurance 
Schemes, Krishi Shramik Samajik Suraksha Yojana, 2001 and Social 
Security Group Insurance Schemes. At present except two central  
sector schemes, almost all other insurance schemes stand withdrawn 
or replaced by some other schemes. As such, the number of persons 
of those marginall y above or below the poverty line, w ho have been 
covered by insurance schemes is only a minute fraction of the actual  
number intended to have been covered as per Tenth Five Year Plan. 
The State-wise statisti cs of lives  covered under social securi ty 
schemes in the last five years is given at Annexure-A.  
 9

CHAPTER-II 
Insurance Regulatory Development Authority 
 
2.1 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IR DA) was 
established in 1999. Following the opening up of the insurance sector 
to private players i n 2000, IRDA has  formulated IRDA (Protecti on of 
Policy Holders’ Interests) Regulations which  insurers have to comply 
with . IRDA has laid down mandatory obligations for both the publi c 
and pri vate sector players towards  the rural and soci al sectors to 
ensure that these areas are not neglected. The definition and 
obligations are as under :- 
A.  Definitions :- 
 
“Rural sector” shal l mean any pl ace as per the latest census which 
has – (i) a population of not more than five thousand; (ii ) a density of 
population of not more than four hundred per square kilometer; and 
(iii) at least seventy five per cent of the male working population is 
engaged in agriculture.  
 
“Social sector” i ncludes unorganiz ed sector, informal sector, 
economically vulnerable or backward cl asses and other categories of 
persons, both in rural and urban areas; 
 
“Unorganised sector” incl udes sel f-employed workers such as 
agricultural labourers, bidi work ers, brick ki ln workers, carpenters, 
cobblers, construction workers,  fi shermen, hamals, handicrafts 
artisans, handloom and khadi workers , lady tai lors,  leather and 
tannery workers, papad makers, pow erloom workers, physi cally 
handicapped self-employed perso ns, primary mild producers, 
rickshaw pullers, safai  karmachari s, salt growers, seri culture 
workers, sugarcane cutters, tendu leaf coll ectors, toddy tappers, 
vegetable vendors, washerwomen, w orking women in hills, or such 
other categories of  persons.  
 
 10

“economically vul nerable or backw ard classes” means persons who 
live below the poverty line; 
 
“other categori es of persons” includes  persons with disabil ity as 
defined in the Persons with Di sabilities (Equal Opportunities, 
Protection of Rights, and Full Partici pation) Act, 1995 and who may 
not be gainfull y employed; and al so incl udes guardians who  need 
insurance to protect spastic persons or persons with disability; 
 
B.  Obligations :- 
 
Every insurer, who begins to carry on insurance business after the 
commencement of the Insurance  Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999), sha ll, for the purposes of secti ons 
32B and 32C of the Act, ensure t hat he undertakes the foll owing 
obligations, during the first five financial years : 
(a) Rural Sector (i) in respect of a life insurer  
  
(I) five per cent in the first financial year; 
(II) seven per cent in the second financial year; 
(III) ten per cent in the third financial year; 
(IV) twelve per cent in the fourth financial year; 
(V) fifteen per cent in the ninth year,  
of total policies written direct in that year;  
 
(ii) in respect of a general insurer :- 
(I) two per cent in the first financial  year;  
(II) three per cent in the second financial year;  
(III) five percent thereafter,  
of total gross premium income written direct i n that 
year.  
 
(b) social sector, in respect of all insurers, -- 
  (I)  five thousand lives in the first financial year; 
(II) seven thousand fi ve hundred lives in the second 
financial year;  
  (III) ten thousand lives in the third financial year;  
(IV) fifteen thousand lives I n the fourth financial year;  
(V) twenty thousand lives in the fifth year; 
 11

 the above obligati ons may be reviewed by IRDA once in     
every five years.  
 
Obligations of exi sting insurers. __  (1) The obligations of exi sting 
insurers as on the date of comme ncement of IRDA Act shall  be 
decided by the Authority after consultation with them and the 
quantum of insurance busi ness to be done shall not be less than 
what has been recorded by them f or the accounting year ended 31 st 
March, 2000. (2) The Authori ty shall review such quantum of 
insurance business periodically and give directions to the insurers for  
achieving the specified targets.  
 
2.2 Sh. C.S. Rao, Chairman , IRDA while explai ning  the role of 
IRDA as a monitoring authority stated during oral evidence that :- 
“……we monitor the performance of  the companies to look at 
the solvency of the insurance co mpanies.  We also clear thei r 
products.  We are in the busi ness of ensuring that any 
obligations that have been ca st on the insurers are full y 
complied with…… One of the obligations that have been cast 
on the insurer while giving a license is that he shall abide by our 
prescriptions with regard to the obl igations towards the rural  
areas and the social sector.  That is also one of the thi ngs that 
is monitored by the IRDA as a part of i ts normal  
programme…….We monitor on a year-to-year basi s whether 
the insurance companies are ad hering to those norms or not. 
….. We do quarterly and yearly monitoring.  While in one or two 
years there have been some short fall compared to what they 
should have done.  We have w arned them and said we will 
impose punishment if there are any violations.  They have done 
much more than what is warrant ed as per the regul ation.  What 
we find is that the prime ins urance companies are willing and  
eager to fulfill their obligations to the rural areas and also the 
social sector.  Sometimes they have difficult ies in reaching 
those targets because we analysed in some cases and we find 
that the NGO had moved away to another i nsurance company 
because they offer better opportun ities.  But in the subsequent 
years, they have been abl e to make  substantially.  T his is our 
experiences as far as social sector is concerned”. 
 12

 
2.3  While defending the case of insurance companies regarding 
non-implementation of the  insurance schem es floated by the Union 
and State Governments, the Chai rman, IR DA stated before the 
Committee as under:- 
“If some of the schemes of the State Governments or the 
Government of India are  not being implemented, it i s either  
because of the State Government concerned or the 
Government of  India i s unable is make up its mind with regard 
to the quantum of subsidy that is involved.  The insurance  
company is supposed to evolve schemes without taking into 
account any subsidy at all. Whatever is financially viable are the 
schemes that are supposed to be i mplemented by i nsurance 
companies. If the State Government or the Government of India 
feels that a particular section of  the population will not be  able 
to pay the kind of premium that is required, then the subsidy will 
have to be forthcoming either from  the State Government or 
from the Government of  India, whichever is the agency that i s 
sponsoring it.” 
 
 
2.4 When asked about the crit eria bei ng adopted by i nsurance 
companies for i dentification of weaker secti ons, Chairman, IRDA 
stated as follows:- 
 
“…. The real probl em is of i dentification. Our urban experience 
in  some of the State has been that 40 per cent of urban 
population comes under the BPL category. In case of rural 
areas, it is more than 70 per cent.  When we are talki ng of a 
BPL oriented universal health scheme, we are talking of a much 
larger number.  B ut the crux of the problem is to identify the 
person of the BP category. Unless we do that, what is li kely to 
happen is that this facility woul d  be misused and those w ho do 
not belong to the BPL families w ould get the benefit of it as it 
happened in the case of ration cards.  If we have a scienti fic 
 13

and systematic method by which we can identif y the persons of 
BPL category, it is possible to have this scheme.” 
 
2.5 In regard to definiti on on below poverty line people in the IRD A 
regulations, the  Chairman, IRDA stated during evidence that:-  
 
“In fact, if you look at the In surance Act and the regulations that 
we have made, you will notice th at we have not talked about 
the people below the poverty line at all.  What we have done i s, 
we have classified them as oc cupational groups. We have to 
identify them with ref erence to the kind of work that they are 
doing…..  So, our definition  of  people who are to be covered 
under social  sector are covering the people i n the 
disadvantaged sections of the popul ation.  We did not say  
`BPL’. We sai d any di sadvantaged section of the population, 
any person bel onging to an occ upational group. He could be a  
weaver, he could be a fisherman, he could be a toddy tapper, 
he could be a blacksmith, he coul d be a goldsmith. Depending 
upon the kind of occupation that he has got, if he i s poor, we 
have taken them in our defini tion. We have not defi ned what 
that poverty is, but it is left to the imaginati on of the 
Government and the  insurance co mpanies.  The idea is not to 
restrict, but to see that a large number of weaker sections of the 
people who are vulnerable and w eaker sections are give n 
insurance cover, then an external agency will have to come and 
then give the subsidy.”  
 
 14

CHAPTER III 
 
INSURANCE SCHEMES FOR WEAKER SECTIONS OF 
SOCIETY  
 
1. Social Security Group Insurance Schemes 
3.1 The Social Securi ty Fund (SSF) was set up in 1988-89 for 
providing social security through group insurance schemes to the 
weaker and vulnerable secti ons of the society. Subsequently, Social  
Security Group Insurance Schemes  were launched by LIC. The 
purpose of these schemes was to provide life cover at subsidized rate 
to the socially and economi cally backward sections. T hese schemes 
provided a sum upto Rs.5000/- on deat h with accident benefit of  
Rs.25,000/-. Persons belongi ng to the foll owing 24 approved 
occupational groups were covered under the scheme :- 
Sr. No.   Occupation 
1. Beedi Workers  
2. Brick Kiln workers  
3. Carpenters 
4. Cobblers  
5. Fisherman 
6. Hamals 
7. Handicraft artisans 
8. Handloom weavers 
9. Handloom and Khadi weavers 
10. Lady Tailors 
11. Leather and Tannery workers  
12. Papad workers attached to ‘SEWA’ 
13. Physically Handicapped Self Employed Persons 
14. Primary Milk Producers 
15. Rikshaw Pullers/Auto Drivers 
16. Safai Karmacharis 
17. Salt Growers 
 15

18. Tendu Leaf Collectors 
19. Urban Poor  
20. Forest workers 
21. Seri Culture 
22. Toddy Tapers 
23. Powerloom workers 
24. Hilly Area women  
 
3.2  The Scheme was  frozen and replaced by Janashree Bima 
Yojana from 10 th August, 2000. Thereafter onl y renewal of groups 
covered earlier is allowed. 
 
3.3 During the peri od since the instruction of  JBY, LIC has 
identified and approved 19 more groups f or their eligibility in addition 
to  above mentioned 24 occ upational groups approved under S ocial 
Security Schemes.  
Sr. No.   Occupation 
1. Food stuffs as Khandsari/Sugar 
2. Textiles 
3. Wood products 
4. Paper products 
5. Leather products 
6. Printing 
7. Rubber and Coal products 
8. Candle products 
9. Toys manufacture  
10. Agriculturist 
11. Transport drivers association 
12. Transport karmacharis 
13. Rural Poor 
14. Construction workers  
15. Fire crackers workers 
16. Coconut processors 
17. Aanganwadi workers and helpers 
18. Kotwal 
 16

19. Plantation workers 
 
2. Janashree Bima Yojana 
3.4 Janashree Bima Yojana provides for  life insurance protection  
to the rural and urban pe ople who are below or  marginally above the 
poverty line and who are aged betw een 18 and 59 years. How ever, 
the person should be a member of  any of the appr oved vocation or 
occupation group out of 43 occupat ional groups approved in this 
regard. A State Government departm ent which is concerned with the 
welfare of the relevant section of the group or village panchayat or 
NGO or any other self help group w ould have to be a nodal agency. 
The scheme cannot be offered to i ndividual members unless they 
form a group of atl east 25. The pre mium for this scheme is Rs.200 
per member. 50%  of which is borne by either the member or nodal 
agency or State Government and the remaini ng 50% is contributed 
from the social security fund managed by LIC.  In regard to  
identification of target popul ation for coverage under the scheme, the 
Secretary (Department of Economic  Affairs) stated during the 
evidence “There are 43 occupational groups which are covered under 
Janashree Bima Yojana. So, there is no fresh definition of BPL 
families in case of life cover.”  
3.5 Schedules of benefits payabl e to the beneficiary under the 
Scheme are:- 
Event        Benefit Amount 
Death (other than by accident)   Rs.20000 
Death or total permanent disability    
due to accident      Rs.50000 
Permanent partial disability due to  
accident       Rs.25000 
 17

 
 
3.6 The coverage under Janashree Bi ma Yojana is stated to be as 
follows :- 
Scheme 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
 215637 819012 1158239 2507024 3539654 
  
3.7 Shiksha Saha yog Yojana (SSY)  : In pursuant to the 
Government’s announcement in the Budget 2001-2002, LIC launched 
the Shiksha Sayhayog Yojana for th e benefit of chi ldren of members 
of Janashree Bima Yojana. The scheme provides for the schol arship 
of Rs.300/- per quarter to students studyi ng in 9th to 12 th standards. 
The beneficiary has not to pa y any premium for availi ng the  
supplementary benefit of scholarship.  
 
3.8 The number of Scholarships di sbursed during the last 3 years 
are as follows: 
Year     No. of Scholarships 
2002-03 47,313 
2003-04 1,60,473 
2004-05 1,74,179 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
3.9 In regard to weaknesses of the above two schemes, LIC in a 
written reply stated as follows:- 
     1. No Scheme can be offered to indi vidual members unless they 
form a group of atleast 25. 
 18

     2. Only heads of families are covered.  
3. Identifying benefi ciaries who are below poverty line or 
marginally above poverty li ne is diffi cult. Hence benefi ts of the 
scheme may be drawn even by those who are not eligible for 
the same. 
3.10 In regard to the efforts be ing made to popularize the scheme,  
representative of the Ministry of  Finance stated during the evidence:- 
“October, every year is celebrated as soci al securi ty month 
where a number of activities do take place. Most of these things 
are sponsored by NGOs.  Groups  are organized from some 
group or Panchayats or some body; they come as our members 
as master policyholders. We try to target the NGOs of the state. 
We have a list of NGOs every month and people’ s 
representatives in this area.  In this month we made extensi ve 
contacts with the people and peop le’s groups al so in the 
Panchayats.  Moreover, even th ough it is not really our full-
profitable business, every year we  set a target of number of 
lives that are to be covered wh ich is given to each of our 
operating units.  This yearly target is renew able every year.  
Once a group joins we take every effort to see those people are 
renewing every year without fail so that the cover comes 
continuously.  These are the efforts that w e are taking for 
popularizing the scheme.”  
  
3.11 A representati ve of NGOs in volved in i mplementation of 
insurance schemes for weaker sectio ns while explaining the reasons 
for  dismal coverage under the scheme, stated during evidence that:- 
“…..my contenti on here i s that the LIC, which is a very large 
organisation has fl oated thi s schem e, but people outside of 
Delhi, or even in Delhi are not aware of thi s.   It is primarily 
because BPL people m ostly stays in the slums or in 
marginalized areas. They are not aware of the scheme.  I go to 
such people to speak to them that such and such scheme 
exists.  P eople are not aware.  My contenti on here is that the 
LIC if it has to reach to a larger audience, then has to pay a 
 19

little more to publicity.  T hey have to advertise more use 
publicity material, or m ay be use the services of the 
Doordarshan for reaching out to pe ople living in villages or in 
the slums and marginalized areas. 
 
My second contention here i s that the Panchayati Raj 
institutions which have i ts reac hes far and wide in the remote 
areas, if they coul d take up this  issue as one of the i mportant 
aspects of their work, then perhaps they will be able to reach 
out to those people who are categorized as BPL families.” 
 
3. Universal Health Insurance Scheme 
3.12 Universal Health Insurance Scheme (UHIS), first l aunched i n 
July, 2003 and redesigned in 2004 covers mainly hospitalization 
benefit upto a l imit of Rs.30000 for a BPL family including 
compensation for death of the earning head of the family for 
Rs.25000. Compensation to the earning head of the family tow ards 
loss of earnings at the rate of Rs.50 per day for the peri od of 
hospitalization to a maximum of 15 days i s also payable. The 
premium payable is Rs.365 for an individual, Rs.548 for a family of 5 
and Rs.730 for a family of 7 with a central Government subsidy of 
Rs.200 for an i ndividual, Rs.300 for a family of 5 and Rs.400 for a 
family of 7 as per Budget 2004-05.  In regard to identification of target  
population for coverage under the sc heme,  representative of the 
Ministry of  Finance informed t he Committee during the evidence as 
under:- 
“In case of non-life cover, under Universal Health Insurance 
Scheme of BPL, we take the definition of the Planning 
Commission.  But all the State Governments have issued 
separate coloured ration cards to  BPL families. So, w e cover 
only those families which are given the BPL ration cards by 
different State Governments.” 
 20

 
 
3.13 The coverage under UHIS is as given below :- 
Years No. of Policies No. of families No. of Persons 
2003-04 327562  416688  1161604 
204-05 52772  65718  182641 
 
3.14 To a query regardi ng the reas ons for unsatisfactory coverage 
under UHIS, the Mi nistry of Health and Family Welfare stated in their 
note  that the Universal  Health In surance Scheme has not taken off  
for a number of reasons including the unsatisfactory efforts on 
increasing enrolment, unsatisfactory thrust of public sector i nsurance 
companies in linki ng service provi sion and to ensure quality health 
care etc.  
3.15 When asked about the fail ure to cover more people under 
health i nsurance scheme, the Chi ef executive, General Insurers 
(Public Sector) Association of Indi a (GIPSA)  stated as follows duri ng 
evidence before the Committee :- 
“…Knowing the experience that we have, the health insurance 
cover has not been successful  be cause of the laws that we 
have. It means that the premiu m, the consi deration which we 
get has been far low than the amount that we have been 
paying. Another reason i s that  w e have not been able to 
enlarge the base. Unless the base i s enlarged, certainl y 
premium will go down because vo lume will go up. What is  
happening unfortunately i s t hat in urban areas only those 
people who are vulnerable to di seases are coming forward to 
take the polici es and in rural areas also, it started happening. 
So, only a select few take it. The population has been identified 
and they are comi ng forw ard to take it. It i s not a question of 
Government subsidizi ng the schemes. It should be 
remunerative to the insurance companies. W e do not want to 
make money out of it. But it should be on the basis of ‘ no profit, 
 21

no loss’. But unfortunatel y at the en d of the day, it turns out to  
be a loss-making proposition. T he subsidy has to be stopped 
and then, it must be remunerative.  That means, the premium 
must commensurate with the risk that we take. That is the basi c 
problem. I am sure, i n another 2-3-4 years, if the base is 
enlarged, this will be taken care of, once the premium goes 
down.” 
 
3.16 During the evidence, the Chie f Executive, GIPSA further stated 
as follows:- 
 
“…We had mentioned earli er also that BPL populati on finds it 
difficult to pay even the subs idized premium. Although subsidy 
is available from the Governm ent, there is a lack of awareness 
and affordability among th ese people. So, we felt that if the 
Government allows 100 per cent subsidy for BPL families for  
the initi al period of two to t hree years, to in crease aw areness 
and save them from rural i ndebtedness arisi ng out of health 
hazards, gradually shifting to a self-supportive schem e, these 
scheme will be successful. If  the State Governments are 
encouraged to take master policie s for the entire State, it will 
reduce the cost of implementati on and will br ing in aw areness 
quickly and uniformly all over the country for better evaluation. 
Lack of reach of i nsurance com panies in true sense to the 
actual rural areas needs to be l ooked i nto by creating a  
separate entity, if possi ble, for socially-oriented schemes. Then 
there is the fact that the cl aim ratio in health i nsurance is much 
higher and the business i s loss-prone all over. This requires a 
different approach other than what is followed at present by the 
public sector insurance companies’.  
 
3.17 When asked about the plan of Ministry of Finance to cover all  
the BPL families under Universal He alth Insurance Scheme (UHIS), 
Special Secretary, Ministry of Finance deposed before the Committee  
 22

as under:- 
 
“I am not in a posi tion to gi ve a target as to by which time we 
will be able to cover all the BPL families. But the restriction of 
the scheme was that it was to be implemented only through the 
public sector i nsurance compani es. That is the Budgetary 
announcement. We have had ab out one year’ s di scussion 
within the Government which involves the Health Ministry, 
Finance Ministry and the insurance companies. N ow, the 
private sector i nsurance companies have al so come forward. 
……Health provisioning, whether  for BPL families or for 
general, is done by the Health Ministry. By virtue of the fact that 
only public sector insur ance companies are under the  
administrative control of the Ministry of Finance, we are before 
you today. Now, there i s in fact a direction right from the Prime 
Minister himself. He had taken a meeti ng in w hich a 
presentation was done by the Health Ministry in whi ch they 
have  been asked to design a scheme which will be applicable 
to all the BPL families irrespective of whether the scheme is to 
be implemented  by the public sector insurance companies or 
by the private sector insurance  com panies. The coverage will 
be all over India. The coverage w ill be for all the BPL families. 
That scheme is now being designed by the Health Ministry.” 
 23

CHAPTER-IV 
 
OTHER SCHEMES 
 
1. LANDLESS AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS GROUP  
INSURANCE SCHEME (LALGI)  
 
4.1   Landless Agricultural Labourers Group Insurance Scheme 
(LALGI) was launched on 15 th August, 1987 and termed as the 
world’s largest group insurance sche me which would about 1.2 cores 
landless agricultural labourers th roughout the country.  Under this 
scheme, heads of families who w ere landless agricultural labourers 
were insured and the scheme provided for the following:  
  
Eligibility 18 to 60 years 
Benefit Rs. 2000/- (prior to 10.1.92 it was Rs. 1000/- 
Premium No premium charged.  E ntire premium was 
drawn from Social Security Fund. 
 
The scheme was run on “no profit no loss” basis by LIC.  The scheme 
was withdrawn w.e.f. 14.8.2000 as  it was envisaged that the 
insurance cover of Re. 2000/- was too low. 
2. RURAL GROUP LIFE INSURANCE SCHEMES 
4.2 Rural Group Life Insurance Sc hemes cam e into effect from  
15.8.1995.  These schemes were to provi de life insurance protection 
to the rural masses.  Personas ag ed 20 years or more but less than 
50 years were eligible to enter the schemes.  A person belonging to a 
household below the poverty line was eligible for a subsidy of 50% in 
the premium, which was shared by the Central and State 
 24

Governments in equal proportion.  The annual premium was Rs. 60/- 
p.a. for a person aged 20-40 years, on the date of joi ning and Rs. 
70/- for aged 40 to 50 years.  In the event of death of a member 
before age 60 years, a flat sum ass ured of Rs. 5000/- was paid to the 
appointed benefi ciary.  The scheme was admini stered through 
elected panchayats.  The schem e was discontinued w.e.f. 01.4.2000 
as there was a proposal  to have an all-encompassing single, sim ple 
land comprehensive scheme of in surance which will be easy to 
operate. 
3. KRISHI SHRAMIK SAMAJIK SURAKSHA YOJANA 
4.3 Krishi Shramik Samajik Suraksha Yojana was launched on 1 st 
July, 2001.  The object of the scheme was to provide life insurance 
protection, periodi cal lump sum survival benefit and pension to the 
agricultural workers.  Persons between age 18 and 50 years could 
enter into the scheme.  Persons engaged in one or more of the 
following agricultural occupations in the capacity of a labourer on hire, 
whether paid in cash or ki nd or partly in cash and partly in kind were 
eligible under this scheme:- 
 a)  farming   
 b)  dairy farming  
 c)  production 
 d)  raising of livestock, bee-keeping or poultry farming and 
 e) any practi ce performed on a farm as i ncidental to or in       
conjunction with  the farm operation. 
LIC in a written reply has stated that the sale of new polici es 
was discontinued from December, 2 003 as advised by Ministry of 
 25

Labour and that the amount  of subsi dy was too hi gh and Ministry of 
Labour’s proposal was turned down by the Ministry of Finance. 
4.4 Premium under the scheme wa s Rs. 365/- per annum and the 
Government contri buted double the am ount  from Social Security 
Fund besides Rs. 100/- for life cove rs.  Gram Panchayats were the 
nodal agency, which identified the agricultural workers and organized 
them into groups of minimum 20 and submitted details to LIC.  The 
scheme was launched in 50 selected districts.  The details of the lives 
covered and benefits accruing were as under:  
 
YEAR COVERAGE OF LIVE INFORCE 
2004-05 36,810 
2003-04 57,044 
2002-03 1,38,235 
2001-02 1,01,209 
 
Benefits: (while the membership is in force) 
 
On death before age 60:        
 
Payment of sum assured along with  
return of accumulated Amount with interest :   Rs, 20,000/- 
 
Payment of an additional sum assured in 
Case of death due to accident:    Rs. 30,000/- 
 
In case of total permanent disability:   Rs. 50,000/-  
 
In case of partial permanent disability:   Rs. 25,000/- 
  
4.5 Besides above, lump sum survi val benefit of Rs. 3000/- were to 
be provided at the end of every 10 th Year after entry into the scheme.  
 26

Minimum pension of Rs. 100/- p.m. were to be paid to the member on 
reaching age 60. 
4.6 When asked for reasons for the closure of the scheme, Finance 
Secretary stated that:  
 
“The Krishi Shram ik Samaji k S uraksha Yojana was started in 
2001 but got frozen because Lab oure Department could not 
provide budgetary devolutions fore new enrol ments.  So, the 
scheme got frozen in 2004.  For new members, the Labour 
Ministry has not able to provid e additional funds and that i s 
why, the scheme stands frozen.” 
 
4. RURAL POSTAL LIFE INSURANCE 
 
4.7 Rural Postal Life Insurance PLI (RPLI) came into bei ng as a 
sequel to the recommendation of the Official Committee for Reforms 
in the Insurance Sector (Malhot ra Committee).  The Committee had 
stated that Rural Branch Postmasters who enjoy a positi on of turst in 
the community have the capacity to  canvass life insurance busi ness 
within their respective areas.  The Government accepted this 
recommendation and permitted Postal Li fe Insurance to extend its 
coverage to the rural areas with effect from 24.3.1995, mai nly 
because of the vast network of Post Offices in the rural areas and low 
cost of operati ons.  The pri me objective of the scheme is to provide 
insurance cover to the rural  public in general and to benefit weaker 
sections and women workers of rural  areas in parti cular and also to 
spread insurance awareness among the rural  population.   RPLI has 
now a total of about 56 lacs pol icies with a total Sum Assured of 
about Rs. 27,000 Crore and the fund balance of about Rs. 1297 
Crore as on 31.3.2006.   
 27

5.     MICRO INSURANCE SCHEMES 
 
4.8 Keeping in perspective the abysm al insurance coverage of the  
poor and the need for having insurance products that can be afforded 
by the rural and urban poor, IRDA floated the concept of Micro 
insurance and notified regul ations for the same in November, 2005. 
Focus of the regulations was to provide a platform  our rul es to 
provide insurance to the targeted segment of the society. 
 
4.9 The following are the terms of life Micro Insurance Products 
Type of  
Cover 
Minimum 
amount of 
Cover 
Maximum 
amount of 
Cover 
Term 
of 
Cover 
Min. 
Term 
of 
cover 
Max 
Minimum 
Age at  
entry 
Maximum 
Age at 
entry 
Term 
Insurance 
with o r 
without 
return of 
premium 
Rs.5,000 Rs.50,000  5 
years 
15 
years 
 18  60 
 
 
 
 
 
Endowment 
Insurance 
Rs.50,000 Rs.30,000 5 
years 
15 
years 
18 60 
Health 
Insurance 
Contract 
(Individual) 
Rs.50,000 Rs.30,000 1 year 7 
years 
Insurer’s 
discretion 
Insurer’s 
discretion 
Health 
Insurance 
Contract 
(Family) 
Rs.10,000 Rs30,000 1 year 7 year Insurer’s 
discretion 
Insurer’s 
discretion 
Accident 
Benefit as 
rider 
Rs.10,000 Rs.50,000 5 year 15 
years 
18 60 
 
Notes: 1. Group insurance products may be renewable on a yearly  
      basis   
  2. The minimum number of members comprising a group shall    
      be at least twenty for group insurance. 
 
 28

 
 
4.10 The following are the terms of non-life micro insurance product 
 
Ite
m  
Type of 
Cover  
Min. Amount 
of Cover 
Max. Am ount 
of Cover 
Term 
of 
Cover 
Min. 
Term 
of 
Cover 
Mix.  
Min. 
Age 
at 
entry  
Max. 
Age at  
entry  
1 Dwelling and 
contents, or 
livestock or 
tools or 
implements 
or other 
named 
assets/or 
Crop 
insurance 
against all 
perils 
Rs.5,000 Per 
asset cover 
Rs.30,000 Per 
asset cover 
1 year 1 year NA NA 
 
2 Health 
Insurance 
Contract 
(Ind.) 
Rs.5,000 Rs.30,000 1 year 1 year Insurer’s 
discretion  
3 Health 
Insurance 
Contract 
(family) 
(option to 
avail limit for 
individual/flo
at on family) 
Rs.10,000 Rs.30,000 1 year 1 year Insurer’s 
discretion  
4 Personal 
Accident 
(per life 
earning 
member of 
family) 
Rs.10,000 Rs.50,000 1 year 1 year 5 70 
 
Note : The minimum number of members comprising a group shall  
      be at least twenty for group insurance.  
 
 29

CHAPTER-V 
 
Insurance Schemes run by State Governments 
5.1 State Governments of Punj ab, Uttanchal and the Government 
of U.T. of Pondichery are providi ng /had provided insurance cover to 
all the Heads of the families livin g below poverty line under Janshree  
Bima Yojana.  Some States have covered entire occupational groups.  
Tamil Nadu has covered handloom weavers, Maharashtra  has 
covered unorgani zed labour and Andhra Pradesh  has covered  
rickshaw pullers, shopkeepers, agricu ltural labourers etc.  LIC in a 
written reply, has stated that such steps taken by the state 
Governments are definitel y advant ageous for provid ing insurance 
coverage for weaker sections. 
5.2 Government of Kerala assumed a Health Insurance Scheme 
namely Kudumshree thi s year for be low poverty l ine people.  As per 
this scheme a death compensati on of R s. 1 l akh and medical  
expenses (of a family consisting of 5 members) upto Rs. 30,000/- per 
annum is offered.   The premium f or the scheme is Rs.399/. Of which 
Rs.99/- shall be borne in the ratio of 1:1:1 by the State Government, 
Local Self Government and the beneficiary respectively.  Rs.300/- will 
come as subsidy from the Central Government.  The scheme is to be 
operated by a private insurance company named ICICI Lombard.   As 
the subsidy of Rs. 300/- under UHIS can be availed only by the Public 
Sector Insurance Companies, the scheme remains a non-starter. In 
this regard, a representative of the Ministry of Health and family 
Welfare stated before the Committee during evidence as follows:- 
“A lot of these expl anations are existing in the universal health 
insurance scheme.  Among other explanations, thi s also 
 30

perhaps is an expl anation that the scheme has not been doing 
well, as it is evident.  That is  why in K erala, when they worked 
out the Kudumbashree which was originally taken from UHI 
scheme. They made seven very critical departures form the 
UHI project.  Pre-exi sting diseases was covered in the 
Kudumbashree which Kerala devel oped.  First year exclusion s 
were covered, maternity benefi ts were covered, cost of 
domiciliary hospitals were covered, mental ill ness, full disabi lity 
compensation and partial  disabili ty compensation was also 
covered.  Surpri singly, the premium worked out which was 
lower than what w as the premium for UHIS.  None of these is 
allowed under the existing UHIS.  They had managed to 
negotiate through an open process and able to get this 
particular thing.  The onl y problem, as you know, is the schem e 
has not started.  Out of 25 lakh below the poverty line families 
in Kerala, about ei ght lakh have already deposited thei r share 
of Rs. 33, the State Government was to gi ve Rs. 33, local 
Government, Rs. 33.  They had expected Rs. 300 to come as 
subsidy from the Government of Indi a, which is as I mentioned 
because of the specific budgetar y statement that it would only 
be available for public sector insurance companies, the Finance 
Ministry has not been abl e to  do that. … They wanted to 
develop with ICICI Lombard through open and transparent 
process and they were bei ng provi ded under UHIH scheme a 
sum of Rs.580/- for a family of  fi ve but the actual  amount 
available was Rs.399/- but the Mi nistry of Finance has not yet 
agreed to release the subsidy of Rs.300/-.”  
 
5.3 Government of A ssam has also introduced Mukhya Mantri r 
Jibon Jyoti Bima Achoni whi ch is a combined Health Insurance and 
Personal Accident Scheme for al l t he citizens of the State. The 
objective of the scheme i s to pr ovide medical expenses upto a 
maximum of Rs.25,000/-.  In re gard to im plementation of this 
scheme, a representative of GIPSA stated duri ng evidence, “whether 
people have got the benefits of the scheme or not is not known.” 
 31

5.4 Government of  Andhra Pradesh has also launched one Graha 
Raksha Yojana in which al the BPL families whose houses are 
destroyed by natural calamities are eligi ble to clai m Rs.10,000.  
Another scheme of Andhra Pradesh is a personal accident cover.  
Anybody in that State who i s a farmer or a  poor man is covered upto 
an insurance of R s.one lakh. Premium for these schemes is pai d by 
the Government of  Andhra Pradesh. In regard to implementation, the 
Committee were informed that th ough it is loss making, it is 
successful.  
5.5 In the state budget of 200 6-07, the Government of Karnataka 
announced to implement a health insurance schem e for landless 
agricultural labourers under the name of “Swarana Suraksha”.  The 
scheme will be implemented by adapt ing the “Universal Health 
Insurance Scheme” of the Government of India.                       
 32

CHAPTER-VI 
 
SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Suggestion made by the Ministry of Rural Development  
 
6.1 National Rural Employment Guarantee Act was enacted in 
2005 which guarantees 100 days of employment in a financial year to 
any rural household whose adult me mbers are willing to do unskilled 
manual work.  The Act came into fo rce initially in 200 districts and will 
extended  gradually to other ar eas noti fied by the Central  
Government.  In the operational gui delines, 2006 of the Act, it  has 
been mentioned that the Act will cov er the w hole country within five 
years. Employment is provided as per the job cards i ssued  by the  
Gram Panchayat to every regist ered household.  The Secretary, 
Ministry of  Rural Development while explaining the utility of job cards 
for the identification of rural  ma sses for coverage under insurance 
schemes, stated as follows:- 
 
“What  we can offer from the Rural Development Department, if 
it works out, could be certai nly much more plausible than what 
the health missi on can offer or any other group can offer. 
Today, at the village level, we have a whole arrangement which 
is  working in these poorest dist ricts for mobili zing the poorest 
households for doing real ly har d work.  They are there. 
Suppose the premium  is as low as Rs.100 or Rs.150.  A day’s 
wage in most of these  places is Rs.60 or Rs.65. Suppose a 
person says that he is willing to give  a day’s wages, it is not 
much for a full annual coverage.  He may be working for 
hundred days, but because of our job card, you can actual ly 
find him i n the vill age for the ent ire period. So, we want to use 
the job card as the poi nt from  which you can get a full year 
coverage for every household.  We think that we can do it. 
 33

Right now there has been a lot of p ublicity for it. In some States 
the scheme has taken off extremel y well. Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pr adesh, Orissa, Chhattisgarh 
are the places where the schemes i s really in full swi ng.  We 
believe it is perfectly possible for us, if a company is also willing 
to stand side by side with us.” 
 
 Suggestions of Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore 
 
6.2 During the Committee’s  vi sit to Bangalore on 21.09.2006, 
Centre for Insurance Research & E ducation , Indi an Institute of 
Management, Bangalore  made a presentati on to the Committee on 
the subj ect “Insurance Schemes f or the weaker sections of the 
society”.  They highlighted the following points concerned with poor 
insurance coverage of weaker sections of the society:- 
(i) High cost of di stribution and administration due to l ow sum 
assured and corresponding low. 
(ii) The current channels a re more urban oriented and this 
provides constraints. 
(iii) Seasonal nature of income leading to irregular payment of 
premium. 
(iv) Operational chal lenges in obtaining reliabl e documentation 
at the tim e of issui ng policies, securi ng acceptable proof of 
age, coll ecting and remitting premiums promptly and 
accurately etc. 
(v) Claims management probl ematic; verifying the authenticity 
of claims time consuming and expensive. 
 
 
 
 34

 
6.3 For affecting im provements in this area, the IIM, 
Bangalore made the following suggestions: 
(i) Introduction of package po licies such as the Farmers’  
Package policy coveri ng various perils incl uding acci dent, 
death and disabil ity of the earning member of the family, 
natural calamities, etc. to increase the awareness of risk and 
insurance and save on distribution costs. 
(ii) Introducing insurance produc ts that provide flexibility in 
premium payment.  Payment schedul e to be linked to the 
harvest season, with an option for top-up payments by 
farmers in periods of surplus in comes, along with a facility 
for irregular premi um payments due to natural di sasters 
without affecting the continuity of the insurance cover. 
(iii) New approaches to widen the coverage to be devised. For 
example, any loan disbursed can stipulate that there shoul d 
be compulsory  death and disability cover. Insurers could 
sell insurance products on t he back of banking products 
widely made avai lable by way of `kisan’ credit cards. Auto 
drivers purchasing vehicles wi th bank loans could be sold a 
compulsory life insurance po licy. Housemaids coul d be 
registered and the employer may be required to compulsorily 
insure them. Vehicle owners may be required to provide 
compulsory insurance for their paid drivers etc. 
(iv) Innovative distribution appr oaches through partnershi p with 
village level instituti ons and non-governmental 
 35

organizations.  This would help to lower distribution and 
claim costs.  
(v) The Indian postal servi ce could also be used to sel l health 
and general insurance poli cies, besides the existing postal  
life insurance. 
(vi) Portability to be insured. 
(vii) Introduction  of si mplified health i nsurance polici es.  The 
main requirement is to rei mburse hospitalization expenses 
incurred for major surgery, or accident. 
(viii) Payment of claim s is an important area. T he post offices 
could be utilized in this important activity, through opening of 
postal savings accounts or bank account in the joint name of 
the insured and hi s spouse to  ensure payment of proceeds 
to the affected party. 
 36

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. The Plann ing Com mission in thei r Tenth Five Year Plan  (2002-07) 
document highlighted that at the beginning of the new  m illennium, 260 
million people in the countr y did not have incomes to access a 
consumption basket which defines the po verty line.  Of these, 75 per cent 
were stated to be in rural areas  w ith the bulk of the rural poor comprising  
as agricultural w age earners, small and marginal farmers and  casual  
workers engaged in non-agricultural activities. The fact  that such a 
significant proportion of populati on of the countr y belongi ng to 
economically weaker sections of the so ciety and l iving below poverty line 
both in rural and urban areas is high ly vulnerable to h igh-risk work 
environments and h ealth hazards, policy and pro grammatic initiatives on  
the part of the Central Government are  needed for providing  protection 
against n atural calamities including crop failure; diseases;  and u ntimely 
loss of lives. Recog nizing the necessit y  for Government’s initiatives for 
providing social security  to th ese  segments of population, the Committee 
took up the subject `Insurance schemes for weaker sections of the society’ 
for examination. The Com mittee had detailed interactions w ith the 
representatives of Ministry  of  Finance (Department of  Economic Affairs-
Insurance Division); Public Sector In surance Companies; Ministry of   
Health and Family  Welfare; Ministry   of  Rural Developm ent; and informal 
discussions w ith State Governments of Kerala and Karnat aka as w ell as  
IIM Bangalore. After going into the various aspect s relating to 
implementation of and performance under different life and non-life 
insurance schemes announced from time  to time by  the Government and 
launched by Public Sector Insurance Companies, the Committee are of the 
view that there is an urgent need to pay  focused attention on revamping 
and redesigning  the various insurance schemes being operated for weaker 
and vulnerable sections of the societ y so that the insurance coverage 
amongst these sections of the societ y is not onl y w idened but  the  
intended benefits also  reach the targeted segments.   The different aspects 
 37

relating to the subject have b een dealt with in detail by  the Committee in 
the succeeding paragraphs. 
  
2. The Com mittee note that su bsequent to setting up of the Social  
Security Fund in 1988-89 for providi ng social securit y through group  
insurance schemes to the w eaker and vu lnerable sections of the societ y, 
different group insurance schemes fo r  approved occupational groups 
belonging to these sections are being subsidized from this Fund at the rate 
of 50 per cent of  the premium payable. Ho wever, in pursuan ce of  
Government’s announcement  in Budg et 2000-2001, this Social Securit y 
Scheme w as  frozen  from 10 th August, 2000 and  onl y renew al of groups 
covered earlier is allow ed.  This sch eme w as simultaneously replaced  b y 
Janashree Bima Yojana (JBY) w hich provides life insurance protection to 
the rural and urban poor persons w ho are below or marginall y above the 
poverty line provided they  belong to  the identified occupational group.  
Since its launch the administering agency i.e., the L ife Insura nce 
Corporation (LIC) has identified and added another 19 occupational groups 
for coverage und er JBY thus taking th e total of approved occupational  
groups under JBY to 43.  The  Committee find that onl y about 35.40 la khs 
persons stood covered under  this scheme by  w ay of new  enrollment or 
renewal during the year 2004-05.  Takin g into con sideration the size o f the 
population intended to be covered under the scheme, the C ommittee are 
convinced that it will take a ver y long time to cover  all the targeted peo ple 
at the present pace. The Committee also feel  that the poor coverage under 
JBY is m ainly due to  certain inhe rent w eaknesses in  its restrictive 
approach and conditionalities attached to the scheme such  as the persons 
covered under the  scheme should  belong onl y to  any  of the 43 
occupational groups identified and notif ied by LIC, the coverage under the 
scheme should  be offered only to a group having minimum membership of 
25 persons and only heads of families s hould normally be  covered.  I n the 
opinion of the Committee, the basi c understanding that policies  for  
 38

insurance need to be canvassed and that the insurance in dustry is alw ays 
supply driven, is missing in the formulation and practices in this scheme.    
Obviously, any  person living below  or marginally above po verty line w ho 
is unable to meet the aforesaid  criterion can not avail himself of coverage 
under this scheme.   The Committee are at a loss in  com prehending  the 
logic of re stricting the benefits under this  scheme to persons belonging  
only to certain identified occupational/v ocational groups  and that too w ith 
a minimum membership of  25 such  persons.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, the scheme in its  present form cannot meet the objective of 
providing life insurance protection to the entire populace of rural and urban 
poor  living below  or marginall y abo ve t he povert y line.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that this scheme shoul d be so revamped  and  
restructured that the benefit of li fe insurance co verage reaches all those 
persons w ho live below  or marginal ly above povert y line in the age 
segment betw een 18 and 60 years. Since the scheme aims at covering  
economically w eaker sections of the so ciety, the sy stem of  grouping a 
minimum of 25 persons should also be review ed so that the coverage 
under  restructured scheme is extende d even to those individuals w ho are 
unable to meet the requirement of fo rming a group of 25 members from an 
identified occupation but willing to join the scheme.   
 
3. According to the information made avai lable to the Committee, the 
Ministry of  Finance introduced the Universal Health Insurance Sch eme 
(UHIS) in Jul y 2003 and not ified it w ithin one year of its operation in 2004 
restricting the scheme only for the BPL families. This scheme is at present  
being implemented b y fou r public sector insuran ce comp anies. 
Astonishingly, this scheme could co ver merely 65728 families comprising  
1,82,641 persons du ring the year 2004-05.   The main reasons put forth b y 
the Government for the poor coverage under the scheme are unsatisfactory 
efforts at increasing enrolment, unsat isfactory thrust of public sector  
insurance companies in linking service provision and to ensure qu ality 
 39

health care, BPL  populat ion’s difficult y to pay even  th e subsidi zed 
premium, unremunerativeness of the scheme to insurance c ompanies, and 
its implementation onl y through the publ ic sector insurance schemes etc. 
Evidently, this scheme has been  conceived w ithout undertaking a  
feasibility stud y an d implemented w ithout taking into consideration the  
ground realities with the result that the performance under the scheme has 
been dismal. This view of the Committee has been further reinforced by the 
disclosure made during evidence by  the Special Secretar y in Minis try of  
Finance t hat the  Prime Minister has directed the Ministry of Health and  
Family Welfare to redesign a health insurance scheme which will cover all 
the BPL families in the entire country irrespective of whether the scheme is 
to be implemented b y the pu blic or private secto r insurance compan ies.  
The Com mittee expect that suitable lessons w ill be dr awn f rom t his 
experience and concrete action in right direction will be  taken atleast now  
by undertaking a comprehensive review of the UHIS in its present form with 
a view to overcoming the obstacles  noticed in the operation of the scheme 
particularly in regard to  poor coverage, role of insurance companies in the 
implementation of the schem e and  th e quantum  of subsidy  on premium 
payable by the Government. Needless to say that decreasing the burden on 
economically w eaker sections and incr easing coverage b oth in terms of  
number of diseases cover ed and amoun t reimbursable under the scheme 
should be the thrust areas w ith particular emphasis on proper provisions 
for delivery of hassle free services. 
 
4. The Com mittee note that the some  of the State Governments have 
been launching health insurance schemes on the lines of UHIS.  The State 
Government of Kerala has also launche d a health in surance scheme in t he 
name of Kudumbashre to be operated by  one of the insurance companies 
in private sector. The premium for the scheme is Rs.399/-, of w hich Rs.99/- 
shall be borne in the ratio of 1:1:1 by the State Government, Local Self 
Government and the beneficiar y resp ectively an d Rs.300/-  to come as 
 40

subsidy from the Central Government.  The Committee have been informed 
that  about eight lakh persons have  deposited their share of Rs.33/-  
towards premium,  but the scheme re mains a non-starter a s the Central 
Government has not released the subsid y of Rs.300/- on the ground that  
such sub sidy und er   UHIS can be av ailed  of onl y by   Public Sector 
Insurance Compani es.    Sin ce the  interests of as man y as eight lakh  
persons of the vulnerable sections of society are  b eing adversely affected 
only  due to procedural requirements despite pay ment of their part of  
premium, the Committee urge the Governm ent to settle th is issue w ith the 
Government of Kerala and r eport on action taken immediately   to the 
Committee. 
5. The Com mittee’s examination also  reveals that  several i nsurance 
schemes were  launched b y the Gover nment for providing social securit y 
to econo mically w eaker sections of th e society b ut a n umber of such  
schemes w ere subsequentl y either w ithdrawn or modified for one reason 
or the other. While  Krishi Shr amik Samajik Suraksha Yojana was launched 
in 2001, it was closed in the year 2003 and only renewals are being allowed 
now.  The main reason for discontinuan ce of this scheme is stated to be 
that the a mount of subsid y was too high and that th e Ministry of Labour’s 
proposal in this regard w as turned do wn by  the Ministry  of  Fina nce.  
Similarly, Landless Agricultural  Labourers Group Insurance Scheme 
introduced in  1987 w ith the  aim of covering 1.2 crore landless agricultural 
labourers too  w as w ithdrawn in the y ear 2000 as the insurance cover of 
Rs.2000/- w as considered to be too l ow. Further,  Rural Group Life  
Insurance Schemes introduced w ith  effect from 15 th August, 1995 for  
providing life insurance protection to the rural masses w as discontinued 
from  1st April, 2000 on the ground that there w as a proposal to have an all-
encompassing single, simple and co mprehensive scheme of insurance 
which will be easy  to operate.  As br ought out earlier in the  Report, even 
the Social Securit y Group Insuran ce Schemes  had been frozen and 
replaced b y JBY in  the y ear 2000. In  y et another instance, proposals are 
 41

stated to be under consideration to  chalk out another sch eme in  place of  
UHIS introduced in the year 2003 a nd redesigned i n 2004.  T he Committee 
take a serious view of such dilatory approach displayed by the Government 
in providing  insurance co verage to economically w eaker sections o f the 
society. Undoubtedly, most of the insurance schemes for this  segment of 
population have been conceived w ithout proper evaluation and in-depth 
study. The Committee, therefore,  recommend that Government should 
devise a scientific mechanism w hereby an y Ministr y embarking on an 
insurance scheme for econo mically w eaker sections must be mad e to 
undertake a thorough stud y on the feasibili ty of t he scheme in its entirety  
before its launch so that the prevalent st ate of affairs is avoided atleast in 
future. 
6. The Committee are also of th e  firm belief that lack of coor dination 
between different Ministries is  one of  the reasons for discontinuance of 
some of the insurance schemes for economically w eaker sections of the 
society as is evident from the mid- way closure of Krishi Shramik Samajik 
Suraksha Yojna within two and a half y ears of its launch as the Ministry of  
Finance turned down the proposal of Ministry of Labour on the ground t hat 
the amount of subsidy under the scheme was too high.  The Committee are 
in no doubt that this aspect of s ubsidy could have been taken into 
consideration before introducing this scheme on 1 st J uly, 2 001 an d it s 
subsequent withdrawal in December, 2003 could have been avoided on this 
count.  This speaks volumes about the manner in w hich the insurance 
schemes meant for targeted segments  are being d evised and implemented 
by the Go vernment.  Since the  Insurance Regul atory and  Develop ment 
Authority(IRDA) and the Insurance Divi sion in the Ministry  of Finance are  
concerned w ith the activities of both life and non -life insurance sect or in 
the country and have a pivotal role in the matter, the Committee desire that 
the IRDA along w ith the Insurance Division should  not only  be made to 
provide requisite guidance in formulati on and effective implementation of 
such sch emes to  the ad ministrative Ministries assigned w ith the 
 42

responsibility of conceptualizing and implementin g the scheme but shoul d 
also assume responsibility for evaluating the sch eme and suggesting mid 
course remedial measures for improv ing performance und er the scheme 
rather than taking recourse to w ithdrawal of scheme.  The Committee trust 
that suitable steps in this direction will be taken in right earnest. 
7. The Committee are also concerned to find that the extent of coverage 
under Central Sector insurance schemes introduced for economicall y 
weaker sections continues to be poor despite some of these schemes 
being in operation for considerable period of time. Several reasons have 
been adduced for the poor coverage under the different schemes.  Some of  
the prominent problem areas are : limit ed reach of insurance compa nies, 
problems of identification of economically weaker families both in rural and 
urban areas, high cost of  distribution a nd admini stration due to lo w sum 
assured, seasonal n ature of income of the econo mically w eaker sections 
leading to irregular payment of premium, operational problems in obtaining 
reliable documents at the time of i ssuing policies, problems of claims 
management and non-existence of suitable channelising agencies who can 
collect premium as w ell as settle the claims. In the opinion o f the 
Committee, launching of sep arate schemes for life and non -life insurance 
coverage is yet another important reason for poor coverage under different 
schemes. Although rural group insuran ce schem es w ere discontinued in 
April 2000 ostensibly on the ground that there was a proposal to have an all 
encompassing single, simple and co mprehensive scheme of insurance 
which would be easy to operate, the Committee are constrained to observe 
that this has lamentabl y not been don e despite a lapse of considerabl e 
period of over six years.  The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend that a 
single comprehensive  insurance scheme sh ould be introduced b y 
combining life, accident and health in surance coverage without any further 
delay for  providing easy  and affo rdable insurance p rotection to 
economically w eaker population in th e countr y. A cost-effective scheme 
carrying  low est possible  premium  should be put in place and the 
 43

Government should subsidize a major pa rt of the premium atleast in the 
initial stages of the new scheme.  
8.   The Committee note that the IRDA (Obligations of Insurers to Rural  
Social Sectors) Regulations 2000 defi nes economically vulnerable classes 
as persons w ho live  below  the povert y line.  Therefore, the ne w scheme 
may provide for flexible rules in regard to timing of payment of premium by 
below po verty line families  as they may  sometimes not be able to 
contribute their part of  the premium  at the time specified  for the purp ose 
by the insurance companies.  The Government may also consider 
introducing fool proof institutionaliz ed arrangements for collection of 
premium in easy and regular instalments from the BPL families at the tim e 
of payment of wages or while extending any financial assistance including 
facility of micro-financing.  The amount  so collected can be paid in lump-
sum when the premium becomes due.  For the purposes of identification of 
economically w eaker section s, the Government may  evo lve a suitable 
mechanism w hereby the  job cards issued under  National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act(NREGA) could, among other methods, be used 
for identification of rural poor. For the districts not covered under NREGA 
at present,  suitable modalities for identification of the targetted population 
may b e formulated. The present impasse arising out of the methods of  
estimation of NSS and actual identifi cation of BPL households by  State  
Governments shoul d not be allow ed to stand in the w ay of offering 
insurance cover to manual workers who report for work under NREGA on a 
regular basis.  A similar arrangement may also be made for the urban poor. 
Considering the  operational challeng es in regard to limited rea ch of  
insurance companies; collection of pr emium; and settlement of claims, the 
Committee  are of considered vie w that huge net w ork of post offices  w ith 
its reach even in the remotest areas in the country can be gainfully utilised 
by involving their  personnel w ho are  familiar with th e segment of 
population they serve. The ser vices of  NGOs, SHGs, etc., who are alr eady 
in this field can also be  utilised fo r depositing  premium collected from the 
 44

beneficiaries and for settlement  of claims with the nearest post office.  The 
Committee trust that the Government w ould address this issue in right 
earnest and devise a single compre hensive insurance scheme for the 
economically weaker population in the country. 
9.         The Committee’s examinati on also reveals that keeping in view  the 
dismal insurance coverage t o the rur al and ur ban poor,  the Insur ance 
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) as part of its developm ental 
role has introduced the concept of micr o-insurance IRDA is stated to have  
taken several steps to ensure that th e benefits of micro-insurance reach  
the people w ho require it most and to see that the products are not priced 
out of the reach of the need y.  The Co mmittee have been informed that 
IRDA has imposed certain obligations on all the insurance companie s to 
undertake such percentages of lif e insurance business and general 
insurance business in the rural and so cial sector as prescribed b y it.    
While the number of persons living be low povert y line both in rural a nd 
urban areas is estimated to be in th e vicinity of  220 millions in 2007, the  
Committee find it astonishing that obligations imposed by  IRDA to 
undertake insurance of those coming un der `rural’ or `social sector’ are far 
short of real needs . IRDA be ing r esponsible for the deve lopment and 
regulation of the insurance sector, th e Committee expect the Author ity to  
play a proactive role in providing in surance coverage to those living below 
and marginally above poverty line.  The Committee, therefore, stress t hat a 
comprehensive review of prescribed obligations should be undertaken b y 
IRDA and  remedial steps taken to m eet the needs of the econo mically 
weaker sections of the society. 
10. The Committee find that IRDA Regulations 2000 define economically 
vulnerable classes as persons w ho live be low the povert y line.  How ever,  
poverty line itself has not be en defi ned in the IRDA Regu lations.  During 
evidence, Chairman IRDA also admitted that the a uthority has not d efined 
poverty and it is le ft to the imagin ation of the Government and Insurance 
Companies.  In the absen ce of an y clear  definition of poverty, the 
 45

Committee feel that IRDA appears t o be relying o n the restrictive 
consumption and income b ased criteria follow ed by  the Planning 
Commission for  identificati on of  poor households.  The Committee are of 
the view  that w hile such  a criteria may be rel evant for targeting Public 
Distribution System etc., the concept of capability deprivation may perhaps 
be more relevant for the purposes of insurance.  The Committee, therefore, 
stress that  it is imperative for IRDA to  have a clear definition of povert y so 
that the economicall y vulnerable secti ons of the societ y may actually reap 
the benefits of insurance protection.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI              C.KUPPUSAMI, 
December  14 , 2006           Chairman, 
Agrahayana   23, 1928(S)          Committee on Estimates 
 
                                                                                                                                       
 46

         ANNEXURE –A 
STATE-WISE STATISTICS OF LIVES COVERED UNDER SOCIAL 
SECURITY SCHEME IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS 
 
STATE 2000-01 200102 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
HARYANA 3587 2293 1277 8671 10686 
HIMACHAL 
PRADESH 
515 3533 3101 3509 11898 
JAMMU & 
KASHMIR 
1595 25 4313 4431 15570 
PUNJAB 0 20121 6334 11235 17433 
RAJASTHAN 58769 81274 80399 92619 105469 
CHANDIGARH 317 20146 10380 112863 175148 
DELHI 394 8438 3415 21560 16023 
MADHYA 
PRADESH 
2757929 2892906 2882156 2784816 2841039 
UTTAR 
PRADESH 
254312 239631 340792 765510 876223 
ASSAM 1667 8410 706640 1005460 40088 
BIHAR 209040 216981 7435 867 512190 
ORRISA 120579 137598 37293 7298 256275 
WEST BENGAL 234371 231770 5469 4766 722116 
KERALA 33084 34257 54023 60456 74475 
TAMILNADU 125435 158112 171757 426927 387970 
ANDHRA 
PRADESH 
123429 244514 224207 437173 783462 
KARNATAKA 131252 140159 94296 122920 217078 
GOA 3853 2358 7182 10500 17103 
GUJARAT 780462 609592 782500 898356 770362 
MAHARASHTRA 32291 58832 97203 113752 312613 
CHATTISGARH 5017 0 1732 388 2389576 
ARUNACHAL 
PRADESH 
0 0 120 0 0 
JHARKAND 0 0 2453 0 0 
MEGHALAYA 0 0 600 0 0 
TRIPURA 0 0 26629 0 0 
 
TOTAL 4877918 5110950 5550706 6894077 10091817 
 
 47

Appendices 
 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
                 (2005-2006) 
  
   TENTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on  Thursday, the 12th September, 2005 
from 1100  to  1300  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2.       Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal 
3.       Shri Lal Muni Choubey 
4.       Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
5.       Shri Anant Gudhe 
6.       Shri P. Karunakaran 
7.    Shri Vijoy Krishna 
8.    Prof. Chander Kumar 
9.    Shri Samik Lahiri 
10.  Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
11.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
12.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan 
13.  Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
14.  Shri  K.S. Rao 
15.  Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
16.  Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
17.  Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.D. Swan   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Cyril John   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Hoti Lal   - Assistant Director 
 48

        -  2 - 
 
 
Witnesses 
  
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) 
 
 
1. Shri A.K. Jha  - Secretary 
 
2. Shri Vinod Rai  - Additional Secretary (FS) 
 
 
INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
(IRDA) 
 
 Shri C.S. Rao   - Chairman 
 
Life Insurance Corporation of India 
 
 Shri T.S. Viyayan  - Managing Director 
 
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. & Head of General Insurance 
(Public Sector) Association of India 
  
 Shri R. Beri   - Chairman & Managing Director 
 
 
2.  The Committee was briefed by  the representatives of Ministry 
of Finance (Department of  Economic Affairs) and other organizations 
on the subject - `Insurance Schemes for Weaker Sections of Society’.   
The briefing was concluded. 
 
3.       A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 49

 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
                 (2005-2006) 
  
   SIXTEENTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on  Thursday, the 5th January, 2006 
from 1100  to  1315  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2.       Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal 
3.        Shri Lal Muni Choubey 
4.      Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
5.        Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
6.        Shri Anant Gudhe 
7.        Shri Jai Prakash 
8.        Shri P. Karunakaran 
9.        Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
10. Shri Samik Lahiri 
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
12.  Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
13.  Shri Zora Singh Mann 
14.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
15.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan 
16.  Prof. M. Ramadass 
17.  Shri  K.S. Rao 
18.  Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri B.D. Swan   -  Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri J.S. Chauhan  - Under Secretary 
                        Contd..2.. 
     -  2 - 
 50

 
 
Witnesses 
  
INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
(IRDA) 
 
1. Shri K.K. Srinivasan, Member 
2. Shri Suresh Mathur, Joint Director 
3. Shri P.A. Balasubramanian, Consultant 
 
2.  The Committee took oral evi dence of  the r epresentatives of 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA)  on the 
subject Ministry of Finance (Department of  Economic Affairs – 
Insurance Division) - `Insurance Sc hemes for Weaker Sections of 
Society’.   The evidence was concluded. 
 
3.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 51

  
 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
                 (2005-2006) 
  
 
   SEVENTEENTH SITTING 
 
 
 The Committee sat on  Thursday, the 5th January, 2006 
from 1500  to  1620  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2.       Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
3.       Shri Jai Prakash 
4.       Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5.       Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
6.       Shri  K.S. Rao 
7.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
8.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
9.       Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
 
Secretariat 
  
 
1. Shri A.M. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.D. Swan   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri J.S. Chauhan  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
      -  2 - 
 52

 
Witnesses 
  
 
GENERAL INSURANCE (PUBLIC SECTOR) ASSOCIATION  
(GIPSA) 
 
     1.  Shri R.C. Jain, Chief Executive, GIPSA 
     2.  Shri  H.P. Singh, Assistant General Manager 
      
2.  The Committee took oral evi dence of  the r epresentatives of 
General Insurance (Public Sector)  Association (GIPSA) on the 
subject Ministry of Finance (Department of  Economic Affairs – 
Insurance Division) - `Insurance Sc hemes for Weaker Sections of 
Society’.   The evidence was concluded. 
 
3.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 53

  
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
                 (2005-2006) 
  
   NINETEENTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on  Wednesday, the  25th  January, 2006 
from 1030  to  1235  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2.       Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal 
3.       Shri Lal Muni Choubey 
4.       Shri V.Kishore Chandra S.Deo 
5.       Shri Anant Gudhe 
6.       Shri Vijoy Krishna 
7.       Shri B.Vinod Kumar 
8.       Shri Samik Lahiri 
9.       Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
10.   Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
11.   Shri Prabodh Panda 
12.   Shri Sukdeo Paswan 
13.   Shri  K.S. Rao 
14.   Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
15.   Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
16.   Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri A.M. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.D. Swan   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri  Cyril John      - Under Secretary 
                        Contd..2.. 
 
 
 54

     -  2 - 
 
Witnesses 
  
Life  Insurance  Corporation of  India (LIC) 
 
1. Shri A.K. Shukla, Chairman 
 
2.      Shri N.B. Sathe, Chief (SBU-P&GS) 
 
3.      Shri M.K. Kukreti, Secretary (Board Sectt.)  
 
 
2.  The Committee took oral evi dence of  the r epresentatives of 
Life Insurance Corporation of India  on the subject Ministry of Finance 
(Department of  Economic Affairs – Insurance Division) - `Insurance 
Schemes for Weaker Sections of Society’.   The evidence was 
concluded. 
 
3.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 55

MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2006-07) 
 
THIRD SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the  19th June, 2006 from 1100 hour to 
1230 hour. 
 
Present 
 
       Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman 
  
        Members 
 
2. Shri Lal Muni Choubey 
3. Shri P. Karunakaran 
4. Shri VijayKumar Khandelwal 
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
6. Shri Samik Lahiri 
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda  
9. Shri K.S.Rao 
10. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
12. Shri Lakshman Singh 
13. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
14. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.      Shri  A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint  Secretary 
2.      Shri  Rajeev Sharma   - Deputy Secretary 
3.       Shri  Cyril John                         -          Under Secretary 
4.      Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Assistant Director 
 
2.      At   the    outset,   the  Commi ttee   t ook   a    briefing  from  the  
representatives of  M inistry  of  Finance ( Department of Economic Affairs – 
Insurance Division), LIC, IRDA and GIPSA on the subj ect, ‘Insurance Schemes 
for weaker sections of society’. The  Committee decided to hold the next sitting 
on 29th June, 2006. 
 
 
 56

 
3.            A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 57

MINUTES OF FOURTH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES 
COMMITTEE 
(2006-07) 
 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29th June, 2006 from 1100 to 
1245 hours. 
 
Present 
 
       Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman 
  
        Members 
 
2. Shri Lal Muni Choubey 
3. Shri Anant Gudhe 
4. Shri P. Karunakaran 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal 
6. Shri Samik Lahiri 
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda  
9. Shri K.S.Rao 
10. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
12. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi 
13. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
14. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
15. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.      Shri  A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint  Secretary 
2.      Shri  Rajeev Sharma   - Deputy Secretary 
3.        Shri  Cyril John                        -          Under Secretary 
4.      Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Assistant Director 
 
 
 
2.    The  Committee took oral ev idence of represent atives of three 
NGOs, namely, Chetanalay a, Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
and Madhok Foundation, on the subjec t ‘Insurance s chemes for weaker 
 58

sections of society’.  The  Committee also decided to hold their next sitting 
on 11th July, 2006. 
 
 
3.            A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 59

MINUTES OF FIFTH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2006-07) 
 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th July, 2006 from 1100 to 1335 
hours. 
 
Present 
 
       Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman 
  
        Members 
 
2. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
5. Shri Anant Gude 
6. Shri P. Karunakaran 
7. Shri Samik Lahiri 
8. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda  
10. Shri K.S.Rao 
11. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat 
12. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi 
13. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
14. Shri Lakshman Singh 
15. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
16. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.      Shri  A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint  Secretary 
2.      Shri  Rajeev Sharma   - Deputy Secretary 
3.        Shri  Cyril John                        -          Under Secretary 
4.      Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Assistant Director 
 
 
 
2.   The  Committee took   oral ev idence of the representatives of M inistry of 
Health and Family  Welfar e (Department of Healt h) and Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of R ural Deve lopment) on the subject ‘Insurance 
Schemes for Weaker Sections  of Societ y’ relating to Ministry of Fina nce 
(Department of Economic Affairs –Insurance Division).   
 60

 
 
 
 
 
 
3.            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
 
 
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 61

MINUTES OF EIGHTH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2006-07) 
 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 17th October, 2006 from 1100 to 
1245 hours. 
 
 
 
Present 
 
     1.       Shri Samik Lahiri  - Convener 
 
         Members 
 
2.      Shri Lal Muni Choubey  
3.      Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4.      Shri Anant Gudhe 
5.      Shri Jai Prakash 
6.      Shri P. Karunakaran 
7.      Shri Vijaykumar Khandelwal 
8.      Prof. Chander Kumar 
9.      Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
10.      Shri Prabodh Panda  
11.      Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
12.      Shri Manabendra Shah 
13.      Shri Lakshman Singh 
14.      Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1.      Shri  Rajeev Sharma   - Deputy Secretary 
2.      Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Assistant Director 
 
    
 62

-  2 - 
 
      Witnesses 
   
Ministry of  Finance 
 
(I)  Shri  Vinod Rai, Special Secretary, Financial Sector 
(II)     Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary  
 
INSURANCE REGULATORY DEVELOPMENT OF INDIA (IRDA) 
Shri C. S.Rao, Chairman, IRDA 
  
 REHABILITATION COUNCIL OF INDIA 
   
  Dr. J.P. Singh, Member Secretary 
   
2.  Since the Chairman expressed hi s inability to attend the sitting, 
the Committee requested  Shri Samik Lahiri, Member of the 
Committee to chair the sitting of  the Committee under Rule 258(3) of 
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
  
3.  The Committee then took oral  evidence of the representatives 
of Ministry of Finance (Department  of Economic Affairs-Insurance 
Division) and Insurance Regulatory Development Authority (IRDA) on 
the subject `Insurance schemes for weaker sections of society’. 
  
4.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 63

MINUTES OF TENTH  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2006-07) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the  14th December, 2006 
from 1500 hours to 1545 hours. 
 
Present 
 
       Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman 
  
        Members 
 
2. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
3. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S.  Deo 
4. Shri Vijaykumar Khandelwal 
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
6. Prof. Chander Kumar 
7. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat 
8. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi 
9. Shri Lakshman Singh. 
10. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
    1.      Shri A. Mukhopadhyay    -         Joint Secretary       
2.      Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
3.      Shri Manju Choudhary - Assistant Director 
 
 
2. The Committee consi dered the draft Report on Insurance 
schemes for weaker sections of society relating to Ministry of  
Finance (Department of  Economic Affairs-Insurance Division) and 
adopted the sam e with minor modificati ons/additions given in the 
Annexure. 
 
 64

3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report 
in the li ght of modifications an d also to make verbal and other 
consequential changes, i f any, arising  out of factual verification  by 
the concerned Ministry and present the same to the House.  
 
4. XX   XX   XX  XX  XX  
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 65

ANNEXURE 
 
MODIFICATIONS MADE BY TH E ESTIM ATES COMMI TTEE IN 
THE DRAFT REPORT ON INSU RANCE SCHEMES FOR WEAKER 
SECTIONS OF SOCIETY RELATING  TO MI NISTRY OF  FINANC E 
(DEPARTMENT OF  ECONOM IC AFFAIRS-INSURANCE 
DIVISION). 
 
Para No.    Line    Modification 
 
3.               3                              After: coverage 
(from bottom)       Add : both in terms of number of       
diseases covered and 
amount        reimbursable. 
 
 
8.                 16                        After: rural poor 
        Add: For the districts not covered     
                 under NREGA at present,  
        suitable modalities for 
       identification of the targeted    
 population may be   
 formulated. 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 66

 67
      