         E.C. No. 1432
           SIXTEENTH REPORT
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
MAINTENANCE OF MONUMENTS BY ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF
INDIA
 S
     E
 A
 L
Presented to Lok Sabha on    March, 2008
      LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
                       NEW DELHI
         March  , 2008/Phalguna  , 1929(S)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Contents
           P a g e
Composition of the Committee on Estimates     (iii)
Introduction          (iv)
Chapter I 1-16
- Introductory        1
- Historical Background     1
- Constitutional provisions and legislation   2
- Ancient Monuments and Archaeological   4
Sites and Remains Act, 1958
- Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 1972 and   5
Rules 1973
- P o l i c y        9
- Heritage Sites Commission    11
- National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 13
Chapter II Finance        17-24
- Budgetary Allocation     17
- Funding to World Heritage Sites    20
- Revenue       22
Chapter III Organisational Set-up and Functions    25-37
- Organisational set-up     25
- Post of DG       26
- Post of ADG (Archaeology)    29
- Manpower       31
- Functions of ASI      32
- Institute of Archaeology     34
- Training of Staff      36
Chapter IV Maintenance of Monuments     38-52
- Conservation and Preservation    38
- Exploration/Excavation     42
- Excavation Reports       43
- M a p s        4 5
- Laboratories        45
- Carbon Dating Machine     46
- Security of Monuments/Sites    47
- Museums       49
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

- Inspection of Sites      51
Chapter V Miscellaneous        53-68
- Encroachments/illegal Constructions   53
- Theft/Smuggling      56
- Untraceable Monuments     58
- Private Sector Participation ± National Culture   59
Fund (NCF)
- Projects sponsored under NCF   62
- Benefits of NCF     63
- Salient features of the MoU   64
- Tourist Facilities      65
- Complaints/Suggestions     68
Observations/Recommendations     69-110
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 17.06.2005       111-112
II. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 9.11.2005 (1100hrs.)      113-114
III.  Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 9.11.2005 (1500hrs.)      115-116
IV. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 17.11.2005       117-118
V. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 6.11.2006        119-120
VI. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 20.12.2007       121-123
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, MP  - Chairman
MEMBERS
2.  Shri Lal  Muni Choubey
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5. Shri Anwar Hussain
6. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
7. Shri P. Karunakaran
8. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi *
9. Shri Vijoy Krishna
10. Vacant#
11.  Shri Samik Lahiri
12. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
13.  Shri Zora Singh Mann
14. Shri Hemlal Murmu
15. Shri D. Narbula
16. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
17.  Shri Prabodh Panda
18.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan
19. Shri Sachin Pilot
20. Shri R. Prabhu
21. Shri Tufani Saroj
22. Smt. Tejaswini Seeramesh
23. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi
24. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
25. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
26.  Shri Lakshman Singh
27.   Kunwar Manvendra Singh
28.   Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
29.   Shri Rewati Raman Singh
30.   Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary
 2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary
 3. Shri C.V. Gadgil  - Director
 4. Smt. Manju Chaudhary - Deputy Secretary II
________________________________________________________________________________
* Elected on 28th November, 2007 Vice Shri Vijaykumar Khandelwal, MP passed away on   13th
    November, 2007.
# Vacant since 03.03.2008 due to resignation of Shri B. Vinod Kumar, MP.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the report on their behalf present this Sixteenth Report on the
Ministry of Culture ±µMaintenance of Monuments by Archaeological Survey of India¶.
2. The subject µMaintenance of Monuments by Archaeological Survey of India ¶
was selected for detailed examination by the Estimates Committee(2005-06). The
Estimates Committee (2005-06) took  briefing on the subject on 17.6.2005 and also
took one non-official evidence and two evidences of representatives of Ministry of
Culture and Archaeological Survey of India on 09.11.2005 (1100 hrs.), 09.11.2005
(1500 hrs.) and 17.11.2005 respectively. The Estimates Committee (2006-07) took
evidence of representatives of Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India
on 06.11.2006. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the
Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India for placing before them the
detailed written notes on the subject and for furnishing information desired in
connection with examination of the subject. The Committee also appreciate the
frankness with which the officers of Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of
India shared their views, perceptions and constraints with the Committee.
3. The Committee would also like to express their gratitude to the Estimates
Committee 2005-06 and 2006-07 for the able guidance and right direction provided
by them in obtaining information for indepth and comprehensive study of the subject.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting
held on 20th December, 2007.
5. The Report  consists of six chapters. The Committee inter-alia made the
following important observations/recommendations:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(i) The Ministry of Culture should devise an institutional mechanism to be
followed by ASI and State Archaeology Departments so that ASI can
get the information regarding the activities of State Archaeology
Departments on regular basis.
(ii) Since the Cabinet Note and Draft Bill are being finalized the
amendments should be proposed for strengthening the Antiquities and
Art Treasure Act, 1972 with a view to effectively checking the illegal
trade and smuggling of the antiquities; and
Local panchayats, patwaris and municipalities should also be involved
in taking care of the heritage.
(iii) The National Heritage Site Commission should be constituted as early
as possible with statutory powers to issue directions to all the State
Governments.
(iv) DG, ASI should be a professional and experienced officer and not just
an administrative officer, so that ASI can work effectively and efficiently
with inspired leadership.
(v) Ministry of Culture should take appropriate steps to strengthen the staff
position, especially at technical levels and posts lying vacant in all
groups should be filled up expeditiously.
(vi) Number of seats in National Institute of Archaeology should be
increased and curriculum should be more attractive, job oriented so as
to compete with international standard so that bright students get
themselves enrolled to study archaeology.
(vii) ASI should devise new methods/techniques with the collaboration of
other Ministries, agencies, institutes, etc. for conserving and preserving
the monuments without losing their originality.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(viii) State Governments should invariably be consulted before taking a
decision to declare a monument as a centrally protected. A provision
should be included in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeology Sites
and Remains Act, 1958 in this regard.
(ix) The Ministry should take all expeditious steps to get all pending
excavation reports completed.  A time frame should be fixed for
completion of all the excavation reports, which are pending for the last
ten to fifteen years.
(x) Effective provisions should be incorporated in the Ancient Monuments
Act to safeguard the monuments from encroachment; and to avoid
encroachments, construction should not be allowed in the first 200
metres from the protected limit of a monument instead of 100 metres.
(xi) Ministry of Culture should initiate expeditious and concrete action to
trace out missing monuments and the Ministry in consultation with
other authorities should devise such a mechanism that before starting
any new developmental work, it should be ascertained that in that
particular area, there are no hidden remains.
(xii) Public/Private partnership should be accepted and availed without any
undue benefits for private partners for promoting and preserving India¶s
cultural heritage.
6. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report.
NEW DELHI;
February 29, 2008
Phalguna 10 , 1929(S)
C. KUPPUSAMI,
Chairman,
Committee on Estimates.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER-I
Introductory
1.1 The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), under the Ministry of
Culture is the premier organization for the archaeological research and
protection of the cultural heritage of the nation.  Maintenance of ancient
monuments and archaeological site and remains of national importance
is the prime concern of the ASI.  Besides, it regulates all archaeological
activities in the country as per the provisions of the Ancient Monument
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958.  It also regulates
Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 1972.
1.2 As on date the number of centrally protected monuments of
national importance under ASI is 3667.
Historical Background
1.3 The story of Indian archaeology formally starts with the formation
of the Asiatic Society in 1784.  With the passage of time a need for a
department of archaeology was felt which led to the establishment of
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI).  Alexander Cunningham was
appointed Archaeological Surveyor by a Government Order from
December 1861.  The primary object of ASI was to survey and record
the archaeological monuments.  Subsequently aspects of preservation
of monuments were added to its charter.
1.4 Initially five administrative circles were created to carry out
preservation, conservation, exploration and excavation. The concept of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

environmental development  around monuments and sites was added
later.  Currently, there are 24 circles through which the Archaeological
Survey of India administers the work of preservation and conservation of
monuments under its protection.  Recently, three Mini-Circles were
upgraded to circles with its headquarters at Mumbai, Shimla and Goa for
administrative convenience in view of the vast area.  Besides, there are
six Excavation Branches, two Temple Survey Projects, one Building
Survey Project, one Prehistory Branch, one Science Branch, two
Epigraphy Branches (one for Arabic & Persian and the other for Sanskrit
and Dravidian) and one Horticulture Branch in the ASI through which
various research work in different fields is undertaken.
Constitutional provisions and legislation
1.5 As regards the necessity of legislation to protect the
archaeological heritage, the Ministry in their brief note furnished to the
Committee have stated that in 1878, the Treasure Trove Act was
promulgated to combat treasure hunting, besides regulating the lawful
disposal of treasures found in accidental digging.
1.6 In 1904, the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act was passed for
the preservation of ancient monuments, control over trafficking in
antiquities and regulation of archaeological excavations and protection
and acquisition of ancient monuments and objects of archaeological,
historical or artistic interest.  The Antiquities (Export Control) Act, 1947
was promulgated basically to regulate export of antiquities.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

1.7 With the promulgation of the Constitution of India on 26 th January,
1950, µarchaeology¶ has been made a concurrent subject under the
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, which reads:
List I (Union List), item 67: ancient and historical monuments and record,
and archaeological sites and remains declared by or under law made by
Parliament to be of national importance.
List II (State List), item 12: libraries, museums and other similar
institutions controlled or financed by the State; ancient and historical
monuments and records other than those declared by or under law
made by Parliament to be of national importance.
List III (Concurrent List), item 40: archaeological sites and remains other
than those declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of
national importance.
1.8 In fulfillment of the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament
passed the ³Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains Act ´ in 1951 by which all the monuments previously
protected under the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act 1904 were re-
declared to be of national importance.  In 1953, after the merger of the
princely states with the rest of India, the ASI took the additional
responsibility of upkeep of the monuments in princely states.
1.9 The Ministry further elaborated that the Archeological Survey of
India operates Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remain Act, 1958 and Rules 1959 and the Antiquities and Art Treasures
Act, 1972 and Rules 1973.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

1.10 The Committee enquired as to what mechanism is being followed
between the ASI and the State Archaeology Department to keep itself
informed about the activities of Sate Archaeology Departments
particularly when the subject falls under the concurrent list, the DG, ASI
in this regard stated as follows:-
³«.the List-I contains the protected monuments of the ASI.  List-II
is the State List of monuments protected by the State
Governments.  It is only the unprotected category which comes
under the Concurrent List.  In respect of those monuments coming
under the State List that is List-II, they fall under the State
Governments and are protected by the State Governments.   We
do not have any system of fund transfer or periodical reporting
except that once in an year, there is a meeting with the State
Culture Departments.  But more than the formal mechanism, there
is an informal relationship between the State Archaeological
Departments and the ASI.  When I go to a State, I meet the Chief
Secretary and the State Culture Secretary and our Superintending
Archaeologists have been directed that they must have periodical
meetings with State Culture Secretaries.  So, there is an informal
arrangement by which we keep in touch with them.  But there is no
regular reporting system.´
1.11 When asked, Ministry of Culture in their written reply further stated
that there is no institutional mechanism for ASI to keep itself informed of
the activities of the State Archaeological Departments except periodical
meetings with Secretaries of State Culture Departments. The
Superintending Archaeologists of ASI have also been advised to keep in
regular contact with the State Departments.
Ancient Monuments & Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958
1.12 Regarding procedure adopted for declaring a monument as a
monument of national importance, the Ministry in their written reply
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

stated that whenever any ancient monument or archaeological site &
remains is found worthy of central protection keeping in view its
historical, archaeological and artistic importance, then in accordance
with Section 4(1) of the Ancient Monuments & Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958, two month notice is issued through an official
gazette notification, expressing its intention to declare the
monument/archaeological site to be of national importance. The printed
copy of the preliminary gazette notification published in the official
gazette of India is made available to all concerned in the respective
State Governments. A copy of the same is affixed at a conspicuous
place near the monument/site to be declared as monument of National
Importance by the respective field office of the Archaeological Survey of
India for information of all concerned.
Antiquities & Art Treasures Act, 1972 and Rules 1973
1.13 The Antiquities & Art Treasures Act, 1972 (AAT Act, 1972) along
with the Rules 1973 came into force with effect from 5 th April 1976 and
deals exclusively with movable cultural property of two broad categories-
Antiquities and Art Treasures.  This Act provides for :-
(i) compulsory registration of notified categories of antiquities;
(ii) regulating the export trade in antiquities and art treasures;
(iii) preservation of smuggling of, and fraudulent dealings in antiquities;
(iv) compulsory acquisition of antiquities and art treasures for
preservation in public places; and
(v) certain other matters µconnected therewith on incidental or ancillary
thereto¶.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

1.14 In the AAT Act, 1972, compulsory registration of antiquities
owned/possessed by an individual has been given priority. Certain
notified categories of antiquities have been defined from time to time
which are required to be registered as per provision of sub-section 3(A)
of Section 14 of the AAT, 1972.
1.15 The Committee during oral evidence asked about the role of ASI in
implementation of the Antiquities & Art Treasures Act, 1972 and the
Additional Director General, ASI stated as follows:-
³The Archaeological Survey of India is also entrusted with the
implementation of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972.  In
order to implement the provisions of the Act, the Archaeological
Survey of India acts in close tandem with customs, CBI, DRI as
well as police authorities.  Under the Act, 28 officers of the State
Governments have been notified as Registering Officers for the
antiquities.  In order to give further fillip to the activities of
registration, some ASI officials of the rank of Deputy
Superintending Archaeologist and Assistant Superintending
Archaeologist have also been recently notified as Registering
Officers. ³
1.16 The Committee enquired about the drawbacks and proposed
amendments in the ³Antiquities Art Treasure Act, 1972 ´, the Ministry of
Culture in their written reply stated that the amendments to the
Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 are under active consideration.
The Cabinet Note and Draft Bill are being finalized in consultation with
the Ministry of Law.  The amendments are proposed for strengthening
the Act further with a view to effectively checking the illegal trade and
smuggling of the antiquities and conferring greater powers on the
enforcement authorities.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

1.17 When asked about the proposed amendments, the Ministry in their
written reply stated that a provision has been made to promote the
cultural exchange with other countries by way of allowing a loan of
antiquities from museums or excavated sites to educational, research
institutes and academic bodies in specific case for the benefit of
scholars and academicians to study the cultural wealth of countries.
1.18 There is no provision in the existing Act for the verification of
registered objects.  Therefore, a new provision has been added to verify
the registered antiquities by the concerned Registering Officer
periodically so as to confirm the existence and present condition as well
as their location to keep track of the antiquities.
1.19 A Proposal has been made that no change, alteration or addition
in the format or appearance of an antiquity, purporting to change its
character after its registration shall be made without prior approval of the
Director General, Archaeological Survey of India or any agency
authorized by him for this purpose for the safety of the antiquity or art
treasure against damage.
1.20 A new provision has been included that any loss, accidentally or
otherwise, damage, defacement or alteration in part or full of registered
antiquity shall be reported to the DG, ASI immediately.  This will facilitate
to assess the damage or loss on account of defacement, alteration in
the form, format of any antiquity or art treasure to confiscate the
antiquities or art treasures in the public interest.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

1.21 It has been experienced in the past that registered antiquities that
get transferred in the names of foreign nationals even on their temporary
hotel address etc. might result in illicit trade and fraudulent dealings in
antiquities.  A fresh provision has, therefore, been made to restrict the
transfer of ownership of antiquity or art treasure to foreign nationals.  It
will prevent illicit trade of antiquities or art treasures in the guise of
transfer of ownership in the name of foreign nationals.
1.22 To check the movement of the antiquity within the country, a new
provision has been incorporated to inform the concerned Registering
Officers and the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India.
1.23 The existing provisions in the Act have exempted some of the
institutions from getting their collections registered but there was hardly
any provision to have a check over the collections in the possession of
such institutions.  Provision has now been made to make the
documentation of such collections obligatory for the exempted
institutions, copy of which will have to be submitted to the Director
General, Archaeological Survey of India.  The Director General or his
authorized nominee shall also have powers to inspect such collections
as and when necessary.
1.24 The words ³Central Government ´ have been substituted by ³the
Director General, Archaeological Survey of India ´.  This will provide
opportunity to the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India for
taking cognizance of such irregularities and for initiating immediate
action in collaboration with the law enforcing agencies without any
procedural delay.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

1.25 Provisions for constituting Advisory Committee, Appeal Committee
of the experts to render expert opinion to the DG, ASI for examination of
objects has been made.  The formation of the committees including
various experts shall eliminate any possibility of error of judgement and
the decision arrived at by the DG, ASI or his authorized nominee, will be
more broad-based and judicious.
1.26 A new provision has been made to the effect that no person other
than Director General, Archaeological Survey of India shall have the
authority of preparing true replica of any antiquity or art treasure in the
same size, colour, material, type and fabric or shall cause anything to
appear like or believed to be an antiquity or art treasure.  This measure
will prevent the replacement and possible illicit trafficking of original
antiquities and art treasures.
1.27 Proposals have also been made to make the punishment deterrent
by enhancing the maximum limit of imprisonment on violation of the
provisions of the Act.  The imposition of fine commensurate with the
valuation of antiquity of art treasure in respect of which the offence is
committed shall be liable to be confiscated.
Policy
1.28 On being enquired about the policy of the Government relating to
archaeological exploration, conservation, preservation and maintenance
of monuments and sites of national importance in the country, the
Ministry of Culture in their written reply stated that the provisions made
in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,
1958, govern excavations in India.  The Director General of the
Archaeological Survey of India grants licenses to various excavation
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

agencies, both government and autonomous institutions, for conducting
excavations on the recommendations of the Standing Committee of the
Central Advisory Board of Archaeology (CABA).
1.29 Criteria for selecting a site for excavation are:
(i) bringing of missing gap(s)  in the cultural sequence of Indian
Archaeology.
(ii) throwing more light on lesser-known cultures
(iii) salvage archaeology in the event of a site being submerged by
a dam or being destroyed or damaged due to absolutely
necessary development works, natural calamities.
1.30 The Archaeological Survey of India conducts excavations through
six Excavation Branches located at Nagpur, Delhi, Patna, Bhubaneswar,
Vadodara and Mysore besides, the Institute of Archaeology, Prehistory
Branch, twenty four Circles also conduct excavations.
1.31 The policy for conservation of monuments is primarily aimed at
ensuring their maintenance without altering their original features as
existing.  Reconstruction of the missing portions is kept to the barest
minimum except when it is absolutely necessary for its structural
stability.  The guidelines for conservation works are laid down in the
Archaeological Works Code and Archaeological Conservation Manual.
1.32 Asked about any specific changes needed in the existing policy,
the Ministry of Culture stated that the present policy in regard to
exploration and excavation is well defined, based on long experience
and does not require any change. However, a policy decision has been
taken not to grant licence to any excavator after three seasons and till
pending excavation report is completed.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Heritage Sites Commission
1.33 In the year 2005, an announcement was made by Hon ¶ble Culture
Minister to form a Heritage Sites Commission. In this regard, Secretary,
Ministry of Culture during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³A draft Heritage Commission Bill is being prepared by a small
Committee under the chairmanship of DG, ASI «..We hope that
Heritage Commission will be able to take up a large amount of the
work that is not yet being tackled under the Archaeological Survey
of India.´
1.34 About the need of constituting National Heritage Sites
Commission, DG, ASI during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³Regarding the various options available for conservation for
heritage monuments, you have mentioned three different
scenarios.   One is entirely by the ASI; second is the ASI and the
State combined; third is, of course, the private initiative coming
and doing it. I won ¶t be able to give a final view on this matter.
Personally, I would like to submit that with such a rich cultural
heritage with such a large number of built monuments all over the
country, it may not be possible for any one organization, like the
ASI, to take care of the entire built heritage.  It has to be a shared
responsibility.  The ASI should only take over monuments which
are nationally declared as important, that most important ones.
There is a process that has been adopted in almost all the
countries of the world.  They call it µlisting¶. Buildings are listed as
List A, List B and List C.  These are not under the Government.
People are not allowed to damage or restructure buildings under
these listings.  Some cities like Mumbai, Hyderabad and Chennai
have already listed.  I would submit that all over the country we
must list the heritage buildings.  I hope that with the National
Heritage Site Commission coming into being, the very important
issue of listing the heritage buildings will be addressed.
1.35 He further stated as follows:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³At the moment there is no legislation for listing all over the
country.  Maharashtra has brought out in Mumbai that particular
order under Town Planning Act.  Hyderabad has brought forward
an order for listing.  Then, certain cities in India have done it at
their levels.  Once the National Heritage Sites Commission is
constituted, it will have legal and statutory powers to issue
directions.  I hope and it is my firm conviction that this Commission
would issue directions to all State Governments to make listing of
heritage buildings.´
1.36 The Committee asked about the aims for setting up National
Heritage Sites Commission, the Ministry of Culture in their written reply
stated that considering the rich heritage of our country scattered all over,
a few monuments and sites notified by the Central and State
Governments represent only a miniscule fraction of our heritage.  With
this fundamental point in mind, National Heritage Commission has been
conceptualized for which guidelines and contracting frameworks for
introducing public private partnership in development and maintenance
of historical/heritage sites and monuments are being formulated.
1.37 The Committee further asked about the latest position of setting up
of National Heritage Sites Commission, the Ministry of Culture in their
written reply stated that the Government proposes to constitute a
Heritage Sites Commission.  The Commission would lay down broad
policy guidelines and take steps to ensure that such guidelines are
observed.
1.38 The proposed Heritage Sites Commission would:
(i) tender advice to Government on heritage matters.
(ii) frame guidelines in the matter of conservation of heritage
monuments and sites
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(iii) can study or cause to study important matters regarding
conservation of heritage and submit reports to the
Government
(iv) suggest appropriate amendments to the existing heritage
legislations.
1.39 The draft Cabinet Note along with a copy of the draft bill for setting
up the Commission has been circulated to concerned Departments of
the Government of India and all State Governments for their comments.
Comments have been received from Ministry of Finance, Ministry of
Environment and Forest and ten State Governments.  These have been
compiled and forwarded to the Ministry of Law alongwith the comments
of the Ministry of Culture.  On receipt of the same the matter will be
placed before the Cabinet for approval and for placing the bill in the
House.
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities
1.40 About a mission on built heritage, Secretary, Ministry of Culture
stated as follows :-
³Built heritage was a mission that was planned as a five year
programme and we have prepared a document on that. It was
taken to the Planning Commission and the Finance Ministry for the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and we had asked for a
Rs.300 crore which had to reduce. We had asked this amount for
five years. We were told to reduce the amount which we have now
done««The budget has been brought down to about Rs.90
crore. In that project we will involve the State Governments, the
universities and the NGOs and various other civil society
institutions to come forward in a project mode to help us on built
heritage. This will help progress of the country also which in turn
could form a base for future working. Thereafter the restructuring
of the ASI will be done within this mode. We require staff for this
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

work. This again would be little problem when we go for
outsourcing. They will be on fixed time periods. We may have to
outsource and get technical staff for field work. The ASI
restructuring as such has to be done in a big way. We have not yet
planned that except that we have also discussed this mission in
the draft Heritage Bill. Maybe, if it is successful, in the Eleventh
Plan, we can think of restructuring the ASI. I think we have to
emphasise on that.´
1.41 The Committee further asked about the projects being sacrificed to
cope with reduced amount, the Ministry of Culture in their written reply
stated that there was a proposal of Rs. 400 crore for two missions
namely µNational Mission on Monuments ¶ and µNational Mission on
Antiquities¶.  Subsequently, the above two missions got amalgamated
into one and coined as µNational Mission on Monuments and Antiquities¶,
for which the project cost has been scaled down from Rs. 400 crore  to
Rs. 90 crore (with 11th Plan Fund requirement of Rs. 90 crore).
1.42 The earlier proposal to have an extensive computer based
network has been deferred for the present, but it can be incorporated at
a subsequent stage. This also has saved cost.
1.43 The Committee further enquired about the latest position and aims
and objectives of constituting National Mission on Antiquities and the
Ministry of Culture in their written reply stated that the Mission was
formally launched by Minister for Tourism and Culture on the 19 th March,
2007 for a period of five years i.e. 2007-2012.
1.44 The goals & objectives of the Mission are as follows;-
1. Prepare National Register of Built Heritage, Sites and Antiquities.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2. Set up State Level data base on built heritage, sites and
antiquarian wealth for information and dissemination to planner,
researchers etc., and for better management of such cultural
resources.  It attempts to create a systematic, accessible and
retrievable inventory of the built heritage, sites and antiquarian
heritage of the country.
3. Promote awareness programme concerning the benefits of
preserving the historical and cultural aspects of built heritage, sites
and antiquities.
4. Extend training facility and capacity building to the concerned state
departments, local bodies, NGO ¶s universities, museums,
communities etc. in the field of conservation of built heritage, and
preservation and management of antiquarian remains.
5.  Help in developing synergy between institutions like ASI, State
Departments, concerned institutions and NGO ¶s to generate close
interaction.
1.45 The Organizational set up of the Mission is as follows:-
 The Mission headquarter will be located at New Delhi and ASI as
Nodal Agency.  The National Mission Headquarters is headed by a
Mission Director.  Besides, there will be 9 staff pulled from ASI and 13
personnel on contract basis will also form part of the Mission Office.
1.46 With a view to have better monitoring of the Mission activities there
will be a National Mission Monitoring Committee which would be chaired
by Secretary (Culture).  Besides, Director General, ASI will be the Vice-
Chairman.  The other members of the Committee include Addl. Director
General, ASI; Joint Secretary, MOC; Joint Director General, ASI and
Mission Director as Member Secretary.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

1.47 To have a better and efficient implementation of the Mission
activities in the States and UTs, there will be a State Level
Implementation Committee which will work under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (C) of all the respective States and Union Territories.  The
Committee would consist of Secretary, Grampanchayat; Director, State
Archaeology and Museums as members; Mission Director (ex-officio
member); experts in the field (nominated members) and the
Superintending Archaeologist of the concerned Circle as Member
Secretary.
1.48 The Archaeological Survey of India as the Nodal Agency will be
the implementing authority for the National Mission.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Chapter-II
Finance
Budgetary allocation
2.1 The Committee enquired about budgetary allocation and expenditure incurred
on maintenance, conservation and preservation of protected monuments and sites,
remains of national importance during each of last five years under plan and non-
plan, the Ministry of Culture in their written reply furnished following statement :-
(Rs. In lakhs)
Plan Non-PlanYear
Allocation
(BE)
(RE) Expenditure Allocation
(BE)
(RE) Expenditure
2002-03 2200.00 3825.13 3781.37 1500.00 2690.00 2868.81
2003-04 2600.00 3201.30 3191.74 5561.00 5891.00 5836.09
2004-05 4628.00 4089.00 4076.54 6636.00 5255.00 5211.46
2005-06 5025.00 4840.99 4852.35 5720.00 5199.31 5342.19
2006-07 4840.00 5775.43 5747.97 5020.00 5085.00 5068.92
2.2 The Committee enquired whether Government increases ASI ¶s
budget allocation every year, DG, ASI during oral evidence stated as
follows:
³As a matter of fact, the Government was very kind to us.  Over
the years, the allocations have increased both under plan and
non-plan.  I must make a submission that compared with the
number of monuments that we are managing and considering the
state of maintenance of a large number of them, there is scope for
much larger allocations and funds to be utilized.  But the ASI can
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

utilize additional funds only if the organization is strengthened.
We have a substantial shortage in the number of technical staff at
the field level. Given the allocations and the present level of
human resource, we are unable to spend more money.  We have
a great need to strengthen the organization and then supplement
allocation.´
2.3 The Committee enquired whether the available money is sufficient,
DG, ASI during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³The available money is quite good for us.  But it is certainly
inadequate if I have to look after all my monuments.  But for that, I
require my organization to be strengthened.  With the existing staff
strength, my capacity to absorb is limited.  Even if you give me
another Rs. 100 crore this year, I cannot spend because I do not
have the manpower.  We have a great difficulty in increasing the
manpower because the Ministry of Finance is taking a very tough
view even for creation of one post.  So, we need to strengthen my
organization at the field level which will require the concurrence of
the Ministry of Finance.  So, first my organization has to be
strengthened and then my budget has to be augmented.  That is
why I said that there is no crunch of money with the available
manpower resources.  If I have to take all my monuments I will
require much more money and much more personnel.´
2.4 When asked about the achievements with reference to Budget
Estimates the Ministry of Culture stated that under structural
conservation more than five hundred monuments received special
attention in a year and the achievements includes consolidation of the
fabric of foundations and super-structure, replacement of worn out and
decayed fabric, water tightening of leaky roofs and damaged open tops,
strengthening measures etc.  Under preservation a large number of
monuments received attention in the form of scientific cleaning of the
monuments and paintings, application of fungicidal treatment,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

consolidants, preservatives, water repellent coating etc.  Considerable
progress was achieved in the environment development around World
Heritage Sties, and other monuments, which attract large number of
Tourists.  These include preservation of existing gardens and
landscapes appropriate plantation, laying of flower beds etc.
2.5 In addition to the above all protected monuments received
attention on a day to day basis which includes measures such as
removal of vegetation growth, routine cleaning and sweeping, day to day
maintenance work, minor repairs, watch and ward, security
arrangements and daily care of the monuments.
2.6 The Committee asked as to whether the money allocated was
sufficient and the Ministry in their written reply stated that the allocation
of funds was not sufficient considering the need of conservation and
preservation of all the protected monuments.
2.7 To a question regarding how much money is required to maintain
and conserve all the centrally protected monuments if sufficient
manpower is provided to ASI, the Ministry in their written reply stated
that it may not be possible to make a precise estimate of the amount
required for conservation of all the centrally protected monuments as no
such exercise has been undertaken so far. However, in the context of
preparation of the 11 th Five Year Plan proposals, it was tentatively
estimated that the annual allocation for conservation for all ASI
monuments should be Rs. 300 crore, and that this must be
accompanied with sanction of additional manpower for conservation.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2.8 The Committee further asked the reasons for projecting Rs.300
crore for plan side for 11 th Five Year Plan by ASI.  DG, ASI during oral
evidence stated as follows:
³««..Per year, we are spending Rs. 100 crore on conservation of
monuments.  With that amount, I am able to attend to about 1000
monuments per year.  Since we have around 3667 monuments.  I
have estimated that there will be a requirement of at least Rs. 300
crore.  That is the basis.´
Funding to World Heritage Sites
2.9 In 1972, the General Conference of UNESCO adopted a
resolution with overwhelming enthusiasm creating thereby a µConvention
concerning the protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage ¶.
The main objectives were to define the World Heritage in both cultural
and natural aspects; to enlist Sites and Monuments from the member
countries which are of exceptional interest and universal value, the
protection of which is the concern of all mankind; and to promote co-
operation among all Nations and people to contribute for the protection
of these universal treasures intact for future generations.
2.10 India is an active member of the World Heritage from 1977 and
has been working in close cooperation with other international agencies.
At present 27 Cultural Sites have been brought under the World
Heritage List.
2.11 About budgetary allocation for World Heritage Sites, DG, ASI
during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³««.we make a special funding for World Heritage Sites in our
budgetary allocation.  The highest priority is given to World
Heritage Sites.  Broadly speaking, we have divided our
monuments into three categories.  The first and the topmost
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

priority is given to World Heritage Sites and those which are in the
tentative list «..The second priority is given to the ticketed
monuments and monuments where many people come because
of religious importance.  Then, there are other monuments, which
come under the third category.  In brief, we give the topmost
priority to World Heritage Sites.´
2.12 He further stated as follows :-
³The entire budgetary allocation is distributed to 24 Circles of the
Archaeological Survey of India(ASI) all over the country. Each
circle is then supposed to distribute the allocation monument-wise.
When the circle makes the allocation monument-wise, they
provide the maximum allocation for the World Heritage Sites.´
2.13 To a question regarding getting financial assistance for World
Heritage Sites by ASI from UNESCO, the DG, ASI during oral evidence
stated as follows:-
³As regards UNESCO, there is no direct financial support from
UNESCO for any one of these World Heritage Sites.  But, we get
benefit in the form of capacity building, that is, training of
personnel. If a site is declared as a World Heritage Site in danger
(for example, India has two sites which are mentioned as World
Heritage Sites in danger, namely, Hampi in Karnataka and Manas
in Assam) there is a provision of limited funding available under
the UNESCO for such sites. But this is a very, small amount.  In
general, I would say, the financial support from UNESCO to any
World Heritage Sites is marginal or virtually nil.´
Revenue
2.14 The Ministry of Culture in their written reply furnished to the
Committee have stated that at present the revenue is being generated
from various sources like sale of entry tickets, fees for
videography/filming of monuments, fee charged for cultural functions in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Centrally protected monuments, sale of publication & guide books, etc.
The major source of revenue is the sale of entry tickets.  But the various
programmes of ASI are carried out through budgetary support of the
Central Government and the revenue collected is deposited in the
Government account.
2.15 The Ministry further stated that during the following three years,
ASI¶s annual receipts from sale of entry tickets into monuments etc. are
as follows:-
  (Rs. in Crore)
Year Amount
2003-04 43.59
2004-05 52.89
2005-06 58.07
2.16 The Ministry of Culture further stated that the above receipts are
remitted to the Consolidated Fund of India.  In this regard, ASI has made
a proposal for creation of ³Non-Lapsable Fund for Conservation &
Preservation Activities on National Monuments of ASI ´ by allocating part
of the income generated through sale of entry tickets in a separate fund
for conservation and preservation as well as for development of tourist
amenities in those monuments.
2.17 On this issue, DG, ASI during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³With regard to ticketing of the monuments, we have two slabs for
ticketing.  For all World Heritage Sites, the entry fee is Rs. 10 for
Indian citizens and $ 5 for foreign nationals.  For non-World
Heritage Sites, it is Rs. 5 for Indian visitors and $ 2 for foreign
tourists.  Sir, the revenue that we collected from entry tickets
mainly, was to the tune of Rs. 44.54 crore in 2000-2001.  This has
gone up to Rs. 52.89 crore in 2004-05.  Sir, we do not get any
share of this ticketed revenue because the entire collection goes
to the Consolidated Fund of India.  But the Ministry of Culture has
made a request to the Ministry of Finance that, at least, a
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

percentage of this ticketed revenue should accrue to the
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI).  At the moment, this matter
is with the Planning Commission.  We would like to push this
matter further and we would like to see that a percentage, at least,
of this revenue comes back to the Archaeological Survey of India. ´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Chapter-III
Organisational Set-up and Functions
Organisational Set-up
3.1 The Ministry of Culture in their written reply apprised the
Committee that the Archaeological Survey of India is the premier
organization so far as the archaeological research, data based study on
scientific analysis, excavation of archaeological sites,
conservation/preservation of centrally protected monuments,
maintenance of site museums and overall regulation of antiquities and
art objects are concerned. Seeing the scientific nature of work, a group
was set up by the DST which recommended that ASI be declared as
Science & Technology Department. The Ministry of Human Resource
Development notified the Archaeological Survey of India as Science &
Technology Department vide  Gazette Notification No. A. 36016/3/89-
Estt.,dated 27.10.1989.
3.2 It is an attached office under the Ministry of Culture, which is
headed by the Union Minister for Culture. The Ministry of Culture has a
Secretary level officer, who looks after various attached and subordinate
offices in the Department.
3.3 The Ministry further stated that being an attached office, the
Archaeological Survey of India has its own head designated as Director
General.  The Director General, inturn, is assisted by an Additional
Director General, two Joint Director General and a group of Directors.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

At present there are 17 Directors assisting the Director General in
performing his duties including two Directors(Epigraphy) stationed at
Mysore and Nagpur, and one Director, Science positioned at Dehradun
and one Director Conservation.  The Director General, ASI enjoys
adequate functional autonomy for discharging various functions. There
is no undue interference from the Ministry of Culture. However, the ASI
functions under the overall guidance of the Ministry which is very much
needed.
3.4 The Committee asked as to whether the Ministry have considered
to provide more autonomy to ASI for efficient and better functioning, the
Ministry in their written reply stated that a proposal for delegation of
enhanced financial powers to the Director General, ASI is under the
active consideration of the Ministry of Culture.
Post of DG
3.5 DG, ASI is an IAS officer since 1993.  The Committee asked the
Ministry about the recruitment rules for the post of DG, the
representative of Ministry of Culture during oral evidence stated as
follows:-
³The recruitment rules provide for both methods.  If there are
eligible archaeologists, they could be promoted to the post of
Director-General in the absence of which the Government can
post from the administrative service.  As regards the number of
years, I will have to check up.  I think in 1993, we had a
professional archaeologist heading the ASI.  Since then, it was
member from the Indian Administrative Service heading it. It was
highlighted in many fora and Standing Committees.  I am afraid I
cannot say that this is the view of the Government or this is the
policy view of the Government.  But it has been brought to the
notice of the Government.  The Government has not taken a view
as to change the rules by which only archaeologists can be posted
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

as Director-General.  That sort of a view is not crystallized. But as
this aspect is highlighted, Government can take a view on this
point.  I cannot give a comment on that.´
3.6 The Secretary, Ministry of Culture during oral evidence further
stated as follows :-
³The post of DG, ASI is filled up as per the recruitment rules of the
ASI as are prevailing on date and they were notified in May, 2002.
Unfortunately since, 1993, there have been no eligible officers in
the feeder cadre of the organisation. The Government of India and
the DOPT at the highest level have taken a decision that for now
they will be filled in by Administrative service officers´
3.7 On this issue, a non-official witness during oral evidence stated as
follows:-
³I have served the ASI for 26 years; the first part of my career for
13 years was under professional archaeologists They were
occupying the top positions of DG, Additional DG and Joint DG.
Now, the situation has changed and bureaucrats are running the
ASI.  They are very efficient and competent people but ASI needs
a sincere professional kind of commitment, involvement and care
and concern for the culture and heritage of the country.  So, I
think, it is a necessity today.  The officers in the ASI are a very
frustrated lot.  We cannot expect good from a frustrated army.
With the bureaucracy, administrative expediency becomes more
important than professionalism in execution.  Secondly, they are
not there for a longer time.  They come and go.  They keep on
coming and going.  So, the kind of commitment and concern that
we expect to run the ASI may not be that much there.  Hence, it is
high time that professionalism and technical finesse were brought
back to the ASI.  The officers of the ASI are the same and the
mandate is clear but there is some slackness on their part.
Therefore, this is a time for self-introspection and also
introspection and review to be taken by the Government.  When
the colonial powers could establish the ASI, nurture it and carry it
forward and make it multifarious, we expect that the national
government should be more concerned about the national heritage
of the country.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.8 The Ministry in their written reply further stated that the ASI is a
multidisciplinary agency consisting of archaeologists, scientists,
historians, engineers and architects. However, appointment of a
generalist administrator as DG, ASI has not hampered the development
of ASI as a scientific organization.
3.9 On further asking about the assessment made in this regard, the
Ministry in their written reply stated that there is no objective
assessment, which has established that appointment of officers from
outside the ASI has hampered the functioning of ASI in any way.
Post of ADG (Archaeology)
3.10 The Committee asked about the reason for the post of ADG
(Archaeology) remaining vacant since 1991, the DG, ASI during oral
evidence stated as follows:-
³With regard to vacancy at the level of ADG what happened is that
on 17 th October, 1991 the then ADG was promoted as DG, ASI.
So the post of ADG fell vacant.´
3.11 He further stated, as follows:-
³As there was nobody to fill in that criterion, the post remained
vacant for some time.  According to the Ministry of Finance
guidelines, if a post remains vacant for one year, it is deemed to
have been abolished.  So, the Ministry of Finance abolished the
post.´
3.12 The Committee then asked about the steps taken to revive the
post, DG, ASI during oral evidence stated as under:-
³Then there was a lot of correspondence between the Ministry of
Culture and Ministry of Finance to revive the post.  However, it
was not agreed to by the Ministry of Finance.  After a lot of
correspondence at the level of the Minister himself and the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Secretary, only this year (2006) the post of ADG was revived by
the Ministry of Finance.
We have already taken up with the UPSC to fill up that post.  This
is the position.´
3.13 On being asked as to whether the Ministry was aware of the
guidelines of the Ministry of Finance in this regard, the DG, ASI stated
as under :-
³Regarding the abolition of the post of Additional DG in the
technical cadre, this was consequent to the fact that there was a
circular from the Ministry of Finance that if a post lies vacant for a
certain period of time, that post will be abolished.´
3.14 The Committee asked for the reason why the matter of
reconsidering the qualification was not taken up with Ministry of Finance,
a representative, Ministry of Culture during oral evidence, stated as
follows:-
³The question of reconsidering the qualification arises only after
the post is revived.  At the first instance itself since it could not be
filled up in the first year as per the existing qualification at that
particular time, it was deemed to have been abolished and further
action can be taken only after the revival - be it a question of
sending a requisition or modifying the qualification under the
recruitment rules.´
3.15 The Committee enquired why the Ministry of Culture did not think
to reconsider the qualification and other things, as it was known to them
that after year the post of ADG would be deemed to be abolished, a
representative, Ministry of Culture stated during oral evidence as follows
:
³Within that one year, it is presumed that may be after sometime
the person would become eligible for promotion to that particular
post. Hence, it was not considered necessary to revise the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

qualification because the people would have been eligible by the
time they became eligible.  Finance Ministry refused to give the
permission for revival.´
Manpower
3.16 Noticing the statements of ASI that there is no dearth of money but
shortage of manpower, the Committee asked the Ministry as to how
many technical posts are lying vacant, the Ministry of Culture in their
written reply furnished the following details:-
Name of
Group
Sanctioned
Strength
Vacancy
Group µ$¶  212  49 posts
 Group µ%¶  460  87 posts
 Group µ&¶  1595  93 posts
3.17 The Ministry of Culture further stated that continuous efforts are
being made to fill up all the vacant posts by conducting DPC meeting
and also through UPSC/SSC.
3.18 Regarding shortage of conservation personnel DG, ASI during oral
evidence stated as follows:-
³Every year, we are taking more monuments for protection and an
existing monument is getting one more year old, which means, it is
subject to greater ageing.  There is an increasing demand for
conservation personnel.  I am afraid, we have not been able to
keep pace with this demand on the one side and on the other side,
the theories and the techniques of conservation are actually
evolving day by day. We may not be able to keep pace with the
changing requirements««´
3.19 While expressing ASI ¶s inability to maintain monuments due to
shortage of staff, a representative of Ministry of Culture during oral
evidence stated as follows:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³There is a sea change in the role of the ASI now and when it was
formed.  There is so much of work added on to the same staff.  At
present, the ASI do not have any architects.  As such, there is no
civil engineering unit, they do not have any conservation architects
which is a new specialization which has happened world wide in
the last 15 years.  The ASI was primarily formed for survey and
also conservation of monuments but more for their maintenance to
the best extent possible.  But when the role has changed in the
last 15 years, we have not been able to keep pace with the
restructuring of the ASI accordingly.  It has been something which
the Ministry has been grappling with.  I think it needs to be done
now.  It will be part of our projects in the Eleventh Plan.´
3.20 The Committee enquired whether ASI has sent any proposal to
the Ministry for increase in manpower, the Ministry in their written reply
stated that ASI has not sent any fresh proposal to the Ministry of
Culture/Ministry of Finance for increase in manpower in ASI.
Functions of ASI
3.21 The Committee asked about the functions of ASI and the Ministry
in their written reply stated that a special reference has been made in
the Constitution of India of the responsibility of the Indian Citizens for
maintenance of cultural property and monuments. In fulfillment of the
provisions of the Constitution, Parliament passed the ³Ancient and
Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act ´ in
1951 by which all the monuments previously protected under the
Ancient Monuments Preservation Act 1904 were re-declared as of
national importance. In 1953 after the merger of the princely states with
the rest of India, the Archaeological Survey of India took the additional
responsibility to maintain, conservation/preservation of monuments
previously looked after by the princely states. A new Act called µAncient
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 1958 ¶ was
passed which covers the entire country and is presently in vogue.
3.22 Under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains 1958, the ASI has declared 3659  monuments of national
importance in the country. During the last 144 years of its existence, the
ASI has grown from a humble beginning to a large organization with an
organized work force at the base and the Director General at the apex.
Its major activities inter-alia are as under :-
(i) Maintenance, conservation and preservation of centrally
protected monuments/sites and remains;
(ii) Conducting archaeological explorations and excavations;
(iii) Chemical preservation of monuments and antiquarian remains;
(iv) Architectural survey of monuments;
(v) Epigraphical and numismatic studies;
(vi) Setting up and re-organization of Site Museums;
(vii) Training in Archaeology;
(viii) Bringing out archaeological publications;
(ix) Archaeological expeditions outside India (Excavation &
Conservation);
(x) Implementation of Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972; and
(xi) Horticulture operation in and around ancient monuments and
sites.
Institute of Archaeology
3.23 About the deviation of Institute of Archaeology from its path, a
representative of ASI during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³The Institute of Archaeology is one wing which could serve the
country in a big way.  Today, this Institute is again a demoralized
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and directionless one.  Luckily, we have purchased a piece of 25
acres of land in Greater Noida on which we want to create a
Heritage Institute which could compare with any fine institution
anywhere in the world whether it is Italian, British or anywhere
else.  So, it is high time that we move the Institute of Archaeology
to that 25 acre piece of land.  It should have all the facilities and
faculties to take care of varied, allied scientific and technological
requirements of a archaeology like archaeo-botany, archaeo-
zoology, archaeo-geology and dating laboratories.´
3.24 On being asked, DG ASI during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³As of late, we have the Institute of Archaeology.  It was supposed
to have been shifted to NOIDA in the new campus.  We have
reviewed the need to shift it to NOIDA.  In the meanwhile, what
happened was that a huge area has become available to the ASI
in the Red Fort campus.  After the Army has vacated the Red Fort,
a large number of buildings have fallen vacant.  They are very
nice, colonial buildings. We have shifted that Institute to the
campus in Red Fort.´
3.25 When the Committee asked as to when ASI is going to convert it
into a National Institute, DG ASI during evidence stated as follows :-
³At one point of time, there is the National Museum Institute.
There is a training institute in the Archives.  There is the Institute of
Archaeology.  The Institute of Archaeology, wanted to be
converted into a Deemed University.  There had been a thinking
that instead of having so many little Institutes under various
organizations, why could we not have one of a national status with
Open University status.´
3.26 On being asked about whether the decision has been taken in this
regard, DG, ASI stated as follows :-
³«.A decision on this is yet not final«´
3.27 The Review Committee has also suggested that in order that it
may grow as the seat of higher learning and research, it may be
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

upgraded as a full fledged National Institute of Archaeology and Art
history with the status of a deemed university with five major schools of
Indian Archaeology, World Archaeology, History of Art, Conservation
and Heritage Management and Archaeological Sciences. In view of this
suggestion the Committee asked about the views of Ministry of Culture
and the Ministry in their written reply stated that as per the
recommendations of the Review Committee the Ministry of Culture has
taken decision in principle to declare the Institute of Archaeology as
deemed university.  Further modalities are being worked out.
3.28 The Committee asked about the number of seats in the Institute,
Secretary, Ministry of Culture further during oral evidence stated as
follows :-
³«.At present, every year 15 students are taken«..´
3.29 She further stated as follows:-
³«.about 300 students apply every year.´
3.30 When asked whether ASI is not getting enough students,
Secretary, Ministry of Culture stated as follows :-
³No, I would not say that we are not getting enough students, so
far, the seats we have kept are 15 every year.´
3.31 On asking about the facilities available for research in the Institute
of Archaeology, the Ministry in their written reply stated that considering
the available infrastructure in the Institute of Archaeology, the facility to
carry out independent research project is inadequate.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Training of Staff
3.32 The Ministry of Culture in their written reply has stated that the
Institute of Archaeology imparts periodical training to employees of
Archaeology Survey of India every year alongwith the PGDA students of
Institute of Archaeology in the field of maintenance, preservation and
structural conservation.  The employees are invited from all the circles to
attend the conservation and preservation course. Besides, ASI also
invites the nominations from State Govt. for training of their employees
in the field of conservation and preservation.  The employees also get
training in excavations as and when recommended by their respective
circles alongwith the PGDA students of Institute of Archaeology.  In the
last five year the Institute has organized such training courses twice at
Fatehpur Sikri in the year 2000 and 2001, twice at Sanchi, District
Raisen in the years 2002 and 2003, and at Fatehpur Sikri in the year
2004.
3.33 In this regard, DG, ASI during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³The Institute was essentially conducting two-year PG Diploma
and we decided that the Institute must also give in-service training
to ASI officers.  Last year, we have given in-service training to 46
officers of the ASI.  There is no strict assessment made on
whether this training has been useful or not but I am very confident
that this in-service training given by the Institute has been useful to
the officers«..´
3.34 ASI also deputes officers for advance training in various countries
and also with international institutions like the ICCROM and UNESCO.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER IV
MAINTENANCE OF MONUMENTS
Conservation and Preservation
4.1 The Ministry in a brief note furnished to the Committee stated that
whenever an ancient structure or an archaeological site/remain is
considered to be of national importance, a proposal to this effect is
initiated by the circle office and sent to the Director General,
Archaeological Survey of India along with its historical, archaeological
and architectural importance. On receipt of the approval of the Director
General, ASI the proposal is forwarded to the State Government with
detailed drawings for the counter signature of the Deputy
Commissioner/Commissioner concerned.  On receipt of the revenue
data duly counter signed, the Central Government issues a notification
of its intentions to declare the monument as of national importance with
a two months notice. On the expiry of notice and after considering the
objections, if any, a final Gazette notification is issued for declaring the
said monument as a monument of national importance.
4.2 The Ministry in their written reply furnished to the Committee have
stated that the technique/scientific method used by Science Branch of
the ASI for preservation and maintenance of monuments, murals,
museums objects etc. depends upon the Physico-chemical
characterization of the material as well as related  conservation problem.
The monuments under protection with ASI are located in different parts
of the country and are experiencing varied climatic conditions therefore
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

suffer with variety of conservation problems.  Since a variety of building
materials have been used for the conservation of monuments, their
treatment for preservation is planned very carefully and is carried out
under the supervisions of Assistant Archaeological Chemist.  The
monuments are in general treated for the removal of biological growth
and other acretionary deposits with the help of suitable and effective
chemical formulations.  The fungicidal treatment and preservation
treatment are given thereafter on the clean and dried surface.  This
treatment helps to provide better aesthetic appearance and retard the
rate of deterioration because of so many natural factors acting upon the
monuments.  The technique may vary depending upon the accretionary
deposits present on the monuments in case of paintings and museums
objects, extra care is taken to stabilize the condition with the suitable
treatment.
4.3 The Committee enquired about the procedure adopted for
declaring a monument as a monument of national importance, the DG,
ASI during oral evidence stated as under :-
³There is Central Legislation called Archaeological Monuments
and Sites Act. Whenever, we note that there is a monument which
has got significant historical and architectural aspects features
then under Section 4 of this Act, we issue a preliminary notification
stating that the Central Governments intends to declare the
particular monument as a monument of national importance.´
4.4 They further stated that the State Governments are consulted if
the proposed monument is State protected and is proposed to be taken
over by the ASI. In all other cases, State Governments are involved only
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

to the extent of preparation of relevant revenue papers required for the
notification or subsequently if land or building compensation is involved.
4.5 The Committee enquired whether any prior consultations are held
with State Governments or other authorities on the subject, DG, ASI
during oral evidence stated as under :-
³«There is no procedure mentioned in the Act or rules of direct
consultation with the State Governments in the Department of
Culture or the Directorate of Archeology.³
4.6 DG, ASI further stated as under :-
³But I personally feel that is better to consult the State
Governments.´
4.7 The Committee asked whether ASI is well equipped with state-of-
the art technology and scientific methods for conserving and maintaining
the monuments, painting,  frescoes, etc,   the Ministry in their written
reply stated that ASI is equipped with the latest technology and scientific
methods.  However, there is a room for improvement.  Conservation of a
monument is a multidisciplinary phenomenon and we seek advice,
expertise of the respective expert agency as per the requirement of a
particular conservation issue.  We have referred our conservation
problems to specialized institutions like Central Building Research
Institute, Roorkee, IITs, Survey of India , Structural Engineering
Research Centre, Chennai, etc.  and we get their technical assistance
from time to time.
4.8 To a question about the prescribed time schedule being followed
by ASI for conservation and maintenance of monument, the Ministry in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

their written reply stated that it may be mentioned that ASI undertakes
conservation measures at far more number of monuments.  Generally
we undertake more than 1000 works pertaining to structural
conservation, chemical preservation and horticultural operation in a
year.  Besides, day to day maintenance is attended to in most of the
monuments. Conservation of monuments is undertaken as per the
priority and need of a particular monument.  Yearly conservation
programme is prepared for structural conservation, chemical
preservation and horticultural operation under special repairs (Plan) and
Non Plan by every circle and science and horticulture branches of ASI.
Day to day maintenance is carried out for the monuments separately
under Non Plan head.
4.9 During oral evidence, the Committee asked about the views of
Archaeological Survey of India on the report published in µThe Indian
Express¶ which has practically exposed the manner in which different
world heritage are being maintained and about their present conditions
including the Sun Temple in Konark, the caves of Ajanta and Ellora and
different other site, in this regard, the DG, ASI stated as follows:-
³You have made a reference to the report that appeared in The
Indian Express.  I have gone through all the reports. I would not
like to make any defensive argument, but I would only like to
submit this much that in the best run organizations, there are
always some shortcomings.  I am not saying that we are without
faults.  Take the example of the first report that appeared on Taj.
There is a photograph of a marble stone that has cracked.  Under
the established rules of conservation, we do not just replace
stones from these monuments because these are all original
stones.  Even if a crack appears, we will not change it unless that
crack leads to structural instability.  It is not that we routinely
replace marbles and making them appear new.  A simple
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

photograph may convey an entirely wrong picture on the
conservation efforts.  Taj is such a huge monument.  A stone here
or there may have developed a crack but as long as it does not
affect the structural stability of the Taj, we would not like to change
it.´
4.10 DG, ASI further as under :-
³Similarly, they have shown the temple of Konark that is supported
by a metallic frame.  These were erected because one of the top
lintels was broken which is now supported by the metallic frame.
We are already consulting people on how to remove this metallic
frame and see that the structure is stable.  The limited point is
there may be shortcomings here and there and I am sure that
there are shortcomings.  We do take action if anybody brings to
our notice that these are the mistakes as they will help us in
improving our performance.  But it is not correct to say that the
world heritage sites are not looked after properly.´
Exploration/Excavation
4.11 The work of exploration and excavation in the Survey is an
ongoing process and a special scheme known as the Village-to-Village
Survey is operational for this purpose.  Under this survey,
comprehensive surveys of the villages throughout the country are being
conducted to know about the archaeological potential of particular area.
4.12 Further, the Survey also selects definite areas for special surveys,
for example an area which is threatened for submergence owing to
construction of dams, etc. Such areas are thoroughly surveyed so that
the prominent archaeological remains/sites can be salvaged.  The ASI
conducts excavation through six Excavation Branches located at
Nagpur, Delhi, Patna, Bhubneshwar, Vadodra and Mysore.  Besides the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Institute of Archchaeology Prehistory Branch and Circles also conduct
excavations.
4.13 Asked about any changes needed in lieu of existing system on
methodology for selection of archaeological sites, the Ministry of Culture
in their reply stated that the existing system of methodology for selection
of archaeological sites does not require any change.  However,
employing modern technologies  like GIS (Geographical Information
System), GPR (Ground Penetrating Radar System) would result in
accurate documentation of site features and their quick analysis.
4.14 With the help of GPR, buried structures, water bodies and several
other features can easily be detected and search can be focused on
specific problem areas, which otherwise take long for formulating
strategy after going through strenuous field excavations.
4.15 The Committee enquired about the norms set up for carrying out
exploration and excavation work and number of proposals taken up
during the last five years, the DG, ASI during oral evidence stated as
follows:-
³«..The procedure is that there is a Standing Committee of the
Central Advisory Board of Archaeology i.e., CABA.  This
Committee examines all the proposals received for excavation and
exploration every year and recommends whichever are
appropriate.  In the year 2006, we have received 135 applications
for excavation.  Out of this, the CABA cleared 96 cases of
excavation for the current year.  Out of the 96 cases, 42 cases
belong to Universities.  So, any University can give a request for
excavation/exploration but it must be approved by this Committee.
We issue a licence.  So, that is the procedure´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Excavation Reports
4.16 When the Committee asked about the excavation reports, DG, ASI
during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³«.ASI is also undertaking excavation in the country. But,
unfortunately, in the last many years, some excavation reports that
were due have not been given.  These are old reports.  Some are
eight year old and some are older reports of ten to fifteen years.
So, a grave view was taken on this account in the Ministry as well
as various other Committees including the Standing Committee as
well as the Central Advisory Board of Archaeology.´
4.17 When the Committee enquired about the reasons for delay in
excavation report, DG, ASI stated that :-
³These excavation reports did not come because the concerned
people retired or they were transferred midway and there were
problems in giving reports.  Now, ASI has been told that these
reports have to be completed and they have a time frame for the
next 18 months.  We will be taking quarterly review and these
reports will be completed in mid 2007.  I may also inform the
Committee in this connection that the PMO has also taken note of
this lacuna.  One of our thrust areas for reporting to PMO is the
pending excavation reports of the ASI.  Since conservation and
protection of our heritage sites are something which the entire
country has to take up in a big way.´
4.18 To a question whether ASI insist on the earlier findings when
anyone comes for fresh licence for excavation, DG, ASI during oral
evidence stated as follows:-
³Till two years ago, we were not insisting that they must come up
with the findings of the earlier excavation to get a fresh licence for
excavation.  Last year and this year, we have made it mandatory
that if anybody comes for a licence for excavation, he must submit
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the result of last year ¶s excavation.  Now, this is mandatory.
Unless one produces last year¶s report and the findings, we will not
consider the application for fresh excavation.´
Maps
4.19 To a question whether there is a need for mapping for carrying out
excavation and exploration work, a representative of ASI during oral
evidence stated as follows:
³Well old maps are there.  Every year some new sites are brought
to light.  Yes, I feel that old maps which were prepared 20 to 30
years ago need updating.  Secondly, a scheme was started to
have an Atlas of 50 years, in which the situation of India, at a
given point of time, was to be made.  But somehow it did not take
well, it could not start well.  But yes, certainly, it is needed.´
Laboratories
4.20 The Committee enquired about the technology being used and
latest methodology adopted for preservation and maintenance of
monuments, rare antiquities, the Ministry of Culture in their written reply
stated that the ASI is equipped with a well established laboratory at
Dehradun having all modern equipments.  Investigative studies are
carried out whenever required for developing safe yet effective methods
and materials for the treatment and the execution is done very carefully
under the strict supervision of an experienced chemist using latest
equipments.  The use of relevant and appropriate technology for the
preservation and maintenance of monuments and rare artifacts is
important to achieve good and lasting results.
4.21 To a question, regarding bringing all the laboratories under one
roof, DG, ASI during oral evidence stated as follows:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³ASI has got a full-fledged laboratory in Dehradun.  It is fairly up-
to-date and well-equipped laboratory.  We have small laboratories
in various places.  The laboratory in Pune is not just for the ASI.  It
is for general conservation. But in today ¶s world with the scientific
developments taking place in such a fast pace, it is not possible to
have in-house facility in each organization.  We must draw upon
the resources of other organizations.  The CSIR has got a lot of
laboratories.  The Central building Research Institute at Roorkee
has a laboratory.  They are always coming to our help.  Then,
Survey of India is coming to our help.  There is a Structural
Research Institute in Chennai.  We are in constant touch with a
large number of organizations.  Above all, I would like to submit
that IIT, Kanpur has extended complete support to the ASI for all
its activities.  So, my submission is that we should rather try to
make use of available facilities in various labs.  We will, of course,
strengthen our own laboratories.  But we may not be able to have
full in-house capacities created.´
4.22 About insufficiency of laboratories, a non-official witness during
oral evidence stated as follows:-
³One aspect that is very sadly lacking in the ASI is research and
development.  We have one laboratory at Dehradun but I do not
think it is functioning adequately these days.´
Carbon Dating Machine
4.23 About carbon dating, thermo-luminescence and  potassium organ
dating a non-official witness during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³We do have it in the PRL, in the Birbal Institute in Lucknow.
Recently, the AMS lab has been opened in Bhubneswar.
Unfortunately, they are not dedicated to archaeology.  They are
more interested in measuring the samples for geology because
working in the area of geology gets them quick international
recognition.  That is not the case with archaeology.  All the
countries are interested only in getting things done for geology to
find out formation of mineral wealth and for dating them.  They are
more dedicated to dealing with geological samples, not
archaeological samples.  I do remember that scores of samples
have been sent to the Physical Research Laboratory from my own
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

excavations and for more than two decades we are yet to get the
results.  That is the dismal situation.  The ASI and the State
Departments of Archaeology and universities are generating a lot
of samples every year.  They do not know where to go for their
time-determination.  If they send them abroad, there are some
legal and technical hassles and secondly the charges are
exorbitant.´
4.24 DG, ASI also stated about carbon dating machine during oral
evidence as follows:-
³As regards carbon dating machine, we do not have that such a
machine.  There are two institutes which does carbon dating for
ASI.  One is Birbal Research Institute, Lucknow and the other is
the Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad. Both these
laboratories do it for ASI.  The whole matter of establishing a
bigger laboratory in ASI was discussed earlier and at that point of
time, the general feeling was that there are many research
laboratories under CSIR.  So, ASI should make use of these
facilities in these laboratories under the CSIR and this is what is
being done now.  Alongwith this, the ASI itself has a laboratory in
Dehradun where such tests can be done.´
Security of Monuments/Sites
4.25 The Committee asked about the steps taken by ASI to improve
safety and security arrangements at the monuments sites and structures
and the Ministry of Culture in their written reply stated that for safety and
security of protected monuments and sites, monument attendants and
temporary status staff have been provided for discharging day to day
watch and ward duties.  In addition, 803 private security guards have
also been deployed for round the clock security and safety at selected
centrally protected monuments in different circles.  As per the direction
of the Hon ¶ble Supreme Court of India, the CISF has been deployed at
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Taj Mahal for its peripheral security w.e.f. 1 st May 2002.  Recently after
the Indian Army decided to vacate Red Fort, CISF has been deployed in
phases for the security of Red Fort w.e.f. 8th April 2003.
4.26 The Ministry of Culture further stated that in this connection, in
1984, an expert group on archaeology constituted by the Government of
India under the Chairmanship of Shri R.N. Mirdha, M.P., recommended
that ASI should have atleast 9000 Monument Attendants to cover all
important monuments in the country.  The Committee felt that even with
this proposed increase, many monuments and sites will be having only
one Monument Attendant for its supervision.
4.27 About shortage of monument attendants, DG, ASI during oral
evidence stated as follows:-
³As far back as 1984, it was estimated that ASI requires 9000
monument attendants all over the country.  We still have only 4000
of them.  We are short by 5000 monument attendants as on date.
We have the difficulty of taking over more monuments because of
shortage of manpower.´
4.28 The Expenditure incurred by ASI on different security agencies is
as follows:-
(A) Deployment of CISF
No. of Personnel deployed Annual Expenditure
459 Rs. 9.25 crores
(B) Deployment of State Police
No. of Personnel deployed Annual Expenditure
100 Rs. 1.50 crores
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(C) Private Security Personnel
No. of Personnel deployed Annual Expenditure
803 Rs. 5.50 crores
Museums
4.29 About Museums, a representative of Ministry of Culture during oral
evidence stated as follows:-
³The Archaeological Survey of India has 41 site museums under
its control and a project has been taken up for holistic upgradation
of the site museums including architectural renovation, display,
security, modernization and provision of various facilities for the
visitors.´
4.30 On being asked about the preparation of any list of sites where
site museums can be developed, the Ministry of Culture in their written
reply stated that the Archaeological Survey of India maintains 41 sites
museums.  Besides two small museums/galleries in the Guard Room
and Zanana Enclosure at Kamalapur (Hampi) in Karnataka are being
organized/developed as an extension to the existing site museum.  In
addition to the above, following site museums are being set up at:
(i) Fatehpur Sikri, Agra (U.P)
(ii) Dholavira, Kuchchh (Gujarat)
(iii) Deeg Palace, Bharatpur (Rajasthan)
4.31 They further stated that however, no list of sites where museums
can be developed, has so far been prepared by the Archaeological
Survey of India.  But the potential for setting up site museums is being
continuously explored.
4.32 The Committee further asked about the steps taken by ASI to
modernize the site museums and make them discharge a positive role in
promoting education, research and tourism instead of keeping them as
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

mere repositories of ancient culture, the Ministry of Culture in their
written reply stated that the Archaeological Survey of India has initiated
steps for upgradation/modernization of the site museums in a phased
manner.  A holistic approach is being adopted to develop museums as
an institute of learning, interactive entertainment and communication as
a popular and attractive destination for people from all walks of life by
modernizing display system, contextual visitors interpretation, thematic
organization and story telling, improved access communication &
circulation, digital documentation of the artifacts, signage, information
kiosk, etc.  The Archaeological Survey of India in collaboration with the
National Museum of India has empanelled architects/designers after
inviting application through Expression of interest and due screening.
4.33 The Ministry of Culture in their written replies further stated that
due to allocation of insufficient funds, the ASI has now taken up the
modernization and upgradation of selected museums in a phased
manner.
4.34 The Committee asked as to whether the literature on items in the
museums is being made available to visitors, the Ministry of Culture in
their written reply stated that the literature in the form of brochures,
giving general information about the museums is made available to
visitors.  The guide books are also available for a limited number of
museums.
Inspection of sites
4.35 The Committee enquired about the system of inspection carried
out in Archaeological Survey of India, the Ministry of Culture in their
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

written reply stated that regular inspection of sites/monuments are being
carried out by Circle/Branch Officers/Officials and officers from DG ¶s
office to the monuments.  For major project works, inspections are
carried out whenever required.  Several times inspections are carried
out and works are executed as per instructions of inspecting officers and
shortcomings are overcome. In addition, where some monuments are
effected/damaged by natural calamities like earthquake, flood, cyclone,
senior officers from Headquarter also visit the site.
4.36 They further stated that the Superintending Archaeologist, Chief
Horticulturist, Director Science regularly inspect the monuments and
monitor the conservation and preservation problems.  Besides this,
officers of the Directorate also inspect important project areas and
thereby monitoring exercise is carried out.
4.37 To look after 3667 Centrally protected monuments and sites, there
are 24 Circle Offices.  It was also pointed out by the Review Committee
appointed on May 4, 2000 to go into the functioning of Archaeological
Survey of India that there was no effective on-the-spot supervision in the
Circles.  The Committee had suggested that middle-level supervision
should be strengthened and the Headquarters should confine itself to
policy and administrative matters. For effective monitoring of the Circles,
the Committee had also suggested that the territorial archaeological
circles be grouped into six Regions with the headquarters located in the
Region itself.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4.38 The Committee asked about the action taken on the proposal
made by the Review Committee for restructuring of ASI and delegating
more powers to Circles, the Ministry in their written reply stated that  the
ASI has been restructured.  On the technical side, DG is assisted by two
Joint Directors General and 17 Directors in the field of Archaeology, out
of which five Directors have been designated as Regional Directors.
Besides, there are two Directors (Epigraphy) stationed at Mysore and
Nagpur, one Director(Admn.).  The delegation of financial powers to the
Circles has been recently enhanced.  Besides, the Mini-Circles have
been upgraded as Circles and therefore, there are 24 Circles at present.
4.39 When the Committee enquired regarding move to reorganize ASI,
especially the Circles and mini-circles to facilitate more effective
monitoring and supervision of the monuments and sites, the Ministry in
their written reply stated that three mini-circles, namely, Shimla mini-
circle, Goa mini-circle and Mumbai mini-circle have been upgraded to
full-fledged Circles for more effective monitoring and supervision of the
monuments/sites under these Circles.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

      Chapter-V
Miscellaneous
Encroachments/Illegal Constructions
5.1 On being asked about the instances of encroachments, the
Ministry in their written reply stated that the most common type of
encroachment is found in the form of construction of multistoried
buildings for dwelling, commercial activity including godowns, religious
buildings and Jhuggi-Jhoparies besides construction of State
Government agencies.  There are also concrete structures as well as of
brick and cement structures, some are built on the basis of clearance
given by the respective Civic bodies/Municipal corporations, etc.
5.2 The Ministry further stated that due to inadequate strength of
regular watch and ward, private security personnel have been deployed
at World Heritage and some of the important centrally protected
monuments.
5.3 On being asked about the measures taken in this regard, the
Ministry stated that as a long time measure, the centrally protected
monuments have also been fenced and the field officers have been
advised to make provisions for such fencing work in the remaining
centrally protected monuments.  This has certainly yielded positive
results in containing the encroachments.
5.4 Further, to prevent encroachments in the protected limits of the
centrally protected monuments, the Superintending Archaeologists, i.e.
the field officers in charge of the respective monuments in a
state/regions have been vested with the powers of Estate Officer and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

authorized to issue eviction notices to the encroachers under the
provisions of Public Premises (Eviction of unauthorized occupants) Act,
1971.
5.5 When the Committee asked about the action initiated on noticing
the encroachment, the Ministry in their written reply stated that as and
when any encroachment is noticed, immediate legal measures under the
provision of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Remains Sites Act,
1958 and Rules, 1959 are initiated by the field officers followed by the
action of the Directorate of Archaeological Survey of India and wherever
needed/ required the assistance from the local State Government/State
Police is requisitioned and with their assistance as and when provided
the encroachments are removed from the protected limits of centrally
protected monuments.  This exercise has certainly yielded a very
positive response from various regions.
5.6 DG, ASI during oral evidence also stated as follows:-
³As you have rightly mentioned, encroachment is a major problem
with the ASI.  Wherever we notice encroachment, we must get the
help of the State Government to remove the encroachment
because this is always a law and order situation.´
5.7 When the Committee asked about the latest information on the
encroachment, DG ASI stated as follows: -
³As on, we have collected information on encroachment.  I have
252 cases of encroachment reported in various circles of ASI.  We
have got 202 cases pending in various courts.  I am mentioning
only about the cases in higher courts, of which 185 cases are in
the High Courts and 17 cases are in the Supreme Court. I have a
list of encroachments in various circles.  It is a time-taking process
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

to get rid of the people who have encroached on the monuments.
In Delhi we are relatively lucky because a committee has been
constituted and periodical evictions are carried out in Delhi.´
5.8 Regarding measures to be taken to prevent encroachment, a non-
official witness during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³I have emphasized that our first priority should be fencing of
heritage area, whether it is a monument or an archaeological site.
Earlier it could not be done because funds were not adequate, but
now possibly, the funds are enough.  Almost all nationally
protected sites should be fenced first.´
5.9 He further stated as follows:-
³The piece of land in the ownership of the State Government or
any Department of the State Government or the Central
Government should be transferred in the name of ASI and the land
that is in private possession should get acquired.  Had it been
done 50 years ago, many of the problems of our monuments
would not have been there.  Now, there is lot of litigation and lot of
encroachments.  We are not in a position to remove them.  So,
fencing of a monuments or site and acquisition of land, whether
Government or private, is a must.´
5.10 The Committee asked about the parameters being followed for
construction near the historical monuments, the DG, ASI during oral
evidence stated as follows:-
³Sir, under the provisions of the Ancient Monuments Act, no
construction is allowed in the first 100 metres from the protected
limits of a monument and another 200 metres from this,
constructions are allowed by the ASI depending on the nature of
the building, the purpose and the height of the building. For first
100 metres in the second zone, we allow constructions up to 15
metres of height. In the second 100 metres, construction is
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

allowed up to 30 metres height. These are the statutory restrictions
on construction around the protected monuments.´
Theft/smuggling
5.11 According to the information furnished by the Ministry of Culture,
44 cases of the theft of idols, statues, etc. from the Centrally Protected
Monuments have been reported during the last five years out of which
only in 14 cases the stolen objects have been recovered and in the
remaining cases the matter is under investigation.
5.12 The Committee asked about the measures initiated to keep a
check on theft/smuggling to recover the stolen objects, the Ministry of
Culture in their written reply stated that in order to ensure the security
and protection of the ancient sculptures, idols and artifacts, watch and
ward staff have been deployed at centrally protected monuments,
archeological sites and museums. The security has been further
supplemented by engagement of private security guards and the state
police.  The Government is also considering the amendment of the
Antiquities and Art Treasures Act 1972 to firmly deal with illicit traffic in
antiquities.   Look out notices are issued to enforcing agencies to locate
and recover the stolen objects.
5.13 In this regard,  a non-official witness during oral evidence stated
as follows:-
³First of all, I would like to make it clear that Police Department
and ASI are working in a nice way in preventing smuggling of
antiquities.  If anything is brought to the notice of ASI, it quickly
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

notifies it to different Police Departments and Interpol.  There is a
system.  If they get any information, they pass it on to us and if we
get some information, we pass it on to them. It is not that it is only
the duty of the Police Department.  Certainly, Police has some
powers, which it can utilize for recovering or chasing those lost
things.´
5.14 When Committee asked about the protection of antiquity, the
representative of ASI during evidence stated as follows:-
³So far as protection of any antiquity from any site is concerned, it
is a humanly impossible task in India because practically every two
villages have an archaeological heritage site either in the form of
an ancient site or a monument.  I tried to make an experiment in
Haryana.  Through our Director, I sent a circular to all the District
Collectors to advise Patwaris and local persons to give information
about monuments or stray antiquities in their zones. So, a lot of
information has started flowing in.  Possibly at some point of time,
we shall have to think how we can involve local panchayats, even
patwaris and municipalities, to take care of the heritage.´
5.15 He further stated as follows:-
³Not after the Act was promulgated, but smuggling does take
place.  That is why, ASI has impressed upon the Police
Department to have a special cell in the Police Department to deal
with those things.´
5.16 In regard to theft, DG, ASI stated as follows:-
³With regard to the suggestion of possibility of theft etc.  I have
submitted that we have tried our best to curtail such incidents.  We
have a terrible shortage of Monument Attendants.  ASI have hired
a private agency and about 803 private security guards have been
hired by the ASI.  We have taken help from CISF and local police.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

But even then I have to confess that we have several monuments
which are not adequately protected.  So, this is a serious problem.
That is one of the areas where we require additional allocation for
hiring more private manpower.´
5.17 He further stated as follows:-
³With regard to the idol theft, I would like to submit that the actual
matter of prevention of theft or investigation is done by the law
enforcing agency which is the police, CBI or customs.  The
Archaeological Survey of India is only implementing the Antiquities
and Art Treasures Act.  Though for processing the case, the law
enforcing agencies take the help of the ASI, we do not have any
field staff for this matter.  The entire responsibility for investigating
the theft or prevention of theft is that of the law enforcing agency.
When it comes to across the border, it is the customs that does the
investigation.  But there is a proposal for amendment of the
Antiquities and Art Treasures Act so that the legal provision can be
made more stringent.  Some amendments have already been
proposed and the proposed amendments are in the final shape.
Untraceable Monuments
5.18 The Committee asked as to whether any enquiry have been
conducted in regard to untraceable monuments, the Ministry of Culture
in their written reply stated that the major causes for the disappearance
of the ancient monuments and sites are rapid urbanization, construction
of multistoried residential and commercial buildings, implementation of
development projects, etc.   Instructions were issued to all Circle
Officers to personally verify the status of such monuments/sites, falling
under their respective jurisdiction.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5.19 The Committee asked whether any responsibility has been fixed
on the officials of ASI, local police or any individuals for the untraceable
monuments. DG, ASI during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³With regard to the missing monuments, the position is, these
monuments have been missing not in the recent past.  Many of
them have been missing since long.  I have got a detailed list in
respect of Delhi monuments.  In 1999-2000 a detailed inquiry was
made into each of the cases.  Many of them have vanished many
years back.  Monuments which were declared protected under
1904 Act and which were protected in 1920, all of them have been
deemed to have been protected under the new Act.   Many of
them are protected for 100 to 150 years.  A total of 35 monuments
are untraceable.  As on date, it may not be possible to fix
responsibility.  But in all cases where monuments are reportedly
missing, we have asked the officers concerned to give a detailed
report.  For Delhi we have got a detailed report.´
Private Sector Participation – National Culture Fund (NCF)
5.20 On being asked about the public private participation, the Ministry
in their written reply stated that in order to facilitate the infusion of private
and public sector funds into the field of heritage preservation, the
National Culture Fund(NCF) was established as a Trust in November
1996 to enable institutions and individuals to perform their rightful role in
promoting and preserving India¶s cultural heritage.
5.21 About public-private sector participation, the Secretary of Ministry
of Culture during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³«« In the Ministry of Culture, we have established a National
Culture Fund about eight-nine years ago. Within that Culture Fund,
we have tried hard to get help from the private sector and other
public sector agencies.  We have not been very successful.  But
some big projects have certainly been taken up.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5.22 On being asked about the aim and objectives of National Culture
Fund the Ministry of Culture in their written reply stated that India ¶s rich
cultural and historical heritage is embodied in its ancient monuments.
We have been preserving this priceless heritage with limited resources.
It is the responsibility not only of the Government but also of every
citizen of the country to come forward to save these intricately crafted
buildings, forts, temples, palaces, etc. It is the prime duty of every citizen
in India to join hands to preserve our past glory.
5.23 Secretary, Ministry of Culture in this regard further stated as
follows:-
³We have a corpus which has been given to us by the Finance
Ministry.  The corpus is there in the Ministry of Culture.  The
corpus is of quite a large amount.  At the moment we have with us
about Rs. 15 Crore.  I think that is the amount that we have and
the secondary corpus is also available but we cannot use the
corpus.  We utilize the interest that we earn from the corpus.  It is
also important to inform the Hon. Members that we have held
various meetings.  We have a Committee under the Chairmanship
of our Minister where there are a large number of members from
the corporate sector and public sector undertakings but a very few
people are coming forward to take up monuments«..
«.They have been working there for three years.  Similarly,
we are trying for other private sector people or the public sector to
come forward but it is very difficult.   We will again discuss the
NCF procedures with FICCI.  Income tax benefits are available
under the NCF to anyone who gives grant  and helps under that
programme.  It is difficult.  Even the corporate sector will not easily
come forward unless they see some benefits and visibility.  Public
sector also will come if you give them enough visibility.
But the private sector will come only if they improve their
bottom line which is something concrete at which they can look at.
It is not just visibility for the private sector.  If the public sector has
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

sufficient visibility and some economic returns, they are willing to
help.´
5.24 The Committee asked about the latest developments with
innovative ideas in this regard, Secretary, Ministry of Culture during
evidence stated as follows:-
³Our Minister has taken a decision for creating a Heritage
Commission. The Heritage Commission Bill is being drafted. If this
Commission is formed, it will also come up with innovative ideas in
future to involve the civil society in many ways. The civil society
has to come forward. The non-governmental organisations and the
State Governments in their own capacities have to come forward
to help in the preservation and also whatever we can have
economic returns from the heritage sector over a period of next
decade if it is planned properly.´
5.25 To further elucidate, a non-official witness during oral evidence
stated as follows:-
³So long  as I was in the ASI, the private sector were promising a
lot and wanted a lot from the ASI but not contributing very
substantially.  I think, we are still in a very early stage.  Private
sector also has to learn the sensitivities of the ASI and vice versa.
It is a welcome thing but if private sector comes forward without
strings or without a lot of interference, they are welcome.  Once
they promise the money, they start putting so much constraints or
conditions and it becomes impossible for the ASI to move
forward.´
Projects sponsored under NCF
5.26 On being asked, Ministry in their written reply stated that following
projects have been sponsored under NCF:-
(a) Pro-active generation of projects and sponsorship to bring about
visible improvements at monuments and sites, heritage complexes
and their environments.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(b) To bring monuments back into the lifestyle and culture of local
communities.
(c) Promotional activities in the form of organized concerts, theatre,
cultural shows, location shoots for films T.V., lectures, community
festivals, etc. be permitted wherever feasible as per ASI
regulations.
(d) Environmental development in and around the heritage sites.
(e) Structural conservation, chemical preservation and refurbishment
of the monuments.
(f) Display of cultural notice boards, direction boards, signage, etc.
(g) Providing visitor friendly amenities.
(h) Providing popular authentic historical literature.
(i) Improvement and upgradation of existing museums and
commissioning of new ones in the vicinity of existing cultural
property.
(j) Illumination of monuments.
(k) Facility for tourists such as cafeterias, parking lots, landscaping,
setting up of information centers, kiosks, cyber cafes, souvenir
shops etc.
Benefits of NCF
5.27 On being asked about the benefit of NCF, the Ministry stated as
follows:-
(a) 100 percent tax rebate under Section 80G(2) of the Income Tax
Act.
(b) Plaques will be put up at each site to advertise donation.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(c) All activity at the adopted site will be donor-specific.
(d) NCF will be responsible for giving receipt of Income Tax
exemption and accounts of utilization of the donations.
(e) Guaranteed mileage for corporate houses as they can project their
donations in their advertisements.
(f) Flexibility in project management through a MoU.
(g) A forum for public visibility and accountability will be set up.
(h) Revenue from events held at site and monuments will be credited
in an account jointly operated by ASI and NCF.
(i) Foreign donations can be received as the clearance under the
Foreign Contributions Regulations Act has been obtained.
(j) NCF will help propagate and inform people around the world about
the heritage of India.
Salient features of the MoU
5.28 On asking about the salient features of this MoU for flexibility in
project management, the Ministry in their written reply stated that the
NCF will be accountable to each donor in respect of funds donated. A
separate dedicated account for each project to be opened by the NCF.
Donors can appoint and monitor the executive agencies to carry out the
project work except for conservation of the monuments subject to the
predefined technical aesthetic conditions laid down by the ASI. A Project
Implementation Committee will be set up with experts and
representatives of the concerned institutions to monitor and implement
the project. A Project Advisory Committee consisting of nominees of
donors NCF and representatives of the civic authorities and other
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

interested groups will oversee the project. NCF will facilitate all
necessary clearances and permissions for the project. ASI will specify in
general terms activities permissible within the protected sites, and in
addition there will be a set of clear local rules applicable to each
individual site. These will be published and made available.
5.29 The centrally protected monuments, which were covered under
these projects are:-
• Taj Mahal (Agra), Agra
• Jantar Mantar, New Delhi
• Monuments at Lodi Garden, New Delhi
• Jaisalmer Fort, Jaisalmer (Rajasthan)
• Konark Sun Temple (Konark), Orissa
• Kanheri Caves, Mumbai
• Khajuraho Temples, Khajuraho
• Monuments at Hampi, Karnataka
• Warangal Fort, Warangal
• Qutab Minar at Delhi
• Humayun¶s Tomb, Delhi
5.30 The Committee further asked as to why this initiative is not
considered to be successful, the Ministry of Culture in their reply stated
that the Archaeological Survey of India and National Culture Fund are in
the process of consultations with the representatives of trade and
industry organisations like the FICCI, CII etc. for promotion of the public-
private partnerships. The Archaeological Survey of India is also bringing
out a publication detailing with the monuments where such projects can
be taken up.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Tourist Facilities
5.31 On being asked by the Committee, whether there is any
arrangement, institutional or otherwise with State Governments and
other Central departments/agencies for development of infrastructure at
the historical sites, structure, monuments, etc. protected by ASI, the
Ministry of Culture in their written reply stated that tourism department of
State Governments and Central Government, use the surroundings of
the archaeological area for developing tourism related infrastructure,
such as toilets, cafeteria, flood light, light and sound programme, tourist
information center etc.
5.32 In this regard, the Ministry further stated that many of the centrally
protected monuments and sites have been provided with the basic
amenities for the visitors. However, there is always scope to
improve/upgrade such existing amenities. ASI is making its best efforts
to improve the basic amenities by way of providing drinking water
facility, toilet block, approach pathway, signages, ramps for disabled
persons, wheel chairs, visitors benches, publication for information, etc
where these facilities are not available. Respective State Governments
are being approached from time to time to construct link metal road
connecting the monument to the nearest airport/railway station to
promote the cultural tourism in the country. Co-ordination with the
Ministry of Tourism is maintained for continuously promoting cultural
tourism in ASI monuments and sites.
5.33 On being asked about the minimum facilities and amenities
available at different sites and monuments, the Secretary, Ministry of
Culture during oral evidence stated as follows: -
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³«.tourist facilities to the minimum extent are also provided by the
ASI. Facilities like the small kiosks, or toilets or canteen facilities
which will not hamper conservation efforts are certainly provided
by the ASI. Smaller monuments in some cities like Bangalore and
Chennai have taken up. You are right that all of them, that is about
5000, do not have such facilities.´
5.34 When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry/ASI to provide
facilities and amenities in and around the monuments, the Secretary
Ministry of Culture during oral evidence stated as follows:-
³In the last two years, we have told the officers concerned that
they should prepare such plans for those monuments that have a
large number of visitors. Even though they are small monuments
we should give minimum facilities of toilets etc. in such
monuments. I am sure that within the next three to five years, we
will see a difference in most of the monuments.
5.35 Secretary, Ministry of Culture further stated as follows:-
³If we talk of larger infrastructure like small hotels or guest houses,
that is with the Ministry of Tourism. Ministry of Tourism has
prepared plans and they have already started the work. They have
identified, if I remember the number right, about 80 rural tourist
hubs within the country which are in remote parts. We have
coordination meetings with Secretary, Tourism which he chairs.
Every six weeks or every two months we hold these meetings. We
have requested the Ministry that these hubs could be situated near
monuments so that tourists could visit them. That is one initiative
which has been taken. If this continues, maybe in the next three to
five years, large number of such smaller monuments can be taken
up for providing infrastructure facilities. ´
5.36 To a query about giving some incentives to the private sector to
construct hotels, etc., near the monument, Secretary, Ministry of Culture
stated as follows:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³I would like to respond very positively to what you have said.  The
time has come. In the past 25 years or so, the economic
opportunities  that were there in this sector, have not been fully
realized; in the last few years only, the realization has come that if
you spend money in this sector, you will get returns.  That has now
to be planned.  It is true that except for the main sites which are
there in the country, which could probably be 25 or 30, we have
not gone beyond that, to be able to create a concerted effort and a
planned programme. But now we should plan.´
Complaints /Suggestions
5.37 The Committee asked about the system put in place for eliciting
suggestions and complaints from tourist/visitors at each of the sites, the
Ministry of Culture in their written reply stated that the Archaeological
Survey of India receives a large number of complaints/suggestions at
the circle office as well as Headquarters. Besides,
suggestions/complaints one recorded in the visitors/suggestions books
maintained in various locations and follow up action is taken on the
suggestions/complaints
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Observations/Recommendations
1. The Committee took up the subject ‘Maintenance of
Monuments by ASI’ for examination and had detailed
interactions with the representatives of Ministry of Culture
and ASI. The Committee note that ASI was set up in 1861 with
the objectives of conserving and preserving the monuments
of the country, taking up archeological excavations,
epigraphical survey, maintenance of sites, museums and
imparting training in archeology.   ASI regulates all
archaeological activities in the country as per the provisions
of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958.  It also implements Antiquities and Art
Treasure Act, 1972.  There are 24 Circles, 6 Excavation
Branches, 2 Temple Survey Projects, 1 Building Survey
Project, 1 Pre-history Branch, 1 Science Branch, 2 Epigraphy
Branch and 1 Horticulture Branch through which ASI
performs its functions. As on date ASI is maintaining 3667
monuments. After going into activities of ASI, the Committee
are of the view that there is sufficient scope for improvement
in several spheres of functioning of ASI in regard to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

maintenance of monuments and archaeological sites and
remains of national importance. These aspects have been
dealt with in detail by the Committee in the succeeding
paragraphs.
2. The Committee note that there is no institutional mechanism
for State Archaeology Departments to keep the ASI apprised
about the activities of State Archaeology Departments except
periodical meetings with Secretaries of State Culture
Departments. No regular reporting system is maintained. DG,
ASI during oral evidence informed the Committee that there is
an informal relation between State Archaeology Departments
and the ASI. But the Committee is of the view that there
should be a formal arrangement between ASI and State
Archaeology Departments. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Ministry of Culture should devise an
institutional mechanism to be followed by ASI and State
Archaeology Departments so that ASI can get the information
regarding the activities of State Archaeology Departments on
regular basis. It is essential that regular reporting system
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

should also be followed so that ASI is apprised of the
activities of State Archaeology Departments.
3. ASI operates Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 1972 and Rules
1973. This Act provides (i) compulsory registration of notified
categories of antiquities; (ii) regulating the export trade in
antiquities and art treasures; (iii) prevention of smuggling and
fraudulent dealings in antiquities; (iv) compulsory acquisition
of antiquities and art treasures for preservation in public
places; and (v) certain other matters connected therewith or
incidental or ancillary thereof.  The Committee note that in the
present scenario, Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 1972 is
not being effectively implemented and has certain lacunae
such as there is no provision for verification of registered
antiquities, assessing the damage or loss on account of
defacement, the movement of the antiquity in the country, its
documentation, etc.  The entire responsibility for
investigating the theft or prevention of theft is that of the law
enforcing agency.
The Committee note that Cabinet Note and Draft Bill are being
finalized and therefore recommend that amendments should
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

be proposed for strengthening the Act further with a view to
effectively checking the illegal trade and smuggling of the
antiquities and conferring greater powers on the enforcing
authorities and making punishment deterrent by enhancing
the limit of imprisonment on violation of the provisions of the
Act. The Committee also recommend that local panchayats,
patwaris and municipalities should also be involved in taking
care of the heritage.
4. The Committee note that with such a rich cultural heritage
and a large number of built monuments all over the country, it
may not be possible for any single organization, like ASI to
take care of the entire built heritage. Many monuments which
are under State List are in a bad shape. State Governments
neither have technically qualified staff nor have financial
resources. The Committee, therefore, very strongly
recommend that National Heritage Site Commission should
be constituted as early as possible with statutory powers to
issue directions to all State Governments. The Committee are
also of the view that the process of ‘listing the buildings as
list ‘A’ list ‘B’ and list ‘C’ which has been adopted in almost all
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the countries in the world should also be adopted in our
country. The Committee was informed that the cities like
Mumbai, Hyderabad and Chennai have already initiated the
process on these lines. The Committee also recommend that
all over the country, Government must list the heritage
buildings, classify them and put restrictions on any one
tampering with these built heritage buildings/sites.
5. The Committee note that a project on National Mission on
Monument and Antiquities has been prepared and launched
for a period of five years i.e. 2007-2012 with the objective to
prepare National Register and set up State level data base of
Built Heritage sites and antiquities; promote awareness
programme concerning the benefits of preserving built
heritage sites and antiquities; extend training facility and
capacity building to the concerned State Departments, local
bodies, NGO’s universities, etc, help in developing synergy
between institutions like ASI, State Governments, concerned
institutions and NGO’s for ensuring close interaction. The
Committee desire that Ministry of Culture should plan the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

project properly and ensure strict compliance in the fixed
term of five years i.e. 2007-2012.
The Committee further recommend that personnel who are to
be hired for the Mission should be professional and should
have sufficient experience in archaeology. These personnel
can also be retired efficient personnel of ASI.
6. The Committee note that the Ministry have tentatively
estimated in the context of preparation of the Eleventh Five
Year Plan proposals that the annual allocation for
conservation of all monuments should be Rs.300 crores. The
estimation was not vetted technically before its projection.
The reasons put forth in support of the estimation was that
Rs.100 crore are being spent on 1000 monuments so the
estimation for 3667 monuments was Rs.300 crore. The
Committee consider this projection hypothetical and
abysmally low because the cost of maintenance of monument
will definitely vary depending on the size and condition of the
monument and therefore recommend that Ministry should
ensure that the estimates of projects are based on realistic
assessment of requirement of funds and all technical aspects
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

should be considered before projection of estimates.  A
separate fund should be allocated for excavation work.
7. India is an active member of World Heritage from 1977.
UNESCO has declared 27 sites as World Heritage Sites in
India. UNESCO provide no direct financial support to these
world heritage sites, though it helps ASI in the form of
capacity building i.e. for training. It provides a marginal
financial support only to a site which is declared as a World
Heritage Site in danger. During evidence the Committee was
informed that a special provision is made in the budget
allocation of ASI for World Heritage Sites. The Committee
note that there are two world heritage sites in danger in India
namely Hampi in Karnataka and Manas in Assam and only
limited funds are available under the UNESCO for these sites.
The Committee are of the view that protection of these sites
which are of exceptional interest and universal value is the
concern of the nation and therefore recommend that
sufficient budget allocation should be made in ASI budget
and all efforts should be made to invite national and
international organisations for providing financial support for
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the protection/conservation of World Heritage Sites at Hampi
and Manas.
8. The Committee are perturbed to note that ASI could generate
only Rs.43.59, Rs.52.89 and Rs.58.07 crore as revenue during
the years 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively. It is too
meager in comparison to the number of monuments. It seems
ASI as well as Ministry of Culture are not making efforts to
increase their revenue. The Committee are of the view that
economic potential of this sector has not been realized either
by ASI or by the Ministry of Culture. If monuments have
something different in the manner of presentation of its
history as well as its indoor activities, it will not only attract
domestic tourists but will definitely attract international
tourists. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry
of Culture as well as ASI should take concrete steps for
increasing their revenue by publicizing more effectively
through electronic media or by organizing more cultural
programmes, light and sound programme, puppet shows,
screening documentaries, etc. at these sites with a lead taken
by Ministry of Tourism and State Tourism Departments. In
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

this way, two purposes will be served, revenue generation will
be more and our invaluable culture will also get a boost.
9. The Committee note that all the revenue earned by ASI is
remitted to the Consolidated Fund of India and ASI do not get
any share of this revenue. The Committee was informed that
ASI has formulated a proposal for creation of “Non-Lapsable
fund for National Monuments of ASI by earmarking part of the
income generated by sale of entry tickets for a separate fund
for conservation and preservation as well as for development
of tourist amenities in those monuments. Moreover, the
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission has also agreed in
principle with the proposal.
The Committee are of the view that if ASI gets some
percentage from the revenue, definitely they will make earnest
efforts to increase their revenue.  Moreover, they will spend it
on maintaining the monuments, which will automatically
curtail ASI’s budget. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the matter should be pursued vigorously at the highest
level with the Ministry of Finance with a request that a part of
the ticketed revenue should accrue to ASI.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

10. The Committee is distressed to note that the post of DG, ASI
is being occupied by an administrative officer and not by a
professional archaeologist since 1993. As per recruitment
rules, if there are eligible archaeologists, they could be
posted as DG. In the absence of eligible archaeologist,
Government can post anyone from the administrative
services as DG of ASI.  The Committee is not satisfied with
Ministry’s view, that this does not hamper the functioning of
ASI, because ASI has so many archaeologists, scientists,
historians, engineers and architects. It is very strange that on
the one hand Ministry is of the view that ASI is a
multidisciplinary agency consisting of archaeologists,
scientists, historians, engineers, etc. and on the other hand,
Ministry could not find one eligible person amongst them to
post him as DG, ASI since 1993. It is very strange that
Ministry compromises to appoint a person, who does not
have any experience in archaeology but has not sought to
amend recruitment rules to appoint a suitable professional to
the post of DG. It seems the Government is not serious about
maintaining country’s valuable heritage. No doubt,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

administrative officers are qualified and competent, but their
appointment is for a short period i.e. two-three years. ASI,
which deals with scientific and technical aspects needs a
professional who understands the technicalities of the
archaeology. The Committee is not convinced by the
argument put forth by the representatives of the Ministry that
since 1993 there have been no eligible officers available in the
organization. The Committee also find that recruitment rules
of the ASI were notified in the year 2002 and amendments
could have been made accordingly before issuing the
notification.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that DG, ASI
should be a professional and not just an administrative
officer, so that ASI can work efficiently and effectively with
inspired leadership. If need arises, necessary amendment in
the Recruitment Rules can be made accordingly because a
person heading ASI with some experience in archaeology is
better than a person who does not have any experience in
archaeology.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

11.  The Committee are surprised to note that the post of ADG
(Arch) remained vacant since 1991 because at that time, none
of the Archaeological Survey of India’s officer fulfilled the
criteria as laid down in the recruitment rules for the post of
ADG.  DG, Archaeological Survey of India during oral
evidence stated that according to Ministry of Finance’s
guidelines, if a post remains vacant for one year, it is deemed
to have been abolished.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance
abolished the post of ADG.  The Committee are of the view
that Archaeological Survey of India should have reconsidered
the qualification for the post of ADG, as they were very well
aware of the guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance. The
Committee are further informed that only in 2006 the post of
ADG (Arch.) has been revived after a lot of correspondence at
the highest level.
The Committee is astonished to note that the post of
ADG was abolished in the absence of having any officer
fulfilling the criteria. In the present circumstances as DG, ASI
is an administrative officer, it was imperative to have the post
of ADG (Arch.). The Ministry of Finance should have preferred
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

to reconsider the qualification for filling up the post of ADG
instead of abolishing the post.
In view of this the Committee recommend that Ministry
of Finance should be considerate if such a situation arises in
future and they should reconsider the recruitment rules
instead of abolishing a technical post. The Ministry of Culture
should also take expeditious steps and apprise the Ministry of
Finance about the facts in time.
12. The Committee note that ASI is not able to keep pace with the
changing requirements due to shortage of manpower. ASI
was primarily formed for survey and conservation of
monuments but now they are looking after the maintenance of
monuments also. DG, ASI during oral evidence informed the
Committee that ASI do not have any engineering unit,
conservation architects etc. and due to shortage of staff, they
are unable to take up more monuments which are of
outstanding universal value and importance. The Committee
is astonished to note that on one hand ASI is facing shortage
of staff and on the other hand, 49 posts in Gr A, 87 posts in Gr
B and 93 post in Gr C are lying vacant for many years.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Moreover, ASI has not sent any proposal to the Ministry of
Culture and Ministry of Finance for increase in manpower.
The Committee therefore, stress that appropriate steps
should be immediately taken to strengthen the staff position,
especially at technical levels viz. architect, engineers etc. and
all the posts which are lying vacant for many years should be
filled up expeditiously.
13. The Committee note that there are various institutes like
National Museum Institute, training institute in the archives,
institute of archaeology. The review Committee headed by RN
Mirdha, MP have suggested that it may grow as the seat of
higher learning and research, it may be upgraded as National
Institute of Archaeology and art history with the status of a
deemed university with five major schools of Indian
Archaeology, World Archaeology, History of Art,
Conservation and Heritage Management and Archaeological
Science. The Committee are also of the opinion and have
recommended that Ministry of Culture should take all sincere
efforts to take a decision to declare it National Institute of
Archaeology and Art History.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

As regards in-take of students, the Committee are
informed that at present 300 students have applied but after
written test and interview only 15 students are taken. The
Committee are of the view that number of seats in the
institute should be increased and recommend that the
curriculum should be made more attractive, job oriented so
as to compete with international standard so that bright
students get themselves enrolled to study archaeology and
subsequently get an avenue to serve and in turn ASI and
State Archaeology Departments may also get trained
personnel.
14. Conservation and Preservation is the prime task of ASI and
the policy of conservation should primarily be aimed at
ensuring structural stability of the monuments without
affecting any change in original features of monuments.  The
Committee note that ASI is giving emphasis on just
renovating the monuments rather than conserving and
preserving the monuments with original characteristics and
they are of the view that ASI should not betray the nation by
tampering with the monuments of national importance. ASI
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

should not do just cosmetic work. By this, the very purpose
of constituting ASI will be defeated. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that ASI with the collaboration of other Ministries,
agencies, institutes, etc. should devise new
methods/techniques for conserving and preserving the
monuments without losing their originality. ASI should also
seek advice of experts of international agencies in this
regard.  The Committee find that ASI takes a considerable
amount of time to repair and renovate a monument.  The
Committee, therefore, recommend that a definite time frame
should be fixed for conservation and preservation of
monuments.
15. The Committee note that according to Section 4 of Ancient
Monuments and Archaeology Sites and Remain Act, 1958,
whenever an ancient monument or archaeological site and
remain is found worthy of central protection keeping in view
its historical, archaeological and artistic importance, two
months notice is issued through an official gazette
notification expressing its intention to declare the
monuments, archaeological site to be of national importance.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Any private individual, State Governments, voluntary
organizations having any objection, can file it. After disposing
of all the objections, ASI declare the particular
monument/archaeological site as a monument/site of national
importance. The Committee note that in all this process, there
is no role of State Government where the particular
archaeological/monument site exists. Though DG, ASI during
oral evidence admitted that ASI generally consult State
Government before declaration of monument/site as a
monument/site of national importance. But there is no such
provision in the Act. Moreover DG, ASI himself agreed with
the view of the Committee that it is better to consult the State
Governments before a decision is taken to declare a
monument as centrally protected.  Cooperation of the State
Governments should also be sought in acquisition of land for
declaring a monument/archaeological site to be of national
importance.  Local bodies such as municipalities etc. may
also be involved in the process.
In view of this, the Committee recommend that a
provision should be included in the Act accordingly and State
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Governments should invariably be consulted before taking a
decision to declare a monument as centrally protected.
16. The Committee appreciate that ASI has done a lot in the field
of excavation and exploration. But there are still many sites
which need to be explored. Exploration and excavation are
very important to fill up the gap in the cultural sequence of
Indian Archaeology, throwing more light on lesser-known
cultures and protecting an area which is threatened by
submergence owing to construction of dams, being
destroyed or damaged due to absolutely necessary
developmental works, natural calamities, etc. So the onus lies
with the ASI and Ministry to take concrete steps in this
direction. The Committee recommend that since it is a
computer era, ASI should employ modern technologies such
as GIS (Geographical Information System), GPR (Ground
Penetrating Radar System) etc. for accurate documentation of
site features and their quick analysis.
The Ministry should also review the methods or systems
adopted by other countries for exploration and excavation
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

work for bringing ASI’s existing methodology for excavation
and exploration at par with international standards.
17. The Committee feel that there is a great need to update the
old maps. It is very distressing to note that neither ASI nor
Ministry of Culture has felt the need to update the maps which
are 20 to 30 year old. As every year, many sites are excavated
and explored, it has become imperative to update the old
maps.
The Committee also note that a scheme was started to
have an Atlas of 50 years in which the situation of India, at a
given point of time, was to be depicted.  But it could not
materialize.  The Committee recommend that for carrying out
updation of maps of ASI, Ministry should fix a time limit and
earnest efforts should be made to start the scheme to have an
Atlas of 50 years and ensure its earliest completion.
18. The Committee are astonished to note that there are so many
excavation reports pending for the last ten to fifteen years
and even PMO has taken note of the lacuna. DG, ASI during
oral evidence stated that the main problem for not submitting
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

these reports is transfer or retirement of concerned officials.
The Committee views this seriously and recommend that the
official concerned with the excavation report should not be
transferred during the period of preparing the report and a
time frame for submitting the excavation reports should be
fixed. On non-submission of report in the prescribed time,
strict action should be taken against all concerned.
The Committee also strongly recommend that the
Ministry should take expeditious steps to get all pending
reports completed and no fresh licence for excavation be
considered in favour of the defaulter in the absence of
previous excavation report. For completion of such reports
services of retired officials can also be obtained. The
Committee also desire that the steps taken in this regard and
status of pending reports may be communicated to the
Committee within 6 months after the presentation of the
Report.
19. The Committee note that use of relevant and appropriate
technology for the presentation and maintenance of
monuments and rare artifacts is important to achieve good
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and lasting results. Though ASI has a full fledged laboratory
in Dehradun and small laboratories in various places, yet ASI
take support from CSIR, SRI Chennai, IIT Kanpur, Central
Building Research Institute at Roorkee and they are unable to
create full in-house laboratories. The Committee therefore,
strongly recommend that ASI should strengthen their own
laboratories and all efforts should be made to establish full in
house laboratories so that research and development
activities may not hamper.
The Committee also note that ASI is not having facility
of Carbon Dating Machine. ASI sends its samples for carbon
dating to Birbal Research Sahani Institute, Lucknow and
Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad. Dating is not
being maintained and ascertained properly. For dating, ASI
has to depend on other institutes and these institutes are
more interested in dealing with geological samples not
archaeological samples. These institutes do not give much
importance to determine the time. It is very astonishing to
note that in PRL, the samples of ASI are pending for results
for more than two decades.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
of Culture should provide Carbon Dating Machine to ASI as
dating is very important aspect. If date is not properly
ascertained or maintained, it will be very difficult to frame up
the history in terms of culture or archaeology of sites.
Moreover, this will also cater to the requirements of the State
Departments of Archaeology and universities which are also
in the state of uncertainty about the agency to approach for
time determination.
20. The Committee note that due to present phenomenon of
terrorism it has become very necessary to provide stringent
security to our national heritage. ASI is having a tremendous
shortfall of monument attendants. An expert group on
archaeology constituted in 1984 by the Government of India
under the Chairmanship of Shri R.N. Mirdha, MP
recommended that ASI should have atleast 9000 monument
attendants to provide security to all important monuments in
the country.  But ASI has 4000 monument attendants.  In
order to cope with this shortfall, ASI which has engaged State
Police, CISF, private security guards and temporary staff, is
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

incurring a huge financial burden on this account. CISF alone
is incurring Rs.9.25 crore expenditure per year on ASI. The
Committee is not averse to engaging other security agencies
for security of monuments but is of the opinion and
recommend that instead of investing so much money on
other agencies, ASI should strengthen its own watch and
ward staff. It should give more stress on appointing its own
monument attendants. Their watch and ward staff should be
given training periodically in order to bring them at par with
other national level security guards. They should be laced
with new gadgets and scanners, CCTV should be installed at
the sites of national importance and surprise checks should
be conducted in order to ensure the promptness of security
staff deputed there.
21. The Committee note that museums play a pivotal role in
representing the history as small and movable antiquities
recovered from ancient sites are kept here with the remains to
which they belong so that they may be studied amid their
natural surroundings. ASI is maintaining 41 site museums
and is initiating steps for upgradation/modernization of the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

selected site museums in a phased manner. ASI in
collaboration with the National Museum of India has
empanelled architects and designers after inviting
applications through Expression of Interest and due
screening. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should provide sufficient funds to enable ASI to
upgrade/modernize the site museums as they are an integral
part of monuments. ASI should take expeditious efforts to
upgrade and modernize all site museums in collaboration
with National Museum of India in time bound manner to
attract more visitors/tourists.
The brochures/pamphlets are distributed free of cost to
the visitors. The Committee note that very few copies of
brochures/pamphlets are being distributed to visitors. The
level of cultural consciousness in India has risen
tremendously and common man wants to know more abut the
history. Therefore, the Committee recommend that adequate
copies of literature in the form of brochures/pamphlets and
guide books should be made available at these museums to
keep the visitors apprised of the relevant facts of antiquities,
etc.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

22. The Committee are informed that regular inspections of
monuments are carried out by Circle/Branch officers/officials
and officers from DG’s office.  Though the ASI has upgraded
three mini-circles to full fledged circles for effective
monitoring and supervisions of the monuments and sites. But
Committee are not satisfied with this arrangement and in view
of this, they recommend that instead of having circles for
large number of monuments, small circles should be formed
so that effective monitoring of monuments can be done.  The
Committee also suggest that middle level supervision should
also be strengthened. The Committee may be apprised of the
action taken in this regard at the earliest.
23. The Committee take serious note of illegal
construction/encroachment taking place near most of the
historical monuments. Such encroachments/illegal
constructions lend a bad view to the monuments and it also
affects tourism potentiality of the monuments. Encroachment
should be removed from the vicinity of heritage sites as it
creates an adverse image in the mind of visitors. ASI should
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

deal with this problem firmly. The Committee also note that in
Delhi, a Committee was constituted and periodical evictions
are carried out in Delhi. The Committee appreciate the action
taken by ASI and Delhi Government and recommend that
such type of Committees should be constituted in other
States also for getting the encroachment in nearby areas of
monuments evicted.
The Committee are of the view that ASI should be
vigilant so that encroachment does not take place. Once there
is encroachment, it becomes very difficult to remove it. ASI is
involved in legal actions for eviction, which is a very lengthy
process. Therefore, the Committee suggest that Ministry
should take stringent steps in this regard such as fencing of
all the monuments, tightening the security, stringent
punishment to guilty, fixing the responsibility of concerned
authority to take care, so that no new case of illegal
construction/encroachment occurs in near future. The
Committee also note that under the provisions of the Ancient
Monuments Act, no construction is allowed in the first 100
metres from the protected limits of a monument and they
recommend that construction should not be allowed in the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

first 200 metres from the protected limit of a monument
instead of 100 metres.  Effective provisions should be
incorporated in the Ancient Monuments Act to safeguard the
monuments from encroachment.  The provisions should
include stringent punishment and eviction by law enforcing
agencies in case of encroachment.
The Committee also suggest that a Notice Board should
be placed near the monuments giving a warning to people
that illegal construction and encroachment is not permitted
nearby monuments and the guilty will be liable to stringent
punishment.
24. The Committee are perturbed to note that only 14 cases out of
44 cases of the theft of idols, statues which have been
reported are solved during last five years. The Committee
note that ASI has huge shortage of monument attendants. To
cope with this shortage, ASI has deployed private security
guards, CISF and local police at centrally protected
monuments, archaeological sites and museums. To keep a
check on theft and smuggling, an Act was brought into force
(Antiquities and Treasures Act, 1972) but this Act has many
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

lacunae and amendments are required to be proposed in this
regard to make it more stringent. A Draft Bill has been
finalized. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry of Culture should take concrete steps to get the Act
amended to curb the cases of rampant theft and smuggling
and provision for stringent punishment for the culprit be
included in the amending Bill.
The Committee is also of the view that as in India we
have a very powerful Panchayati Raj system, the Ministry
should avail benefit of it.  The Ministry should devise such a
mechanism in which Gram Pnachayat, Patwaris, etc. could be
involved to take care of heritage, in the process of checking
illicit trafficking  of antiquities, etc. The Committee
recommend that Ministry of Culture should also take
immediate steps to get back the idols, statues recovered by
police or security agencies in their possession.
25. The Committee are aggrieved to note that 35 centrally
protected monuments/sites in the country are untraceable.
The major causes for the disappearance of the ancient
monuments and sites are rapid urbanization, construction of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

multistoried residential and commercial buildings,
implementation of development projects, etc.  The Committee
was informed by ASI that as on date, it may not be possible to
fix responsibility. The Committee view this as casual
approach of ASI in this regard.  It is highly deplorable on the
part of ASI as well as Ministry of Culture that no expeditious
steps have been taken to trace the centrally protected
monuments. Only instructions were issued to circle offices to
personally verify the status of such monuments/sites, falling
under their respective jurisdiction.  No other State except
Delhi has bothered to sent a detailed report in this regard. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should
pursue vigorously with all the concerned circle offices to give
detailed report within a specified time period and expeditious
and concrete action should be initiated to trace out the
missing monuments.  The Ministry should also fix the
responsibility in this regard.
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of
Culture in consultation with other authorities should devise
such a mechanism that before starting any new
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

developmental work, it should be ascertained that in that
particular area, there are no hidden remains.
26. The Committee note that India’s rich culture and historic
heritage is embodied in its ancient monuments and this
priceless heritage is being preserved with limited resources.
It is neither wise nor prudent to get ASI alone to shoulder the
responsibility of conservation, excavation of all the
monuments and they therefore strongly recommend that the
Ministry of Culture and ASI should make all sincere efforts to
bring public and private sectors to come forward to perform
their rightful role in promoting and preserving India’s cultural
heritage. ASI should periodically bring out a publication
detailing the monuments where such projects can be taken
up. The Committee are also informed that in order to facilitate
the infusion of private and public sector funds into the field of
heritage presentation, National culture fund was established
in 1996. The Committee recommend that modalities of NCF
should be discussed with FICCI, CII and other corporate
houses. Benefits of the contribution made in NCF for
promotion of public private partnership and salient features
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

of MOU i.e. NCF will be accountable to each donor in respect
of funds donated and donors can appoint and monitor the
executive agencies etc. should invariably be advertised. The
Committee are also of the opinion that public/private
partnership should be accepted and availed without any
undue benefits for private partners.
27. The Committee note that most of the monuments do not have
basic tourist facilities/amenities like drinking water, toilet,
kiosks etc. Even they do not have the proper approach road
connecting the monument to the nearest airport/railway
station. The Committee are also constrained to note that even
after the lapse of many decades, Ministry is still planning to
give instructions to its officers to prepare plans for providing
such amenities. The Committee depricate the attitude of the
Ministry/ASI and very strongly recommend that they should
make available to visitors all the basic facilities like drinking
water, toilets, kiosks approach pathways, signage’s, ramps
for disabled persons, visitor benches etc. Ministry of Culture
and ASI should approach and co-ordinate with respective
State Governments, tourism Departments and local
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

governments. The Ministry of Culture/ASI should also give
incentives to the private sector to construct hotels etc near
the monument in order to attract more and more
tourists/visitors.
28. The Committee note that follow up action on
complaints/suggestions received at the circle offices as well
as headquarters of ASI and recorded in the
visitors/suggestion book is taken by ASI. The Committee
recommend that redressal system should further be
strengthened and visitors suggestions book/complaint box
should be kept at all historical monuments of national
importance. One higher official should be made responsible
for attending and taking the remedial steps on the
complaints/suggestions received from the visitors of
monuments under his circle/branch.
 NEW DELHI;
 February 29, 2008
 Phalguna 10, 1929(S)
C. KUPPUSAMI,
Chairman,
Committee on Estimates.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX-I
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
   FIFTH SITTING
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 17 th  June, 2005 from 1255
hrs. to  1400  hours.
    Present
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman
 Members
2.       Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
3.       Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4.    Shri Anant Gudhe
5.       Shri Jai Prakash
6.       Shri  P. Karunakaran
7.       Shri Vijoy Krishna
8.       Shri B. Vinod Kumar
9.       Prof. Chander Kumar
10.  Shri Samik Lahiri
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12.  Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
13.  Shri Prabodh Panda
14.  Shri Sukhdeo Paswan
15.  Shri K.S. Rao
16.  Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17.  Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Secretariat
1. Shri A.K. Singh  -  PCPI
2. Shri B.D.Swan  - Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Cyril John  - Under Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

     Witnesses
Ministry of Culture
1. Shri K. Jayakumar, Joint Secretary
Archeological Survey of  India(ASI)
1. Shri C. Babu Rajeev, Director General
2. Shri R. C. Misra, Additional Director General
2.  The Committee was briefed by the representatives of  Ministry of
Culture and  Archaeological Survey of  India on the subject
`Maintenance of Monuments by Archaeological Survey of  India ¶.  The
briefing was concluded.
3.       A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
   TWELFTH SITTING
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 9 th November, 2005
from 1100  to  1230  hours.
    Present
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman
 Members
2.   Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
3.   Shri Lal Muni Choubey
4.   Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
5.   Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
6.   Shri Samik Lahiri
7.   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8.   Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
9.   Shri Zora Singh Mann
10. Shri Prabodh Panda
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri  Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
13. Shri  Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
14. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
15.  Shri  Lakshman Singh
16. Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav
Secretariat
1. Shri B.D.Swan  - Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Cyril John  - Under Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Non-official Witness
Shri R.S. Bisht     - Former Joint Director General,
Archaeological Survey of  India(ASI)
 2.  The Committee took oral evidence of non-official witness on
the subject `Maintenance of Monuments by ASI ¶.  The evidence was
concluded.
3.           A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
   THIRTEENTH SITTING
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 9 th November, 2005
from 1500  to  1550  hours.
    Present
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman
 Members
2.      Shri B.Vinod kumar
3.      Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4.      Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
5.  Shri  Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
6.  Shri  Arjun Charan Sethi
7.  Shri  M.A. Kharabela Swain
Secretariat
1. Shri B.D.Swan  - Deputy Secretary
2. Shri Cyril John  - Under Secretary
Witnesses
Ministry of Culture
1. Smt. Neena Ranjan, Secretary
2. Shri K. Jayakumar, Joint Secretary
 3.      Shri L. Rvniah, Joint Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Archaeological Survey of India(ASI)
1.    Shri R. C. Misra, Additional Director General
2.    Dr. R.K. Sharma, Joint Director General
3.    Prof. R.C. Agrawal, Joint Director General
2.  The Committee took oral evidence of  the representatives of
Ministry of  Culture and Archaeological Survey of  India(ASI)  on the
subject `Maintenance of  Monuments by ASI ¶.  The evidence was not
concluded. The Committee decided to take further evidence of the
representatives of  Ministry of Culture and ASI on the subject on 17 th
November, 2005.
3.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX IV
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
  FOURTEENTH SITTING
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 17 th November, 2005
from 1100  to  1305  hours.
    Present
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman
 Members
2. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
3.      Shri Lal Muni Choubey
4.      Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
5.      Shri Samik Lahiri
6.      Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7.      Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
8.  Shri  K.S. Rao
9.      Shri  Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10.    Shri Lakshman Singh
11.    Shri Sukhdeo Paswan
Secretariat
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Cyril John   - Under Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Witnesses
Ministry of Culture
1. Smt. Neena Ranjan, Secretary
2. Shri K. Jayakumar, Joint Secretary
 3.      Shri L. Rynjah, Joint Secretary
Archaeological Survey of India(ASI)
1. Shri C. Babu Rajeev, Director General
2.      Shri R. C. Misra, Additional Director General
3.      Dr. R.K. Sharma, Joint Director General
4.      Prof. R.C. Agrawal, Joint Director General
2.  The Committee took oral evidence of  the representatives of
Ministry of  Culture and Archaeological Survey of  India(ASI)  on the
subject `Maintenance of  Monuments by ASI ¶.   The evidence was
concluded.
3.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX V
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2006-07)
NINTH SITTING
The Committee sat on Monday, the  6th November, 2006 from
1100 hours to 1235 hours.
Present
       Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman
Members
2. Shri Lal Muni Choubey
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5. Shri Jai Prakash
6. Shri  B. Vinod Kumar
7. Shri Samik Lahiri
8. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Prabodh Panda
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
13. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia
14. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
15. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
Secretariat
1.      Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Deputy Secretary
2.      Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Assistant Director
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Witnesses
Ministry of Culture
(I) Shri R. C. Mishra, Joint Secretary
(II)    Shri Ganji Kamala Vardhana Rao,  Director
Archaeological Survey of India(ASI)
(I) Shri C. Babu Rajeev, Director General
(II) Shri R.C. Misra, Addl. Director General
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the officials of the
Department of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) to the
Sitting and informed them about the work done by the Committee in
respect of examination of the subject µMaintenance of Monuments by
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)¶.
3.  The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Tourism and Culture (Department of Culture) and
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) on the subject `Maintenance of
Monuments by ASI¶.
4.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX VI
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007- 08)
 TENTH SITTING
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 20th December, 2007
from 1500 hours to 1530 hours.
PRESENT
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, MP   - Chairman
MEMBERS
2.  Shri Lal  Muni Choubey
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5. Shri P. Karunakaran
6. Shri Vijoy Krishna
7. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
8.  Shri Samik Lahiri
9. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
10. Shri D. Narbula
11.  Shri Prabodh Panda
12.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
15. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
    Shri C.V. Gadgil  - Director
2. The Committee considered the draft Report on Ministry of Culture
on the subject, µMaintenance of Monuments by Archaeological Survey of
India¶ and adopted the same with some modifications/additions as given
in the Annexure.
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report in
the light of modifications/additions and also to make verbal and other
consequential changes, if any, arising out of factual verification by the
concerned Ministry and present the same to the House.
*****    ****   ****   *****
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Annexure
Modifications/additions made by the Estimates Committee in the Draft Report
on Ministry of Culture on the subject, ‘Maintenance of Monuments by
Archaeological Survey of India’.
Para No.  Page No . Line    Modification
  6 76  Last  After   : projection of estimates.
Add : A separate fund should be
 allocated for excavation work.
14 87  Last    After  : in this regard.
Add   : The Committee find that ASI
takes a considerable amount of time
to repair and renovate a monument.
The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a definite time
frame should be fixed for
conservation and preservation of
monuments.
15  89  Last  After  : centrally  protected.
Add   : Cooperation of the State
Governments should also be sought
in acquisition of land for declaring a
monument/ archaeological site to be
of national importance. Local bodies
such as municipalities etc. may also
be involved in the process.
23  102  10  After  : 100 metres.
Add   : Effective provisions should be
incorporated in the Ancient
Monuments Act to safeguard the
monuments from encroachment. The
provisions should include stringent
punishment and eviction by law
enforcing agencies in case of
encroachment.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages