      E.C. NO. 1429 
 
   THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
       
 
(Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of 
Home Affairs - ‘New Delhi Municipal Council’) 
 
 
    S  
     E  
      A  
       L  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.8.2007 
 
 
Lok Sabha Secretariat 
New Delhi 
 
 
 
August, 2007/ Sravana, 1929(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE(2007-2008)  (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N           
 
 CHAPTER  I  Report       1-21  
    
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have 
   been accepted by Government 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the  
   Committee do  not desire to pursue in view 
   of Government’s replies 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in  respect 
   of which replies of Government have not 
   been accepted by the Committee 
  
CHAPTER  V Recommendations/Observat ions in respect of which  
final replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee  
held on 16.8.2007. 
  
II. Analysis of the action  taken by Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in  
the Eleventh Report of Estimates Committee 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE    
   (2007-2008) 
 
 
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, MP  - Chairman 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
2.  Shri Lal  Muni Choubey 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Anant Gudhe 
5. Shri Anwar Hussain 
6. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain 
7. Shri P. Karunakaran 
8. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal 
9. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
10. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
11.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
12. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
13.  Shri Zora Singh Mann 
14. Shri Hemlal Murmu 
15. Shri D. Narbula 
16. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
18.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan 
19. Shri Sachin Pilot 
20. Shri R. Prabhu 
21. Shri Tufani Saroj 
22. Smt. Tejaswini Seeramesh 
23. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi 
24. Choudhary Bijendra Singh 
25. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
26.  Shri Lakshman Singh 
27.   Kunwar Manvendra Singh 
28.   Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
29.   Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
30.   Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri C.V. Gadgil  - Director (I) 
 4. Smt. Manju Chaudhary - Deputy Secretary II 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Estimates Co mmittee, having been authorised by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Report on action 
taken by Government on the recommendati ons contained in the Eleventh Report 
of Estimates Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  on the Ministry of Home Affairs 
– ‘New Delhi Municipal Council’. 
 
2.  The Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 
23rd May, 2006. The Government furnished their replies indicating action taken 
on the recommendations contai ned in that Report on 9 th May 2007.  The Draft 
Report was considered and adopted by t he Estimates Committee (2007-2008) at 
their sitting held on 16th August, 2007. 
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following Chapters:- 
 
I. Report; 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by  
Government; 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations whic h the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies; 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee; and 
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
4.   An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report of Estimates Committee (14 th Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix II.  It  would be observed therefrom that out of 29 
observations/recommendations made in the Report, 15 recommendations have 
been accepted by Government and the Co mmittee do not desire to pursue one 
recommendation in view of Government’s  reply. Replies of Government in 
respect of 9 recommendations have no t been accepted by the Committee and 
final replies in respect of 4 recommendations are still awaited. 
 
5. During the meeting of the Committee held on 16 th August, 2007, all the 
Members present expressed their utter dism ay over the lack of purposeful action 
evident in the Action Taken Notes of the Ministry even on the  

 
 
recommendations that have been accepted by the Ministry. They desired that the 
Ministry should show greater sincerity and dispatch in the compliance of 
recommendations of the Committee accepted by Government. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
        NEW DELHI;             C. KUPPUSAMI, 
      August 20, 2007                     Chairman, 
     Sravana 29, 1929(S)                              Committee on Estimates. 

     CHAPTER I 
 
              REPORT  
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
Ministry of Home Affairs – ‘New Delhi Municipal Council’. 
 
1.2 The Committee’s Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 23rd May, 2006. It contained 29 observations/recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes on all these observations/recommendations have been received from the Ministry 
of Home Affairs – ‘New Delhi Municipal Council’. 
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and recomm endations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 7, 9, 12, 14, 16 to 19, 21, 22, 25, 27 and 28 
 (Total 15, Chapter II) 
         
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government’s reply  
Sl. No. 15       (Total 1, Chapter III) 
         
(iii) Recommendations/observations in re spect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
Sl. Nos. 2, 6, 10, 11, 20, 23, 24, 26 and 29  (Total 9, Chapter IV) 
      
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited.  
Sl. Nos. 3, 5, 8 and 13      (Total 4, Chapter V) 
 
1.4 The Committee dealt with the action taken by Government on some of the 
recommendations. The Committee note that  NDMC area comprises the territory that 
has been described as Lutyen’s Delhi which includes Rashtrapati Bhawan, Parliament 
House, Supreme Court, Diplomatic missions, residences of Ministers, Members of 
Parliament etc., and after noting the scope for improvement in t he working of NDMC, 
the Committee had given some recommendations in its 11
th Report (14 th Lok Sabha). 
The Committee express their serious disp leasure on finding action taken replies 
furnished by the Ministry to be evasive and not  indicative of earnestness on the part of 
the Ministry. The Committee strongly condemn casual approach of the Ministry and are 
of the view that Ministry  should not adopt such call ous approach and should be extra 
vigilant and earnest in taking action on recommendations of the Committee.  
 

 
 
Granting Right to vote to the MPs in NDMC’s Meeting 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para. No. 2) 
 
1.5 On viewing the undue delay in impl ementing the recommendations of the 
“Balakrishna Committee” and debarring MPs to right to vote in NDMC’s meetings the 
Committee had recommended as follows :- 
 
“The Committee note that Balakrishna Committee constituted to look in to the 
manner in which the governance of the Union Territory should be carried on, also 
looked into the functioning of the Municipal arrangem ents in the area. That 
Committee had recommended that NDMC should consist of a certain number of 
Members elected on the basis of adult franchise and an equal number of 
members appointed by the Lt. Governor and the Vice Chai rman, NDMC should 
be elected  by members themselves. As the area covered by NDMC includes not 
only Government offices, Diplomatic Missi ons, etc., but also about three lakh 
resident population, the Co mmittee are of the view th at the recommendations of 
Balakrishna Committee in this regard need to be reconsidered by the 
Government in all seriousness.  This attains even greate r significance in view of 
poor participation of nominat ed members of the Council in the meetings of the 
Council and its Committees. The Committee al so note that according to Section 
4(2) of the NDMC Act, 1994,  the Members of Parlia ment representing the 
constituencies which comprise wholly or  partly the New Delhi Area, shall be 
special invitees for the m eetings of the Council without a right to vote. On the 
other hand, the MLAs representing consti tuencies, which comprise wholly or 
partly the New Delhi area enjoy the right to vote in the Council meetings. The 
Home Secretary was candid in admission dur ing evidence: “I think it stands to 
reason that Members of Parliament should also have  a voting right”. The 
Committee, therefore, stress that Govern ment should review the desirability of 
modifying composition of the Counc il as recommended by Balakrishna 
Committee keeping in view the basic democratic principles and also granting 
voting right at the council meetings to the Members of Parliament representing 
the constituencies comprising wholly or par tly the area under the jurisdiction of 
NDMC.” 
         
  
 
1.6 The Ministry of Home Affairs in thei r action taken reply stated as follows :- 
 

“It has been decided that the aforesaid re commendations made by the Estimates 
Committee are required to be looked into in  greater detail to come to correct 
conclusion and for the present, the existing arrangement may be continued.”  
 
1.7 The Committee are not satisfied with the action taken reply furnished by 
the Ministry.  Secretary, Mi nistry of Home Affairs in his deliberation during oral 
evidence has invariably stated: “….. But I th ink it stands to reason that Members 
of Parliament should also have a voting right”. Apparently no serious efforts 
appear to have been made in this rega rd after the presentation of the Report to 
the House. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
desire that recommendations of the Balakrishna Committee in regard to 
modifying the composition of the Council be reconsidered in all seriousness and 
Members of Parliament representing the constituencies comprising wholly or 
partly the area under jurisdiction of NDMC should be granted right to vote in the 
Council meetings.   
 
Recovery of arrears of property tax 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, P. No. 6)  
 
1.8 On noting NDMC’s failure to asses ta x pertaining to 85 properties located at 
Anant Ram Dairy, the Committee had recommended as follows :- 
“The Committee are also constrained to fi nd that there were press reports and  
audit observations on the  failure of NDMC in assessing tax  pertaining to  85 
properties located at Anant  Ram Dairy, though basic  amenities were being 
provided by NDMC to the colony.    What is more distressing is the fact that 
NDMC has failed to explain before the Co mmittee as to how NDMC was obliged 
to provide civic amenities to these buildings consider ed to be unauthorised and 
even not coming under the purview of the ta x net.   It is also not clear on what 
considerations and at what level it was decided to provide civic amenities to 
these unauthorised buildings. These facts  lead to  the presumption that NDMC 
has possibly aided and abetted  unauthorized constructions by providing them 
the amenities.   Under the circumstances , the Committee recommend that an in-

depth and thorough enquiry be conducted into the entire sequence of events of 
this case and those responsible be brought to book.  
II. Although the Committee were informed during evidence held on 
19th July, 2005 that the Council had taken a decision that without prejudice to the 
status of the buildings, they shall be assessed and notices shall be issued to the 
owners, it had not been implemented till August, 2005.  The Committee trust that 
NDMC  would earnestly pursue  the matter and  recover the arrears of property 
tax as admissible under the rules without any further delay.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the specific action taken in this regard.” 
 
1.9 The Ministry of Home Affairs in thei r action taken reply stated as follows :- 
 
“During the course of survey conducted by the field staff of the House Tax 
Department in the year 1999-2000, 65 properties were foun d to be constructed.  
Notices under section 72 of the NDMC Act 1994 were issued to all the 65 owners 
of the properties for assessment of proper ty tax with effect from 1.4.99.  The 
Deptt. is in process of settling pending  notices.  In the NDMC Act no time is 
specified for settlement of notice under section 72.  The dem and shall be raised 
against the persons primarily liable for pay ment of Property Tax w.e.f. 1.4.99.  
Further the field staffs have been entru sted the job to conduct survey of the 
entire Anant Ram Dairy Colony and to boo k the properties which have come up 
recently. 
 
No separate enquiry has been conducted in the matter as this has already 
been examined in the Annual Audit Report of  the Chief Auditor of NDMC.  The 
Property Tax Department of NDMC has i ssued notices under Section 77 of the 
Act for initiating assessment proceeding for property tax in 120 cases out of 183 
properties located there.  In 63 cases, Department is conducting survey and 
notice will be sent very soon.    
 
In the meanwhile, Ministry of Ur ban Development had constituted a 
Committee under Shri K. K. Mathur, IAS (R etd.) to look into various issues 
relating to unauthorized development in the form of farm houses and 
unauthorized colonies inhabited by affluent sect ions of the society.  The report of 
the Committee is under consideration of the Government.”
 
 
1.10 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Government. During the 
course of oral evidence, Ch airperson, NDMC apprised the Committee that there 
are 85 properties in a place called Anant Ram Dairy which have not been 
assessed whereas in the Action T aken Replies it is stated that 65 properties were 
found to be constructed and notices unde r section 72 of the NDMC Act, 1994 

have been issued to all the 65 owners of  the properties. Moreover, it is very 
astonishing that after a lapse of one y ear NDMC could not raise even the demand 
of House Tax against these properties. The Committee views the matter of giving 
evasive information seriously and therefore, strongly feel that while furnishing 
the information, the Ministry should be extra vigilant. The Committee while 
reiterating their earlier recommendation ur ge that NDMC should earnestly pursue 
the matter and recover the arrears of property tax as admissible under the rules 
within six months. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard.  
 
Uninterrupted Power Supply  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, P. No. 10)  
 
1.11 Realising a great need to  implement short term and long term plans strictly by 
NDMC to provide uninterrupted power suppl y to the consumer, the Committee had 
recommended as follows :- 
 
“Electricity Department of NDMC is responsible for distribution network upto the 
supply point of the consum ers in the entire NDMC area  and for development of 
power distribution system to meet the gr owing demand of  various categories of 
consumers.   The Committee have been info rmed that some of the problems of 
power supply were due to tripping of t he grid and burn out of some transformers, 
which needed replacement.   Since it is ess ential to ensure  overall improvement  
in  the services provided by the Council as well as  uninterrupted power supply to 
the consumers, the Committee sugges t that NDMC should motivate its 
maintenance staff through appropriate incent ives and implement their short-term 
and long-term  plans strictly according to time schedules prescribed for the 
purpose.” 
          
 
1.12 The Ministry of Home Affairs in thei r action taken reply stated as follows :- 
 

“Some of the problems in ens uring continuity of power supply partly relate to 
trippings from Delhi Transco Limited end over which New Delhi Municipal Council 
has no control as power supply is received by New Delhi Municipal Council from 
Delhi Transco Limited.  With regard to the efficient working of the New Delhi 
Municipal Council system for providing uninterrupted power supply, an Expert 
Committee headed Sh. Y.P. Singh (formerly Member Tech. Delhi Vidyut Board & 
Advisor(Power) Govt. of NCT of Delhi was constituted on 9 th August 2005 to 
study the existing New Delh i Municipal Council system/analyse the weaknesses, 
make recommendations and prepare action plan for preventive maintenance etc. 
The Committee submitted its report on 30.9.2005.  Based on the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee,  the action taken for Short Term & 
Long Term Plans has been made which is as under: 
 
Short Term Plans 
Sl. No. Plan Status 
1 Replacement/augmentation of LT 
Panels and 55 distribution 
transformers at various electric 
substations. 
Tenders at an estimated cost of Rs.6.53 
Crores have already been called and are 
under technical evaluation. Works are 
expected to be awarded in the next three 
months and thereafter executed before 
31.03.2008. 
 
2 Replacement of 11KV HT panels 
in 40 nos. electric sub-stations 
that have served their useful life. 
Tenders for 30 nos. electric sub-stations 
have already been called and are due for 
opening on 17.04.2007. 
 
3 Replacement of old 11KV HT 
feeders and interconnectors 
cable (12 K.Mtrs. approx) that 
have served its useful life.  
The works are in progress as per site 
requirement and are expected to be 
completed by 31.03.2008 
4. Providing Electronic Energy 
Meters to all the consumers in 
NDMC area. 
Tenders were called both for three phase 
and single meters. Tenders for single 
phase meters are to be re-called whereas 
tenders for three phase meters are in 
process. 
5. Procurement of 2 no. additional 
cable fault locating vans for 
repair of LT cable faults 
Tenders have already been called and are 
in process. Technical specifications are 
being changed as per latest available 
specifications. These are expected to be 
procured by 31.03.2008. 
6 Preventive maintenance works 
as recommended. 
These are ongoing works and major 
preventive works have again been 
completed before start of summer 2007 viz. 
before 31.03.2007. 
7 Establishing 33KV sub-stations at 
Trauma Centre of AIIMS 
The works have since been completed. 
Testing & Commissioning is in process. 
The S/S is to be commissioned before 
30.04.2007 providing 16 MVA additional 
power. 

Long Term Plans 
Sl. No. Plan Status 
a) Replacement of 
remaining HT/LT 
switchgears, 
distribution 
Transformers that 
have served their 
useful life 
b)  Replacement of 
remaining old 11KV 
HT feeders & 
interconnector cable 
that have served 
their useful life 
As per site requirement, the works will be taken in 
hand for timely execution. With the passage of time, 
additional works of this nature are required to be done. 
These are continuous works, which shall be completed 
as per site requirements. 
c)  There are a number of high voltage schemes which are under process with 
CE(E-I) Deptt., some are listed below:  
1 Replacement of 
sick/faulty 66KJV 
feeder from GT 
Station to NDMC 
substation Vidyut 
Bhawan. 
The estimates have already been sanctioned and 
tenders are being called. 
2 Replacement of 
remaining old 33 KV 
IP feeders that have 
served their useful 
life and feeding 
power supply to 
NDMC area. 
The estimates are yet to be prepared. The old 33 KV 
feeders are in working condition and in use. 
3 Laying of additional 
66KV feeder from 
Park Streed Grid 
station of DLT to S/S 
School Lane & 
Vidyut Bhawan of 
NDMC 
Estimates have already been sanctioned. C.E.A. are 
being engaged as Consultants and tenders are to be 
shortly called. 
4 Establishing of 66KV 
S/S at BD Marg & 
33KV S/S at Church 
Road 
Earlier called tenders were rejected. Fresh tenders are 
being called. 
5 Augmentation of 
existing 33KV 
substations at State 
Guest House & 
Bapu Dham to 66KV 
The work is linked with up-gradation of BSES Ridge 
Valley S/S to 220KV which may take about 2 years.  
Work is being planned accordingly. 
6 Establishing 220KV 
S/S at Harish Chand 
Mathur Lane & 
Trauma Centre 
DTL has already called tenders and the works are 
expected to be completed within two years. 

Regarding incentives to the Maintenance staff for their motivation, and to 
increase efficiency following actions have been taken: 
 
1. The staff have been provided with proper hand tool kits. 
 
2. Maintenence staff have been provided with Mobile Phones. 
 
3. Promotions to the eligible field staff. 
 
4. Filling up the vacant posts is receiving top most priority. 
 
5. Residential accommodation is provided to essential duty staff on out of turn 
basis. 
 
6. Health Scheme Plan for all empl oyees and their dependants with leading 
Hospitals is under active consideration/implementation.” 
 
 
1.13 The Committee are perturbed to note th at an Expert Committee headed  by 
Sh. Y.P. Singh (formerly Member Tech. Delhi Vidyut Board S. Advisor (Power) 
Government of NCT of Delhi constituted to study the existing NDMC 
system/analyse the weaknesses, make recommendations and prepare action plan 
for preventive maintenance, etc., had submitted its report on 30.9.2005. But the 
Ministry has not taken appropriate st eps to execute short and long term plans 
based on the recommendation of the Expert Committee. The Minist ry is still in 
process of calling or scrutining the tender s relating to almost all short term and 
long term plans. 
1.14 The above mentioned state of affairs is a clear indication of indifference 
and lack of determination on the part of Ministry to improve the power supply 
situation as almost 18 mont hs have already passed, si nce Expert Committee has 
submitted its Report and the Ministry is unable to start many of short term and 
long term plans. The Committee strongly recommend that Government should 

take all possible steps to execute these pl ans immediately and action taken may 
be intimated to the Committee within three month from the date of presentation of 
the Report to the House.  
 
Faulty Water/Electricity Meters 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.  11, Para No. 11) 
 
1.15 In regard to over billing and f aulty working of water/electricity meters, the 
Committee had recommend as follows :- 
“As regards over billing and fau lty workin g of water and electricity meters, the 
Committee are informed that there is an established pr ocedure to rectify over  
billing and faulty working of water and electricity meters.  The Committee is of the  
opinion that this is an area that require s ut most attention by  NDMC and st eps 
should be taken  to check over billing and for replacing faulty water and electricity 
meters with promptitude. They also desir e that the programme for modernization 
of Water Meter Workshop should be ta ken up in right earnes t and com pleted 
within a specific time frame.” 
 
1.16 The Ministry of Home Affairs in their action taken reply stated as under :- 
 
“In case of defective electric/water me ter, the electricity and water charges are 
assessed provisionally and the final assessments are made on the follo wing 
basis: 
 
1.  Consumption Pattern of Last y ear (CPL - based on the average 
consumption during the corresponding period of the preceding year) 
 
2.  Consumption Pattern of Subseq uent year (CPS - bas ed on the average 
consumption during the corresponding period of the subsequent year) 
 
3.  Average base (based on CPL and CPS basis.  The average is worked out  
as (CPL + CPS) 
                      2 
 
NDMC has  already  pr ovided electronic energy meters to its bulk  supply  
consumers having electrical load of  above 100 KW.  There are nearly 660 
consumers in this category. 
 

For the remaining categories of cons umers, an estimate for providing 
electronic energy meters is already in process.  The requirement of such 
consumers is 50,000 meters  approx. and the estimated cost is Rs.13.00 crores 
approx. 
 
Tenders have already been invited for procurement of electronic energy 
meters.  Technical bids have already been finalized and price bids also opened.  
The tender are presently under scrutiny.” 
 
1.17 The Committee note with dissatisfact ion that the reply furnished by 
Ministry does not mention any step taken by the Government to check over 
billing and replacing faulty water mete rs. The Ministry is also silent on 
Committee’s recommendation that the progr amme for modernization of water 
meter workshop should be taken up in right earnest and completed within a 
specific time frame. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
expect the Ministry to implement the same in  its entirety and apprise them of the 
action taken in this regard expediously.  
 
Unauthorised Parking 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.  20, Para No. 20) 
 
1.18 Stressing the need to frame a parking policy to meet the requirement of people 
visiting over-crowed and prominent places and noticing the irregulari ties in allotment 
and running of unauthorized parking lots, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The  total number of vehicles registered in Delhi has increased more than six 
times and the number of private cars, motor cycles, etc. has increased more than 
seven times during the past twenty years.  The Committee find it astonishing that 
despite such a substantial increase in t he number of vehicles  in Delhi, NDMC 
has not yet framed any “parking policy” to meet the requirements of people 
visiting some of the already over-crowded and prominent  places  within its area.  
What is more distressing  is the fact that NDMC displayed a lackadaisical attitude 
in the  matters connected with allotment  of parking lots and could not prevent 
running of  unauthorized parking lots in it s area as substantiated  by the  

information furnished to the Committee.   Even Audit has brought  out that  as 
many as seven parking lots were allo tted in 2000 and 2001 without obtaining 
proper approval and two parking lots were being run unauthorizedly during the 
same period. Contractors who were allo tted four parking lots in 1995 for three 
years had not until March, 2003  paid outst anding license fee of Rs. 13.25 lakh 
due upto July, 1998  and no efforts were made by the Council to pursue recovery 
of the outstandings.  It goes without saying that such irregularities cannot be 
perpetuated without the conni vance of employees in  the Council who are 
responsible for regulating parking lots. The Committee take a very serious note 
of such irregularities in the Council a nd recommend that responsibility should be 
fixed for the irregularities, erring officials punished, de faulting contractors black-
listed and the overdues recovered without an y further delay. The follow up action 
taken in this regard should be intimated to the Committee. The Committee  also 
desire NDMC to formulate a parking policy to regulate traffic in  the area under its 
jurisdiction, to take up the construction of proposed  multi-level parking lots at the 
earliest and take steps for setting up more multi level parking lots in its area.” 
 
 
1.19 The Ministry of Home Affairs in thei r action taken reply stated as under :- 
 
“NDMC had framed a parking policy to meet the requir ement of people visiting 
some of the crowded areas.  Last such po licy was adopted by the Council in the 
year 2004 which had taken into account various factors to prevent running of 
unauthorized parking lots. 
 
Under the provision of NDMC Act, onl y Chairperson, NDMC is competent 
to accord approval for acceptance and rejection of the tenders invited for various 
works, including parking lots.  The Ass tt. Secy. of the Deptt. is authorized to 
convey approval of the Chairperson for allotment of the parking lots.   
 
For pursuing the recovery of outstanding dues from  the parking 
contractors, it is stated that upto the year 1995, most of the parking lots were 
allotted to Ex-servicemen sponsored by Director General (Resettlement, Ministry 
of Defence).  The outstanding of Rs.13. 25 lacs due upto July 1998 are pending 
against those Ex-servicemen.  With a view to effect recovery from the said ex 
allottees, the matter has been taken up with the Director General (Resettlement) 
and matter is being pursued vigorously. 
 
For maintenance of proper records, and recovery of Council dues, an 
Accounts Section has been created in the year 1998 for the Enf. Deptt.  Since 
then proper records relating to demand and collection security etc. are being 
maintained and pending recoveries are watched. 
 
A survey has been conducted by RI TES Ltd. to recommend ways and 
means for proper management of the parking lots in NDMC area and also to 
reorganize the existing parking lots.  The recommendations of the RITES have 

since been received and the same have been submitted for approval of the 
competent authority for adoption in NDMC.   
 
In order to improve parking infras tructure in NDMC area and as per the 
parking policy of Delhi Government developm ent of the following three multilevel 
parkings has been taken up on a public private partnership basis: 
 
1.  K. G. Marg, behind HT Building. 
2.  Baba Kharak Singh Marg, 
3.  Sarojini Nagar 
 
Global bids have been invited and qualific ation process is over.  Based on 
the development control regul ations approved by the DDA  further stages of bid 
process are being taken up.  
 
Bids have been received on 9.4.2007 and are under scrutiny.” 
 
 
1.20 The Committee are happy to note that  a survey has been conducted by 
RITES Ltd. to recommend ways and means for proper management of the parking 
lots in NDMC area and also to reor ganize the existing parking lots. The 
recommendations of the RITES have been submitted for the approval of the 
competent authority for adoption in NDMC. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the matter should be taken up vigorously with competent authority in view of the 
commonwealth games and Committee be appr ised of the follow up actions. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of  the concrete steps taken in regard to 
construction of three multilevel parkings viz. KG Marg, behind HT building, Baba 
Kharak Singh Marg, Sarojini Nagar.  
1.21 At the same time the Committee are di stressed to note that the Ministry has 
not viewed the recommendation of the Co mmittee seriously which states about 
the irregularities in allotment of parking lots and running of unauthorized parking 
and to fix responsibility for the irregulariti es, to punish erring officials, blacklist 

defaulting contractors and recover over  dues without any further delay. The 
Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendati on, urge the Government 
to take strict action and desi re to be apprised of the action taken by Government 
in this regard. 
 
 
Encroachment in NDMC area 
 
Observation/Recommendation(Sl. No. 23, P. No. 23) 
 
1.22 Stressing the need to conduct an inquiry into the entire episode connected with 
missing official records pertaining to encr oachment in NDMC area, and the culprits be 
brought to book, the Committee had recommended as follows :- 
“It is disturbing to note that as agains t 418 notices served by the Unauthorized 
Construction Cell of NDMC, follow up action was taken by NDMC only in 145 
cases for demolition or sealing of unaut horized premises. The remaining cases 
are pending before different courts including public hearing by competent 
authority in NDMC. The Commi ttee have also been  informed that a  number of 
religious structures exist in NDMC area  on public pathways, footpaths, etc., and 
in order to ensure that they do not spread, these structures have been 
videographed and will be updated every three to six months. The Area Inspectors 
have been made responsible for checking any addition to the existing structures. 
From the data furnished before the Committ ee, it is quite evident that the Area 
Inspectors have not been vigilant enough to check encroachments and 
unauthorized constructions. 
Distressingly, all records pertaining to unauthorized 
constructions/encroachments prior to January, 2002 are not traceable. To say 
the least, it is a clear indication of ND MC officials working hand in glove with 
those responsible for such encroachment s. The Committee deplore such actions 
on the part of public servants who are responsible for protecting and 
safeguarding public property. The Committ ee recommend that an enquiry be 
conducted into the entire episode connec ted with missing official records 
pertaining to encroachments in NDMC ar ea and the culprits be brought to book. 
The files should either be traced or rec onstructed within a specified time-frame 
and the encroachers  dealt with firmly. T he Committee would like to be apprised 
of the results achieved in the matter withi n six months from presentation of this 
Report.” 
    

 
1.23 The Ministry of Home Affairs in thei r action taken reply stated as follows :- 
 
“In order to have better vigilance and effective checks on unauthorized 
construction, the Junior Engineers pos ted in Un-authorised Construction Cell 
(UACC) have been delegated with powers to issue stop work order notices to the 
party as and when any ongoing unauthorized construction is detected. 
 
As far as records pertaining to unauthor ized constructions prior to January 2002 
are concerned, it is submitted that records prior to 2002 are available on 
separate individual files, which are being consolidated.  The records of 
unauthorized construction after that peri od have been consolidated at one place 
and are being updated regularly.” 
 
 
1.24 The Committee are perturbed to not e the casual approach of NDMC 
regarding records pertaining to unauthorized construction prior to January, 2002. 
The Committee in their earlier recomme ndation have asked NDMC to reconstruct 
the records with a specific time frame and deal with encroachers firmly and 
communicate results achieved in the matte r to the Committee within six from 
presentation of the report. The Committee are astonished to note that even after 
lapse of more than one year NDMC coul d not compile the records and they have 
not initiated/taken any action towards the culprits. The Committee, therefore 
strongly recommend that NDMC should take immediate steps for tracing and 
compiling the records of the unauthorized  construction prior to January, 2002 
and take action against the culprits and apprise the Committee of the action taken 
in this regard.  
 

Unauthorised Construction 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 24, Para No. 24) 
 
1.25 Taking note of unauthorized constructi ons in Lutyen Bungalow zone area, the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee also note that during the joint survey for unauthorized 
constructions in Luyten Bungalow Zone  Area conducted by NDMC and Land & 
Development Office, only 554  out of 771 properties could be surveyed as 217 
properties were either locked or not allowed. The Committee desire that the 
survey of  the remaining 217 properties should also  be conducted expeditiously 
and  appropriate action taken in cases of  unauthorized construction noticed in 
this area.” 
 
   
     
1.26 The Ministry of Home Affairs in thei r action taken reply stated as follows :- 
 
 
“NDMC is in the process of restarting su rvey of 217 properties which were found 
locked or where survey not allowed by the owner or belongs to Foreign Missions.  
Notices for survey are being served. 
 
Out of these 217 properties, the department is in the process of  issuing notices 
to 13 properties belonging to Foreign Embassy/Missions to survey the area for 
unauthorized constructions.” 
 
 
1.27 Taking note of unauthorized construc tion in Lutyen Bungalow zone area 
and delay in survey of 217 properties,  Committee had recommended that the 
survey of there 217 properties be conducted expeditiously.  From the action taken 
reply furnished by the Ministry, the Commi ttee is constrained to note that even 
after the lapse of more than a year afte r the presentation of Report, NDMC is still 
in the process of restarting survey of such properties.  The Committee finds this 
indifference extremely disappointing.  The Committee very strongly reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that the survey  of these properties be conducted 

expeditiously and appropriate action be t aken according to the guidelines issued 
on 8.12.1988 by the Government of India.  The Committee desire to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard. 
 
Need to frame Clear cut guidelines for functions 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 26, P. No. 26)  
 
1.28 Keeping in view the problems faced by residents of Park Lane adjacent to Indoor 
Stadium when the functions are held in  Indoor Stadium, the Committee had 
recommended as follows :- 
“Talkatora Indoor Stadium is  given on r ent for holding various  functions and the 
parking space adjacent to the Indoor Stadium  is also rented out for cooking and 
catering services for some of such f unctions.  It has been pointed out in a 
representation submitted to the Committee by the residen ts of Park Lane that  
whenever the vacant space is let out, the leftover food and other garbage are not 
cleaned for days.  Moreover, tents  and fi ttings  are erected and dismantled late 
in the night causing  great deal of noi se pollution and  disturbance to the 
residents of Park Lane adjacent to the I ndoor Stadium.   However, Ministry of 
Home Affairs informed the Committee that efforts are made to clear the leftover 
food by 10 a.m. on the following day and the users of the Stadium are also  being 
asked to clean up the parking space immediately after the functions are over.  In 
view of the serious problems being faced by nearby residents particularly during 
nights, the measures taken by NDMC for timely cleaning up, checking noise 
pollution and disturbance  to the nearby residents seem to be inadequate.  The 
Committee, therefore,  recommend that  NDMC should use space inside the 
Stadium for cooking food etc. and not  us e the parking space for such purposes.   
They also desire that NDM C should frame clear cut guidelines for users of 
Talkatora Indoor Stadium and en sure their strict compliance by the users as well 
as NDMC staff. The concerned officers/staff should be invariably made 
accountable for any lapses in this regard.” 
 
 1.29 The Ministry of Home Affairs in thei r action taken reply stated as follows :- 
“After the representations of the Resi dents of Park Lane were received, 
cooking/catering has been allowed in t he side lane of the Talkatora Indoor 
Stadium. 
Cooking inside the premises is not permitted by the Fire Department, 
NDMC, as it is a fire- hazard. Recently, Council has approved enhancement of 
the charges for booking this side lane for catering purposes, from Rs.2,000/- to 

Rs. 10,000/-. The security has also been en hanced from Rs. 5,000/- to 10,000/-. 
In case of any violations the security is liable to be forfeited. 
The staff has been given strict instruct ions for ensuring that erection and 
dismantling of tents is carried out during day time.” 
 
1.30 The Committee are not satisfied wi th the action taken reply of the 
Government and are of the view that ju st increasing the booking and security 
charges of side lane adjacent to the Indoor Stadium and merely giving strict 
instructions for erection and dismantling of tents in a day time will not be enough 
to solve the problem of nearby resident s of this area. The Committee, in their 
recommendation have stressed that clear-cut guidelines in this regard be issued 
for users as well as NDMC staff. The Co mmittee while reiterating their earlier 
recommendation urge that detailed guidelines in this regard be issued for users 
as well as NDMC staff and strict compliance of these guidelines be ensured. 
 
Preparation for Commonwealth Games 2010 
 
Observation/Recommendation(Sl. No. 29, Para no. 29) 
 
1.31 Regarding preparation for the prestigious Commonwealth Games 2010, the 
Committee had recommended as follows :- 
 
“In view of the prestigious Commonw ealth Games 2010 to be hosted in the 
capital, there is an urgent need for all agencies of the Government  including 
NDMC to gear up in order to provide infr astructure  on a par with international 
standards. In addition to  upgradation of t he stadia,  parking areas; roads; parks; 
shopping centres; places of tourist interest; etc., are   also required to be brought 
up to the desired standards. Making NDMC   area slum free and  rehabilitation of 
the slum dwellers  are also some of  matters requiring prom pt attention of the 
Council.  The Committee, therefore, stress that NDMC should formulate an 
action plan for providing total  face lift to the  city falling within its jurisdiction and 
have it implemented  withi n a stipulated and rigid ti me-frame. The Committee 
would like  to be apprised of specific st eps being taken by NDMC in preparation 
for the Common Wealth Games 2010.” 

 
    
1.32 The Ministry of Home Affairs in th eir action taken reply stated as under :- 
 
 
“In view of the Commonwealth Games- 2010, training needs are being identified 
to upgrade the work culture and output to meet international standards. 
Behavioral capsules are also being desi gned for the officers/officials of all 
categories and even skilled/ unskilled workers are being trained for enhancing 
their knowledge and to keep them inform ed with the latest techniques and 
implementation thereof. 
 
Projects: 
 
(1) Stadia Projects: 
 
The concept plan for Talkatora Stadium, a venue for boxing event has 
been submitted to Delhi Ur ban Arts Commission (DUAC) for approval.  The 
detailed plan and estimates are under preparations. 
 
The concept plan for Shivaji St adium, a venue for warm-up hockey 
matches, developed by the Architect consultant is being scrutinized.  
 
(2) Road Improvement Plan(RIP): 
 
Out of 52 roads in this project, work on 21 roads has been completed. The 
work in respect of 5 roads is in progress. 
 
(3) Redevelopment of Connaught Place: 
 
The plan of Restoration of Faç ade of ‘C’ block has been approved by 
DUAC and the administrative approval ta ken for expenditure sanction has been 
obtained. 
 
The tenders for restoration of Façade of ‘C’ block has been received and 
the technical bid in under Scrutiny. 
 
4) Street Landscaping Project: 
 
The major roads taken in this project are (i) Mother Teressa Crescent, (ii) 
BKS Marg & Hanuman Plaza, (iii) Tees January Marg & Lane, (iv) Niti Marg, (v) 
S.P. Marg, (vi) Aurbindo Marg, (vii) M andir Marg, (viii) Janpath, (ix) Dalhousie 
Road & (x) Church Road. The conceptual  plan except the roads appearing at 
serial numbers (vii) & (viii) have been appr oved. Preliminary estimates are being 
prepared. In case of road at serial numbers (vii) & (viii), the conceptual plan is at 

the stage of preparation. The landscaping of Dalhousie road and Church road will 
be done departmentally. 
 
5) Restoration of N.P. Boys School: 
 
The Heritage Conservation Committ ee and DUAC have approved the 
concept and design of this project. Pre liminary estimates has been approved by 
the Council. Notice inviting tender is being prepared. 
 
6) Restoration of Gole Market: 
 
The Heritage Conservation Committ ee and DUAC have approved the 
concept and design of this project. Pre liminary estimates has been approved by 
the Council. The project has been divided into three segments. 
i) Implementation of Signag es, Street furniture detailed estimates is being 
scrutinized. 
ii) Rehabilitation of Buil dings & services and façade restoration. Detailed 
estimates has been prepared and is being checked by Planning Deptt. 
iii) Improvement of interior design and upgradation of shop office. Detailed 
estimates is being scrutinized     
 
 
7) Multilevel Parking: 
 
Three locations have been identified for the construction of Multi Level 
Parking on public-private participation ba sis to ease out the problems faced by 
citizen in parking of vehicles. These sites are located at Baba Kharak Singh 
Marg, Kasturba Gandhi Marg (behind HT Bl dg.) and Sarojini Nagar. M/s IDFC 
has been appointed as consultant for th is project. Tenders have been received 
for this project and is under scrutiny. 
 
8) Construction of Public Toilets: 
 
This project is meant to improve publ ic utilities in NDMC area and the 
work i.e. being executed as Build-operate- transfer basis. The first plan of the 
work for creating facility south of Rajpath is already in progress and is being done 
by M/s Hythro Power Corporation Ltd. The tender for the second to create this 
facility north of Rajpath is ready for publication phase. 
 
9) Redevelopment of Yashwant Place, Cinema Complex: 
 
This complex is bein g developed as a modern leisure cum commercial 
center on public-private par ticipation basis. The work is being done under the 
consultancy of M/s IL&FS. 
 

10) Municipal Waste Processing & Disposal facility at Okhla: 
 
NDMC has earmarked an area of l and measuring about 15 acres for 
establishing facilities to process, m anage and dispose Municipal Solid Waste on 
public-private participation basis at Okhla. M/s IL&FS has been appointed 
consultant for this project. The plant will take care of the MSW and the bi-
products, such as RDF, fluff bio-gas et c. which will be utilized for generation of 
electricity and producing fly ash. 
 
11) PPP Project for the Collection an d transporation of Municipal Solid 
Waste: 
 
The work of collection, segregat ion and transporation of MSW and 
landscape waste (leaves, tr ee trimmings, branches et c.) in NDMC area from 
point of collection to the land fill site waste processing site has been awarded to 
M/s Ramkey Energy & Environment Ltd. for a period of 8 years. 
 
12) NDCC Phase-II: 
 
The work of rectifications of det ects and the balance work of NDCC 
Phase-II building and the auditorium and Li brary building is in progress. The 
target date completion of this project is Dec. 2007. 
 
 
 
13) Janpath Market Improvement: 
 
Tenders for the improvement of façade for Janpath Road berm market has 
been called and will be opened in the last w eek of April 07. The redevelopment 
plan for various other NDMC markets is under preparation.” 
 
 
 
1.33 The Committee are perturbed to note th at just three year s are left to start 
prestigious Commonwealth Games 2010 and Ministry has still not taken concrete 
steps in this regard. In regard to Road Improvement Plan (RIP), out of 52 roads, 
current status of 26 roads has not been furnished. In most of the projects 
tenders, estimates, technical bid are still under scrutiny or under preparation.  
1.34 The Committee, therefore, strongl y recommend that Government should 
take steps expeditiously and within a sti pulated and rigid time frame to prepare 

themselves to meet all requirements of  international standards to host the 
prestigious 2010 Commonwealth Games.  
  
Implementation of Recommendations 
 
1.35 The Committee would like to emphasise that they attach the greatest 
importance to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the 
Government. They would, th erefore, urge that the Government should keep a 
close watch so as to ensure expeditious implementation of the recommendations 
accepted by them. In case it is not possible to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit for any reason, the ma tter should be reported to the Committee 
with reasons for non-implementation.  
1.36 The Committee desire that repli es in respect of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter V of the Report ma y be finalized and final replies of the 
Government furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (S. No. 1 Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee took up the subject “New Delhi Municipal Council” (NDMC) for 
examination and had  detailed interactions with the representatives of Ministry of Home 
affairs and New Delhi Municipal Council. In t he light of the landmark Constitution (74 th 
Amendment) Act, 1992 which provided for constitutional status and a di stinctive role to 
municipalities, the NDMC Act, 1994 was enacted by Parliament  providing special status 
to New Delhi Municipal Council. NDMC area comprises the territory that has been 
described as Lutyen’s Delhi, which includes Rashtrapati Bhawan; Parliament House; 
Supreme Court; Central Government Office s; Diplomatic Missions; residences of 
Ministers, Members of Par liament, Diplomats and Central Government employees; and 
also a few private residential properties and shopping complexes. After going into the 
working of NDMC, the Committee are of the view that there is sufficient scope for 
improvement in several spheres of its worki ng. These aspects have been dealt with in 
detail by the Committee in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The view of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
     dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 4, Para No. 4) 
 
The Committee find that NDMC receives  substantial grants-in-aid from 
Government and the deposition by  the Chairperson, NDMC in this regard that NDMC is 
a municipality with a difference and it does not depend on State or C entral grants for its 
operations is not fully justified. The Committee also note that with concern that the 
Council has not been able to utilize fully the annual budget allocations since 1999-2000. 
The unspent amount with the Council was Rs. 3,124.37 la kh, Rs. 7452.45 lakh, Rs. 
9,696.85 lakh, Rs. 9,932.97 lakh and Rs. 8,229.64 lakh in each of the succeeding years 
during the period 1999-2000 to  2003-04. The reason for the under-utilization of funds 
put forward by NDMC are that: the capital expenditure is tak en from year to year basis, 
some of these estimates are projected even  before the projects are properly and fully 
conceptualized, there are certain procedures before the actual expenditure could take 
place, etc. The Committee are not satisf ied with these reasons adduced by the Council 
for under-utilization of funds. The Committee,  therefore, recomm end that the Council 
should ensure that the projections made in its Budget estimates are based realistic 

assessment of requirement of funds. A sys tem of development accounting based on 
modern principles of muni cipal management and accounts needs to be put in place 
which should make costs of service transparent for both NDMC and the public. The 
Committee would like to be informed about the precise steps taken by NDMC in this 
regard.  
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The existing Book Keeping system in Ne w Delhi Municipal Council is changing 
over to commercial accounting.  In this regard a firm of Chartered Accountants has 
been engaged as consultant for transition and revamping from the year 2004-05.  This 
change would provide for scientific accounting of development fund.  
 
New Delhi Municipal Council has issued in structions to all concerned that due 
care be taken in future to ensure the proj ections made in budget proposals are based 
on realistic assessment of requirement of funds for the schemes proposed for 
execution.   
 
A Committee headed by Director (Finance) was constituted by the Chairperson, 
NDMC to study processing delays in various  stages of proposal from Engineering 
Department and suggest remedial action for mi nimizing delays wit hout deviating from 
the procedure.  The recommendations m ade by the Committee include a Scheduled 
Monitoring Mechanism; periodic review of th e progress of proposals/tenders over Rs.25 
lakh; upward revision of delegation of powers; laying down time schedule for scrutiny of 
proposals; preparing check-lists for curtailing delays; computerization in various areas, 
etc.  These recommendations are being followed. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 7, Para No. 7) 
 
Government buildings under NDMC Ac t, 1994 are exempt from payment of 
property tax. In lieu of property tax, NDMC is levying service charges on these buildings 
through executive instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance. While service charges 
are being paid by some Ministries/Department s, others have raised objections to the 
executive instructions. As a result, an amount  of Rs.3410 lakh wa s outstanding against 
Government Departments as on  31.03.2005. The Co mmittee also note that at present 
the service charges are being levied on t he basis of executive orders issued by the 
Ministry of Finance without any statutory provisions in this  regard. In view of the 
constraints being faced in the recovery of  service charges, NDMC has been advised to 
carry out an amendment to the NDM C Act to provide for collection of service charges in 
lieu of property tax. At t he time of evidence taken by  the Committee, the proposed 
amendment was stated to be under  active consideration of the Delhi Government. The 

Committee desire that the Ministry of Home  Affairs should take prompt steps for 
amending the NDMC Act. 
 
As stated during the course of examinat ion of this subject, the proposal for 
appointing a person or an authorit y with statutory powers for valuation of properties and 
calculation of service charges should also be  considered seriously so that NDMC is not 
denied of its rightful dues. Recovery of out standing service charges from Government 
Departments should also be pursued at the highest level and the Committee apprised of 
the results achieved in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The New Delhi Municipal Council pas sed a resolution on 27.4.2005 for 
amendment of Sections 65, 363 and 412 of the NDMC Act, 1994, by inserting 
provisions for levy of service charge on pr operties of State Governments, Central 
Government and Diplomatic Missions.  It al so included appointment  of a person with 
statutory powers for valuatio n of properties and calculation of service charges.  The 
resolution has been forwarded to the Govt. of NCT of Delhi to legislate in the matter.   
 
The matter regarding payment of service charges to the municipal bodies was 
considered in a meeting convened by Additi onal Secretary in Ministry of Urban 
Development on 7.6.2006.  In the meeting, it was decided that the local bodies like New 
Delhi Municipal Council, Municipal Corporati on of Delhi etc may collect service charges 
from the Union of India for the properties se rviced by them at the rate of 75% of the 
property tax computed in respect of private properties located in their jurisdiction.   
 
The need for appointing a person or an authority with statutory power for 
valuation and calculation of service charges was not felt necessary as the matter was 
referred to the Committee constituted under  section 9 of the NDMC Act to see the 
applicability of Unit Area Me thod of Property Tax in NDM C area.  The Committee has 
recommended calculation of service char ges on properties of State Govt. and 
diplomatic enclave as per Govt. Properties and has invited public 
suggestions/objections. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 9, Para No. 9) 
 
NDMC used to procure 140 mi llion liters per day (MLD) of filtered water from 
Delhi Jal Board. When the supply was reduced to 120 MLD, NDMC generated about 20 
MLD water through its own efforts by in stalling 137 tubewells and 5000 deep well hand 
pumps to meet the short supply. In order to meet the growing demand for drinking water 
in future and to redress the complaints on account of no supply or low pressure in water 

lines, the Committee suggest that NDMC should make advance planning for 
modernizing and augmenting its system of water supply for meeting the demand in its 
area in an efficient manner. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
New Delhi Municipal Council has initiate d necessary action by diverting the 
excess water from its areas wherever availa ble to the areas where the scarcity of water 
is felt, through internal arrangements. 
 
New Delhi Municipal Council has al so awarded the work for conducting 
“Technical-Commercial Survey Analysis” of wa ter distribution system in its area to M/s. 
SPAN Consultant Pvt. Ltd. for moderni zation and augmenting the system through 
internal arrangements. 
 
New Delhi Municipal Counc il has also appr oached Delhi Jal Board to enhance 
the supply of water to New De lhi Municipal Council from differ ent points of bulk supply 
by diverting the availabl e additional quantity of water due to commissioning and 
functioning of Sonia Vihar Project. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 12, Para No. 12) 
 
One of the important statut ory functions of NDMC is to ensure daily cleaning of 
streets and removal of garbage so as to pr ovide neat and clean environment in the 
areas within its jurisdiction. According to the Ministry, cleaning and sweeping of roads 
and surroundings and removing of  garbage are being undertake n on all days including 
Sundays and holidays and sust ained efforts are being made for improving the 
attendance of safai karamcharies. However,  a study conducted by Audit has brought 
out that the claims made by t he Ministry have a hollow ring to it as 16 Resident Welfare 
Associations had reported that cleaning, sweeping and removal of garbage were not 
attended to by the staff daily and complaints  in this regard were not attended to 
promptly.  It is distressi ng to note that Audit Report 200 1 pointed out that NDMC paid a 
hefty sum of Rs. 2.14 crore to private tr ansporters for removal of garbage during the 
period from 1997 to 2000, despite the fact that NDMC had more than the required fleet 
of its own vehicles. From the information made available to them, the Committee find 
that NDMC hired private vehi cles thus having at its di sposal 81 trucks against the 
requirement of 55 trucks in 1997-98, 92 trucks against the requirement of 71 trucks; in 
1998-99 and 92 trucks against the requirem ent of 84 trucks in 1999-2000. NDMC 
admitted that low uti lization of fleet of trucks for removal of garbage has been on 
account of number of holidays, breakdown of vehicles, lack of will to work in a 
Government set up, absenteeism, etc. In t he opinion of the Committee it is a clear 

manifestation of lack of super vision, monitoring and work culture in NDMC. There is 
need for reorganization and motivation of the entire division of NDMC that is responsible 
for maintenance, cleaning and removal of  garbage.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that NDMC should devise a scientif ic mechanism for close monitoring and 
supervision at all levels with a view to ensuring optimum utilizat ion of manpower and 
fleet of trucks available for daily cleaning and removal of garbage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Despite best efforts, utilizat ion of departmental vehicles can only be improved to 
a certain extent because of  their age. New garbage vehicles  were not being purchased 
as New Delhi Municipal Council thought it bette r to outsource the services of collection 
and transportation of garbage, on the basis  of tender. Hence whenever the adequate 
number of New Delhi Municipal Council trucks were not available, department had been 
hiring private trucks to supplement the work of lifting of garbage.   
 
Repeated efforts are being made to motiva te the staff for better supervision 
which has shown positive results in the last  2-3 years. In fact New Delhi Municipal 
Council is in the process of completely overhauling the solid waste management system 
to meet the requirement of MSW Management rules 2000.   
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 14, Para No. 14) 
 
NDMC has a 150 bed General Hospital, one 50 bed Maternity Hospital and 36 
dispensaries to cater to the health requirements of the peopl e in the NDMC area. 
Reportedly, there are complaints that doctors and medicines are generally, not available 
in the NDMC run hospit als and dispensaries causing hard ships to the patients. Despite 
surprise checks and action taken agains t absentees and chronic late-comers, the 
situation does not seem to be fully satisfactory. In the opinion of the Committee, there is 
an imperative need to improve the overall working of the hospitals by ensuring 
punctuality of doctors and staff and also by maintaining equipments and providing 
medicines. They, therefore, stress that appropriate steps should be taken to improve the 
functioning of NDMC run hos pitals and dispensaries. T he Committee also recommend 
that complaint/suggestion boxes be kept at prominent locations in the hospitals and 
dispensaries run by NDMC and the Health  Department should ma ke arrangements to 
collect the complaints and suggestions from the boxes every fortnight and take 
corrective measures for improving the health services. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
New Delhi Municipal Council ke eps in its store 413 drugs of various kinds.  Of 
these 80 drugs are meant exclusively for in- patients.  The budgetary allocation and the 

expenditure on procurement of medicines have const antly been on the rise since 2002-
03 as tabulated below: 
Sl. 
No. 
Year  Budget provision 
(Rs. in lacs) 
Expenditure (Rs. in lacs) 
1 2002-03 136 135 
2 2003-04 171 140 
3 2004-05 205 193.47 
4 2005-06 205 204.20 
 
 
NDMC medical services have been re-organise d by bringing all types of services 
under one roof.   The senior-most doctor is the In-charge of the said medical unit which 
in turn ensures better supervision over the staff and also punctuality. All the major 
equipments are under annual maintenance service contract with the supplying firms.   
Both the hospitals under the control of NDMC have suggestion boxes at prominent 
places.   The same have been placed in the dispensaries as suggested. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 16, Para No. 16) 
 
The Committee not with concern that out of 3091 students of NDMC schools who 
appeared in class X exam inations during the last five years, only 54 students scored 
marks between 75% and 89% and only 4 student s scored above 90% marks. Out of 
2510 students, who appear ed in class XII examination dur ing the same period, only 39 
students scored marks between 75% and 89%  and none of the students could score 
above 90% marks. It is a clear in dication that the quality of education being imparted to 
students in NDMC owned schools is not upto  the mark.  Although NDMC has informed 
the Committee during evidence that it will give  emphasis on improving the infrastructure 
in schools, timely supply of books, uniforms and upgradation and modernization of 
education, they would like to be assured in more concrete terms of the seriousness 
NDMC attaches to achieving these objectives. The Committee would also like NDMC to 
concentrate more on improving the quality of  education so that the students of NDMC 
schools may achieve standards and gradings co mparable to public schools. A concrete 
action plan should be drawn up for achieving this end and the Committee be apprised of 
the same.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that there is a constant improvement in quality of education being 
imparted to students in New Delhi Municipal Co uncil.  There is an increase over last 

year in terms of pass percentage, total number  of first division and students securing 
above 80% & 90% as per data given below for the academic year 2005-06 :- 
 
Class X 
 
Pass percentage – 64% 
% of Ist Divn. – 35% 
Out of total passed, 
Above 80% - 14 students 
Above 90% - 02 students 
 
Class XII 
 
Pass percentage – 80% 
% of Ist Divn. – 48% 
Out of total passed, 
Above 80% - 4 students 
Above 90% - 1 student 
 
 
Following steps are being taken up to improve quality of education: 
 
a. Extra classes have been conducted to improve the quality of result in 
Board Examinations, for this, help of leading public schools like DPS, R.K. 
Puram is also being taken. 
b. In order to improve th e quality of teaching, emphasis  is given on teachers 
training.  During summer vacations, teachers training was organized which 
included stress management for teachers,  techniques of making learning 
interesting and adolescence education. 
c. NDMC has constituted from this year  a scholarship of Rs.500/- per month 
for all girls students of class XI who will secure 60% and above in class X 
CBSE examination.  This scholarsh ip will be given every month for a 
period of 2 years i.e. till class XII. 
d. It has been decided to cr eate an ability section from  Class IX and XI in 
same schools of NDMC for providing special attention to the meritorious 
students. The students will be select ed from a common examination at 
level of Class VIII and securing over  80% in this examination. The 
examination has been c onducted and the ability sections will start 
functioning from the 2007-08 session.  
 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 

Recommendation (S. No. 17, Para No. 17) 
 
At present the repair of roads is being carried out manually through 18 Road 
Service Centers spread across the NDMC area. It is also st ated that efforts are being 
made to mechanise patch and pothole repair of the roads. According to the Home 
Secretary, the common problem in Delhi is multiplicity of agencies providing various 
services such as telephones, sewer and ot hers where digging of roads becomes a 
prerequisite and NDMC has to relay the roads. The Committee, therefor e, strongly feel 
that the process of mechanization of road repair should be introduced without any 
further delay so as to ensure time and cost effectiveness in maintenance of roads. They 
further desire that there should be proper  coordination based on GIS system and 
agreement among different serv ice providers and it shoul d be made mandatory for all 
such agencies to repair the roads immediately after they have finished their work. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The repair and maintenance of roads and lanes are done by the 
agency/contractor for a period of one to five years, depending on the contract 
agreement.  After this period, the work is  done by the Department manually.  However, 
efforts have been made to identify suitable road repair machines keeping in view the 
availability of accessories, software techni que suited to municipa l interests, road 
conditions and the working trends.   
NDMC has developed its own GI S system on which all impo rtant public utilities 
have been marked for improving the delivery of service.  Regular inspection is carried 
out to find out potholes and whe never these come to notice,  the same are immediately 
repaired.   
NDMC has also developed in-house softwar e for granting permission for road 
cut.  Inspection by the Department is also  done to monitor the road cut provision.  
NDMC is charging restoration charges for restoring road cut after completion of work.  
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 18, Para No. 18) 
 
The Horticulture Department of NDMC is  responsible for maintaining 6 gardens, 
49 round abouts and 82 sma ll parks in residential colonies  for which total manpower in 
the Department is 1492 out of  which 1338 are Malis. Althoug h NDMC has claimed that 
the green areas are maintained in the best possible manner, th e Committee strongly 
feel that the maintenanc e and upkeep of parks and round- abouts in NDMC area is not 
up to the mark despite having as many  as 1338 Malis on the payroll of NDMC. 
Evidently, the personnel in this Department are not properly deployed and they also lack 
proper training, guidance and motivation. C onsidering the fact t hat NDMC area, being 
the heart of the national capital, should rece ive highest priority as far as maintenance 
and beautification of green area are concerned, the Co mmittee desire that the 

Horticulture Department should accordingly, draw up an action plan for imparting 
adequate training to its personnel so as to ensure better upkeep of the parks and round 
abouts. They would like to be apprised of follow up acti on taken by NDMC in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Horticulture Department is responsib le for maintaining Central Vista, major 
parks and gardens, colony parks, roundabouts, green strips al ong the roads including 
maintenance of roadside trees  and plantation.  In addi tion, the department does the 
periodic pruning of trees, lifting of fall en trees and branches dur ing storm, collects 
horticulture wastes from the garden and roadsides.  The department is also responsible 
for preparation of lawns of Ra jpath & India Gate during Repub lic Day celebration, other 
events having national as well as social and cu ltural importance, floral decoration along 
the VVIP routes and major events.  There are 1230 malis in the department to carry out 
the duties under 67 choudharies. 
 
However, the department is aware of the problems at  field level and has taken 
various steps to improve the efficiency of staff, mechanization and better maintenance 
of green area of NDMC. 
 
Roundabouts – For the purpose of redesig ning and developments, NDMC had 
outsourced 25 roundabouts to different Public  Section Undertakings and other reputed 
organizations.  Planning for re-landscaping of remaining roundabouts is under 
consideration and upgradation. 
 
Colony Parks – For proper upkeepment of parks, s pecial efforts have been made and 
in the colonies of Jor Bagh, Golf Link, Malcha Marg, possibiliti es are explored to 
develop the parks with the help of RWAs under Bhagidari Scheme. 
 
Roadside berms & green strips – NDMC is giving high priority to improve the roadside 
greenery, avenue plantation.  The planning for comprehensiv e development of Road 
Berms is underway. 
 
Training and motivation to staff  – Forest Research Institute (FRI), Dehradun is 
engaged as consultant for training of Field St aff including malis in identification of 
Diseased trees and causal organism for disease and treatment. This is on going project. 
FRI Scientists have visited Delhi to guide and tr ain filed staff in nursery techniques, tree 
maintenance and raising of go od quality tree saplings. Field officers at Dy. Directors, 
Asstt. Directors and Section Officers are sent to Forest Research Institute, Dehradun for 
undergoing training on Tree Management and Conservation.   
In October 2006, A workshop on Tree Conservation issues was organized by the 
department for the benefit of Field Officers.   
Ten malis were trained at IARI Pusa in floriculture during the year 2006-07. 

Around 20 Choudharies and 600 Malis were s ent on field visit in various parks & 
gardens of Delhi including Mughal Garden, Ra shtapati Bhawan for learning the quality 
of horticulture work and knowledge sharing.  
 
 
Mechanization – To improve the efficiency and performance of the staff, mechanization 
component is increased.  Required machinery like Power tillers, Ride on lawn mowers, 
tractors and shrub masters, chain saw etc. are procured time to time as per necessity.   
 
Trees – NDMC is known for beautiful Avenue trees, which give special character to 
each road.  Since the trees along roadsi de are 6-7 decades old, during strong 
wind/storm, few of the trees fall every year.  For preparation of a sc ientific replacement 
plan of trees, treatment of diseased trees and providing training to the staff of the 
department in appropriate techniques, the Fore st Research Institute, Dehradun has 
been appointed as Consultant.   
 
Scarcity of water – For proper maintenance of green ar ea, sufficient water is essential 
and in the recent years, acut e shortage of water for meet ing horticultural needs has 
been experienced in NDMC area.  This has badly affected the horticultural activities.  
NDMC is considering various options to overall improvement to augment water supply. 
 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 19, Para No. 19) 
 
The Committee express their satisfaction over the fact that NDMC has made a 
provision for rain water harvesting in its bu ilding bye-laws and it does give Completion 
Certificate to any new building unless it ha s rainwater harvesting provision in it. NDMC 
is stated to have completed 17 such works in  the building belongi ng to it. Three works 
for rainwater harvesting are in progress and has  also referred 85 such projects to the 
Central Ground Water Board for their advice. The Committee suggest that in order to 
optimally utilize the rain water for being used for various purposes in the city, NDMC 
should explore the possibility th at even the existing building s in the area are gradually 
made to adopt water harvesting techniques. In  order to achieve this objective, the 
possibility of extending certai n incentives to such building owners who go for water 
harvesting works should also be considered seriously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Council has already passed a Resolution for grant of incentives to the 
building owners who opt for water harvesting system in the form of rebate from House 
Tax, Electricity/Water charges etc.   
 

 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 21, Para No. 21) 
 
Complaints received in NDMC are regi stered in the Central Control Room. 
Besides this, senior officers meet the public as part of open darbar and bhagidari 
scheme of the Chief Minister of Delhi. While proper record of complaints received in the 
Central Control Room are being kept, no record  of complaints received in open darbars 
is maintained by NDMC. The Committee consi der it important that proper record of 
complaints received during ope n darbaras is also maintained for their timely follow-up 
and redressal. They also stress that keeping in view the nature of responsibilities 
discharged by NDMC. The public grievances redressal machinery in the Council should 
be further strengthened and concrete  steps taken for timely redressal of grievances of 
the public. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Proper record, including Action Taken Repo rt, is maintained for the complaints 
received in the Central Control Room and at various Complaint Centres in NDMC area. 
 
A separate Register is being maintained for the redressal of 
grievances/complaints received during Open Darbar.  Action Taken Report is sought 
from the concerned officer on the grievances/ complaints. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 22, Para No. 22) 
 
In NDMC there were 1,668 vacancies in different grades in July, 2005 against the 
sanctioned strength of 18,000 employees. T he Committee have been informed that the 
vacancies in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts have been intimated to Delhi Staff Selection Board 
and that no part of the council has been sufferi ng on account of vacant posts as short-
term contracts are resorted to in anticipation of the vacanc ies. The Committee consider 
that such a large number of vacant posts is a clear manifestation of  the adverse effect 
on the delivery of services by NDMC and  they, therefore desir e that NDMC should 
pursue the matter earnestly with Delhi Staff Selection Board and get the vacancies filled 
up at the earliest to ensure smooth functioning of NDMC.  
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
For various vacant posts of Group ‘C’ in New Delhi Municipal Council, Delhi 
Subordinate Services Selection Board has  been requested to fill up these posts on 
urgent basis. Regarding vacant posts of Group ‘D’, New Delhi Mu nicipal Council itself is 
taking necessary action being competent to  do so. The number of vacant Group ‘C’ 
posts is much less compared to that of Group ‘D’ posts. New Delhi Municipal Council  is 
employing people on cont ract to meet the shortfall of staff so as to ensure smooth 
functioning of works. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25, Para No. 25) 
 
As per the latest survey there are as many as 41 jhuggi clusters in NDMC area of 
which five are on NDMC land  and others are on Government  owned land belonging to 
different Departments. After 25 jhuggi cluste rs were removed in 2002, there has not 
been much progress in removal and relocation of such encroachments in NDMC area. 
As for removal of such clusters on NDMC land, NDMC has been allotted two acres of 
land at Bakkarwala for relocation of jhugg ies and the Slum and JJ Wing of MCD has 
been entrusted with in task of relocating the eligible members out of these clusters. 
Since NDMC is responsible for monitoring encroachments on its land, the Committee 
desire that NDMC must draw up a time-frame  for vacating the jhuggi clusters on its 
land. The Committee also expect  NDMC to pay specific attent ion to removal of jhuggi 
clusters in its municipal area in view of the forthcoming Commonwealth Games 2010 
and apprise the Committee of the progress achieved in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Slum and JJ Wing of MCD is the Nodal Agency for relocating the Jhuggi-Jhopri 
clusters. There are seven Jhuggi Clus ters in NDMC land.  NDMC has deposited 
Rs.1,08,69,000/- to Slum and JJ Department of  MCD for relocation of these jhuggis. 
The matter has also been taken up with the Ministry of Urban Development.  Two 
meetings have been held in this connection under the Chairpersons hip of Secretary, 
Ministry of Urban Development.  Slum & JJ Department has been asked to relocate the 
Jhuggi Clusters in NDMC area on priority basis. 
 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06 Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 

Recommendation (S. No. 27, Para No. 27) 
 
Yet another area requiring attention of NDMC  is the improper utilization of the 
parks for playing cricket, footba ll etc. Undoubtedly, such acti vities amount to misuse of 
gardens and inconvenience to the morning wa lkers. According to  NDMC, an area in 
Talkatora Garden has been earmarked as cricke t ground where playing of cricket and 
football is officially permitted. The Commi ttee stress that the area meant for cricket 
ground should be clearly demarca ted with boundaries so that other users of the park 
are not put to undue inconvenience. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In parks & gardens of New Delhi Municipa l Council, playing of any game like 
cricket, football is not permitted as playing of the games leads to damage to the garden.  
However, in the Talkatora Garden, an area is earmarked for playing cricket, which is 
called Talkatora Cricket Ground, which is r egularly used for Cricket.  The demarcation 
of playground has been completed.  
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 28, Para No. 28) 
 
The Committee are perturbed to note that out of 10 cases relating to corruption 
charges against employees of NDMC pending before C ounts/special Judge, 9 cases 
relate to illegal gratification. It gives an im pression to the general public that corruption 
is rampant in NDMC. Undoubt edly, NDMC would be able to im prove its working only if 
corrupt practices and cases of illegal gr atification are totally weeded out. The 
Committee, therefore, strongl y recommend that vigilance mechanism in NDMC should 
be further strengthened and stri ngent action taken against employees who are found 
indulging in corrupt practices. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
These 9 cases were related to the period from 1998 to 2001.  For the period of 
2001-06, 3 cases have been registered for which 5 persons, namely Sh. A.K. Bajaj, AE, 
Sh. Jai Bhagwan C&D mistry, Sh . Harish Joshi, Fitter, Sh . J.K. Sood, AE, Sh. Vijay 
Kumar, JE, were booked for illegal gratification as well as undue favour.   
Efforts have already been made to control corruption by organizing Vigilance 
Awareness Weeks, educating staff and by organizing seminars on these issues.  
Preventive action was also taken by conducti ng surprise checks and by checking the 
files being dealt by the dealing hands.   

All efforts are being made to strengthen t he Vigilance Deptt. and also to take 
stringent action against the employees, who are found indulging in corrupt practices. 
The registration of cases by CBI or Anti  Corruption Branch relating to corruption 
charges shows a declining trend. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WH ICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 15) 
 
There are as many as 87 schools being run by NDMC including 6 Navyug Senior 
Secondary Schools and 3 Navy ug Primary Schools. The Committee are surprised to 
note that inspite of informing them that existing number of schools are adequate to cater 
to the needs of NDMC area, construction of a Senior Se condary School opposite Birla 
Mandir is under consideration for which an amount to Rs. 6.50 crore has been approved 
by the Council. During evidence, the Chairp erson of NDMC informed that enrolments in 
NDMC schools have dropped duri ng the last two years.  In view of the above facts, the 
Committee have serious doubts whether the dec ision to start a new school has been 
taken after making proper assessment of the needs of the area. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that  the decision to start the new sc hool should be reviewed at the 
highest level after making a realistic assessment of the need of the area and the 
Committee be appraised of the outcome thereof.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There is only one Se nior Secondary School in the area north of  Rajpath to cater 
to the needs of students of 5 pr imary schools in the area. The enrolment figures are as 
follows: 
 
Name of School Enrolment in Primary 
Section 
Navyug Primary School 35 
Navyug Pr. School, Mandir Marg 70 
N. P. School, Tilak Marg 70 
N. P.  School, Pataudi House 35 
N.P. School, Derbhanga House 35 
Navyug Sr. Sec. School, Peshwa 
Road 
70 
TOTAL 245 
  
However, the total number of seats av ailable in Navyug Sr. Sec. School at 
Peshwa Road in Class-VI is only 105.  
Presently, the students of Primary schools of  the North of Rajpath go to various 
Senior Secondary Schools as under: 
 
a) The students of Pataudi House go to Peshwa Road. 
b) The students of Tilak Marg which is a 2 section school go to Sarojini Nagar. 

c) The students of Mandir Marg go to  either Moti Bagh or Vinay Marg. 
d) Jor bagh & Darbhanga House Primary Scho ols were started in academic session 
2005-06 and thus after 3 years from now shall need a Sr. Sec. School to adjust 
its students. 
 
It is seen from above that students of M andir Marg & Tilak Marg who pass class 
V and of approximately 10-11 y ears of age have to travel long distance to attend Class 
VI. This is against the policy of neighborhood schools. 
To accommodate the primary school stu dents of the area, a new Navyug Sr. 
Sec. School at Mandir Marg is required. It is , therefore, proposed to establish a new 
Navyug Sr. Sec. School in Mandir Marg area.  
 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OMNo.16015/4/06- 
Delhi-II dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      

Chapter IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH GOVERNMENT’S R EPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that Balakrishna Commi ttee constituted to look into the 
manner in which the governance of the Un ion Territory should be carried on, also 
looked into the functioning of the Municipa l arrangements in the area. That Committee 
had recommended that NDMC should consist of a certain number of Members elected 
on the basis of adult franchise and an equal  number of members appointed by the Lt. 
Governor and the Vice Chairm an, NDMC should be electe d by members themselves. 
As the area covered by NDMC includes not  only Government o ffices, Diplomatic 
Missions, etc., but also about three lakh re sident population, the Committee are of the 
view that the recommendations of Balakr ishna Committee in this regard need to be 
reconsidered by the Government in all seriousness. This attains even greater 
significance in view of poor participation of  nominated members of the Council in the 
meetings of the Council and it s committees. The Committee also note that according to 
Section 4(2) of the NDMC Act, 1994, the Members of Parliament representing the 
constituencies which comprise wholly or par tly the New Delhi Area, shall be special 
invitees for the meetings of the council without a right to vote. On the other hand, the 
MLAs representing constituencies, which comprise wholly or partly the New Delhi area 
enjoy the right to vote in the Council meetings. The Ho me Secretary was candid in 
admission during evidence: “I think it stands to reason th at Members of Parliament 
should also have a voting right.” The Committ ee, therefore, stre ss that Government 
should review the desirability of modifying composition of the co uncil as recommended 
by Balakrishna Committee keeping in view the basic democratic principles and also 
granting voting right at the council meetings to the Members of Parliament representing 
the constituencies comprising wholly or partly the area under the jurisdiction of NDMC. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been decided that the aforesaid recommendations made by the Estimates 
Committee are required to be looked into in great er detail to come to correct conclusion 
and for the present, the existing arrangement may be continued. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06 Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6) 
 
The Committee are also constrained to find that there were press reports and 
audit observations on the failure  of NDMC in assessing tax pertaining to 85 properties 

located at Anant Ram Dairy,  though basic amenities were being provided by NDMC to 
the colony. What is more distressing is the fa ct that NDMC has failed to explain before 
the Committee as to how ND MC was obliged to provide civic amenities to these 
buildings considered to be unauthorized and even not coming under the purview of the 
tax net. It is also not clear on what considerations and at w hat level it was decided to 
provide civil amenities to these unauthori zed buildings. These facts lead to the 
presumption that NDMC has possibly aided and abetted unauthorized construction by 
providing them the amenities. Under the circumstances, the Committee recommend that 
an in depth and thorough enquiry  be conducted into the ent ire sequence of events of 
this case and those responsible be brought to book.  
 
Although the Committee were info rmed during evidence held on 19 th July, 2005 
that the Council had taken a decision that  without prejudice to the status of the 
buildings, they shall be assessed and notices shall be issued to the owners, it has not 
been implemented till August, 20 05. The Committee trust that NDMC would earnestly 
pursue the matter and recover the arrears of property tax as admissibly under the rules 
without any further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific action 
taken in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the course of survey conducted by the field staff of the House Tax 
Department in the year 1999-2000, 65 properties were found to be constructed.  Notices 
under section 72 of the NDMC Act 1994 were  issued to all the 65 owners of the 
properties for assessment of property tax wit h effect from 1.4.99.  The Deptt. is in 
process of settling pending notices.  In the NDMC Act no time is specified for settlement 
of notice under section 72.  The demand shall be raised again st the persons primarily 
liable for payment of Property Tax w.e.f. 1.4.99.  Further the field staffs have been 
entrusted the job to conduct survey of the entire Anant Ram Dairy Colony and to book 
the properties which have come up recently. 
 
 No separate enquiry has been conducted in the matter as this has already been 
examined in the Annual Audit Report of the Chief Auditor of NDMC.  The Property Tax 
Department of NDMC has issued notices under Section 77 of the Act for initiating 
assessment proceeding for property tax in 120 cases out of 183 properties located 
there.  In 63 cases, Department is conducting survey and notice will be sent very soon.    
 
In the meanwhile, Ministry of Urban Development had constituted a Committee 
under Shri K. K. Mathur, IAS (R etd.) to look into various issues relating to unauthorized 
development in the form of farm houses and unauthorized colonies inhabited by affluent 
sections of the society.  The report of the Committee is under consideration of the 
Government.  
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- 
Delhi-II dated 9th May, 07) 
 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 10) 
 
Electricity Department of NDMC is respons ible for distribution network upto the 
supply point of the consumers in the entire NDMC area and for development of power 
distribution system to meet the growing demand of various  categories of consumers. 
The Committee have been informed that the so me of the problems of power supply 
were due to tripping of t he grip and burn out of some transformers, which needed 
replacement. Since it is esse ntial to ensure overall improvement in the services 
provided by the Council as well as uninte rrupted power supply to the consumers, the 
Committee suggest that NDMC should moti vate its maintenance staff through 
appropriate incentives and impl ement their short-term and long term plans strictly 
according to time schedules prescribed for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Some of the problems in ensuring continuity of power supply partly relate to 
trippings from Delhi Transco Limited end ov er which New Delhi M unicipal Council has 
no control as power supply is received by New Delhi Municipal Council from Delhi 
Transco Limited.  With regard to the effi cient working of the New Delhi Municipal 
Council system for providing uninterrupted power supply, an Expe rt Committee headed 
Sh. Y.P. Singh (formerly Member Tech. Delh i Vidyut Board & Advisor(Power) Govt. of 
NCT of Delhi was constituted on 9 th August 2005 to study th e existing New Delhi 
Municipal Council system/ analyse the weaknesses, make recommendations and 
prepare action plan for preventive maintenance etc. 
 
The Committee submitted its report on 30.9.2005.  Based on the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee, the action taken for Short Term & Long 
Term Plans has been made which is as under: 
 
 
 
 
Short Term Plans 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Plan Status 
1 Replacement/augmentation of 
LT Panels and 55 distribution 
transformers at various 
electric substations. 
Tenders at an estimated cost of 
Rs.6.53 Crores have already been 
called and are under technical 
evaluation. Works are expected to be 
awarded in the next three months and 
thereafter executed before 31.03.2008. 
 

2 Replacement of 11KV HT 
panels in 40 nos. electric sub-
stations that have served their 
useful life. 
Tenders for 30 nos. electric sub-
stations have already been called and 
are due for opening on 17.04.2007. 
 
3 Replaced of old 11KV HT 
feeders and interconnectors 
cable (12 K.Mtrs. approx) that 
have served its useful life.  
The works are in progress as per site 
requirement and are expected to be 
completed by 31.03.2008 
4. Providing Electronic Energy 
Meters to all the consumers in 
NDMC area. 
Tenders were called both for three 
phase and single meters. Tenders for 
single phase meters are to be re-called 
whereas tenders for three phase 
meters are in process. 
5. Procurement of 2 no. 
additional cable fault locating 
vans for repair of LT cable 
faults 
Tenders have already been called and 
are in process. Technical specifications 
are being changed as per latest 
available specifications. These are 
expected to be procured by 
31.03.2008. 
6 Preventive maintenance works 
as recommended. 
These are ongoing works and major 
preventive works have again been 
completed before start of summer 2007 
viz. before 31.03.2007. 
7 Establishing 33KV sub-
stations at Trauma Centre of 
AIIMS 
The works have since been completed. 
Testing & Commissioning is in process. 
The S/S is to be commissioned before 
30.04.2007 providing 16 MVA 
additional power. 
 

Long Term Plans 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Plan Status 
a) Replacement of 
remaining HT/LT 
switchgears, 
distribution 
Transformers that 
have served their 
useful life 
b)  Replacement of 
remaining old 
11KV HT feeders 
& interconnector 
cable that have 
served their useful 
life 
As per site requirement, the works will be taken in 
hand for timely execution. With the passage of 
time, additional works of this nature are required 
to be done. These are c ontinuous works, which 
shall be completed as per site requirements. 
c)  There are a number of high voltage schemes which are under process 
with CE(E-I) Deptt., some are listed below:  
1 Replacement of 
sick/faulty 66KJV 
feeder from GT 
Station to NDMC 
substation Vidyut 
Bhawan. 
The estimates have already been sanctioned and 
tenders are being called. 
2 Replacement of 
remaining old 33 
KV IP feeders that 
have served their 
useful life and 
feeding power 
supply to NDMC 
area. 
The estimates are yet to  be prepared. The old 33 
KV feeders are in working condition and in use. 
3 Laying of 
additional 66KV 
feeder from Park 
Streed Grid station 
of DLT to S/S 
School Lane & 
Vidyut Bhawan of 
NDMC 
Estimates have already been sanctioned. C.E.A. 
are being engaged as Cons ultants and tenders 
are to be shortly called. 
4 Establishing of 
66KV S/S at BD 
Marg & 33KV S/S 
at Church Road 
Earlier called tenders were rejected. Fresh 
tenders are being called. 

5 Augmentation of 
existing 33KV 
substations at 
State Guest House 
& Bapu Dham to 
66KV 
The work is linked with up-gradation of BSES 
Ridge Valley S/S to 220KV which may take about 
2 years.  Work is being planned accordingly. 
6 Establishing 
220KV S/S at 
Harish Chand 
Mathur Lane & 
Trauma Centre 
DTL has already called tenders and the works are 
expected to be completed within two years. 
 
Regarding incentives to the Maintenanc e staff for their mo tivation, and to 
increase efficiency following actions have been taken: 
 
1. The staff have been provided with proper hand tool kits. 
 
2. Maintenence staff have been provided with Mobile Phones. 
 
3. Promotions to the eligible field staff. 
 
4. Filling up the vacant posts is receiving top most priority. 
 
5. Residential accommodation is provided to essential duty staff on out of turn basis. 
 
7. Health Scheme Plan for all employees an d their dependants with leading Hospitals is 
under active consideration/implementation. 
 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 11) 
  
As regards over billing and faulty workin g of water and electricity meters, the 
Committee are informed that there is an established procedure to rectify over billing and 
faulty working of water and electricity meters . The Committee is of the opinion that this 
is an area that requires utmo st attention by NDM C and steps should be taken to check 
over billing and for replacing faulty water and electricity meters with promptitude. They 
also desire that the programme for moderni zation of Water Meter Workshop should be 
taken up in right earnest and completed within a specific time frame. 
 
 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
In case of defective electric/water me ter, the electricity and water charges are 
assessed provisionally and the final assessments are made on the following basis: 
 
1.  Consumption Pattern of Last year (CPL - based on the average consumption 
during the corresponding period of the preceding year) 
 
2.  Consumption Pattern of Subse quent year (CPS - based on the ave rage 
consumption during the corresponding period of the subsequent year) 
 
3.  Average base (based on CPL and CPS basis.  The average is  worked out as 
(CPL + CPS) 
                    2 
 
NDMC has already  provided electronic  energy meters to its bulk supply  
consumers having electrical load of above 100 KW.  There are nearly 660 consumers in 
this category. 
 
For the remaining c ategories of consumer s, an estimate for providing electronic  
energy meters is already in process.  T he requirement of such consumers is 50,000 
meters approx. and the estimated cost is Rs.13.00 crores approx. 
 
Tenders have already been invited for procur ement of electronic energy meters.  
Technical bids have already been finalized and price bids al so opened.  The tender are 
presently under scrutiny. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 20) 
 
The total number of vehicles register ed in Delhi has  increased more than six 
times and the number of private cars, motor cycles, etc. has increased more than seven 
times during the past twenty years. The Committ ee find it astonishing that despite such  
a substantial increase in the number of vehi cles in Delhi, NDMC has not yet framed any 
“parking policy” to meet the requirements of people v isiting some of the already over-
crowded and prominent places wit hin its area. What i s more distressing is the fact that  
NDMC dis played a lackadais ical attitude in the matters connected with allotment of 
parking lots and could not prev ent running of unaut horized parking lots in its area as 
substantiated by  the information furnished to the Committee. Even  Audit has brought 
out that as many as seven parking lots were allotted in 2000 and 2001 without obtaining 
proper approval and t wo parking lots were  being run unauthoriz edly during  the same 
period. Contractors w ho were allotted four parking lots in 1995 f or three years had not 
until March, 2003 paid outstandi ng license fee of Rs. 13.25  lakh due upto July, 1998 

and no efforts were made by the Council to pursue recovery of the outstandings. It goes 
without saying that such irregularities cannot  be perpetuated without the connivance of 
employees in the Council who are respons ible for regulating parking lost. The 
Committee take a very serious note of such irregularities in the Council and recommend 
that responsibility should be fixed for the irregularities, erring officials punished, 
defaulting contractors black- listed and the overdues recovered without any further 
delay. The follow up action taken in this re gard should be intimated to the Committee. 
The Committee also desire NDMC  to formulate a parking policy to regulate traffic in the 
area under its jurisdiction, to take up the construction of proposed multi-level parking 
lots at the earliest and take steps for setting up more multilevel parking lots in its area.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NDMC had framed a parki ng policy to meet the require ment of people visiting 
some of the crowded areas.  Last such policy was adopted by the Council in the year 
2004 which had taken into acco unt various factors to prevent running of unauthorized 
parking lots. 
 
Under the provision of NDMC Act, only Chairperson, NDMC is competent to 
accord approval for acceptance and rejection of the tenders invited for various works, 
including parking lots.  The Asstt. Secy. of the Deptt. is authorized to convey approval of 
the Chairperson for allotment of the parking lots.   
 
For pursuing the recovery of outstanding dues  from the parking c ontractors, it is 
stated that upto the y ear 1995, most of the parking lots were allotted to Ex-servicemen 
sponsored by Director General (Resettlement, Mi nistry of Defence).  The outstanding of 
Rs.13.25 lacs due upto July 1 998 are pending again st those Ex-servicemen.  With a 
view to effect recovery from the said ex allottees, the matter has been taken up with the 
Director General (Resettlement) and matter is being pursued vigorously. 
 
For maintenance of proper records, and re covery of Council dues, an Accounts 
Section has been created in the year 1998 for the Enf. Deptt.  Since then proper records 
relating to demand and collection security etc. are being mainta ined and pending 
recoveries are watched. 
 
A survey has been conducted by RITES Ltd. to recommend ways and means for 
proper management of t he parking lots in NDMC area and  also to reorganize the 
existing parking lots.  The recommendations  of the RITES have since been received 
and the same have been submitted for approval  of the competent authority for adoption 
in NDMC.   
 
In order to improve parking infrastructure in NDMC area and as per the parking 
policy of Delhi Government development of t he following three multilevel parkings has 
been taken up on a public private partnership basis: 
 
1.  K. G. Marg, behind HT Building. 

2.  Baba Kharak Singh Marg,. 
3.  Sarojini Nagar 
 
Global bids have been invited and qualificat ion process is over.  Based on the 
development control regulations approved by t he DDA further stages of bid process are 
being taken up.  
 
Bids have been received on 9.4.2007 and are under scrutiny. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 23) 
 
It is disturbing to note that as against 418 notices served by the Unauthorized 
construction Cell of NDMC, follow up action  was taken by NDMC only in 145 cases for 
demolition or sealing of unauthorized prem ises. The remaining cases are pending 
before different courts incl uding public hearing by  competent authority in NDMC. The 
Committee have also been informed that a number of religious structures exist in NDMC 
area on public pathways, footpaths, etc., and in order to ensure that they do not spread, 
these structures have been videographed and will be updated every three to six 
months. The Areas Inspectors have been made responsible for checking any addition to 
the existing structures. From the data furnished before the Committee, it is quite evident 
that the area Inspectors have not been vig ilant enough to check encroachments and 
unauthorized constructions.  
 
Distressingly, all records pertaining to unauthorized constructions/encroachments 
prior to January, 2002 are not traceable. To say the least, it is a clear indication of 
NDMC officials working hand in  glove with those responsib le for such encroachments. 
The Committee deplore such actions on the par t of public servants who are responsible 
for protecting and safeguarding pubic property. The Committee recommend that an 
enquiry be conducted into the entire episo de connected with missing official records 
pertaining to encroachments in NDMC area and the culprits be brought to book. The 
files should either be traced or reconstructed within a s pecified time-frame and the 
encroachers dealt with firmly. The Committee w ould like to be apprised of the results 
achieved in the matter within six months from presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to have better vigilance and effective checks on unauthorized 
construction, the Junior Engineers posted in Un-authorised Construction Cell (UACC) 
have been delegated with powers to issue stop work order notic es to the party as and 
when any ongoing unauthorized construction is detected. 
 

As far as records pertaining to unauthor ized constructions prior to January 2002 
are concerned, it is submitt ed that records prior to 20 02 are available on separate 
individual files, which are being consolidated.  The reco rds of unauthorized construction 
after that period have been consolidated at one place and are being updated regularly. 
 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06-Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24, Para No. 24) 
 
The Committee also note that during the joint survey for unauthorized 
constructions in Lutyen Bungalow Z one area conducted by  NDMC and Land & 
Development Office, only 554 out of 771 properties could be surveyed as 217 properties 
either locked or not allowed. The Committee desire that the survey of the remaining 217 
properties should also be conducted expediti ously and appropriate action taken in the 
cases of unauthorized construction noticed in this area. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NDMC is in the process of restarting su rvey of 217 properties which were found 
locked or where survey not allowed by t he owner or belongs to Foreign Missions.  
Notices for survey are being served. 
 
Out of these 217 properties, the department is in the process of  issuing notices 
to 13 properties belonging to Foreign Em bassy/Missions to survey the area for 
unauthorized constructions. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06-Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26, Para No. 26) 
 
Talkatora Indoor Stadium is given on rent for holding various functions and the 
parking space adjacent to the Indoor Stadium is also rented out for cooking and catering 
services for some of such functions. It has been pointed out in a representation 
submitted to the Committee by the residents of Park Lane that whenever the vacant 
space is let out, the leftover food and other garbage are not cleaned for days. Moreover, 
tents and fittings are erected and dismantled late in the night causing great deal of noise 
pollution and disturbance to the residents of Park Lane adjacent  to the Indoor Stadium. 
However, Ministry of Home Affairs info rmed the Committee that efforts are made to 
clear the leftover food by 10 a. m. on the following day and t he users of the Stadium are 
also being asked to clean up the parking space immediately after the functions are over. 
In view of the serious problems being fac ed by nearby residents particularly during 
nights, the measures taken by NDMC for timely cleaning up, checking noise pollution 

and disturbance to the nearby residents s eem to be inadequate. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that NDMC should use space inside the Stadium for cooking 
food etc. and not use the parking space for such purposes. They also desire that NDMC 
should frame clear-cut guidelines for users of Talkatora Indoor Stadium and ensure their 
strict compliance by the users as well as  NDMC staff. The concerned officers/staff 
should be invariably made accountable for any lapses in this regard. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
After the representations of the Resi dents of Park Lane were received, 
cooking/catering has been allowed in the side lane of the Talkatora Indoor Stadium. 
 
Cooking inside the premises is not permi tted by the Fire Department, NDMC, as 
it is a fire-hazard. Recently, Council has approved enhancement of the charges for 
booking this side lane for catering purposes , from Rs.2,000/- to Rs. 10,000/-. The 
security has also been enhanced from Rs. 5,000/ - to 10,000/-. In case  of any violations 
the security is liable to be forfeited. 
 
The staff has been given strict instruct ions for ensuring that erection and 
dismantling of tents is carried out during day time. 
 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06-Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29, Para No. 29) 
 
In view of the prestigious Commonw ealth Games 2010 to be hosted in the 
capital, there is an urgent need for all agenc ies of the Government  including NDMC to 
gear up in order to provide infrastructure on a par with international standards. In 
addition to upgradation of the Stadia, park ing areas; roads; parks; shopping centers; 
places of tourist interest; etc., are also  required to be brought up to the desired 
standards. Making NDMC area slum free and rehabilitation of the slum dwellers are also 
some of matters requiring prom pt attention of the Council.  The Committee, therefore, 
stress that NDMC should formulate an action plan for providing total face lift to the city 
falling within its jurisdiction and have it impl emented within a stipulated and rigid time-
frame. The Committee would like to be appri sed of specific steps being taken by NDMC 
in preparation for the Commonwealth Games 2010.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In view of the Commonwealth Games-2010, training needs are being identified to 
upgrade the work culture and output to meet internati onal standards. Behavioral 

capsules are also being desi gned for the officers/officials  of all categories and even 
skilled/unskilled workers are being trained for enhancing t heir knowledge and to keep 
them informed with the latest techniques and implementation thereof. 
 
Projects: 
 
(1) Stadia Projects: 
 
The concept plan for Talkatora Stadi um, a venue for boxing event has been 
submitted to Delhi Urban Arts Commission ( DUAC) for approval.  The detailed plan and 
estimates are under preparations. 
 
The concept plan for Shivaji Stadium, a venue for warm-up hockey matches, 
developed by the Architect consultant is being scrutinized.  
 
(2) Road Improvement Plan(RIP): 
 
Out of 52 roads in this project, work on 21 roads has been completed. The work 
in respect of 5 roads is in progress. 
 
(3) Redevelopment of Connaught Place: 
 
The plan of Restoration of Façade of ‘C’ block has been approved by DUAC and 
the administrative approval taken for expenditure sanction has been obtained. 
 
The tenders for restoration of Façade of  ‘C’ block has been received and the 
technical bid in under Scrutiny. 
 
4) Street Landscaping Project: 
 
The major roads taken in this project ar e (i) Mother Teressa Crescent, (ii) BKS 
Marg & Hanuman Plaza, (iii) Tees January Ma rg & Lane, (iv) Niti Marg, (v) S.P. Marg, 
(vi) Aurbindo Marg, (vii) Mandir Marg, (viii) Janpath, (ix) Dalhousie Road & (x) Church 
Road. The conceptual plan except the road s appearing at serial numbers (vii) & (viii) 
have been approved. Preliminary estimates are being prepared. In case of road at serial 
numbers (vii) & (viii), the conceptual plan is at the stage of preparation. The landscaping 
of Dalhousie road and Church road will be done departmentally. 
 
5) Restoration of N.P. Boys School: 
 
The Heritage Conservation Committee and DUAC have approved the concept 
and design of this project. Preliminary estimates has been approved by the Council. 
Notice inviting tender is being prepared. 
 
 
 

6) Restoration of Gole Market: 
 
The Heritage Conservation Committee and DUAC have approved the concept 
and design of this project. Preliminary estimates has been approved by the Council. The 
project has been divided into three segments. 
iv) Implementation of Signag es, Street furniture detailed estimates is being 
scrutinized. 
v) Rehabilitation of Buil dings & services and façade restoration. Detailed 
estimates has been prepared and is being checked by Planning Deptt. 
vi) Improvement of interior design and upgradation of shop office. Detailed 
estimates is being scrutinized     
 
7) Multilevel Parking: 
 
Three locations have been identified for th e construction of Multi Level Parking 
on public-private participation basis to ease out the problems faced by citizen in parking 
of vehicles. These sites are located at Baba Kharak Singh Marg, Kasturba Gandhi Marg 
(behind HT Bldg.) and Sarojini Nagar. M/s ID FC has been appointed as consultant for 
this project. Tenders have been received for this project and is under scrutiny. 
 
8) Construction of Public Toilets: 
 
This project is meant to improve public ut ilities in NDMC area and the work i.e. 
being executed as Build-operate- transfer basis. The first plan of the work for creating 
facility south of Rajpath is already in pr ogress and is being done by M/s Hythro Power 
Corporation Ltd. The tender for the second to  create this facility north of Rajpath is 
ready for publication phase. 
 
9) Redevelopment of Yashwant Place, Cinema Complex: 
 
This complex is being developed as a m odern leisure cum commercial center on 
public-private participation basis. The work is being done under the consultancy of M/s 
IL&FS. 
 
10) Municipal Waste Processing & Disposal facility at Okhla: 
 
NDMC has earmarked an area of land measuring about 15 acres for establishing 
facilities to process, manage and dispose Municipal Solid Waste on public-private 
participation basis at Okhla. M/s IL&FS has been appointed cons ultant for this project. 
The plant will take care of the MSW and the bi -products, such as RDF, fluff bio-gas etc. 
which will be utilized for generation of electricity and producing fly ash. 
 
11) PPP Project for the Collection and transporation of Municipal Solid Waste: 
 
The work of collection,  segregation and transporatio n of MSW and landscape 
waste (leaves, tree trimmings, branches etc.) in NDMC area fr om point of collection to 

the land fill site waste processing site  has been awarded to M/s Ramkey Energy & 
Environment Ltd. for a period of 8 years. 
 
 
 
12) NDCC Phase-II: 
 
The work of rectifications of detect s and the balance work of NDCC Phase-II 
building and the auditorium and Library building is in progress. The target date 
completion of this project is Dec. 2007. 
 
13) Janpath Market Improvement: 
 
Tenders for the improvement of façade for Janpath Ro ad berm market has been 
called and will be opened in the last week of April 07. The redevelopment plan for 
various other NDMC markets is under preparation. 
 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I 

III. Chapter V  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT 
OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee on Subordinate Legislation in their 5 th Report (Second Lok 
Sabha) had recommended that ordinarily Rules should be framed under an Act as soon 
as possible after the commencement of the Act and in no case this period should 
exceed six months. The Committee take seri ous note that though the NDMC Act came 
into force in 1994, NDMC has not framed the Rules and Regulations under it even after 
more than a decade of its commencement. Se ction 24 of the Act provides that the 
quorum necessary for transaction of business at a meeting of the Council shall be 
prescribed by the Central Government. T he word, ‘prescribed’ has been defined under 
Section 2 (34) of the Act as prescribed by rules made under this Act. The Committee 
are at a loss to understand how the Council has been regul ating its meetings without 
prescribing the quorum and how the Council continues to function under the saving 
clause of the Act, i.e. under the Rules and Bye-laws which were framed way back in the 
year 1911. The Committee feel that the de lay in framing the Ru les has defeated the 
very purpose of the Act as its provisions cannot be fully implemen ted as contemplated 
until Rules and Regulations are put in place. The Home Se cretary admitted during his 
deposition before the Committee that there has been inordinate delay in framing the 
Rules under the Act and assured the Committee that the Bye-laws shall be in place 
before the end of 2005.  The Committee trust that Rules must have been framed and 
notified by Government by now  as per the assurance giv en before the Committee. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the ac tion taken by the Government in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the New Delhi Muni cipal Council Act, 1994, rules are required to be framed 
by the Central Government on seven subjects, of which rules have been framed in 
respect of five subjects.  Details in this regard are given in the Annexure.  Position 
regarding the two sets of rules, which are yet to be framed, are as under: 
  
(i) Preparation of Scheme for distribution of electricity:  New Delhi Municipal 
Council is awaiting policy guidelines from Delhi Electricity Regulatory 
Commission in accordance with the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003. 
(ii) Manner of sealing the unauthorized constructions:  The draft rules are at the 
stage of inter-ministerial consultation.  
 

(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06-Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
Annexure 
 
Status of the rules, etc to be framed by the Central Govt. under NDMC Act 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Section Subject Present status 
1. 16 (2) Rates for attending meetings The notification regarding the 
New Delhi Municipal Council 
(Rates for attending meetings of 
the Council) Rules, 2006 was 
published on 6
th December, 
2006.  
2. 24 (1) Quorum The Central Govt. had prescribed 
quorum for the meetings of the 
Council vide notification dated 
31
st January, 1996.   
3. 195 (1) 
(b) 
Preparation of schemes for 
distribution of electricity 
New Delhi Municipal Council is 
awaiting policy guidelines from 
Delhi Electricity Regulatory 
Commission in accordance with 
the provisions of the Electricity 
Act, 2003. 
4. 250 (1) Manner of sealing the 
unauthorized construction 
Draft rules are at the stage of 
inter-ministerial consultation.  
5. 253 (2) Terms and conditions of 
service of the Presiding 
Officer of Appellate Tribunal  
6. 253 (6) Terms and conditions of 
service of the Registrar and 
other staff of Appellate 
Tribunal 
7. 254 (3), 
255 (4), 
255 (6) 
Form of appeal and rules of 
procedure of Appellate 
Tribunal. 
There is single Appellate Tribunal 
for both MCD and NDMC.  Rules 
for the Conditions of service of 
the Presiding Officer of the 
Municipal Appellate Tribunal 
were notified by the Central Govt. 
on 10
th February, 1986 and Rules 
for the Procedure to be followed 
by the Tribunal were notified by 
the Central Government on 10 th 
February, 1986 under the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee are perturbed to note the staggering amount of outstanding 
property tax which has reached Rs. 329.25 crore as in 2004- 05 from Rs. 78.28 crore in 
1994-95. The Committee further note that as on 31.3.2005, there were 88 major 
defaulters of property tax whose outstandings were above the range of Rs. 50 lakh 
each. While quantum of arrear s of outstanding property tax against these defaulters is 
stated to be Rs. 197 crore, the amount recoverable on this account works out to over 
Rs. 20 crore as per the information furnished to the Committee. The measures taken by 
NDMC for recovering the outstanding dues from def aulters, such as attachment of rent, 
moving Estimate Officer for recovery under  Public Premises Act, litigations and 
reminders have not yielded the de sired results. In many case s the recovery of property 
tax/service charges is locked up in disput e, litigation or remand. The Committee are 
also deeply concerned to note that half of the arrears for recovery pertain to hotels. The 
formula under which the hotels were being a ssessed prior to 1994 has been set aside 
by the Court and the arrear s are being reassessed as per  court order. The Chief 
Auditor, NDMC has also pointe d out in the Annual Audit Report that ther e have been 
cases of under assessment of  tax resulting in loss of revenue and undue delay in 
finalization of assessment  rateable value of property and tax thereon. The committee 
view these facts seriously and recommended that specific time-frame should be fixed 
for assessment/reassessment of tax as also re covery of arrears and concerted efforts 
should be made for an early recovery of the outstanding dues. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
New Delhi Municipal Council is  making concerted efforts for recovery of arrears 
for which notices under Se ction 100(1) of the NDMC Ac t have been issued to the 
defaulters.  Wherever required,  orders for attachment of rent are being issued under 
section 108 of the NDMC Ac t, 1994.  For settlement of re mand cases, time frame has 
been made with the prior approval of the competent authority.  The cases for settlement 
of remands are under process.  Action Plan duly approved by the Chairperson has been 
circulated for compliance and is being followed.  
 
Due to its concerted efforts, New De lhi Municipal Counc il collected arrear 
demand of Rs.34.23 crores in the year 2005-06 and Rs.25.60 cr ores in the year 2006-
07.  The Council also made efforts to rectify incorrect demand. As a result, demand was 
reduced by Rs.22.38 crores in 2005-06 and by Rs.9.76 crores  in 2006-07.  It may also 
be mentioned that a demand of over  Rs.37 Crores is blocked in  litigation in the case of 
State Trading Corporation, pending in the Supreme Court, and other linked cases.  
Similar issues are involved in a large number of other cases and the Council is not 
pressing for payment till the finalization of case in the Supreme Court.  
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 8) 
 
The Committee have been informed that it  has been decided that NDMC would 
be paid license fee by Government Department s at CPWD rates and that the license 
fee shall be increased for a period of five y ears at 20% per annum to bring it closer to 
the market rates and the position shall be revi ewed after five years. It has been pointed 
out that the Directorate of Estates itself  has not implemented the decision so far and 
NDMC is facing difficulties in recoveri ng huge outstanding of license fee from 
Government Departments. The Committee ther efore, desire that Ministry of Home 
Affairs should take up the matter at t he highest level with the Ministry of Urban 
Development so that user Depar tments are directed to comply strictly with the decision 
for payment of license fee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
While it is a fact that e ffective from 1.4.2002 increase in licence fee at 20% had 
been proposed, this has never come into effe ct.  The reason is th at the increase was 
proposed in view of the fact that the Directorate of Estates was considering de-leasing 
of the building at Lok Nayak Bhawan and entering of direct tenancy between the 
occupier departments and New Delhi Municipal Council.  If that had happened, the 
occupier departments were at liberty to enter into direct tenancy with New Delhi 
Municipal Council taking into account 20% in crease in licence fee which would remain 
static for a period of five years upto 2007.  However, this was not agreed to and it was 
decided to restore status quo, which effect ively meant that no increase was to be 
effected in licence fee and existing terms and conditions would continue.  New Delhi 
Municipal Council was also informed about this decision by the Directorate of Estates 
 
Thus, since the revision of licence fee at 20% per annum for a period of five 
years has not been implemented as  such, 20% increase per an num in rent is not to be 
given.  However, periodica l increase in rent has been gr anted to New Delhi Municipal 
Council upto 07.11.2003 and further increas e is under active consideration of 
Directorate of Estates. 
 
In respect of Akbar Bhawan, Ministry of External Affairs increased the licence fee 
by 20% from 1.4.2002 till 31 st March, 2004 and thereafter, t hey are paying the licence 
fee at 8% annual increase.  The Income Tax Department and Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner, occupying Mayur Bhawan, hav e not increased the licence fee by 20% 
from 1.4.2002. 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 13) 
 
NDMC generates about 275 metric t ones of garbage per day which is 
transported to MCD landfill sites incurring an expense of Rs. 2 crores per annum. The 
Committee have been informed that even the M CD landfill sites are going to be filled up 
very soon and NDMC does not have any scientific states of the art landfill. The 
Committee, however, note with satisfaction that  taking clue from a suggestion made by 
them during the briefing, NDMC is presently working on a new project to set up state-of-
art compost plant with the facility for segreg ation of all types of waste and a Refuse 
Derived Fuel (RDF) Plant with private sector  participation and the plant is excepted to 
be set up in a year. The Committee trust that  NDMC would pursue this project earnestly 
and make all out efforts to set up the plan t within the time fram e worked out for this 
purpose. They except to be apprised of the progress made by NDMC in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
New Delhi Municipal Council is  in process of setting up state of the art compost 
plant with the facility of segregation of all types of waste by outsourcing through IL & FS.  
Tripartite agreement is pr oposed among NDMC, MCD and IL & FS. As per this 
arrangement, garbage is segregated and part of  this is recycled.  Organic part is 
converted into fuel at the RD Plant.  Muni cipal Corporation of Delhi has signed the 
concerned agreement.  New Delhi Municipal Council is about to sign it.  
The work of collection, s egregation and transportation of  Municipal solid wastes 
from the collection point to the land fill/treatment facility site has been awarded to M/s 
Ramkey Energy & Environment Ltd. 
 
 
(Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.16015/4/06- Delhi-II  
dated 9th May, 07) 
 
 
 
 
    
NEW DELHI;                C. KUPPUSAMI, 
August 20  , 2007                        Chairman, 
Sravana 29 ,1929(S)                                           Committee on Estimates. 
 

 
 
MINUTES OF SIXTH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
   (2007-08) 
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 16th August, 2007 from 1500 hours to 
1600 hours.  
  
    
  Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  -  Chairman 
  
Members 
 
 
2.  Shri Lal  Muni Choubey 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri P. Karunakaran 
5. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
6. Shri D. Narbula 
7. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi 
8. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
9.  Shri Lakshman Singh 
10. Kunwar Manvendra Singh 
  11. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
 
 
 Secretariat  
 
 
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C.V. Gadgil   - Director (I) 
3. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 

-2- 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman on his behalf and on behalf of the Committee placed 
on record their profound sorrow on the sad demise of Shri Ajit Singh, Chairman of 
NAFED and also a sitting Member of Parliament.  
 
3. The Committee consi dered and adopted the following draft Reports with some 
modifications  as given in Annexures I and II:- 
 
(i) Report on action taken by the Governm ent on the recommendations contained in 
the Eleventh Report of the Estimates Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on the Ministry 
of Home Affairs – ‘New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC)’ ; and 
 
(ii) **    **   **    ** 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of 
modifications and also to make verbal and  other consequential c hanges, if any, arising 
out of factual verification by the concerne d Ministries and present the same to the 
House.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned.  

              Annexure  I 
 
Modification made by the Estimates Committee in the Draft Report on action 
taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report 
of the Estimates Committee (14 th Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Home Affairs  – 
‘New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC)’ 
 
Para No.  Page No. Line   Modification 
 
   1.4   1  Last     After : some of the recommendations. 
Line   
Add : The Committee note that  NDMC area  
comprises the territory that has been 
described as Lutyen’s Delhi which 
includes Rashtrapati Bhawan, 
Parliament House, Supreme Court, 
Diplomatic missions, residences of 
Ministers, Members of  Parliament etc., 
and after noting the scope for 
improvement in the working of NDMC, 
the Committee had given some 
recommendations in its 11th Report (14th 
Lok Sabha). The Committee express 
their serious displeasure on finding 
action taken replies furnished by the 
Ministry to be evasive and not indicative 
of earnestness on the part of the 
Ministry. The Committee strongly 
condemn casual approach of the 
Ministry and are of the view that Ministry 
should not adopt such  callous approach 
and should be extra vig ilant and earnest 
in taking action on recommendations of 
the Committee.  
 
    1.10    5  4 th  Delete : without any  further delay.  
 
Read : within six months.  
  
 

APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction to Report) 
 
Analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eleventh Report of the Estimates Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
     (i)       Total number of recommendations/observations    29 
 
(ii) Recommendations/obs ervation which have been  
accepted by the Government  
Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 7, 9, 12, 14, 16 to 19, 21, 22, 25, 27 and 28  15  
          
Percentage        51.72% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply  
S l .  N o .  1 5          1  
            
Percentage        3.45% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/obser vations in respect of  
which Government’s replies have not been accepted  
by the Committee 
Sl. Nos.  2, 6, 10, 11, 20, 23, 24, 26 and 29    9 
 
Percentage        31.04% 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which  
Final replies of Government are still awaited.  
 
      Sl. Nos. 3, 5, 8 and 13       4 
  
              Percentage          13.79% 
 
 
 