     E.C. NO. 1437
   EIGHTEENTH REPORT
 ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
            (2008-09)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES FOR WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
     Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.10.2008
         LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
          NEW DELHI
   October 20, 2008/ Asvina 28, 1930(S)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

          CONTENTS
   Page
Composition of the Committee on Estimates     (iv)
Introduction          (v)
Chapter I   INTRODUCTORY       1-15
Ø Introduction       1
Ø National Policy       2
Ø PWD Act 1995       4
Ø National Trust for welfare of persons with Autism,
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple
Disability Act, 1999       6
Ø Supported Guardianship Scheme    10
Ø Samarth Scheme      11
Chapter II FINANCE 16-27
Ø Budget        16
Ø Grant-in-Aid       18
Ø Tapering of grant-in-aid     26
Chapter III PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES    28-63
Ø National Institutes      28
Ø Composite Rehabilitation Centres     30
Ø District Disability Rehabilitation Centre   31
Ø National Handicapped Finance and Development
Corporation (NHFDC)      33
Ø Assistance to Disabled Persons (ADIP) Scheme   38
Ø Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS) 42
Ø Head Count        44
Ø Procedure for informing NGOs    45
Ø Salary Structure       46
Ø National Scholarships to persons with disabilities
Scheme 48
Ø Chief Commission for Persons with Disabilities  49
Ø Insurance Scheme      52
Ø Incentive to Employees in the private sector   53
Ø Job Reservation       57
Ø General awareness      60
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Chapter IV   REHABILITATION COUNCIL OF INDIA   64-73
Ø Number of Institutions       65
Ø Monitoring        69
Ø Full time Chairman       70
Ø Zonal Coordination Committees    72
Chapter V MISCELLANEOUS       74-80
Ø Women with disabilities     74
Ø Vocational Training      75
Ø Unemployment Allowance     76
Ø Disability Pension      77
Ø Disability Certificate       77
Ø Issuance of National Identity Card    80
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS              81-125
ANNEXURES            126-136
I. Statement indicating Budget Estimates and Expenditure
under Plan for the last five years            126
II. Statement indicating Budget Estimates and Expenditure
under Non-Plan for the last five years                     128
     III.       List of the Sanctioned DDRCs           129
IV. Statement showing the position regarding number of
vacancies reserved and number of appointments of
Persons with Disabilities made during
2004 in various Ministries/Departments of
Government of India                        133
V. State/UT-Wise details of Disability Pension being granted
to persons with disabilities                       136
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDICES           137-151
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held   137
  on 03.07.2007
 II.  Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held   139
on 23.07.2007
III. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held   142
on 09.10.2007
IV. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held   144
on 20.06.2008 (1130 hrs.)
V. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held   146
on 20.06.2008 (1440 hrs.)
VI. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held  149
 on 08.09.2008
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMPOSITION
       COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2008-2009)
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, Chairman
Members
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale
3. Shri R. Dhanuskodi Athithan
4. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
5. Shri Lal Muni Choubey
6. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
7 Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
8. Shri Anant Gudhe
9. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
10. Shri P. Karunakaran
11. Shri Vijoy Krishna
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
14. Shri Zora Singh Mann
15. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
16. Shri G. Nizamuddin
17. Shri Prabodh Panda
18. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel
19. Shri D. Vittal Rao
20. Dr. R. Senthil
21. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi
22. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
24. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
25. Shri Lakshman Singh
26. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
27. Shri Jagdish Tytler
28. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
29. Shri K. Virupakshappa
30. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary
 2. Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary
 3. Shri V.S. Negi  - Director
 4. Smt. Manju Chaudhary - Deputy Secretary II
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been
authorised by the Committee to present the report on their behalf,
present this Eighteenth Report on the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment ± µProgrammes and schemes for welfare of persons
with disabilities¶.
2. The subject µProgrammes and schemes for welfare of persons
with disabilities ¶ was selected for detailed examination by the
Estimates Committee (2007-08) and the Committee took oral
evidence of representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment and Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI) on 3 rd July,
23rd July and 9th October, 2007.  The Estimates Committee (2008-09)
took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment and RCI on 20 th June, 2008.  They also heard the
views/suggestions of the NGOs viz. (i) Handicapped Welfare
Federation, (ii) National Federation of the Blinds and (iii) All India
Federation of the Deaf on the same day. The Committee wish to
express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment, Rehabilitation Council of India and NGOs for
appearing before them  and for furnishing information desired in
connection with examination of the subject. The Committee also
appreciate the frankness with which the officers/representatives of
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, RCI and NGOs
shared their views, perceptions and constraints with the Committee.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3. The Committee would also like to express their gratitude to the
Estimates Committee 2007-08 for the able guidance and right
direction provided by them in obtaining information for indepth and
comprehensive study of the subject.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 8th September, 2008.
5. The Report consists of six chapters. The Committee have inter-
alia made the following important observations/recommendations :-
(i) Noticing the unawareness about the implementation of
National Policy for disabled persons, the Committee have
made recommendation to device mechanism to effectively
associate Panchayti Raj institutions, local bodies and involve
MPs/MLAs in the process of implementation of the policy
and work relating to evaluation of its implementation should
be assigned to an autonomous body having expertise in the
field.
(ii) Taking note that disabilities like thallassaemia, flurosis,
cochlear implant, etc. have not been recognized so far under
Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry should examine all such
disabilities and explore possibility to give recognition to these
disabilities in the Persons with Disabilities Act.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(iii) Finding a wide variation in budget allocation and actual
expenditure made by the Ministry, the Committee expressing
their deep concern on the under-utilisation of funds have
recommended to ensure effective planning, implementation
and monitoring to make optimum use of allocation received.
(iv) With a view to give representation to disabled persons in a
multi-disciplinary grant-in-aid Committee for supporting
voluntary organisations of the State Government/UT
Administration, the Committee recommend that efforts
should be made to ensure the representation of disabled
persons or their Associations in the Committee.
(v) To ensure the quality of assistive devices provided to
persons with disabilities, the Ministry should appoint some
agency which may be authorized to give them certification
like, BIS, to market these products for the safe use of the
beneficiaries.
(vi) Emphasising the need to have a full-time Chairman in
Rehabilitation Council of India to guide about its activities
and maintain close liaison with the Ministries and for
interacting with State Governments, Vice Chancellor of the
Universities and rehabilitation professionals inside and
outside the country, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry should take concerteous steps to appoint a full time
Chairperson in Rehabilitation Council of India.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(vii) There is a great need to simplify the present complicated
procedure of issuing medical certificate to persons with
disabilities. The Ministry should review the procedure
thoroughly and amend accordingly.
(viii) Various travel concessions are provided to persons with
disabilities. For availing these concessions different pass are
issued to persons with disabilities. To overcome the problem
of keeping so many passes for availing travel concessions,
the Committee recommend that the Ministry should issue
National Identity Card containing all the particulars of
individuals to persons with disabilities which should be valid
for availing all travel concessions.
6.     For facility of reference, the recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the
Report.
NEW DELHI;
October 15 , 2008
Asvina 29, 1930(S)
(C. KUPPUSAMI)
                               Chairman
    Committee on Estimates.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER I
Introductory
Introduction
1.1 The Constitution of India ensures equality, freedom, justice and
dignity of all individuals and implicitly mandates an inclusive society
for all, including persons with disabilities. In the recent years, there
have been vast and positive changes in the perception of the society
towards persons with disabilities. It has been realized that a majority
of persons with disabilities can lead a better quality of life if they have
equal opportunities and effective access to rehabilitation measures.
1.2 According to the Census 2001, there are 2.19 crore persons
with disabilities in India who constitute 2.13 percent of the total
population. This include persons with visual, hearing, speech,
locomotor and mental disabilities. Seventy five percent of persons
with disabilities live in rural areas, 49 percent of disabled population is
literate and only 34 percent are employed.
1.3 The Government of India has enacted three legislations for
persons with disabilities viz.
(i) Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995, which provides for
education, employment, creation of barrier free environment,
social security, etc.
(ii) National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral
Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disability Act, 1999
has provisions for legal guardianship of the four categories
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and creation of enabling environment for as much
independent living as possible.
(iii) Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992 deals with the
development of manpower for providing rehabilitation
services.
National Policy
1.4 National Policy for Persons with Disabilities has been
announced in February, 2006. The National Policy recognizes that
persons with disabilities are valuable human resource for the country
and seeks to create an environment that provides them equal
opportunities, protection of their rights and full participation in society.
The focus of the policy is on (a) prevention of disabilities and (b)
rehabilitation measures.
1.5 The salient features of the National Policy are :-
(i) Physical Rehabilitation, which includes early detection and
intervention, counselling and medical interventions and
provision of aids and appliances. It also includes the
development of rehabilitation professionals.
(ii) Educational Rehabilitation including vocational training and
(iii) Economic Rehabilitation for a dignified life in society.
1.6    The Policy specifically focuses on issues concerning women
and children with disabilities. Various Ministries/Departments in
Central Government and the State Governments and UT
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Administrations are implementing the policy, which is continuous
process.
1.7 On being asked about the measures which have been
taken/proposed to be taken to involve Panchayati Raj Institution in
the process of implementing National Policy for Disabled Persons,
2006, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written
reply furnished to the Committee stated that the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj as also Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
have requested State/UTs to ensure that disability related issues
came up for discussion and implementation in Gram Sabha and the
Standing Committee relating to health, hygiene and sanitation of
Intermediate Panchayats (IPs) and Zilla Parishads (ZPs) etc.
Panchayati Raj Institutions are also involved in the functioning of
District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs).
1.8 The Committee enquired about the procedure adopted by the
Ministry to monitor the proper implementation of the policy by various
agencies, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their
written reply furnished to the Committee stated that Central
Coordination Committee (CCC) and Central Executive Committee
(CEC), which monitor the progress of implementation of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 1995 also monitor the implementation of National
Policy.
1.9 When the Committee asked what is the mechanism of
evaluation of National Policy for persons with disabilities, the
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment during oral
evidence stated as under:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³Evaluation is probably best done by a body which can do it
objectively. If it were to be done in house there would always be
a kind of feeling that this was not done objectively. So, in
general the policy is that any implementing agency should not
get evaluation done by its own subordinate or adjunct agency. It
is either, the Programme Evaluation Organisation of the
Planning Commission which is outside the Ministry or it is a
reputed institution of social science or other technical reputed
institutions. Evaluation function is normally assigned to an
outside agency.´
1.10 When asked whether any evaluation has been made regarding
implementation of National Policy, the Ministry in their written reply
stated that such evaluation study has not been made so far.
The Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995
1.11 On being asked about the details of the Persons with
Disabilities (Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation)
Act, 1995, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their
written reply furnished to the Committee stated that to give effect to
the Proclamation on the Full Participation and Equality of the People
with Disabilities in the Asian and Pacific Region, the Government of
India enacted ³The Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995´.
1.12 ³Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995 ´ is applicable to seven
disabilities, which are (i) blindness (ii) low vision (iii) leprosy-cured (iv)
hearing impairment (v) loco motor disability (vi) mental retardation
and (vii) mental illness. The Act is very comprehensive and all
encompassing. It provides for both preventive and promotional
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

aspects of rehabilitation like education, employment and vocational
training, job reservation, research and manpower development,
creation of barrier-free environment, rehabilitation for persons with
disability, unemployment allowance for the disabled and
establishment of homes for persons with severe disability, etc.
1.13 For implementation of the provisions of the Act, a multi-sectoral
collaborative approach, involving all the Appropriate Governments i.e.
Ministries of the Central Government, the State Governments/Union
Territories, Central/State undertakings, local authorities and other
appropriate authorities, is being followed.
1.14 The Act also provides for Chief Commissioner for Persons with
Disabilities (CCD) and Commissioner in each State/UT with quasi-
judicial powers for redressal of grievances and protection of rights to
persons with disabilities and monitoring utilization of funds allocated
for their benefit.
1.15 The Committee asked whether any change has been felt
necessary by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in the
Persons with Disabilities (Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that steps have already been initiated for amendment to the Persons
with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995. National consultation with stakeholders was
undertaken and four meetings had been held in northern, southern,
eastern and western regions of the country. The suggestions
received from the stakeholders are being examined for amending the
Persons with Disabilities Act.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral
Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999
1.16 When asked about the main objectives of National Trust for
Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation
and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that the main objectives of National trust are to enable and empower
persons with disabilities to live as independently and as fully as
possible, to extend support to registered organisations providing need
based services, and to evolve procedure for appointment of legal
guardians for persons with disabilities requiring such protection.
1.17 The National Trust Act covers autism, cerebral palsy, mental
retardation or a combination of any two or more of such conditions
and includes a person suffering from severe multiple disability.
1.18 The Government of India has provided Rs.100 crore towards
the corpus of the Trust. The income generated from the corpus is
utilized to implement its programmes.
1.19 In this regard, a representative from Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment during oral evidence also stated as follows :-
³«« we have a National Trust for persons suffering from
autism, cerebral palsy and multiple disabilities. This Trust is
functioning on the basis of a corpus.´
1.20 He further stated as follows :-
³The trust have a Rs.100 crore corpus fund given by the
Government some years back. They are not dependent upon
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

us for budgetary support every year because it is a Trust and
they operate in a fairly autonomous manner, working for
persons suffering with these disabilities.´
1.21 About the functions of National Trust, Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee
stated that National Trust for the Welfare of persons with Autism,
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities functions
with the help of NGOs. It has registered more than 731 such
organisations to take up its programmes. Major activities undertaken
are :-
(a) Constitution of Local Level Committees (LLCs) to screen,
appoint and monitor legal guardian and create awareness of
the activities of the Trust. So far, 588 LLCs have been
constituted
(b) The Trust is providing training to community based
caregivers so that persons with disabilities may live
independently and as fully as possible
(c) The programmes of Trust are implemented through State
Nodal Agencies Centres (SNACs) which include
dissemination of information and training of parents and
professionals. 22 SNACs are operational.
(d) Supported Guardianship Scheme is being implemented in 36
districts to encourage relatives, friends and institutions to
accept legal guardianship of destitutes and abandoned
disabled persons. Under this scheme Rs.500/- per month
per beneficiaries is provided for 10 beneficiaries per district.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The amount is utilized to meet basic needs of food, shelter,
medical and rehabilitation.
(e) It is implementing a Scheme called SAMARTH to provide
residential services both for short term and long term. 105
such projects have been sanctioned. These projects also
take up activities like early intervention, special education or
integrated schools, open schools, vocational training,
recreation/sports, etc.
1.22 The Committee asked how much income is generated and
spent through corpus by the National Trust for Welfare of Persons
with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple
Disability, during the last 7 years, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished the following
statement:-
(In lakhs of Rupees)
Sl. No.  Year Income Generated  Utilisation
1. 2001-02 551.98 396.31
2. 2002-03 1289.83 (Includes the
income of previous year
received this year)
505.69
3. 2003-04 1032.11 607.31
4. 2004-05 887.94 620.39
5. 2005-06 895.17 375.86
6. 2006-07 991.24 442.22
7. 2007-08 971.52 (Till Feb, 08) 651.90 Till Jan., 08
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

1.23 On enquiring about the reasons for lower utilization of funds in
comparison to the income generated through corpus of the National
Trust for welfare of persons with autism, cerebral palsy, mental
retardation and multiple disabilities, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that since the field of developmental disabilities (Autism, Cerebral
Palsy, Mental Retardation & Multiple Disabilities) is evolving and
many organizations are very new, they are not fulfilling the funding
norms.  286 districts are having no NGOs working in this area.
However, over the years, the norms are being liberalized and many
steps are being taken to encourage the activities in unserved districts.
In the current year, many new schemes have been launched.  With
strengthening of delivery system through SNAC/SNAP (State Nodal
Agency Centre/State Nodal Agency Partner) and capacity building of
NGOs registered with the National Trust; it is expected that funds will
be adequately utilized and there will be more demand for fund to
expand the coverage of various schemes which are being run on a
pilot basis only.
1.24 The Committee enquired about the steps being taken by
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to form NGOs in these
286 districts the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their
written reply furnished to the Committee stated that the position has
improved with 45 new Local Level Committees of the National Trust
(LLCs) having been constituted with the registered NGOs in the
concerned districts. Further, LLCs have been constituted in 173 more
districts with the help of NGOs in the neighboring districts. In 68
districts, no suitable NGOs could be identified and therefore it was
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

decided that the LLCs will be formed with Persons with Disabilities as
members. Such LLCs have been formed in 64 districts. Thus, LLCs
now cover 590 districts. The process for formation of the LLCs in the
remaining districts is in progress.
Supported Guardianship Scheme
1.25 The Committee asked about the aim and objective of
Supported Guardianship Scheme, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that since Legal Guardianship is a major objective of the National
Trust, and is seen as a means of securing the future of disabled
persons, this vacuum needs to be addressed. Therefore, a guardian
who is willing and is approved by the Local Level Committee (LLC)
may be supported with limited financial support for the up keep of the
disabled person. The scheme of Supported Guardianship will provide
encouragement to those relatives/friends who are willing but unable
(financially) to look after their disabled wards.
1.26 The main objective of the scheme is to provide financial
security to severely disabled persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy,
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities who are destitute and/or
abandoned by supporting the cost of guardianship for the above
mentioned group within their own communities.
1.27 To a question, whether Government is considering to
implement Supported Guardianship in all the parts of the country and
increasing the amount provided under this scheme, the Ministry of
Social Justice in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that as also supported by an evaluation study, the Guardianship
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Scheme can have significant impact over a large area in the country if
the present coverage of the Scheme is enlarged. But to have a
sizeable target population of at least 1 lakh, even at the present
honorarium level the fund required will be 60 crores per annum.
Therefore, the issue, particularly the financial implication and
providing for logistic support, would need to be subjected to
examination in proper perspective.
1.28 Keeping in view the limited availability of funds, at present, up
to 10 beneficiaries per District are being covered under the Scheme,
which can be increased if funds for the purpose goes up in future.  An
NGO in its memorandum submitted to the Committee have stated
that the National Trust Act is totally a pro rich Act. the Act talks about
the Guardianship Scheme, but it does not give any security to a child
from poor families.
Samarth Scheme
1.29 The Committee further asked about the aims, objectives and
features of the Samarth Scheme, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished the following details :-
Aims & Objectives of the schemes are :-
1. To provide permanent care for abandoned and destitute
persons with disabilities
2. To provide support and protection to persons whose family
support is gradually diminishing
3. To provide services to persons with disability whose family
members are willing to pay for good quality services
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4. To provide services to young persons with disability who need
to stay in group homes and independent living situations
5. To provide services to senior citizens with disability
6. To create opportunities for family members to get respite time
in order to fulfill other responsibilities
7. To support Registered Organisations and Local Level
Committees in the development of a range of service delivery
systems which respond more closely to the needs of disabled
8. To provide rehabilitation and relief to persons with disability
whose family are unable or unwilling to support them any longer
Important features of this centre based scheme are :-
• This scheme will cover only Residential Care Projects for both
Short Term Respite Care and Prolonged Stay
• There will be a ceiling for the number of projects for each State
based on size and population; geographical spread within the
State will also be considered
• The scheme is based on a tapering off of grants. The pattern of
funding will be :-
1st year - 100% of the recurring expenditure.
2nd year - 100% of the recurring expenditure
3rd year - 90% of the recurring expenditure
4th year - 75% of the recurring expenditure
5th year - 60% of the recurring expenditure
6th year  - 45% of the recurring expenditure
7th year - 30% of the recurring expenditure
8th year  - 15% of the recurring expenditure
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

9th year - Grants-in-aid shall be stopped from 9 th year.
• The building owned or hired (250 sq.mts.) should be clean,
spacious, well lighted and ventilated to facilitate comfortable
stay and learning by the trainees/beneficiaries
• The entire building, including toilets should  be barrier-free and
accessible for persons with disabilities
• The amount of assistance on account of rent will be regulated
within the above ceiling keeping in view the parameters
associated with it, the area occupied and used for the project,
the number of beneficiaries, the prevailing PWD assessment
rates in that area and the rent agreement
• Individual Programme Plans and Individual files are to be
maintained for each Resident and their progress regularly
monitored and documented
• Under the head of contingency, expenses such as postage,
transport, telephone, stationery, medicines, office expenses,
electricity, water charges, equipment maintenance only related
to the project etc. would be covered
• The Beneficiaries¶ should :-
(a) Belong to the four disability groups of Autism, Cerebral
Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities
(b)  Selection will be on a first come first served basis
(c)  30% should be from BPL families
(d)  There should be a 40:60 ratio of girls and boys
(e) There will be prefunding, infunding and post funding
inspections.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

• Projects will be MENTORED (facilitated) by the State Nodal
Agency Centres (SNACs) of that State, or the neighboring
State as authorized by the  National Trust
• There will be an Evaluation of the Centre Based Scheme
after 3 years and if there is a negative report about any
centre, the grant-in-aid will be terminated
• Out of the total of 30 beneficiaries for which sanction is
given, all Centres should keep a ratio of 80:20 between Long
term and Short term Residents (Prolonged stay 80% and
Respite Short term stay 20%)
• Therefore, for the 6 seats under Respite Care, a minimum
number of beneficiaries for the whole year should be 50
persons on a rotating basis
• A range of Rehabilitation services should be provided for by
the Centre including Special Education, Therapies, Pre
Vocational and Vocational Training, Recreation, Sports and
Cultural activities etc.
• The National Trust is funding food component of 30% of the
residents, who are from BPL families/destitutes/orphans at
Rs.600/- per month per resident at 100% for the first two
years and thereafter it will be tapered off
• The Accounts of Project holders will be audited by CAG
approved auditors/National Trust authorized auditors
• Under Non-Recurring heads, items to be purchased would
required sanction of the National Trust PRIOR TO
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

PURCHASE by the NGO. A list of items, with prices and
names of shops (actual quotations) should be submitted
along with the Project proposal
• The National Trust will sanction items both under Non-
Recurring and Recurring items at the discretion of the Grants
Sub-Committee (GSC) whose decision shall be binding and
final.
1.30 An NGO in its memorandum submitted to the Committee stated
that Samarth Scheme in this Act gives residential facility to 35
children, out of which only nine seats are for the BPL, whereas the
rest are all paid seats. This scheme deprive a child of his family and
community and is totally against its objective.
1.31 On being asked whether Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment would suggest any specific change in National Trust
for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999, the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the
Committee stated that a sub-committee, headed by Chairperson,
National Trust and including the stakeholders and Experts is already
considering the matter. In its meeting held on 16.1.2008, the sub-
committee have come to the conclusion that there was no conflict
between the objectives of the National Trust Act and the UN
Convention of Rights for the Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD)
except there is a shift in thinking in the concept of legal guardianship.
The concept of legal capacity has been introduced in the UNCRPD.
There has also been a suggestion that mentally ill persons may also
be included under the National Trust Act.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

     CHAPTER-II
             FINANCE
Budget
2.1 Statement giving the budget estimate and expenditure under
plan and non-plan from the year 2002-03 to 2006-07 is as under :-
Rs. in crore
Year   Plan
BE Exp.
2002-03 229.50 193.27
2003-04 219.50 168.87
2004-05 250.60 177.15
2005-06 250.60 195.72
2006-07 243.00 183.06
2007-08 221.00 191.00
Total 1414.2 1109.07
(Scheme wise statement is annexed – Annexure I and II).
2.2 As regards, low plan expenditure, the Ministry have stated that
the main reasons for lower plan expenditure vis-à-vis outlay were
budgetary cuts and late receipt of recommendations from State
Government on grants-in-aid proposals.
2.3 The Committee asked about the monitoring mechanism to
check the utilization of funds and the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that the monitoring of utilization of funds in case of the NIs/PSUs is
ensured through Executive Councils/Board of Directors, which meet
quarterly to review their functioning as also utilization of funds.  The
performance and utilization of funds in case of NGOs is monitored
through:-
(a) Audited financial statements
(b) Annual Reports/Half Yearly Progress Reports
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(c) Regular inspection by State Government District Welfare
Officers
2.4 The Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment on the issue of monitoring the schemes stated
as follows :-
³In June, 2007 the Central Government has constituted a
Group of Ministers under the Chairpersonship of the hon.
Home Minister to specifically go into issues of disability
and to monitor all schemes/programmes/
activities/legislative measures, etc. concerning the
disability sector. The other Members of the Group ± apart
from our own Minister ± are Minister of Urban
Development, Minister of Finance, Minister of Law and
Justice, Minister of Rural Development, Minister of
Communication and Information Technology, Minister of
Health and Family Welfare, Minister of State for Women
and Child Development, Minister of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation and Minister of State for Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions. It has held five
meetings so far, and it has reviewed a range of issues.´
2.5 The Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment further stated as follows :-
³A number of Ministries have made their presentations
before the Group of Ministers. For example, our own
Ministry on the overview, the Ministry of Human Resource
Development has on inclusive education; Ministries
concerned with transport in regard to accessible transport
system; Ministries concerned with construction in regard
to barrier-free physical environment and so on and so
forth. The first set of recommendations of this Group has
been finalized and is likely to be submitted to the hon.
Prime Minister in the near future.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Grant-in-aid
2.6 The Committee asked about the procedure to release the grant-
in-aid to NGOs, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in
their written reply furnished to the Committee stated that proposals
for grant-in-aid under the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme
(DDRS) are required to be sent by NGOs to the concerned State
Government/UT Administrations in the prescribed application form,
along with project details, Annual Reports, and other documents such
as audited accounts, utilization certificate for the previous year (in the
case of continuing grants), etc.  Proposals from various NGOs are
examined by a multi disciplinary grant-in-aid committee of the State
Government/UT Administration , along with inspection reports of the
State Government.  The recommendations of the Committee are
forwarded by the State Government/UT Administration to the Ministry
of Social Justice & Empowerment.  The recommendations from the
State Governments/UT Administrations are to be sent in a
consolidated manner, after duly considering the need to correct the
regional imbalance.  Inspections can be carried out by any agency
other than the State Government/UT Administration that may be
designated by the Ministry.  Recommended proposals are considered
by the Ministry on the basis of the model projects and detailed norms
laid down in the scheme and the past performance of the
organization.  Grant-in-aid can be provided to a maximum of 90% of
the admissible grant as per the norms, while 10% is expected to be
borne by the organization.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2.7 The Committee enquired about the number of NGOs and
grants sanctioned and released during the year 2004-05, 2005-06,
2006-07 and 2007-08 (till March 2008), the Ministry of Social Justice
& Empowerment in their written reply furnished the following
statement to the Committee:
Year  No. of proposals of
NGOs received
No. of NGOs
sanctioned
grant
Grants
sanctioned
(Rs. in
crore)
Grant
released (Rs.
in crore)
2004-05 Not maintained 688 67.31 67.31
2005-06 Not maintained 741 66.8 66.8
2006-07 Not maintained 687 54.51 54.51
2007-08
(as on
27.3.2008)
1229 (of 2007-08) 688 (of 2007-
          08)
628 (pending
cases of 2005-06
and 2006-07)
70.86 69.65
2.8 Regarding pendency of utilization certificate, the Ministry in a
reply stated that the grant in aid for a financial year is being released
only after receipt of the utilization certificate for the previous year.
Therefore, no utilization certificates remain pending now.
2.9 When asked about Utilisation Certificate a representative of the
Ministry during oral evidence stated as follows :-
³«.That is endeavour that we are trying that is we get good
quality proposals and also get utilization certificate. This was
one issue which was creating problem. We were not getting the
utilization certificates in time.´
2.10 About the time consuming procedure of releasing grant-in-aid,
an NGO in their memorandum submitted to the Committee stated that
not only the funds are inadequate, the application processing has
long procedures.  The application is first submitted at the State
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Government which then forwards it to Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment.  The State Government first conducts the inspection
and then sends report to the central Ministry.  The inspection takes
place after a long gap of application submission.  Consequently the
disbursement of first installment of the grant reach to the NGO at the
end of the financial year and the second installment comes in the
next financial year.  The NGO needs to have a cushioning amount to
meet its expenditures as the funding comes late.
2.11 Another NGO, in the memorandum submitted to the Committee
stated that the system of grant-in-aid to the organization that runs a
school be simplified.  Presently, the papers are first handled at the
district level, then forwarded to the State level and then sanctioned at
the central level.  This complicated procedure with several channels
within the channel leads to a delayed release of aid which at times
takes almost a year.  In order to simplify the procedure after the
inspection at the time of the release of the first grant, all subsequent
grant-in-aid should be released to the district and further release to
the organization should be subject to satisfaction reports form the
District Magistrate for the release of such grants.  This would largely
simplify the release of grants-in-aid making such institutions viable in
running the schools.
2.12 When the Committee asked whether Ministry have any
proposal under consideration to simplify the procedure, the Ministry of
Social Justice & Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the
Committee stated that the Ministry has streamlined the procedure for
examination of proposals for grant-in-aid to voluntary organizations to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

reduce the delay in various stages of processing.  Under the new
procedure, which became effective in 2007-08, the last date for
submission of proposals by voluntary organisation to State
Governments/UT Administrations for 2007-08 was fixed by the
Ministry as 30 th June, 2007.  As a result an adequate number of
proposals became available early in the financial year, instead of
being received late in the year and in a piecemeal manner.  Under
the new procedure, State Governments/UT Administrations were
constituted Multidisciplinary Grant-in-Aid Committees to examine
proposals and make recommendations.  Consolidated lists of
recommended proposals, in order of priority, were forwarded by the
State Governments to the Ministry, adequate time was available for
processing cases in the States/UTs and in the Ministry and
documents were wanting in fewer cases as compared to earlier
years.  This has led to a marked improvement in the efficiency of the
system, utilization of available funds and timely release of grant-in-aid
in 2007-08.
2.13 On enquiring about constitution of multi-disciplinary Committee,
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply
furnished to the Committee stated that as per the instructions issued
by this Ministry on 21.3.2007, multi-disciplinary grants-in-committees
for supporting voluntary organisations are to be constituted by the
concerned State Government/Union Territory Administration, with the
suggested composition as below:
i) Principal Secretary/Secretary of the State  Chairperson
 Department looking after the welfare of
 SC/OBC/Social Defence/Disabilities
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

ii) Two other Secretaries from the State Government  Member
 considering their relevance for the subject
iii) Three experts/reputed NGOs from the State/  Member
 UT to be nominated by the Chairperson
iv) Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary/Director  Member-Secretary
 Welfare/Social Welfare of the State Government
2.14 In States where the welfare of SC/OBC/Persons with
Disabilities and subjects relating to Social Defence are dealt with the
different Departments, separate Committees may be constituted.
2.15 The Committee further enquired whether the Committee has
the representation of disabled persons or their Association, the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply
furnished to the Committee stated that the suggested composition of
the Committees includes three experts/reputed NGOs from the
State/UT to be nominated by the Chairperson. While there is no
stipulation by this Ministry to ensure representation of disabled
persons or their associations in the Committees, the State
Governments/UT Administrations can include experts who are
disabled persons or reputed NGOs in the disability sector that may be
associations of persons with disabilities.
2.16 In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment during oral evidence also stated as follows :-
³In regard to persons with disability at the State level grant-in-
aid Committees, it is true that there is no express provision for
doing that but it is possible to give them representation. There
are three slots for experts and representatives of NGOs and
State Governments can associate persons with disabilities
under that category.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2.17 The Committee asked whether any time frame has been fixed
for the disposal of applications and release of the grant, the Ministry
of Social Justice & Empowerment in their written reply furnished to
the Committee stated that no time frame has been fixed for the
disposal of applications and release of the grant, since the time taken
for processing up to the stage of actual release of grant varies from
case to case.  The time taken varies as it depends upon completion
of the requisite documents by the organization and suitable response
to queries that may be raised by the Ministry.
2.18 The Committee asked about the main reason for delay in
sanctioning and releasing the grants, the Ministry of Social Justice &
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that the main reasons for delay in sanctioning and release of grant-in-
aid under the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme are as
below:
(i) Delay in submission of applications by the organizations
to the State-Governments.
(ii) Delay by State Governments in forwarding the
applications with requisite recommendations to the
Ministry.
(iii) Delay in completion of procedural formalities and
submission of wanted documents by the organization.
(iv) Constraints due to the increasing number of proposals for
grant-in-aid and non-availability of matching staff in the
Ministry.
2.19 On being asked about the total sanctioned strength and actual
strength the Ministry stated that the total sanctioned strength of staff
is 9, including 2 posts of Section Officer and 7 posts of
Assistant/UDC/LDC. The actual strength at present is 9, including 2
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Section Officers and 7 Assitants/UDCs/LDCs. Thus, the sections
dealing with the DDR Scheme proposals have been provided the
sanctioned staff recently.
2.20 The Committee asked about the steps taken to procure
matching staff to deal the increasing number of proposals for grant-in-
aid, the Secretary, Social Justice and Empowerment during oral
evidence stated as follows:-
³On inadequacy of staff, it has been taken up at a higher level
and I have just joined about two and a half months back. I
propose to take it up with my counterpart in the Department of
Personnel and Training to give us our full strength of staff so
that there would not be any vacancies.´
2.21 The Committee wanted to know about the steps being taken to
ensure timely release of grant-in-aid and strengthen the present
scheme of grant-in-aid to NGOs for persons with disabilities for
ensuring quality programmes, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that there is a need to further strengthen the inspection and
monitoring system so that proposals are received in time from the
State Governments/UT administrations. It is also necessary to deploy
adequate number of persons in the Ministry to process the cases in
time.
2.22 On enquiring about the procedure adopted for
inspections/monitoring of the NGOs alongwith channels involved in
the procedure, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment in their
written reply furnished to the Committee stated that each proposal for
grant under the DDRS scheme is considered in the Ministry on the
basis of recommendations of the State Governments.  The State
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Governments send recommendations only after carrying out
inspections and consideration of the proposals by a Multidisciplinary
Grant-in-aid (GIA) Committee.  Inspections can also be carried out by
an agency designated by the Committee.
2.23 To a  query, whether the persons engaged for the work of
inspection/monitoring are specialized in the field, the Ministry of
Social Justice & Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the
Committee stated that inspections reports are prepared by the
inspecting team in a standardized and comprehensive format
prescribed by the Ministry, which includes relevant details about the
project, past performance, staff and beneficiary details, maintenance
of records by the organization and specific remarks of the inspecting
team on the feasibility of funding the project.  The inspecting team
includes officials with experience in the administration of
welfare/rehabilitation schemes and accounts personnel wherever
required.  Special inspections by technical experts in the relevant field
of disability are also carried out, wherever found necessary.
Monitoring of implementation of the projects and utilization of grants
is also done through examination of various documents submitted by
the NGOs along with the application for grant, such as the Annual
Reports, audited statement of accounts and utilization certificates.
Independent evaluation of implementation of the projects under the
scheme is also taken up by the Ministry through reputed agencies,
which includes detailed inspections.
2.24 The Committee asked if an NGO can forward their proposal to
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment directly to avoid
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

delay in grant, the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment during oral evidence stated as under:-
³First of all, on the delay in routing the proposals of NGOs
through the State Governments, I would submit that there are
alternatives and an NGO, if it so wishes, can also route its
proposals through one of our seven National Institutes of
Disability. So, it is not 100 per cent mandatory that only the
recommendation of the State Government is required and there
is a certain amount of flexibility there.´
Tapering off grant-in-aid
2.25 The Ministry in their written reply have informed the Committee
that to encourage gradual self-reliance of NGOs, tapering of grant
has commenced in 2007-08 in projects already funded for 7 years in
urban areas.  Tapering is by 5% every alternate year, so as to reduce
the level of funding to 75%.
2.26 About reducing donations, a representative from an NGO
during non-official evidence stated as follows :-
³The quantum of donations and public funds is also on the
decrease. They have their problems. They expect something in
return which perhaps through the NGOs they are not able to
get. So, they are investing less and donating less.´
2.27 In regard to tapering off the grants, another representative from
NGO during non-official evidence stated as follows :-
³One of the decisions taken in respect of this scheme ±
Deendayal Upadhyaya Scheme ± is that for the NGOs, after
certain years of running the programme with the grant-in-aid
under this Scheme, the grants-in-aid will be phased out in a
proportional manner and they will have ultimately to become
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

self-sufficient. The Committee Members would appreciate that
the public donations are also drying up. Therefore, there are no
other means. It is because, we are charitable organisations and
we cannot venture into commercial ventures. Therefore, this
decision of the Government will ultimately result into
disappearance of the programmes in the NGO sector of which
the ultimate effect would be that the educational programmes,
the training programmes will also disappear and the legislative
mandate of equality and full participation will be frustrated.´
2.28 On being asked about the reason for tapering off the grant, the
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during oral
evidence stated as follows :-
³On the issue of tapering of Government grant, this is being
done very selectively as was also mentioned by one of the hon.
Members. It is confined only to the NGOs which are working in
the urban areas. There is only 5 percent reduction in alternate
year and the ultimate tapering is only to the level of 75 per cent.
So, it is not really a drastic tapering. The intention was that over
a period of time NGOs should be able to do these activities with
somewhat lesser dependence on the Government although to
the extent of 75 per cent, the Government ¶s commitment
always stands at the very least.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER III
Programmes and Schemes
3.1 The Committee asked about the various programmes and
schemes implemented for the welfare of persons with disabilities, the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply
furnished the following details to the Committee about their
programmes and schemes:-
(i) National Institutes
3.2 For the welfare of persons with disabilities, the Government
have developed an extensive infrastructure. The following seven
national Institutes, specialized in various disabilities are working for (i)
development of rehabilitation manpower for providing specialized
services to persons with disabilities; (ii) research & development of
and (iii) development of models for delivery of services :-
• Institute for the Physically Handicapped, New Delhi
• National Institute of Visually Handicapped, Dehradun
• National Institute for Orthopaedically Handicapped, Kolkata
• National Institute for Mentally Handicapped, Secunderabad
• National Institute for Hearing Handicapped, Mumbai
• National Institute of Rehabilitation Training & Research, Cuttack
• National Institute for Empowerment of Persons with Multiple
Disabilities, Chennai.
3.3 The National Institutes are knowledge centres and the expertise
developed by them is utilized through Composite Rehabilitation
Centres (CRCs) & District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

to cater to the needs of the persons with disabilities. These Institutes
have regional centres also.
3.4 In this regard, a representative from Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment stated as follows :-
³We have seven National Institutes for persons with disability all
around the country. More or less, these are disability-wise
institutes. There is one for hearing handicapped at Mumbai;
one for visually handicapped at Dehradun; and there is one for
mentally handicapped at Secunderabad. For persons with
orthopaedic disabilities, we have three institutes, that is, at
Delhi, Kolkata and one at Ulatpur near Cuttack, and we have
one for multiple disabilities near Chennai. Many of these
institutions have started new courses at Masters, Bachelors,
and Ph.D level in the recent past.´
3.5 There are also several National Institutions under the Ministry
of Health & Family Welfare, which are working in the field of medical
treatment and rehabilitation of persons with disabilities. These are :
• National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences,
Bangalore;
• All India Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation,
Mumbai;
• All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore;
• Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi, etc.
3.6 The Committee desired to know whether the National Institutes
are sufficiently well equipped to serve the persons with disabilities,
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply
furnished to the Committee stated that upgradation of National
Institutes is a continuous process. However, these Institutes are
adequately equipped to run a wide range of courses for manpower
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

development and training in disability sector. They are also providing
rehabilitation services through outreach activities. To meet the
evolving needs in the sector and in keeping with international best
practices, several new courses have been introduced in the last few
years.
(ii) Composite Rehabilitation Centres
3.7 Due to lack of adequate facilities for rehabilitation of persons
with disabilities, the Ministry of Social Justice and empowerment has
set up five Composite Regional Centres for persons with disabilities
at Srinagar, Sundernagar (Himachal Pradesh), Lucknow, Bhopal and
Guwahati to provide both preventive and promotional aspects of
rehabilitation like education, health, employment and vocational
training, research and manpower development, rehabilitation for
persons with disabilities etc. Basic objective of setting up CRCs is to
create the infrastructure required for training and manpower
development, research and development and providing services to
persons with disabilities, particularly in those parts of the country
where such infrastructure is lacking at present. These Centres are
providing composite and comprehensive facilities for rehabilitation of
persons with disabilities of all categories, training and organizing
awareness programmes in the field of rehabilitation at regional levels.
All the CRCs are functional. These Centres are being provided with
assistance to  build their own buildings, which will have all disabled
friendly features and barrier free access. The CRCs also conduct
various training programmes for professionals. Comprehensive
rehabilitation services including aids and appliances are being
provided to the persons with disabilities.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.8 These Centres have been working as extended arms of
National Institutes, in each of the disabilities and provide services to
persons with all types of disabilities at one place.
3.9 To a question, whether Government have felt need to set up
more CRCs in other regions also, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that there is a need to establish one CRC in each state.
(iii) District Disability Rehabilitation Centres
3.10 On being asked about the functions of District Disability
Rehabilitation Centres, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that District Disability Rehabilitation Centre (DDRC) Scheme basically
seeks to provide comprehensive services to the persons with
disabilities at the grass root level through creation of infrastructure
and capacity building at district level for awareness generation,
rehabilitation, training/guiding of grassroots level functionaries. Under
the scheme, rehabilitative support to persons with disabilities is
provided through :-
• Survey and identification of persons with disabilities through
camp approach;
• Awareness generation for encouraging and enhancing
prevention of disabilities, early detection and intervention, etc.
• Early Intervention;
• Assessment of need of assistive devices, provision/fitment of
assistive devices, follow up/repair of assistive devices
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

• Therapeutic services e.g. Physiotherapy, Occupational
Therapy, Speech Therapy, etc.;
• Facilitation of disability certificate, bus passes and other
concession/facilities for persons with disabilities;
• Referral and arrangement of surgical correction through
Government and Charitable institutes;
• Arrangement of loans for self employment, through banks and
other financial institutions;
• Counselling of disabled, their parents and family members;
• Promotion of barrier free environment;
• To provide supportive and complimentary services to promote
education, vocational training and employment for persons with
disabilities through: -
(i) Providing orientation training to teachers, community and
families
(ii) Providing training to persons with disabilities for early
motivation and early stimulation for education, vocational
training and employment
(iii) Identifying suitable vocations for persons with disabilities,
keeping in view local resources and designing and
providing vocational training and identifying suitable jobs,
so as to make them economically independent
(iv) Provide referral services for existing educational, training,
vocational institutions.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.11 In this regard, Secretary Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment during oral evidence stated as follows :-
³The DDRCs are supposed to be the centres at the district
level, which will give these persons counseling for various kinds
of problems of the disabled and also undertake the
rehabilitation. We also have to integrate them with our
programmes. This is an incentive which has been taken very
recently. We are quite aware that in an ideal scenario, there
should be a district disability rehabilitation centre, at least one in
each district. We are quite aware of this fact. But then, initially
the policy and thinking was that to begin with let us have it in
those districts where there is no major NGO or no such
agencies working for the disabled. So, 199 such centres have
been sanctioned and I think 128 are operational.´
3.12 On being asked whether 128 DDRCs are sufficient to meet the
needs of the disabled person in the country, the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the
Committee stated that the Government have already sanctioned 199
DDRCs, a list of which is at Annexure III . As soon as all these
DDRCs become functional, the Government would consider
sanctioning more DDRCs in the unserved districts of the country.
National Handicapped Finance and Development Corporation
(NHFDC)
3.13 On being asked about the objectives of setting up National
Handicapped Finance and Development Corporation, Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to
the Committee stated that the National Handicapped Finance and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Development Corporation was established in 1997 with the following
main objectives :
a) To promote economic development activities and self-
employment ventures for the benefit of persons with
disabilities;
b) To extend loan to persons with disabilities for upgradation
of their entrepreneurial skill for proper and efficient
management of self-employment ventures;
c) To extend loans to persons with disabilities for pursuing
professional/technical education leading to vocational
rehabilitation/self-employment; and
d) To assist self-employed individual with disabilities in
marketing their finished goods.
Loans at concessional rates are provided to persons with
disabilities for setting up enterprises, education, etc.
3.14 In this regard, a representative from Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment during oral evidence stated as follows :-
³We have the National Handicapped Finance and Development
Corporation. Its headquarters is in Faridabad. That Corporation
works for the economic empowerment of persons with
disabilities. Basically they give loans for economic activities,
income-generating activities.´
3.15 The Committee enquired about the eligibility criteria of
sanctioning loan to a person with disabilities for setting up enterprise,
pursuing education, etc., the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that NHFDC provides financial assistance for wide range of income
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

generating activities to persons with disabilities. Brief details of the
schemes of NHFDC are as under :-
1) For setting up small business in Service/Trading
sector : Loan up to Rs.1.0 lakh for sales/trading activity
and Rs.3.00 lakh for service sector activity. The small
business, project or activity, for which financial assistance
has been sought will have to be operated by the disabled
person himself and/or employing at least 15% disabled
persons in his venture.
2) For purchase of vehicle for commercial hiring : Loan
upto Rs.5.00 lakh. Purchase of vehicle including auto
rikshaw for commercial hiring purpose.
3) For setting up small industrial unit :  Loan upto Rs.5.00
lakh. Loan assistance is provided to disabled persons for
manufacturing, fabrication and production. The disabled
persons will be the owner/chief executive of the company
and will employ at least 15% disabled persons.
4) For Agricultural activities :  Loan upto Rs.5.00 lakh.
Loan assistance is provided to disabled persons for
agricultural production, irrigation, horticulture, sericulture,
purchase of agricultural machinery/equipment for
agricultural services, marketing of agricultural products,
etc.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5) For self-employment amongst persons with mental
retardation, cerebral palsy and autism :  Loan upto
Rs.3.00 lakh. In such cases, the financial assistance is
extended through parents or spouse or legal guardian of
the dependant mentally disabled person.
6) Loan for Professional/Educational/Training courses :
Loan upto Rs.7.50 lakh for studies in India and upto
Rs.15.0 lakh for studies abroad.
7) Financial Assistance for Skills and Entrepreneurial
Development
8) Micro Credit Scheme by State Channelising Agencies
implemented through NGOs. Loan upto Rs.5.00 lakh for
each NGO and Rs.25000/- for each beneficiary.
9) Parents ¶ Association of mentally retarded persons. Loan
upto Rs. 5.00 lakh.
Rate of Interest :
i) Upto Rs.50,000/-    - 5% p.a.
ii) Above Rs.50,000/- and   - 6% p.a.
upto Rs.5.0 lakh
 iii) Above Rs.5.0 lakh   - 8% p.a.
  (loan for education/training)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Repayment :
General scheme    - maximum 10 years
 Education scheme   - 7 years
 Micro Credit Scheme   - 36 months
Rebate : A rebate of 1% p.a. on interest for disabled women.
Procedure for Obtaining Loan :
Applications on prescribed format to be submitted through the
State Channelising Agency. Projects can also be submitted through
the branches of Punjab & Sind Bank or Oriental Bank of Commerce
who have entered into a collaborative arrangements with NHFDC for
implementation of the schemes of NHFDC. Projects upto Rs.1.50
lakh are sanctioned by State Channelising Agency/Bank and
applications for loan more than Rs.1.50 lakh are sanctioned by
NHFDC.
3.16 The Committee asked about the status of pendency of
applications for receiving the loan, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that during 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07, 3282 beneficiaries, 4765
beneficiaries and 4563 beneficiaries respectively have availed loans
from NHFDC. As on 10 th July, 2007, 865 applications are pending for
availing loan.
3.17 About disbursal by NHFDC, the Secretary Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment during oral evidence stated as under:-
³In   regard   to   self - employment,  the National Handicapped
Finance & Development Corporation provides loan to persons
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

with disabilities. They have disbursed about  Rs.172 crore in
the last four years to about 35,000 persons with disabilities. The
NHFDC works through State channelising agencies and there
are 44 of them around the country.´
3.18 Stressing on revising the limit of loan, a representative from an
NGO during non-official evidence stated as under:-
³For working people I would suggest the Handicapped Finance
Corporation should provide loans. For those who can afford and
those who are working, they should provide loan at differential
rates of interest to procure transport for them. NHFDC is
basically to provide loans at subsidized rates for the working
people. The limits for these were decided more than a decade
before. Those limits should be revised because of the
inflationary pressure. If they are providing Rs.1 lakh for a
particular purpose then it should be increased accordingly as
the cost of procuring capital and the working capital has gone
up.´
Assistance to Disabled Persons (ADIP) Scheme
3.19 On asking about the procedure of acquiring assistive devices
from the Government, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that the persons with disabilities can get the assistive devices from
the Government under the Scheme of Assistance to Disabled
Persons for purchase/fitting of aids/appliances (ADIP Scheme).
Under the Scheme, grants-in-aid is sanctioned to the NGOs/National
Institutes/ALIMCO/DDRCs to distribute modern assistive devices to
the needy persons with disabilities.
3.20 The main objective of the scheme is to assist the needy
physically handicapped persons with durable, modern and standard
aids and appliances, which can promote their physical, social and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

psychological rehabilitation. To expand its coverage, the scheme has
been revised w.e.f. 01.04.2005. Apart from revision in income
eligibility, many new products have been brought under the purview
of the scheme, which include motorized tricycle for persons with
locomotor disabilities, software for persons with visual disabilities
using computers etc. Further, it has also been provided that at least
25% of the beneficiaries should be women.
3.21 Under the revised scheme, the aids appliances costing up to
Rs.6000/- are given to the disabled person free of cost whose
monthly income is up to Rs.6,500/- and 50% of the cost to those
having an income between Rs.6501/- and Rs.10,000/- per month.
Under the Scheme medical and surgical correction and intervention,
which is essential prior to fitment of aids and appliances is also
included.
3.22 About this scheme, the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment during oral evidence stated as follows :-
³«..one is the Assistive Devices to persons with disabilities.
Under this programme, we organize camps in various parts of
the country and we provide them certain aids like tricycles, etc.
either free of cost or at subsidized prices by holding such
camps.
Basically these are to the poorer sections of the society. Under
this scheme Rs.67.62 crore  have been released for the year
2006-07. This scheme is implemented primarily through the
NGOs. To some extent we are trying to involve the DDRCs also
in this process. They are also taking it up. This serves also as
an important channel for communication of various
programmes for the disabled.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.23 During 10 th Five Year Plan details of allocation,
expenditure & coverage under the scheme are given below:-
Rs. in Crore
Year Budget Allocation Amount Released No. of NGOs
Assisted
2002-03 55.00 57.00 139
2003-04 57.00 55.00 152
2004-05 60.00 63.19 147
2005-06 67.00 57.91 139
2006-07 71.20 49.39 64
(upto Dec. 2006)
3.24 Elaborating the ADIP Scheme, the Secretary, Social Justice
and Empowerment during oral evidence stated as under;-
³We have a large scheme of providing concessional assistive
devices to persons with disabilities free or at concessional
rates. In the last four years, a total of 11  lakh beneficiaries have
been provided assistive devices. This scheme is almost entirely
implemented through non-government organisations. It has
also been revised with effect from April, 2005 and provisions
regarding eligibility have been made more liberal. We also hold
special camps under the scheme to assess persons with
disability and to provide them with assistive devices. In the
North-Eastern Region, 387 such special camps were held, and
23 in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.´
3.25 In this regard, an NGO in their memorandum submitted to the
Committee stated that the aids provided are of low cost and not up to
the mark under ADIP Scheme. Persons having income between
Rs.6501/- to Rs.10000/- per month have to pay 50% of the total cost
of the aid. In a country like our, where the number of family member
is 6 to 8, it is very difficult to pay even this amount.
3.26 About the quality of assistive device provided under ADIP
Scheme, a representative from an NGO during non-official evidence
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

stated as under :-
³The mobility aids, like the wheel chairs, which are available in
the market are of sub-standard quality.´
3.27 Suggesting remedial steps to improve the quality of these
assitive devices, representative further stated as under ;-
³At the moment we do not have any agency which monitors the
quality. We need to strengthen the standardization and if
possible some agencies appointed. It should authorize them
and give them labels, like the ISI, to market these products.
Even as small a thing as crutch, which people use is of sub-
standard quality. So many accidents have occurred and people
have broken their bones because of this.´
3.28 To a question as to why the Government does not provide
improved equipment under this scheme, like battery operated and
some other things, the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment during oral evidence stated as follows :-
³««.That is because our scheme does not substitute the open
market system, open market things which are available
throughout the country either from Government sources or
through the non-governmental sources. These are already
there. Our scheme is a special intervention basically keeping in
view the needs of the poorest persons where we give them this
equipment, these aids either totally free or at subsidized costs.
Therefore, when the scheme has been evolved there is a limit
prescribed. So, we include those equipment and those
appliances which are within that financial limits.´
3.29 The Committee wanted to know whether the Ministry have
received any complaint about the supply of sub-standard assistive
device under ADIP Scheme from any NGO/individual, the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the Committee stated that no specific written complaints have been
received. However, there have been oral complaints during meeting
with Implementing Agencies of Schemes of Assistance to Disabled
Persons for Purchase/Fitting of Aids/Appliances (ADIP) Scheme.
Chairman & Managing Director, Artificial Limbs Manufacturing
Corporation of India (ALIMCO) has assured that he would take
immediate remedial action in respect of each such complaint
including instant replacement of defective/poor quality of assistive
device.
Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS)
3.30 About Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS), the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply
furnished to the Committee stated that the Deendayal Disabled
Rehabilitation Scheme is being implemented since 1999 with the
objective of ensuring effective implementation of the Persons with
Disabilities Act, 1995, by creating an enabling environment and
encouraging non-governmental organisations through financial
assistance for undertaking projects for the welfare of the disabled in
different disciplines, including the areas of education, training and
rehabilitative services.
3.31 The scheme provides support to Non-Government
Organisations in delivering various rehabilitation services to persons
with disabilities. The activities supported under the scheme include
special schools for children with orthopedic, speech, hearing, visual
and mentally disabilities, vocational training centres to provide basic
skills to person with disabilities so that they may live as independently
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

as possible, community based rehabilitation programme, half-way
homes for psycho-social rehabilitation of treated and controlled
mentally ill persons, community based rehabilitation programme, pre-
school and early intervention programmes, manpower development
programmes, support for setting up Braille presses and placement
services, etc. District Disability Rehabilitation Centres set up by the
Ministry are also funded under this scheme after they have  been run
for a period of five years in respect of such centres set up in Jammu
& Kashmir or North East and three years in the rest of the country
and handed over to a prominent NGO in the District for its further
continuance and maintenance.
3.32 About this scheme, the Secretary Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment during oral evidence stated as follows :-
³««which we are implementing is DDRS, the Deen Dayal
Rehabilitation Scheme. This scheme we are implementing
through the NGOs. Under this they have special programmes
for rehabilitation of the persons with disabilities, like they have
special schools, vocational training centres, pre-school
interventions, half way homes, etc. For this purpose the Ministry
provides them support by way of grants. For the year 2006-07,
we had provided Rs.54.51 crore for this.´
3.33 On being asked about the number of homes set up for the
disabled person and number of inmates, the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee
stated that eleven halfway homes for psychosocial rehabilitation of
treated and controlled mentally ill persons are being run by the NGOs
with the financial support under Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation
Scheme of the Ministry. The objective of these homes is to provide
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

vocational training, counseling to them and their families to facilitate
reintegration with the family/society and medical advice/treatment to
take care of occasional psychiatric disturbances. Nearly 450 persons
are getting benefits in these homes.
3.34 About funding patterns of these homes, the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment further stated that eligible NGOs running
half way homes/hostels for a group of 25 inmates are eligible to get a
maximum recurring grant of Rs.7.33 lakhs and non-recurring grant of
Rs.2.78 lakhs under the scheme. The recurring part of the grant
covers honorarium to staff and doctors/specialists and expenditure on
other items like rent, maintenance, contingencies, medicines and
non-recurring grant covers the equipment for vocational training,
furniture and kitchen equipments etc. The Government provides
support to the maximum of 90% of the admissible grant and rest 10%
is to be met by the NGO.
Head Count
3.35 To a question, whether the grants are released on the basis of
beneficiaries or head count on the day of inspection, the Ministry of
Social Justice & Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the
Committee stated that the number of beneficiaries to be considered
for grant-in-aid to a voluntary organisation in a particular year is
calculated keeping in view various factors such as the number of
beneficiaries found present on the day of inspection, the number of
beneficiaries covered in the grant for the previous financial year and
the prescribed ceiling of 15% increase in number of beneficiaries over
the previous year.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.36 The Committee desired to know whether the Ministry have ever
received any request from the NGOs to change the procedure, the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply
furnished to the Committee stated that there is no general demand
from NGOs to change this procedure. There have been requests from
NGOs in a few cases in the past but sufficient cause has not been
found to amend the procedure in this regard.
Procedure of Informing the NGOs
3.37 The Committee asked about the procedure being adopted by
Ministry to intimate NGOs regarding the status of their application
submitted for grant-in-aid by them, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that regular correspondence is made with the organization in
connection with processing of the applications for grant-in-aid
submitted by them.  The organisations are also contacted over
telephone to expedite submission of wanting documents.  Further,
any organization that contacts the Ministry over telephone or in
person are provided the information sought.  In the case of new
proposals for grant-in-aid, the minutes of the Screening Committee
constituted by the Ministry are made available on the Ministry ¶s
website so that the organisations become aware whether their
proposal is recommended.  If the proposal is not recommended, the
reasons for not recommending the proposal can also be seen on the
website.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.38 In this regard, an NGO in their memorandum submitted to the
Committee stated that many of the NGO ¶s carry out the programmes
as desired with the support of the Government through various
grants.  Many a times we were put into difficulties due to the
inordinate delay in releasing the grants.  We are also at dark to know
the extent of the grant or release.
Salary Structure
3.39 The Committee asked about the pay scales given to teachers
working in these schools/institutions for the disabled are at par with
the teachers of general schools, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that the pay scales given to teachers/professionals working in
schools/institution for the disabled are not at par with the teachers in
general schools, RCI is advocating equivalence of terms and
conditions of service between teachers qualified with Diploma/Degree
in General Education and Diploma/Degree in Special Education. The
Ministry is also pursuing the matter with Ministry of Human Resource
Development, which as per National Policy for Persons with
Disabilities, is the nodal Ministry to coordinate all matters relating to
the education of persons with disabilities.
3.40 On being asked whether any study has ever been conducted to
know the reasons for staff leaving in NGOs at regular intervals for
higher salary, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their
written reply furnished to the Committee stated that the Ministry does
not determine the salary structure of staff working in NGOs. Under
the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme honorarium for
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

qualified teachers is provided to NGOs as per scheme norms. An
evaluation study of the scheme was assigned to the Tata Institute of
Social Sciences, Mumbai by the Ministry in 2004. One of the
recommendations in the evaluation study report is that, in order to
attract and retain quality staff, it is necessary to reconsider the
honorarium currently offered. The Committee further asked about the
honoraria given to special educators at present, the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the
Committee stated that there is a proposal to revise the cost norms of
the scheme, including honoraria, which is to be considered by the
Expenditure Finance Committee. The present level of honoraria for
special educators varies from Rs.2800 to Rs.6000 per month,
depending upon the qualifications and experience.
3.41 The Committee desired to know whether the Expenditure
Finance Committee have considered the proposal to revise the cost
norms of the scheme including honorarium, the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the
Committee stated that the proposal to revise the cost  norms of the
Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme including the honorarium
has been considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee in its
meeting held on 12.5.2008, and will now be placed before the
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.
3.42 In this regard, an NGO in their memorandum submitted to the
Committee stated that there is a great disparity in the rate of
honorarium for teachers in special school and those who are working
in the Government sponsored schools, while both are giving same
quantum of services. Naturally there is a dearth of good teachers in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

special schools for educating the children with special needs.
Moreover, there is no scope of retirement and other benefits for the
teacher under these schemes. We think that Government should look
into it to minimize the differences as far as possible.
3.43 Another NGO in this regard has also stated that disparity in
salary structure of staff working in NGOs with other field of work is the
cause for staff leaving at regular intervals for higher remuneration. It
should be at par with other professionals and teachers to retain good
quality staff. (eg. HRD salary structure is much higher than the
MSJE).
National Scholarships to persons with disabilities scheme
3.44 In regard to scholarships, the Secretary Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment during oral evidence stated as follows :-
³About the scholarships, we have really not been able to do
much about it. But then we have a small scheme under which
some scholarships are given to the disabled students to pursue
their higher professional courses.´
3.45 When asked about the details of schemes for national
scholarship of person with disabilities, the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee
stated that scholarships for persons with disabilities are provided from
the interest earned from investments made from National Disability
Fund in various public sector banks. Students with 40% or more
disability whose monthly family income does not exceed Rs.15,000/-
are eligible for scholarship. A scholarship of Rs.700/- per month to
day scholars and Rs.1,000/- per month to hostellers is provided to the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

students pursuing Graduate and Post  Graduate level technical or
professional courses. Rs.400/- per month to day scholars and
Rs.700/- per month to hostellers is provided for pursuing diploma and
certificate level professional courses. In addition to the scholarship,
the students are reimbursed the course fee subject to a ceiling of
Rs.10,000/- per year.
3.46 So far 1443 scholarships have been awarded and 447
scholarships have been continued. The year-wise details are given
below :-
Year Scholarships awarded Scholarships continued
2002-03 175 ---
2003-04 289 93
2004-05 505 131
2005-06 474 176
2006-07 --- 47
Total 1443 447
Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities
3.47 On asking about the steps being taken by the Government to
safeguard the rights and facilities of the persons with disabilities, the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply
furnished to the Committee stated that Chief Commissioner/State
Commissioners for Persons with Disabilities are mandated to take
steps to safeguard the rights and facilities to the persons with
disabilities. Based on the complaints filed before the Chief
Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities (CCD)/State
Commissioners, if the provisions Act, any rules, bye-laws,
regulations, executive orders or instructions are violated or are not
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

implemented, CCD/State Commissioners take up the matter with the
concerned authorities. The Act also empowers the Chief
Commissioner/State Commissioners to issue suo-moto notice of any
such non-compliance. CCD is required to coordinate the work of the
Commissioners. CCD/State Commissioners have the same powers
as are vested in the Civil Court for certain purposes.
3.48 Under Section 58 of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995 the
CCD has been assigned the following functions :-
(a) coordinate the work of the Commissioners;
(b) monitor the utilization of funds disbursed by the Central
Government;
(c) take steps to safeguard the rights and facilities made
available to persons with disabilities;
(d) submit reports to the  Central Government on the
implementation of the Act at such intervals as the
Government may prescribe.
3.49 Section 59 of the Act provides that the CCD may of his own
motion or on the application of any aggrieved person or otherwise
look into complaints with respect to matters relating to :-
(a) deprivation of rights of persons with disabilities;
(b) non-implementation of laws, rules, bye-laws, regulations,
executive orders, guidelines or instructions made or issued
by the appropriate Governments and the local authorities for
the welfare and protection of rights or persons with
disabilities, and take up the matter with the appropriate
authorities.
3.50 About the powers vested to Chief Commissioner for Persons
with Disabilities, the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment during oral evidence stated as follows:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³We have an Ombudsman under the PWD Act at the National-
level as well as an Ombudsman at every State-level. At the
National-level he is called the Chief Commissioner for Persons
with Disabilities (CCPD), and at the State-level he is called the
Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities. Like our various
National Commissions such as for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes, Minorities, Women, etc., the Chief
Commissioners and the State Commissioners have powers of a
Civil Court to examine complaints and to investigate them.´
3.51 The Committee asked whether the rights of Chief
Commissioner/State Commissioner are sufficient in regard to
redressing the grievances and safeguarding the rights of persons with
disabilities, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their
written reply furnished to the Committee stated that the Chief
Commissioner and (State) Commissioners have certain powers of a
Civil Court under Section 63 of the PWD Act. These are similar to the
powers vested in the National Commission for SC, ST, Minorities,
Women etc., and seem adequate.
3.52 About the insufficient power of CCD, a representative from an
NGO during non-official evidence stated as follows :-
³The Chief Commissioner for Disability is an institution which
has been created under the Act for the redressal of the
grievances but this institution has not been equipped with the
powers to ensure implementation of the directions issued by the
Chief Commissioner or at the State level, State Commissioners
for persons with disabilities. Moreover, in many States, the
State Commissioners for persons with disabilities are not
separately appointed but it is the Secretary of the concerned
department that is Social Welfare or Social Justice or
Empowerment, as the case may be, in respective States. They
are entrusted with the additional job of Commissioner for
persons with disabilities. This is a clear violation of the
accepted legal principle that implementer cannot judge the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

enforcement part also. Therefore, I also recommend that while
undertaking the exercise of amendment, all these areas also
need to be reconsidered.´
Insurance Scheme
3.53 To a question about the insurance schemes meant for persons
with disabilities, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in
their written reply furnished to the Committee stated that the persons
with disabilities, who are gainfully employed, are provided insurance
coverage under the normal insurance schemes of the LIC (may be
with certain restrictions and extra premium).  However, the persons
with disabilities, not employed/not employable could be covered
under Jeevan Adhar and Jeevan Vishwas Schemes.   The National
Trust has also formulated a Health Insurance Scheme (Niramaya) for
the persons with four types of disabilities covered under the trust.
The scheme is to be launched in the following 10 selected districts of
the country in the first phase-
S.No.  State/UT  District
1 Bihar Kaimpur
2 Chandigarh Chandigarh
3 Delhi Central Delhi
4 Gujarat Ahmedabad
5 Kerala Ernakulam
6 Madya Pradesh Jabalpur
7 Tamilnadu Erode
8 Tripura Agartala
9 Uttar Pradesh Rae Bareily
10 Uttrakhand Bageshwar
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The objectives of the scheme are:
Ø To provide affordable Health Insurance to person with Autism,
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation & Multiple Disabilities
Ø To encourage health services seeking behaviour among
persons with disability
Ø To improve the general health condition & quality of life of
person with disability
The Scheme envisages to deliver µCommunity based ¶ cover, which
will:
Ø Have a single premium across age band
Ø Provide same coverage irrespective of the type of disability
Ø Insurance cover upto 1.0 lakh Rs. and
Ø All persons with disabilities will be eligible and included and
there will be no µselection¶
3.54 Stressing to introduce a cashless health-insurance scheme, a
representative from NGO during non-official evidence stated as
follows :-
³We wish that if cashless health insurance scheme is
introduced for the physically challenged people, it would be
good. It is because the Government hospitals are not able to
cope with the pressure. If it is provided it would help us a lot.´
Incentive to Employees in the private sector
3.55 The Committee asked about the steps taken to encourage the
private sector to employ persons with disabilities, the Secretary,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during oral evidence
stated as under :-
³Section 41 of the Act provides that there should be incentives
given to the employers in public and private sector so that they
are able to employ persons with disabilities amounting to at
least five percent of the work force. In 2007 budget speech, the
Hon. Finance Minister had announced a special scheme to
provide incentive. It has been said that the employers ¶ share of
contributions for EPF and ESI will be borne by the Government
of India for three years. This was the announcement made by
the Hon. Finance Minister in his budget speech of 2007. The
Ministry of Social Justice and the Ministry of Labour and
Employment are jointly developing this scheme.´
3.56 Further in a answer to a starred question no. 203 dated
13.3.2008, the Ministry has furnished following statement about the
scheme µIncentive to employers in the private sector:-
(i) Total outlay  : Rs. 1800 crore for the 11 th Five Year Plan
(ii) Sector covered : Private Sector
(iii) Jobs to be created : 1 Lakh per annum
(iv) Salary limit  : Employees with disabilities, with monthly wage
up to Rs. 25,000/- per month, working in the
private sector would be covered.
(v) Incentives  : Payment by Government of the employer ¶s
contribution to the Employees Provident Fund
and Employees State Insurance for the first
three years. The administrative charges of
1.1% of the wages of the employees covered
under the Employees Provident Fund &
Miscellaneous Provisions (EPF & MP) Act will
continue to be paid by the employer.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Conditions:-
A. The scheme will be applicable to the employees with
disabilities:-
(i) Covered under the Persons with Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act,
1995 and the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism,
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities
Act, 1999.
(ii) In the private sector all over India on enrolment of the
employees in Employees Provident Fund (EPF) and the
Employees State Insurance (ESI), under the Employees
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and
Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 respectively.  In the State
of Jammu and Kashmir, the employees would be registered in
EPF under the J&K Employee Provident Fund and
Miscellaneous Provision Act, 1961.
(iii) Appointed on or after 1.4.2008
B. The employers would submit a copy of the disability certificate,
issued to the disabled employee by the Competent Authority
under the Persons with Disabiliteis (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 and the
Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Rules, 1996, first time when such
benefit under EPF and ESI is claimed.
C. The Government will directly provide employer ¶s contribution for
the schemes covered under the Employees Provident Fund &
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and the Employees State
Insurance Act, 1948.  This will be done in respect of employees
for a maximum period of three years. The administrative
charges of 1.1% of the wages of the employees covered under
the EPF Act will continue to be paid by the respective
employers.
3.57 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment would make
available to the Employees Provident Fund Organisation and
Employees State Insurance Corporation lumpsum funds by way of
advance.  These would be used for the purposes of adjustment of
individual claims received from the employers under the scheme.
The amount with the organisations would be replenished periodically.
Initially both the organisations would be provided Rs. 5 crore each
and considering the requirement, the amount would be subsequently
enhanced.  The advance amount would be subject to quarterly review
by the high level committee to be set up.
3.58 The Committee enquired as to how Government propose to
keep vigil on private sector to ensure the proper implementation of
the scheme as there are irregularities in employee contribution
towards ESI, EPF, etc., the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that the Ministry of Labour & Employment is in the process of
finalizing the changes in EPF and ESI scheme/Rules.  To monitor the
implementation of the scheme, a high level Committee Co-chaired by
the Ministries of Labour & Employment and Social Justice &
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Empowerment would be constituted.  The composition of the
Committee will be as follows:
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment ±
Chiarman
(b) Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment ±
Co-Chairman
(c) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employemnt-
Member
(d) Chief Provident Fund Commissioner of Employees
Provident Fund Organisation -Member
(e) Commissioner, Employees State Insurance Corporation ±
Member
(f) Joint Secretaries & Financial Advisors from the Ministries
of Social Justice & Empowerment and Labour &
Employment ± Member
(g) Joint Secretary level officer in Ministry of Social Justice &
Empowerment - Member Secretary
3.59 The Committee would meet periodically, as per requirement,
with a minimum sitting of once in quarter and consider various issues
necessary for the smooth functioning of the scheme.  Also, as per
Government¶s decision, an effective system will be evolved for central
record keeping, on-line registration and monitoring.
Job Reservation
3.60 The Committee asked about the quota fixed for jobs in
Government services for persons with disabilities, the Secretary
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during oral evidence
stated as follows :-
³The PWD Act of 1995, the Act for persons with disabilities is
the main Act in this regard. Under Section 32 there is provision
that the appropriate Government would identify the posts where
these reservations are to be made. In the context of the Central
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

posts in the Ministries as well as in the PSUs, it is the
Government of India. In the context of the States, these are the
State Governments. It is also mentioned in Section 33 of the
same Act that there would be reservations in employment on
three per cent vacancies in identified posts. These are for
blindness and low vision; hearing impaired and loco  motor
disability which also includes persons affected by cerebral
palsy. The one point that I would like to submit is and in fact,
here I am referring to the national Policy Document, the status
of reservation in the Government of India posts in the Ministry
under category (A) is 3.07 per cent, for category (B) it is 4.41
per cent, for category (C) it is 3.76 per cent and for category (D)
it is 3.18 per cent.
For PSUs, the status is A ± 2.78 per cent, B ± 8.54 per
cent, C ± 5.04 per cent and D ± 6.75 per cent. The basis of
these figures is page 6 of the document on National Policy for
the Disabled. This broadly indicates the status upto 2002. We
have submitted it to the Hon. Committee. The Department
which monitors it or the nodal Department is the Department pf
Personnel and Training. And as per the information gathered
from them, 2004 figures are the latest available figures
available with them and this is what we have submitted to the
Hon. Committee also. In 2004, 6358 recruitments were made
and out of that, 1352 posts were reserved for the persons with
disability and 563 have been filled up. I have got the break-up
with me. For visually handicapped, it is 140, hearing
handicapped-94, orthopaedically handicapped-329. I would like
to submit one grievance here. This highest posts in the
Government for the persons with disabilities which are filled
through UPSC have not been identified. Then how can
reservation be done and how can the posts be filled up for the
persons with disabilities? I am happy to submit before the
Committee that in 2006, UPSC has made recruitment for 22
civil services and out of them, 19 services have been identified
as suitable for recruitment of persons with disabilities. This has
been done by the respective cadre controlling authorities. But
the Ministry of Social Justice has played a small catalytic role in
that direction.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.61 On being asked about the provision of identification of posts
periodically, the Secretary Ministry, of Social Justice and
Empowerment further stated as follows :-
³I would also like to submit that under the Act, there is a
provision that posts should be periodically identified and revised
in various categories of services in the PSUs. It has to be
revised at periodical intervals of three years. The last such list
circulated by the Ministry of Social Justice was as of 2001. We
admit that there was a delay.´
3.62 The Secretary further stated as follows :-
³Whereas in 2001 list, in all the four categories, 3345 posts had
been  identified for the disabled persons but in the revised 2007
list, the number of such posts is 5026.´
3.63 The Committee enquired about jobs actually reserved and filled
up including the name of organisations in which these jobs are
reserved, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their
written reply furnished to the Committee stated that according to
DOPT, during 2004, 6358 direct recruitments were made in 42
Government Ministries/Departments, out of which 1352 vacancies
(Visually Handicapped ± 267, Hearing Handicapped ± 309,
Orthopaedically Handicapped ± 776) were reserved for Persons with
Disabilities. Against these reserved vacancies, 563 persons with
disabilities (VH ± 140, HH ± 94 and OH ± 329) were actually
appointed. This works out as 8.85% of the total recruitments (instead
of 3% as provided in the Act) made during the year. A list showing
Ministry-wise/Department-wise position of vacancies reserved and
appointments of persons with disabilities made is enclosed
(Annexure-IV).
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.64 The Committee asked about the mechanism which monitor the
issue of 3 per cent reservation in CPSUs, the Secretary, Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment during oral evidence stated as
follows :-
³On the issue of 3 per cent reservation in CPSUs, this is
essentially being monitored by the Chief Commissioner of
Persons with Disabilities « However, I would like to inform the
Committee that the CCPD regularly screens all advertisements
for recruitment brought out either by Central Ministries or their
organisations or CPSUs and whenever it comes to their notice
that an advertisement does not comply with the provisions of
reservations, they take up the matter with us or the Ministry or
the CPSU as the case may be and follow it through.´
General Awareness
3.65 On being asked about steps taken to create awareness
regarding the programmes and schemes for welfare of persons with
disabilities, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their
written reply furnished to the Committee stated that the following
steps have been taken to create awareness regarding the
programmes for persons with disabilities:-
(a) The information is available with DDRCs;
(b) The information is disseminated through the camps
organized by the DDRCs, NGOs, NIs and ALIMCO for
assessment and distribution of aids and appliances;
(c) Sensitization/awareness prograrmmes are organized by the
NIs as part of the regular training programme.  These
programmes cover various sector including civil servants,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

rehabilitation/professionals, Doctor, members of panchayati
raj institutions etc.
(d) To provide awareness in rural areas, Anganwadi workers are
provided assitance to disseminate information to pregnant
women and young mothers regarding prevention and early
detection of disabilities.  These programmes have been
taken up on pilot basis in 30 districts of U.P. and Bihar and
13 districts in Assam.  The programme will be further
expanded based on its evaluation after the implementation
of its pilot phase.
(e) The NIs also disseminate information through simplified
brochure in local languages wherever any camps are
organized by them;
(f) A Disability Help Line has been established in Delhi and
Mumbai.  It is proposed  to expand this network through the
country. This help line provides complete information abut
the disability and also the benefits available and procedure
for obtaining the benefits by persons with disabilities.
3.66 The Committee also desired to know about general programme
on prevention, early detection and intervention of disability, the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply
furnished to the Committee stated that Section 25 of the Persons with
Disabilities Act, 1995 lays down the following for Prevention and Early
detection of disabilities: -
(a) Undertake surveys and investigations
(b) Research on causes of disabilities
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(c) Promotion of prevention of disabilities
(d) Screening of all children at least once in a year for identifying
at-risk cases
(e) Provision of trained staff at Primary Health Centres (PHCs)
(f) Creation of awareness through schools, PHCs, VLWs,
Aganwadi Workers, TV, Radio, etc.
3.67 They further stated that the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare is implementing the following Schemes :
• National Leprosy Eradication Programme
• National Programme for Control of Blindness
• Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme
• Pulse Polio Immunization Programme
• The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had allocated
Rs.1196.25 crore for the above programmes in the year 2006-
07.
• A pilot project for creation of awareness on prevention and
early detection and intervention of various types of disabilities
covers 30 districts (17 in Uttar Pradesh and 13 in Bihar) has
been taken up. The project envisages dissemination of
information in rural areas through Anganwadi workers.
Recently, a pilot project has been taken up in 13 districts of
Assam also. The programme is under implementation.
3.68 The Committee asked about steps being taken to eradicate
fluorosis, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

written reply furnished to the Committee stated that launching of a
National Programme for Prevention and Control of Fluorosis is under
active consideration of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER IV
Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI)
4.1 About constitution of Rehabilitation Council of India, the
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during oral
evidence stated as follows :-
³Hon. Members are aware that the RCI is a statutory body
functioning under the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment. It has been entrusted with twin responsibility of
standardizing and regulating the training of personnel and
professionals in the field of rehabilitation and special education.
The RCI was set up as a registered society in 1986. It was
given the status of a statutory body subsequently by an Act of
Parliament, namely the Rehabilitation Council of India Act,
1992. The RCI Act was amended in 2000 to bring it in line with
the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995.´
4.2 About the objective of RCI Act, 1992, the Chairman, RCI stated
as follows :-
³«- Regulating the training of trainers for persons with disability;
-  Standardising the courses of trainers, and
-  Maintaining the Central Rehabilitation Register of all
   professionals.
«« the Act was amended in the year 2000 which gave us two
more mandates:
- Monitoring of services all over the length and breadth of
India, and
-  Undertaking research in rehabilitation and special education´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Number of Institutions
4.3 About number of institutions imparting training to personnel and
professionals, the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment during oral evidence stated as follows: -
³There were only 24 institutions which were training personnel and
professionals in the field of rehabilitation and special education in
1986 when the RCI was started. This has now increased to 288.´
4.4 To a query about insufficient number of institutions, the
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment further
admitted during oral evidence stated as follows: -
³However, 288 training institutions in the field of rehabilitation are
not sufficient to train the required number of personnel. Thus,
country needs about 8 lakh special educators and other
professionals. Today, against 32,000 persons registered with RCI
as rehabilitation professionals with the distance educational
programme introduced by RCI approximately 22,000 persons are
being trained every year.´
4.5 On being asked about the steps taken to improve this situation,
the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during
oral evidence further stated as follows: -
³Since the requirement of rehabilitation professionals and
personnel is very large, the RCI is constantly looking for ways of
widening the bridge. In regular courses recognized by the RCI,
7600 students are getting trained. Further, distance education
training is being imparted through nine open universities under
which 7000 professionals are getting trained every year.  RCI is
also offering short term courses for general school teachers
through foundation courses. Right now this has been started in
Bhoj University in Madhya Pradesh and nearly 260 centres are
operational. Every year about 8000 teachers are being trained
under this programme. This is also constantly being increased.
Thus, about 22,000 rehabilitation professionals and personnel are
being added to the central rehabilitation register every year.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4.6 The Committee enquired about the aim, objectives and features
of Distance Education Training, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that the Rehabilitation Council of India visualizing the benefits of
distance education in the area of disability, in order to meet the huge
need of trained Resource Teachers/manpower, has launched a
series of training programmes through Distance Education. The
objectives of Distance Education are: -
• To develop a broad perspective of the role of specially trained
professionals as an agent of change in the prevailing and
emerging Indian society in the ensuing Age of IT Revolution
and globalisation.
• To democratize higher education by providing access to large
segments of the population, in particular the disadvantaged
groups such as those living in remote and rural areas, including
working people, women and other adults who wish to acquire
and upgrade their knowledge and or/skills.
• To develop professional competencies to educate the group of
learners comprising children with disabilities.
• To know and understand various methods and approaches of
organizing learning experiences of learners with disabilities for
inclusive/integrated/special education set up.
• To develop competencies for selection and organization of
learning experiences.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

• To understand the nature and needs of children with disabilities
and their learning process.
• To develop competencies to deal with the academic and
personal problems of the students with disabilities.
• To know and understand the various methods and techniques
of evaluation and their applications.
• To develop competencies in selection and development and
use of evaluation tools.
• To develop competencies in organizing various co-curricular
and extra curricular activities.
• To know, understand and develop the ability to manage a
special school.
• To develop competencies for organizing various instructional
and student support activities.
RCI has started the following courses under its Distance Education
Programme:-
(i) B.Ed. (Special Education) to meet the need of trained
Special Educators.
(ii) Foundation Course on Education of Children with Disabilities
to develop basic competencies in the teacher working in
general school system in the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
programme.
(iii) Diploma and PG Diploma Course in Community Based
rehabilitation (DCBR & PGDCBR).
(iv) Awareness-cum-Training Package for parents of persons
with disabilities keeping in view their vital role.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(v) Post Graduate Professional Diploma (PGPD), which enables
teachers having B.Ed. qualification, with specializations in
the education (special) needs of children with Mental
Retardation, Visual Impairment and Hearing Impairment to
become equivalent to a special educator.
4.7 On being asked about specialized teachers, the representatives
of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during oral evidence
stated as under:-
³About the teachers, as a part of the overall SSA strategy, we
have district training schools. One strategy is that all the teachers
are to be provided training in their district schools which are known
as DIETS. There is a one-week programme to familiarize and
understand as to what are the requirements of the persons with
disabilities and how they should be taught.
Secondly, for the hearing-impaired children, there are two
strategies which the Ministry of HRD is following. One is that there
is requirement of special teachers. The policy is that normally one
special teacher should be available in the school. These special
teachers have a qualification which is called B.Ed. Special
Education where they are exposed to all kinds of disabilities, how
the children are to be taught, etc. Therefore, even if one school is
having a special teacher, he can work as a resource person for all
the schools in the neighborhood. So, that is one strategy. Special
teachers are less available. The Rehabilitation Council of India is
taking all steps to train more and more teachers with this kind of a
special education.´
4.8 The Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
during oral evidence further stated as follows :-
³RCI is also launching accredits accumulation system from next
year through which more people will be encouraged to come to
this sector and earn diplomas at their own pace and need. This will
help to improve the situation. RCI has recently launched EDUSAT
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

tele-conferencing facility with the help of ISRO and has embarked
upon a dedicated channel for the disability sector. This was
inaugurated on the 5 th of October by the hon. Minister of Social
Justice and Empowerment. This provides a live tele-conferencing
facility on 24 hours basis with a two way audio and one way video
channel. Through this tele-conferencing facility the RCI proposes
to reach the un-reached and improves the position regarding
availability of rehabilitation professionals.´
Monitoring
4.9 The Committee asked about the monitoring mechanism of RCI,
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply
furnished to the Committee stated that RCI monitors the performance
of recognized institutions and takes the following steps to monitor
quality of training :-
(a) Surprise visits and inspections
(b) Planned visits and inspections
(c) Direct interactions with Course Coordinators
(d) Direct interactions with students/trainees
(e) Explanations are demanded in case of a large number of
failures in both theory and practical examinations.
(f) Explanations are demanded and action taken (example
withdrawal of recognition) in case of non-compliance.
(g) Semester pattern of examinations has been introduced
which ensures examinations are held every 6 months, which
in turn means that syllabus has to be completed in time.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4.10 To a question, about effective monitoring mechanism, the
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during oral
evidence stated as follows:-
³As far as monitoring is concerned ««. This includes
inspections, surprise visits by experts, monitoring by the zonal
coordination committees, involvement of the concerned
universities, involvement of the concerned State Governments,
feedback from the students and the teachers and the action on
the complaints of irregularities received in coordination with the
Chief Commissioner of Disabilities.
Having submitted that, we are quite aware that this is field
where there is no scope for complacency and there is need for
constant vigilance for keeping the organization not becoming
opaque so that we can reach the excellence we are striving
for.´
Full-time Chairman
4.11 The Committee asked about the reasons for not having a full
time Chairman in RCI, the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment stated during oral evidence as follows :-
³«. I would like to take this esteemed Committee into confidence
and state that we, in the Ministry, are seized with the problem. This
is a highly evolving field, and disability itself is a highly evolving
field both nationally as well as internationally. Whatever is
happening is only in the last two or three decades. So, when this
Act was formulated in 1992, this was even before the mother Act,
that is, the Persons with Disabilities Rights Opportunities Act 1995
was formulated, but the RCI Act was formulated in 1992. As per
the perception at that time, it was thought that perhaps a part-time
Chairman would serve the purpose. In fact, the Act itself does not
anywhere make a specific mention on that account. It only
mentions that there has to be a Chairperson under Section 3 sub-
section 3. It also mentions under Section 8 sub-section 2 that the
Council may determine the appropriate allowances for the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Chairperson. Now, when at that time, in 1992, this problem was
thought of, the Department of Personnel was duly consulted and a
view was taken that a part-time Chairperson will be enough.
Accordingly, in these 14-15 years, we have had part-time
Chairpersons. But we are seized with the problem that the need is
increasing and considering the magnitude of the problem there is
justification for having a full-time Chairperson. In fact, we are going
to the Cabinet to take a final decision on that account. The Ministry
is all in favour of it. So, we are taking whatever steps are required
in that direction. I would like to assure the Committee on that
account.´
4.12 The Committee asked about the Ministry ¶s suggestion to bring
changes in its present organisational set-up so as to make its
functions more effective, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply submitted to the Committee
stated that by deploying contractual staff or by engaging experts in
each field of rehabilitation, the Council manages its responsibilities.
Keeping in view the increasing level of activities of the Council in
regulating and promoting manpower development, the Council needs
to have a full time Chairperson to guide its activities and to maintain
close liaison with the Ministries, for interacting with State
Governments & Vice-Chancellors of the Universities and with
rehabilitation professionals inside and outside the country.
4.13 On being asked about the steps taken to appoint a full time
Chairperson for RCI, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated that the matter
is under active consideration of the Government and is being put up
to the cabinet shortly.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Zonal Coordination Committees
4.14 The Committee desired to know, whether RCI has any regional
level functioning, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in
their written reply stated that the Council has established seven Zonal
Co-ordination Committees (ZCC) in collaboration with Non-
Governmental Organizations i.e. Central Zone at Bhopal, Eastern
Zone at Kolkata, North-Eastern Zone at Shillong, Northern Zone at
Ludhiana, Southern Zone at Secunderabad, Southern II Zone at
Coimbatore and Western Zone at Ahmedabad. These Committees
function in advisory capacity and act as Regional Chapters. The
Council has  been utilizing their services for effective monitoring of
training institutes. These Committees strengthen the training
programmes under their Zones by inviting professionals/personnel
and NGOs in their workshops/seminars/sensitization programmes
etc.
4.15 About insufficient number of Zonal Coordination Committees,
the Chairman, RCI during oral evidence admitted as follows :-
³We have seven regional coordination committees looking after all
the States of the country. Each regional coordination committee,
therefore, looks after about 5-6 States. We feel that this is very
difficult. This is done basically through NGOs. Therefore, it is an
informal arrangement and we find that there is need to go down to
the States first and then to the districts. We have submitted this to
the 11th Five Year Plan and hopefully, we will get a solution.´
4.16 About the working of Zonal Coordination Committees, Ministry
of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to
the Committee stated that these Committees maintain vigil on the
functioning of training institutes to the extent possible in their
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

respective zones, inspite of various limitations. It will however be
ideal if State Level Committees are established across the country,
particularly where there is greater density of training institutions.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

    Chapter V
    Miscellaneous
Women with Disabilities
5.1 According to census 2001, there are 93.01 lakh women with
disabilities, who constitute 42.46% of total disabled population.
Women with disabilities require protection against exploitation and
abuse.
5.2 The Committee further asked about steps being/have been
taken by the Ministry/NGO to encourage girls with disabilities to
become self-dependent, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that under all schemes of the Ministry/NGOs preference is given to
girls/women. Further enquiring about, whether any reservation is
fixed for them in jobs, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment stated that no separate reservation is fixed for them in
jobs.
5.3 To a question, whether the Government is providing any social
security scheme to the disabled girls/women the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the
Committee stated that no, Government is not providing any social
security scheme to the disabled girls/women.
5.4 About the social security scheme for disabled girls/women, an
NGO in its memorandum submitted to the Committee stated that
experience hitherto gathered prove that in many cases specially
disabled girls/women fall in utter helplessness in their later part of life
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

or when they go out of any institution. This is very tragic and
unfortunate. It will be highly appreciated if the Government and Non-
Government organizations could jointly provide any Social Security
Scheme which will help them with monthly financial assistance at the
time of their adversity.
Vocational Training
5.5 Under Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995 there is provision for
providing vocational training to persons with disabilities. In this
regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
during oral evidence stated as follows :-
³The vocational rehabilitation centres are run in two ways-they
are run by the Labour and Employment Ministry and a large
number of them are run by various NGOs and they are
supported by this Ministry with grants-in-aid schemes. Their
basic purpose is to give some vocational skills so that they can
earn some livelihood to the disabled persons, mostly the people
who are mentally retarded and all those people. They are not
sort of formalized to that level.´
5.6 In this connection when the Committee asked about the
mechanism evolved for providing vocational training to the persons
with disabilities, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in
their written reply furnished to the Committee stated that vocational
training to persons with disabilities is being provided through 20
Vocational Rehabilitation Centres (VRCs) established by the Ministry
of Labour and 144 Vocational Training Centres (VRCs) run by the
NGOs and supported by the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment. In addition, Ministry of Labour has also been
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

providing non-formal job oriented skill training through 7 Skill-Training
Workshops (STWs) and rehabilitation services in rural areas through
11 Rural Rehabilitation Extension Services (RRECs).
5.7 The Vocational training Centres supported by the Ministry
provide to disabled beneficiaries in Automobile/Electrical and
Electronics/Mechanical/Printing/Textile industry related and other
services related trades etc. These lead to development of skills for
future employment or self-employment. These Centres also run
residential courses. Grant in aid to the NGOs running these courses
is provided to meet 90% of the eligible cost including payment of
honorarium to the instructors, stipend to the trainees, hostel
maintenance, transport, building rent, trade specific equipment, raw
material, computers, furniture, books, etc.
5.8 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written
reply furnished to the Committee further stated that under the
programme of the Ministry of Labour during 2006, 10,986 persons
with disabilities were rehabilitated by training and assistance in
placement for wage and self-employment. VTCs under the Ministry
have been providing training to 15000 persons with disabilities every
year.
Unemployment allowance
5.9 When asked about the rate of unemployment allowances, the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their written reply
furnished to the Committee stated that the unemployment allowance
is provided to the persons with disabilities by the State
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Governments/UT Administrations depending on their financial
capacity. This varies from Rs.75/- P.M. to Rs.500/- P.M.
5.10 The Committee asked the reason for having a meager amount
of just Rs.75/- p.m. as unemployment allowance in several States,
the Secretary Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during oral
evidence stated as follows :-
³«.unemployment allowance to the disabled is provided only by
the State Governments. The Government of India does not
have any share in it.´
Disability Pension
5.11 On being asked, whether the disability pension is being
provided to disabled persons, the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the Committee stated
that the National Policy for Persons with Disabilities lays down that
the State Governments and UT Administrations will be encouraged to
rationalize the amount of pension and unemployment allowance for
persons with disabilities. A State/UT wise list is at Annexure V.
Disabilities Certificates
5.12 On being asked about the procedure being adopted to issue a
µDisability Certificate ¶ to disabled persons, the Ministry of Social
Justice & Empowerment in their written reply furnished to the
Committee stated that as per the Persons with Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation), Rules,
1996, a Disability Certificate is to be issued by a Medical Board duly
constituted by the Central and the State Government.  The Medical
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Board consists of at least three members out of which at least one
member is to be a specialist in the particular field for assessing
locomotor/Visual including low vision/hearing and speech disability,
mental retardation and leprosy cured, as the case may be.  The
Medical Board after due examination is to indicate the period of
validity in the certificate, in cases where there is any chance of
variation in the degree of disability and is to give a permanent
Disability Certificate in cases of such permanent disabilities where
there are no chances of variation in the degree of disability.
5.13 Issue of disability certificate is a technical matter. A three-
member board where concerned expert doctor is a member issues
the certificate, which is countersigned by Chief Medical
Officer/Medical Superintendent/Head of the Hospital.
5.14 About the issuance of Disability Certificate, the Secretary,
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment stated as follows :-
³At the moment, the issue of Disability Certificate depends on
the persons meeting the criterion of 40 per cent disability as
defined in the law/rules and instructions there-under. The
Central and State Governments have constituted Medical
Boards at the District-level and in Central Government hospitals
to issue these certificates. But as of now, Disability Certificates
have been issued to approximately 22 per cent of the targeted
population. A Committee was appointed to suggest some
simplification in the procedure. The Committee has submitted
its recommendations, and these are under consideration. We
hope to bring in amendments to the rules under the PWD Act to
give effect to these recommendations.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5.15 The Committee further asked about the recommendations of
the Committee set up to simplify the procedure, the Secretary during
oral evidence stated as follows :-
³Basically, without going into great details, I would say that the
Committee has recommended decentralization and where a
disability is obvious and beyond doubt, the Committee has said
that the power to certify disability should be delegated or
brought down from the district level to the CHC or PHC level.
We are processing recommendations. Fortunately, these do not
require amendments to the Act. They can be implemented with
an amendment to the rules prepared notified under the PWD
Act and we are in the process of preparing those rules. We
hope to implement them soon.´
5.16 To a question, if a person is refused to get disability certificate
by Medical Board, to which authority he can approach for redressal of
grievance, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their
written reply furnished to the Committee stated that the Medical
Board is not to refuse Disability Certificate to any person unless an
opportunity is given of being heard. On representation by the
applicant, the Medical Board is required to review its decision having
regard to all the facts and circumstances of the case and pass such
order in the matter as it thinks fit.
5.17 The certificate issued by the Medical Board makes a person
eligible to apply for facilities, concessions and benefits admissible
under schemes of the Governments or Non-Governmental
Organisation, subject to such conditions as the Central or the State
Government may impose.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5.18 In this regard, an NGO in its memorandum submitted to the
Committee stated that still today differently abled children/persons
are being harassed by various Government and non-Government
institution due to not obtaining Disability Certificate from Competent
Authority and it is a shame on us all. Most of their parents are
uneducated/half-educated and they do not know where to go, how to
apply etc. Even institutions like us do not get proper response from
the Competent Authorities in this regard. Hence to avoid this
harassment and long process, it could be better if the institutions
running special Schools are empowered to issue Disability Certificate
to the children who come to them for admission fulfilling stipulated
conditions framed by the Government in this regard on the basis of
Doctors/Expert¶s observation.
Issuance of National Identity Card
5.19 As various concessions are given to the persons with
disabilities in traveling by Central Government and State
Governments, the Committee asked about these concessions, in this
regard, a representative from an NGO during oral evidence stated as
follows :-
³« there are various concessions given to the persons with
disabilities basically in travel. While railway journey, we have 75
per cent concession. Many States give us free transportation
facility. Some States give us 50 per cent transportation by bus
free, 50 per cent concession. But for every concession, we
need to have a separate pass. There should be a National
Identity Card issued and that should be valid for all the travel
concessions whether it be under the Central Government or in
any State Government.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Constitution of India ensures equality, freedom, justice and
dignity of all individuals and implicitly mandates an inclusive society
for all, including persons with disabilities. The Committee selected the
subject µProgrammes and schemes for the welfare of persons with
disabilities¶ for examination and had detailed interactions with the
representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment,
Rehabilitation Council of India and NGOs.
According to the Census 2001, there are 2.19 crore persons
with disabilities in India. Now-a-days there have been vast and
positive changes in the perception of the society towards these
people. It has been realized that a majority of these persons can lead
a better quality of life if they have equal opportunities and effective
access to rehabilitation measures. The Government of India has
enacted three legislations for persons with disabilities viz. (i) Persons
with Disabilities (Equal opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995; (ii) National Trust for welfare of persons with
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disability
Act, 1999; and (iii) Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992. National
Policy for persons with disabilities has also been announced in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

February, 2006. After going into the functioning of the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment and Rehabilitation Council of India,
the Committee feel that the Act and convention lay many obligations
upon the Government and society. The subject of Disability still falls
under the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and keeping
in view the increased obligations in terms of convention as well as Act
and the changing scenario both economic as well as social and
political, there is a need for consideration of a separate department
dealing with persons with disabilities. The Committee also feel that
though the policy has been rightly pronounced and legislations have
also been enacted but the benefits that are intended have not
reached the disabled beneficiaries. There is ample scope for
improvement in several spheres of working of the Ministry and RCI.
These aspects have been dealt with in greater detail by the
Committee in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. The National Policy recognizes that persons with disabilities are
valuable human resource for the country and seeks to create an
environment that provides them equal opportunities, protect their
rights and encourages their full participation in society. The focus of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the policy is primarily on prevention of disabilities, early detection and
appropriate intervention, physical and economic rehabilitation
measures, inclusive education, employment in the public as well as
the private sector and self-employment, creation of a barrier free
environment and development of rehabilitation professionals. The
Committee note that India has ratified the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of People with Disabilities (UNCRPD). By doing this,
India has reaffirmed its commitment towards the International Policy
Framework in respect of persons with disabilities. The Committee,
therefore, are of the view that now it has become obligatory to
incorporate the essence of the UN convention in our planning,
implementation, monitoring and review processes pertaining to
the welfare of disabled persons.
The Committee also note that there is a wide gap between the
policy and grassroot reality. There is lack of awareness about
disabilities. The Ministry have not taken sincere measures to create
awareness. Although the policy has been formulated, proper
implementation is lacking. Even the local MPs/MLAs are not apprised
about the various welfare schemes. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry should devise a mechanism to effectively
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

associate Panchayati Raj institutions, local bodies and involve
MPs/MLAs of the country in the process of implementation of
National Policy for disabled persons, 2006. They also
recommend that the Ministry should assign the work relating to
evaluation of implementation of National Policy for persons with
disabilities to an autonomous body having expertise in the field.
3. The Persons with Disabilities (opportunities, protection of rights
and full participation) Act, 1995 (PWD Act) enacted to give effect to
the Proclamation on the full participation and equality of the people
with disabilities in the Asia and Pacific region is applicable only to
seven disabilities viz. blindness, low vision, leprosy-cured, hearing
impairment, loco-moto disability, mental retardation and mental
illness. This Act also provides for both preventive and promotional
aspects of rehabilitation like education, employment, vocational
training, job reservations, research and manpower, creation of barrier
free environment, rehabilitation of persons with disabilities,
unemployment allowance, establishment of home for persons with
disabilities, etc. The Committee note that no sincere effort has been
made to effectively implement the PWD Act, 1995. The commitment
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

made in the Tenth Five Year Plan of reaching the un-reached
disabled persons remained unfulfilled. The Committee were informed
that steps had been initiated for amendment to the Persons with
Disabilities (opportunities, protection of rights and full participation)
Act, 1995. Consultation with stakeholders at national level was
undertaken. The suggestions received from the stakeholders are
examined for amending the Act. The Committee are of the firm
view that though Act is in place, proper implementation of it is
lacking and they, therefore, recommend that Ministry should
examine the suggestions received from stakeholders in the
country expeditiously and accordingly bring amendments in the
PWD Act in consonance with the UNCRPD within a timeframe
after presentation of the Report to the House.
 The Committee are also of the view that there are certain
other disabilities like thallassaemia, flurosis, cochlear implant,
etc, that have not been recognized in the PWD Act, 1995 so far.
They recommend that Ministry should examine all such
disabilities and explore possibility to give recognition to these
major disabilities in the PWD Act .
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4. National Trust Act covers autism, cerebral palsy, mental
retardation or a combination of any two or more of such conditions
and includes a person suffering from severe multiple disability. The
main objectives of this trust are to enable and empower persons with
disabilities to live as independently and as fully as possible, to extend
support to registered organizations for providing need based services
and to evolve procedure for appointment of legal guardians for
persons with disabilities requiring such protection. The Committee
note that the trust has generated income of Rs.551.98 lakh,
Rs.1289.83 lakh, Rs.1032.11 lakh, Rs.887.94 lakh, Rs.895.17 lakh
and Rs.991.24 lakh during the year 2001-02, 2002-03, 2003-04,
2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively and the utilization is
Rs.396.31 lakh, Rs.505.69 lakh, Rs.607.31 lakh, Rs.620.39 lakh,
Rs.375.86 lakh, Rs.442.22 lakh for the same period. The Committee
are distressed to note that National Trust could not fully utilize the
funds from 2001-02 to 2006-07. They are astonished to note the
reasons given by the Ministry for lower utilization of funds in
comparison to the income generated through corpus of National
Trust, that 286 districts are having no NGOs working in this area. The
Committee view this lackadaisal attitude of the Ministry
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

seriously and recommend that every sincere effort should be
made to encourage NGOs to serve in the unserved districts for
ensuring optimum utilization of the funds and also to ensure
that the disabled beneficiaries in those districts are not deprived
of their right to live a dignified life. They also recommend that
mentally ill persons should also be included under the National
Trust Act.
5. Under the Scheme µSupported Guardianship ¶ Rs.500/-p.m per
beneficiary is provided to 10 beneficiaries per district in 36 districts for
encouraging relatives, friends and institutions to accept legal
guardianship of destitutes and abandoned disabled persons. The
Committee were informed that keeping in view the limited availability
of funds at present only upto 10 beneficiaries per district are being
covered under the scheme. According to an evaluation study, the
Guardianship Scheme can have significant impact over a large area
in the country if the  present coverage of the scheme is enlarged. The
Committee are not convinced with the reason put forth by the Ministry
that due to limited availability of funds the scheme is confined to only
10 beneficiaries per district. The Committee recommend that the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Ministry should take steps to implement this scheme in other
districts of the country at the earliest and the amount of
assistance should be suitably increased from Rs.500, which is a
meager amount to take proper care of disabled persons.
6. National Trust is implementing a scheme called SAMARTH to
provide residential facility - both short term and long term. The
Committee note that this scheme provides residential facility to 35
children, out of which only nine seats are for the BPL beneficiaries
and rest are all paid seats. The scheme deprives poor disabled
persons. The Committee, therefore, recommend that seats for
BPL beneficiaries should be increased. The Committee also note
that the scheme is based on tapering of grants. At the Ninth
year, the grants will be stopped. The Committee are of the view
that this scheme should not be based on 100% tapering of
grants. It will discourage NGOs to come forward to take up
projects under this scheme. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Ministry should review this scheme and instead
of 100% tapering of the grants, it should be tapered off to certain
lower extent.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7. The annual budget allocation for the years 2002-03, 2003-04,
2004-05, 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08 were Rs.229.50 crore,
Rs.219.50 crore, Rs.250.60 crore, Rs.250.60 crore, Rs.243.00 crore,
Rs.221.00 crore and expenditure for the same period is Rs.193.27
crore, Rs.168.87 crore, Rs.177.15 crore, Rs.195.72 crore, Rs.183.06
crore and Rs.191 crore respectively.  The Committee are surprised to
see the wide variation in budget allocation and actual expenditure by
the Ministry. The allocated funds have not been fully utilised.  The
situation, to say the least is very alarming.  The reasons advanced by
the Ministry are - the late receipt of recommendations from State
Governments and delay in receipt of grants-in-aid proposals from the
NGOs. The Committee while expressing their deep concern on
the under utilization of funds recommend that as project
proposals and projections for budget are drawn up well in
advance, effective planning, implementation and monitoring
should be ensured to make optimum use of allocation received
annually.
Regarding pendency of utilization certificate, the Ministry
informed that the grant-in-aid for a financial year is being released
only after receipt of the utilization certificate for the previous year.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

However, a representative of the Ministry agreed during the evidence
that getting the utilization certificate in time is creating problem. The
Committee view this attitude of the Ministry in giving varying
information about the actual situation very seriously and desire
that while furnishing the information to a parliamentary
Committee, the Ministry should be extra vigilant.
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should make
all efforts to recover the grant-in-aid from those NGOs who have
either misused the grants or have not furnished utilization certificate
for the grant-in-aid received by them.  They also recommend that
appropriate penal action should be taken against those NGOs who
have misused the grants.
 The Committee further note that multi-disciplinary grants in
Committees for supporting voluntary organisations does not have any
representation of disabled persons or their Associations. They
recommend that the Ministry, as was agreed during the
evidence, should invariably make efforts to ensure the
representation of disabled persons in the multi-disciplinary
grant in Committee.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Committee were also informed that the persons engaged in
the work of inspection/monitoring are not specialized in the field and
the inspection reports are prepared by the inspecting team in a
standardized and comprehensive format prescribed by the Ministry.
Not convinced with the reply of the Ministry, the Committee
recommend that monitoring/inspection of the projects, including
review of past performance, staff, data regarding beneficiaries,
maintenance of records should be done by persons specialized
in the field.
8. The Committee have been informed that proposals for grant-in-
aid under Deendayal Rehabilitation Scheme are required to be sent
by NGOs to the concerned State Government/UT Administration in
the prescribed applications form along with project detail, annual
report and other documents such as audited accounts, utilization
certificates for the previous year, etc. Proposals from various NGOs
are examined by a multi-disciplinary grant-in-aid Committee of the
State Government/UT Administration, alongwith inspection reports of
the State Governments. The recommendations are then sent by the
State Governments/UT Administration to the Ministry. Inspection can
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

be carried out by any agency other than the State Government/UT
Administration that may be designated by the Ministry.
Recommended proposals are considered by the Ministry on the basis
of the model projects and detailed norms laid down in the scheme
and past performance of the organisation. Grant-in-aid can be
provided to a maximum of 90% of the admissible grant while 10% is
to be borne by the NGO. The Committee are constrained to note
that the Ministry do not even possess the data regarding number
of proposals of NGOs received during the years 2004-05, 2005-
06, 2006-07. They therefore, recommend that Ministry should
evolve a mechanism to maintain data regarding number of
proposals received and grant sanctioned to maintain the
transparency.
The Committee are distressed to find that the processing of
application for a grant-in-aid has a lengthy procedure. The inspection
takes place after a long gap of submission of application resulting
disbursement of first instalment of grant to the NGOs at the end of the
financial year and the second instalment in the next financial year.
They also note that the procedure to sanction the grants is
complicated with several channels within channel and it leads to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

delay. No time frame has been fixed for the disposal of applications at
various stages and release of grant. The Committee are not
convinced with the reasons put forth by the Ministry that (i) delay by
State Governments, (ii) delay in completion of procedural formalities
and (iii) non-availability of matching staff in the Ministry causes delay
in sanctioning and releasing the grants. They recommend that
provisions about the time frame at every stage of disposal of the
application should be made in the Act itself. The status of the
application should be placed at the internet for the information
of the NGOs/individuals as is done in the case of issuance of
passport. They also recommend that the Ministry should allow
those NGOs who have proven record in the field to apply direct
to the Ministry to save the procedural delay.
9. The Committee notice that from the year 2007-08, the Ministry
have started tapering off grant in projects already funded for seven
years in urban areas to encourage gradual self-reliance of NGOs.
Tapering off is done by 5 per cent in every alternate year so as to
reduce the level of funding to 75 per cent level. The Committee are of
the view that in the present era of commercialization, there are very
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

few corporats who donate for social cause. Everyone wants
something in return. NGOs being Charitable organisations, cannot
venture in to commercial field. In these circumstances, tapering off
the grants will create a big problem for NGOs to perform their
activities. This decision will result into phasing out of some
programmes of the NGOs and negate the legislative mandate of
equality and full participation for the disabled. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should devise such
mechanism through which NGOs can become self-reliant to
meet their expenses and tapering off the grants should be
reduced from 75% to a lower level.
10. The Committee were informed that seven National Institutes at
New Delhi, Dehradun, Kolkata, Secundrabad, Mumbai, Cuttack and
Chennai have been set up in the country which are specialized in
various disabilities and are working for the development of
rehabilitation manpower providing specialized services to persons
with disabilities; and research and development of models for delivery
of services. Four other National Institutes at Bangalore, Mumbai,
Mysore and Ranchi under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

are also working in the field of medical treatment and rehabilitation of
persons with disabilities. The Committee in this regard  are of the
view that only these handful National Institutes are not sufficient to
cater the needs of persons with disabilities. These National Institutes
will not be abled to cover all parts of the country.  They therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should make efforts to set up more
such institutes all over the country, region-wise and preference
should be given to those regions where such Institutes have not
so far been set up. They also recommend that the existing
National Institutes should also be upgraded as per international
standards and strengthened and together with the local non-
governmental organisations should reach the blocks and
villages where their services are required the most.
11. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have set-up
five Composite Regional Centres for persons with disabilities at
Srinagar, Sundernagar (Himachal Pradesh), Lucknow, Bhopal and
Guwahati to provide for both preventive and promotional aspects of
rehabilitation like education, health, employment and vocational
training, research and manpower development, rehabilitation for
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

persons with disabilities, etc.  These centres have been working as
extended arms of National Institutes in each of the disabilities and
providing services to persons with all type of disabilities at one place.
The Committee feel that more such Composite Regional Centres
should be set up in every State in the country. The Ministry also in
their written reply furnished to the Committee have underlined the
need to establish one Composite Regional Centre in each State. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take
expeditious steps to establish more Composite Regional
Centres in the country.  They would like to be apprised of the
action taken by the Ministry in this regard.
12. District Disability Rehabilitation Centre scheme (DDRC)
basically seeks to provide comprehensive services to the persons
with disabilities at the grass root level through creation of
infrastructure and capacity building at district level for awareness
generation, rehabilitation, training/guiding of grass root level
functionaries.  Under this scheme, rehabilitation support is provided
to the persons with disabilities.  The Committee are distressed to note
that there are only 199 DDRCs and only 128 are operational. They
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

are of the view that every district of the country should have one
DDRC.  The Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
while deposing before the Committee stated that in an ideal scenario,
there should be a district disability rehabilitation centre at least one in
each district. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should
make expeditious efforts to operationalise the remaining
sanctioned DDRCs.  After that, the Ministry should take concrete
steps to set up more DDRCs in unserved districts of the country.
Special care is required to cover those districts which are truly
backward and where the prevalence of disability is higher and
services as well as facilities for the disabled persons are
meager. The Committee reiterate that the people’s
representatives and local bodies henceforth be kept informed
about DDRC schemes.
13. The Committee have been informed that National Handicapped
Finance and Development Corporation (NHFDC) was established in
1997 with an objective to provide loans at concessional rates to
persons with disabilities for setting up an enterprise, or for the
purpose of education, etc. Loan applications have to be submitted in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the prescribed format through the State Channelising Agency and
branches of Punjab & Sind Bank or Oriental Bank of Commerce.
Projects upto Rs.1.50 lakh are sanctioned by State Channelising
Agency/Bank and loan applications seeking more than Rs.1.50 lakh
are sanctioned by NHFDC. The Committee note that the limits to
provide loans at subsidized rates for the working people were
decided more then a decade ago. They, therefore, recommend that
these limits should be revised in view of growing inflation.  The
Committee also note that there are 44 State Channelising Agencies.
They recommend that  all Nationalised banks should be given
instructions to accept loan applications of disabled persons and
more State Channelising Agenies should be opened to facilitate
the beneficiaries.
The Committee also feel that persons with disability find it very
difficult to commute by public transport. They have to depend on
vehicles specifically meant for them, driven by them or driven for
them. Procuring such vehicles is difficult. They, therefore,
recommend that NHFDC should provide conveyance loan
without interest to disabled persons.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

14. The Committee note that under Assistance to Disabled Persons
(ADIP) Scheme modern assistive devices are provided to needy
person with disabilities through NGOs/NIs/ALIMCO/ DDRCs. The
main objective of the scheme is to assist the needy physically
handicapped persons with durable, modern and standard aids and
appliances which can promote their physical, social and
psychological rehabilitation.  They further note that for expanding its
coverage, the Ministry has revised the scheme w.e.f. 1.4.2005 and
under the revised scheme, motorized tricycle for persons with
locomotor disabilities, software for persons with visual disabilities
using computer etc. are provided.  The assistive devices costing up to
Rs. 6,000/- are given to the disabled persons free of cost whose
monthly income is upto Rs. 6,500/- and 50% of the cost to those
having an income between Rs. 6,501/- and Rs. 10,000/- per month.
The Committee are of the view that the income limit for supply of
the assistive devices to the needy persons with disabilities
should be revised as these limits were decided long back.
The Committee further note that the assistive devices provided
under ADIP scheme are of sub standard quality. The Ministry in their
reply have also agreed that there have been oral complaints during
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

meeting with implementing agencies of schemes of Assistance to
disabled persons for purchase/fitting of Aids/Appliances (ADIP)
scheme. The Committee are also constrained to note that the Ministry
do not have any agency which monitors the quality of these devices.
Even crutches supplied to the beneficiaries are of sub-standard and
have caused accidents. They also disagree with the view of the
Ministry that their scheme is a special intervention basically keeping
in view the needs of the poor disabled persons and they include
those equipments and appliances which are within their financial
limits. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
should not compromise with the quality of equipments for
disabled persons which can prove hazardous. They strongly
recommend that for maintaining the standard of assistive
devices some agency should be appointed which may be
authorized to give them certification, like the BIS, to market
these products for the safe use of the beneficiaries.
15. The Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS)
provides support to Non-Government Organisations in delivering
various rehabilitation services to persons with disabilities.  This
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

scheme was started with the objective of ensuring effective
implementation of the Persons with Disabilities (PWD) Act, 1995 by
creating an enabling environment and encouraging non-governmental
organisations through financial assistance for undertaking projects for
the welfare of the disabled in different disciplines including the areas
of education, training and rehabilitation services.  Under this scheme
activities like special schools for children with orthopaedic, speech,
hearing, visual and mental disabilities, vocational training centres,
pre-school and early intervention programme, half way homes, etc.
are taken up. The Committee note that eleven half way homes set up
by NGOs provide vocational training, counseling to persons with
disabilities and their families to facilitate reintegration with the
family/society and medical advice/treatment for taking care of
occasional psychiatric problems. The Committee recommend that
the Ministry should encourage NGOs to set up more halfway
homes under this scheme.
16. The Committee find that the criteria of releasing grant-in-aid are
based on the number of beneficiaries found present on the day of
inspection, the number of beneficiaries covered in the grant for the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

previous financial year and the prescribed ceiling of 15 per cent
increase in number of beneficiaries over the previous year. They feel
that the criteria evolved is totally illogical. The inspection generally
takes place in winter season or rainy season and the disabled
students remain absent from the school for many days during these
seasons. The absenteeism of children with the disabilities is high due
to the associated medical complication. Therefore, in their view it is
unjustified that just on the basis of one day ¶s attendance, grant-in-aid
is decided. NGOs have to bear expenses according to the prescribed
teacher-student ratio. Even if the students remain absent, NGOs
have to pay teachers ¶ salaries, perks, etc. and bear all the expenses.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that grants should be
sanctioned on the basis of children enrolled. However,
Government should make note of the attendance of disabled
children over a period of time. The Ministry should explore the
possibility to constitute a regulatory body to conduct regular
inspection in schools.
17. The Committee note that the Ministry are not following a proper
procedure to inform the NGOs about the status of their proposals.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Many a time they are kept in the dark about the status especially the
amount of grant that will be sanctioned, etc. They have to come
personally to Delhi from far flung areas to know the status of their
proposals. The Committee also note that in case of new proposals for
grant-in-aid, the minutes of screening Committee are made available
on the Ministry¶s website so that the organisations know whether their
proposal is recommended. If the proposal is not recommended, the
reasons for not recommending the proposal can also be seen on the
website. The Committee desire that the same procedure should
be followed for all the proposals for grant-in-aid. Status of all
proposals of all the NGOs should be displayed on the website of
Ministry so that every NGO can easily find out the status of their
proposal and chalk out their plans accordingly.
18. The Committee are constrained to note that the pay scales of
teachers/professionals of special schools are not at par with general
school teachers. The pay scales of teachers are so low that no staff is
willing to teach or work. The teachers/professionals leave special
schools and join other schools offering higher remuneration. As such,
there is great dearth of good teachers in special schools for children
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

with special needs. The present level of honorarium for special
educators varies from Rs.2800/- to Rs.6000/- p.m., depending upon
the qualification and experience of the educator. They also note that
there is great disparity in the rate of honorarium for teachers of
special school and those who are working in
Government/Government sponsored schools while both are giving
the same services. The Committee have been informed that
Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI) is advocating same terms and
conditions of services for teachers qualified with diploma/degree in
general education and diploma/degree in special education. One of
the recommendations of the evaluation study conducted by Tata
Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai is that in order to retain and
attract well qualified staff, it is necessary to reconsider the
honorarium currently offered. The proposal to revise the cost norms
of the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme, including
honoraria has been considered by the Expenditure Finance
Committee on 12.5.2008 and will now be placed before the Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs. The Committee are of the view
that disparity in salary structure of staff working in NGOs and in
other fields is the root cause for staff leaving at regular intervals
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

for higher remuneration and they, therefore, strongly
recommend that the teachers of special schools should be paid
good salary so that they do not leave the schools for want of
good salary and children with special needs are not deprived of
good teachers.
The Committee also recommend that the proposal to revise
the cost norms of the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation
Scheme including honoraria as considered by Expenditure
Finance Committee should be placed before Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs immediately and action thereon should also
be taken expeditiously.
19. The scholarship to persons with disabilities is provided from the
interest earned from investment made under the National Disability
Fund available in various public sector banks.  Students with 40% or
more disability whose monthly family income does not exceed
Rs.15,000/- are eligible for scholarship. A scholarship of Rs.700/-
p.m. to day scholars and Rs.1,000/- p.m. to hostellers is provided to
those students who are pursuing graduate and post graduate level
technical or professional  courses. Rs.400/- p.m. to day scholars and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Rs.700/- p.m. to hostellers is provided for pursuing diploma and
certificate level professional courses. The Committee have been
informed that the Ministry have awarded 1443 scholarships and 447
scholarships have been continued. The Committee are constrained to
note that in comparison to large number of disabled persons in our
country, only 1443 scholarships are provided, which are quite
meager. The Secretary, Ministry of social Justice and Empowerment
during the interaction with the Committee have accepted that ³about
the scholarships we have really not been able to do much about it.
But then we have a small scheme under which some scholarships
are given to the disabled students to pursue their higher professional
courses´. The Committee are also of the view that the amount
provided under this scheme is too meager to bear educational
expenses. They therefore, recommend that the Ministry should
review this scheme in the present scenario and accordingly
increase the amount provided under this scheme and also make
earnest efforts to provide more scholarships to more students
with disabilities.
The Committee desire that to encourage the persons with
disabilities, nationalized banks may be asked to extend
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

education loans to disabled persons to pursue higher studies on
lesser simple rate of interest. This way the banks will also be
fulfilling their social obligations towards society and will help in
bringing the disabled persons to the main stream. They
recommend that this matter may be pursued with the Ministry of
Finance and nationalized banks for implementation.
20. The Committee note that Chief Commissioner/State
Commissioners for Persons with Disabilities are mandated to take
steps to safeguard the rights and facilities of the persons with
disabilities. They have certain powers of a Civil Court under Section
63 of the PWD Act. These are similar to the powers vested in the
National Commissions for SC, ST, Minorities, Women, etc. The
Committee are perturbed to note that many States do not appoint
separate State Commissioners and the Secretary of the concerned
department is entrusted with the additional job of Commissioner for
persons with disabilities. This is a clear violation of the accepted legal
principle that implementors cannot judge the enforcement part also.
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should look into
this matter and make a stringent rule in this regard so that every
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

State should invariably appoint a separate Commissioner for
persons with disabilities. The Committee also note that Chief
Commissioner/State Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities
is a Quasi Judicial Authority and has power of civil court and
they therefore, recommend that the enforcement powers should
also be vested to enable the CCD to discharge his duty
effectively and if need be, suitable amendment should be made
in the existing Act.
21. The persons with disabilities who are gainfully employed are
provided insurance coverage under the normal insurance schemes of
LIC (with certain restriction and extra premium) and the persons with
disabilities who are not employed/not employable are covered under
Jeevan Adhar and Jeevan Vishwas Schemes.  National Trust has
also formulated a Health Insurance Scheme µNiramaya¶ for the
persons with four types of disabilities, viz. Autism, Cerebral Palsy,
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities covered under the trust.
The scheme is to be launched in the 10 selected districts of the
country in the first phase to provide affordable health insurance to
persons with aforementioned disabilities to encourage health services
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

seeking behaviour among persons with disability and to improve the
general health condition and quality of life of persons with disability.
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should formulate
such other health policies like Niramaya covering the persons
with other disabilities also. They also desire that the Ministry
should take expeditious steps to launch Niramaya in every
district of the country.  The Committee further recommend that
the Ministry should encourage other insurance companies to
formulate cashless health insurance policies for persons with
disabilities as the Government hospitals are not able to cope up
with the increasing pressure.
22. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has
formulated a scheme viz. µIncentive to Employees in the Private
Sector¶ w.e.f. 01.04.2008 which is applicable to the persons with
disabilities whose monthly income is up to Rs.25,000/- p.m. and
working in the private sector, who are also covered under the
Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights
and Full Participation) Act, 1995 and the National Trust for Welfare of
Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Disabilities Act, 1999.  The Government has encouraged private
sector to employ persons with disabilities - atleast 5% of their work
force should consist of them. Under this scheme, employer ¶s share of
contributions for EPF and ESI for the first three years will be made by
the Government. In fact, the Ministry of Labour and Employment is in
the process of finalizing the changes in EPF and ESI Rules.
The Committee recommend that Ministry of Labour and
Employment should finalize the changes in EPF and ESI
Scheme/Rules immediately and apprise them about the changes
made within 6 months of presentation of the Report.
 The Committee are of the view that since several irregularities
in employee contribution towards ESI, EPF, etc. have been noticed,
the Ministry should be extra vigilant in implementing this scheme.
They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment should devise an effective mechanism to
monitor the implementation of the scheme. The Committee also
desire that the Government should explore the possibility of
giving more incentives like tax exemptions/ relaxation to private
sector employers in order to encourage them to employ more
persons with disabilities.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

23. Under Section 32 of PWD Act 1995, there is a provision that
Government should identify the posts where reservations for persons
with disabilities are to be made.  In Section 33 of PWD Act, it is
mentioned that there would be reservations in employment of 3%
vacancies in identified posts. The status of reservation in various
Ministries/Dept. against identified posts in Grade A,B,C &D is 3.07%,
4.41%, 3.76% and 3.18% respectively. For PSUs the reservation
status in Grade A,B,C and D is 2.78%, 8.54%, 5.04% and 6.75%
respectively. The nodal Department in respect of these reservations
is the Department of Personnel & Training. The Committee are
astonished to note that the nodal department i.e. Department of
Personnel and Training have data/ information only upto the year
2004 and according to the available data, out of total 1352 posts
reserved for person with disabilities only 563 have been filled up. The
Committee also note with dissatisfaction that there are so many
Ministries/Departments where not even a single post is reserved for
persons with disabilities. One of the reasons put forth for not filling up
the posts by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is that
UPSC have not identified higher posts in the Govt. for the persons
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

with disabilities. In the absence of identification, naturally these posts
have not been filled up. The Committee recommend that the
Ministry should take expeditious steps to fill up all vacant posts
for persons with disabilities and should also take up the matter
of identifying the higher posts with UPSC as early as possible.
Under PWD Act, there is a provision that these posts should be
periodically identified and revised in various categories of service in
the PSUs at the interval of three years. The Committee are
constrained to note that the last such revision was done by the
Ministry in 2001. The Committee view very seriously the lackadaisical
attitude of the Ministry towards persons with disabilities. For years
together no efforts have been made to identify and revise the posts in
various categories of services in the PSUs. They, therefore,
recommend that the exercise to identify and revise the posts in
PSUs according to PWD Act, 1995 should be undertaken without
any further delay and the Committee be apprised of the action
taken in this regard. The Committee also recommend that a
separate panel should be set up for promotion of disabled
persons and PWD Act should be amended accordingly.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

24. The Constitution of India ensures equality, freedom, justice and
dignity of all individuals and implicitly mandates an inclusive society
for all including persons with disabilities. Many legislations have been
enacted for the welfare of the disabled persons. The Committee note
that although the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has
taken various steps to create general awareness about programmes
and schemes for welfare of persons with disabilities such as
information available with DDRCs is disseminated through camps
organized by DDRCs, NGOs, NIs and ALIMCO for the distribution of
aids and appliances to the disabled, but there is a wide gap between
the grassroot reality and the policy. Its proper implementation is
lacking. Even the local corporators, MLAs, MPs are not kept informed
about the various welfare schemes. The Committee are of the view
that more attention is needed in this regard.  This is very sensitive
area, where training should be given to people working in the field.
The life of disabled persons is challenging.  They are subjected to lot
of humiliation.  So, the Ministry have to become extra cautious about
providing amenities to them. The Ministry should take more stringent
steps to create awareness about early detection, intervention,
treatment of disabilities among general public. They therefore,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

recommend that the Ministry should take advantage of
electronic media, small tele-films, ads on disabilities for creating
awareness about detection and treatment of the disabled
through television, as this is very popular source of creating
awareness about disabilities. The Ministry should also address
this issue through Press. Programmes and schemes regarding
camps, etc. should be advertised in National level newspapers.
Steps should be initiated to stage nukad-natak (street shows),
etc. relating to persons with disabilities in small villages, towns,
etc.
 The Committee have also been informed that for creating
awareness in rural areas, Anganwadi workers are provided
assistance to disseminate information to pregnant women regarding
prevention and early detection of disabilities. These programmes
have been taken up in 30 districts of UP, Bihar and 13 districts of
Assam. The Committee recommend that this programme should
be implemented in every district of all the States in the country.
 The Committee note that a disability helpline has been set-up in
Delhi and Mumbai which provides complete information about the
disability, the benefits available and the procedure for obtaining the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

benefits by persons with disabilities. They recommend that
disability helpline should be established in every State so that
none of the disabled persons is deprived of the benefits of the
schemes.
 They also recommend that new medium of communication
needs to be explored to create awareness about the
achievements. While designing the website, it should  be made
user friendly and more interesting by including few case studies
and statistics.
 The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment with the coordination of other
Ministries should take up National Level Programme to eradicate
deadly diseases like flurosis, leprosy, etc.
25. The Committee note that in 1986 when RCI was set-up there
were only 24 institutions, which were imparting training to personnel
and professionals in the field of rehabilitation and special education.
Now RCI has 288 institutions. It is appreciable but still this number is
insufficient to cater to the need of trained personnel in a vast country
like India which has nearly 2.19 crore disabled persons.  They
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take steps to set
up more training institutions in the country specially in far flung
areas and in those areas where there is no institution.
 The Committee have been informed that distance education
training is being imparted through 9 open universities under which
7000 professionals are trained every year. The Committee are of the
view that distance education training should be imparted through
more universities so that more professionals can be trained because
we need about 8 lakh special educators and professionals. They
recommend that the Ministry should take expeditious steps to
provide distance education training through more universities.
 The Rehabilitation Council of India(RCI) is offering short term
courses for general school teachers through foundation courses
organized by Bhoj University in MP and nearly 260 centres are
operational. After getting basic education in special schools, students
are brought to the main school, so that they do not find it difficult to
integrate in the society later on. So, it becomes imperative that
general school teachers should also be trained to educate these
children. Otherwise their purpose of getting education in general
schools will be defeated. The Committee are of the view that a large
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

number of general school teachers need to be trained. They
recommend that RCI should offer short term courses for general
school teachers through foundation courses/seminars in more
universities, so that large number of general school teachers are
trained to help the disabled students.
26. The RCI monitors the performance of recognized institutions
through inspections, surprise visits by experts, monitoring of the
Zonal Coordination Committee, involvement of the concerned
universities and State Governments, by way of feed back from the
students and teachers and action on the complaints of irregularities in
coordination with the Chief Commissioner of Disabilities. The
Committee are of the view that measures taken by RCI are not
adequate to keep a vigil on the performance of recognized
institutions. Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
during oral evidence had expressed the opinion that there is need for
constant vigilance regarding functioning of these organisations.  Even
a bit of carelessness on the part of RCI will adversely affect the
performance of these institutions. The Committee recommend that
the Ministry should look into this matter with great seriousness
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and devise a mechanism to keep a strict vigil on the working and
performance of the recognized institutions.
27. The Committee are astonished to note that RCI, is having a
part-time Chairman since its inception. Though the Act does not
make a specific mention anywhere, it only mentions that there has to
be a Chairperson under Section 3 Sub-Section 3. It also mentions
under Section 8 Sub-Section 2 that the Council may determine the
appropriate allowances for the Chairperson. In the present scenario,
RCI¶s activities have increased on a large scale in regulating and
promoting manpower development. So, there is a great need to have
a full time Chairperson to guide its activities and maintain close
liaison with the Ministries and for interacting with State Governments,
Vice Chancellors of the Universities and rehabilitation professionals
inside and outside the country. It is an established fact that success
of an organization to a large extent depends upon the proficiency and
interest shown by the Head, who is at the helm of affairs.  The
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should take
concerteous steps to appoint a full-time Chairperson in RCI and
place the matter before the Cabinet urgently.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

28. The Committee further note that RCI has established Zonal
Coordination Committees in collaboration with Non Governmental
Organisations in 7 States i.e. Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal,
Meghalaya, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat. These
Co-ordination Committees maintain vigil on the functioning of training
institutes in their respective zones. These Committees strengthen the
training programmes under their zone by inviting
professionals/personnel and NGOs in their
workshops/seminars/sensitization programme, etc. These seven
Committees are looking after all the States of the country. Thus each
Committee has to look after atleast 5-6 States, which is a very difficult
task. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should take
expeditious steps to set-up more Zonal Coordination
Committees especially in those regions where a large number of
training institutes are located to maintain vigil on the functioning
of these training institutes.
29. According to census 2001, there are 93.01 lakh women with
disabilities, i.e. 42.46% of the total disabled population. The
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Committee have been informed that though preference is given to
girls/women in all schemes of the Ministry/NGOs but no social
security scheme has been planned for the disabled girls/women. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry should formulate a
social security scheme for disabled girls/women so that their
future can be secured to some extent. If these girls become
independent, some boys might come forward to marry them.
 The Committee are dismayed to note that there is no provision
for stringent punishment for those persons who commit atrocities
such as sexual assault against disabled girls. The Committee
recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter with Ministry
of Home Affairs and if need be, necessary amendments be made in
the IPC and Cr. P.C.
30. Under Persons with Disabilities Act, there is a provision for
providing training to persons with disabilities and vocational training is
provided to persons with disabilities through vocational rehabilitation
centres run by the Ministry of Labour and Employment and by various
NGOs supported by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
with grants-in-aid scheme. The Ministry of Labour and Employment is
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

running 20 Vocational Rehabilitation Centres and 144 Vocational
Training Centres are run by NGOs and supported by Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment. In addition to this, Ministry of
Labour and Employment has been providing non-formal job oriented
skill training through 7 Skill Training Workshops (STWs) and
rehabilitation services in rural areas through 11 Rural Rehabilitation
Extension Services. The Committee are of the view that Vocational
Rehabilitation Centres run by the Ministry of Labour and Employment
and NGOs are very less in comparison to the population of disabled
persons. They recommend that the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment should encourage NGOs to set up more
Vocational Rehabilitation Centres in different parts of the
country especially in those areas where there is no such
Vocational Rehabilitation Centres. They also recommend that
the Ministry of Labour and Employment should also set up more
Vocational Rehabilitation Centres. The Committee also stress
that courses provided by these institutions should cater to
present day needs.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

31. The unemployment allowance as well as disability pension is
provided to the persons with disabilities by State Governments/UT
Administrations according to their financial capacity. Unemployment
allowance varies from Rs.75/- to Rs.500/- p.m. and disability pension
varies from Rs.60/- p.m. to Rs.1000/- p.m. The Committee are
unhappy to note that only just Rs.75/- p.m. is given as unemployment
allowance and Rs.60/- p.m. is given as disability pension in several
States. It seems to be mockery of disabled persons. They are of the
view that this meager amount of unemployment allowance/disability
pension is degrading and insulting for disabled persons as it would
create inferiority complex among them. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Ministry should take up the matter with State
Governments and encourage them to raise the amount of
unemployment allowance/disability pension, keeping in mind the
present inflation. The Ministry should also fix certain amount as
minimum unemployment allowance/disability pension being
provided to disabled persons by State Governments/UTs.
32. Disability Certificates are issued by the Medical Board duly
constituted by the Central and State Governments. The Medical
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Board consists of three members out of which at least one member
has to be specialist in the particular field for assessing
locomotor/visual disability including low vision/hearing and speech
disability, mental retardation and leprosy cured, as the case may be.
The Committee find that due to complicated procedure getting a
disability certificate is very difficult for persons with disabilities. The
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment has deposed
before the Committee that only 22 percent of the targeted population
has been issued Disability Certificate. The Committee have been
informed that the Committee set up to simplify the procedure of
issuing µDisability Certificate ¶ has recommended that the power to
certify disability should be brought down from the district level to the
CHC or the PHC level. These recommendations can be implemented
by an amendment in the rules notified under the PWD Act and the
Ministry are in the process of preparing those rules.  The Committee
recommend that the Ministry should take expeditious steps to
amend the relevant rules notified under the PWD Act.
 The Committee find that if a person is refused Disability
Certificate, he/she has to again give a representation to the Medical
Board, which would then review the decision having regard to all the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

facts and circumstance of the case and pass such order in the matter
as it thinks fit. The Committee find it ironical. A person who has been
refused to get Disability Certificate by Medical Board again has to
give representation to Medical Board. The Committee are of the view
that if once Medical Board has refused, it will hesitate to issue the
disability certificate.  So, in such cases the competent authority to
reconsider the issuance of Disability Certificate should be other than
the Medical Board.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that
this procedure should also be reviewed thoroughly and
amended accordingly.
33. Various travel concessions are provided to persons with
disabilities. They are given 75% concession in railway journey. Some
States give them free transportation by bus and some States give
50% concession. For availing these concessions different passes are
issued to persons with disabilities. So the person with disability has to
obtain several passes, which creates problem for them. It is a fact
that for a person who is suffering from disabilities, keeping various
passes during travel is very difficult. The Committee recommend
that to overcome the problem of keeping up various passes, the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Ministry should issue National Identity Card containing all the
particulars of individuals to persons with disabilities, which
should be valid for availing all travel concessions.
NEW DELHI;
October 15  , 2008
Asvina 23, 1930(S)
    (C. KUPPUSAMI)
                 Chairman
Committee on Estimates.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

           A n n e x u r e - I
Statement indicating Budget Estimates and Expenditure under Plan for the last five years
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07Sl. No.
    BE Exp     BE Exp   BE Exp    BE Exp    BE Exp
      1      4      6      8 10   12 14    16 18    20  21
Central Sector
Scheme (CS)
1. National Institute for
the Visually
Handicapped
4.00 4.00 7.00 6.50 6.05 0.55 5.50 3.45 5.50 5.00
2. National Institute for
the Orthopeadically
Handicapped
2.00 1.80 3.50 3.00 4.50 3.00 4.50 2.50 4.50 3.50
3. National Institute for
the Hearing
Handicapped
6.00 5.80 8.00 7.50 9.00 5.86 10.00 6.15 7.50 7.00
4. National Institute for
the Mentally
Handicapped
6.00 5.75 9.00 7.76 9.50 9.62 11.00 10.99 11.00 8.72
5. NIRTAR, Cuttack 6.00 6.00 7.00 7.00 6.25 6.25 6.25 7.24 7.00 7.00
6. Institute for the
physically
handicapped
2.00 2.00 3.00 1.34 2.50 1.50 2.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
7. National Institute for the
Multiple Handicapped
2.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 6.50 7.49 6.50 6.50
8. Artificial Limb
Manufacturing
Corporation
4.00 2.20 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.30 1.25
9. Scheme of Assistance
to Disabled persons
for purchase/fitting of
Aids and Appliances
55.00 57.0
0
57.00 55.00 67.00 63.19 67.00 57.91 71.20 67.62
10. Deen Dayal Disabled
Rehabilitation Scheme
72.00 75.5
0
79.00 71.00 90.00 67.31 90.00 66.80 90.00 54.51
11. Indian Spinal Injury
Centre
4.00 2.50 3.50 2.50 3.50 2.62 3.50 2.99 3.50 3.27
12. Rehabilitation Council
of India
4.00 4.00 3.00 2.09 3.00 2.01 3.00 2.85 3.00 2.91
13. N.H.F.D.C. 15.00 10.0
0
10.00 0.00 11.00 1.00 11.00 11.00 11.00 5.50
14. Schemes arising out
of the implementation
of the Persons with
Disabilities Act, 1995
30.50 9.66 20.70 2.53 31.00 10.04 25.34 13.42 16.00 7.38
15. Science & Technology
Mission Mode
2.00 0.83 1.80 1.00 2.00 0.37 2.00 0.51 1.00 0.50
16. College of
Rehabilitation
Sciences etc.
10.63 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
17. Miscellaneous
Scheme
 [I]   IT Plan 0.25 0.50 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.22 0.50 0.28 0.50 0.50
 [II]  Others 0.75 0.50 0.75 0.79 0.75 0.78 1.50 1.14 1.50 0.90
18. O/o Chief
Commissioner for
Persons with
Disabilities
1.00 0.78 0.00 Transferred to N.P. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
19. National Trust for the
Persons with Mental
Retardation Cerebral
0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Palsy, Autism and
Multiple Disabilities
 Centrally Sponsored
Scheme (CSS)
20. Employment of the
Handicapped
0.00 1.44 2.00 0.25 2.00 1.54 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00
 External Aided Project
(EAP)
21. UNDP funded-Support
to children with
disability
2.37 2.01 1.00 0.36 0.30 0.29 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
 New Scheme
22. Centre for Visually,
hearing and
Orthopaedically
Disabled Persons in
Collaboration with the
Govt. of Japan
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00
229.50 193.
27
219.50 168.87 250.60 177.15 250.60 195.72 243.00 183.06
Central Sector Scheme (CS): Those schemes which are implemented by the Ministry or its agencies
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS): Those schemes which are implemented through State Govt./UT Administration
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

           A n n e x u r e I I
         Statement indicating Budget Estimates and Expenditure under Non-Plan for the last five years                                       Rs. in Crore
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
BE Exp BE Exp BE Exp BE Exp BE Exp
National Institute for the
Visually Handicapped
3.99 3.99 3.99 3.99 4.40 4.40 4.57 4.86 4.77 4.71
National Institute for
Orthopaedically
Handicapped
2.66 2.66 2.66 2.66 2.92 2.80 2.99 3.28 3.14 3.14
National Institute for
Hearing Handicapped
4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.67 4.42 4.85 5.16 5.06 5.06
National Institute for
Rehabilitation, Trg. &
Research
3.72 2.26 3.57 3.57 3.92 3.92 4.05 4.05 4.24 4.09
Institute for Physically  3.72 3.72 3.72 3.72 4.10 4.10 4.20 3.09 4.38 4.30
National Institute for
Mentally Handicapped
2.39 2.39 2.39 2.39 2.63 2.63 2.70 2.70 2.82 2.77
Estt. of Rehabilitation
Centres
4.00 4.20 4.20 4.62 4.60 4.85 4.85 3.00 0.01 0.00
Rehabilitation Council of
India
0.88 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.90 0.85 0.90 0.80 0.93 0.90
Handling Clearance of
Duty Free
Consignments
3.00 7.00 3.82 5.06 4.00 4.99 4.00 3.60 4.05 4.05
Chief Commissioner for
Persons with Disabilities
Under Plan 0.90 0.88 0.40 1.05 1.00 0.93 1.26 1.05
National Commission for
Persons with Disability
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.03 1.44 0.81 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Total 28.61 31.32 30.35 32.02 33.98 34.82 34.11 31.47 30.66 30.07
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

      Annexure III
 List of the Sanctioned DDRCs
S.No Name of the State/UT Name of the DDRC
1. Andaman & Nicobar DDRC Port blair
2. Andhra Pradesh DDRC Anantpur
3. Andhra Pradesh DDRC Karimnagar
4. Andhra Pradesh DDRC Vishakapatnam
5. Arunachal Pradesh DDRC Itanagar
6. Assam DDRC Dibrugarh
7. Assam DDRC Silchar
8. Assam DDRC Tezpur
9. Bihar DDRC Banka
10. Bihar DDRC Chapra
11. Bihar DDRC Darbhanga
12. Bihar DDRC Gaya
13. Bihar DDRC Jehanabad
14. Bihar DDRC  Kishanganj
15. Bihar DDRC Muzaffarpur
16. Bihar DDRC Nawada
17. Bihar DDRC Samastipur
18. Chattisgarh DDRC Bastar
19. Chattisgarh DDRC Durg
20. Chattisgarh DDRC Jashpur
21. Chattisgarh DDRC Raigarh
22. Chattisgarh DDRC Raipur
23. Dadra & Nagar Haveli DDRC Silvassa
24. Daman & Diu DDRC Diu
25. Goa DDRC Panaji
26. Gujarat DDRC Ahmedabad
27. Gujarat DDRC Bhavnagar
28. Gujarat DDRC Jamnagar
29. Gujarat DDRC Junagarh
30. Gujarat DDRC Nadiad
31. Gujarat DDRC Rajkot
31. Gujarat DDRC Surat
33. Gujarat DDRC Vadodara
34. Haryana DDRC Hissar
35. Haryana DDRC Kurukshetra
36. Haryana DDRC Rohtak
37. Haryana DDRC Sonepat
38. Himachal Pradesh DDRC Dharamsala
39. Himachal Pradesh DDRC Shimla
40. Jammu & Kashmir DDRC Anantnag
41. Jammu & Kashmir DDRC Leh
42. Jammu & Kashmir DDRC Udhampur
43. Jharkhand DDRC Dumka
44. Jharkhand DDRC Hazaribag
45. Jharkhand DDRC Jamshedpur
46. Jharkhand DDRC Ranchi
47. Karnataka DDRC Belgaum
48. Karnataka DDRC Bellary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

49. Karnataka DDRC Gulbarga
50. Karnataka DDRC Mandya
51. Karnataka DDRC Mangalore
52. Karnataka DDRC Tumkur
53. Kerela DDRC Kozhikode
54. Kerela DDRC Thiruvananathapuram
55. Kerela DDRC Thrissur
56. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Agar
57. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Alote
58. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Balaghat
59. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Damoh
60. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Dewas
61. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Gwalior
62. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Indore
63. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Jawad
64. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Jhabua
65. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Khargaon
66. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Mandsaur
67. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Rajgarh
68. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Rewa
69. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Sagar
70. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Satna
71. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Ujjain
72. Maharashtra DDRC Aurangabad
73. Maharashtra DDRC Buldana
74. Maharashtra DDRC Dadar/Mahim
75. Maharashtra DDRC Kolhapur
76. Maharashtra DDRC Latur
77. Maharashtra DDRC Sindhudurg
78. Maharashtra DDRC Wardha
79. Manipur DDRC Imphal
80. Megahalaya DDRC Shillong
81. Mizoram DDRC Aizwal
82. Mizoram DDRC Kolasib+Mamit
83. Mizoram DDRC Lunglei+Lunglit
84. Nagaland DDRC Dimapur
85. Orissa DDRC Ganjam
86. Orissa DDRC Kalahandi
87. Orissa DDRC Koraput
88. Orissa DDRC Mayurbhanj
89. Orissa DDRC Phulbani
90. Orissa DDRC Sambalpur
91. Pondicherry DDRC Pondichery
92. Punjab DDRC Bhatinda
93. Punjab DDRC Ferozepur
94. Punjab DDRC Hoshiarpur
95. Punjab DDRC Patiala
96. Punjab DDRC Sangrur
97. Rajasthan DDRC Bikaner
98. Rajasthan DDRC Jhunjhnu
99. Rajasthan DDRC Jodhpur
100. Rajasthan DDRC Tonk
101. Rajasthan DDRC Udaipur
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

102. Sikkim DDRC Gangtok
103. Tamil Nadu DDRC Kanyakumari
104. Tamil Nadu DDRC Madurai
105. Tamil Nadu DDRC Salem
106. Tamil Nadu DDRC Thoothukudi
107. Tamil Nadu DDRC Vellore
108. Tamil Nadu DDRC Virudhunagar
109. Tripura DDRC Agartala
110. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Agra
111. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Allahabad
112. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Ambedkar Nagar
113. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Balia
114. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Farrukhabad
115. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Gonda
116. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Gorakpur
117. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Jhansi
118. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Mau
119. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Meerut
120. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Pilibhit
121. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Raibarielly
122. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Varanasi
123. Uttaranchal DDRC Almorah
124. Uttaranchal DDRC Haridwar
125. Uttaranchal DDRC Tehri Garwal
126. West Bengal DDRC 24 Parganas North
127. West Bengal DDRC Dakshin Dinajpur
128. West Bengal DDRC Jalpaigudi
129. West Bengal DDRC Murshidabad
130. Andaman & Nicobar DDRC Nicobar
131. Andhra Pradesh DDRC Srikakkulum
132. Arunachal Pradesh DDRC East Kamang
133. Arunachal Pradesh DDRC Tawang
134. Assam DDRC Barpeta
135. Assam DDRC Dhemji+Lakhimpur
136. Assam DDRC Dhubri
137. Assam DDRC Jorhat
138. Assam DDRC Karimganj
139. Assam DDRC Nagaoan+Marigaon
140. Bihar DDRC Araria
141. Bihar DDRC Aurangabad(Bihar)
142. Bihar DDRC Begusarai
143. Bihar DDRC Bhojpur
144. Bihar DDRC East Champaran
145. Bihar DDRC Kaimur
146. Bihar DDRC Katihar
147. Bihar DDRC Madhubani
148. Bihar DDRC Nalanda
149. Bihar DDRC Vaishali (Hajipur)
150 Chattisgarh DDRC Dhamtari
151. Chattisgarh DDRC Rajnandgaon
152. Gujarat DDRC Dahod
153. Gujarat DDRC Surendranagar
154. Haryana DDRC Fatehbad
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

155. Himachal Pradesh DDRC Chamba
156. Himachal Pradesh DDRC Kinnaur
157. Jammu & Kashmir DDRC Baramulla
158. Jammu & Kashmir DDRC Doda
159. Jammu & Kashmir DDRC Poonch
160. Jharkhand DDRC Dhanbad
161. Karnataka DDRC Bidar
162. Kerela DDRC Pathanamthitta
163. Lakshwadeep DDRC Lakshwadeep
164. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Chindwara
165. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Guna
166. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Khandwa
167. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Sehore
168. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Shivpuri
169. Madhya Pradesh DDRC Vidisha
170. Maharastra DDRC Gondia
171. Maharastra DDRC Hingoli
172. Maharastra DDRC Nanded
173. Manipur DDRC Churanchandrapur
174. Manipur DDRC Thoubal
175. Megahalaya DDRC East Garo Hills
176. Megahalaya DDRC Janitia Hills
177. Nagaland DDRC Mon
178. Nagaland DDRC Tuensang
179. Orissa DDRC Jajapur
180. Orissa DDRC Keonjhar
181. Orissa DDRC Nabrangpur
182. Pondicherry DDRC Karaikal
183. Punjab DDRC Amritsar
184. Punjab DDRC Moga
185. Punjab DDRC Nawanshahr
186. Rajasthan DDRC Ajmer
187. Rajasthan DDRC Jalore
188. Rajasthan DDRC Jaselmer
189. Rajasthan DDRC Pali
190. Tamil Nadu DDRC Perambalur
191. Tripura DDRC Dhalai
192. Tripura DDRC North Tripura
193. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Maharajganj
194. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Mathura
195. Uttar Pradesh DDRC Muzzafarnagar
196. Uttaranchal DDRC Bageshwar
197. Uttaranchal DDRC Nanital
198. West Bangal DDRC Birbhum (at Bolpur)
199. West Bengal DDRC Cooch Behar
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

     Annexure IV
Statement showing the position regarding number of vacancies reserved
and number of appointments of Persons with Disabilities made during 2004
in various Ministries/Departments of Government of India
S.
No.
Ministry/Depart-
ment
Total
direct
recruitme
nts made
in 2004
No. of vacancies reserved
for
No. of appointments
made of
VH HH OH Total VH  HH OH  Total
1. D/o Economic
Affairs
   5 - 1 4 5 - - - -
2. D/o Science &
Tech.
   10 - 2 186 188 - - 1 1
3. D/o Space    372 - 3 15 18 - 2 9 11
4. M/o Textiles    13 12 13 3 28 - - - -
5. President
Secretariat
   1 - - - - - - 1 1
6. PMO    - - - - - - - - -
7. D/o Fertilizers    - - - - - - - - -
8. M/o Power    1 - - - - - - - -
9. D/o Chemicals &
Petrochemicals
   - - 1 1 2 - - - -
10. D/o Heavy
Industry
   - - - - - - - - -
11. Planning
Commission
   - - 1 - 1 - - - -
12. Vice President
Sectt.
   - - - - - - - - -
13. D/o
Biotechnology
   - - - - - - -- - -
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

14. D/o Defence
Prod.
   247 39 64 108 211 25 33 80 138
15. O/o C&AG    533 27 37 72 136 1 1 5 7
16. D/o Agri.&Coop.    16 5 6 9 20 1 1 2 4
17. D/o Expenditure    - - - 1 1 - - - -
18. D/o Animal Hus.
& Dairying
   8 2 2 3 7 1 - 1 2
19. Cabinet Sectt.    5 - - - - - - - -
20. D/o Atomic
Energy
   495 17 18 14 49 1 4 16 21
21. M/o Defence    1,370 66 94 146 306 23 43 83 149
22. D/o Information &
Technology
   5 - 2 2 4 - - - -
23. M/o Civil Aviation    - - - - - - - - -
24. D/o Commerce    139 1 - 1 2 1 1 - 2
25. D/o Public
Enterprises
   3,009 73 37 131 241 87 7 108 202
26. M/o Labour    8 4 2 2 8 - - 2 2
27. MHA    16 2 1 4 7 - - 2 2
28. D/o Scientific &
Indl. Research
   - - - - - - - -- -
29. M/o External
Affairs
   1 - - - - - - - -
30. M/o Parl. Affairs    - - - - - - - - -
31. D/o Shipping    11 1 2 8 11 - - - -
32. M/o Stas. & Prog.
Imp.
   1 - - 1 1 - - 1 1
33. D/o Ocean
Develop.
   - - - - - - - - -
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

34. D/o IP & P    34 3 5 26 34 - 1 6 7
35. D/o Consumer
Affairs
   - - - 4 4 - - - -
36. Legislative Deptt.    - - - - - - - - -
37. D/o Shipping    11 1 2 8 11 - - - -
38. M/o Water
Resources
   44 14 16 24 54 - 1 11 12
39. M/o SSI & Agro
Rural Industries
40. M/o Culture    3  - 3 3 - - 1 1
41. D/o Women &
Child
Development
   - - - - - - - - -
42. M/o Steel    - - - - - - - - -
 Total    6,358 267 309 776 1352 140 94 329 563
VH ± Visually Handicapped
HH ± Hearing Handicapped
OH ± Orthopaedically Handicapped
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

  ANNEXURE-V
State/UT-Wise details of Disability Pension being granted to persons with disabilities
Sl.No. States Disability Pension
1. Andhra Pradesh 200 P.M. w.e.f. 1.4.2006
2. Bihar Stipend of Rs.100/- P.M. to PwDs below poverty line
3. Chandigarh Rs.200/- P.M.
4. Chhattisgarh Rs.150/- P.M.
5. Daman & Diu Rs.60
6. Dadra and Nagar Haveli Rs.60/- P.M.
7. Delhi Rs.60/-
8. Goa Rs.1000/- P.M.
9. Gujarat Rs.200/- to PWDs with more than 75% disability under
SANT SURDAS SCHEME
10. Haryana Rs.300 to 600 P.M.
11. H.P. Rs.200/- under the Scheme µDistress Relief Allowance¶
12. J & K Rs.300 through money order
13. Jharkhand Prothsahan Bhatta of Rs.200 P.M. under Swami
Vivekanand Nihshakta Swavalamban Prothsahan
Yojna
14. Karnataka Maintenance Allowance of Rs.400/- P.M. to
economically backward PwD from April, 2007
15. Kerala Rs.150/- P.M. w.e.f. August, 2005
16. Lakshadeep Rs.300/- P.M. w.e.f. 1.4.2006
17. Maharashtra Pension of Rs.250/- given under Sanjay Gandhi
Niradhar Yojna through  banks. (In case of more than
one PH in one family, pension is provided to the family
@Rs.500/- for two and Rs.625 for more than two.
18. Manipur Financial Assistance of Rs.1000/- per head
19. M.P. Social Security Pension of Rs.150/- P.M.
20. Nagaland Rs.100/-
21. Orissa Pension/Subsistence Allowance of Rs.200/- P.M.
22. Pondicherry
23. Punjab Rs.200/-P.M.
24. Rajasthan Rs.200/-P.M.
25. Sikkim Rs.500/-P.M.
26. Tamil Nadu Maintenance Allowance per beneficiary to severely
disabled including mentally retarded
27. Tripura Rs.125/- P.M.
28. U.P. Rs.125/- P.M.
29. Uttrakhand Rs.400/- P.M.
30. W.B. Rs.400/- P.M.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

      APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
 FOURTH SITTING
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 3rd July, 2007 from 1500 hours to
1630 hours.
     Present
 Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman
Members
2. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
3. Shri Anwar Hussain
4. Shri P. Karunakaran
5. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
6. Shri Samik Lahiri
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
8. Shri D. Narbula
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Prabodh Panda
11. Shri Sukdeo Paswan
12. Shri Sachin Pilot
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Smt. Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi
16. Shri Lakshman Singh
17. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
18. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
Secretariat
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint Secretary
2.      Shri C.V. Gadgil   - Director
Witnesses
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
1. Dr. Sundeep Khanna  -   Additional Secy. (SJ&E)
2. Shri Ashish Kumar   -   Deputy Director
3. Ms. Purnima Singh   -  Joint Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4. Shri Vinod Aggarwal  -  Joint Secretary
5. Dr. Manoj Kumar   -  Chief Commissioner for
         Persons with Disabilities
2. The Committee was briefed by the representatives of  Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment on the subject - µProgrammes and Schemes for
Welfare of Persons with Disabilities. ¶. The briefing was concluded.
3.            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

       APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
 FIFTH SITTING
The Committee sat on Monday, the 23rd July, 2007 from 1100 hours to
1310 hours.
      Present
Shri C. Kuppusami  -  Chairman
Members
2. Shri Lal  Muni Choubey
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5. Shri P. Karunakaran
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
7.  Shri Samik Lahiri
8. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri Sukdeo Paswan
11.  Shri Sachin Pilot
12. Shri Tufani Saroj
13.  Smt. Tejaswini Seeramesh
14.      Shri Arjuncharan Sethi
15.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
16.  Shri Lakshman Singh
17.  Kunwar Manvendra Singh
18. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
19.   Shri Rewati Raman Singh
20.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
Secretariat
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary
2. Shri C.V. Gadgil  - Director (I)
3. Smt. Manju Choudhary - Deputy Secretary II
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Witnesses
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
(i) Dr. (Smt.)Veena Chhotray - Secretary
(ii)  Sh. Ashish Kumar  - Deputy Director General
(iii) Ms. Purnima Singh  - Joint Secretary
CHIEF COMMISSIONER FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
(i) Dr. Manoj Kumar
THE NATIONAL TRUST FOR THE WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH AUTISM,
CEREBRAL PALSY, MENTAL RETARDATION AND MULTIPLE DISABILITIES
(i) Ms.Poonam Natrajan  - Chairman
NATIONAL HANDICAPPED FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
(i) Sh. M. Ravi Kanth  - Chairman & Managing Director
REHABILITATION COUNCIL OF INDIA
(i)  Dr. J.P. Singh  - Member Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry
of Social Justice and Empowerment to the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment on the subject µProgrammes and
Schemes for Welfare of Persons with Disabilities ¶.
4. Hon ¶ble Chairman and Members of the Committee raised several points,
such as employment for the disabled, unemployment allowance, rehabilitation of
the persons with disabilities and availability of certain aids to them, penal
provisions for deterrence of physical abuse of disabled persons, role and powers
of Chief Commissioner of Disabilities, higher education to such persons,
providing training to the teachers and the right kind of teaching learning material,
programme for eradication of fluorosis and role of Rehabilitation Council of India
etc.
5. Thereafter, the Hon ¶ble Chairman, Estimates Committee asked the
representatives to furnish detailed notes on some of points to which full
information was not readily available with the representatives.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

6. The Committee also decided to take oral evidence of Rehabilitation
Council of India in due course.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

       APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
 SEVENTH SITTING
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th October, 2007 from 1100
hours to 1255 hours.
    PRESENT
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, MP   - Chairman
MEMBERS
2.  Shri Lal  Muni Choubey
3. Shri Anant Gudhe
4. Shri Anwar Hussain
5. Shri P. Karunakaran
6. Shri Vijoy Krishna
7. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
8. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
9.  Shri Prabodh Panda
10.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan
11. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
12.  Shri Lakshman Singh
13. Kunwar Manvendra Singh
14.  Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
15.  Shri Rewati Raman Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint Secretary
2. Shri C.V. Gadgil   - Director
3. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Deputy Secretary II
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
 1. Dr. (Smt.) Veena Chhotray, Secretary
2. Sh. Ashish Kumar, Deputy Director General
3. Ms. Purnima Singh, Joint Secretary
REHABILITATION COUNCIL OF INDIA
1. Major General (Retd.) Ian Cardozo, Chairman
2. Dr. J.P. Singh, Member Secretary
2. At the outset Hon ¶ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and Rehabilitation Council of India.
The representatives briefed the Committee on the subject ³Programmes and
Schemes for Welfare of Persons with disabilities ´. Then they replied to the
queries raised by the Members of the Committee on the subject. Committee
Members were particularly interested to know whether the RCI Act, legislated in
1992, required immediate amendments in order to bring it in conformity with the
73rd and 74 th Constitutional Amendments of 1992-93. They pointed out that
implementation of provisions of RCI Act, 1992 needed to be done through
involvement of panchayats and not only NGOs.
3. The Committee decided to undertake a study tour to Kolkata, Port Blair
and Chennai from 30th October to 3rd November, 2007.
4. The Committee also decided to hold their next sitting on 23rd October,
2007 to take the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Human
Resources Development and University Grants Commission on the subject
³University Grants Commission´
5.            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

        A P P E N D I X I V
MINUTES OF THIRD SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 20th June, 2008 from 1130 to 1300
hours.
     PRESENT
               Shri C. Kuppusami - Chairman
 MEMBERS
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Lal Muni Choubey
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5. Shri P. Karunakaran
6. Shri Vijoy Krishna
7. Shri Samik Lahiri
8. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
14. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
15. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
16. Shri Lakshman Singh
17. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
18. Shri Jagdish Tytler
19. Shri K. Virupakshappa
20. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1.      Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary
2.      Shri C.V. Gadgil  -  Director
3.      Smt. Manju Chaudhary - Deputy Secretary ± II
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Witnesses
Handicapped Welfare Federation
  Shri Satish Malik  - General Secretary
National Federation of the Blinds
Shri S. K. Rungta  - General Secretary
All India Federation of the Deaf
1. Km. Surrendar Saini  -  President
2. Shri D.P. Sahay  - General Secretary
3. Shri Suraj Prakash  - Treasurer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of NGOs viz.
Handicapped Welfare Federation, National Federation of the Blinds and All India
Federation of the Deaf.
3. The representatives of NGOs apprised the members about the problems
being faced by them while implementing programmes and schemes for welfare of
persons with disabilities such as insufficient funds, delayed grants, tapering off
grants, low quality devices provided under ADIP scheme, etc. The
representatives also gave their suggestions in this regard. They suggested that a
separate department should be constituted to deal efficiently with the problems
faced by the persons with disabilities, an agency should be appointed to check
the quality of devices provided under ADIP scheme, persons suffering from
thalasimia should also be considered as disabled persons, single national identity
card should be issued to every disabled person to avail the facilities, and to
simplify the procedure for issuance of disability certificates, etc.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX V
MINUTES OF FOURTH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 20 th June, 2008 from 1440 to 1540
hours.
     PRESENT
               Shri C. Kuppusami - Chairman
 MEMBERS
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Lal Muni Choubey
4. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
5. Shri Anant Gudhe
6. Shri P. Karunakaran
7. Shri Vijoy Krishna
8. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri D. Vittal Rao
13. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
14. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
15. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
16. Shri Lakshman Singh
17. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
18. Shri Jagdish Tytler
19. Shri K. Virupakshappa
20. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1.      Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary
2.      Shri C.V. Gadgil  -  Director
3.      Smt. Manju Chaudhary - Deputy Secretary ± II
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Witnesses
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
1. Shir K.M. Acharya   - Secretary
2. Ms. Sangita Gairola  - Additional Secretary
3. Shri Ashish Kumar  - Deputy Director
General
4. Ms. Purnima Singh  - Joint Secretary
5. Shri Vinod Aggarwal - Joint Secretary
Chief Commissioner for Persons with
Disabilities, New Delhi
  Shri. T.D. Dhariyal   - Deputy CCD
Rehabilitation Council of India
  Major General (Retd.) Ian Cardozo   - Chairman
National Trust for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy,
Mental Retardation and  Multiple Disabilities, New Delhi
  Ms. Poonam Natrajan - Chairperson
National Handicapped Finance and Development Corporation, Faridabad,
Haryana
  Shri M. Ravi Kanth  - Chairman & Managing
Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry
of Social Justice and Empowerment to the sitting of the Committee.
3. As directed by Hon ¶ble Chairman, Secretary Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment initially briefed the Committee on the subject, µProgrammes and
schemes for welfare of persons with disabilities ¶. Thereafter, the representatives
of the Ministry replied to the queries made by the Members of the Committee.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The discussion centred around the issues pertaining to difficulties faced by
NGOs while implementing the programmes and schemes for welfare of persons
with disabilities such as simplifying the procedure of releasing grants to the
NGOs, issue of disability certificate to disabled persons, tapering off grants, etc.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

       APPENDIX VI
MINUTES OF SIXTH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 8 th September, 2008 from 1100 to
1240 hours.
     PRESENT
               Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale
3. Shri Lal Muni Choubey
4 Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
5. Shri Anant Gudhe
6. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
7. Shri P. Karunakaran
8. Shri Vijoy Krishna
9. Shri Samik Lahiri
10. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi
13. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
14. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
15. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
16. Shri Lakshman Singh
17. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
18. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
19. Shri K. Virupakshappa
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.S Saxena   -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri V.S Negi   -  Director
3. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Deputy Secretary ± II
2. The Committee considered the draft Report on Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment on the subject, µProgrammes and schemes for welfare of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

persons with disabilities ¶ and adopted the same with some
modifications/additions as given in the Annexure.
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report in the light
of modifications/additions and other consequential changes, if any, arising out of
factual verification by the concerned Ministry and present the same to the House.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Annexure
Modifications/additions made by the Estimates Committee in the Draft Report on
Ministry Social Justice and Empowerment on the subject, ‘Programmes and
schemes for welfare of persons with disabilities’.
Page No.  Para No . Line    Modifications/Additions
84 2  7 (from top)  For           :  outside agency
Substitute : autonomous body
90  7  10 (from top)  After          : by them.
Add            : They also recommend
that appropriate penal
action should be taken
against those NGOs
who have misused the
grants.
98  13  11 (from top)  After         : Committee recommend
that
Add         : all Nationalised  banks
should be given
instructions to accept
loan applications of
disabled persons and
112-113 23  Last line  After : regard.
Add         : The Committee also
recommend that a
separate panel should
be set-up for promotion
of disabled persons and
PWD Act should be
amended accordingly
125  33  4   After         : Identity Card
Add        : containing all the
particulars of individuals
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages