E.C.No.1418 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS 
– BANKING DIVISION) 
 
PUBLIC SECTOR BANKS - 
NON PERFORMING ASSETS 
 
 
S 
 
E 
 
A 
 
L 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  25.04.2005 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April 2005/Vaisa kha 1927 (S)
 1

 CONTENTS 
 
PART A 
       
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
      Introduction  
           
Chapter I-System of Income Recognition, Asset             
Classification and Provisioning 
 
-Introductory 
-Prudential Norms on I ncome Recognition, Asse t Cla ssification a nd 
Provisioning 
-Income Recognition 
-System of Assets Classification 
-Asset classification to be borrower-wise and not facility-wise 
-Provisioning norms 
-Norms for Agricultural advances 
-Government guaranteed advances 
-Advances granted under rehabilitation packages approved by BIFR/term 
lending institutions 
-Factors responsible for NPAs 
-Provisioning made by Banks for NPAs 
-Under Reporting of NPAs. 
 
  CHAPTER–II   Sanction of Loans/Advances    
   
-Loan Policy and Loan Recovery Policy 
   -On-s ite Inspection 
   -Off-site Surveillance and Monitoring System 
   -Qua rterly Monitoring System 
   -Qua rterly Informal Meeting 
   -Use of External Auditors as Supervisory Resources 
   -Prom pt Corrective Action (PCA) 
   -Sanction of credit in excess of prudential exposure  
limits 
-Compliance of banks with the Inspection Reports 
 by RBI 
 
    
 CHAPTER III     Staff Accountability             
 - Transgression of Delegated Powers 
   -Central Vigilance Commission (CVC)’s 
     Jurisdiction over Bank functionaries/officers 
 
 CHAPTER IV Recovery of NPAs     
   -Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) 
   -The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial  
 2
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 
2002 (SARFAESI Act) 

-Securitisation and Reconstruction  Companies (SC&RC) 
-Recovery of NPAs under SARFAESI Act 
-Recovery of  Loa ns/Dues thro ugh Co mpromise/One Time  Settlement  
System 
(i) Settlement Advisory Committees 
(ii) One Time Settlement Scheme for small sector 
(iii) Recoveries under OTS upto Rs. 5 crore 
(iv) One Time S ettlement Scheme f or S mall Lo ans li mit upto Rs. 
25,000/-  
(v) One Time Settlment for NPAs in respect of loans to Small and 
Marginal Farmrs upto Rs. 50,000/- 
-One-time settlement scheme for NPAs upto Rs. 10 crore 
  
 CHAPTER V  Writing Off Loans/Advances            
 
 CHAPTER VI Wilful Default and Diversion of Funds      
    
- Wilful Default of Loans 
(a) Definition 
(b) Diversion and Siphoning of Funds 
(c) Cut-off limits 
(d) Penal measures 
(e) End-use of Funds  
- Role of Auditors 
- Criminal Liability/action against diversion/ siphoning of funds 
- Classification of borrowers as Wilful Defaulters  
 
CHAPTER VII  Corporate Debt Restructuring             
 
CHAPTER VIII  Credit Information Bureau                   
 
PART  B 
 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee   
 
    Annexures I to XIV                 
 
    APPENDICES 
 
 I Minutes of the sitting of EC held on 10.12.2003. 
      
 II Minutes of the sitting of EC held on 02.12.2004.  
   
 III Minutes of the sitting of EC held  on 22.03.2005.    
  
 IV Statement of  conclusions/recommendations    
    
 
    
 3

COMPOSITION OF ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami, MP  - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
2.       Shri A. Sai Prathap 
3.       Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4.       Shri Chander Kumar 
5.       Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
6.       Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7.       Shri Anant Gudhe 
8.       Shri Jai Prakash 
9.       Shri N.N. Krishnadas 
10.       Shri Samik Lahiri 
11.       Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
12.       Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato 
13.       Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
14.       Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15.       Shri Prabodh Panda  
16.       Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.       Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
18.       Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
19.       Shri Harikewal Prasad 
20.       Prof. M. Ramadass 
21.       Shri K.S. Rao 
22.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
23.       Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
24.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
25.       Shri Laxman Singh 
26.       Shri Sartaj Singh 
27.       Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
28.       Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
29.       Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
30.       Shri Vijay Krishan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   -   Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.  Singh   - PCPI 
4. Shri Cyril John   - Under Secretary 
5. Shri M.K. Madhusudan  - Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the C hairman of the E stimates Committee, havi ng been 
authorised by the Committee to su bmit the report on their behalf 
 4

present this Sixth Report on the Mi nistry of Finance (D epartment of 
Economic Affairs – Banking Divisio n) – ‘Public Sector Banks – Non 
Performing Assets’. 
2. The subject, ‘Public Sector Banks – Non Performing Assets’ 
 was sel ected for detailed exami nation by the Estimates Committee 
(2002-2003).  The Estimates Committ ee examined every aspect of 
the subject by cal ling for detaile d written information and  taki ng 
evidence of the representative s of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs – Banking Division) and RBI  on 
10.12.2003 and 2.12.2004. During t heir study tours the Committee 
held informal discussion with 26 Publ ic Sector Banks to get first hand 
information on the subject.   The Committee wish to express their  
thanks to the Officers of the Mini stry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs – Banki ng Divisi on), RBI and the Public Sector 
Banks for placing before them  detailed written notes on the subject 
and for furni shing information desired i n connection with the 
examination of the subject.   The Committee also appreciate the 
frankness with which the officers shared their views, perceptions and 
constraints with the Committee. 
3. The Committee would also like to express their gratitude to the  
 5

Estimates Committee  2002-2003 and 2003-2004 for the able 
guidance and right direction provided by them in obtaining information 
for indepth and comprehensive study of the subject. 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
 their sitting held on 22nd March, 2005. 
 
5. The Report consi sts of ei ght chapters. The Committee have 
inter-alia made the following important 
observations/recommendations :- 
(i)  With a vi ew to further impr ove the performance of the public 
sector banks in relation to their control and containment of 
NPAs and to  develop a healthy and sound fi nancial system in 
the country, the following m easures may be taken by the 
Ministry of Finance/RBI:- 
1. RBI may require to im press upon banks about the  need 
to set up/strengthen their corporate research capabi lities 
and to furnish to credit ev aluation offi cials updated 
information on macro-economic   trends and the current 
state of  global competitiv eness; near-term prospects of 
various i ndustries; and the likely shifts i n relevant 
Government policies so that  potential NPAs can be 
detected at  the incipient st age and necessary correcti ve  
measures  taken by the banks for recovery of the  loans. 
 6

2. It should be ensured that corporate governance is   
implemented by all  the Publ ic Sector Banks on  priori ty 
basis over a time-bound period. 
     3. ‘Governance’ audits should be conducted  and   
penalties  imposed through increased capita l charge on 
non-compliant and errant  banks. 
     4.  Special  training  modules    for    staff    in   credit  
supervision and monitoring and recovery management be 
developed. 
(ii)  As per the extant rules, bank officials of the  rank of Scale III  
and above in the Public Sect or Banks are covered under the 
ambit of Central  Vigilance Commission. T he   Ministry of 
Finance should take up the matter w ith the CVC to  restrict the 
coverage of bank officials coming under the purview of  CVC so  
that officials of the banks are able to concentrate better on the 
core banking acti vity of lending credit and recovery of loans 
without being under the grip of undue  fear. 
(iii)  The Working Group headed by Shri Vinod Rai should go into 
the  entire gamut of functioni ng of DRTs and  suggest 
comprehensive  measures for co mplete overhaul of the DRT 
structure for speedy recovery of  bad loans. The Working Group 
 7

may also examine the feasibility of streamlining the existing  
procedures so that DRTs can take up high value cases on a 
priority  basis  and also for their expeditious settlement so that it 
would have a bearing on the overa ll recovery positi on of NPAs 
by the  banks/FIs.  
(iv) The Ministry of Finance should expl ore the possibili ty of  
constituting a separate cadre for m anning the DRTs and  till  
such time,  steps  should be tak en in the right earnest to fil l up 
the existing vacancies expediti ously. The Working Group 
headed by Shri Vinod  Rai may also  examine if there is a need  
of setting up more DRTs in t he country, besides, providing 
proper infrastructure and other amen ities to the existi ng DRTs 
for their efficient  functioning.  
  (v)  The  Committee are given to understand that at present  the   
Asset Reconstruction Company   (India) Ltd., (ARCIL) is  buying 
the bad assets of the Banks at  70 to 80% discount and besides 
banks have no guarantee that they will get any return from these 
assets, with the result that mo st banks are hesitant to transfer 
their assets to Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs).  The 
Committee feel  that  setti ng up of more Asset Reconstruction 
Companies  will lead to  healthy com petition  which in turn  will  
 8

force the Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) to acquire 
bad loans at better valuations.  
(vi)   Banks should further  streamline their Loan Recovery Policy and 
also evol ve innovative methods such as setti ng up of  Special 
Recovery Teams for recovery  of bad loans and explore the 
possibility of franchisi ng the job of recovery  of bad loans to an 
outside agency as has been done by some private banks such  
as ICICI Bank and HDFC Bank. They should also expl ore the 
possibility of  deploying other Value Added Services  that will aid 
banks in effective recovery of loans. 
(vii) Due diligence  sh ould be exercised by bank s while writing off  
loans and the number of accounts  as well as the amount written  
off should be kept to the barest mini mum. There shoul d not be 
any let up on the part of banks with regard to loans written off 
and concerted efforts should be made  for their recovery. 
(viii) Banks should make concerte d efforts to strengthen their credit 
appraisal and sanctioning syst em and post-di sbursement 
supervision so that the i ncidence of  wilful  defaul t can be 
detected at the incipient stage and corrective m easures   taken 
to check it. 
 9

(ix) Banks should adopt a proactiv e  approach in  filing  criminal 
cases against the wilful defaulte rs and  RBI should periodi cally 
review the progress made by th e banks in this regard. The 
efficacy of the exi sting penal provisions under sections 403 and 
415 of IPC in relation to action against wilful defaulters by banks 
may be got revi ewed  by the STAFCR set up by Ministry of 
Finance/RBI,   and legal and other  procedural changes, i f any, 
that may be required may  also be  made   so that  the menace 
of wilful default can be contained effectively. 
(x) There is a need  for rati onalisation of tenure of packages 
approved under CDR mechanism, which is presently divided 
into four time slabs.  The feasibility of reducing the time slabs  
from 4 to 3 and the possibil ity of  limiting the maximum tenure 
of package for repayment  of  loan to 15 years under CDR 
mechanism, should be examined. 
6. For facility of reference, t he observations/recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in  bold type in the body of the 
report and have also been reproduced in consoli dated form in the 
Appendix. 
 
New Delhi               C. Kuppusami  
 10

April 5, 2005       Chairman 
Chaitra 15, 1927(Saka)              Committee on Estimates 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
SYSTEM OF INCOME RECOGNITION ASSET  
CLASSIFICATION AND PROVISIONING 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
Developing of sound and heal thy financial  instituti ons, 
especially banks, is a sine qua  non for maintaining overal l 
stability of the financial system of the country.  The high level of 
NPAs in banks and financi al in stitutions has been a matter of 
grave concern to the pub lic as bank credit is the catalyst to the 
economic growth of the country and any bottleneck in the 
smooth fl ow of credit, one caus e for which is the mounting 
NPAs, is bound to create adverse repercussions on the 
economy.  When the loans taken  are not repaid, much of the 
funds go out  of f inancial system  and the cycle of l ending- 
repaying-borrowing is broken.  T he banks have also to repay 
their depositors and others from whom the money had been 
borrowed.  If the borrowers do not pay, the banks have to  
borrow additional funds to repay the depositors and creditors.   
This leads to a situation where banks are reluctant to lend fresh 
funds to new projects or the on-going projects thus choking the 
system.  Once the credit t o various sectors of the economy 
slows down, the economy i s badly hurt.  There is slow down in 
GDP growth and i ndustrial output an d fall in the profit margins 
 11

of the corporates which resultantly cause depression in the 
market. 
The most important business im plication of the NPAs is 
that it leads to  credit risk management assuming pri ority over 
other aspects of bank’s functioning.  The bank’ s whol e 
machinery would thus be pre-occupied with recovery 
procedures rather than concent rating on expanding business.   
A bank with a hi gh level of N PAs would be forced to incur 
carrying costs on  non-income yielding assets.  Other 
consequences would be reduction in interest income, high level 
of provisioning, stress on prof itability and capi tal adequacy, 
gradual decline i n abil ity to meet  steady increase in cost,  
increased pressure on net interest margin (NIM) thereb y 
reducing competiti veness, steady er osion of capital resources 
and increased difficulty in augmenting capital resources. 
Prudential  N orms on Income Recognition, Asset 
Classification and Provisioning 
 
In order to ensure greater t ransparency in the borrowal 
accounts and to reflect actual he alth of banks in their balance 
sheets, the RBI introduced prudent ial regul ations rel ating to 
income recogni tion, asset clas sification and provisi oning as 
recommended by the Narasimham Committee (1991) with 
certain modifications in a phased manner over a three-year 
period beginning 1992-93.  These re gulations have put in place 
objective criteria for asset classi fication, provi sioning and  
recognition of income, which was lacking hitherto.  This change 
has brought in the necessary quantification and objectivity into 
 12

the assessment of NPAs and provisioning in respect of problem 
credits.  The evol ution of the sy stem of asset classifi cation, 
income recogni tion and provisioning since i ts introduction in 
April, 1992 to the present, is briefly enumerated below :- 
1. Definition 
An asset, includi ng a leased asset, becomes non-
performing when it ceases to gener ate income for the bank.  A 
`Non-Performing Asset’(NPA)’ was defined as a credit facility in 
respect of which the interest and /or instalment of principal  or 
any other amount due to  the bank has remai ned  `past due’ for 
a specified period of time.   The specified period was reduced in 
a phased manner as under:- 
Year ending March 31  Specified period  
  
1993 four quarters 
1994   three quarters 
1995 onwards   two quarters 
An amount due under any credit fa cility is treated as “past 
due” when it has not been paid within 30 days from  the due 
date.  Due to the i mprovements in the payment and settlement 
systems, recovery climate, upgradation of technology in the 
banking system, etc. it was decided  to dispense with `past due’ 
concept, with effect from March 31, 2001. Accordingly, as from 
that date, a Non-performing Asset (NPA) shall be an advance 
where- 
(i) interest and/or instalment of principal remain overdue for  
a period of more than 180 da ys in respect of a Term 
Loan. 
 13

(ii) the account remai ns `out of order’ for a peri od of more 
than 180 days, in respect  of an Overdraft/Cash Credit 
(OD/CC). 
(iii) the bill remains overdue for a period of more than 180 
days, in the case of bills purchased and discounted. 
(iv) Interest and/or instalment of principal remains overdue for 
two harvest seasons but for a peri od not exceeding two 
half years in the case of an advance granted for 
agricultural purposes, and 
(v) Any amount to be received remains overdue for a peri od 
of more than 180 days in respect of other accounts. 
With a view to moving  towards international  best 
practices and to ensure greater transparency, it has been 
decided to adopt the `90 days overdue’ norm for identification of 
NPAs from the year ending March 31, 2004.   As a facilitating 
measure for smooth transiti on to 90 days norm, banks have 
been advised to m ove over to c harging of interest at monthl y 
rate by April  1,2002.  However,  the date of cl assification of an 
advance as  NPA should not  be changed on account of 
charging of interest at monthly rate.  Banks should, therefore, 
continue to classify an account as NPA only if the i nterest 
charged during any quarter is not serviced full y within 180 days 
from the end of the quarter with effect from  April 1,2002 and 90 
days from the end of the quarter with effect from March 31, 
2004. 
An account shoul d be treated as `out of order’ if the 
outstanding balance remai ns continuousl y in excess of the 
sanctioned limit/drawing power.  In cases where the 
 14

outstanding balance in the principal  operating account is less 
than the sanctioned limit/drawing power, but there are no 
credits continuously for six months as on the date of B alance 
Sheet or credits are not enough to cover the interest debi ted 
during the same period, these ac counts should be treated as 
`out of order’ . Any  amount due to the bank under any credit 
facility is `overdue’ if it is not  paid on the due date fixed by the 
bank. 
2. Income recognition  
Internationally income from non-pe rforming assets (NPA) is not  
recognised on accrual basis but is booked as income only when 
it is actually received.  T herefore, the banks should not charge 
and take to  income account  interest on any NPA. 
3. System of Assets Classification 
Asset cl assification system was i ntroduced by RBI in 
April, 1992.  It had been decided that banks should classif y 
their advances i nto four broad groups (i) standard assets (ii ) 
sub-standard assets, (iii) doubtful assets and (iv) loss assets by 
compressing the existing eight health codes.  Broadly  
speaking, classification of asse ts into the above categories 
should be done taking into account the degree of well defined  
credit weaknesses and extent of  dependence on collateral  
security  for realisation of d ues.  Banks should, therefore, keep 
the following definitions in mind while classifying the assets. 
 
 
(i) Standard assets    
Standard asset i s one which does not di sclose any 
problems and which does not ca rry more than normal risk 
attached to the business.  Such an asset is not a NPA. 
(ii) Sub-standard assets 
Sub-standard asset is one wh ich has been classified as 
NPA for a period not exceeding two years.   With eff ect 
from 31 March, 2001, a su b-standard asset i s one which 
has remained NPA for a period less than or equal to 18 
months.  In such  cases,  the current net worth of the 
borrower/guarantor or the current  market value of the 
 15

security charged is not enough to ensure recovery  of the 
dues to the bank in full.  In other words, such an asset will 
have well  defined credit weaknesses that jeopardi se the 
liquidation of the debt a nd are characterised by the 
distinct possibility that the bank  will sustain some loss, if 
deficiencies are not corrected.  With effect from 31 March, 
2005, a sub-standard asset w ould be one, which has 
remained NPA for a period le ss than or equal  to 12 
months. 
(iii) Doubtful assets 
A doubtful asset is one which has remained NPA for a 
period exceeding two y ears.  With effect from 31 
March, 2001, an asset is to be classified as doubtful, 
if it has remained NPA for a period exceeding 18 
months. 
A loan classified as doubtfu l has all the w eaknesses 
inherent i n assets that were classifi ed as sub-standar d 
with the added characteristi c that the weaknesses make 
collection or liquidation i n full, on the basi s of currently 
known facts, conditions and values, highly questionable 
and improbable.  With effect  from March 31, 2005, an 
asset would be cl assified as doubtful if it has remained in 
the sub-standard category for 12 months. 
(iv) Loss assets   
A loss asset is one where loss has been identified by the 
bank or internal or external auditors or the RBI inspecti on 
but the amount has not been written off, wholly.  In other 
words, such an asset is considered uncoll ectable and of 
such little value that its co ntinuance as a bankable asset 
 16

is not warranted al though there may be some salvage or 
recovery value. 
 Special Mention Accounts 
With a vi ew to enable banks to look at accounts with 
potential problems in a focussed manner  ri ght from the onset 
of the problem so as to impart  efficacy to monitori ng and  
remedial action, RBI had iss ued guidelines in 2003 whereunde r 
banks have been advised to introdu ce a new  asset category-   
“Special mention accounts”,  in between “Standard” and “Sub-
Standard” categories for their internal monitoring and follow-up. 
4. Asset classification to be  borrower-wise and not 
facility-wise 
It is difficult to envisage a situation when only one facility 
to a borrower becomes a probl em credi t and not others.   
Therefore, all the facilities granted by a bank to a borrower will 
have to be treated as NPA and not  the particular facility or part 
thereof which has become irregular. 
5. Provisioning  norms 
In conformity with the prudential norms, provi sions should 
be made on the non-performing assets on the basis of 
classification of assets into pres cribed categories.  Taki ng into 
account the time l ag between an account becoming doubtful of 
recovery, its recognition  as such, the realisation of the security 
and the erosi on over time i n the va lue of security  charged to 
the bank, the banks should make provisi on agai nst sub-
standard assets, doubtful assets and loss assets as below:- 
 Loss Assets 
 17

The entire asset should be wri tten off.  If the assets are 
permitted to remai n in the books for any reason , 100 per 
cent of the outstanding should be provided for. 
  Doubtful assets 
(i)100 percent of the extent to which the advance is 
not covered b y the realis able value of the security  to 
which the bank has a vali d recourse and the realisable 
value is estimated on a realistic basis.  
(ii)In regard to the secure d portion, provision may be 
made on the following basi s, at the rates ranging from 
20 percent to 50 percent  of the secured portion  
depending upon the period for which the asset has  
remained doubtful: 
  
Period for which the 
advance has been 
considered as doubtful 
Provision requirement 
                    (%) 
Upto one year                    20 
One to three years                    30 
More than three years                             50 
 
With the enactment of the Securitisation and  
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security 
Interest Act, 2002 and the chances/extent of recovery of an 
asset reducing over a peri od of ti me,  RBI i n its Annual policy  
statement for 2004-2005 had decided to introduce the  following 
graded higher provisioning requirement according to the age of 
 18

NPAs, under `doubtful for more than three years’ category, with 
effect from March 31, 2005:- 
 
(a) Unsecured portion 
Portion of the advance, which i s not covered by the 
realisable value of tangible security to which the bank has 
a valid recourse and the realis able value i s estimated on 
a realistic basis, provision  w ill be to the extent of 100 per 
cent as hiterto. 
 19

 
(b) Secured portion 
Period for which the advance has         Provision requirement 
Remained in `doubtful’ category            on secured portion 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
More than three years 
 
(i) Outstanding stock of NPAs as           (i) 60 per cent as on  
on March 31,2004                March 31, 2005. 
           75 per cent as on  
           March 31, 2006 
                                                                     100 per cent as on 
                                                    March 31, 2007  
 
(ii)Advances classified as `doubtful        (ii) 100 per cent 
     more than three years’ on or  
     after April 1, 2004.  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 Sub-standard Assets 
A general provision of 10 percent on total outstanding should 
be made. 
Standard Assets  
Banks should make a general provision of a minimum of 0.25 
percent on standard assets on global loan portfolio basis. 
Floating provisions 
Some   banks m ake a `floating provision’ over and above the 
specific provi sions made i n res pect of accounts identified as 
NPAs.   Consideri ng that hi gher loan loss provisioning adds to 
the overall financial strength of the banks and the stability of the 
financial sector, banks are urged to vol untarily set apart 
provisions much above the minimum prudential levels as a 
desirable practice. 
6.Norms for Agricultural advances 
 20

(i) In respect of advances gra nted for agricul tural purpose a 
non performing asset i s one where interest and/or 
instalment of principal and/or any other amount due to the 
bank, remains unpaid after it has become overdue for two 
harvest seasons but for a period not exceeding two half-
years.  The above norms are made applicable to all direct 
agricultural advances. 
(ii) In respect of  agricultural loans, other than those specified 
above, identification of  NPAs would be done on the same 
basis as non agri cultural advances which, at present, is 
the 180 days deli nquency norm.  The delinquency norm  
would become 90 days with effect from March 31, 2004. 
(iii) Where natural calamities im pair the repaying capacity of 
agricultural borrowers, banks may decide on their own as 
a relief measure- conversion of the short-term production 
loan into a term loan or res chedulement of the repayment 
period; and the sanctioning of fresh short-term loan, 
subject to vari ous guideli nes contai ned in R BI circulars 
issued by the Rural Planning and Credit Department. 
(iv) In such cases of conversion or re-schedulement, the term 
loan as well as fresh short-term loan may be treated as 
current dues and need not be classified as NPA.  The 
asset classifi cation of th ese loans would thereafter be 
governed by the revised terms  & conditions and would be 
treated as NPA if interest and/ or instalment of principal 
remains unpaid, for two harvest seasons but for a peri od 
not exceeding two half years. 
7.Government guaranteed advances      
 21

(i) The credit facilities back ed by guarantee of the Central 
Government through overdue  may be treated as NPA 
only when the Government repudiates its guarantee when 
invoked.  This exemption from classificati on of 
Government guaranteed advances as NPA is not for the 
purpose of recognition of income. 
(ii) With effect from Ist A pril, 2000, advances sanctioned  
against State Government guarantees should be 
classified  as NPA in the normal course, if the guarantee 
is invoked  and remains i n default for more than two 
quarters. With effect from March 31, 2001 the peri od of 
default is revised as more than 180 days and with effect 
from March 31, 2004 the period of defaul t would be 
revised as more than 90 days. 
8.Advances granted under rehabilitation packages 
approved by BIFR/term lending institutions  
 
(i) In respect of advances  under rehabilitation package 
approved by BIFR/term lending institutions, the provi sion 
should continue to be made in respect of dues to the bank 
on the existing credit facilities as per their classification as 
sub-standard or doubtful asset. 
(ii) As regards the additional  facilities sanctioned as per 
package finalised by BIFR and/or  term lendi ng 
institutions, provision on additional facilities sanctioned 
need not be made for a peri od of one year from the date 
of disbursement. 
 22

(iii) In respect of additional credit facilities granted to SSI units 
which are identified as sick and where re habilitation 
packages/nursing programmes have been drawn by the 
banks themselves  or under consortium arrangements, no 
provision need be made for a period of one year. 
Statements showing the total number of NPA accounts 
and amount involved therein and the Gross and Net NPAs as a 
percentage of total advances as well as total assets  in respect 
of Public Sector Banks duri ng  the year ending 2003 and 2004 
are shown in Annexure .     
 Factors responsible for NPAs 
The Ministry of Finance (Deptt. Of Economic Affairs – 
Banking Division) have stated that the following factors are 
responsible for incidence of  NPAs in the banks:- 
(i) Diversion of funds for expansion/modernisation/setting up 
new projects/helping promoting sister concerns. 
(ii) Time/cost overrun while implementing projects. 
(iii) External factors like raw-material shortage, raw-material/ 
Input price escalation, pow er shortage, industri al 
recession, excess c apacity, natural calami ties like floods, 
accident etc. 
(iv) Business failure li ke produ ct fai ling to capture market, 
inefficient management, strike/strained labour relations, 
wrong technology, techni cal probl em, product 
obsolescence, etc. 
(v) Failure, non-payment/overdues in other countri es 
recession in other countries, externalizati on problems, 
adverse exchange rate, etc. 
 23

(vi) Government polici es li ke excise, im port duty changes, 
deregulation, pollution control orders, etc. 
(vii) Wilful default, siphoning of  funds, fraud, misappropriation, 
promoters/management disputes etc. 
Besides above, factors such as deficiencies on the part of 
the banks viz. deficiencies in  credit apprai sal, monitori ng and 
follow-up; delay  i n  rel ease of limits; del ay in settlement of 
payments/subsidies by G overnment bodies, etc. are al so 
attributed for the incidence of NPAs.    
 Provisioning made by Banks for NPAs 
Asked whether RBI had advi sed/prescribed any norms 
with regard to provisioni ng for NPAs by banks, such as amount 
to be set out/earmarked as a percentage from out of the profits 
earned by them during a fi nancial year,  the Ministry of Finance 
in a written reply  stated that  banks should comply with the 
minimum requirements of provisioning towards different classes 
of NPAs (substandard/doubtful/loss) and also towards standard 
assets as a precaution.  The banks are however free to set 
apart higher provi sions to im prove the provision coverage 
towards NPAs to strengthen the bank’ s financial positi on.  
Higher coverage provi des additional buffer towards NPAs.  
While banks are encouraged to en hance  the coverage ratio by 
setting out higher allocation from  operating profits, the practi ce 
is mainl y Board driven.  R BI had not advised/prescri bed  any 
norms wi th regard to provi sioning for NPAs by banks as a 
percentage of the profi ts earned by them during a fi nancial 
year. 
 24

The total   amount of provi sioning made by each of the 
Public Sector Banks and its per centage to the total profits  
earned during the last three years, is given in Annexure        . 
 Under-Reporting of NPAs 
Asked to state whether R eserve Bank of India takes 
action against those Banks whic h indulge i n under-reporting of 
NPAs either  due to wrong classification of assets or/and  non-
adherence to the prudential norms for asset classification  etc., 
the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. Of Economic Affairs – Banking 
Division)  in thei r reply have stat ed that  public sector banks 
have been generally adhering to the prudential norms on asset 
classification.  However, inst ances of under-reporting of NPAs 
due to wrong classifi cation of assets/non-adherence to 
prudential norms for asset classifi cation are brought out in the 
Annual Financi al Inspection (AFI).   The shortfall in provisions 
identified during the AFI are detected by the RBI while 
assessing the bank’s net worth and its Capital Risk Weighted  
Assets ratio and the bank i s required to take necessary acti on 
to make additional  provi sions to  im prove capital immediatel y.  
The need to strictly adhere to the prudenti al norms is al so 
impressed upon the CMD and other seni or executives of the 
bank during the course of the di scussions held by RBI on the 
findings of the i nspection.  The bank’s compliance to the 
inspection findings, including addi tional provisioning is ensured 
through regular follow-up.  T he under reporting of NPAs 
generally arise on account of erroneous interpretation of the 
prudential guidelines on asset cl assification and the divergence 
is normally not significant.  In the recent past, significant 
 25

divergence was detected in the  case of Global Trust Bank and 
after the steps to augment the capital did not succeed, it was 
merged with OBC, to protect depositors’ interests. 
 
    CHAPTER-II 
 
SANCTION OF LOANS/ ADVANCES 
 
 Sanction of loans by bank functi onaries at various l evels i s 
governed by clearl y laid down deleg ation of powers, w hich may not 
be exceeded under normal circumst ances.  The management of  
credit  exposure to individuals /g roup borrowers, loan sanctioning  
and loan recoveri ng activi ty in  a bank is purely a management 
function and each bank’s B oard of  Directors is authorised to frame 
suitable polici es i n thi s regard.  The loan sanctioning and recovery 
activity at each level is required to  be monitored by the prescri bed 
higher authority under the delegation of powers and both the activities 
are under the overall c ontrol of the Chairm an and the Board of 
Directors. Each bank shoul d also evolve a credit ap proving system, 
where the loan proposal s beyond  pre-specified limits are approved 
by an “Approval Grid” or a “Committee”. 
 The Ministry of  Finance (Departm ent of  Economic Affairs-
Banking Division) have stated that   management of credit risk should 
receive the prime attention of the top management of the banks.   As 
a prudential measure ai med at  better risk management and 
avoidance of concentration of credit risks, the Reserve Bank of  India 
had advi sed the banks to fix limits on thei r exposure to specific 
industry or sectors  and  prescr ibed regul atory limi ts on banks 
exposure to individuals and group bor rowers  in India and unsecured 
 26

guarantees and unsecured  advances.  In addi tion, banks are also 
required to observe certain statutory and regulatory exposure limits in 
respect of advances against inve stments in shar es, debentures &  
bonds. 
Loan Policy and Loan Recovery policy   
 According to Mini stry of  Finance (Department of  Econom ic 
Affairs-Banking Division),  banks have been advised by R BI to 
prepare well defined Loan Policy and Loan Recovery Policy approved 
by their Board of Directors.   The loan policy of a bank, duly approved 
by its Board of  Directors shou ld  cover the methodol ogy for 
measurement, monitoring and control of credit risk. In order to control 
the magnitude of credit ri sk, prudential  norm s on bench mark 
financial ratios, single borrower-group borrowers exposure , 
substantial exposure, industry spec ific,  regi on specific and sector 
specific exposures, expo sures to sensiti ve sectors etc. shoul d be 
covered in the Loan Policy.  The Policy may also lay down 
documentation standards,  delegation of powers including for write off 
and revi ew procedures, maturity and pricing polici es, factors taken 
into consi deration while deciding in terest rates above the floor rate, 
etc.  The Loan Recovery Policy may lay down the manner of recovery 
of dues, norms for permitted sacrifice/ waiver, factors to be taken into 
account  before considering waivers and monitoring of write 
off/waiver cases.  Bank officials are  expected to act within the policy 
laid down with the approval of the Board of Directors. 
 During evidence, the Committee observed that there is no 
appropriate monitoring and supervi sion of the performance of the 
banks by RBI in the area of managem ent of credit exposure, loan 
sanctioning and l oan recovery, etc.  In response, the Secretary, 
 27

Ministry of  Finance (Department  of  Economic Affairs-Banking 
Division) deposed as follows:- 
“The most important questi on which you have raised i s how far 
RBI is supervising the framing of the loan policies by the banks, 
their del egation and loan recov ery poli cies. If there are 
transgressions and violations whet her RBI in scrutiny finds that 
the credit appraisal systems in an institution are strong or not.  I 
think, I would respond to it by saying that every year, the bank’s 
balance-sheet and its head office and important large branches, 
where lots of loans are concentrated, are specifically inspected 
by our officers.  They are cal led AFI, annual financial inspection 
by the RBI officers.  This is a very stringent process.  
Previously, the focus was only on transacti on based audit and 
now, we are moving  from transaction based audit to risk based 
audit to identify what are the risk s in a parti cular institution and 
if there is too much of exposure onl y to steel  sector and that 
bank is becoming sick li ke th at to a specific sector and 
somebody is deal ing extensivel y i n the money and foreign 
exchange markets or it has heavil y invested  in unrated paper 
and tomorrow, the bank can lose out sizeable sums of money 
because there is no market for these investments.  So, the 
focus is changing from what it was to what it is. 
 
 The RBI has given very cl ear general directi on that it is 
the responsibili ty of the Board of each management to put in 
place a comprehensive loan policy document.  I will assure this 
body that a loan policy document  is placed before the Board 
and simil arly, a l oan recovery pol icy is also placed before the 
Board.  When our officers from RBI go for inspection, they see 
whether the poli cies have been correctly framed-and merely 
framing them is not enough – and w hether they have 
percolated down to every branch and whether every branch i s 
observing these instructions or not because these things are 
also very relevant and important.  Our inspectors com ment on 
this part of it”.   
 
In their post-evidence repl y, the Ministry of  Finance have 
stated that Department of B anking Supervision (DBS), Reserve 
Bank of  India exerci ses supervisory functi ons over banks 
 28

through on-site and off-site s urveillance and monitoring 
systems, which are enumerated below in detail:- 
(i) On-site Inspection 
  
The main instrument of supervision of the banks is on-site 
inspection.  The main objecti ve of on-site inspection is to  
ensure that the bank is complying with the i nstructions issued 
by RBI from time to time.  The inspection process focuses  on 
aspects crucial to the bank’ s financial soundness with a recent 
shift in focus towards risk management.  A reas relating to 
internal control , credit management, overseas branch  
operations, profitability, compliance with prudential        
regulations, developmental as pects, proper valuation of 
asset/liability, portfolio invest ment portfolio, and the bank’s role 
in soci al lending are covered in  the course of the inspection.  
The Department undertakes statut ory inspecti ons of banks on 
the basi s of an annual programme, which is co-terminus with 
the financial  year for publi c sector banks.  After the i nspection 
report is i ssued to the bank, follo wed by a `supervi sory letter’, 
based on the inspection findings,  the concerns  expressed in  
the inspection are discussed with the CEO of the bank and a 
Monitorable Action Plan is given to  the bank for rectifi cation of 
those deficiencies.  The De partment submits a memorandum 
covering supervisory concerns broug ht out in the inspection, to 
the Board  for Financial Superv ision (BFS) which had been set 
up to ensure integrat ed approach to regulat ion and supervision 
of the banks, FIs and NBFCs.  Sp ecific corrective di rections of 
the BFS are conveyed to the banks concerned, for i mmediate 
compliance. 
In terms of the new approach  adopted  for the on-site 
inspection of banks, the Inspecting Officers concentrate on core 
assessments  based on the CAMELS model (Capital  
Adequacy, Asset Quality, M anagement, Earnings Apprai sal, 
Liquidity and Systems & Cont rols).  This approach eschews 
aspects which do not have a dire ct bearing on the evaluation of 
the bank as a whole or which should essentially concern the 
internal management of the bank. 
(ii)Off-site Monitoring          
In order to coll ect financial information from banks on a 
quarterly basis so as to  assess the financial health of the 
 29

banks in between  on-si te inspections, and monitoring of 
functioning of banks on a continuous  basis, a system of Off-site 
Surveillance and Monitoring S ystem (OSMOS) was set up in 
1995.  T he off-site surveill ance  and monitori ng system has 
been designed to facilitate the following: 
- To build a memory on the supervised institutions; 
- To capture systemic trends in banking and to support policy 
initiatives; 
- For better focus of supervi sory effort and to optimise resource 
allocation; and 
- Identification of banks showing financial deterioration and to  
act as an Early Warning System  (EWS) and as a trigger for on-
site inspections. 
Under  the OSMOS system, a set of periodical returns 
has been  prescribed for banks which are received on half-
yearly /quarterly /monthly b asis.  The off-site monitoring 
system monitors the complia nce of banks with RBI 
instructions such as banks’ exposure to sensitive sectors 
like real estate, capital market etc. on monthly basis. 
Besides above, RBI also  employ s the following 
devices/schemes to monitor the financial health of the 
banks:- 
(a)Quarterly Monitoring System 
 30

  
A Quarterly Monitoring System through on-site vi sits to 
the newly licensed banks in their first year of  operation is in 
place.  Old and new private banks di splaying  systemic 
weaknesses are also subjected to quarterly monitoring. 
 (b) Quarterly Informal Meeting 
  
In order to give an opportunit y to meet the supervi sor at 
regular interval s for discussi ng compl iance rel ated i ssues and  
agreeing on regulatory and superviso ry requirements in respect 
of new business initiatives, a quarterly informal meeting system 
for banks with the offici als  of Department of  Banking  
Supervision had been designed a nd put i n operati on from 
January, 2000.  Some of the publi c sector banks have also 
been placed under special monitori ng, with a Senior Officer i n 
the jurisdictional Regional Office of the  Bank entrusted with the 
special monitoring efforts.  The Deputy G overnor/Executive 
Director i n-charge of banking su pervision call the C EOs of 
those banks, wherein serious defi ciencies have been reported 
in the inspection reports, for a discussion on the specific steps 
the bank’s top management would need to take to improve its 
financial strength and operational soundness.   
 
(c)Use of External Auditors as Supervisory Resources 
The role of external auditors  i n bank supervisi on had 
since been enhanced.  The audi tors have been di rected to 
verify certain other aspects like adherence to statutory liquidi ty 
requirement, prudential norms relati ng to income recognition, 
 31

classification of assets, provi sioning, capital adequacy and 
various other financial  paramet ers being disclosed in the 
Balance Sheet of the banks.  External  auditors are also 
entrusted to carry out focussed audit of specific areas  of 
supervisory concerns.   
Banks were advised to introduc e a system of concurrent  
audit in 1993 by using external audi tors as a major resource.  
RBI had also issued instructions  to set up an Audit Committee 
of the Board for overseeing the audit function in banks. 
(d)Prompt Corrective Action (PCA)  
A schem e of prompt corrective action based on certain 
triggers had been introduced i n December 2002 as a 
supervisory tool on an experim ental basi s.  The trigger poi nts 
are CRAR, Net NPA and Return on Assets (R OA). The scheme 
is aimed at taking action at an earl y stage, w hen banks show 
incipient sign of weaknesses. For every tri gger poi nt certain 
structured and mandatory actions have been laid down.   
The Ministry have  stated that   banks, by and large, do 
follow the guidelines issued by  RBI.  The banks’ branches/ROs 
are audited/inspected by Statutor y Auditors/internal inspectors 
of the banks.  The deviations from the prescribed Loan Policy 
on a sample basis are also looked into at the time of on-site 
inspections of these banks by RBI and if any deviati ons of 
guidelines are observed, the matte r is taken up with the top 
management of concerned bank for early redressal. 
Asked to state how far non-observance of  prescribed 
norms while processing the applicat ions for sancti on of loans 
are responsible for NPAs, the Ministry of  Finance (Department 
 32

of  Economic Affairs-Banki ng Division) in a written reply stated  
that it was not possi ble to quantify as to how far non-
observance of prescribed norms wh ile processing appli cations 
for sanction of loans, had contributed to NPAs. 
Enquired as to how  the Ministry would find out whether 
prescribed norms while processi ng of applications for sanction 
of loans are bei ng observed by banks, the Deputy Governor, 
RBI during evidence held on 10.12.2003 stated as under:- 
“Data in that parti cular form at, there is no return in which we 
can capture thi s particular data.  But in the course of the 
inspection either by the Reserve Bank of  Indi a or by the bank’s 
own inspection and audi t team, if any wrong doing is found out 
then staff accountability is fixed.  This will explain that.” 
 
Sanction of  credit  in excess of prudential exposure limit 
 The number of banks that have granted credit limits i n 
excess of   the prudential  exposure limits, as observed by RBI 
in  thei r  Annual Inspections during the last three years, i s 
furnished below:- 
Annual Financial    No. of  Banks 
Inspection   Public Sector Pvt. Sector  Foreign 
    Banks  Banks   Banks 
 
 2000-01        22             ---         30 
 
 2001-02                           25                       3                     34 
 
 2002-03       25                       8                    16  
 
Asked to state the puniti ve action taken against the banks 
for exceeding the prudential expos ure limits, the Ministry of  
Finance, in a written reply  had st ated that approval of  RBI for 
sanction of the credit limits in excess of the prudential exposure 
 33

ceiling had been sought by the banks subsequently in all the 
cases. Approval was granted by  RBI after examination on 
merits, and no punitive action was taken in view thereof.  
In the B udget for 2004-05, the Fi nance M inister had 
announced that banks with st rong ri sk management system s 
would be allowed to have greater  latitude in their exposure to  
the Capital market.       
            
Compliance of banks with the Inspection Reports by RBI 
 According to Ministry of Finance (Departm ent of Economic 
Affairs-Banking Division) during RBI inspecti on, the Inspecti ng 
Officers examine the systems and procedures in ban ks.  As regards 
borrowal accounts, test checking of  some accounts above a certain  
cut  off point is resorted to.  The irregul arities noti ced during the 
inspection generally relate to de ficiencies  in apprai sal of credi t 
proposals, lack of post-sanction/disb ursement supervision, laxity in 
recovery of non-performing assets (N PAs), delay in review/renewal  
of credit limits, non-observance of  in structions/guidelines issued by 
RBI/Head Office, arrears in  balancing of books of accounts, etc.  The 
irregularities/deficiencies are brought to the notice of the respective 
banks for correcti ve action and co mpliance is cl osely monitored  
through RBIs Regional Offices.  Di scussions are al so held wi th the 
banks’ Chief Executive  Officers and Directors.  A summary of the 
findings of  RBI's’ inspection of  banks, is placed before the Board for 
Financial  Supervisions (BFS) and necessary follow up action is taken 
on the advice/directions of the BFS.   
 Asked to state the penal meas ures taken by R BI against those 
banks who do not submit complianc e reports in time  and repeatedly 
 34

indulge i n the irregulari ties which normally are pointed out by RBI 
during their inspections, the Mini stry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs – Banking Divisio n) in thei r reply had stated that 
RBI had strengthened the system of “follow up of Inspection findings” 
 and had issued the follo wing instructions to it s Regional Offices on 
May 29, 2002:- 
(i) Statement of  non-compliance with the earlier AFI report has 
been made integral part of the latest AFI report. 
(ii) Two months time i s given for submission of first compliance by 
the banks. 
(iii) Penal action has been envis aged in case of delay in 
submission of compliance by the bank. 
(iv) Regional Offices were also advised to complete scrutiny of first 
compliance within one month of  its receipt. 
 In the light of  observations made by JPC on stock market scam 
and matters relating thereto, and with a view to further streamline the 
existing system of inspection, and  improving the quality of Inspection 
Reports and their focussed follow-up, Regional Offices of RBI were 
further advised on 18th July, 2003 as under:- 
(i) Inspecting Officers should focus more on identi fying the  
causative factors which gi ve rise to persi sting defici encies 
rather than on deficiencies in individual transactions. 
(ii) Based on the deficiencies observed in the individual  
transactions, Inspecting Office rs should be able to clearl y 
identify the gaps/l acunae i n t he systems and same should be 
highlighted in the reports. 
(iii) Whenever, the findings of t he report bring out deficiencies in 
the systems, the compliance al so should address the same.  
 35

The compliance given by the bank for havi ng rectifi ed the 
deficiencies in respect of  instances/transactions, based on 
which the Inspecting Officer had i dentified the gaps in the 
system, may not be accepted as full compliance. 
(iv) The follow-up of inspection  findings should be based on action 
plan (agreed with bank) which cont ains direction to banks to 
take corrective action regarding de ficiencies, within a specifi ed 
time frame. 
The Mini stry had stated that non-compliance of banks with  
irregularities observed during   RBI Inspection, would be dealt with in 
accordance with the aforestated instructions issued i n May, 2002 
and July, 2003. 
  
CHAPTER-III 
 
STAFF ACCOUNTABILITY 
 
Transgression of  Delegated Powers 
 
 During Annual Fi nancial Inspection (AFI), RBI  Inspecti ng 
Officers look into  the aspect of transgression of  delegated powers 
by Bank functionaries and instan ces, if any, found are adversel y 
commented upon in thei r inspection report. In the cases of l arge 
NPAs, the system/practi ce of fi xing of staff accountabil ity i s 
examined.  If any weaknesses are no ticed, the fact is commented as 
a deficiency in the inspecti on report.  Wherever the banks have not 
examined staff accountabili ty, they are asked to take necessary 
action without further del ay. As per  RBI guidelines, staff 
accountability aspect is required to be examined by the concerned 
bank as soon as there is a shift in  the asset classifi cation of an 
 36

advance from standard to sub- standard. The Bank  management 
takes necessary action in this regard in consultation with the CVC.  
The management of the Bank does  make a distinction between 
malafide acts and genuine action on t he part of the  functionaries  in 
respect of instances of  trans gressions reported and take action 
against the erring offici als accordingly.  Wherever mal afide acts are 
observed  in sanctioning excess over delegated powers, disciplinary 
action is taken against the concerned  officials.  Punishments ranging 
from reprimand, reducti on of i ncrement, transfer, dem otion, 
compulsory retirement, etc. were meted out against the erring officials 
depending on the degree of  accountability of the erring officials.  The 
details of puniti ve actions, if any , taken by i ndividual banks agai nst 
erring officials are not centrally maintained.   
The  Ministry of  Finance (Department of  Economic Affairs-
Banking Division)   had stated that  there is no system in RBI for 
compiling information relating to transgression of delegated power by 
bank functionaries on account to account basis. Hence i t i s not 
possible to indicate as to how many accounts hav e turned i nto Non 
Performing Assets on account of  transgression of delegated powers.  
It has also been stated that RBI had not issued any direction to the 
banks to report to it cases of staff accountability in NPAs. 
In this regard, Deputy Governor, RBI during evidence held on 
10.12. 2003 deposed before the Committee as under:- 
“As regards transgression, the answer is that some people tend  
to violate the l imits laid down.  I would not say that they violate 
the limits for the purpose of profit, but it i s violated so that the 
unit starts functioning.  Some transgression in exuberance- if I  
may be permitted to say – do ta ke place, but there is a 
judgement call taken by the management to see whether the 
transgression done has benefi ted the person who has 
 37

sanctioned it and if that i s the case, then it is manifestly 
irregular and it will attract vigilanc e.  If it is only a judgmental 
error, then I think, that the benef it of the doubt should be given 
in favour of the official who took that decision.  
  
In this context, I think, the steps which the CVC are now taking-
for example by announcing that they  will only look at very large 
amounts and leave it to the B ank Management, etc. – are 
definitely a confidence booster for the Banki ng Sector.  As a 
result of this all the people will come forward very freely and  
revive the activi ty of lending.  At one point of time this actuall y 
had, more or less, total ly  slowed down.  So, the supervision of 
Reserve Bank has been far and wide.”  
 
 On 22nd February, 2005 the Ministry of Finance had unveiled a 
package giving managerial autonomy to the Public Sector Banks, and 
advised them to take further acti on thereon. While giving further 
operational autonomy to the Board of  Directors, the Mini stry of 
Finance  proposed Banks to lay dow n a policy of accountabil ity and 
responsibility of B ank officials a nd take action against erring B ank 
officials in conformity with such pol icy. The policy framework should 
provide for stringent punishment for all mala fide acti ons but, at the 
same time, recognize that bona fide errors do occur while making 
decisions relating to commercial judgment.  
 
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) 
Jurisdiction over Bank functionaries/officers 
 
 As per the provi sion in Para 3 of the Special Chapter on 
Vigilance Management in Public Se ctor Banks, issued in April 2003 
by the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), officers of the rank of 
scale III and above in the Public Sector ban ks are covered under the 
 38

ambit of Central  Vigilance Commi ssion.  However, in composite  
cases i nvolving official s who fall in the C entral Vigilance 
Commission’s jurisdiction and others who do not, the case as a whole 
has to be referred to the CVC for its advice. 
 The Committee, during informal discussions held with 
representatives of various Public Sector Banks during study tours, it 
came to notice that bank managers of the rank of  scale III and scale 
IV lacked initiative to muster new  accounts or enroll new clientele 
because of their  coming under the purview of CVC. 
 Asked to state whether it had been proposed to restrict the 
level/grade of bank officers co ming under CVC upto Deputy General  
Manager (DGM) only, the Ministry of  Finance (D epartment of 
Economic Affairs – Banking Division) in their written reply have stated 
that as per provision in the Central Vigilance Commission Bill, 1999, a 
notification had to be issued specifying the level of officers of 
Corporation, established by or under the  Central Act, Government 
Companies, Societies and Local  Authorities, owned or controll ed by 
the Central Government  in respe ct of whom the CVC is empowered 
to enquire,  or cause an enquiry or i nvestigation to be made into any 
complaint alleging offences under th e Prevention of  Corrupti on Act, 
1988.  The DOPT had called for proposals from various 
Ministries/Departments with  regard to  the l evel of officers of the 
Government Companies etc. under their admini strative  control,  who 
could be covered under  the juri sdiction of the CVC, for the above 
purpose.  The Ministry of  Finance  (Department of Economic Affairs 
– Banking Division) had i nformed t he DOPT as well as Cabinet 
Secretariat that i n respect of banks and fi nancial institutions, the 
CVC’s jurisdiction should be restricted to the officers of the level of  
 39

Scale VI and above i.e. Deputy  General Manager and above.  After 
the lapse of the CVC Ordinance 199 9, a Resolution was passed on 
04.04.1999   to continue  the provisi ons of the CVC Ordinance 1999, 
which ceased to operate from 05.04.1999. Since the CVC Bill had not 
been passed,  the notification envis aged in the said bill/resolution 
could not be finalised. 
 Asked whether any progress was made  by the M inistry of  
Finance in this regard,   the Se cretary, Ministry of Finance 
(Department of  Economic Affairs- Banking Division) during evi dence 
held on 10.12. 2003 deposed as under:- 
“Now, the CVC’s jurisdi ction extends over a very large number 
of executives i n the banks.  That has a counter-productive 
effect. Sometimes, it is restrain ing and inhibiting the executives 
from taking fair and bona fide decisions also.   It also defeat s 
the purpose of vi gilance in the sense that there are far too 
many people and priori ty case s cannot be focussed upon.   
Therefore, the whole effort gets dil uted.  We have been 
discussing this issue with the Chi ef Vigilance Commissioner 
and he himself has been of this vi ew.  He feel s that the current 
scope of coverage is far too wide and he has already worked 
out a draft revi sion which we have commented upon where he  
intends to focus only on the topmost levels of the banks so that 
the focussed acti on    can be taken and certain exampl es can 
be made and vigil ance action from the external agencies’ point 
of vi ew i s restri cted to the top echelons of the banks.   The 
remaining levels will be corrected through self-regulating 
mechanism and vigi lance departments of the banks  
themselves. This is in the process of being done and should the 
Committee make such a re commendation, it will only 
strengthen everybody’s hands to do this.  The idea is to make a 
focus and make examples and not just draw the net too wide. 
 
Actually, the cut off level  could be even higher.  For instance, in our 
latest discussion, the suggestion has been that there should be one 
level bel ow the Executi ve Director,  in fact, the General Manager’s 
level or the Chief General  M anager’s level.   I think these  orders are 
 40

likely to be issued very  shortly.  We need not even have to go to 
lower levels because that can be taken care of by other agencies and 
especially by the banks themselves.”  
 
     
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOVERY OF NPAS 
 
Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) 
The Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions 
Act, 1993 was enacted on 27 th August, 1993 to provide for the 
establishment of Tribunal s for the expedi tious adj udication and 
recovery of debts due to banks and financial institutions and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
At present there are 29 Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) and 5 
Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal s (DRATs)  establ ished in different 
States/UTs.  Particulars of location of DRTs and DRATs, date of their 
establishment and jurisdiction are given in Annexure –    . 
The Act was amended i n the ye ar 2000 and some of the 
important provisions that had been incorporated in the Debt Recovery 
Act, 1993 for strengthening DRTs were as follows:- 
i) Provision for placement of more than one Recovery Officer. 
-Section (7); 
ii) Power to attach defendant’s property/assets before judgement 
-Section 19(13); 
iii) Appointment of Receiver wi th powers of realisation, 
management, protection and pres ervation of property – Section 
19(18) (a) to (e); 
 41

iv) Penal provisions for di sobedience of Tribunal’s Order or for 
breach of any terms of the Order. – Section 19(17). 
Also, all public sector banks w ere advised to set up speci al 
DRT cells at their Head Offices and to keep a close li aison with 
standing counsels who appear before the DRTs for the effective 
presentation of cases and to constitute Settl ement Advisory 
Committees to deal with chronic recovery cases which will also 
cover the cases pending with DRTs. 
Asked whether the above  amendments to the Act  have helped  
DRTs in speedy recovery of dues  of bad loans from the borrowers, 
the  Mini stry i n a written reply ha ve  stated that subsequent to the 
amendments made to the Act in the year 2000, there had been an 
improvement in the overall performance of DRTs.   The percentage of 
cases decided by DRTs has incr eased from 13% as on 31.12. 1997 
to 37.26% as on 31.3. 2004.  T he percentage of recovery to total  
dues has also concurrently  increase d from 1.67% as on 31.12.97 to 
8.36% as on 31.3. 2004.  
 During evidence held on 2.12.2004 , the Secretary, Ministry of 
Finance (Departm ent of Economic A ffairs – Banking Division) had 
stated that the number of cases file d in all the 29 tribunals, as on 30th 
June, 2004, were 76,384 i nvolving an amount of Rs. 1,54,975 crore.  
Out of these, 46,208 cases invo lving an amount of Rs. 58,305 crore 
were disposed of by the DRTs.  M ore than 50 per cent cases, which 
were filed have been disposed of and there are, of course, a number 
of cases which are of very high value and they have been pending for 
quite some time.  The total numbe r of  cases with each DRT vary 
between 300 and 3000.    
 
 42

 A statement  showing the tota l number of cases pending with 
DRTs , the number of cases deci ded and the amount recovered etc., 
as on June,2004 is given in Annexure IV.  
 
 The Committee having  noted  t he difficulty of banks and DRTs  
in  recovering  the amount even by way of auctions, because very 
often the bidders do not come forth, asked the Ministry to state the 
remedial measures contemplated to overcome this problem. Agreeing 
with the Committee’s observation, the Ministry in a written reply have 
stated that efforts to  realize securities covering bank dues, by 
auction of assets charged did not always succeed in the absence of 
suitable bidders and in som e cases banks do find diffi culty in finding 
ready buyers for the properties bei ng auctioned.  Sale by public 
auction i s not the onl y recourse available to banks and DRTs.  
Following are  some of the measure s available/being contemplated, 
for realization of securities:- 
1. Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002 notified  under 
Securitization and Reconstructi on of Financial  Assets and  
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act) 
provides for follow ing additi onal methods for sale of seized 
assets: 
a. Obtaining quotations from parties dealing in the assets or 
otherwise interested in buying such assets. 
b. Inviting public tenders, and  
c. By private treaty. 
2. Banks w ould be able to contac t their other borrowers i n the 
same line or those interested in the assets. 
 43

3. Instead of trying to sell the unit as a whole, sale could be 
attempted in parts as in some cases this mi ght prove to be a 
better strategy. 
4. Asset Reconstructi on Companies (A RC) could prove to be a 
useful vehicle for realization of  assets covered by impaired 
loans.  By pooling together asse ts of si milar nature from 
different banks, the ARCs would be in a better  position to offer 
a more attractive package for potential buyers.  
Asked to state the steps proposed to be taken to strengthen the 
DRTs for their effective functioning, the Ministry in a written reply 
furnished on 9th May, 2003 have stated that RBI is of the opinion that 
there is slow but steady progress in disposal of cases filed before 
DRTs and also in recovery of the amount decreed by them.  RBI had 
come to these conclusions on the basis of performance of DRTs with 
reference to com mercial banks.  RBI had also observed that 
appointment of more than one Recovery Officer through DR T 
Amendment Act, 2000 would speed up rec overy.  As a result of the  
amendment carri ed out, banks are now  able to seek injunction 
against the borrowers/seizures and sale of assets.  Also the provision 
relating to counter claim by borrower s, has curtail ed the delay and 
simplified the process of recovery. 
 Asked about the vi ews of the Mi nistry with regard to expediting 
the process of settlement of pendi ng cases,  the Ministry in their 
written reply furnished in April,2004  had stated that on a revi ew, it is 
observed that the arrangement needs  to be further st rengthened to 
expedite the resol ution of  larger number of cases referred to by 
Banks/Financial Institutions.  In view of this, Government of Indi a had 
 44

decided to set up a Worki ng Group to exam ine the structural and 
other legal measures to strengthen the arrangement. 
    On being asked as to when the the Working Group on 
restructuring of DRTs was cons tituted and the factors that 
necessitated its constitution, the Mi nistry  of Finance in their Post 
Evidence Reply   furnished in Dece mber, 2004 have stated that after 
obtaining the performance revi ew conducted by the RBI, the 
Government of India set up a W orking Group in February 2001 under 
the Chairmanship of Shri S. N. A ggarwal, Presiding Officer of Debt 
Recovery Tribunal (DRT) II, Delhi to review the existing provisions of 
the Recovery of D ebts due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 
1993 and the Rules framed hereunder in  the light of the suggesti ons 
received from vari ous quarters such  as banks, financial  institutions, 
DRTs and indivi duals and to examine the adequacy of the 
infrastructure avail able to DRTs.  While recogni sing the need  for 
speedy and effective recovery of  bad loans of the banking sector is a 
sine qua non for survival of the bank ing industry, the W orking Group 
had suggested amendments to the Act and Rules framed thereunder. 
The Working Group subm itted its report in August 2001. RBI 
examined the Report of  the S.N. Aggarwal Group and communicated 
their views to Government in Fe bruary, 2002. In their comments 
furnished to the Government,    RB I  supported the recommendations  
made by the Working  Group for st rengthening the infrastructure of 
DRTs  in totality.  As  regards  amendments  to  the DRT  Act and the 
Rules framed thereunder, the RBI  st ated that they have no objection 
to the  amendments proposed by t he Working Group, barring six 
amendments on which RBI differed with the Working Group.  Apart 
from their views on the  Work ing Group recom mendations  RBI had 
 45

also  made the  following sugges tions  for  consideration of the 
Government at the time of amendment of the DRT Act:- 
i) Jurisdiction of DRTs over the cases pending/subsequently filed  
before BIFR. 
ii) Provisions for more than one Presiding officer in a DRT. 
iii) Penal provisions to cover obstruction by the borrower to  
receiver appointed by the DRT to take possession of his 
properties. 
iv) Presiding Officers to have knowledge of banking law. 
v) Empowerment of DRT to order  disclosure of  assets/property 
by the borrower by way of affidavit. 
vi) DRT to notify borrowers defaulting to honour its decree. 
vii) Recovery certificate to cover details of secured assets. 
viii) Deletion of Rule 10 to enable banks to file one application for all 
facilities granted to borrowers. 
 Recently on the recommendations  of Reserve Bank of India 
the Government had consti tuted a Working Group headed by Shri 
Vinod Rai, AS(FS) to examine afresh the issues related to DRT’s rol e 
in recovery of NPAs for enhancing their effectiveness and to review 
the functioning of Debts Recovery Tribunals. The Working Group will 
examine the following issues and recommend appropriate measures: 
i) The need to extend the provisi ons of the R ecovery of Debts 
Due to Banks and Financial  Institutions Act(RDDB Act) for less 
than Rs 10 lakhs under section 1(4) of the Act. 
ii) Redistribution of the jurisdiction of the various DRTs. 
iii) Modification in the existing  strength of the DRTs/DRATs. 
Strengthening the scope of the Ac t to include other fi nancial 
institutions under section 2 (h)(ii) of the Act. 
 46

iv) Desirability of enabling the Chairperson of a DRT to conduct an 
enquiry against the Presiding Officer and consequential  
changes in the cri teria for eligibi lity for being appointed as a 
Chairperson, DRAT. 
v) Desirability of appointing m ore than one Presi ding Officer for a 
DRT to ensure speedy disposal of cases. 
vi) The need to strengthen the s upervisory role of Chairperson of 
DRATs over the DRTs. 
vii) Any other matter consid ered rel evant for improving the 
efficiency of DRTs. 
Asked whether the Working Group would  consider the issue of  
 prioritisation of the cases so that   high-value cases can be taken up 
first, the Secretary, Ministry of  Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs – Banking Division) during evidence held on  2.12.2004, stated 
as under:- 
“Since I am not privy to the Committee’s del iberations,  I 
would not be abl e to say whether we can recommend 
this, but this is an extremely important point… ……….we 
will certainly take this up.  I quite agree that in ensuring 
effective management, we have to follow eighty-twenty 
principle.  The more important cases must be  taken up 
first.  The fact is that the ba nks themselves have to do i t.  
We have to have some fast track procedure within the 
DRTs also.  Sir, your suggestion is very well taken.” 
  
Asked to furnish the details regarding long pending cases along  
with the period of penden cy, age-wise, of each case, i n each of the 
DRT, the Ministry in their repl y stated that case-wise and DRT-wise 
 47

information is not avail able. However RBI obtains quarterl y 
statements from the banks advi sing RBI about the number of DRT 
cases fi led/decided/pending as also the amount involved/amount 
recovered. 
Asked whether there is any proposal under consideration of the  
Government to set up more DRTs in the country the Mi nistry stated 
that there is no such proposal at present. 
 
Staff strength and vacancies in DRTs 
 The Ministry of Finance (Department of E conomic Affairs – 
Banking Division)  in a written reply furnished on 9 th May, 2003 had 
stated that each of t he 29 DRTs has one post  each of Presi ding 
Officer, Registrar and Assistant R egistrar and two posts of Recovery 
Officers and all these posts are deputation posts. The issue of 
manning DRTs had been conti nuously reviewed to ensure that 
adequate staff is posted and time ly arrangements are made for 
replacement and also in meeting contingencies.  The staff strength of 
DRTs which was  originally  16,  was subsequently i ncreased, and 
now it stands at 30 incl uding the Presiding Officer.  The present 
strength is considered ade quate to meet the current workload of 
DRTs. Banking Division appoints P residing Officers, Registrars, 
Recovery Officers and Assistant Registrars.  Recruitment for the 
remaining staff i s done by the DRT s as per the Recruitment Rules 
notified.  There are inst ances of vacancies in these posi tions on 
account of premature repatriation of existing staff for various reasons, 
as well as time taken for completi ng the selection procedure. Since 
delays are taking place in regular posting of staff, nodal banks have 
been asked to come forward to provi de support to DRTs as a 
 48

temporary or ad-hoc measure as i t is  in the larger i nterest of the 
Banks to improve the efficiency of DRT system. 
 While pointing out that short age of m anpower had led to delay 
in the process of settlement of ca ses, the Committee suggested that 
vacant posts may be filled up in coordination with the concerned 
agencies including State Governments.  In response, the Secretary,  
Ministry of Finance, (Department  of Economic Affairs Banking 
Division) during evidence  held on 10.12. 2003, deposed as under :- 
“I think, this is very valid.  We shall take an i mmediate review 
and early corrective action and see t hat the sanctioned staff is 
provided and whatever staff st rength i s necessary or any 
improvement is necessary we take that”. 
 
 
The Securitisation and Reconstru ction of  Financial Assets and  
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. 
 
The Securitisation and Reconstructi on of  Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI) Act, which 
came into force on June 21, 2002, an d received President’s asset on 
December 17, 2002  provi des  a platform to banks and financial 
institutions for resolving their probl ems of non-perform ing/distressed 
assets by financi al restructuring or by expeditiously disposing of 
financial assets. 
The sali ent features of  the SARFAESI Act, 2002 are as 
follows:- 
(i)Registration 
 49

 A securitisation or reconstruct ion company, with owned fund of  
not less than Rs.2 crore or not exceeding 15 per cent of total financial 
assets acquired or to be acqui red as specified by the R BI, can 
commence or carry on business after obtaining a certifi cate of 
registration (CoR).  Existing  securitisati on or reconstruction 
companies would  have to apply for registration to the RBI within si x 
months from the commencement of the Ordinance.  For grant of  CoR 
to a company, the condi tions to be satisfied include: (a) not incurred 
loss in any of the three preceding financial years.  (b) made adequate 
arrangements for realisation of  financial assets for securitisation or 
asset reconstruction, (c) pays peri odical returns, and (d) compli es 
with the prudential norms of the RBI.   In addition, the Directors of the 
company should have adequate  pro fessional expertise and not have 
been convicted of any moral turpitude/offence.  Not more than half 
the Board members should be as sociated in any manner with the 
sponsor, and should not otherwise hold any cont rolling interest i n 
such securitisation or reconstruction company. 
(ii)Operations/functions 
 The acquisi tion of  financial assets by the 
securitisation/reconstruction company  would be through the issuance 
of debentures/bonds or agreements with banks/FI s.  The notice of 
acquisition  may be sent by banks/ FIs to the concer ned obligor, who, 
in turn, i s to make paym ent to the concerned securi tisation or  
reconstruction company.  In case no notice of acqui sition is given, 
then money/properties recei ved subsequently by banks/ FIs would be 
held in trust on behalf of the sec uritisation  or reconstructi on 
company.  Other functions of such company would include acting as 
agent for banks/FIs to recover their dues from borrowers, acting as 
 50

manager and receiver if appointed by court or tri bunal.  The disputes 
will be settled by conciliation or  arbitration as provided in the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
(iii)Prudential Norms     
 The RBI, in publi c interest and to regulate t he financial system 
of the country to i ts advantage woul d, determine poli cy and give 
directions to such companies on i ncome recogni tion, accounting 
standards, provision for bad and do ubtful debt, capital adequacy and 
deployment of funds.   
(iv)Enforcement of  Security Interest 
 The Act empowers secured creditors to enforce any security 
interest  credi ted in its favor with out any intervention of court or 
tribunal.  The secured creditor may require the borrower to discharge 
his liabilities within 60 days from the date of notice, fai ling which the 
secured creditor is entitled to ta ke possession or management of the 
secured assets including the right  to transfer by way of lease, 
assignment or sale or appoint  any person to manage the secured 
asset.  T he borrowers are allowed to seek protection by filing an 
appeal in the Debt Recovery Tribuna l (DRTs) along with a deposit of 
75 per cent of the amount claimed with the D RT in order to prevent 
misuse of appeal provisions. 
(v)Offences and Penalties 
 There are stri ct  provi sions of pe nalties for offences or default 
by the securitisation or reconstruction company.  In case of defaul t in 
registration of transacti ons, modification of security i nterest or in 
reporting satisfacti on of security interest, every company or officer 
would be fined upto Rs.5,000/- per day.  In case of non-compli ance 
with directions by the RBI, the company could be fined upto Rs.5 lakh 
 51

and in case of continuing offence,  an additional fine of Rs.10,000 per 
day may be imposed. 
 The provisions of this Ac t will override other laws.  The 
application of other laws such as the Company’s Act 1956, Securities 
Contract (Regulation) Act, 1956 and Securities and Exchange Board 
of India Act, 1993, however are not barred. 
Securitisation and Reconstruction Companies (SC & RC)  
The Ministry of   Finance (Department of Economic Affairs - 
 Banking Division) in a written reply furni shed in April,2004  had 
stated that two W orking Groups we re constituted by the  Reserve 
Bank to formulate guideli nes for S Cs and RCs.   Based on the 
recommendations of these Work ing Groups,  guidelines and 
directions were issued vide  Notification N o.DNBS.2/CGM(CSM)-
2003, dated April 23, 2003 on aspects  relating to registration, owned 
funds, permissible business, operati onal structure for gi ving effect to 
the business of securitisation and asset reconstruction, deployment of 
surplus funds, i nternal control system, prudential norms and 
disclosure requirements.  Department of Banking O peration and 
Development had also issued guidelines on sale of financial assets to 
securitisation and asset reconstruction com panies by banks and 
financial institutions and related issues on April 23, 2003.  An 
External  Advisory Committee chaired by Shri R.H. Patil, Chairm an, 
Clearing Corporation of  India and cons isting of experts from the field 
of banking, law and accountancy wa s consti tuted for screening the 
applications for registrati on of Securitisation Companies and 
Reconstruction Companies.  The members of the Committee were: 
1. Shri H.R. Ranina, Advocate 
2. Shri Y.H. Malegam, Chartered Accountant 
 52

3. Shri K.B.L. Mathur, Economic Advisor and Joint 
Secretary, Ministry of  Finance and  
4. Smt. Shyamla Gopinath, Executive Director, RBI. 
     The Committee decided the methodology to be adopted in 
scrutinising the applications vis- à-vis the conditions contai ned in 
Section 3 (3) of the Securiti sation Act.  On the  recommendati ons of 
the Committee, Reserve Bank had granted registration to Asset 
Reconstruction Company (India) Limited (sponsored by SBI, ICICI 
Bank and IDBI and having its Regi stered Office in Mumbai) and 
Assets Care Enterprise Limited (s ponsored by IFCI, PNB, TFCI, LIC, 
BOB and UBI and having its Regi stered Office in N ew Delhi) on 
August 29,2003 and October 17, 2003 respectively.  Two applications 
were returned as the companies were  yet to be incorporated and one 
company had requested to keep its application in abeyance as it i s 
contemplating  changes in the management.  The remaining 
applications are at various stages of processing, as there are certain  
information gaps, which are awaited from the companies.  The status 
position of the applications had been  stated to be  as  under:- 
 
 Total applications received  15 
 Applications approved    2 
 Applications pending   11 
 Applications returned    2 
 Asked to state the total  num ber of Asset Reconstruction  
Companies establ ished as on date and whether the number of 
companies set up is adequate to meet the demands of Banks and 
Financial Institutions for Securitisati on and Reconstruction of their 
impaired/bad assets, the S ecretary, Ministry of Finance (Department 
 53

of Economic Affairs – Banking Di vision) during evidence held on 
2.12.2004, had deposed as under:- 
“So far, three asset reconstructi on companies have been set 
up.  They are all very new. One is ACE, the second is ARCIL 
and the third has recently been prom oted by the Unit Trust of 
India. Now, all of these co mpanies are very new because the 
law itself is very new and the entire business of asset 
reconstruction for our country is also very new. 
   
These asset reconstruction com panies are just in the process  
of starting to do busin ess and unless they can operate 
successfully and show to  other prospective inve stors that it is a 
good and viable business,  it is unlikely that other asset 
reconstruction companies would co me in the field.  Elsewhere 
in the w orld al so, the experien ce of asset reconstruction 
companies has not been altogether uniform.  In some places,  
they have been somewhat successful and in some others they 
have not been so successful .  In some places, asset 
reconstruction companies are pri marily the holding of the 
Government and i n others they are in the pri vate sector.  In 
India also, they are in the pri vate sector and pri vate sect or 
capital is likely to come into the business of asset 
reconstruction only when it sees that these asset reconstruction 
companies are functioning effectively. 
 
So, doubtless, considering our total NPAs, perhaps, there might 
be busi ness for three or four co mpanies.  T here are already 
three companies operating, but th ese are at a very nascent 
stage and we need to do more to create enabling envi ronment 
so that they function effectively.  They are yet to prove that they 
would be effecti ve instruments of the process of asset 
reconstruction.” 
  
In their post evidence repl y, the Ministry   have further stated 
that three companies have been granted Certi ficate of Registration to 
commence the business of Securiti sation/Reconstruction and  few 
more companies may be consi dered for granting Certificate of 
Registration depending upon their su itability.  The establishment of 
 54

these companies are expected to m eet the i mmediate demand from 
banks for transfer of impaired assets. 
 
Recovery of  NPAs under SARFAESI Act 
 
The  Committee learnt that as per the interi m order passed by 
Supreme Court,  secured creditors cannot part with the assets of the 
borrowers  by way of le ase agreement or sal e and that many banks 
were not even seizing  the assets since it will not be possible for them 
to sell. Asked  how the problem would be  dealt with by the Ministry  
of  Finance, the Secretary, Ministry of  Finance (D epartment of  
Economic Affairs - Banki ng Divisi on) duri ng evi dence held on 
10.12.2003, deposed as under:- 
“…. But what has happened in this case is that  as soon as this 
legislation was promulgated, a large number of petitions were 
filed in various courts, including the High Courts, and the matter 
has also come up before the Supreme Court.  Many interim  
orders have also been passed and this has, unfortunately, for 
us, diluted the impact of thi s Act itself.  This matter is still under 
consideration at the level of the hon. Supreme Court.  The 
hearing is going on.  It appears to  us that the Court will perhaps 
uphold the validity of the Act.  T hat is the impression we get.  I 
cannot really predict what will happen.  They have found that 
perhaps the debtors or borrowers are not getting proper 
opportunities  to explain their own side of the case.  Perhaps 
the principle of natural justice is not being properly adhered to.  
So, a suggesti on   has come up that we should l ay down a 
procedure whereby they have a dequate opportunity of hearing 
and they can present their ow n case.  The Attorney-General  
himself is appeari ng in this case.  The major case is Mardia 
Chemicals which is being discussed at present.  Our hope is 
that perhaps the validity of this law will be upheld. But there 
might be certain instructions in regard to the procedure which is 
to be foll owed.  The confirma tion by the hon. Supreme Court 
 55

about the validity of this Act will greatly strengthen the hands of  
our banks….”    
 
The Supreme Court of India in its Judgement dated  18.04.2004 
in Mardia Chemicals Ltd. vs. Union of  India and others, had  upheld 
the validi ty of provisions of Securiti sation and Reconstruction of  
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Securi ty Interest Act, 2002 
except the provision of sub-section (2) of Section 17 which had been 
held to be ultra vires of Article 14 of  the Constitution. 
The Finance Mini ster in hi s speech on the Budget for 2004-
2005 had stated  that in  the wake of  Supreme Court judgement, 
many banks have pointed out practi cal difficulties likely to arise in 
speeding up the recovery of non-perform ing assets. It is proposed to 
amend the relevant provisions of the Act to appropriately address the 
Supreme Court’s concerns regarding a fair deal to borrowers while at 
the same time, ensuring that t he recovery process is not delayed or 
hampered.  Related amendments to the Recovery of  Debts Due to 
Banks and Financial Institutions Ac t, 1993, if necessary, will also be 
made. 
Pursuant to Finance Minister’s statement in the Budget : 2004-
05, the Enforcem ent of Security Interest and Recovery of D ebts 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2004 seeking to amend the Securitisation 
and Reconstruction  of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security 
Interest Act, 2002, the R ecovery of Debts Due to Banks and 
Financial Institutions Act, 1993 and the Companies A ct, 1956 was 
passed by both H ouses of Parliam ent and  assented to by the 
President on  29 th December, 2004.  Amendments  made to the 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of  Financi al Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 are as follows:- 
 56

 
(a) The secured creditor is required to cons ider, in response to 
the notice issued by the secured   creditor under sub-section  
(2) of Section 13 of the said Act, any representation made or 
objection raised by the borrower and cast an obligation upon 
the secured credi tor to communi cate within one week of 
receipt of such representation or objection the reasons for 
non-acceptance of the represent ation  or obj ection to the 
borrower and take possession of  the secured asset only 
after reasons for not accepting the objections of the borrower 
have been communicated to him in writing; 
(b) enable the borrower to make an application before the Debts 
Recovery Tribunal  without making any deposit (instead of 
filing an appeal before the Debts Recovery Tribunal after 
depositing seventy-five per cent  of the amount claimed with 
the notice by the secured creditor); 
(c) provides that the Debts Recovery Tribunal shall dispose of 
the appli cation as expediti ously as possi ble and di spose of 
such application within si xty days from the date of such 
applications so that the tota l period of pendency of the 
application with such Tribunal shall not exceed four months; 
(d) make provision for transfer of pending appli cations to any 
one of the Debts Recovery Tribunal in certain cases; 
(e) enables any person aggri eved by any order made by the 
Debts Recovery Tribunal to file an appeal  to the Debts 
Recovery Appellate Tribunal after depositi ng with the 
Appellate Tribunal fifty  per cent of am ount of debt due from  
 57

him, as claimed by the secured creditor or determined by the 
Debts Recovery Tribunal, whichever is less. 
Besides above the Act also amended the Recovery of Debts  
Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 so as to enable the 
bank or financi al i nstitution to withdraw, with the permission of the 
Debts Recovery Tribunal, the application made to it and thereafter 
take action under the Securitisation  and Reconstruction of Financial  
Assets and Enforcement of Secu rity Interest Act, 2002.  The 
Companies Act, 1956 was also ame nded so as to provide that any 
reference made under secti on 424A  of that  Act shall  abate if the 
secured creditors representing three- fourth in value of the amount 
outstanding agai nst financi al  assi stance disbursed to the borrower 
have taken measures to recover their secured debt under sub-section 
(4) of Section 13 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial 
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. 
Asked about the experi ence of the Government with regard to 
Securitisation Act, the Secretary, Mi nistry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs – Banking Division) duri ng evidence held on 
2.12.2004 stated as under:- 
“Upto  30 th September, 2004, which is the latest, the total  
number of notices  issued was 70, 254, and these only relate to 
public sector banks.  Private se ctor banks would have al so 
taken action under it.  The total amount involved was Rs. 
21,988 crore.  The number of cases in which recoveries coul d 
be made was also around 29,301 but the total amount 
recovered was Rs. 22,238 crore .  Then, the number of 
compromise  proposals was 16,150 and the amount received 
through compromise proposals was Rs. 1369.87 crore, to be 
exact.  Nearly two years have el apsed si nce the law was 
passed.  For a major part of this period, thi s law was under 
judicial challenge.  The hon.  Supreme Court passed i ts Order 
only recently.  Pursuant to the Supreme Court’ s Orders, 
 58

because of the urgency required in this matter, the Government 
has also brought i n an Ordi nance to comply w ith the Supreme 
Court Order and to see that the recovery process is not 
delayed.  I would say that the experi ence so far has been quite 
satisfactory.  With the l oopholes that are proposed to be 
plugged by bringing out amendments in this Act, we will be able 
to address this problem further.  The amendments proposed 
are already before the Parli ament and are to be taken up for 
consideration whenever the Business Advisory  Committee 
decides.  Accordi ng to thi s amendment, we have to give a 
reasonable opportunity to the bor rower to state his case.  The 
allegation in the judiciary was that sometimes you can make 
arbitrary claims against a borrower.   If the due is only Rs. 10 
crore, you can issue a notice for Rs. 100 crore and the 
borrower has no opportunity to expl ain whether the cal culation 
is right or wrong.  Also someti mes very arbitrary view can be  
taken.  So, the hon. Supreme Court has taken a view that once  
that notice is issued, then the bank has to adj udicate.  It has to  
issue a reasoned order respondi ng to the objections of the 
borrower, and onl y thereafter the bank can proceed to attach 
the assets of the party.   Agai nst that order issued by the bank, 
which will be a reasoned order,  the borrower w ill also have a 
right to go in for appeal. 
 
Earlier, even to challenge the initial notice, the borrower had to 
deposit 75 per cent of the am ounts due.  That will no longer be 
necessary.  He can state t he case without depositing any 
amount.  But when he goes in appeal, he has to deposit at least 
50 per cent of the amount due an d the appellate court in its 
discretion can reduce that amount  from 50 per cent to 25 per 
cent.  So it is fair to the borrow er and it is fair to the lender also 
so that the recovery process is not delayed.  We, in  the 
Government, are confident that this will be not only  a fair law, it 
will also be a very effective law against wilful defaulters.” 
    
Recovery of Loans/Dues thr ough Compromise/One Time  
Settlement System 
 
As per directions of Reserve Bank of India, compromise 
settlement sy stem for recovery  of  loans has been evolved b y 
 59

banks.  The details of vari ous schemes and amount recovered 
thereunder are as follows:- 
1. Settlement Advisory Committees: 
RBI had issued specific guidel ines to Public Sector 
Banks in May 1999 for c onstitution of Settlement  
Advisory Committees for compromise settlement of 
NPAs of small sector by PSBs in order to reduce 
pendencies and enable banks to vigorousl y pursue 
other rel atively large case s. Some banks have set up 
independent Settl ement Advisory Committees (SACs) 
headed by a reti red Judge of the Higher Court to 
scrutinize and recommend compromise  proposals.  
The function of the Committee is advisory i n nature.  
While the  Committee  could give its views on the 
proposals invol ving compromise/wri te off referred 
specifically to it, a final decision thereon would have to 
be taken by the competent o fficials as prescribed under 
the  system of delegation of powers in the bank 
independently.  
2. One Time Settlement Scheme for small sector 
The guidelines  issued by RBI in relation to Settlement 
Advisory Committees will apply to borrowers in the 
small business incl uding trading and personal segment 
and Agricultural Sector. All NPAs which are chronic and 
at least three years old as on March 31, 1999 were 
eligible under the scheme which was in operation till 
September 30, 2000. 
3. Recoveries under OTS upto Rs. 5 crore : 
 60

The One Time Settlement Scheme for NPAs upto Rs. 5 
crore, which was offered upto 30 th June, 2001 as per 
the guidelines of RBI had resu lted in settlement of 887 
lakh NPA accounts involving Rs. 4,649 crore. 
4. One Time Settlement Scheme  for Small Loans limit 
upto Rs. 25,000/- : 
Following the meeting of Fi nance Mi nister with Chief 
Executives of public sector banks held on 12 th 
November, 2001, RBI issued guidelines for compromise 
settlement of NPAs and small loan amount with 
sanctioned limits upto Rs. 25,000/- on 22 nd December, 
2001.  The guidelines cover all NPAs as on 31 st March, 
1998 and were operative upto June, 2002.  Under the 
scheme the amount to be recovered towards settlement 
was fixed at the balance outstanding towards principal 
in the loan account as on 31 st March, 1998.  All banks 
had impl emented the scheme.   An estimated 30.95 
lakh accounts invol ving NPAs of Rs.  2,522 crore were 
eligible for settlement un der the scheme.  2.33 l akh 
applications were receive d for settlement upto 31 st 
March, 2002 out of which approvals were given in 
respect of 1.79 lakh cases involving an amount of Rs. 
149 crore.  As on 31 st M arch, 2002, total  recoveries 
reported under the scheme amounted to Rs. 90 crore.  
5.One time Settlement for NPAs in respect of loans to     
    Small and Marginal Farmers upto Rs. 50,000/-: 
RBI issued guidelines under the  scheme for recovery 
of NPAs in respect of  loans to Small and Marginal  
 61

farmers upto Rs. 50,000/-  on 22 nd March, 2002.  
These guidelines were applicable for NPAs as on 31st 
March, 1998. The features of  the scheme are similar 
to those i n the scheme for small borrowers with limit 
upto Rs. 25,000/-.  The scheme which was i n 
operation until 31 st December, 2002, was extended 
upto 31 st March, 2003. As the scheme was 
announced towards the end of  the financi al year 
2001-02, banks did not hav e any perform ance to 
report, as on 31st March, 2002.  Most banks however, 
reported that their Boards ha ve adopted the scheme 
and advised the branches for implementation.  With a 
view to reducing the leve l of NPAs, all  scheduled 
commercial banks and financial i nstitutions were 
advised vide  Circular dated 2 nd May, 2001 to make 
increasing use of forum of Lok Adalats to settle 
banking disputes involving amount upto Rs. 5 lakh. 
One-time settlement scheme for NPAs upto Rs.10 
crore  
The One Time Settlement Scheme for NPAs was 
reviewed by Reserve Bank of Indi a and revised 
guidelines were issued to all Public Sector Banks on 
January 29, 2003.  The coverage had been raise d 
to chronic NPAs upto Rs. 10 crore.  
Data in respect of the OTS scheme of Rs. 10 crore 
and below  of the Public S ector Banks is gi ven i n 
Annexure V.   
 62

Asked to state the estimated total loss to banks, per year, on 
account of One Time Settlement Scheme (OTS), the Ministry in their 
written reply  stated that the gui delines for OTS Scheme finalised by 
RBI in consultation with Government  of Indi a provides for settlement 
of dues in respect of NPAs which are classified as doubtful on a given 
date.  They do not provide for any waiver of princi pal amount, but 
permit the Banks to waive  only i nterest accruing af ter the amount 
had already turned NPA where interest  payable cannot be booked as 
income of the Bank. In other words, the sacrifi ce in such settlem ents 
would cover amounts not actuall y accounted as income and hence 
the concept of “loss” in arriving at the settl ement, as per the OT S 
guidelines of RBI, is not proper.  However, the Banks have been 
entering into compromise settlements beyond  the RB I guidelines in 
cases where the value of the collateral or other security has grossly 
eroded and the borrower, i n the j udgment of the Bank, is not in a 
position to cough-up adequate fu nds for payment as per the OT S 
Scheme circulated by RBI. For such settlem ents, the Banks have 
framed their own recovery poli cies with the approval of their 
respective Boards. Hence, there ha ve been instances where the 
Banks, w ith the approval of thei r B oard, have waived off pri ncipal  
amount also. The principal amount so waived can be treated a loss to 
the Bank, though this reduction i n NPA helps the Bank in improving 
the qual ity of its financi al status and asset portfolio. As principal  
amounts have been waived in exce ptional cases by Banks as per 
their recovery policy adopted by t he Board, such information is not 
being maintained centrally either by RBI or the Government. 
Statements  gi ving detail s of  su it fi led cases filed by Public 
Sector banks in Courts of Law and DRTs which are pending between  
 63

5 to 10 years and 10 years and above  as on 31.3.2002 and 
31.3.2003, are  given in Annexure - VI. 
Asked whether any target i s set for recovery of bad loans the 
Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Economic Affairs – Banking 
Division) during evidence held on 2.12.2004 deposed as under :-  
“Now, we have moved to an entir ely different system. Most 
banks are listed in the stock m arkets, and their balance-sheets 
and their accounts are know n; their NPAs are known. They are 
themselves very consci ous of this fact. Therefore, for reducing 
their NPAs, there is no longer any need to set any targets. They 
will lose business, if they have high NPAs.”  
 
Asked about the suggestions for effe ctive recovery of NPAs by 
the Banks and measures taken/proposed to be taken by Government, 
RBI and  Banks for reducing and preventing recurrence of bad  loans, 
NPAs, the Ministry of Finance in a written reply have stated that 
Government of India and RBI have advised the banks to take the 
following measures for recovery of loans:- 
i) Formulate Loan Policy and Loan Recovery Policy 
with the approval of Board of Directors and 
implementation thereof. 
ii) Establish Recovery Cells at Head Office, fi xing of 
recovery targets for various levels and close 
monitoring of recovery performance. 
iii) Review NPA accounts of  Rs. 1 crore and above by 
Board of Directors with spec ial reference to fixing of 
staff accountability and review of top 300 NP A 
accounts by Management Committee of the Board. 
 64

iv) Strengthen the risk management systems by putting 
in place instituti onal framework for identifying,  
monitoring and management of credit risk. 
v) Implement Non-di scretionary and non-
discriminatory One Time Settlement Scheme 
announced by RBI. 
vi) Recovery of loans by way of  compromise 
settlement through Settlement Advisory Committees 
and Lok Adalats; and 
vii) Filing of cases in Debt Recovery Tribunals. 
Besides above,  the Ministry had also stated that a Credi t 
Information Bureau had been set up to disseminate i nformation on 
borrowers to the banks and  Corpo rate Debt Restructuring (CDR) 
mechanism had been put in place to provide a transparent 
mechanism for restructuring of corporate debts of viable entities.  The 
Securitisation & Reconstruction of Fi nancial Assets and Enforcement 
of Security Interest Act,. 2002,  had been enacted to facilitate 
foreclosure and enforcement of securi ties in cases of default and to 
enable the bank and financial institutions to realize their dues and the 
Asset Reconstructi on Company (I ndia) Ltd. had been incorporated 
under the Companies Act, 1956.  RBI had issued a fresh one-time 
settlement scheme on 29 th January, 2003 for co mpromise settlement 
of chronic NPAs upto Rs. 10 crore.   
 
  
 
   
 
 65

  
CHAPTER _V 
WRITING OFF LOANS/ADVANCES 
 
 According to Ministry of Finance (Departm ent of Economic 
Affairs – Banking Division), write off is permitted as a last resort when 
all other means to recover the loans are exhausted and where no 
security i s avai lable. Banks may write off advances  at Head Office 
level, even though the relative advances are still outstanding in the 
branch books.  However, it is necessary that provision is made as per 
the cl assification accorded to th e respective accounts.  In other 
words, if an advance is  a loss asset, 100 per c ent provision will have 
to be made therefor. The total amount which is written off finds a 
mention in the Balance Sheet/Annual Report of the respective banks.   
The cases of com promise proposals  of bad debts, losses, etc. 
written off by the Chairman and other functionaries are required to be 
put up to the Management Commi ttee/Board of Directors, on a 
quarterly basis with all relevant information, such as, the sancti oning 
authority, causes for the account turning bad, efforts made for the 
recovery of dues and staff accountability. 
The Ministry has further stated that techni cal write off is 
resorted to by banks to cleanse th e balance sheet of bad debts.  The 
borrowers, however, continue to be l iable for payment of the dues to 
the bank.  It is l earnt that borrow ers are not kept informed of such 
decisions, particul arly when the br anches continue to pursue the 
borrowers’ obligati ons to repay t he dues except where compromise 
settlements are entered into. 
 66

As per R BI instructions, Board of Directors of indivi dual banks 
are required to delegate appropriate powers for write off of bad debts/ 
losses and compromise proposals to the various functionaries subject 
to such safe-guards/conditi ons and reporting, as the Board may 
prescribe.  The proposal s for write off shoul d be exami ned covering, 
inter alia, the following aspects :- 
(a) The sanctioni ng authority in the case of advances had 
exercised his powers judiciously and adhered to the gui delines 
issued by the banks in the matt er of grant of advances and that 
normal terms and conditions were stipulated. 
(b) There was no laxity in the conduct and post-di sbursement 
supervision of advances. 
(c) There was no act of commi ssion or omission on the part of the 
staff leading to the debt proving irrecoverable. 
(d) All steps possible to recover the dues had been taken and that 
there was no further prospect of recovering the debts and 
writing off/compromise was in the larger interest of the bank, 
and  
(e) The authority approving write off proposal did not sanction the 
advance in question in his individual capacity. 
The Committee liked to be appri sed of the legality of the loan 
amount written off and whether Banks have the legal authori ty to 
recover the amount.  The Secretary,  Ministry of Finance (Department 
of Economic Affairs-Banki ng Divi sion), during evidence held on 
10.12.2003, clarified the matter as under :- 
“The other issue that you have ki ndly raised is i n regard to the 
legal position of loans which are written off.  Our own 
understanding i s that irrespective  of provi sions made for bad 
loans or writing off of those l oans, the banks retain the right to 
 67

recover the loans completely.  The writing off is done only at the 
Head Office level and not at branch level.  At the branch level , 
the loans remain recoverable and the bank itself should take al l 
possible action to recover the lo an from whatever asset i s 
available for security or from personal guarantees  or whatever 
means are avail able.  So, writing off or making a provi sion in  
regard to a certai n bad loan does not permi t the bank or the 
branch from not recovering it.  It is possible that somebody 
might challenge it in a court of law and so far I am not aware of 
court having passed any advers e judgement from our point of 
view.  Of course, the courts will ta ke a legal view in this regard, 
but our understanding so  far has been this and this is the  
presumption and premise on the ba sis of which banks are 
presently operating.” 
 
 The Deputy Governor, RBI further clarified during evidence  as 
under:- 
“Now, I come to the other comment which you made.  Where 
write off has taken pl ace, tech nically, after provisions ha ve 
been made out of the bank profi ts, the loan goes out of the 
bank books, but it remains i n another set of books where it i s 
called ‘advance under collection’.  After the recoveries are  
made, the amounts are di rectly credited to Profit and Loss 
Account.  This accounti ng proc edure has been approved.  It 
has stood the test of time.  I c annot recollect the case l aws, but 
a few people have challenged this in the court also, but my 
understanding i s that courts have upheld the acti on that the 
legal rights do not get extinguished  just after the asset is taken 
out of the books and that  the lender has a ri ght to pursue hi s 
request to the securities.  That has stood the test of time on that 
part of it.” 
 
 The total amount written off by Banks during the last five years 
is as under:- 
Year 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 
Amount(Rs 4500 6446 8711 11620 13490 
 68

in crore) 
 
 
The statement showing details of  amount recovered by Public  
Sector Banks through compromise/ write-off during financial years 
2003 and 2004  is furnished at Annexure-VII. 
The details of borrowers whose NPA accounts involving more 
than Rs. 50 crore have been writt en off and the action taken against 
these borrowers  by the respective banks is given in Annexure-VIII. 
 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
WILFUL DEFAULT AND DIVERSION  OF FUNDS 
 
1. Wilful Default of Loans 
 In the wake of concern expressed over the persistence of wilful 
default i n the f inancial system by  the Parliament’s Standing 
Committee on Finance in their 8 th Report (13 LS) on “Financial  
Institutions”, the Reserve Bank of  India had, i n consultation with the 
Government of India, constituted in May 2001 a  Worki ng Group on 
Wilful Defaulters (WGWD) under th e Chairmanship of  Shri S.S. 
Kohli, the then Chairman of  th e Indian Banks’ Associ ation, for 
examining some of the recommendat ions of the Committee.  The 
Group submitted its report in  November 2001.  The  
recommendations of the WGWD were further examined by an In- 
house W orking Group constituted by the Reserve Bank.  The RBI 
vide their Circular dated 30.05.2002 advised all the Banks/FIs about 
the revised definition of the term  `wilful default’ and other related 
 69

matters as recommended by Kohli Co mmittee. The details contained 
in the circular are given below:- 
“A.  Definitions  
 
“A wilful default would be deemed to have occurred if any of the 
following events is noted: 
 
(i) the unit has defaul ted in meeting its payment/repayment 
obligations to the l ender even when it has the capacity to 
honour the said obligations. 
 
(ii) The unit has defaulted in meeting its payment/repayment 
obligations to the l ender and has not utili sed the fi nance 
from the lender for the specific purposes for which finance 
was avai led of but has diverted the funds for other 
purposes. 
 
(iii) The unit has defaulted in meeting its payment/repayment 
obligations to the lender and has siphoned off the funds 
so that the funds have not been utilised for the specific 
purpose for which finance was avail ed of, nor are the 
funds available with the unit in the form of other assets. 
 
B.  Diversion and Siphoning of  Funds 
  
It has al so been decided that the terms “diversion of 
funds” and “siphoning of funds” should be construed to mean 
the following:- 
 70

  
Diversion of  Funds , referred to at para   above, w ould be 
construed to include any one of the undernoted occurrences: 
 
(a) utilisation of short-term working capital funds for long-term 
purposes not in conformity with the terms of  sanction; 
 
(b) deploying borrowed funds for purposes/activi ties or 
creation of assets other than those for which the loan was 
sanctioned. 
 
(c) transferring funds to the subsidiaries/Group companies or 
other corporates by whatever modalities; 
 
(d) routing of funds through any bank other than the lender 
bank or members of consortium without prior permissi on 
of the lender; 
 
(e) investment in other com panies by way of acquiri ng 
equities/debt instruments  without approval of lenders; 
 
(f) shortfall i n deployment of funds vi s-à-vis the amounts 
disbursed /drawn and the di fference not being accounted 
for. 
 
 
Siphoning of funds, referred to at para above, 
should be construed to occur if any funds borrowed from 
 71

banks/FIs are utili sed  for purposes un-rel ated to the 
operations of the borrower, to the detriment of the 
financial health of the entity or of the lender.  The decision 
as to whether a particular i nstance amounts to siphoni ng 
of funds would have to be  a judgement of the lender 
based on objective facts and circumstances of the case. 
 
C.  Cut-off limits  
 
While the penal measures indicated at para D below 
would  normally be attracted by all the borrowers 
identified as wilful defaulters  or the promoters invol ved in 
diversion/siphoning of funds, keeping in view the present 
limit of  Rs.25 l akh fi xed by the Central Vigilance 
Commission for reporting  of cases of wilful default by the 
banks/FIs to RBI, any wilful  defaulter with an outstandi ng 
balance of  Rs.25 lakh or m ore, as on the date of this 
circular, would attract the penal measures stipulated at 
para 7 below. This  limit of  Rs.25 lakh m ay also be 
applied for the purpose of  taking cognisance of  
the instances of  `siphoning’/ `diversion’ of funds. 
   
D. Penal measures  
 
In order to prevent the access to the capital   
markets by the wilful defaul ters, a copy of the list of wilful  
defaulters would henceforth be forwarded by  RBI to SEBI 
as well.  It has also been decided that the following 
 72

measures should be i nitiated by the banks and FIs 
against the wilful defaulters i dentified as per the definiti on 
indicated  at paragraph A above: 
 
(i) No additi onal facil ities should be granted by any 
bank/FI to the listed wilful  def aulters.  In addition, the 
entrepreneurs/promoters of  companies where banks/FIs 
have i dentified siphoning/di version of funds, 
misrepresentation, falsification of accounts and fraudul ent 
transactions should be debarred from institutional finance 
from the schedul ed com mercial banks, Development 
Financial Instituti ons, Government owned NBFCs, 
investment institutions, etc. for floating new ventures for a 
period of 5 years from the date the name of the wilful 
defaulter is published in the list of wilful defaulters by the 
RBI. 
 
(ii) The l egal process, wh erever warranted, against the 
borrowers/guarantors and foreclosure of recovery of dues 
should be initiated  expeditiously.  The lender  may initiate 
criminal proceedi ngs agai nst wilful defaul ters, wherever 
necessary. 
 
(iii) Wherever possible, the banks and FIs should adopt a 
proactive approach for a change  of management of the 
wilfully defaulting borrower unit. 
 
 73

(iv) A covenant in the loan agreements, with the 
companies in which the notified FIs have significant  stake, 
should be incorporated by the FIs to the effect that the 
borrowing  company shoul d not induct a person who is a 
director on the Board of a company which has been 
identified  as a wilful defaulter as per the definition and that 
in case, such a person is found to be on the Board of the 
borrower company, it would take  expeditious and effective 
steps for removal of the person from its Board. 
 
It would be  imperative on the part of the banks and 
FIs to put in place a transp arent mechanism for the entire 
process so that the penal prov isions are not misused and 
the scope of such discreti onary powers is kept to the 
barest minimum.  It shoul d also be ensured that a solitary 
or isolated  instance is not made the basis for imposing the 
penal action. 
 
While dealing with wilful default of a single borrowing 
company in  a Group, the bank s/FIs should consider the 
track record of the indivi dual company, with reference to 
its repayment performance to its lenders.  However, in 
cases where a l etter of comf ort and/or the guarantees 
furnished  by the companies within the Group on behalf of 
the wilful ly defaul ting  units are not honoured when 
invoked by the banks/FIs, such Group companies should 
also be reckoned as wilful defaulters.” 
 
 74

On being asked whether  covenant i n the loan agreement has 
been i ncorporated by all the banks to the effect  that the borrowing 
company should not induct a person who is a Director on the Board 
of Company which has been identif ied as a wilful defaulter, the 
Ministry in its reply has stated that fi nancial i nstitutions have 
incorporated  a sui table covenant in the loan agreem ent entered into 
by the borrower company at the time of   avail ment of the facil ity  to 
ensure that the borrowing companies comply with this condition.  
E.  End-Use of  Funds 
With regard to end-use of funds, the   RBI vide its circular dated 
30.05.2002, had issued guidelines to banks on the  basis of  
recommendations of  Kohli Committee.  
The guidelines inter alia state that i n cases of project financing, 
the banks/FIs seek to ensure end use of funds by, inter alia, obtaining 
certification from the Chartered Account ants for the purpose.  In case 
of  short-term corporate/clean l oans, such an approach ought to be 
supplemented by `due d iligence’ on the part of  lenders themselves,  
and to the extent possi ble, such loans should be limited to only those 
borrowers whose integrity and reliability were above board. The banks 
and FIs, therefore, sh ould not depend entirely on the certifi cates 
issued by the Chartered Accountan ts but strengthen their internal  
controls and the credit ri sk m anagement system  to enhance the 
quality of their l oan portfoli o.  N eedless to say, ens uring end-use of 
funds by the banks and the FIs should form  a part of their loan policy 
document for whi ch appropriate  m easures should be put in place.  
Following are some of the illustrative measures that could be taken 
by the lenders for monitoring and ensuring end-use of funds:- 
(a) Meaningful scrutiny  of quarterly progress reports/ 
 75

operating statem ents/balance sheets of the 
borrowers; 
(b) Regular inspection of  borrowers’ assets charged to  
the lenders as security; 
(c) Periodical scrutiny of borrowers’ books of accounts 
and the non-li en accounts maintained with other 
banks; 
(d) Periodical visits to the assisted units; 
(e) System of periodical stoc k audit, in case of w orking 
capital finance; 
(f) Periodical comprehensive management audit of the 
`credit’ function of the lender s, so as to identify the 
systemic-weaknesses in the credit-administration. 
Asked to state whether the il lustrative measures 
enumerated by R BI for ensuring  proper end-use of funds are 
being foll owed by the banks, the Ministry of  Finance in their 
reply stated that banks have a well-defined procedure for post-
disbursement supervision of l oan accounts and monitoring of 
end-use of funds. Aspects  relat ing to diversion of funds by 
borrowers/companies are look ed into and adherence or  
otherwise of guidelines of RBI for verifying end use of funds lent 
by banks are commented upon at the time of i nspection of 
branches/controlling offices by bank ’s own inspectors, statutory 
auditors and also at the time of   Annual Financial Inspecti on 
conducted by R BI. Serious defi ciencies and lapses are 
discussed during Annual Financial Inspection/audit, etc.              
The Ministry of Finance has further stated that it has been 
observed from the loan pol icy docu ments of the  banks  that  
 76

they have incorporated  measures such as visits to the assisted 
units, cal ling for documentary ev idence, verification of stock 
acquired out of bank funds etc. for ensuring end use of funds. 
2. Role of  Auditors 
The Ministry of Finance has stated that in case of project  
financing, banks/FIs obtain certificate from Chartered Accountants on 
end use of funds by the borrowers .  The Working Group on wilful 
defaulters set up under the Chairmans hip of  Shri S.S. Kohli had 
recommended that in case any falsification of account on the part of 
the borrowers is observed by the banks/FIs, they should lodge a 
formal complaint against the auditors of the borrowers with the 
Institute of  Chartered Accountants of  India (ICAI), if it is observed 
that the auditors were negligent or deficient in conducting the audit to 
enable the ICAI to examine and fix accountability of the auditors.  
With a view to monitoring the end-use of funds, if the lenders desire a 
specific certi fication from  the borrow ers' auditors regarding 
diversion/siphoning of funds by the borrower, the lender should award 
a separate mandate to the auditors for the purpose.  To facilitate such 
certification by the auditors the banks and FIs will also need to ensure 
that appropriate covenants in t he loan agreements are incorporated 
to enabl e award of such a ma ndate by the lenders to the 
borrowers/auditors.   
RBI has formulated the following policy for taking action against  
audit firms on account of  irregularities reported against them:- 
(i) Anonymous complaints received against audit firms are 
 not entertained; 
(ii) In case of  complaints received from any Government 
Department, any regulating authorities, or in case serious 
 77

irregularities are observed by Inspector of  RBI during 
AFI of the bank or where  delay in accepting,  
commenting/completing statut ory audit work assignment 
by RBI or refusal of stat utory audit by concerned audi t 
firms, they are denied audit by RBI after exami ning their 
responses and in consul tation with the Sub-Committee 
(Audit) of the BFS. 
(iii) Where complaint is receive d from Government of India, 
Ministry of  Finance, Banki ng Divisi on, necessary penal  
action is taken by RBI agai nst the concerned audit firm  
and full facts are reported to S ub-Committee (Audit) of 
BFS. 
(iv) Where complaint has al ready be en filed with ICAI no      
action i s taken unless i t i s advi sed by the ICAI about 
either filing the case by i ts Council at its on prima faci e 
stage or referring the case to its disciplinary committee. 
 (v)    Audit fi rm denied audit by the offi ce of C&AG are also 
denied audit by RBI.  In case statutory audit is denied to 
any audit firm its name is not consi dered for any private 
sector bank/foreign bank/local area bank/state financi al  
corporation. 
It has further been stated that presently, firms having been  
found guilty of professio nal  mis-conduct by IC AI firms against which 
the cases are pending with the inst itute (including those involved i n 
audit of banks/financial institutes  i nvolved i n the irregular secured 
transactions of 90-91, 91-92) and thos e denied audi t by the offi ce of 
C&AG, are denied statutory audit by RBI. 
Asked to state the number of cases where banks have lodged  
 78

complaints against the audi tors of th e borrowers for falsification  of 
accounts with the Institute of  Chartered Accountants of India (IC AI) 
for being negligent or defici ent in conducting the audit, the Ministry in  
a written reply have stated that at pr esent there is no system in pl ace 
to compile information on such complaints made by banks to ICAI. 
3.Criminal Liability /action ag ainst diversion/ siphoning of 
funds 
  
Expressing serious concern over  diversion/siphoni ng of funds 
by borrowers, the Joint Parliam entary Committee on Stock Market 
Scam and Matters relating  thereto in thei r Report have inter alia 
recommended (para no. 10.84) as under:- 
“…….. the Committee find that the activity of diversion of  funds 
is not  culpabl e either under B anking Regulation Act or under 
the Indian Penal Code………..the Committee are however 
constrained to  note that even this ci rcular (ci rcular dated 
30.5.2002 issued by RBI pursuant to recommendation of 
Working Group on Willful Default –Kohli Committee) is silent  
with respect to fixi ng criminal liabi lity against those who siphon  
of funds deliberately, resort to mis-representation, fal sification 
of accounts and i ndulge of fraudulent  transactions.  In view of 
the fact that as regards judicial interpretation  of Secti ons 405 
and 415 no offence of b reach of  trust or cheating i s construed 
to have been committed in the case of loans, i t is essential that 
such offences are clearl y defined  under the existi ng statutes 
governing the banks, providing  for criminal action in all such 
cases where the borrowers di vert the funds with malafide 
intention.  Though the C ommittee agree that such penal 
provisions should be used sparingly and after due diligence and 
caution, at the same time it is also essential that banks closely 
monitor  the end use of the funds and  obtain certifi cates from 
the borrowers certi fying that the funds have been used for the 
purpose for which these w ere obta ined.  Wrong certification, 
should attract criminal action against the borrowers.”  
 79

 
RBI constituted a Working Group under the chairmanship of  
Shri D.T. Pai, Banking Ombuds man,  Uttar Pradesh with  
representatives of SBI, ICICI Bank, Canara Bank, IDBI, IFCI and RBI 
as its m embers to examine the JP C recommendation (para No. 
10.84). T he terms of the reference  of the W orking Group amongst 
others were to review  sections 405  & 415 of Indian Penal Code in 
order to spell out cl early that breach of  trust or cheati ng is construed  
to have been committed in the case of loans of banks/financial 
institutions. The Working Group had  submitted its Report on 25 th 
April, 2003.  The Working Group de liberated all rel evant issues and 
recommended amendment to Section 405 and incorporation of new 
Sections 415A, 424A and 465A to t he IPC to provide for crimi nal 
action against those indulging in  diversion/siphoni ng of funds, 
resorting to misrepresentati on, falsification of accounts and indul ging 
in fraudulent transactions.   The recommendations made by the  
 
Working Group  are detailed as under :- 
Proposed amendments to Indian Penal Code, 1860 
I. Section 405 – Number the present  provision as sub 
section (1) and add new s ub sections (2) and (3) to 
the section 
Section 405(2) – w hoever, has availed any financial  
assistance from a bank or fi nancial institution, shall 
be deemed to have been entrusted with the  amount 
involved in the financial assi stance and if he makes 
mis-utilisation of such money or disposes any 
portion or whole of such amount not i n accordance 
 80

with the terms of the contract, express or i mplied 
with the bank or financial institution shall be deemed 
to have dishonestly used such amount in violation of 
legal contract as aforesaid. 
405(3)- Who ever has acqui red any specific  
property with the  financial assistance availed, from 
a bank or financial institution and a  security i nterest 
has been created in favour of such bank or financial 
institution shall be deemed to have been entrusted 
with such property and  if he  misutilises or disposes 
such property, wholly or partly, not in accordance 
with the  terms of the contract, express or implied 
with the bank or financial institution shall be deemed 
to have dishonestly misappropriated such property 
in violation of legal contract as aforesaid. 
Explanation (1) for the purpos e of sub sections (2) 
and (3) above and Secti ons 415A, 424A, 465A, the 
words ‘ bank’, ‘ financial instituti on’, ‘financial  
assistance’, ‘ security i nterest’ shall  have the same 
meaning as assi gned in the Securiti sation and 
Reconstruction of Financial  Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. 
II. In the Indian Penal Code after Section 415 the  
following sub-section may be inserted namely, 
Section 415 – After the present provision insert a 
new Section 415A 
Who ever, with the intention of avai ling financial  
assistance from a bank or financial institution or to 
 81

prevent the bank or  financial instituti on  from 
recovering the financial assi stance availed or which 
may be availed, makes any statement which is false 
in material particulars or does any act or omits from 
doing any act, causing wrongf ul loss to the bank or 
financial instituti on shall  be deemed to have 
deceived the bank or financial institution wi th an 
intention to cheat. 
Provided that whoever knowingly takes part i n the 
preparation or provides information w hich is false in 
material particulars for such preparation or certifies 
or authorizes the veraci ty of any statement 
submitted to the bank  or financi al institution for 
availing the aforesaid financial assistance or 
preventing its recovery shall be deemed to have 
intentionally aided cheating. 
III. In the Indian Penal Code, after Section 424 the 
following section may be inserted, namely: 
Section 424A Punishment for Removal of Assets 
etc. 
Who ever 
(a)  removes or conceals, or transfers or 
causes to be transferred any property in 
his custody or control which is subject to 
any form  of security  interest created i n 
favour of any bank without the express or 
implied consent or concurrence of such 
bank; or 
 82

(b)  furnishes any statem ent which is fal se in 
any material particulars, to any bank 
concerning any property which i s in his 
custody or control and which is either  
subject to any form or securi ty interest i n 
favour of any bank/FI or which is offered 
by him to any bank/FI to be made  subject 
to any  security i nterest in favour of that 
bank 
shall be puni shed with i mprisonment of 
either description which may extend to two 
years, or with fine or with both. 
IV. Add new section numbering as 465A in IPC 
After the present Section 465 the following new   
Section may be inserted namely: 
465A – Penalty for falsification of books; 
If with intent to defraud or deceive a bank or a 
financial institution from whom a financial facil ity is 
availed, any borrower or employee or his agent. 
a) destroys, mutilates, alt ers, falsifies or secrets, 
or is pri vy to the destruction, m utilation, 
alteration, falsifi cation or secreting of any 
books, papers or securities; or 
b) makes or   i s privy to the m aking of any false 
or fraudulent entry in any register/books of 
accounts or document belonging to the 
company; 
 83

He shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years and shal l also be 
liable to fine. 
Amendment to Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
V. Amendment to the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 by 
incorporating Section 114A has been recommended 
as detail ed under.  This would provide statutory  
presumption in favour of pr osecution in connection 
with the offences dealt under Section 424A of IPC 
and reduce burden of banks /financial instituti on in 
proving the offence. 
After Section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872, the followi ng secti on may be inserted, 
namely:- 
“114B In a prosecution for dishonest or fraudulent 
removal, conceal ment or t ransfer of any form of 
security i nterest, created in  favour of any bank/ or 
FI, furnishing of any statement which is false in any 
material particulars with re spect of such security 
interest under Section 424A of the Indian Penal  
Code, the Court shall presume that - 
a) any act of removal, concealment of transfer of 
such security interest or the furnishing or any 
such statement by any person, was 
dishonestly or fraudulently made unless a 
contrary is shown: 
b) any such transfer was dishonestly or 
fraudulently made when – 
 84

i) such transfer was  made without the 
consent or concurrence of the bank/FI 
and 
ii) the proceeds of su ch transfer were not 
utilized to discharge t he security interest 
subject to which such property is held.” 
VI. The amendments recommended by Mitra 
Committee with regard to the provisions of Indian 
Penal Code, Indi an Evidence Act and Criminal 
Procedure Code be implemented expeditiously. 
VII. The Banking Regulation Act primarily deals with the 
banks and do not directly deal with relation between 
the borrower and the bank.  The issue involved is 
fixing criminal liability on borrower, the group was of 
the strong view that certain additi ons to Section 405 
and 415 of IPC will serve th e purpose.  It is not out 
of place to mention here that the Banking  
Regulation Act does not have any trial procedure.   
Group therefore do not recommend any amendment 
to the Banking Regulation Act. 
 Asked to state whether the recommendations made by D.T. Pai 
Working Group have been accepted  and implemented, the Deputy  
Governor, RBI during evi dence he ld on 2.12.2004 deposed as 
under:- 
“Sir, you have m entioned about the JPC’s recommendati on 
about taking crimi nal action against those who have siphoned 
off funds or have diverted bank credit or other uses.  It is true, 
the JPC had recommended that we shoul d consider taking 
criminal action.  We had had this examined by the legal  
 85

department.  Then, we have set up,  what is called, a Standing 
Technical Advisory Committee for financial regul ation.  It 
comprises select bankers and financi al institutions. W e 
considered this subject matter as one of the agenda i tems for 
discussion also.  T he members i nclude select foreign bankers, 
the pri vate bankers, the public sector banks.  We wanted a 
debate on the subject as to how and whether it would be 
appropriate to take criminal action.  After having considered the 
Standing Technical  Advisory Committee’s views and the legal  
views in the matter, we have proceeded to issue a circul ar to all 
banks in July 2004 advi sing the banks that they should take 
criminal action wherever they find that borrowers have diverted 
funds.” 
  
On  perusal of guidelines  advised by RBI to all banks/AFIs on                 
on 23rd July,2004 regarding  measures  to be taken by banks against 
wilful defaulters (Annexure-IX),  the Committee found that under the 
extant guidelines Banks were to  seriously and promptly consider 
initiating criminal  action against wilful  defaulters, wherever 
considered necessary, based on the facts and circumstances of each 
case under the  provisions of Section 403 and 415 of IPC, 1860.  
Asked about the reasons for not accepti ng the specific 
recommendations proposing amendments to IPC made by D. T . Pai 
Committee, the Mi nistry in their pos t-evidence repl y have stated as 
under:- 
“The D.T. Pai Committee recommendations were exam ined by 
RBI in the background of the steps  already initiated by Reserve 
Bank in May 2002 to effecti vely address the i ssue of  
diversion/siphoning of funds. The D.T. Pai Committee had 
recommended legal amendments necessary to facilitate 
criminal action against borrow ers who divert/siphon off  bank 
funds, but it was fel t that ‘p resumptive guilt’ in breach of 
contracts with borrowers for initiati ng crimi nal proceedings 
implicit in the recommendation could post difficul ties as had  
happened in the case of FERA violations. The experience of 
 86

banks i n regard to vigilance proceedings based on similar 
presumption was also no better. It was also observed that the 
recommendation could lead to asymmetry  between Banks and 
borrowers in the context of the ab ility of banks to appropriate all   
types of cash flow s in the borrow ers’ accounts in its favour. In 
this context, there was also the need to di stinguish genuine 
exogenous causes affecting the borrowers’ ability to service the 
dues from deliberate attem pts to divert banks assistance. Thus 
when certain defaults may not be due to diversi on, also 
sometimes even di version may not lead to default. It was also 
important to know  whether t he banks can have systems to 
identify and check attempts for diversion at some stage and to 
initiate appropriate action based on loan covenants rather than 
relying on criminal  action to recover the dues. While there was 
certainly a need to check the abuse  of the fi nancial system, it 
was felt that as lendi ng and borrowing are commercial 
transactions between consent ing/contracting parti es, 
presumption of cri minality ma y not be proper. Further, such 
stipulation if applied only to banks and not to other 
intermediaries may lead to asy mmetrical treatment and could 
be questi oned in Courts of law.  Considering the im plications 
implicit i n the legislati ve amendments, D.T. Pai Committee 
recommendations were taken up fo r wider discussions with the 
Standing Techni cal Advisory Committee on Financi al 
Regulation (STACFR), an advisory body comprising of bankers, 
legal experts and academicians set up by RBI. The issue was 
examined by the STACFR with specific reference to the 
following : 
 
(i) Implications of adopting the changes suggested by 
the D.T. Pai Committee. 
(ii) Exploring all possible options available to achieve  
the obj ectives governing th e recom mendations of 
the JPC. 
(iii) Need for checking dive rsion of banks funds through 
the NBFC route : 
(iv) Mechanism for redressal of grievances of borrowers 
declared as willful defaulter. 
 
 87

While entirely agreeing with the observations of the JPC  on the 
need for strong action against willful  defaulters, in a demonstrable 
way, STACFR observed that : 
 
(a)   The recommendations of the P ai Group for 
amendments to Indian Penal Code has an implicit 
element of presumptive guilt on the part of the 
borrower. Implementation of the recommendation is 
fraught with constraints part icularly i n view of the 
general banker-customer relati onship and the 
aspect of natural justice. 
(b)   Banks can initiate crim inal action agai nst defaulting 
borrowers even in the present envi ronment. 
Diversion of funds often takes place through new 
accounts opened in banks other than the lending 
banks. While it is difficult to prevent a customer from 
borrowing from any other bank i n the present 
environment, banker should be prudent while 
financing a borrower of another bank. 
(c)   Banks are generally in terested in recovering the 
moneys lent by them and option for recall of a loan 
is exerci sed after exhaustin g all other methods of 
recovery. Initi ating criminal action against the 
borrower is unli kely to help banks in recovering the 
money lent by them. 
 
After further exam ination of t he views of the STACFR and the 
legal position, RBI has noted that even the existing legal provisions in 
Cr. P. C. facilitate initiation of desired actions without legal 
amendments as was originally contemplated. 
 
In view of the above, banks/FIs have been advised by RBI on 
23rd July 2004  to formulate a transp arent policy with the approval  of 
the Board in order to initiate criminal  action against wil lful defaulters 
on a case by case basis, under the provisions of Sections 403 and 
415 of the Indi an Penal Code(IPC),  1860 depending upon the facts 
and circumstances of the case.” 
 
It had al so been stated i n the said circular that the 
mechanism put in place by the ban ks for i nitiating criminal action  
 88

against wilful defaulters would be reviewed  after one year with a 
view to improve the same. 
 
The number of criminal proceedings initiated by banks/FIs 
 against  the wilful defaulters, as  on November 30, 2004 pursuant to 
RBI circular dated 23.7.2004 is as follows:- 
 
 
Category Information 
received from 
No. of 
banks/Fis 
No. of 
banks/FIs filed 
criminal 
proceedings 
No. of criminal  
complaints 
lodged 
Public Sector 
Banks 
22 18 138 
Private Sector 
Banks 
12 10 36 
Foreign Banks 15 9 21 
Total of banks 49 37 195 
Financial 
Institutions 
4 3 27 
Grand Total 53 40 222 
Classification of borrowers as Wilful Defaulters 
 According to the RBI’s circular dated 29 th July, 2003 all Banks 
are required to – 
(a) form a Committee of higher functionari es headed by the 
Executive Director for classification of borrowal accounts as  
willful defaulters, and 
(b) create a redressal mechanism  in the form of Committee 
headed by Chairman and Managing Director for giving a 
hearing to  borrowers who rep resent that they have bee n 
wrongly classified as willful defaulters. 
 89

On representation by the borrowers who were classified as  
‘Willful Defaulters’, that the redressal mechanism should precede the 
classification as Wi llful Defaulter, the RBI vide its circular dated 17 th 
June, 2004 had clarified that the cl assification of the defaulter as 
willful and the mechanism for redressal of the grievance of the 
borrower concerned are to be carried out thoroughl y through two 
distinct processes, viz. 
(a) The first stage would be the ident ification of default as ‘willful’ 
based on the prescribed norms (vide circul ar dated May 30, 
2002) through a Committee approach as stipulated in 
paragraph 1(a) of the circul ar dated July 29, 2003 referred to 
above. 
(b) The borrower should thereafter be suitably advised about t he 
proposal to classify him as willful defaulter along with the 
reasons therefor. The concerned borrower should be provided 
reasonable time (say 15 days)  for making representation 
against such deci sion, if he so desires, to the C ommittee 
headed  by the Chairman and Managing Director. 
A final declaration as ‘willful defaulter’ should be made after a  
view is taken by the Committ ee on the represent ation and the 
borrower should be suitably advised. 
 The Ministry of Finance (Department of E conomic Affairs – 
Banking Division) in a written reply have stated that out of 55 banks 
(including 23 publi c sector banks) a nd 4 financial insti tutions (FIs), 
from whom the i nformation has been received, all the banks/FIs 
except 2 foreign banks have set up the Committee  for Grievance 
Redressal.  As regards num ber of case s of wil ful defaulters referred 
to the Gri evance Redressal Committ ee, it has been stated that from 
 90

the information received from 55 b anks (including 23 publi c sector 
banks), 33 cases have been referre d to the Grievances Redressal 
Committee by banks and in 31 cases, it has been established that the 
default was wilful.  Remaining 2 cases are pending wi th the 
Committees for consideration. 
 Asked to state whether any effo rts have been made to trac k 
down the money si phoned off by Wi lful Defaulters and to retrieve the 
same, the Secretary Mini stry of Fi nance ( Department of  Economic 
Affairs – Banking Division) dur ing evidence held on 2.12.2004 
deposed as under:- 
“…in regard to siphoning off of money and how this money trai l 
being pursued let me say that there are bodies within the 
Ministry of Finance, I woul d not  be able to descri be functions 
properly because I am not personal ly aware; but there is, for  
instance, the Directorate of Revenue Intel ligence and the 
income-tax authorities themselves. There are intelligent wings 
who will track movements of money.  
 
But in regard to banks and fi nancial institutions, perhaps 
the focus is more on credit and development and, of course, 
recovery of their own dues. Perhaps, there is not so much 
attention in pursuing any loss of money of other sources, other 
channels because they are essenti ally not in  business of doing 
it. I am not saying that it is not important and it should not be 
attempted. But that has been th e case so far…. But what we 
need to do is to establish a mechanism where these agencies 
can share that information with banks because it is all i n public 
interest to do so. Even i n co untries abroad, as far as I 
understand, if such a thing were to happen in the United States, 
it is IRS which will actually track. But the point is very well taken 
that there must be a system  in place within the financi al sector 
where thi s information can be co llected and shared. This is 
insofar as tracking the money trail is concerned.” 
 
Statement showing number of cases  of wilful defaulters (suit- 
 91

filed accounts) involving R s. 25 lakh and above as on 31 st M arch, 
2003 and 2004 i n respect of all the P ublic Sector Banks is given in 
Annexure-X. The number of cases of  wilful default (non-suit filed 
accounts) of Rs. 25 lakh and above as on 31 st March, 2003 and 2004 
in respect of Public Sector Banks is shown in the Statements given at 
Annexure-XI. 
 On perusal of figures in respec t of cases  of wilful default (non-
suit filed accounts) obtained as on 31 st March, 2004, the Committee 
noticed that  State  Bank of India had 160 number of non-suit filed 
accounts of cases of wilful def ault involving an amount of Rs. 790.33 
crore, Bank of India had 53 non-sui t filed accounts involving Rs. 
131.27 crore, and Punjab National Bank had 46 accounts invol ving 
Rs. 124.47 crore. 
 Asked to furni sh the  names of the defaulting 
individuals/companies and the acti on taken against them by the 
above banks, the Ministry of Finance (D epartment of Economic 
Affairs – Banking Division) in a written reply have stated that the 
information under the schemes of defaulters of Rs. 1 crore and above 
and wilful defaulters of Rs. 25 lakh and above is being collected and 
disseminated under the provisions of Chapter IIIA of the RBI Act.  
Sub-Section (1) of Section 45E of t he RBI Act stipul ates that any 
credit information contained i n any statement submitted by a banking 
company under S ection 45C or furnis hed by the Reserve Bank  to 
any banking company under Sect ion 45D shall be treated as  
confidential and shall not, except for the purposes of this Chapter, be 
published or otherwise disclosed.  Clause (b) of sub-section(2) of 
Section 45E of the RBI Act enables the Reserve Bank to publi sh the 
information collected by it under Section 45C in such consoli dated 
 92

form as it think fi t without disclosi ng  the name of any banking 
company or its borrowers.  Moreover, such publicati on is permissible 
only if the same is consi dered necessary by the Reserve Bank in the 
public interest.  In view  of the specifi c statutory prohibiti on contained 
in Section 45E of the RBI Act, it is  not open to the Reserve Bank to 
publish/publicise the list of all defau lting borrowers.  However, as the 
names of defaulters against whom suits have been filed are ready in 
public domain, the information is placed on the web site of CIBIL.    
  
CHAPTER-VII 
 
 
CORPORATE DEBT RESTRUCTURING 
 
 
Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) is  one of the methods  
suggested for reduction of Non-Perf orming A ssets.  T he process i s 
primarily reschedul ing the debt port folio of the borrowers among its 
creditors to help the borrowers i n the revival of projects and conti nue 
operations through reductions in existing debt burden and 
establishment of new credit lines with implied assum ption that the 
lender would prefer reducti on in ri sk to optimization of returns.  The 
objective of the CDR is to en sure a timely and transparent 
mechanism for restructuri ng of the corporate debts of viable 
corporate entities affected by intern al and external factors, outside 
the purview of BIFR, DRT or other legal proceedings, for the benefit 
of all concerned.  In particular,  the framework was intended to 
preserve viabl e corporates   affe cted by certain internal/external  
factors and minimise losses to cr editors/other stakeholders through 
an orderly and coordinated restructuring programme.  
The guidelines on CDR put forth by the Reserve Bank indicate that 
the CDR is to have a three tier structure : (a) CDR Sta nding Forum; 
(b) CDR Empowered Group and (c) CDR Cell.The CDR Sta nding 
Forum would be a se lf-empowered body  wh ich would lay down 
policies and guidelines and guid e and monitor the progress of  
corporate debt restructuring.  The C DR Empowered Group on the 
other hand, will decide on indivi dual cases of corporate debt 
 93

restructuring, which will consider preliminary report of all cases of 
requests of restructuring submitte d to it by the CDR Cell. The  
Empowered Group would be mandated to look into each case of debt 
restructuring and examine the viabi lity and rehabilitation potential of 
the com pany and approve the restructuri ng package within a 
specified time of 90 days or at  best 180 days of reference to the 
Empowered Group. The lowest of  the three ti ers would be the CDR 
Cell, which would make the initial scrutiny of all proposals received 
from borrowers/lenders by calling for proposed rehabilitation plan and 
other information and put up the matter before CDR Empo wered 
Group wi thin one month to dec ide whether rehabi litation i s prima 
facie feasible.    
Pursuant to the announcement m ade in the  Union Budget -2002-
2003, a High Level Group (under t he Chairmanship of Shri Vepa 
Kamesam) was constituted to revamp the CDR Scheme. Based on 
the recommendations made by t he High Level  Group and in 
consultation with the  Government, a revised schem e of CDR was 
finalised and forwarded to banks in February, 2003. 
The salient features of the revi sed CDR scheme issued in February 
2003 are as follows:- 
(i) It will cover multiple banking 
accounts/syndication/consortium accounts with 
outstanding exposure of  Rs.20 crore and above. 
(ii) It will be a voluntary system based on Debtor-Creditor 
Agreement (DCA) and Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA). 
(iii) The revised guidelines prov ide exit options for lenders 
who do not wish to commit additional  financing or wish to 
sell their existing stake. 
(iv) `Stand-still’ agreement binding for 90 days or 180 days by 
debtors and creditors  respectively, under which both 
sides commit themselves not to take recourse to any legal 
action during the `stand-still’ period.     
In a written repl y, the Mini stry of  Finance have stated that the  
following parameters were l aid down for approval of the cases under 
CDR system :- 
(a) The Category 1 CDR system will be  applicable only to 
accounts classified as `s tandard’ and `sub-s tandard’.  
There may be a situation where a small porti on of debt by 
a bank might be classified as doubtful.  In that situation, if 
the account has been classified as 
`standard’/`substandard’ in t he books of at least 90% of 
 94

lenders (by val ue), the same  would be treated as 
standard/sub-standard, only for the purpose of judging the 
account as eligible for CDR, in the books of the remaining 
10% of l enders.  There would be no requirement of the 
account/company being sick, N PA, or being in default for 
a specified period before ref erence to the CDR system.  
However, potentially viable cases of  NPAs will get 
priority.  This approach woul d provide the necessary 
flexibility  and facilitate ti mely intervention for debt 
restructuring.  Prescribing any milestone(s) may not be 
necessary, since the debt restructuri ng exercise is bei ng 
triggered by banks and financial insti tutions or with their 
consent.  
(b) In no case, the requests of  any corporate indulgi ng in 
wilful default, fraud or malfeasance, even in a single bank, 
will be considered for restructuring under CDR system. 
(c) The  accounts where recovery  suits have been filed by  
the lenders agai nst the company, may be eligible for 
consideration under the CDR sy stem provided, the 
initiative to resolve the case under the CDR system is 
taken by  at least 75% of the l enders (by val ue).  
However, for restructuri ng of such accounts under the 
CDR system, it should be ensured that the accounts meet 
the basi c criteri a for becoming eligible under the CDR 
mechanism. 
(d) BIFR cases are not eli gible for restructuring under the 
CDR system.  However, large value BIFR cases, may be 
eligible f or rest ructuring under the CDR system  if 
specifically  recommended by the C DR Core Group.  The 
Core Group shall recommend exceptional BIFR cases on 
a case-to-case basis for c onsideration under the C DR 
system.  It should be ensured that  the lending insti tutions 
complete all the formalities in seeking the approval from 
BIFR before implementing the package. 
 
 
(e) Details of restructuring packages approved by Corporate 
Debt Restructuring (CDR) e mpowered Group under CDR 
mechanism are as under :- 
 
 
 95

 
 
Sr No. Status No. of restructuring 
packages approved 
Amount 
1 Fully implemented 
cases 
42 36587 
2 Sanctioned, but not 
implemented/partly 
implemented 
22 15648 
3 Sanction/implementa
tion in progress 
18 9531 
 Total  82 61766 
  
 
A list  of  corporate entit ies whose accounts have bee n 
restructured under the Corporate Debt Restructuring System, is given 
in Annexure-XII.  .Asked to furnish the information regarding the date 
from whi ch each of these com panies had been referred for debt 
restructuring under CDR mechanism, the time schedule fixed for 
repayment of debt, both principal a nd interest; and the amount of 
debt including interest repai d by each company and the outstanding 
debt pending, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs – Banking Division) in a wr itten reply have stated that as the 
information sought is   lender-specific and is not in the public domain, 
RBI would not be i n a position to furnish them i n the light of statutory 
restrictions. 
 
However, as per the information furnished by the Ministry, the 
frequency distribution of tenure of packages approved under CDR  
mechanism as on 30th June, 2004 is as under: 
 
 96

Sr. Tenure of package No. of cases Percentage 
1 Less than 7 years 17 18 
2 7 to 10 years 42 44 
3 10 to 15 years 29 31 
4 15 years and more 6 7 
 Total 94 100 
 
The Ministry have also stated that the post-restructuring 
performance of the 61 fully implemented cases of CDR  shows that  
in case of 66% of these cases, paym ent is bei ng received regul arly.  
Payment is not yet due in respect of 16 cases. The  details given are 
as under: 
        ( Rs. Crore) 
Performance No. Amount Performance No. Amount 
Better than 
projection 
22 36,229 Regular in 
payment of 
dues 
40 35,498 
In line with 
projections 
25 10,233 Debt service 
is yet to 
commence/ 
moratorium 
16 5,939 
Inferior to 
projections 
14 3,695 Delay in 
payment 
5 8,720 
 61 50,157  61 50,157 
  
 The Committee came to know  that there has been a tendency 
amongst banks to go in for restruct uring of debts of corporate bodies 
with a vi ew to reduce the provis ioning i n respect of NPAs. By 
restructuring the loans of corporate b odies, which are usually of high 
value, the banks are able to bring down the NPAs on paper. 
 97

Asked whether it is not des irable for RBI to i ssue new  
guidelines asking the  banks to classify the l oans being restructured 
under CDR scheme as NPAs and make graded provisioning 
according to an approved formula and recl assify them only after 
these loans have turned into standar d assets, the Secretary Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs – Banking Divisi on) 
during evidence held on 2.12.2004  deposed as under:- 
“But there was a small point, whi ch you mentioned, about 
Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR)  mechanism.  In that you 
said that should it not be cl assified as NPA?  Absolutel y on the 
dot, right.  It shoul d be classified as NPA, and we have issued 
instructions that for one year, it shoul d continue to be classified 
as per its existi ng classi fication.  That means, even after 
restructuring, they cannot change the classi fication  for one 
year.  The account would be wa tched and onl y on the basis of 
the recovery made, can the classification change thereafter.” 
 
In thei r post evidence  reply, the Mini stry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs – Banking Divi sion)  have 
supplemented  that CDR mechani sm accepts only those corporate 
debts for restructuring, which are fa cing temporary probl ems but are 
viable. T he CDR Standing Forum  has put in place well defined 
viability parameters for various in dustry categories. RBI also has 
issued guidelines on provisioning requirement and asset classification 
methodology to be followed by banks in respect of accounts taken up 
for restructuring. These gui delines do not leave any scope for banks 
to misrepresent the status of their assets restructured under the CDR 
mechanism. Further RBI has prescr ibed detailed guidelines on 
upgradation of an asset into standard category, which has undergone 
restructuring. Banks are also requir ed to discl ose on an aggregate 
 98

basis in the balance sheet the details of advances restructured under 
CDR mechanism. 
A copy of the instructions issued by RBI to banks with regard to 
applicability of the asset classification norms in respect of NPA loans, 
which have been restructured under CDR is given in Annexure        .  
Asked  to state whether the afore -stated instructions are bein g 
followed by banks in letter and sp irit and whether instances of 
violation of these instructions have come to notice of RBI during their 
Annual Financi al Inspection (AFI), the Ministry in their repl y stated 
that  instances of non-observance ha ve not come to notice of RBI, 
during the AFI of the banks. 
 
The Ministry have further stat ed that as the CDR mechani sm 
had completed 3 years, RBI had  set up a Special Group under 
Deputy Governor (Smt. Gopinath) to review the CDR mechanism and 
suggest improvements. 
 
 
 CHATPER-VIII 
 
CREDIT INFORMATION BUREAU 
 
 Banks and lendi ng instituti ons have a traditi onal resi stance, 
because of the confidential nature of banker-customer relationship, to 
share  credit information on the cl ient, not only with each other, but 
also across sectors.  There has been  a widely felt need to establi sh a 
Credit Information Bureau (CIB)  des igned to obtain and share data 
on borrowers in a system atic manner for sound credit deci sions, 
thereby helping to facil itate avoidan ce of adverse selecti on. This 
would also facili tate reduction i n NPAs.  Based on the 
recommendations of the Working Group constituted to expl ore the 
possibilities of setting up a CIB in  India and realis ing the importance 
of devel oping better institutional mechani sms for shari ng of credit-
 99

related i nformation, the Un ion Budget 2000-01,  announced the  
establishment of a  Credit Information  Bureau.  Pursuant to Finance 
Minister’s announcement in his Budg et proposals for 2000-01, Credit  
Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (CIB IL). CIBIL was set up by State 
Bank of  India in associati on with HDFC in January, 2001 with an 
unauthorized capi tal of  Rs.50.00 crore and paid-up capital of  
Rs.25.00 crore, with equity participat ion of  40 per c ent each and two 
foreign technol ogy partners vi z. M/s Dun &  Bradstreet Inform ation 
Services (India) Ltd. and Trans Un ion International Inc., USA sharing 
the remaining 20 per cent equity st ake.  CIBIL will serve as an 
effective mechanism for exchange of informati on between banks and 
FIs for curbing growth of NPAs and for cater to dissemination of credit 
information in respect of commerc ial and consumer segment.  CIBIL 
is al so required to col lect cred it related positive and negative 
information on borrowers from various credit institutions and process 
and disseminate the information on a regular basis. 
 The Mini stry had further stated  that as a first step towards 
activating the Bureau, RBI consti tuted a Working Group i n December 
2001 to examine the possibility of the CIB performing the role of 
collecting and disseminating inform ation on the suit-fi led accounts 
and the li st of defaulters, presen tly being reported to RBI by banks 
and notified financial institutions.  The Report of  the Working Group 
was submitted in January, 2002 and   some of  its recommendations  
which satisfied the existing legal  framework had been implemented 
by the Reserve Bank of Indi a.  Accordingly, banks and FIs  had been 
directed under Section 35A  of the Banking R egulation Act, 1949 that 
they should subm it the list of suit-fil ed accounts of Rs.1 crore and 
above as on March 31, 2002 and quarterly updates thereof till  
 100

December 2002 and suit-fil ed accounts of wilful defaulters of  R s.25 
lakh and above as at end-March,  June, September and December 
2002 to RBI as well as to CIBIL for a period of  1 year till 31 st March, 
2003.   Thereafter, aforesaid inf ormation should be submitted to 
CIBIL only and not to  RBI. However, banks and notified FIs  would 
continue to submit the data relating to non-suit fi led accounts of  Rs.1 
crore and above, classified as doubtful or loss, as on March 31, and 
September 30 and also quarterl y list of wilful defaulters (Rs.25 lakh 
and above) where suits have  not been filed only to RBI as hitherto.  
Thus, the statement on non-suit f iled account need no t be sent by 
banks/FIs to CIBIL.  Once fully o perationalised, CIBIL  would be able 
to share its com prehensive database of credit information on all 
borrowal accounts (performi ng and non-perform ing) with its 
members, which is li kely to im prove the quality of thei r credit 
appraisal and decisions. 
 On being  asked about the  non-operati onalisation of CIBIL, 
Secretary, Ministry of  Finance (Dep tt. of  Economic Affairs - Banking 
Division) during evidence held on 10.12. 2003 stated as under:- 
“As far as CIBIL is concerned, it is a pri vate company and  
certain type of information has been made available to them.  
That is above one crore wil lful defaulters, and suit filed cases 
that information is being collected.  Now, in so far as CIBIL 
infrastructure is concerned, it is state of the art.  It has all the 
modern software and hardware, and it is quite capable of 
collecting, anal yzing, generat ing and di sseminating that 
information.  The problem, howev er, is that there is a certain 
degree of doubt whether secrecy l aws should prevent some 
types of information being shared with this company. 
 101

 
Now, in many countries this is being done on the basi s of  
the law prevailing there.  There i s no special law for this kind of 
company, excepting in the Sri Lank an case.  In Sri Lanka they 
have special law for Credit Information Bureau and i n other 
countries, there are no law s, but under the existing laws, they 
have  created thi s.  But   CIBIL type of organi sations are 
functioning in many other countri es.  This is only at a 
consideration stage.  The decisi on at the political leadership 
level is yet to be taken, but we have framed a draft law and sent 
it to the Ministry of Law so that we get a legal foundation for this 
company and impediments that al ready exist in its becoming 
fully operational can be removed. The Ministry of Law has been 
having some doubts about it. If the hon.Committee consi ders it 
appropriate to make a recom mendation, it wi ll greatl y 
strengthen our hands.  Our inte ntion really is that the 
information  which is not privileged, which is in public domain or 
which impacts on the functi oning of banks, which are trustees 
of depositors’ m oney, must be available to this Credit 
Information Bureau and it must  be shared with other bankers 
for a public purpose.  We should have that capacity and ability. 
That is what the proposed law se eks to do.  It i s also just 
sharing of that information.  There is no public disclosure in 
this.”  
       
In their post-evidence reply furnished in April, 2004, the Ministry 
of  Finance had stated that Reserve Bank of  India had advised 
banks/notified All India Financial Institutions and State Financial  
 102

Corporations on June 4, 2002 to submit periodical information on suit-
filed accounts of  Rs.1.00 crore and abov e and suit-filed  accounts of  
wilful defaulters of  Rs.25.00 la kh and above to RBI and CIBIL from  
March 31, 2002 for a period of one year til l March 31,2003 and 
thereafter to CIBIL only. Statements showing summary as well  as 
detailed list of  sui t filed acc ounts of  Rs.1 crore & above and  suit 
filed accounts (wilful defaulters) of   Rs.25 lakhs & above compiled by 
CIBIL as on 30.9. 2004 are given in Annexure - XIII.  
  CIBIL had becom e operati onal in 2002 and had since taken 
over the work of collating the lists of  suit-filed accounts of  Rs.1 crore 
and of suit-fil ed accounts of  wilf ul defaulters of  Rs.25 lakh and 
above as on 31.03.2003 and onwards .  However, CIBIL would be 
fully operational once banks/FIs furni sh credit information on non-suit 
filed accounts also.  In thi s regard, RBI had advi sed banks/FIs on 
October  1, 2002 to obtai n consen t clause from existing and new 
borrowers to enable CIBIL to take over credit dissemination function 
in its entirety.  In N ovember 2002, CIBIL had advised operating rules 
to banks/FIs with the approval of its Standing Advisory Committee. 
 The Ministry had further stated that with a vi ew  to 
strengthening the legal  mechani sm and faci litating the Bureau to 
collect, process and share credit  i nformation on the borrowers of 
banks/FIs, and also to overcome the constrai nts of banks’ obligation 
of maintaining secrecy with regar d to borrowal accounts,.  a draft 
Credit Information Companies (Regula tion) Bill covering registration, 
responsibilities of the Company, righ ts and obligations of the credit 
institutions and safeguarding privacy rights was prepared by Reserve 
Bank and submitted to Government in October 2001.   The Ministry of 
Finance discussed the draft bill with Re serve Bank officials in M arch 
 103

2003 and certain changes were made in the bill.  Subsequently 
various aspects relating to enactment  of the Bill, were discussed in a 
meeting held i n November, 2003 i n the Ministry of Law.  Certai n 
clarifications sought by Ministry  of Law were provi ded by RBI.  The 
draft bill had been discussed by the offi cials of  Ministry of  Law, 
Ministry of  Finance and RBI and further refinements had been made 
in the proposed bill in the year 2004.  
 The Credit Information Companies Regulation Bil l, 2004 
seeking to provide regulation of cr edit information companies and to 
facilitate efficient distribution of credit and matters connected 
therewith or inci dental thereto h ad since been introduced in Rajya 
Sabha on 6th December, 2004. The bill inter alia covers the follow ing 
broad areas :-  
i) Registration of credit information companies. Grant of 
Registration Certificate by RBI. 
ii) Requirement as to minimum capital. 
iii) Management of credit information companies. 
iv) Power of RBI to determine policy i n relati on to functi oning of 
credit information companies. Power of RBI to give directions. 
v) Powers and duties of Auditors. 
vi) Functions of credit information companies. 
vii) Settlement of disputes. 
viii) Information privacy principles. 
ix) Offences and penalties. 
x) Power of RBI to impose penalty. 
xi) Power of Central Government to make rules. 
xii) Power of Central Government to exempt in certain cases. 
The bill also empowers CIBIL to collect information relating to 
 104

 all borrowers including non-suit-filed accounts of wilful defaulters. 
Besides above, the credit information company may:- 
• Collect, process and collate information on trade, credit and  
financial standing of the borrowers of the credit institutions which is 
a member of the credit information company. 
• May provide credit scoring to its specified users or to other credi t 
information company. 
• No credit informati on received by the credit i nformation company 
be disclosed to any person other than specified user or for any 
other purpose other than permitted by any law. 
 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
9.1    The initiatives  taken by RBI starting from 1992 to  
tackle the problem of Non Performing Assets (NPAs) in the 
financial sy stem b y way of  prescribing prudential 
norms/regulations  in line  with  the international standards  for  
recognition of income accrued  on impaired loans, asset 
classification and loan loss  provisioning,  followed by   further 
tightening of these prudential norms  at periodical intervals, had  
led to gradual decline in the NPAs in the financial sy stem in 
general and Public Sector Banks in particular. As p er Economic 
Survey – 2004-05, Gross NPAs in Public Sector Banks in 
absolute terms have decreased from Rs. 56473 cro re in 2001-02 
to Rs. 51538 cro re in 2003-04. D uring the same period  Gross 
 105

NPAs to Gross Advances in Public  Sector Banks  declined from 
11.1% in 2001-02 to 7.8 % in 2003-04 and  Gross NPAs to Total 
Assets declined from  4.9%  to 3.5%. Net NPAs to Net  Advances  
also reduced from 5.8 % in 2001-02 to 3.0%  in 2003-04 and the 
Net NPAs to Total Assets reduced from 2.4% to 1.3% during the 
same period. The decline in percentage of NPAs should not give 
any room for comfort or make the banks and RBI complacent 
because when  compared to in ternational standards of 2 %, the 
level of gross NPAs in Public Se ctor Banks at 3.5%  is still high. 
Especially the level of  gross NP As in some of the Public Sector 
Banks like   Punjab & Sind Bank  and Dena Bank which is still as 
high as 8% and 6.7%respectively,  is a matter of grave  concern.  
 
9.2   The decline in gross and n et NPAs and improvement in the  
Capital Adequacy  Ratio (CAR) of  Public Sector Banks in the  
recent y ears was largely  aided by sharp reduction in interest 
rates, which  brought windfall profi ts to the banks, as they  had  
parked their funds in Governm ent securities far above the  
statutory limits.  The  profits ear ned had been sensibly   used to 
make provisions,  write off NPAs  and to improve their CAR. The 
new RBI norms for reckoning  asse ts as non-performing and  for  
 106

non-recognition of income fr om such a ssets (b y reducing t he 
minimum period of debt-servicin g default from 180 day s to  90 
days) which came into effect from the quarter ended March, 2004, 
would presumably have resulted in significant  additions to NPAs 
during   the financial y ear 2003-2004 and 2004-2005.    Added to 
this the RBI’s advice to  banks in its Annual Policy Statement for 
2004-05 to introduce graded higher provisioning according to the 
age of NPAs included under “doubtfu l for more than three years’ 
category”  would have further incre ased the burden of   banks in 
relation to provisioning and put severe strain on their profits as 
well as on their Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR).   
 
9.3   The interest rates seem to  have been bottomed out and   
stabilized at the current levels. A s a result Public Sector Banks, 
of late, have been pay ing more at tention to lending, rather than 
relying on treasury  income to in crease their  botto m line. As the 
banks register strong ass et growth through disbursal of loans, 
their capital base is exp ected to decline and will need to be 
augmented. The new Basel II norms  which will come into effect 
from 2006  would require banks to set aside larger capital 
depending on the risk of loan assets.  It is, therefore, imperative 
 107

and also incumbent upon the  ban ks to  tighten their control in 
relation to credit risk manageme nt, credit supervision  a nd 
monitoring of post disbursement of  loans, etc. so that the assets 
of the banks are not impaired and turn bad.  Besides this further 
integration of the Indian economy   with t he globa l economy  is  
expected to subject the competiti veness  and performance of 
Indian enterprises to increased pressures. All these factors point 
towards the need for constant  vigilance aimed at  containing 
fresh accretions to NPAs.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the following measures may  be taken b y the Ministry  of 
Finance/RBI  to further  improve the performance of the public 
sector banks in relation to their control and containment of NPAs 
in order to  develop a healthy  and sound financial sy stem in the 
country:- 
1.  The RBI may  require to impress upon banks about 
the  need to set up/strengthen their corporate 
research capabilities and to  furnish to credit 
evaluation officials updat ed infor mation on macro- 
economic  trends and the current state of  global 
competitiveness; near-term prospects of various 
industries; and the likely  shifts in relevant 
 108

Government policies so that potential N PAs can be 
detected at  th e incipien t stage and necessar y 
corrective  measures  taken by the banks for recovery 
of the  loans. 
2.  It should be ensured that corporate governance is   
implemented b y all the Public Sector Banks on  
priority basis over a time-bound period. 
3.   ‘Governance’ audits should be conducted  and   
penalties  imposed throug h increased capital charge 
on non-compliant and errant  banks. 
4.   Special  training  modules    for    staff    in   credit  
supervision a nd monitoring and recover y 
management be developed. 
 
9.4 The Committee note that  despite the banks having  well  
laid down loan and lo an recovery policies inter alia covering the 
methodology for measurement, moni toring and control of credit 
risk and other prudential norms fo r credit  exposure to various 
sectors/groups of borr owers c oupled wi th onsit e and offsite 
monitoring system  and RBI’s exam ination of these policies and 
identification of various risks in relation to credit exposure to 
 109

various sectors by  banks during their Annual Fi nancial 
Inspection (AFI),  there has been a steady increase in incremental 
NPAs of Public Sector Banks.  Gr oss NPAs in PSBs in absolute 
terms have been increasing  steadily  over the y ears.   From Rs.  
39253.14 crore in 1992-93, the year in which Prudential 
Regulations for Income Recogn ition, Asset Classification  and 
Provisioning was introduced by RBI, the gross NPAs in absolute 
terms  rose to Rs. 51541 cror e in 2003-04.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the ban ks should further streamline and 
strengthen their sy stems/procedures relatin g to credit 
assessment, supervision and monitoring of  post-disbursal 
credit, etc. and ensure that bank  functionaries strictly  adhere to 
these systems/procedures, so that  fresh NPAs are not accreted 
to the banks. RBI should also  constantly  monitor the various 
systems/procedures laid down b y banks  in relation to credit 
appraisal, supervision and management, post-disbursement 
credit monitoring, internal c ontrol, credit audit sy stem and 
compliance with various prudent ial regulations so that banks 
may better manage their NPAs and no fresh NPAs are accreted to 
the balance sheet.  The Committee also recommend that RBI 
should strengthen its supervision of the ba nks by progressively 
 110

increasing the coverage of maxi mum number of  branches of 
each bank under Annual Financial Inspection, so as to ensure 
that various guidelines/instructions  issued b y it relating to 
identification of NPAs and r ecognition of interest accrued on 
them, are correctly  interpreted and that there is no under-
reporting of NPAs by the  banks.   
 
9.5 The Committee are concerned to note that  22 banks  
had   sanctioned  credit  in  excess  of  prudential   exposure 
limits in 2000-2001 and the number of banks which have  
exceeded the credit limits went up to 25  in the years 2001-02 and 
2002-03.   It  is  astonishing    that RBI had granted approval in all 
the cases after examination on meri ts and no punitive action was 
taken, despite th e fact that the acti on  on the part of the banks 
was in gross violation of prude ntial norms/measures prescribed 
by RBI. Needless to say   condonation of  such  commissions  of 
serious nature  by  RBI   have  the grave potential of loans  
leading  to NPAs  and also will  encourage banks to commit such  
violations  time and  again. The  failure of Globa l Trust Bank  
(GTB) and its subsequent merger with Oriental Bank of  
Commerce is a case in point.  It  is now evident that  o ver-
 111

exposure to capital market beyond prudential norms had led GTB 
to incur heavy  losses resulting in  mounting NPAs,  erosion of 
capital and net worth turning negative resulting in collapse of the 
bank. The Committee expect that RBI  would in future exercise 
more stringent supervision on  the bank s and would impose   
severe penalties for violating of  prudential exposure limits. 
 
9.6 The Committee note with satisfaction that pursuant to   
the reco mmendations of Joint Parliamentary Committee (Stock 
Market Scam) the system of compliance of banks to the  findings 
of inspection b y RBI had been st reamlined.  The  RBI had also  
prescribed a new set  of guidelines for stren gthening compliance 
by banks.  The Committee trus t that there will not be any  
slackness   in the follow-up of the Compliance Reports submitted 
by banks. The Committee also  recommend that a separate  
‘Monitoring Cell’ should be  se t up in RBI  for continuous 
monitoring of compliance of RBI guidelines and  observations 
made  in  its Inspection Reports. 
 
9.7 The Committee have been informed that as per RBI  
 112

guidelines, staff accountability  is required to be examined by the 
concerned bank in consultation wi th the CVC as soon as there is 
a shift in the asset classification of an advance from standard to 
sub-standard. A distinction is made  between malafide  acts and 
genuine action on the part of f unctionaries  in respect of 
instances of  transgression reported and action is taken  
accordingly against the erring offi cials. During evidence, the 
Deputy Governor, RBI informed the Committee  that there is a 
judgment call taken by  the ma nagement to see whether the 
transgression done has ben efited the person who has 
sanctioned it and if that is the case, then it is manifestly  irregular 
and will  attract vigilance.  If it is only  a judgmental error, then  
the benefit of  doubt  is given in favour of the official who took  
the decision. The Committee, however note that there are no 
proper guidelines in regard to fi xing of accountability  in respect 
of transgression of delegated powers  by the bank functionaries.   
The Committee note that recently  Ministry of Finance had 
unveiled a package giving manageri al autonomy  to the Public 
Sector Banks, an d advised them to take further action thereon.  
As part of the autonomy  packag e, Ministry  of Finance had 
suggested  Banks to  lay  dow n a policy of accountability  and 
 113

responsibility for  Bank officials and take action against erring 
Bank off icials in conformi ty with such policy .  It has also been 
suggested that the policy  framew ork should also  provide for  
stringent punishment for all mala fide actions  of bank officials 
but, at the same time, recognize that bona fide errors do occur  
while making de cisions relating to commercial judgment. The 
Committee recommend that in the light of above broad  policy 
frame work laid down by  the Ministry of  Finance , RBI shoul d 
advise all the banks to formulate a transparent policy  for fixing 
accountability and responsibility on erring bank officials for their  
mala fide actions and provide stringent speedy punishment 
depending on the degree and nature of offence.  
 
9.8 As per the extant rules, bank officials of the  rank of  
Scale III and above in the Public  Sector Banks are covered under 
the ambit of Central Vigilance Commission.  During interaction 
with representatives of various PS Bs, the Committee learnt that  
bank officials,  in general, ar e hesitant to take initiatives for 
mustering new account s and giving l oans for fear of the 
accounts  turning into NPAs.   As a result there is lack of 
initiative on the  part of bank emplo yees who a re now more 
 114

concerned about  avoiding vigila nce cases and adverse  entries 
in their ACRs.    As a re sult of this,  lending ope rations in the  
banks have been adversely  affected. The Committee, therefore,  
recommend that  the   Ministr y of Financ e shoul d take up the 
matter with the CVC to  restrict the coverage of bank officials 
coming under the purview of  CV C so that official s of the banks 
are able to concentrate better on the core banking activity  of 
lending credit and recovery of loans without being under the grip 
of undue  fear. 
9.9 The Committee, are unhapp y to note that even after  11 
years since the enactment of Re covery of Debts due to Banks 
and Financial Institutions Act, 199 3,   the performance of DRTs 
set up under the said Act  is not very  satisfactory .  As per 
information furnished b y the Mi nistry of Finance, as on 30.6. 
2004, 63,600 cases were filed before DRTs involving an amount 
of Rs. 91925.89 crore. Out of this, 27956 cases involving an  
amount of Rs. 26358 crore were deci ded and only an amount  of 
Rs. 7845.31 crore had been recovered, which is aro und 30 % of 
the amount settled. The Ministry  have  co ntended that 
subsequent to amendments ma de to the Act in 2000, the 
performance of DRTs has improved which has been reflected in 
the increase in percentage of cas es  decided b y DRTs from 13 % 
as on 31.12. 1997 to 37.26 % as on 31.3. 2004, and  in the 
percentage of recovery  to total dues which also concurrentl y 
increased from 1.67% to 8.36% during the said period.    As there 
 115

are still large number of cases pe nding before DRTs involving 
huge amount, the Committee  do no t fully share  the perception 
of the Ministry  of Finance th at the performance of DRTs has 
improved subsequent to the amendments to the DRT Act in 
2000, and feel th at still there exists a lot of scope for further 
improvements.  
 
9.10 In a written reply  furnished  to the Committee in  
December, 2004, the Ministry  of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs – Banking Di vision) informed  that after 
obtaining the performance review  conducted b y the RBI, 
the Government of India had set up a Working Group in 
February, 2001 under the Chairm anship of Shri S. N. 
Aggarwal, Presiding Officer of  Debt Recovery  Tribunal 
(DRT) II, Delhi to review th e existing pr ovisions of the 
Recovery of Debts due to Ban ks and Financial Institutions 
Act, 1993 and the Rules framed thereunder in the light of 
the suggestions received from various quarters such as 
banks, financial institutions, DRTs and individuals and to 
examine the adequacy  of the in frastructure available with  
DRTs. The Working Group submit ted its report in August,   
2001 wherein it  had suggested amendments to the Act and 
Rules framed thereunder. The report was examined by  RBI 
and their  views communicated  to the  Government in 
February, 2002. On the reco mmendations of Reserve Bank 
of India the Gov ernment had further constituted another 
Working Group headed by  Sh ri Vinod Rai, AS(FS) to 
examine afresh the issues related to DRT’s role in recovery 
 116

of NPAs for enhancing their effectiveness and to review the 
functioning of Debts Recovery Tribunals. 
 
9.11 The Committee  note that  the Working Group headed  
by Shri S.N. Aggarwal had submitted its Report to the 
Government  way back in August, 2001. In their comments/views, 
furnished to the Government on the recommendation of Working 
Group in February , 2002, the    RBI  supported the 
recommendations  made b y the Working  Group for 
strengthening the infrastructure of DRT s  in totality .  As  regards  
amendments  to  the DRT  Act an d the Rules framed thereunder, 
the RBI  stated th at they have no objection to the  amendments 
proposed b y the Working Gr oup, barring six amendme nts on 
which RBI differed with the Work ing Group.  Apart from their 
views on the  Working Group r ecommendations  RBI had also  
made some suggestions  for  consideration of the Government at 
the time of amendment of the DRT Act.  The    fate of the 
recommendations made by the Aggarwal Working Group are  not  
known as the reply furnished by the Ministry is  silent with regard 
to its implementation.  It appears that the Ministry of Finance 
instead of examining the feasib ility of implementing  the 
recommendations of the Work ing Group headed b y Shri  
 117

Aggarwal, had rather  chosen to constitute another Working 
Group headed by  Shri Vinod Ra i and  that too after passage of 
more than two y ears  to examin e afresh the issues related to 
DRT’s role in recover y  of NPAs and to review the functioning of 
DRTs.   The Committee deplore the casual approach of the 
Ministry of Finance to such an important issue of  functioni ng of 
DRT sy stem especially  when the en tire  process o f recovery  of 
bad debts of banks and FIs  hinges on  its effective functioning.  
The Committee hope that in future   Government will act with 
greater promptness in pluggi ng  loopholes in the  s ystem for  
speedy recovery of bad debts. 
 
9.12   The Committee hope that the Working Group headed b y 
Shri Vinod Rai shall go into the  entire gamut of f unctioning of 
DRTs and  suggest comprehensive  measures for complete 
overhaul of the DRT structure fo r speedy recovery of bad loans. 
They further expect that the Work ing Group would also examine 
the feasibility  of streamlining th e existing  procedures so that 
DRTs can take up high value cases on a priority  basis  and also 
for their expeditious settlement so  that it would have a bearing 
on the overall recovery  position of NPAs by the  ba nks/FIs. The 
 118

Committee expect that the Working Group would submit its 
Report e xpeditiously a nd the functioning of DRTs  woul d be  
streamlined at the earliest. 
 
9.13 The  Committee  note  that  lack  of   adequate   staff  at  
various levels, particularly  at Recovery Officer/In spector  level 
had seriously jeopardized the wo rking of DRTs.  Key  vacancies  
in the  grade of Presiding O fficer/Recovery Officer/ Recovery  
Inspectors lie unfilled for several months, leading to delay  i n 
settlement of cases.  The Committee  decry  the half-hearted 
measures  proposed to be taken by the Ministr y,  such as  
soliciting the cooperation of nodal  banks to come forward for 
providing staff support to DRTs as a temporary  or adhoc 
measure, etc.  The Committee desi re that the possibility  of  
constituting a separate cadre fo r manning the DRTs should be 
explored and  till the same is constituted, steps  should be taken 
in the right earnest to fill up the existing vacancies expeditiously. 
The Committee also  reco mmend that in view of ever-burgeonin g 
of pending cases of NPAs in the DRTs, the Working Group 
headed by Shri Vinod  Rai may also examine if there is a need  of 
setting up more DRTs in the coun try. Besides this, p roper 
 119

infrastructure and other amenities shoul d   be pr ovided t o the 
existing DRTs for their efficient  functioning.  
  
9.14  The Committee note that two Asset Reconstruction 
Companies viz.  A sset Reconstruction Company  (India) Ltd. 
(ARCIL) and  As set Care Enterpri se Ltd. (ACE) sponsored  b y 
Banks (FIs) have been granted  registration in August and 
October 2003 respectively.  The third  company  promoted by UTI 
has been set up in 2004.  The Secretary , Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs – B anking Division) in his 
deposition before the Committee on 2.12.2004  stated that  all the 
three asset reconstruction compan ies are just in the process of 
starting to do business and unless they can operate successfully 
and show to other prospective in vestors that it is a good and 
viable proposition,  it is unli kely that other asset reconstruction 
companies would come in the fi eld. However, the  C ommittee are 
given to understand that at present   the   Asset Reconstruction 
Company   (India ) Ltd., (ARCIL) is  bu ying the bad a ssets of the 
Banks at 70 to 80 % di scount and besides banks have no 
guarantee that they will get any return from these assets, with the 
result that most banks are hesita nt to transfer their assets to 
 120

ARCs.  The Committee feel that  setting up of more Asset 
Reconstruction Companies  will l ead to  healthy competition  
which in turn  will  force the  ARCs to acquire bad loans at b etter 
valuations.  
 
9.15  The Committee are distressed to  note that  over the y ears 
the recovery of NPAs has not shown any satisfactory progress. 
The total recoveries through up gradation and compromise write-
off which stood at Rs. 18730 crore in March, 2003  had  
marginally increased to  Rs. 20705 crore in  March, 2004.  As is 
evident,  the  efforts  for  reco very b y  banks is  off-set by   
aggressive   provisioning, which is the onl y viable method banks 
seem to have resorted to for reduction of NPAs.  This shows the 
sordid state of affairs prevailing in banks in so far as recovery of 
bad loans is concerned. The Committee, therefore,  reco mmend 
that banks should further  streamline their Loan Re covery Policy 
and also evolve innov ative m ethods such as setting up of   
Special Recovery  Teams for reco very of bad loans and also  
explore the possibility  of franchis ing the job of recovery   of bad 
loans to an outside agenc y as ha s been done b y s ome private 
banks such as ICICI Bank and HDFC Bank.   The Committee  note 
that  some banks  like SBI had roped in Detective Agencies which 
have expertise in financial investig ation,  fraud detection, etc. to 
recover NPAs. The y rec ommend  that other banks shoul d  
emulate SBI in this regard  and also explore the possibility  of  
 121

deploying other Value Added Se rvices  that will aid banks in  
effective recovery of loans. 
 
9.16 It is a disturbing  trend  that the amount of NPAs written 
off  in respect of PSBs has b een steadily  increasing over the 
years. As against an amount of Rs. 4500 crore written off in the 
year 2000,  the  amount of NPAs  written-off in 2004 rose to Rs. 
13490 crore, which  has more than trebled. The Committee 
recommend that due diligence  should be exercised  while  
writing off  loans and the number of accounts  as well as the 
amount written off shoul d be kept to t he barest minimum.  As   
per the existing procedure, the lo ans are written off only  at the 
Head Office level and remain r ecoverable at the branch level.  
The Committee, therefore,  recommend t hat there shoul d not be  
any let up on t he part of banks wi th regard to loans written off 
and concerted efforts should be made  for their recovery. 
 
9.17   The Committee are deeply concerned about the growing  
number of suit filed and non -suit filed accounts of  wilful 
defaulters in Public Sector Banks.   The number of non-suit filed 
accounts of wilful defaulters which stood at 439 involving an 
amount of Rs. 1114.06 crore as on 31.3.2002 increased to 513 
 122

involving an amount of Rs. 1643.22 crore by  31.3. 2004.  The non 
suit filed  account  of wilful defaulters of Rs. 25 lakh and a bove 
was 1421 as on 31.3.2003 involving an amount of Rs. 4140.61.  
The number increased to 1487 cases involving an amount of Rs. 
4525.87 crore as on 31.3.2004. The  Committee recommend that 
banks should make concerted effo rts to strengthen their credit 
appraisal and sanctioning s ystem and post-disbursement 
supervision so that the incidenc e of  wilful default can be 
detected at the incipient stage and corrective measures   taken to 
check it. 
 
9.18   The Committee note that based on the recommendations 
of the Working Group on Wilful  Defaulters (Kohli Committee),   
RBI  ha d advised the  banks in  Ma y, 2002 about  the revised 
definition of the term ‘W ilful Default’ and also the meaning of 
terms such as “Diversion of Funds ”, “Siphoning  of Funds”, etc. 
and  suggested the penal measures the banks shoul d take 
against the wilful defaulters.  
As the RBI circular dated 30.5.2002 issued pursuant to 
recommendations made by  the K ohli Committee w as silent with 
regard to fixing of criminal liab ility against those who siphon of 
 123

funds deliberatel y, resor t to mis-representation, falsification  
transactions, etc.,   the JPC on Stock Market Scam (2002) in their 
Report recommended that  such offences be clearly  defined 
under the existin g statutes governing the banks, providing for  
criminal action in all such  cases where the borrowers divert the 
funds wi th malafide intention.  Pursuant to  recommenda tion 
made b y JPC on Stock Market Scam, the Ministry  of Finance 
constituted a Working Group  und er the chairmanship of Shri 
D.T. Pai, Banking Ombudsman, UP.  The Working Gr oup in their 
Report submitted  in April, 2003 inter alia recommended for  
amendments to Sections 405 and incorporation of new Sections 
415A, 424A and 465A in IPC stipulating for stringent penal action 
ranging from 2 to 7 years of imprisonment for those defaulters 
who indulge in diversion/siphon ing of funds,  resorting to 
misrepresentation, falsification of accounts indulgi ng in  
fraudulent transactions, etc. Considering t he implic ations 
implicit in the legislative amen dments recommended by the D.T. 
Pai Committee,  the same were  discussed by  the Standing 
Technical Advisory  Committee on Financial Regulation  
(STACFR), an advisory body  comprising of bankers, legal 
experts and academicians set up b y RBI. After further 
 124

examination of the views of the STACFR and the legal position 
and having  note d that even the existing legal provisions in Cr . 
P. C. would facilitate initiation of desired action without le gal 
amendments as was originally  contemplated, RBI advised 
banks/FIs on 23rd July  2004  to formulate a transparent policy 
with the approval of their Boards in order to initiate criminal 
action against willful defaulters, on a case by  case basis, unde r 
the provisions of Sections 403 and 415 of the Indian Penal 
Code(IPC), 1860 depending upon the facts and circumstances of 
the case. It had also been stated  in the said circular that the 
mechanism put in place by  the banks for initiating criminal 
action against wilful defaulters would be reviewed  after one 
year with a view to improve the same. 
 
9.19 The Committee note that  as on 30.11.2004, 138 criminal 
complaints  have been lodged  and  in 18 cases  criminal  
proceedings have been filed agai nst the wilful defaulters b y 
Public Sector Banks pursuant to the guidelines issued by RBI on 
23.7. 2004 in this regard . The Committee urge upon the banks to 
adopt a proactive  approach in  filing  criminal cases against the 
wilful defaulters and recomme nd that RBI should periodi cally 
 125

review the progress made by  the banks in this regard. The 
Committee note that under the ext ant guidelines performance of 
banks will be reviewed  by  RBI after a period of 1 y ear. They 
recommend that the efficacy  of the existing pena l provisions  
under sections 403 and 415 of IPC in relation to action against 
willful defaulters by  banks may  al so be got reviewed  by  the 
STAFCR set up by Ministry of Finance/RBI,   and legal and other 
procedural changes, if an y, that may be required ma y  be made    
so that  the menace of wilful default can be contained effectively. 
 
9.20     Corporate   Debt  Restructuring  (CDR)  is one of the  
methods suggested for reduction of NPAs.  The objective of CDR 
is to ensure timely  and transparent  mechanism for restructu ring  
corporate debts of viable corpora te  entities affected  by internal 
and external factors outside the purv iew of BIFR, DRT or other  
legal proceedings for the benefit of all concerned. The Committee 
were informed that out of 82 restructuring packages approved 
under CDR, 42 cases involving Rs . 36587 crore have been fully  
implemented, 22 cases involv ing Rs. 15648 crore were 
sanctioned but not implemented/p artly implemented and in 18 
cases in volving Rs. 9531 crore  sanction/implementation is in 
 126

progress. An analy sis of  post-r estructuring  performance of 61 
fully implemented cases, show that in 40 cases involving an 
amount of Rs. 35,498 crore, pay ment is being received regularly , 
in 16 cases involving Rs. 5939 crore debt receivin g is not y et 
due, and in 5 cases in which an  amount of Rs. 8720 crore is 
involved there has been a delay  in payment. It has further been 
stated that in 22 CDR cases, the performance is stated  to be 
better than projections made and in 25 cases the performance 
has been in line with the projections.  In 14 cases the 
performance has been stated to be below  the projections made.  
 The frequency  distribution of  tenure of packages approved 
under CDR mec hanism reveals that out of 94 C DR packages  
approved as on 30 th June, 2004, in 17 cases th e tenure for 
repayment of loan is  less th an 7 y ears and  in 42 cases the 
tenure is between 7 to 10 y ears.  In 29 cases the ten ure is 
between 10 to 15 y ears and in 6 cases the tenure is 15 y ears and 
more.  The Committee are of the opinion that there is a need  
for ratio nalisation of tenure of packages approved unde r CDR 
mechanism, which is presently  divided into four time slabs.  The 
Committee recommend that the feasi bility of reducing the time 
slabs from 4 to 3 shoul d be examined, and also the possibilit y of  
 127

limiting the maximum tenure of package for repayment  of loan to 
15 years. 
 
9.21  The Committee note  that a Sp ecial Group  headed by  Smt. 
Gopinath, Deputy Governor, RBI had been set up to review the 
functioning of CDR mechanism.  The Committee expects that the 
Special Group would examine the functioning of CDR scheme in 
its entirety  and suggest suitab le measures for streamlining the 
functioning of the CDR mechani sm so that  onl y s uch  cases 
which are potentially  viable for revival  are sel ected in a non-
partisan, non-discriminatory and  transparent manner. 
 
9.22  The   Committee   are   happy   to   note  that    Credit  
Information Bureau (India) Limi ted (CIBIL) has  become 
functional from  January , 2001, with an authorised capital of 
Rs.50 crore and paid-up capital of Rs .25 crore. The Bureau    will 
serve as an effective mechanism fo r exchange of information 
between banks and financial instit utions for curbing gr owth of  
NPAs and for disseminating credit information in respect of  
commercial and consumer segment.  CIBIL is also requi red to 
collect credit related positive and negative  information on 
borrowers from various credit institutions and process and 
disseminate the same on a regular basis.  CIBIL became 
operational in 2002 and had  taken over the work of collatin g the 
 128

lists of suit filed account s of Rs. 1 crore and above and of suit-
filed accounts of wilful defaulter s of Rs.25 lakh and above from 
31.03.2003 onwards.  
 
9.23   With a view to provide n ecessary  legislative support to the 
business of credit information an d to regulate credit information 
companies so as to fac ilitate efficient  distri bution of credit, the 
Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Bill, 2004, had been 
introduced in the Raj ya Sabha on 6.12.2004. The Bill  inter alia, 
provides for  registration and responsibilities of the credit 
information compan y, rights a nd obligations of the credit 
institutions, facilitating credit in formation companies to collect, 
process and  share credit information on the borrowers of 
banks/FIs and  safeguarding pri vacy rights,  and also  to  
overcome the constraints of ba nk’s obli gation of maintaining 
secrecy with regard to borrowal accounts etc.  The Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Finance, to which the Bill had been 
referred had since submitted its Report to Parliament. The 
Committee expect the Government to  pursue the legislation so 
that  its enactment  would enable  Credit Information Companies 
to play  an effective role in maintaining comprehensive and 
efficient data base sy stem of credit  information on borrowers so 
 129

as to en able banks  and FIs to  facilitate  management of  their 
credit risk  efficiently  so th at fresh accretion of NPAs are 
arrested.  
 
NEW DELHI:     C.KUPPUSAMI 
April 5, 2005                   Chairman, 
Chaitra 15,1927(S)   Committee on Estimates 
 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2004-2005) 
 
 
    TENTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursda y, the  2 nd December, 2004 
from 1500 to   1640  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2.   Prof. Chander Kumar 
3. Shri Anant Gudhe 
4.  Shri  Jai Prakash 
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 
6.   Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato 
7.   Shri Zora Singh Mann 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
10.   Shri Harikewal Prasad 
11.   Shri Laxman Singh 
12.   Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
13. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
 130

Secretariat 
  
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
3. Shri Cyril John   -      Under Secretary 
4. Shir M.K. Madhusudhan - Assistant Director 
 
 
Witnesses 
 
MINISTRY OF  FINANCE (D EPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC 
AFFAIRS – BANKING DIVISION) 
 
1. Shri N.S. Sisodia   - Secretary (FS) 
2. Shri Vinod Rai   - Additional Secretary (FS) 
3. Shri Amitabh Verma  -  Joint Secretary (BO) 
4. Shri Ram Muivah   - Director (BOA) 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
1. Mrs. K.J. Udeshi   -  Deputy Governor, RBI 
2. Shri C.R. Muralidharan  -  CGM, DBOD 
 
 
2.   The   Committee    took    further evidence  of  the  
representatives    of Ministry of   Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs-Banking Division) and RBI on the subject ‘Ministry of  Finance 
(Department of Economic A ffairs-Banking Divi sion) – P ublic Sector 
Banks - Non Performing Assets’.  The evidence was  concluded. 
 
 3.  A verbatim record of the  proceedings was kept. 
 131

  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee cons idered the explanation given by 
Dr. P.C. Keshavankutty Nayar, President, Medical Counci l of 
India(MCI) regarding his ab sence during the sitting of the Estimates 
Committee hel d on 16 th November, 2004. In view of the regrets 
expressed   by the President, MCI, the Committee condoned  his 
absence during the said sitting and decided not to pursue   the matter 
further. 
 
5.  The Committee al so decided to undertake on the spot Study  
Tour in  February, 2005. 
  
      The Committee then adjourned.   
 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2004-2005) 
 
 
    THIRTEENTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday , the  22nd  March, 2005 from 
1500 to   1535  hours.  
  
     Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
     Members 
 
2.   Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
3. Prof. Chander Kumar  
4. Shri  Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
5. Shri Jai Prakash 
6.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
9. Shri K.S. Rao 
10.  Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
 132

 133
11.   Shri Laxman Singh 
12.  Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
13.  Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh   - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
2. Shri B.D. Swan   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Cyril John   -      Under Secretary 
4.   Shri M.K. Madhusudhan - Assistant Director 
 
 
  
 
2.   The   Committee considered the draft Report on ‘Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs-Banking Division) – Public 
Sector Banks - Non Performing Assets’,  and adopted the same 
without any modification.  
 
 3.  The Committee authorised t he Chairman to finalise the Report 
in the light of verbal and other consequential changes, if any, arising 
out of factual verification by the Mi nistry and present the same to the 
House. 
 
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 