E.C. NO.1419 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE  
(2004-2005) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
COUNCIL FOR ADVANCEMENT OF PEOPLE’S ACTION AND 
RURAL TECHNOLOGY (CAPART) 
 
 
S 
 
      E  
 
       A  
 
        L  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on        26th April, 2005          
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April 26, 2005/Vaisakha  6, 1927(S) 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
PART – A 
 
Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES    
 
Introduction          
 
CHAPTER I 
A.  Historical Background 
B. Aims and Objectives 
C.  Restructuring of CAPART  
D. Organisational Set up 
E. Staff Strength 
 
CHAPTER II 
A.  Financial Position  
B.   Utilisation Certificate 
CHAPTER III 
A.  Implementation of Schemes 
B.   Public Cooperation(PC) 
C.   Organisation of  Beneficiaries(OB) 
D.  Watershed Development 
E.  Support Voluntary Organisations 
F.  Young Professional Scheme 
G.  Disability Action Scheme 
H.  Advancement of Rural Technology Schemes 
I.  Technology Research Centres  
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER IV 
A.  Voluntary Organisations (VOs) 
B.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
CHAPTER V 
A.  Marketing 
B.  Publicity and Media 
 
C.  Involvement of peoples repr esentatives in the rural areas in 
the implementation of CAPART’s projects 
 
PART – B 
 
- Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Vacancy position in CAPART as on 17.11.2004 
I. Statement showing State-wise List of Black 
Listed Organisations and action taken against 
them………………………………………………… 
 
II. Minutes of Sitting  of the Estimates Committee  
held on 27.9.2004………………………………… 
  
III. Minutes of Sitting  of the Estimates Committee  
held on 28.9.2004………………………………… 
 
IV. Minutes of Sitting  of the Estimates Committee  
held on 16.11.2004………………………………… 
        
V. Minutes of Sitting  of the Estimates Committee  
held on 19.4. 2005………………………………… 
 
 
Annexure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        

COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
     Members 
 
2.      Shri A. Sai Prathap 
3.     Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4.   Prof.  Chander Kumar 
5.   Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
6.       Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7.       Shri Anant Gudhe 
8.   Shri Jai Prakash 
9.       Shri N.N. Krishnadas 
10.   Shri Samik Lahiri 
11.    Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 
12.    Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato 
13.    Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
14.   Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15.    Shri Prabodh Panda 
16.    Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.    Shri Sukhdeo Paswan  
18.    Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
19.    Shri Harikewal Prasad 
20.    Prof. M. Ramadass 
21.    Shri K.S. Rao 
22.    Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
23.    Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
24.    Shri Manabendra Shah 
25.    Shri Laxman Singh 
26.    Shri Sartaj Singh 
27.    Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
28.    Shrii Akhilesh Yadav 
29.    Shri V. Kishore Chandra Deo 
30.    Shri Vijay Krishan 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri John Joseph  - Additional  Secretary 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K. Singh   - Pr incipal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
      4.   Shri B.D. Swan   - Deputy Secretary 
5.  Shri Cyril John   -      Under Secretary 
6. Smt. Manju Chaudhary   - Assistant Director 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been 
authorised by the Committee to su bmit the report on their behalf 
present this  Seventh Report on the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development) – ‘Council for Advancement of 
People’s Action and Rural Technology’. 
2. The subject ‘Council for Advancement of People’s Action and  
Rural Technology’ was selected for detailed examination by the 
Estimates Committee (2002-2003).  The Estimates Committee 
examined every aspect of the subject by calling for detailed written 
information and  taking evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) and 
CAPART on  27.8.2004, 28.8.2004 and 16.11.2004.  The Committee 
wish to express their thank s to the Officers of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development) and CAPART for 
placing before them  detailed wri tten notes on the subject and for 
furnishing information desired in c onnection with the examination of 
the subject.   The Committee also appreciate the frankness with 
which the officers shared their views, perceptions and constraints 
with the Committee. 
3. The Committee would also like to express their gratitude to the  
Estimates Committee  2002-2003 and  2003-2004 f or the able 
guidance and right direction provided by them in obtaining 
information for indepth and comprehensive study of the subject. 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
 their sitting held on 19th April, 2005. 

5.  The Report consists of five chapters. The Committee 
have inter-alia made the following important 
observations/recommendations :- 
(i)  There is an urgent need for the Government to review the 
overall functioning of CA PART and restructure the 
organisation in such a  manner that it fulfills its aims and 
objectives. 
(ii) Ministry/CAPART should w ork out a formula to provide 
assistance to VOs to develop rural  technology for the 
States in proportion to t heir rural population and 
incentives should be given to VOs  to motivate them to 
work in the rural areas of those States which have 
received lesser assistance from CAPART.  
(iii)  A suitable mechanism be evolved to ensure that no 
grants may be sought by  members serving on 
Committees of CAPART for NGOs with which they are 
associating in their official capacity till such time they are 
serving on the  Committees. 
(iv) The Regional Committees  of CAPART should be 
strengthened with adequate manpower, delegation of 
powers, etc.    
(v) There is  need to fix the tenure of  the Director General for 
a  minimum period of three years in order to ensure 
continuity and for formulating  a long term vision for the 
Council. 
(vi) CAPART should identify  t hose areas of activities in 
keeping with its aims and objectives which are not being  

undertaken by other agencies and formulate and orient its 
operations on the basis of the ‘Vision Statement’.  
(vii)  Furnishing of Utilisation Certificates by the Voluntary 
Organisations  within the time-frame should be  made 
mandatory and its compliance monitored  scrupulously. 
(viii) Projects of innovative and integrated nature which  lead 
to creativity and capacity building of the rural community 
should be identified and assisted under the PC scheme. 
(ix)   More and more Young P rofessionals (YPs) should be 
encouraged to set up VOs in  unreached rural areas so 
that the services of voluntary organisations are available 
to all  regions of the country. 
(x) More and more VOs which hav e experience in disability 
development programmes should be encouraged to come 
forward for the upliftment/rehabi litation of  extremely 
vulnerable people with disability in rural areas. 
(xi)  Rural Technology Division in CAPART be further 
strengthened and qualified personnel with adequate 
experience  be inducted immediately for timely and 
expeditious appraisal and advancement of technology 
and related projects. 
(xii) A Panel including  a repres entative from the Ministry  
should be set up to review the entire list of Institutional 
Monitors and Evaluators and  retain only eligible 
institutions and individual s.  The procedure should be 
streamlined in such a manner as to eliminate any 

loophole for corruption in t he process of evaluation and 
monitoring of projects.  
6. For facility of reference, the observations/ 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold 
type in the body of t he  report and have also been  reproduced 
in consolidated form in the Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                         C. KUPPUSAMI, 
April    25, 2005                             Chairman, 
Vaisakha  5 ,1927(S)                            Committee on Estimates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
A.  Historical Background 
 
 The  Council for Advancem ent of People’s Action and 
Rural Technology (CAPART) wa s formed in September, 1986 
by the amalgamation of the People’s Action in Development 
India (PADI)  and Council for Rural Technology (CART).  Since 
the objective of these two organisations were complementary 
and there were convergence of objectives and activities, 
resulting in duplication and overlapping, it was thought proper 

that these two organisations shoul d be merged.   It is a society 
registered under the Societies  Registration Act, 1860 and 
operates as an autonomous body under the aegis of the 
Ministry of Rural Development wi th Headquarters at New Delhi.  
It has nine Regional Committee O ffices in various parts of the 
country.  The mandate of CAPA RT is to encourage, promote  
and assist voluntary action in rural development with particular 
emphasis on persons Below Po verty line (BPL), Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and ot her disadvantaged groups of 
the society and to provide appropri ate technological  inputs in 
the rural development programmes for the eradication of rural 
poverty.  During the nineteen ye ars of its existence CAPART 
has become one of the major funding agencies for the voluntary 
sector in the field of rura l development and has supported 
around 12000 voluntary organizati ons in the country.  The 
assistance provided to the volunt ary organizations is diverse in 
aspects ranging from drinking wa ter, sanitation, watershed 
development, income generation activities for rural poor and 
women, social forestry and housing to disability.  In the field of 
rural technology, it strives to crea te a scientific temper in the 
country to disseminate and encourage the adoption of 
appropriate technologies.  For this purpose, the Council has 
helped in the setting up of a number of Technology Resource 
Centres (TRCs).  The Counc il works with voluntary 
organizations with the objective of achieving people’s 
participation, empowerment and social mobilization through 
various activities. 

 While aiming at integrated devel opment of rural areas, the 
main thrust of the council’s support has been for funding 
location specific soluti ons through empowerment and 
mobilization of the rural poor and dissemination of appropriate  
rural technologies.  
B.  Aims and Objectives 
 The  aims and objectives of CAPART are:- 
i) to encourage, promote and assist voluntary action in the 
implementation of projects for the enhancement of rural 
prosperity; 
ii) to strengthen and promote voluntary efforts in rural 
development with a focus on  injecting new technologies 
to support such development; 
iii) to act as the national nodal point for coordination of all 
efforts at generation and disse mination of technologies 
relevant to rural development in its wider sense; 
iv) to act as a catalyst for development of technology 
appropriate for the rural areas, by identifying and funding 
research and development effort s and pilot projects by 
different agencies and institutions particularly Voluntary 
Organisations; 
v) to act as a conduit for transfer of appropriate  technology 
to Government Departments, public sector undertaking, 
cooperative societies, volu ntary agencies and members 
of public  to encourage adoptio n of modern techniques 
and appropriate technology in rural development;  
vi) to act as a clearing house of information and data bank; 

vii) to disseminate knowledg e on rural technology to 
manufacturers of machinery tools, equipment and spare 
parts so that large scale production of technically 
improved machinery etc. is carried out in the private 
cooperative and public sectors; 
viii) to promote, aid, gui de, organize, plan, undertake, 
develop, maintain and coordinate projects/schemes 
aimed at all round developmen t, creation of employment 
opportunities, promotion of self-reliance, generation of 
awareness, organisation and im provement in the quality 
of the life of people in ru ral areas in general and of the 
economically and socially  handicapped sections in 
particular; 
ix) to assist and promote progr ammes aimed at conservation 
of the environment and natural resources; 
x) to strengthen existing in stitutions of research and 
development or set up institutions, so that national level 
institutions on matters of purely or largely rural interest 
are built up; 
xi) to collaborate with other institutions, associations and 
societies  in India or abroad including concerned 
international agencies and c onstituents of the UN system 
interested in similar objectives; 
xii) to conduct or sponsor training programmes, conferences, 
lectures and seminars on rural development activities of 
particular interest to women, with an accent on improved 

technologies appropriate to their role in rural 
development; 
xiii) to conduct or sponsor t raining programmes for trainers, 
particularly in the voluntar y sector, so that improved 
technology is disseminated to participants in development 
of rural areas; 
xiv)  to conduct or sponsor  training programmes/seminars, 
workshops and meetings to promote interaction between 
government agencies and vol untary agencies working in 
the field of rural development and technology; 
xv) to carry out research studies, survey, evaluation and the 
like on the use of appropriate technology and to offer 
fellowships, scholarships and prizes in furtherance of the 
objectives of the society; 
xvi) to prepare, print and publish paper, periodicals, 
monographs and books in furtheranc e of the objectives of 
the society. 
  Commenting on objectives  of CAPART, a representative 
of CAPART stated during the co urse of oral evidence  as 
under:- 
“Objectives of CAPART are to promote and assist 
voluntary action for rural prosperity, to promote 
dissemination and promotion of   appropriate technologies 
for rural development, to act as a national nodal point for 
generation and dissemination of rural technologies, to 
focus on conservation of environment and natural 
resources management. 
 
The other objectives are to network with national 
and international institutions for promotion of voluntary 

action, to create the necess ary synergy and to promote 
and support peoples’ participation through voluntary 
action in the capacity building.” 
 
 A representative of CAPART also stated as under:- 
“Their special focus is on  the backward regions and 
chronically drought  prone a reas inaccessible and far off 
areas.  Apart from implement ing some infrastructure 
development or income generation or employment 
generation activities, it is done in such a manner that the 
community also gets capacitated for future in due course”. 
  
When the Committee wanted to know the reasons for 
decreasing trend in the  number of BPL beneficiaries, a 
representative of the organisation stated that the mandate of 
CAPART was to encourage, promote and assist voluntary 
action in rural development with particular emphasis on persons 
below poverty line (BPL), schedul ed castes, scheduled tribes 
and other disadvantaged groups of the society and to provide 
appropriate technological  inputs in  rural development 
programmes for the eradication of  rural poverty.  But the 
number of beneficiaries identif ied by CAPART is decreasing 
year after year.  For instance, in   1998-99, it was 4,49,158, in 
1999-2000 it was 31,520,  in 200 0-2001 it was 1,00,895, in 
2001-2002 it was  1,39,491 and the figure for 2002-2003 was 
3,28,000  which is  cumulati ve and year-wise  break-up has not 
been given.    To a specific query  as to why was the number  of 
beneficiaries  selected coming down and   whether it was 
difficult to identify eligible beneficiaries  or they were unable to 
reach the office or the mother agencies were unable to identify 

them, Ministry of Rural Deve lopment (Department of Rural 
Development) in their note furnished to the Committee stated 
as under:- 
“CAPART’s shift  from its policy and decrease in the 
number of straight jacketed projects sanctioned to the 
voluntary organizations  may be the main reason for the 
decrease in the number of beneficiaries.  Most of the 
projects supported by CAPART follow area based 
approach and therefore, the num ber of beneficiaries may 
increase or decrease depending upon the population in 
the area covered.” 
  
On being asked about the num ber of beneficiaries in 
different States, Ministry of Rural Development in their note 
furnished to the Committee stated that  the number of 
beneficiaries vary from State to State. For instance in West 
Bengal, there were as many as  24,92,008 beneficiaries, in 
Andhra Pradesh it was 9,39,847 beneficiaries, in Goa there was 
no beneficiary at all and in Punjab there were only 432 
beneficiaries.   
During evidence the Committee wanted to know   about 
the wide variation among the v arious regions  getting benefits 
from CAPART.  The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development 
stated during the course of oral evidence as under:- 
“……….At present, there is no princ iple for allocation of a 
certain number of projects to a State.  The National 
Standing Committee takes up t he projects as they come 
at the central level, and at the regional level, the Regional 
Committees themselves take up these schemes.  They 
are the people who sanction the projects.” 
 

C. Restructuring of CAPART  
 
The Review Committee  set up in 2002 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, D epartment of Rural Development 
inter alia made the following recommendations:- 
(i) CAPART should operational ise the recently adopted 
‘Vision Statement’ specifying strategies for achievement 
of its long, medium and short-term goals.  These 
strategies if pursued with vigour by CAPART shall help 
shed its current image of being limited to a funding 
agency for voluntary organisations. 
 
(ii) CAPART should undertake a detailed exercise to identify 
those areas of activities that are not already being 
addressed by other agencies or line-departments to avoid 
overlapping of the activities and multiplicity of the 
implementing agencies. 
During evidence the Committee wanted to know  whether 
Ministry propose to make any chan ge in the present network of 
CAPART for better functioning and co-ordination.  In reply,  the 
Director General, CAPART  stated as under:- 
  
“A Committee was set up under the Secretary, RD, which 
interviewed a lot of people, and also worked with the 
representatives of scientific organisations in the country. 
After working together, they came out with the Report. 
The main features of this Report relate to what CAPART 
should be doing for the fut ure, that is, CAPART’s vision 
statement. So, it is said that it  should not present itself as 
only funding agency in the VO sector, but it should create 
a niche for itself by adopting flagship replicable 
programmes. As I said, we should do pilot-based 
programmes which can be replicated. Secondly, they said 
that there should be strong linkages with stakeholders, 
with agencies in HRD institutions and technology based 
institutions. CAPART should work with them and also with 
the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). This is another 

suggestion which is made by them in the overall policy of 
CAPART. Then, another suggestion was regarding 
identification of core areas  not already being addressed 
by other agencies. That called for innovation, and have 
prospects for universal replicability. Again, another one 
was regarding establishi ng and strengthening the 
functioning of complementary institutional networking at 
all levels, and focus on conversions of programmes and 
services under implementation by voluntary 
organisations.”  
 
The Committee desired to know about on the follow up  
action taken by the Ministry/CAPART on the recommendations 
made by the Review Committee.  The Secretary, Ministry of  
 
 
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development stated 
in reply as under:- 
“……..the Government has accepted this report, in 
principle, and we hope that in the coming year, we will be 
able to implement all t he recommendations putting 
together the CAPART and the Ministry.” 
 
To a further  specific query, DG CAPART stated as 
under:- 
“…….the recommendation of th e association of experts, 
technologists, scientists in the National Scientific Committee on 
watershed has already been implemented. 
 
 D.  Organisational Set up 
 Organisational set up of the Council consists of the 
following bodies:- 

i)  General Body: 
It functions under the Chairmanship of President  of 
CAPART and has the following powers and functions: 
a) To give overall policy guidance and directions for  
efficient functioning of the society, approve the 
annual budget of the Society drawn by the EC to be 
submitted to the Government of India for sanction of 
Government grants; 
b) to consider the balance sheet and audited accounts  
for the previous year; 
c) to consider the annual report prepared by the EC; 
d) to add and amend the rules of  the society with the   
approval of Government of India and 
e) to frame bye-laws not inconsistent with these rules  
for the regulation of business of the society with the 
approval of Government of India, etc. 
ii)  President 
Union Minister/Minister of State (IC), in charge of 
the Ministry is the ex-officio President of the Society.  The 
President presides over t he Annual General Meeting and 
Special General Meeting of th e Society.  The President 
shall have the authority to cause to review periodically the 
work and progress of the Society with a view to ensuring 
that the activities of th e Society are carried on in 
accordance with the provis ions of the Memorandum of 
Association and Rules (MoAR). 
iii)  Vice-President 

MOS/Deputy Minister in the Ministry is the ex-officio 
Vice-President of the Society.   If there are  two or more 
such Ministers, one of t he Ministers/Dy. Ministers 
nominated by the President shall be the ex-officio Vice-
President of the Society.  The Vice-President shall 
exercise such powers and perf orm such other duties as 
the President may deem fit to delegate to him. 
iv)  Executive Committee : 
The Executive Committee shall have a membership 
of not less than fifteen and not more than twenty-five 
members nominated by the Pres ident of the Society from 
amongst the members of the General Body for the same 
duration for which the General Body is constituted 
provided that the Financial Advise r of the Ministry dealing 
with the subject in the Government of India shall be one 
of the members. 
The Executive Committee shall exercise all 
executive and financial powers of  the Society, subject to 
such directions, as may be issued by the Government of 
India. 
The EC has the powers to prepare and execute 
detailed plans and programmes for the  furtherance of the 
objects of the Society.  In addition to this the EC 
- consider the annual and supplementary 
budgets placed before it, 

- prepare annual report and accounts of the 
Society for the consideration of the General 
Body, 
- create posts and appoint such staff as may be 
required for the efficient management of the 
affairs of the Society subject to the approval of 
Government of India and regulate the 
recruitment and  conditi ons of the service of 
the officials,  
- has powers to receive and to have custody of 
the funds of the Society and to manage the 
properties of the Society, 
- incur expenditure, subject  to provisions of the 
approved budget. 
- Enter for, and on behalf of the Society into 
agreement including those containing 
arbitration clauses, etc. 
- appoint boards, Standing Committees, Sub-
Committees and panels, consisting of persons 
who may or may not be members of the 
Society or employees of the Council. 
(v)   Chairman 
The Minister of State who is the ex-officio Vice-
President of the Society shall be the ex-officio Chairman 
of the EC. The Chairman sha ll preside over the meetings 
of the EC and shall see that the affairs of the Society are 
run efficiently and in accordance with the provisions of the 

MoAR.  The Chairman may in writing delegate such of the 
powers, as he may consider necessary to DG.  The 
Chairman shall take decisions on all such matters which 
he thinks are of sufficient importance and urgency and 
cannot await being placed before the next meeting of the 
EC and which he anticipates would get the approval of 
the Committee in its next meeting. 
(vi) Vice-Chairman  
The Secretary to the Government of India of the  
Ministry/Department dealing with  the Society shall be the 
ex-officio Vice-Chairman of the EC.  The Vice-Chairman 
shall exercise all powers and discharge such duties and 
responsibilities as may be delegated to him by the 
Chairman of the EC.  In addition, Secretary to the 
Government of India, Drinking Water Scheme of the 
Ministry is ex-officio second Vice-Chairman of the EC.  
However, the President of t he Society may at any time 
appoint a person as the Second Vice-Chairman of the EC 
who shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.  
The Vice-Chairman shall ex ercise such powers and 
discharge such duties and responsibilities as may be 
delegated to him by the Chairman. 
(vii) Director General  
DG is the principal Executive Officer of the Society.  
He is appointed by the EC with the prior approval of the 
Government of India and is gov erned by such terms and 
conditions of service as the EC may determine from time 

to time with the approval of the Government of India.  DG 
is responsible for the proper administration of the affairs 
and funds of the Society, prescribing the duties for all 
employees, exercising supervision and disciplinary control 
over the work and conduct of all employees of the Society 
as well as coordinating and exercising general 
supervision over all the activities of the Society and 
carrying out all acts required to institute, conduct, defend, 
compound or abandon any legal proceedings by or 
against the Society or otherwise concerning the affairs of 
the Society. 
In the absence of the DG on long leave, deputation 
in India or abroad or  at the time of laying down office, 
arrangements to look after his duties may be made by the 
Chairman of the EC.  DG may in writing delegate such of 
his powers as he may consi der necessary to any officer 
below him. 
(viii) F&A Committee  
There is a Standing Committee on Finance & 
Appointments comprising of DG, CAPART being the 
Chairman alongwith Joint Se cretary, MoRD dealing with 
the Society and two members of the EC.  The Standing 
Committee is a recommendatory body to the EC and is 
responsible to scrutinize the accounts and the budget 
estimates of the Society and to consider proposals  for 
new expenditure on account of the major works and 
purchases, to scruitinize re-appropriation statement and 

audited accounts, to review t he finances of the Society 
from time to time, to consider qualifications and   
recruitment rules for the various  posts in the Society, to 
advise the Society in all personnel matters including 
recruitment and promotions, to recommend the policy with 
regard to such financial and personnel matters, to give 
advice and make recommendat ions to the EC on any 
financial and administrative que stion affecting the affairs 
of the society. 
(ix) National Standing Committees :  
There are four NSCs namely on Rural Technology,  
Watershed and Water Resource Management, People’s 
Cooperation and Marketing, Communication, HRD and 
Monitoring and matters of  interest to the Voluntary 
Sector, for the effective discharge/sanctioning of the 
project proposals in CAPART Headquarters.  The 
Committee have the authority to consider projects for 
sanction with an outlay of upto Rs. 1.00 crore.  The  
project involving more than Rs. 1.00 crore will be 
considered by the Committee and referred to the EC with 
its recommendations for decision. 
D.  Regional Committees 
On the  Regional set up of CAPART, Ministry of Rural 
Development in their note furnished to the Committee stated as 
under :- 
“As on date, the Council  have nine Regional Committees, 
namely Ahmedabad, Bhubneswar, Chandigarh, Dharwad, 

Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Lucknow and Patna.  The  
broad geographical coverage of the RCs is as under:- 
 
Name of the RCs Geographical coverage 
Ahmedabad Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Daman & Diu, Dadar 
and Nagar Haveli, Chhatisgarh 
Bhubneswar West Bengal, Orissa, Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Chandigarh Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, 
Chandigarh and Punjab 
Jaipur Delhi and Rajasthan 
Guwahati Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram, Sikkim, 
Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Tripura and Meghalaya 
Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Pondicherry 
Lucknow Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal 
Patna Bihar and Jharkhand 
Dharwad Karnataka, Kerala, Goa and 
Lakshadweep 
 
The Regional  Committees are empowered to 
consider and sanction project proposals upto an  outlay of 
Rs. 20 lakh in accordance with the guidelines and 
procedure prescribed by t he CAPART Headquarters.  
Chairman of the Regional Committees presides all the 
meetings of the Regional Committees and DG or his 
nominee is required to attend the meeting of the RCs.  
The minutes of the proceedings of all the meetings of the 
RCs and resolutions passed are circulated by the 
Member Convenors who are inv ariably Officers of the 
Society and the minutes are  placed before the next 
meeting of the Committee for its confirmation.  The RCs 
have the powers to approve the Annual Budget of the 
RCs prepared by the MC (Member  Convenor), which is 
submitted to the Headquarters for approval.  The 
Administrative and Financial Powers of the RCs are 
exercised by the MCs to the extent of delegation made to 
them and the MCs are responsib le for the correctness, 
regularity and propriety of the decisions taken by them.  
The monitoring of the projec ts sanctioned by the RCs is 

held with the assistance of panel of experts/monitors 
empanelled by the Headquarters.” 
  
According to the Policy guidelines both Regional 
Committees and National Standing Committees comprise  
representatives from experienced voluntary organisations. 
The Review Committee set up in 2002 had recommended 
that considering the fact   that programmes are being 
implemented by  multiple agencies like State Governments, 
DRDAs, Panchayat Raj institutions and others, the coordination 
and convergence of programme s could be achieved through 
adequate representation of these bodies in the Committees of 
CAPART.  

Asked to furnish  the number and dates of meetings of  
the General Body, the Executive Committee and the F&A 
Committee held in the last five years,  Ministry of Rural 
Development furnished the following statement:- 
S.No. Name of 
Committee 
No. of sittings Date of 
Meeings 
1. General Body 4 03.05.1999 
05.08.2000 
30.10.2001 
30.01.2003 
 
2. Executive 
Committee 
8 03.05.1999 
17.01.2000 
24.03.2000 
05.08.2000 
01.02.2001 
14.09.2001 
22.03.2002 
29.01.2003 
 
3. F&A 10 26.02.1999 
10.01.2000 
16.03.2000 
08.09.2000 
19.7.2000 
30.08.2000 
29.01.2001 
02.07.2001 
18.11.2002 
28.01.2003 
  
Ministry of Rural Development  in a note furnished to the 
Committee also stated that during la st five years four meetings 
of the General Body were held on 3.5.1999, 5.8.2000, 
30.10.2001 and 30.01.2003. 

During evidence , the  Committ ee pointed out that one of 
the function of General Body is  to approve the Annual Budget 
of the Society and asked how could the Society get the 
approval of the Annual Budget in  the year 2002 as no meeting 
was held in that year.  In r eply, Director General,  CAPART 
stated that the approval was got in the next meeting.  It was 
post facto approval. 
To a further query about the shifting of dates of the 
meetings to various months, a representative of  CAPART 
stated as under:- 
“There is a provision in Memorandum of Association and 
Rules that in cases of emergency and pending meeting of 
the Executive Committee or the General Body, the 
Chairman or the President, that  is the Hon’ble Minister of 
Rural Development is authorized and competent to 
approve any project proposal or any issue which can 
subsequently be ratified in the Executive Committee or 
the General Body.  So we hav e been making use of this 
emergency provision a nd depending upon the 
convenience of the Hon’ble Minister, we are convening 
the meeting of the General Body.” 
 
While supplementing, the Secretary  of the Ministry stated  
as under:- 
“……..the hon. Minister presides over the General Body.  
So subject to his  convenience the meetings are 
cancelled and it does sometime s become difficult for us 
………… In fact I had appeared  before another hon. 
Committee on Petitions, CAPART has been even 
delaying the  laying of annual report and accounts before 
the Parliament. We have undertaken that in future 
CAPART will ensure that their meetings are held in time 
and the accounts are finalised and Auditors’ Report is 

obtained and given so that  it can be placed in the 
Parliament.” 
 
The Committee further queried  as to how often the 
General Body is expected to meet to which the representative 
of  CAPART replied as under:- 
“It is expected to meet at least once in a year.  It can also 
meet twice  a year.  It invo lves a huge expenditure as 
100 members will have to be flown down and with a 
small budget, we have specifically restricted the meeting 
to one or at the most twice.” 
 
Asked about  the reasons as to why the meeting of the 
General Body, the  Executive Committee and the  F&A are not 
being held regularly  the Director General, CAPART stated 
during evidence  as under:- 
“Some of the Committee meet ings have been organised 
as and when the agenda material was available and there 
was a need to call the meeting.  Undoubtedly, we could 
have more meetings.  But I will have to look at the 
reasons why over the years, in which periods the 
meetings have not been held so  regularly as they should 
have been.  Basically the general reason has been that 
the agenda was not adequate.  They felt that they can 
have only two meetings in that year, they need not call it 
every quarter and so on.  I will have to look at the files 
and find out the details.  Maybe, the Chairman did not call 
the meeting of the Executive Committee.  May be, he 
postponed it.  There may be some elections.” 
 
In a note furnished to the Committee, Ministry further 
stated that the Committee meetings are organised as and when  
adequate agenda material is availabl e as otherwise it will result 
in avoidable  administrative expenses.  Adequate material is 

available for placing before the NSCs and RCs after the 
proposals are desk appraised, evaluated in the field and found 
suitable for consideration.  Regarding Executive Committee 
meetings, these are organised w hen sufficient items requiring 
approval are available and the Chairman, Executive 
Committee/President, General Body  gives dates convenient to 
him for chairing the meetings. 
E.  Staff Strength 
The Committee was apprised t hat the total sanctioned 
staff strength of CAPART was 186 and actual strength as on 
17.11.04  was 160. There were  26 vacant posts. 
 During the course of oral evidence, a representative of 
CAPART stated as under:- 
“There is under-staffing in strategic  areas, both in the 
Regional Centres as well as in the Head Office.  Since 
there is a ban on creation of pos ts, we have the same set 
of people or the staff created in 1986 though our work has 
phenomenally expanded.  We have moved into many new 
innovative areas.  So the process of recruitment of staff 
has not kept up with the increased needs of the 
organisation.  If we are to work as a social laboratory, we 
need to experiment constantly, need to validate and try to 
test new ideas for which we need very high level of  
professionals. We are lacking in it.  There is also a need 
for associating more professi onals in subject matters or 
specialists in new areas particularly in disability, water 
management and rural tec hnology.  These are three 
highly specialized areas where we need to have high 
level of specialists.  We do not have them now.  But 
efforts are on to convince the Government that they 
should give us this staff in these core areas.” 
 

 A representative of CAPART also stated during oral 
evidence as under:- 
“Originally the staff was sanctioned only for the Head 
Office.  It was only from 19 95 onwards that the Regional 
Centres were set up.  CAPART  had to spread their staff 
very thinly and no new staff hav e been created.  They are 
managing with the nine Regional Centres  with the staff 
which were there in the mid 1986 onwards.  As a result 
the Regional Centres are not adequately manned  and 
also the Head Office has been  running short of resources 
by deploying staff to the Regional Centres.” 
 
  The Committee desired to know about the terms and 
conditions of service of Director General, CAPART. In reply,  
Director General, CAPART stated as follows:- 
“The Director Generals who hold this post are mostly from 
Indian Administrative Service.  Shri Raman Dutta was 
there nearly about three and a half years ago, served for 
a long period.  This was followed by a Punjab  Cadre 
Officer.  He served for a little over a year and the present 
Director General has put in more than a year and a half.” 

 
CHAPTER II 
A.  Financial Position  
Budget allocation from Ministry of Rural Development, 
Government of India is the main source of funds for CAPART. 
Apart from this, some amounts are al so available from the Ministry 
of Agriculture and foreign funding agencies. 
A statement showing the Budgetary Allocations received by 
CAPART from the Ministry  in the last five years is given below :-  
               
         Amount in crores  
Year Budget Receipts Actual 
expenditure* 
1999-2000 30.00 31.55 35.44 
2000-2001 30.00 29.65 43.61 
2001-2002 30.00 30.00 44.44 
2002-2003 30.00 30.00 58.79 
2003-2004 50.00 50+21.
46** 
67.83 
 
*Excess amount has been met out of available fund of earlier 
years during 1999-2000 to 2002-2003. The amount is 
underutilized during 2003-2004 due to code of conduct by Election 
Commission. Further,  substantial amount was received at the fag 
end of the financial year. 
 

**As against the budget  allocation of Rs 50 crore, an 
additional amount of Rs 21.46 crore was received by CAPART 
towards the end of the financial year.  
 
 
 
Source and utilization of foreign funds 
amount in crores 
Year Source  Amount 
Received 
Amount 
Utilized  
Amount 
Renewal 
Danida    - 0.88   - 1999-2000 
UNDP 0.58 0.44   - 
Danida   - 0.09   - 2000-2001 
UNDP 1.83 0.96   - 
Danida   -  0.01 0.86 2001-2002 
UNDP 2.23 2.28   - 
Danida   - 0.01 0.80 2002-2003 
UNDP 1.30 1.32   - 
Danida   - 0.01 0.20 2003-2004 
UNDP 0.50 0.72   - 
 
 
The Department have also stated that CAPART’s 
expenditure for the year 2003-2004  was Rs 67.83 crore against 
the total release of Rs. 71.46 crore. 
On being asked about the  variations between the 
amounts sanctioned and the amounts released, Ministry of 

Rural Development  in their post evidence r eply stated as 
follows:- 
“The sanctioned amount is released in instalments 
during the duration of the project period and the 
duration of each project varies from project to 
project.  Further, instalment s of sanctioned projects 
are not released in case of NGOs which are under  
Funding Restrictions Category. In some cases the 
projects are terminated  midway and the sanctioned 
amount is not released.  In some cases project 
duration also gets extended for the reasons beyond 
the control of the organisation.” 
  
B.  Utilisation Certificate 
When the Committee wanted to know as to whether 
Voluntary Organisations furnish Utilisation Certificates to 
CAPART and to what extent UCs have been received from VOs 
during 2003-2004, they were in formed that Voluntary 
Organisations(VOs) furnish Utilization Certificates to CAPART 
for the amounts released to them and CAPART furnishes UC to 
the Ministry for the entire amount  received from the Ministry. 
CAPART has received UCs for Rs. 10.03 crore during 2003-
2004. When asked about the guidel ines laid by CAPART for 
furnishing Utilization Certificate,  they stated that CAPART 
stresses on the Voluntary Organisations for furnishing utilization 
certificate after the release of  second installment to them 
indicating the item-wise utilizat ion of funds duly certified by 
chartered accountants. 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
A. Implementation of Schemes 
Government’s decision to su pport voluntary organizations 
from the Seventh Plan period onwards was based on the 
realisation that VOs not only provide a new model and 
approach  to rural development but also secure the involvement 
of families living below the pov erty line in the development 
effort.  The Seventh Plan document had a section captioned   
‘On Involvement of Voluntary Agencies’  which spelt out (i) the 
role of voluntary agencies in rural development, (ii) the 
criteria/suggestion for identifying  voluntary agencies in rural 
development, and (iii) the areas in which voluntary 
organizations can make a contribution. 
In a note furnished to the Committee, Ministry of Rural 
Development stated as under:- 
“ CAPART supported various projects namely CRSP, OB, 
DWCRA, ARWSP, ARTS, PC, IRDP, Panchyati Raj, 
Social Forestry, Watershed, Disability and Media upto 
1998-99.  From 1999-2000 only 5 schemes are supported 
by CAPART which are PC, ARTS, OB, Watershed and 
Disability.” 
   
 They were asked about the reason for discontinuing some 
of the schemes/projects which were implemented by CAPART 
before 1999-2000. In their reply furnished to the Committee, the 
Ministry  stated as under:- 
“The people’s participation and voluntary action in the 
implementation of the straight jacketed schemes was not 

achieved as expected.  There were shortcomings in 
implementation of straight jacketed schemes Accelerated 
Rural Water Supply Programme and Central Rural 
Sanitation Porgamme (ARWSP and CRSP) like 
inadequate participation by the beneficiaries in the matter 
of maintenance of the latrines and hand pumps, 
installation of hand pumps favourable to a few 
households, provision of individual latrines to some 
ineligible households, use of latrines for other purposes, 
etc.  There was duplication in the implementation of the 
programmes as all these programmes were also 
implemented by the State Governments.” 
 
In a note furnished to the Committee, Ministry of Rural 
Development further stated that an expenditure of Rs. 78.72 
crore and 61.70 crore was in curred on ARWSP and CRSP 
schemes upto March, 1999. 
Elaborating further during the course of oral evidence, 
 Director General, CAPART stated as under:- 
“The main schemes of CA PART are thos e schemes 
which are done with Public Cooperation. Then comes 
Organisation of the Benefici aries.  They entertain 
projects, proposals on Rural Technology, Watershed 
Development and Disability Action.  These are major 
schemes of CAPART under which they entertain projects,  
proposals directly from the voluntary organizations 
without there being any interference, between  CAPART 
and the voluntary sector.  T he voluntary organizations  
need not come through the state Government because 
that way it saves a lot of time and it attracts voluntary 
action much faster.” 
 
B.  Public Cooperation Scheme 
Public Cooperation  (PC) is one of the oldest schemes of 
CAPART, which had its focus on income and employment 

generation for the weaker sections , especially the historically 
disadvantaged strata like SCs, STs, OBCs, differently abled, 
women, etc.  Until 31 st March, 1999 PC was one of the most 
sought after schemes by the vo luntary sector under which a 
wide variety of projects in sect ors such as agriculture, animal 
husbandry, minor irrigation, post -harvest processes, fisheries, 
artisanal activities, horticul ture handicrafts and so on were 
covered. 
On being asked whether any review of the performance of 
CAPART  has been done, it was stated in a written reply that 
during the year 1998-99, the pe rformance of CAPART was 
comprehensively  reviewed by  the Ministry of Rural 
Development and it was decided that Governmental schemes 
such as CRSP, ARWSP, DWCR A and JRY, etc. which were 
also being implemented through CAPART, will be withdrawn.  It 
was also decided that most of the activities which were 
supported under these schemes would henceforth be 
supported under the PC scheme.  One of the major reasons for 
this change was that the Ministry  felt that the Governmental 
schemes do not afford much scope for the social engineering 
and mobilization skills of the voluntary sector.  Rather, 
‘contractor type’ NGOs with ‘target oriented’ approach had been 
tapping bulk of CAPART resourc es under various schemes.  In 
view of this, it was decided that Public Cooperation scheme will 
be so designed as to make it participatory with focus on 
harnessing the collective energies of the stake holders with an 
empowerment perspective thereby making Public Co-operation 

as a process-oriented programme as against a stereotyped and 
target-oriented one. 
 When asked about the aims and objectives of the Public 
Cooperation Scheme, Ministry in their note furnished to the 
Committee stated as under:- 
“Projects of innovative an d integrated nature only are 
considered under this scheme which result in harnessing  
the collective energies and creativity of the rural 
community and lead to capacity building and 
enhancement of life.” 
 
 When the Committee asked as to how it is ensured that 
projects of innovative and integra ted nature which contribute to 
the socio economic development of rural poor are funded 
through Public Cooperation, CAPAR T in their note stated as 
under:- 
“Only such projects which are based on social 
engineering skills of the NGOs  for mobilizing community 
support for creation of sustainable livelihood security 
systems, are supported under th e PC scheme.  Routine 
activities i.e., mere distribution of assets like cattle, 
houses, etc. are not supported under PC scheme.  
Similarly, stand alone activities without the necessary 
backward and forward linkages, i.e., tailoring centres, etc. 
are also not supported.” 
 
 CAPART funded 94 voluntary organizations under PC 
Scheme in the last five years and the total number of projects 
was 98.  Total amount sanctioned under this scheme for this 
period was Rs. 16,26,43,061.2 and released amount was 
8,68,50,328. 

 In a note furnished to the Committee, CAPART stated 
that  44 Voluntary Organisations were put under Funding 
Assistance Stopped/Black list agenci es etc. during the last five 
years. 
C. ORGANISATION OF BENEFICIARIES 
  OB is a funding scheme of CAPART whereby BPL 
Category and other disadvantaged strata of the rural areas are 
made aware of their economic and political rights enabling them to 
become empowered citizens of the country. In addition, the 
scheme is also intended to address such a social, economic or 
environmental issue that may have become one of the most 
prominent reasons of their backw ardness. The projects under OB 
are also expected to create aw areness and mobilise the target 
group around the selected burning issue of the area. 
The labour class in urban areas fight for their rights by  
making unions. However, no such platform is available to the poor 
in the rural areas. OB scheme has been designed to organise the 
BPL strata of the rural areas through the medium of social 
awareness so that they could collect ively raise their voice and fight 
for the protection of their rights. In other words the main objective 
of OB is to organise the BPL strata for struggle and social justice. 
Objective 
i. To provide support to community/groups consisting of the 
poor people who wish to organise themselves or have 
organised themselves, either on their own or due to the 
efforts of a Voluntary Organi sation for a cause which is 
sufficiently just or serious and sustain their 

campaign/struggle for betterment  of their economic status 
and social power. 
 
ii. To increase the awareness of the people and to empower 
them so as to able to be get what is rightfully theirs in terms 
of scheme, rights and legal entitlements. 
 
iii. To increase their bargaining power by supporting active 
networking amongst sim ilar campaigns in the 
region/country. 
 
iv. To protect and support the interests of SC/ST, women, 
landless labourers, bonded labourers, physically  
handicapped persons and other di sadvantaged sections of 
the society. 
 
v. To fight legal battles to se cure justice for a large number of 
poor and exploited people, incl uding legal counseling and 
assistance for the poor litigants. 
 
Asked as to how it is ensured that programmes under the 
OB Scheme actually benefit the target group which are most 
disadvantaged and oppressed sections of the society, Ministry of 
Rural Development in a note furnished to the Committee stated 
as under:- 
“The target group/beneficiaries  of the programmes under 
OB Scheme are only those w ho are most disadvantaged 
and oppressed sections of the society. CAPART has inbuilt 
system to ensure that the programmes under the scheme 
are sanctioned for the benefit of  these people only. The 
project proposals submitted by the Voluntary Organisations 
are sanctioned only after conducti ng desk appraisals of the 
projects at the office. The projects sanctioned are 
appraised/evaluated at regular intervals [Pre-funding, Mid-
term, Post-evaluations]. The project evaluations are 
conducted by the inde pendent monitors who are 
empanelled by CAPART. During field evaluation, project 

evaluators go to the projec t area and interact with the 
beneficiaries and find out whether the programme has 
been undertaken and whether th ey have been benefited 
out of the programme.” 
 
Aims and Objectives of  OB Scheme  
  
1. Aware the villages about their rights in Panchayati Raj 
Schemes. 
2. Awareness about ‘Development Money’ with the local 
MLAs/MPs for creating infrastructure in their 
constituency. 
3. Aware about the land-laws and its  reforms. 
4. Providing Legal-aid facilities on a continuous basis. 
5. Aware them about right of information. 
6. Advocacy about the co-operative  movement and 
formation of Self Help Groups. 
7. Aware them about the progra mmes and schemes in local 
Post-Offices and Banks. 
8. Aware  them about the various development 
programmes and schemes of local 
block/district/Government. 
9. Aware them about scientific  re-utilisation of various 
wastes available  in villages. 
10. Organise community to ke ep the hygienic environment 
(Sanitary and waste water disposal systems) 
11. Advocacy on to use safe-drinking water various methods 
of purification of water can be apprised. 
12. Create awareness related  to non-farm/farm-based 
income-generating activities  with their latest technical 
knowledge. 
13. Aware  the community 
14. Apprise the community about the various potential 
trades/technical  areas and the centers where the 
training are being imparted. 
15. Organising the society against social evils. 
16. Organising the community to retain social values. 

17. Advocacy and encourage the village community related 
to child-education including girls. 
18. Advocacy also needs to  discourage the  community 
regarding killing of unborn girls and its impact at a later 
stage. 
19. Apprise the society about to  care the health of women 
specially who are pregnant. 
20. Encourage community about afforestation. 
21. Advocacy to apprise villag ers to use of non-conventional 
energy sources. 
22. Advocacy against establishment of a factory/industry 
emerging toxic and harmful products and by-products. 
23. To proper utilization (not ex ploitation) of local natural 
resources say minerals/mines. 
24. Encourage the society for rev ival of traditional health 
practices and plantation of herbal medicines. 
25. Advocacy on the issue of revival of traditional water-
management systems and its better utilization (water-
harvesting structures). 
26. Organise the village community to prepare themselves 
against natural calamities i.e., drought, floods, cyclones, 
fires, earthquake etc. 
27. Encourage villagers to revive the traditional method to 
solve the community level issues only through open-
discussions and discussions based upon consensus. 
 
Given   below  is   the   year-wise   consolidated    list      of 
beneficiaries as on 5th November, 2004 against which  sanctions 
have been made in OB Scheme by CAPART since April, 1999:- 
 
Financial Year  SC ST General OBC BPL Women Disabled Others Total 
1999-2000 1,749 2,201 6,660 1,515  689  4,320 17,134 
2000-2001 16,693 10,335 5,170 749  12,499 78 46,234 91,758 
2001-2002 1,499 560 4,454 480 1 3,750  12,060 22,804 
2002-2003 1,223 61 4,778 10,070 665 2,482  12,371 31,650 
2003-2004 3,426 553 13,222 8,415 8,271 2,496  8,114 44,497 
2004-2005 30 30 50   250  3,220 3,580 
Total 24,620 13,740 34,334 21,229 8,937 22,166 78 86,319 2,11,423 
 

The State wise details of t he projects under OB Scheme,  
amount sanctioned and released  since 1999is as under:- 
 
State No. of Projects Sanction Amount(Rs.) Release Amount(Rs.) 
Andhra Pradesh 97 11396696 9559847 
Assam 6 361455 361455 
Bihar 61 3346958 2506657 
Chandigarh 1 238000 126500 
Delhi 1 95000 95000 
Gujarat 4 765625 765625 
Haryana 52 3156090 2907090 
Himachal Pradesh 22 2235010 2039710 
Jammu & Kashmir 6 365975 254475 
Jharkhand 13 1331742 914167 
Karnataka 9 395500 144500 
Kerala 4 110000 55000 
Madhya Pradesh 1 1618940 809470 
Maharashtra 4 110500 79580 
Manipur 1 93100 38000 
Meghalaya 1 16000 16000 
Orissa 66 3071307 2147255 
Punjab 4 185900 161900 
Rajasthan 2 345000 90000 
Tamil Nadu 40 6173810 3585616 
Uttar Pradesh 55 1899270 1459270 
Uttaranchal  4 223000 211000 
West Bengal 39 1578652 1055484 
 
D.  Watershed Development 
Watershed development projec ts have been taken up under 
different programmes launched by t he Government of India.  The 
Drought Prone Areas Programme  (DPAP) and the Desert 
Development Programme (DPP) adopted the Watershed approach in 
1987.  The Integrated Wasteland Development Projects Scheme 
(IWDP) taken up by the National Wasteland Development Board in 
1989 also aimed at developing wast elands on a watershed basis.  
This programme has been brought under the administrative  
jurisdiction of the Department of Wastelands Development now 
redesignated as Department of  Land Resources in the Ministry of 

Rural Development.  The fourth  major programme based on the 
watershed concept is the National Watershed Development 
Programme in Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA) under the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 
The Watershed Conservation and Development Division 
was started in CAPART in the year 1995-96 with the following 
objectives:- 
(i) To promote sustainable economic development of the 
community which is directly or indirectly dependent on the 
watershed through: 
(a) Sustainable utilization of the watershed’s 
natural resources like land, water, grass, forests 
etc. that  will mitigate the adverse effects of 
drought and prevent further ecological 
degradation. 
(b)    Employment generation and development of 
the human and natural resources of the village 
in order to promote income generation 
activities. 
(ii) To encourage restoration of ecological balance in the 
village through: 
(a) Sustained community action for the operation 
and maintenance of assets created and 
further development of the potential  of the 
natural resources in the watershed. 
(b) Simple, easy and affordable technological 
solutions and institutional arrangements that 

make use of, and build upon, local technical 
knowledge, materials and traditions. 
(iii) Special  emphasis to im prove the economic and social 
conditions of the resource-poor and the disadvantaged 
sections of the watershed  community such as the asset 
less and the women through: 
(a) More equitable distribu tion of the benefits of 
land, water resources and biomass 
development. 
(b) Greater access to income generating 
opportunities and focus on human resource 
development. 
 On being asked about the objective of Watershed 
Development Programme, the representative of CAPART 
stated as under:- 
“Under Watershed development, the idea is basically to 
create water and food security, developing wasteland, 
ecological development, environmental protection 
combined with income and employment generation locally 
so that the food and water insecurity is removed, 
particularly the ground water is charged, in situ moisture 
conservation is ensured and the livelihood support 
systems of the people are furt her strengthened locally.  
This is one of the flagship programmes of CAPART.  
Again, Sir, here the emphasis is on enhancement of 
biomass, productivity of  ecosystem and poverty 
alleviation.  We have seven mother NGOs which are 
known as support vo luntary organisations.  They train the 
small voluntary organizations on how to make projects on 
watershed development and how to implement projects.  
Our projects range from 10 00 to 2500 hectares and the 
cost per hectare is Rs. 6000 for different types of 

treatment activities like ch eck dams, sub-surface dams, 
nala plugging, gali-plugging, afforestation.  These various 
types of activities we im plement under this watershed 
programmes. 
 
 This is one of the check dams being constructed in 
Gujarat under the Watershed programme.  This is of a 
very participatory nature.  So  far we have sanctioned Rs. 
43.76 crore under Watershed and 440 projects are taken 
up so far.  Some have been implemented completely.  At 
the moment, out of these 440. we have 240 on-going 
projects.  It is expected that 2.17 lakh hectares will be 
treated in next four to five  years when these Watershed 
projects are completed.” 
 
The Committee desired to know about the method of 
selection of Watersheds Projects.  In reply, it has been stated 
that a watershed is go-hydrological unit or an area that drains  
at a common point.  In the villages selected for intervention, 
watersheds totaling approximately 1000 to 2500 hectares shall 
be identified and selected by the VO in consultation with the 
villagers from the watershed are a.  The total size of the 
watershed has been fixed keeping  an average norm in view.   
The calculation of the workload and expenses of a Programme 
Implementation Agency  (PIA) have been worked out keeping 
this factor in mind.  However under special 
circumstances/exceptional cases an area less than 1000 
hectares may be cons idered.  Consideration of such    
proposals will greatly depend on special justification provided 
by the VO and the concerned SVO. 
The following criteria may be used in the selection of  

watersheds:- 
(a) Ones which have acute s hortage of water, especially 
drinking water. 
 
(b) Watersheds which have a large population of scheduled 
castes/scheduled tribes dependent on it. 
 
(c) Critical watersheds which have undergone heavy soil 
erosion and have a preponderan ce of wastelands and 
highly degraded land. 
 
(d) Those which have a preponderance of common lands. 
 
(e) Where actual wages are significantly lower than the 
minimum wages. 
 
(f) Those contiguous to another watershed which has 
already been developed/may be selected for 
conservation. 
 
(g) Watersheds which had been previously taken up for 
comprehensive development/treatment works. However, 
if the specific area of the watershed now identified had 
not previously benefited from any development works, 
even though it was a part of a larger watershed taken up 
under any of the ear lier programmes, it may be selected 
for a project now. 
 
(h) Five hundred hectares is a general norm and if on actual 
survey, a watershed is found to have less or more area, it 
may be taken up for conservation, keeping in view that 
the total area to be developed by a PIA is 1000 to 2500 
ha. 
 
(i) Where public participation and commitment, individually 
and collectively, is available to carry out th e precepts and 
objectives of this scheme. 
 
The cost per hectare is Rs. 6000 in the plain areas and 

Rs. 7,500 in the hilly regions bec ause in the hilly regions, the 
labour is expensive. The cost of  single structure should not 
exceed Rs. 5,00,000 in plain and Rs. 7,00,000 in hilly areas.  
The upper limit of a project is Rs. 1.5 crore.  The cost of 
renovation should not exceed 20% of the total activity cost. 239 
projects are being  implemented under the new guidelines. 
 During oral evidence, the representative of CAPART 
stated that watershed development projects are implemented at 
the village level.  They need not be of very high technical nature 
because the rural people themselv es implement these projects 
with the help from some engineers or some agricultural experts.  
One single  structure should not cost more than five lakh of 
rupees because large area of 2000-2500 hectare is to be 
covered.  In the hilly areas, si ngle structure may be check dam, 
farm pond, retaining well or something like that. 
 A representative of CAPART also stated as under:- 
“We initially take any organisation in our fold under track 
B, we do not insist on a detailed action plan; we only have 
an introduction.  We insist on application and profile.  We 
confirm its credibility.  We have these evaluators, who 
have to give us report within 45 days, and desk 
appraisers.  We only know the preliminaries about the 
organisation before we put it on tract B.  Once its 
progress report is made to NSC, subsequently it is 
upgraded to track A. 
 
 Some of the organisations which have already got training 
and experience of implementi ng many projects, they can 
straightaway be put under track A, a fast track system.  
We have also that system with us.  Then, the consent of 
villagers, projects costs etc.  and other responsibility is 
collective, where the VO has to go to villagers and sit with 

them.  Only then, we see the report which is duly signed 
by villagers or Gram Sabha because we insist of Gram 
Sabha’s or panchayat’s resolution.   After that, we put it 
under tract A.  In track A, these are the major activities 
which are done-community mobilization, formation of 
watershed groups and we make user groups for irrigation, 
hand-pumps and may be for a local forest or pasture and 
self-help groups are also made.” 
 
In a note furnished to the Committee regarding remedial 
measures taken by CAPART to  ensure that there are no  
irregularities in the implementation of the watershed 
programme, Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Rural Development) stated as under:- 
“Utmost care is being taken to avoid any possibility of 
irregularities by involvi ng the local villagers and 
panchayat in all  aspects of the watershed programme.  In 
order to ensure people’s  participation  and involvement of 
different village agenices each voluntary organisation 
(Project Implementation  Agency) carries out its duties 
through a team designated as the watershed 
conservation team.  During the course  Participatory Rural 
Appraisal, the watershed  conservation team members 
should identify community leaders, opinion makers and 
village youth who can be in volved in organizing locally 
self help groups and the user groups. 
 
For each earthwork/activity the concerned 
Watershed Conservation team members will identify a 
group of people (user groups) who may be affected.  
These user groups meet regu larly at least once in a 
month and all members ensure voluntary 
donation/contribution for the related project work/activity 
in terms of cash, kind, labour.  These user groups submit 
their record regularly to t he Watershed Conservation 
Team (WCT). 
 

 The villagers of the  workshed area in their first 
general body meeting elect nine representatives from 
among themselves giving adequate representation  to the 
Self Help Groups and User G roups as members of the 
Watershed Committee.  The Gram Panchayat and the 
WCT are requested to nominate one member each as 
their representatives.  The Watershed  Committee 
account is operated jointly by the voluntary organisation 
and one member from the village.  
 
In addition to the above, a three-tier monitoring 
system is strictly followed in respect of each project 
proposal.  5 voluntary organizat ions are playing vital roles 
in selection of potential voluntary organizations, their 
capacity   building, preparation of Action Plan, its 
implementation and periodic  evaluation.  In brief, the 
scheme is implemented with close collaboration and 
coordination of villagers and Gram Panchayat with their 
intensive  participation, which ensures smooth 
implementation of project without any possibility of 
irregularity.” 
 
E. Support Voluntary Organisations 
CAPART’s Watershed programme places  a central and unique 
emphasis on capacity building.  In order to achieve this goal, it was 
decided to identify and provide as sistance to experienced voluntary 
organisations who would in turn act  as Support Voluntary 
Organisations (SVOs) for the CA PART programme.  The roles and 
responsibilities  of SVOs have been defined over a period of time and 
presently can be summed up broadly as under:- 
- Promotion of the CAPART watershed programme 
among prospective partner VOs through 
promotional workshops.   CAPART agreed to 
provide financial support for su ch workshops.  Such 

promotional efforts would help identify promising 
partners for CAPART.  SVOs were considered 
ideally suited for this role being VOs themselves 
and because of their close contact with the field. 
- Training of WCT members of selected PIAs 
(Programme Implementin g Agency) through 
intensive Basic Training Courses and several 
specialized training courses.  With this, it became 
essential for each partner VO to have their teams 
undergo the Basic Training  Course at the SVO.  
Only after their team obtai ned training  certificates 
from the SVO would the PI A be able to graduate to 
the next stage. 
- Field based technical and logistical (hand-holding) 
support to PIAs until the execution of the action plan 
was completed. 
- To act as institutional monitors for the CAPART 
watershed programme and undertake evaluations if 
and when desired by CAPART. 
 To a further query,  it has been stated that th e following   
seven SVOs have been formed in the country so far:- 
 1. AGRAGAMEE, Orissa 
 2. Peermade Development Society, Kerala 
 3. People’s Science Institute, Uttaranchal 
4. Development Support Centre, Gujarat 
5. AFARM, Maharashtra 
6. Samaj Pragati Sahyog, Madhya Pradesh 

7. Hindi Swaraj Trust, Maharasthra 
When asked about the functions of SVOs, it has been 
stated that the main functions of SVOs are to (a) conduct 4 
number of workshops per year to select potential VOs (b) to  
impart basic training of 45 days to  voluntary organizations (c) to 
monitor and evaluate the credentia l  of voluntary organisations 
(d) support the voluntary organ izations in preparation and 
implementation of  Action Plan in Watershed Development 
Projects. 
In a note furnished to the Committee, Ministry of Rural 
Development stated that there are no constraints in identifying 
more number of SVOs to support  the programme. CAPART’s  
National Standing Committee on Watershed and Water 
Resource Management has constituted a Committee 
comprising DDG(A)/HOD(WSD), Chairman National Standing 
Committee and a member of NSC in its 37 th meeting held on 
28th November, 2003 for the selection of new Support Voluntary 
Organisation (SVOs), which is under process. 
 
F.  Young Professionals Scheme 
The Committee desired to know about the scheme.  It has 
been stated that YP Scheme was introduced in 1988 with the 
main objective of sensitizat ion of young post graduates to rural 
development work throug h NGOs/ DRDAs/CAPART and 
introducing professionalism and bu ilding capacity amongst the 
Organisations working in the field of rural development. Till date 

CAPART has recruited 568 YPs  and at present 166 YPs are 
working under this scheme from wh ich 26 are working in Head 
Office, 27 in RCs, one in Ministry (in Marketing Cell) and 112 in 
DARDs/VOs.  
During evidence, the Committee desired to know about 
the  method of selecting  eligib le students, a representative of 
CAPART  stated as under:- 
“CAPART has identified some institutions in the country 
like Tata Institute of social work, IRMA in Baroda, 
National Institute of Fores try FRI, Dehradun and Xavier 
Institute of Management in Labour and Social Services in 
Ranchi and Bhubneshwar all over the country. When the 
students are in their final year, a team goes there and it 
interacts with the faculty and the students and then 
selects the eligible students. 
 
After selection they are provided orientation training 
for 15 days including field exposure in reputed voluntary 
organizations and are placed with NGOs/VOs working in 
the rural areas and DRDAs on cost sharing basis. In order 
to encourage YPs to work in development sector 
interested YPs are provided the grant with  maximum 
ceiling of Rs 5 lakh under Starter Package, to set up 
Voluntary Organisations for crea ting infrastructure, office 
and administrative expenses and stipend for YP and if 
two YPs jointly set up a VO then budget ceiling is Rs 
6,20,000/-. YPs can avail starter package after completion 
of their tenure and before completion of 5 years from their 
date of entitlement.” 
  
Asked about the induction of these young professionals in 
the Ministry or CAPART, the witness stated as under:- 
“They are not given jobs like that.  They are just taken for 
three year term to learn how to do rural work and to work 

in NGO and to promote voluntarism and to work  in 
voluntary organizations.  A basic training is given through 
CAPART so that after t hree years, they leave the 
organisation and go into the w orld.  Many of them are 
taken by voluntary organizati ons.  They get jobs.  Then 
after a good training with CA PART, they go out.  Every 
year we make a recruitment  of about 60 such young 
students.” 
 
G.  Disability Action Scheme 
The Disability Action Division was set up in the year 1995 
in CAPART.  The aim of this division was to change the 
development paradigm from one of charity to that of 
empowerment.  The promulgation of the “Persons with 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunitie s Protection of Rights and Full 
Participation) Act, 1996 mandates th at 3 per cent of the total 
Government expenditure on pov erty alleviation should go to 
people with disabilities.  The 1991 round of the Sample Survey 
conducted by the National Sample Survey Organisation 
estimated that people with visual, communication and 
locomotor disabilities number at least 14.56 million, or 1.9% of 
the total population of India. This figure covers only people who 
are “profoundly disabled”, and doe s not include those with 
moderate to mild disabilities, who could, with a little effort, be 
integrated into efforts for rural development. Also not included 
in this figure are people with mental disabilities, and those 
affected by leprosy and deteriorating neuro-muscular conditions 
(e.g., muscular dystrophy, motor neurone disease, Parkinson’s 
disease and senile dementia). A separate Sample Survey of 

Mental Retardation estimated that 3% of all children aged 0 to 
14 are developmentally delayed. However, this figure once 
again excluded children with learning di sabilities (e.g. dyslexia), 
or those referred to as slow learn ers. Again, about 5% to 10% 
of the general population of India are estimated to suffer from 
mental disorders of varying types and degrees of severity. 
Village level surveys in different parts of the country indicate 
that 4%-10% of the population are persons with disabilities.  
Ministry of Rural Development  in a note furnished to the 
Committee stated as under;- 
‘India was the first country in South Asia to become a 
signatory to the Proclamation on the full participation and 
equality of people with  dis abilities in the Asian and 
Pacific Region at the inception of the Asia and Pacific 
Decade of Disabled Persons, 1993-2002.  The 
proclamation makes special mention of the need to 
improve the living conditions of persons with disabilities in 
rural areas.  During the  intervening period from 1995-
2003, the Division has supported 129 projects involving a 
range of activities that ha ve attempted to address 
disability as a development and human rights concern.  
Capacity building and awareness raising on disability 
issue among people with dis ability and their communities 
have been the main focus of the projects sanction. 
 
So far CAPART has identified VOs which have 
some experience in the field of disability development 
programmes to act as facilitation centers to impart training 
in CBR to the workers engaged with the VOs and also to 
help the VOs in formulation of suitable project proposals.’’ 
 
The Ministry also stated that  during the period from 1993 

to 2002  an amount of Rs. 7, 08,99,464 was sanctioned for 
projects under Disability Action Scheme and Rs. 4,93,68,796 
released. 
They also stated that eleven workshops are proposed to  
be organised in different parts of  the country to propagate the 
Disability Action Scheme of CAPART and thereby help the VOs 
in formulating need based realisti c project proposals aiming at 
integrating the persons with disability in the mainstream 
development paradigm.  
H.  Advancement of Rural Technology Schemes 
 The Mandate of CAPART with respect to Rural 
Development is to coordinate a ll efforts towards advancement 
of technology relev ant to rural areas except for sectors being 
dealt with by  ICAR and its sister organizations.  The broad 
objective of the Council under this is development and 
dissemination of rural technology.  The thrust is to promote 
innovative rural technologies in the villages especially those 
catering to disadvantaged sectio ns of the society.  As a  
medium-term goal, the Council proposes to establish/ 
strengthen technology developm ent and dissemination centers 
in major sectors of sustainabl e natural resource management 
and rural  development, namel y, water, energy, earth, 
technology for rural artisans, processing of agro-forestry 
produce, etc. to ensure rural  industrialization and self-
employment in the villages. Proj ects aimed at conducting need-
based study, survey and adaptive research, development, 
administration and disseminati on of appropriate technologies 

amongst the poor are funded under the Rural Technology 
Scheme. 
 During the course of evid ence, the representatives of 
CAPART  stated as under:- 
“There are some of the decentralized technologies.  Out 
of 74 technologies, 23 technologies are being dealt with 
by regional committees.  They are authorized to entertain 
projects.  These are the ma in technologies – organic 
farming technique using indigenous varieties of seeds 
and various composting methods, nursery raising 
including green house techniques, bamboo cultivation 
and bamboo handicrafts training and marketing roof water 
and water harvesting using Ferro cement tanks hydraulic 
ramp and random rubber block F erro cement roofing and 
fish segregation devices. Thes e are some of the very 
popular technologies under which we are entertaining 
projects because they directly  enhance the quality of life 
and income of the rural poor. 
 
There are some other technologies like organic 
leather tanning, agri-film lin ing and ponds, sustainable 
harvesting and semi-processing of medicinal and 
aromatic plants and then of bio-mass mushroom farming, 
saline water testing, honey k eeping and solar lantern and 
solar cooker. Then we have processing and preservation 
of foods and vegetables and red crape pottery 
technology. These are some of the very popular 
technologies.” 
 
 Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development)  in their note fu rnished to the Committee stated 
that it is maintaining a data bank of 74 listed technologies for 
rural areas. As against the 74  rural technologies, CAPART has 
covered 33 Rural Technologies and sanctioned 1933 projects 
with CAPART’s assistance of Rs 96.13 crore.  

 The Review Committee, se t up under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary (RD) has also obs erved that though Department of 
Science and Technology have developed 50 to 60 technologies 
through a process of intensive fi eld studies for identifying the 
requirements, only 5 to 7 technologies were being implemented 
through VOs for a number of reas ons like lack of awareness of 
available technologies, inadequate capability of the VOs for the 
implementation of most technol ogies and  the unwillingness of 
voluntary organizations to undert ake implementation of new 
technologies. The review Committ ee further stated that they 
were informed that while the Department of Science and 
Technology had submitted 79 proj ects for the approval of the 
CAPART only 26 projects could be sanctioned by CAPART due 
to shortage of competence to scrutinize the project in  
CAPART. 
I.  Technology Research Centres  
 A programme of setting up of Technology Research 
Centres (TRCs) was initiated by CAPART under this scheme. 
These are Voluntary Organisations equipped with laboratory 
facilities and who have received annual grants from CAPART 
for development of appropriate technology and dissemination of 
the same through a network of small Voluntary Organisations 
within their area of operation. 
 During the course of ev idence a representative of 
CAPART informed the Committee as follows:- 
“…CAPART today has 22 Technology Research Centres 
which are excellent mother  NGOs and their mandate is 

basically to train new Vol untary Organisations in using 
technology and how they w ill introduce technology 
whereby  people can have a be tter livelihood and better 
running capacity”. 
 
 While going through the report of the Review Committee 
the Committee observed that the target of CAPART is to set up 
at least one Technology Researc h Centre in every State and at 
the rate of  5 TRCs every year, eventually about 100 TRCs all 
over the country. 
 The DG, CAPART, stated during the course of oral 
evidence  as under:- 
“…CAPART is trying to function through these 
organizations, supporting their workshops and training 
programmes of these 22 T RCs that we have, the 
Planning Commission has asked us to increase this. They 
say that it is not just enough.  But we are not picking them 
up in a hurry. We need to be very sure that the 
organisation merits selection by CAPART.” 
 
Commenting on TRCs, the DG, CAPART stated during  
evidence  that they have recent ly entered into a MoU with IIT, 
Delhi. The Council of Scientific  and Industrial Research and the 
Department of Bio Technology have up scaled these existing 
technologies and designs giving a further fillip to rural 
development efforts and wide dissemination of approved 
technology. The idea is that these institutions are highly 
specialized institutions in some technologies. 
The DG, CAPART also stated that CAPART is  in the  
process of entering into a MoU with some institutions like the 
National Institute of Designs, IIT, Khadagpur and ICAR, etc. to 

further help them in upgradi ng the technologies and 
dissemination thereof. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
A.  Voluntary Organisations (VOs) 
Formal  voluntary  effort is a relatively  new concept in our 
country  and was officially ac cepted as an instrument of 
development in the 1980s and  em bodied in the Seventh Five 
Year Plan document. CAPART became a major funding agency  
for voluntary organisations associated with rural development. 
VOs which have been registered under the Societies 
Registration Act or Indian Trust Act or Religious and Charitable 
Trust Act are eligible for CAPART support. Any of the VOs 
falling under the above categories and having 3 years 
registration and audited accounts can submit project proposals 
directly to CAPART as per the scheme guidelines. In case of 
first timer VOs to CAPART, they are required to approach the 
respective RC office. If the projec t proposal is found as per the 
norms and guidelines, it is got appraised before according 
sanction. The RC/NSC sanctions the proposal. Release of 
funds is generally done in installments. Second and subsequent 
installments are released after mid-term evaluation and final 
evaluation is conducted after completion of the project. 
Minimum requirements of VOs to apply for a CAPART 
Project are :- 

1. Be registered under the Societies’ Registration Act, 1860 
or a State  Amendment thereof, the Indian Trust Act, 1882 
or the Religious’ and Charitable Institutions Registration 
Act, 1920. 
2. Have a bank or post office account for the last three 
years. 
3. Be working with beneficiaries in rural areas. 
4. Have a proven track record of working with peoples’ 
participation.  VOs with limited experience must first apply 
to the RCs for a project of less than Rs. 10 lakh. 
5. Not have been put on the list of organizations under 
funding restrictions. 
6. Not have more than three o ngoing projects with CAPART. 
Regarding norms for selecting VOs and mechanism 
available with CAPART for verifying the authenticity of 
voluntary organizations, Ministry of Rural Development in a 
note furnished to the Committee  stated as under:- 
 
“The genuineness, capability, credibility and element  of 
people’s participation of the VO are ensured by CAPART 
through verification of the necessary documents, previous 
record and pre-funding evaluation by an independent 
monitor before sanctioning any project. 
 
When the Committee asked as to how it is ensured that 
people’s participation is there in  the projects chosen for 
providing support by CAPART, Ministry in their note furnished 
to the Committee  stated as under:- 

“CAPART insists that the proposals submitted by the 
voluntary organizations are need based and are prepared 
in consultation with the tar get groups for whom these are 
prepared.  The fact  whether the people’s participation is 
there in the projects chosen by the voluntary 
organizations is verified by  CAPART through the project 
evaluators who are deputed for  conducting pre-funding 
appraisal before these are sanctioned.  These project 
evaluators interact with the target group/beneficiaries and 
find out whether the project is  prepared in consultation 
with them and to what  extent they have been 
participating in the implementation of the programme.  
Apart from this there is an element of people’s 
participation by way of contribution to the cost of the 
project either in the shape of cash or kind i.e., by 
contributing their labour in the implementation of the 
project.” 
 
When the Committee asked about the reasons for 
decrease in the number of voluntary organizations supported 
over a period of time,  Ministry in their post evidence reply  
stated as under:- 
“Earlier VOs felt that once the minimum conditions are 
fulfilled, assistance from CA PART could be claimed as a 
matter of right. Consequently, mushrooming of VOs has 
taken place in various parts of the country and there are 
instances of misutilisation of funds and evidence of an 
unhealthy trend of emergence of contractor type VOs with 
the sole objective of taking up physical work and little 
concern for promoting community and social effort. In 
order to rectify the trends e ffectively and remove other 
imbalances, only VOs with proven track record in 
mobilizing people’s participati on, particularly the rural 
poor and other weaker sectio ns of the society and 
capable of developing appropri ate rural technology and 

serving as agents of change now qualify for CAPART’ 
assistance. Accordingly CAPART has modified the 
guidelines. There has been a shift from achieving 
financial and physical target s to sustainability and 
capacity building in rural a reas and implementation of 
innovative and integrated projects and in development 
and dissemination of appropriat e rural technology. This 
shift in the procedure is the reason for decrease in the 
number of organizations support ed by CAPART over a 
period of time.” 
 
In their post evidence reply furnished to the Committee,  
Ministry of Rural Development stated that till October, 2004, 
294 voluntary organizations w ere blacklisted and 1400 
voluntary organizations were put under Further Assistance 
Stopped Category. 
On being asked, the Direc tor General, CAPART stated 
during the course of oral evidence as under:- 
“The negative image which I am getting which most of 
you would also be aware of is the type of voluntary  
organizations which get into our net for assistance and do 
not do the job, but siphon the money.  What are we to do?  
We are clear that over a period of time the checks and 
balances which we have introduced will take care of that 
problem prima facie.  It is not that anybody would walk 
into CAPART’s office, get the money and go away.  The 
experience of the last few y ears has taught us that at 
every stage, we have to have checks and balances so 
that the valuable money of the Government given to the 
voluntary organisation or t he NGO organisation is not 
misused or mis-utilised or fri ttered away.  What are we 
doing?  We ensure that only well-qualified NGOs who 
satisfy the criteria that we have prescribed come and 

apply for assistance.  It they do not satisfy them, in the 
pre-funding stage itself, the application is rejected.  But 
nuance to this arrangement which I am thinking of is one 
of classifying NGOs, rating NGOs so that good NGOs 
come forward to get assistance and the ones which are 
doubtful do not even come and waste our time and we do 
not even, by mistake, come forward to assist them.  We 
want to ensure that. 
 
 The Second stage is, even if that organization is not 
at all to be doubt ed and the bonafides are correct, we 
would like to  ensure that t he projects they propose are 
the ones which fall within our framework.   For that 
purpose we do pre-funding de sk analysis or study.  Then 
only we take a decision whet her to fund it or not.  After 
the first stage funding is over we ensure there is a mid-
term study or appraisal by  another agency, not the 
agency which was involved in  pre-funding study or 
analysis.  Lastly, even after t he project is satisfactorily 
completed, we engage institutional monitors to give 
reports on the kind of work done as far as good NGOs or 
good action is concerned.  In  regard to those who have 
not utilized the money we do what is called stopping the 
fund, FAS, Further Assistance Stopped.  In regard to such 
categories if we notice ther e is a malafide action on their 
part, we want to ensure t hat cases are registered and 
authority’s assistance is sought for recovering the money.  
Right now the system that we have developed is, up to 
Rs. 25,000 or below if a particular NGO has not 
accounted for the money received, we ensure that by 
persuasion the amount is reco vered because the cost of 
litigation will be much more than Rs. 25,000.  But in  
regard to all other cases where the amount outstanding is 
above this limit, we ensure that strong action is taken with 
the help of the district authorities, police or other law 
enforcing agencies. 
 
The hon. Member of Parliament ’s suggestion that we do 
not involve or inform the Dist rict Magistrates or SDOs is 
valid in this context because any DM or SDO can take the 

plea that at the time of s anction they were not involved or 
informed what was the point in asking them to chase 
these very fellows about whose credentials they do not 
know anything.  We agree, Sir, that this is a kind of lacuna 
which we should plug.  But the outstandings are there and 
it is a matter of concern.  We want to see how these 
outstandings are reduced.  In this process we would like 
to see that the vigilance officer and his team at my 
disposal are all put to the maximum work to achieve this 
purpose.  I thought I may co ver these four areas and 
place them before you.” 
 
 During the course of oral evidence, the Committee asked  
about the action taken/initiated to  recover the money  from the 
defaulters voluntary organisati ons.  A representative of  
CAPART  stated as under:- 
“I admit that there are a large number of cases where due 
to black-listing the am ount stands un-re covered and 
unaccounted for.  The number of  such black-listed cases 
over a period of time is 294.  But with regard to cases 
where we have filed FIR for recovering the amount is 166.  
The hon. Member is correc t, where large sums are 
involved, we are very slow.  T hat is his point.  FIR lodging 
arrangement, technique or mechanism has been devised 
very recently.  Only since la st one year or so lodging FIR 
in order to recover the amount  has been introduced as a 
mechanism.  We will see to it that in these cases  not only  
FIRs stand filed but further follow up action is also taken 
by the police authorities by wa y of investigation, filing of 
charge sheet and placing before  the courts concerned.  
We will pursue the matter. 
 
 But in regard to these cases also, I noticed that in 
the last five or six years  the number of such non-
recoveries is coming down.  The cases of huge amount 
largely relate to the period before 1995.  I am not 
explaining away the situation.  Kindly do not 
misunderstand me. I only saw that with regard to these  

cases of past 1995, the kind of schemes and the type of 
framework within which CAPART functioned also perhaps 
helped in the kind of situation that we witness today. 
  
What was the situation?  We used to help a number 
of beneficiary oriented programmes based on individual 
cases.  So an amount was given to a number of  
beneficiaries in large numbers.  We have given the 
figures since 1995 or so.  A fter the policy guidelines were 
revised and specific schemes and categories of schemes 
which were entrusted for CA PART to be implemented.  
We noticed locking of funds, non-accounting of funds, 
non- recovery of funds is gr adually coming down.  I would 
like to assure the hon. Member and also the Ministry that 
we will do everything in our power to see that positive 
progress is made in bringing down these amounts which 
are outstanding and wherever we fail, we will see to it that 
the law takes its own course and we would also see to it 
that in future the kind of mechanism that we have is fully 
strengthened to see that only genuine and really genuine 
voluntary organizations receiv e our assistance and there 
is no misuse of government money.” 
 
The Committee observed that some times the Voluntary  
Organisations which have been put  under black listed category 
or payment stopped category, later submit project proposals 
using different names and regi stration numbers and asked 
Ministry as to what precauti onary measures have been taken  
or are proposed to be taken to check such practice.  The 
Ministry in a note furnished to the Committee stated as  
under:- 
“Generally, it is not feasible to find out whether a black 
listed organisation has  reapplied for funds with a different 
name and registration number an d as a precautionary 
measure, CAPART has stipulated that the photographs of 

the chief functionary and other executive members of the 
voluntary organisation are to  be supplied alongwith the 
project proposals.” 
  
During oral evidence, a representative of CAPART stated  
 
that there are 294 black listed organizations which have 
misappropriated  about Rs. 3 crore and Rs. 7 crore partly.  So 
the total misappropriation is a bout Rs. 10 crore.  For the 
recovery of the amount, CAPART has started  filing of FIRs 
against all the black listed organizations who have 
misappropriated more than Rs. 25,000. In total 166 FIRs have 
been filed by CAPART against 294 black listed voluntary 
organisations. A Statement giving state-wise list of blacklisted 
organisations and action taken against them is given in 
Annexure II. 
In this connection, the Dire ctor General, CAPART  stated 
as under:- 
 
“This system was introduced  only 4 years before.  Earlier 
people received money on t he goodwill and goodness.  
Then we realized that the goodness alone will not work 
and we will have to work di fferently.  We had started 
going through the prescribed la w as per the  Cr.PC 
(Criminal Penal Code) or whatever it is.  Now I noticed 
that we have been able to recover over the last few 
months alone Rs. 21.27 lakh from various places.  We will 
keep that pressure.  But it is f ar less.  It is not 10% of the 
total amount which is outsta nding.  An amount of Rs. 6 
crore and odd is outstanding.  There, we assure you and 
that  lead to a period prior to 1995.  So, the credentials of  
these societies are such that some might have 
disappeared  or dissolved.  But we are pursuing and will 
ensure that in the long run arm of  law catches them so 

that nobody can get away by misusing Government 
money and remain complacent.  We will ensure it. ” 
 
The Committee asked about the names of the officers  
who were responsible for sancti oning the funds to the black 
listed organizations and the acti on taken against those officers.  
CAPART in a statement furnished to the Committee  
stated that fifty officers we re involved and t he main charges 
were : 
1. Pre-mature black listing of VOs. 
2. Release of funds to black listed VOs. 
3. Identification of VO  and beneficiaries was not 
verified according to guidelines. 
4. No action was taken to close the projects. 
5. No action initiated to  call for the progress report. 
6. No follow-up which initiated to  call for monitor’s 
report. 
7. No action initiated to recover the money. 
8. Project approved before the voluntary organisation 
completed three years of registration. 
9. Did not check out whether the revolving fund is kept 
in the joint account of  CAPART and voluntary 
organisation. 
 
As regards action taken against the officers, a  
representative of CAPART stat ed that minor penalty of 
‘censure’ was imposed.  In some  cases, one or two increments 
were stopped and in some cases pen alty of reduction of pay by 

one or two stages and that  too for specified period of one or 
two years was imposed. 
 The Committee asked about t he reasons for leakage of 
funds and the steps taken by CAPART to arrest the leakage. 
Ministry of Rural Development  in a note furnished to the 
Committee stated as under:- 
“When there were no systems in  place for funding VOs, 
CAPART took up the role of a pioneer in the country.  
Prior to 1995, sanction of funds was made by individual 
officers and prior to 1997, it was not mandatory in 
CAPART to conduct pre-f unding appraisal before 
sanctioning the project and mid-term evaluation before 
the release of second and subsequent instalments. These 
were the reasons  for leak age of funds.  CAPART 
developed procedures/system s for examining and 
appraising the technical and fi nancial viability of projects 
proposed by the VOs on the basis of its past experience 
and after learning from the mist akes.  Further, in order to 
enhance transparency and dec entralization in the 
sanctioning of project, CAPART has set up Regional 
Committees for processing and sanctioning of project 
proposals up to a limit of Rs. 25 lakh.  It has set up 
National Standing Committees for each functional area, 
e.g. Watershed Developmen t, People’s Cooperation etc. 
for larger projects.  Both the RCs and NSCs comprise 
representatives from ex perienced VOs, eminent 
individuals, State RD Secretaries, etc. This methodology 
to promote group evaluation as projects are appraised, 
sanctioned and evaluated essentially by people from the 
voluntary sector with CAPART officials in the supporting 
role as catalysts.  CAPART has also set up panel of 
expert project evaluators, spread through the country for 
field evaluation of projects .  It has been made mandatory 
to conduct mid-term eval uation before releasing the 
second instalment and post evaluation after the 
completion of the project.  These systems have proved 
helpful in arresting the leakage of  funds to a great extent.  

Wrong reporting by independent   monitors about the 
credibility of the VO a nd implementation of the 
programmes also led to leakage of  funds in some cases.  
In order to avoid these instanc es, it has been decided to 
put more emphasis on empanelment of institutional 
monitors.” 
 
Asked as to how it is ensur ed that the proposals of the 
VOs are genuine, Ministry of Rural  Development in their post 
evidence reply furnished to the Committee stated as under:- 
“CAPART has a system of getting the credibility of the VO 
and its office bearers verified through field evaluation by 
the independent monitors bef ore the project proposal is 
approved by the sanctioning  committee.  Further, the 
representatives of the vol untary organizations of the 
region who are on CAPART’s different sanctioning 
committees also give their opinion about the credibility 
and capacity of the voluntary o rganizations.  In so far as 
the genuineness of the proposals are concerned, the 
evaluators interact with the target group (benef iciaries) of 
the project and the local people, panchayat, etc. to ensure 
the genuineness and need of the project.” 
 
B. Monitoring and Evaluation 
Quality of projects implemented depends upon close 
monitoring and timely  mid course corrective measures. In order 
to ensure that the objective of the projects have been achieved, 
CAPART is following a three-tier system of monitoring in each 
project proposals as follows:- 
Pre-funding Appraisal : After Desk appraisal and before 
consideration/sanction of the project proposal. 

Mid-term evaluation  : Before release of second and 
subsequent instalments of fund, and 
Post Evaluation  : After receipt of completion report, 
audited statement of accounts and Utilisation Certificate. 
However as per policy guidelines, CAPART has made it 
mandatory to conduct Impact Assessment Studies for all 
cases where voluntary organi zations have been given 
assistance of more than Rs. 1.00 crore in a period of 4 
years or Rs. 50 lakh for a single project. 
Asked about the criteria followed  for selection and 
empanelment of Project Evaluators  and Institutional Monitors 
by CAPART for evaluation and moni toring of projects, Ministry 
of Rural Development in their post evidence reply stated as 
under:-  
“CAPART is having system of empanelling Institutes of 
repute as well as Educational  and Research Institutions 
working in the Rural Sector, as institutional Monitors in 
order to utilise the expert manpower available in various 
fields for effective implementation of the projects funded 
by CAPART. It includes Support Voluntary Organisations 
(SVOs) working under CAPART.” 
 
(i) Institutional Monitors 
 
There are 38 institutions empanelled for monitoring work. 
 
The basic guidelines for empanelment of Institutional Monitors 
are as follows: 
 
1. The Institution/Organisation should be a National level  

Institute/Organisation of repute. 
 
2. The Institute/Organisation should have worked in rural 
sector for at least three years, Institutes of Rural 
Management, Social Sciences, any other field/s which 
may be relevant to the rural sector. 
 
3. The Institute/Organisation should have expertise in 
specific rural, technical or social sector. 
 
4. An SVO/TRC of CAPART. 
 
Apart from the above general gu idelines all individuals of 
the Institutes who wish to be empanelled as institutional 
monitors are required to fulfill the eligibility conditions as laid 
down for empanelment of FCEs of CAPART. 
 
 
(ii) Procedure of Empanelment of Monitors/FCEs: 
 
Every person who wishes to be empanelled in the 
CAPART panel of Facilitator-cu m-Evaluators(FCE) has to 
submit the bio-data  (duplicate) in a prescribed form through the 
respective Member Convenors of  Regional Committees of the 
concerned States. The credentia ls of the persons are reviewed 
by the Empanelment Committee, which thereafter decides 
about Empanelment. Anyone who wishes to be empanelled as 
an FCE should fulfill the following minimum eligibility criteria 
namely : 
 
1. Should be at least 30 years and not more than 65  
years of age. 
2. Should be at least a graduate from a recognised 
university. 
3. Should have relevant experi ence in rural development 
sector. 
4. Should be willing to take  up any type of assignment 
entrusted to him. 
5. Should not have a past criminal record. 
 

However mere fulfillment of the above eligibility criteria 
does not entitle a candidate to be empanelled. The 
Empanelment Committee takes the final decision of 
empanelment and the decision of the Committee is final unless 
otherwise stated by the Committee. 
 
The performance of each FCE is  reviewed from time to 
time, and he can be de-listed even before the completion of the 
term of three years if his performance is not found satisfactory. 
 
In the  Tata   Consul tancy Report (CAPART-VO-
Interaction-VOs’ Standpoint), it has been observed :- 
“Improper selection of monitors and corrupt practices 
associated with them are the most common  problems faced by 
the VOs……..” 
 
In a reply furnished to the Committee, Ministry of Rural 
Development also stated as under:- 
“CAPART has no system of overall evaluation of the 
programme and overall assessment of villages and 
beneficiaries required to be assisted.  However, the 
beneficiaries required to be assisted in a particular village 
are assessed by the NGO in  consultation with the 
Panchayats and Block Developm ent Officers.  Regarding  
the evaluation of the programme, each project is evaluated 
on a four tier basis i.e., before sanction, mid-term appraisal 
and after  completion by the independent monitors apart 
from the evaluation at desk level in the office.” 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
A.  Marketing 
Ministry of Rural Development and CAPART direct major 
part of their efforts towards  income generation activities 
through  production of marketable goods in rural areas. To 
provide these goods marketing outlets and to make their 
presence felt in urban markets, marketing division of CAPART 
decided to give this work of rural artisans distinct identity under 
the name of “Gram Shree”. Gram  Shree which literally means  
‘wealth of villages’ provides an oppor tunity to rural producers to 
sell their products directly in major markets, to interact with the 
buyers, to study and comprehend the latter’s tastes, 
preferences and choices. Thus, it  helps them to upgrade and 
adjust their products and marketing skills and provide a better 
service to the consumer wh ile benefiting from a larger 
marketing opportunity. 
CAPART Hqs. organises Gram Shree Melas in the State 
capitals. All the Regional Commi ttees of CAPART organise the 
Gram Shree Melas at regional levels thus providing an 
extension to the work being carried on by the Hqs. Regional 
Committees organize Melas for the CAPART Supporting 
Voluntary Organisations (CSVOs) at a small level promoting the 
rural products brought by the CSVOs. CAPART has so far 
organised 150 Melas. 

The Council also organizes a large exhibition, ‘SARAS’ 
during the India International T rade Fair in Pragati  Maidan 
every year for promoting produ cts of the rural poor produced 
under the income generation schemes of the Ministry of Rural  
Development and CAPART.  M ore than 1000 producers from 
all the  States and Union Territories of India participate in the 
exhibition.   SARAS results in not only direct sale of rural 
products but also in firm orders  from various buyers including 
exporters. CAPART organised four exhibitions of SARAS so 
far. 
CAPART also participates in the International events. The 
main objectives of participation in the international fairs is to 
provide exposure at the international level to the products made 
by the rural artisans presently produced under the “Swarn 
Jayanti Swarojgar Yojana” ke eping in mind the success 
experienced after holding ‘SARAS ’ exhibitions at IITF, Pragati 
Maidan. CAPART participated in 3 International fairs so far. 
In addition to the  above, CAPART also participates in the 
exhibitions organised by others lik e Swadeshi Melas, etc, in 
which rural producers are depute d to exhibit and sell their 
products. 
On asking as to how many Gram Shree Melas were 
organised by CAPART in each of the last five years and that 
amount spent  on such melas, CAPART furnished the following 
statement:- 
 
 

 
        ( R s .  i n  l a k h s )  
Year No. of 
Melas 
Locations Total 
Expenses 
Total Sales Sales per 
Mela 
1998 16 Pune, Hyderabad, 
Calcutta,  Guwahati, 
Udaipur, Jamshedpur, 
Bhubaneshwar, Gangtok, 
Tirupati, Manali, Laddakh, 
Hyderabad, Shimla, New 
Delhi, Jammu, Bombay 
99.33 489 30.56 
1999 10 Ludhiana, Jaisalmer, 
Lucknow, Jamshedpur, 
Guwahati, Sibsagar, 
Mandi, Vijayawada, 
Punchkola, Ooty 
90.91 235.02 23.50 
2000 6 Trivandrum, Mandi, 
Guntoor, Jamshedpur, 
Amritsar, Keylong 
32.26 161 26.83 
2001 6 Bangalore, Gangtok, 
Warrangal, Leh, Mumbai, 
Guwahati 
50.56 128.00 21.33 
2002 4 Mumabi, Chennai, 
Ahmedabad, Guwahati 
33.27 116.0 29.0 
During the course of oral evidence the Committee asked 
CAPART about the criteria for holding Gram Shree Melas and 
the efforts being made to ensure that these Melas are held in 
different parts of every state to  help the rural artisans. The 
Ministry  in a note furnished to the Committee stated as 
follows:- 
“Gram Shree Melas are organi sed by CAPART in 
different parts of the coun try throughout the year at 
national level, state level and rural areas. CAPART Head 
Office organizes about twelve  melas each in State 
Capitals. All the State capitals are covered in the course 
of time. Nine Regional Office s of CAPART organize three 
melas each under their respective jurisdiction in places 
other then State capitals. It is ensured that CAPART 
Gram Shree Melas are  organised in different corners of 
India synchronizing with popular fairs and events of the 

regions to get an opportunity for the artisans to sell their 
rural produce through such exhi bitions in rural and urban 
areas. 
 
CAPART organize SARAS during IITF at Pragati 
Maidan, New Delhi in collaboration with Ministry of Rural 
Development. SARAS was awarded “Gold Medal” by 
ITPO for the  best display during IITF in the year 2001-
2002. 
 
Keeping in view the starvation deaths and lack of 
marketing opportunities for the handloom producers of 
AP, CAPART organised a theme Mela of handloom in 
Warangal   for these producers. 
 
After the devastating earthquake of Gujarat, as a 
result of which artisans were reduced to  penury, the 
Division supported Rural Enterprise Summit organised by 
CII at Ahmedabad to assist the artisans to sell their 
crafts.” 
 
In the post evidence reply furnished to the Committee, 
Ministry of Rural Developm ent (Department of Rural 
Development)  stated as under:- 
“It is desirable to establish stall/outlets in major cities on 
permanent basis to provide continuous marketing support 
to facilitate rural producers to  market their produce. So 
far, CAPART has not estab lished any such permanent 
establishments/centres in cities /towns for facilitating such 
an endeavor. However, such provision is being thought of 
and the Council is planning on this aspect for 
incorporating permanent rural marketing outlets in urban 
locations. The Council would seek the advice of its newly 
constituted Marketing Advisory  Committee in this regard, 
during its next meeting for provid ing further in/outs on this 
aspect and the modus o perandi to be adopted  by 
CAPART towards establishing and maintaining such rural 
marketing outlets in urban destinations.” 

  
During the course of evidence  the Committee enquired 
from CAPART as to what steps  have been taken to ensure that 
talented rural artisans are not d eprived of the opportunity to 
participate in such Melas.  Mini stry stated  in their post 
evidence reply as under:- 
“New participants are bei ng offered the opportunity 
to participate in melas/exhibitions, for ensuring 
support to the needy and the poor rural artisans. 
CAPART has a norm of including one-third new 
participants in every mela and exhibition.” 
 
B.  Publicity and Media 
 
The Media Division of CAPART was set up to meet the  
information needs of both voluntary organizations and in-house 
requirements of the Headquarters and the Regional 
Committees. The Media Division of CAPART functions primarily 
as a support division for dissemination of information about 
CAPART to the grass root voluntary organisations. 
When asked  about the steps taken by Ministry to  
publicize its projects and programmes among voluntary 
organizations, local bodies, people’s representatives and the 
general public, CAPART in a note furnished to the Committee 
stated that the following step s have been taken by the Council 
to publicize its projects and programmes among voluntary 
organizations, local bodies, people’s representatives and the 
general public :- 
 

1.   Print Media: 
A bi-monthly Newsletter (Eng lish-Hindi) is published by 
CAPART, which provides coverage of various happenings in 
Regional Centres and Headquarters(D elhi). The Council also 
publishes a quarterly magazine-P eople’s Action, which is a 
forum for the voluntary sector. Various issues on development-
related themes likes environment, people’s movement, 
education, etc are published. The magazine is presently 
circulated to over 3000 voluntary agencies in India. It is also 
widely circulated amongst policy makers and decision-makers. 
An electronic magazine ‘People’s Action.com’ has also 
been launched. 
 2.  Films: 
The    Council  has  produced   nearly 100  films  on  
successful  VO’s  and appropriate technology. Films are 
distributed to the VO’s at a nomi nal rate and a catalogue of film 
containing a brief synopsis of each film has also been 
developed. 
3.  Workshops, Seminars and Conferences: 
The Council sponsors VO’s to conduct workshops, 
seminars and conferences espe cially focusing on project 
formulation, capacity building and rural development schemes 
of Government. For example a workshop was conducted by the 
National Union of Journalists , on Development Journalism at 
Hissar in 2002. 
4.   Facilitation Centre: 

22 VO’s have been identified and designated to work as 
CAPART Facilitation Centres. They work in close collaboration 
with concerned RC’s and are responsible for conducting 
workshops, seminars in order to orient grassroot VO’s about 
CAPART schemes. 
5.   Vikalp Fellowship Programme: 
This is an effort to provide  exposure to the urban youths 
regarding problems in  rural areas an d functioning of VO’s. This 
exposure trip is sponsored by  Council every year for 40 
students (in a batch of 20 each) from remote areas. Last year it 
had proven to be  very successf ul with Seva Mandir, Udaipur 
hosting the programme for the students of Jharkhand. 
The present arrangement has, so far, proved to be very 
satisfactory one. CAPART felt  that in order to reach an ever-
wider audience, its Films should be aired on the Doordarshan. 
C.  Involvement of peoples representatives in the rural 
areas in the implementation of CAPART’s projects 
 
On the issue of transparency and accountability in CAPART, 
during the course of oral ev idence, the representatives of 
CAPART stated as under:- 
“We have taken some steps to ensure transparency and 
accountability in this organisation.  Different 
Parliamentary Committees from time to time have been 
giving us the benefit of their advice and guidance and 
based on those suggestions,  over the years, we have 
implemented these steps.  We  have started  endorsing a 
copy of the sanctioned projects to the  concerned MP and 
the MLA of the area to keep them in the picture so that 
they could also keep an eye on the projects being  
implemented in their areas in order to enable them to give 

the benefit of their guidance and experience in the matter.  
We also are endorsing a copy  to the concerned District 
Collector and the Panchayat.” 
 
The Director General, CAPART added as under:- 
 
“……….Now, what I propose to do is to see that not only 
the future projects but also the list of the projects 
sanctioned up-to-date is furn ished to the hon. Members, 
District Magistrates and the representatives of the area 
concerned.  As far as Members of Parliament are 
concerned, I would write a personal letter to them 
informing them with regard to the projects and areas 
where these things have been sanctioned.  In addition to 
this, in future, we will ensure that the copies of the 
sanction letters are endorsed to them. 
 
 There was a related point with regard to informing 
the District Magistrates or t he Sub-Divisional Officers and 
making them aware of the CAPART related projects.  
Since direct assistance  is  given to the voluntary 
organisations or NGOs by CAPART, a very legitimate 
point has been raised regarding some kind of a 
communication gap or lack of knowledge on the part of 
District Magistrates about the schemes being 
implemented by CAPART through them.  This is a lacuna 
which we hope to rectify by the communication 
arrangement which we will introduce.  At the same time, I 
would also like to assure the  hon. Members that, in 
future, we will ensure that the District Magistrates, the Zila 
Parishads, the Sabhapatis are fully kept informed about 
the various schemes and proj ects sanctioned in their 
respective areas by organizing meetings, interaction 
sessions, review  meetings with them.  A number of them 
are being planned in the coming months.  We will see 
that, in future, they are also actively involved.” 

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
  
1.  The Council for Advancement of People’s Action and 
Rural Technology (CAPART) was established in 1986 by 
merging two organisations in  existence at that time, viz. 
The People’s Action in Development (India) (PADI) and the 
Council for Advancement of Rural Technology (CART).  
The main aims and objects of the Council are : to 
encourage, promote and assist voluntary action in the 
implementation of projects for the enhancement of rural 
prosperity; to strengthen and promote voluntary efforts in 
rural development with the focus on  injecting new 
technological inputs in this behalf; and to act as the 
national nodal point for the coordination of all efforts at the 
generation and dissemination of technologies  relevant to 
rural development in its wider  sense.  At a point of time 
when formal voluntary effort was a relatively new concept 
in the country, CAPART took up the role of a pioneer in 
funding voluntary organisations for sustainable 
development in the rural areas.   The Council works with 
Voluntary Organisations (VOs) with the objective of 
achieving people’s  participation, empowerment and social 
mobilisation through various acti vities.   In a period of 
almost two decades since its inception, CAPART has 
become one of the major funding  agencies for the 
voluntary sector in the field of  rural development and has 
supported around 12000 voluntary organisations in the 

country involving an amount of  about Rs. 783 crore.  After 
going into the functioning of CAPART, the Committee are 
of the view that there is su fficient scope for improvement 
in several spheres of working of the Council.  These 
aspects have been dealt with  by  the Committee in detail in 
the subsequent paragraphs of the Report. 
 
2. CAPART was established in 1986 as a sequel to the 
thinking prevalent  in  the c ountry at that time regarding 
the role and contribution  that the voluntary sector could 
make in the field of social a nd rural development and the  
need for a facilitation instituti on and environment for this 
purpose.  This was also envisaged in the 7 th Five Year Plan 
Document (1985-90) which emphasised that voluntary 
agencies could supplement Go vernment efforts with the 
added advantage of being flexible and better placed to 
mobilise  and organise the poor.  They could activate the 
delivery system at the grass roots level to respond to the  
felt needs and be the eyes and ears of the people at the 
village level.  Further they  could mobilise financial 
resources from within the community and train cadres of 
grass roots level functionaries to promote professionalised 
voluntarism.  According to the Committee, the rationale  for 
setting up CAPART would be ju stified only if the services 
provided by the Council m ake a conceptual and qualitative 
difference from what was thus far being done by the 
Government agencies and cont ractors and encourage and 

promote voluntary action in rural development.  The 
Committee are not  satisfied with the impact that CAPART  
has been able to make in  providing appropriate 
technologies and inputs in rural development programmes 
for  eradication of rural pover ty. Having gone into the 
working of CAPART, the Comm ittee are of the view that  
there is an urgent need for the Government to review the 
overall functioning of CAPA RT and restructure the 
organisation in such a manner th at it fulfills its aims and 
objectives purposefully. The functioning of CAPART needs 
to be reviewed keeping in view the mandate given to it to 
encourage, promote and assist voluntary action in rural 
development with particular emphasis on persons   below 
poverty line (BPL), Scheduled  Castes, Scheduled Tribes 
and other disadvantaged groups of the society.  The 
Committee expect the Gover nment to set up a High 
Powered Committee to review  the working of CAPART, 
take prompt corrective measures to regulate its functioning 
and apprise them of the follow up action taken thereon. 
 
3. According to CAPART, the special focus of the 
Council is on the backward regions and chronically 
drought prone, inaccessible and far off areas.   However, 
the Committee are deeply concerned to note that there has 
been considerable decline in the number of Below Poverty 
Line (BPL) beneficiaries of  CAPART schemes over the 
years.  From 4,49,158 BPL beneficiaries in 1998-99 the 

number went down to 31 ,520 in 1999-2000,  1,00,895 in 
2000-01 and 1,39,491 in 2001-02  and 3,28,218  in 2002-03 
(which includes cumulative number of BPL beneficiaries 
for the schemes).  The con tention of CAPART that the 
decrease in the number of BP L beneficiaries is on account 
of a shift in its policy and  decrease in the number of 
straight  jacketed projects sanctioned to the voluntary 
organisations is not convincing.  The argument that the 
projects supported by CAPART follow area based 
approach and therefore, the number of BPL beneficiaries 
may increase or decrease de pending upon the population 
in the area covered also does not carry weight.  Another 
disturbing trend  that has co me to the notice of the 
Committee is the disproportion ate variation in the number 
of BPL beneficiaries from one  State to the other.  For 
instance, in West Bengal ther e were as many as 24,92,008 
BPL beneficiaries and in Andhra Pradesh 9,39,847 BPL 
beneficiaries, in Sikkim there were  125, in Andaman & 
Nicobar  280, in Meghalaya  540, etc. BPL beneficiaries  as 
on 5th October, 2004.  According to the Ministry there is no 
system of allocation of specific number of projects to a 
particular State.  As  per the existing procedure followed by 
CAPART, those States with more number of voluntary 
organisations will derive greater benefit from the schemes 
implemented by CAPART and other States will be deprived 
of the same.  However, CAPART  being the nodal agency to 
encourage, promote and assist voluntary action in rural 

development, the Committee ar e of the firm view that 
benefits of the Council should be available to all the 
regions in the country.  The imbalance needs to be rectified 
by adopting appropriate policy measures.    The Committee 
recommend that Ministry/CAPART should work out a 
formula to provide assistance to VOs to develop rural 
technology for the States in proportion to their rural 
population and incentives should be given to VOs to 
motivate them to work in th e rural areas of those States 
which have received lesser assistance from CAPART.  
They also express their anguish at the decline in the 
number of BPL beneficiaries  identified  by CAPART year 
after year and desire that all out  efforts should be made by 
CAPART to reach out to the maximum number of people 
Below Poverty Line. 
 
4.    The Committee note that so me of the main functions  
as conferred upon the General Body of CAPART by the 
Memorandum of Association/Rules include approval of  
Annual Budget of the Council,  considering the balance 
sheet and audited accounts of the previous year and  the 
Annual Report prepared by the Executive Committee.  The 
Committee note with concern that during the last five years 
only four meetings of the General Body were held on 
3.5.1999, 5.8.2000, 30.10 .2001 and 30.12.2003 and no 
meeting was held at all in the year 2002.  The Committee 
are distressed to  note that th e meetings of the  General 

Body are not  held regularly in spite of the provision that 
the General Body is expected to meet at least once in a 
year.  The Committee also note that meetings of the 
Executive Committee, Finance and Appointment 
Committee, National Standing Committees and Regional 
Committees are also not  held at regular intervals.  The 
reasons for such irregular meetings are stated to be the  
huge expenditure involved in  travel, want of adequate  
agenda and availability of a provision that  under 
Memorandum of Association/ Rules that  authorises the 
Chairman or the President of  the Council to approve in 
cases of an emergency any pr oject/proposal or any issue 
which can subsequently be r atified by the  Executive 
Committee and the General Body. The Committee do not 
agree with this view as they co nsider that  approval of the  
Annual Report, Annual Budget, etc. are substantive  issues 
which require approval of the wider body annually. The 
Committee have taken a  seri ous note of the  tendency 
prevalent in  CAPART to resort to frequent use of  
emergency provisions available in the  Memorandum of 
Association and Rules to get  projects/proposals  approved 
by the Chairman or the Presi dent and then later get it 
ratified by the Executive Committee or the General Body. 
The Committee recommend th at CAPART should not 
indulge in such practices and a provision be incorporated 
in the Memorandum of Associ ation/Rules in this regard.  
They also recommend that the Annual Report and Audited 

Accounts of CAPART should be la id in  Parliament in time 
in order to ensure  compliance  of administrative and 
financial accountability to the Legislature.  
 
5. The  Committee note that th e Review Committee  set 
up in 2002 had recommended th at considering the fact that 
programmes are being implemente d by  multiple agencies 
like State Governments, DRDAs, Panchayat Raj Institutions 
and others, better coordination and convergence of 
programmes should be achie ved through adequate 
representation of these agenci es in the Committees of 
CAPART.  The Committee are of the view that having 
representatives of State Governments, DRDAS, Panchayat 
Raj Institutions, etc. on the Committees of CAPART will go 
a long way in creating synergy for channelising funds for 
need based projects  and thus avoid duplication.  They 
desire that the proposal shou ld be considered seriously 
and the action taken thereon be intimated to the 
Committee. 
 
6. The non-official members  nominated  by the President  
of CAPART  to the General Body, etc. are drawn from 
NGOs, Experts and Instituti onal Heads.  The Committee 
feel that there are chances of undue favour being shown in 
sanctioning the projects of those VOs whose 
representatives are on CAPART’s Committees as 
Members.  They may take advanta ge of their membership 

to secure grants for their own organisations. The 
Committee also note that the Review Committee on 
restructuring of CAPART had recommended that no grants 
may be sought by member s serving on Committees of 
CAPART for NGOs with which they are associating in their 
official capacity till such ti me they are serving on the  
Committees. The Committee, th erefore, recommend that  a 
suitable mechanism be evo lved to implement the 
recommendations of the Review Committee.  
 
7.   The  Committee  note  that  there  are  nine   Regional  
Committees, namely (i) Ahmedabad covering Gujarat, 
Madhya Pradesh , Maharashtra, Daman and Diu, Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli and Chhatisgarh, (ii) Bhubneshwar covering 
West Bengal, Orissa and  Anda man and Nicobar Islands, 
(iii) Chandigarh covering Ha ryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu and Kashmir, Chandiga rh and Punjab, (iv) Jaipur 
covering Delhi and Rajasthan, (v) Guwahati covering all  
North Eastern States, (vi) Hyderabad covering Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and P ondicherry, (vii) Luchnow 
covering Uttar Pradesh and Uttr anchal (viii) Patna covering 
Bihar and Jharkhand and  (ix) Dharwad covering 
Karnataka, Kerala, Goa and Lakshadweep. The Committee 
have gathered an impression that the Regional Committees 
are not  sufficiently equipped  with the required manpower, 
etc. to discharge their responsi bilities effectively.  With the 
jurisdiction of Regional Committees extending to a number 

of States,  the representatives of VOs  have to travel from 
distant places to pursue the project proposals.  Moreover, 
monitoring of the projects approved by Regional 
Committees  also becomes difficult.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Regional Committees should be 
strengthened with adequate manpower, delegation of 
powers, etc.  The possibility of establishing more Regional 
Offices should also be got examined.   The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the  
Ministry in this regard. 
 
8. The Committee are  constrained to note that although 
CAPART needs highly specialised personnel to carry on its 
operations, the Council has b een managing with the same 
set of personnel  available since 1986.  The shortage of 
qualified personnel at the Headquarters and Regional 
Offices seems to be a major constraint in further 
strengthening and consolidating the operations of 
CAPART.   There is need for deploying the services of 
professionals especially  to deal with matters like 
disability, water management and rural technology.  
Despite the prevailing restricti ons on new recruitment, a 
methodology should be worked out by which people with 
the required expertise are available with the Council for 
carrying on its operations effectivel y.  It is also found that 
there is no continuity in the post of Director General of 
CAPART as the incumbents h ave been changing after a 

period of one to three years.  There is a need to fix the 
tenure of  the Director Genera l for a  minimum period of 
three years in order to ensure continuity and for 
formulating  a long term vision for the Council.  The 
Committee expect the Gover nment to take appropriate 
measures in regard. 
 
9.  The Committee note that as on date the actual staff  
strength of  CAPART is 160 as against the sanctioned 
strength of 186.  There are as many as 26 positions  lying 
vacant, some of them for y ears together in a Council 
already crippled with shortage of qualified personnel.  As a 
result of shortage of manpower, not only have the 
operations at Headquarters of the Council  been affected, 
but also the impact is even  more severe in the Regional 
Offices.  It is intriguing to find that whereas on the one side 
CAPART is facing shortage of  qualified personnel, on the 
other side no sincere efforts seem to have been made to fill 
up the existing vacancies.  The Committee deprecate the 
negligent attitude of the Go vernment and recommend that 
prompt action  be taken for filling up the existing vacancies 
in CAPART. 
 
10. The Committee note that a Review Committee under 
the chairmanship of the Secr etary, Department of Rural 
Development was set up  in  2002 to look into the 
functioning of CAPART.  The Committee had 

recommended that CAPART should operationalise its 
‘Vision Statement’  which specified strategies for achieving 
long, medium and short-ter m goals.  The Review 
Committee had felt that by pursuing those strategies, 
CAPART could come out of its image of being limited to a 
funding agency for voluntary organisations.  The Review 
Committee had also recommend ed that CAPART should 
undertake a detailed exercise to  identify those activities 
that are not already being addressed by other agencies or 
line departments to avoid o verlapping of activities and 
multiplicity of implementi ng agencies.  The Committee 
have gathered an impression that CAPART has not been 
able to keep pace with  the rapidly changing scenario in 
rural technology and development.  If this is  really so  
achieving the aims and objectives of the Council  will 
continue to remain a distant dream.  It is astonishing that 
even at a time when CAPART  is going to complete two 
decades of its existence, no long, medium and short-term 
goals have  been set by the Council to achieve its mandate.  
The Committee recommend that  CAPART should identify  
those areas of activities in keeping with its aims and 
objectives which are not being  undertaken by other 
agencies and formulate and orient its operations on the 
basis of the ‘Vision Statement’.  They also desire that the 
recommendations of the Review Committee  which have 
been accepted in principle by  the Government should be 

implemented expeditiously and the Committee be apprised 
of the same.  
 
11. CAPART    relies    for    funds   mainly     on    budget   
allocations from the Ministry of Rural Development and 
some amount made available by the Ministry of Agriculture 
and  foreign funding agencies.  Against the receipt of Rs. 
31.55 crore, Rs. 29.65 crore, Rs. 30 crore, Rs. 30 crore and 
Rs. 71.46 crore in th e years 1999-2000 to 2003-2004 
respectively, the actual expendi ture was Rs. 35.44 crore, 
Rs. 43.61 crore, Rs. 44.44 crore, Rs. 58.79 crore and Rs. 
67.83 crore.  It is surprising to see the  wide variations in 
receipt and actual expenditure by CAPART.  It is stated that 
the excess amount spent during 1999-2000 to 2002-2003 
was met out of available funds of earlier years.  In 2003-
2004 the amount allocated has no t been fully utilised.  One 
of the reasons advanced for th e variations between receipt 
and expenditure is that funds are released by CAPART 
depending on the progress in the projects for which the 
amounts are sanctioned.  The Committee also note that 
Voluntary Organisations do not furnish Utilisation 
Certificates in time.  For instance, although the actual 
expenditure in 2002-2003 was Rs.  58.72 crore and in 2003-
2004 Rs. 67.83 crore, CAPART  received Utilisation 
Certificates for only  Rs. 10.03 crore during the year  2003-
2004.  The situation, to  say the least, is very alarming.  The 
Committee are deeply concerned about the wide variations 

in  receipt and  expenditure and under-utilisation of funds 
in the previous years.  As project proposals and 
projections for budget are drawn up well in advance, 
effective planning, implementation and monitoring of 
projects and programmes should  be ensured by CAPART 
so that it is able to make optimum  use of allocations 
received annually .  Furnishing of Utilisation Certificates by 
the Voluntary Organisations  within the time-frame should 
be  made mandatory and its compliance monitored  
scrupulously. 
 
12. Upto  1998-99,  CAPART  had  taken   up a   number of  
schemes for implementation, vi z. Central Rural Sanitation 
Programme (CRSP), Organisati on of Beneficiaries (OB), 
Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas 
(DWCRA), Appropriate Rural Technology (ARTs),  Public 
Cooperation (PC), Integrated Rural Development 
Programme (IRDP), Panchay ati Raj, Social Forestry, 
Watershed, Disability and  Media.  From 1999-2000 the 
major schemes supported by CAPART are PC, ARTs, OB, 
Watershed and Disability.  The reason for discontinuing 
some of the schemes  w as the less than expected  
participation of the people  in the implementation of 
straight jacketed schemes.  Besides other factors, there 
was also duplication in the implementation of programmes 
as many of the programmes we re also being implemented 
by the State Governments.  A ccording to CAPART under 

the present schemes, they entertain project proposals 
directly  from the Voluntar y Organisations without any 
interference. 
 
13. Public Cooperation (PC) Sc heme is one of the oldest 
schemes of CAPART which had its focus on income and 
employment generation for the  weaker sections, 
especially the disadvantaged  strata like SCs, STs, OBCs,  
differently abled, women, etc.  In 1998-99 it was decided 
that PC scheme  will be so designed as to make it  
participatory with focus on harnessing the collective 
energies of the  stake holders with an empowerment 
perspective thereby making PC as a process oriented 
programme as against a stereotyped and target-oriented 
one.  CAPART funded 94 voluntary organisations under PC 
Scheme in the last five year s and the total number of 
projects was 98.  Out of the total amount of Rs. 
16,26,43,061 sanctioned under the  scheme only an amount 
of Rs. 8,68,50,328 was released .  Another astonishing fact 
that has emerged is that out of 94 voluntary organisations  
funded  under the scheme, 44 have been put under 
Assistance Stopped/Black Listed Category  during the last 
five years.  The Committee are very unhappy about the 
implementation of PC, which w as  one of the most sought 
after schemes of CAPART.  The  figures showing variation 
in sanction and release of funds, the number of voluntary 
organisations put under Assistance Stopped/Black Listed 

Category, etc. are  glaring examples of the state of affairs 
in CAPART in the implemen tation of  important schemes.  
The Committee cannot but express their displeasure about 
the implementation of PC Sc heme.  They recommend that 
only voluntary organisations with proven record and social  
engineering skills should be engaged by CAPART.  The 
Committee also desire that only projects of innovative and 
integrated nature which  lead  to creativity and capacity 
building of the rural community  should be identified and 
assisted under the PC scheme.  Steps should also be taken 
to make the maximum utilisati on of the funds sanctioned 
under the scheme. 
 
14. Organisation of Beneficiaries(OB) is a funding 
scheme of CAPART  wher eby BPL categor y and other 
disadvantaged strata of the rural areas are made aware of 
their economic and political rights enabling them to 
become empowered citizens of  the country.  The project 
proposals submitted by VOs are sanctioned by CAPART 
after conducting  desk appraisals of the projects.  From the 
year-wise list of beneficiaries of OB Scheme furnished by 
CAPART, it is seen that out of a total number of 2,11,423 
beneficiaries  in the years from 1999-2000 to 5
th November, 
2004, only 8,937 are BPL category, 78 disabled, 24,620 from 
SC and  13,740 from ST cate gory.  From the data one 
gathers an impression that the Scheme has failed to 
provide benefit to the targ eted  groups such as BPL 

category and other disadvantaged strata of the rural areas.  
While expressing their displeasure  regarding the failure  of 
CAPART in the implementation of the Scheme, the 
Committee desire that it should make conscientious efforts 
to identify and cover the targeted groups under OB 
Scheme.   
 
15. Another scheme, Watershed  Development, is one of 
the flagship programmes of CAPART for creating water 
and food security,  developing wasteland and achieving 
ecological development, environmental protection 
combined with income and employment generation locally.  
So far an amount of Rs. 43.76 crore has been sanctioned 
for 440 projects, of which 240 ar e ongoing projects.  It is 
expected that 2.17 lakh hectares  of land will be treated in 
the next four to five years th rough the implementation of 
these projects.  Accordin g to the Committee the 
performance of Watershed Development Programme which 
was started in 1995-96 has been quite tardy and 
unimpressive.  The ongoing ma intenance of areas treated 
under Watershed Development Programme also does not 
seem to have been ensured.  The Committee desire that 
Ministry should review the implementation  of  Watershed 
Development Programme and issue necessary directions 
for the  proper implementation of the projects so as to help 
in promoting sustainable economic development of the 
rural community. 

 
16. Support Voluntary Organisations (SVOs) play an 
important role in impl ementing the Watershed 
Development Projects through promotional efforts which 
help to identify promising partners for CAPART.  The SVOs 
also monitor and evaluate the credentials of voluntary 
organisations and support vo luntary organisations in  
preparation and implementation of action plan in 
Watershed Development Projects.  The Committee note 
that  only seven such mother SVOs have been identified so 
far in the country.  CAPART’s National Standing Committee 
on Watershed and Water R esource Management had 
constituted a Committee on 28 th November, 2003 for 
selection of new SVOs.  The Committee expect CAPART to 
expedite the matter and identi fy more mother  SVOs for 
effective implementation of  Watershed Development 
Programme. 
 
17. The Committee  note that the Young Professionals 
 (YP)   Scheme was introdu ced in 1988 with a view to 
inducting  professionalism and building capacity among 
the organisations working in the field of rural development.  
The process  of selection of  60 young professionals  is 
done through campus intervi ews in a number of   
institutions.  After training,  they are placed with NGOs/VOs 
for three years.  Thereafter  interested YPs are given grant 
of upto Rs. 5 lakh to set up Vo luntary Organisation.  While 

appreciating the scheme, the Committee recommend that 
more and more YPs should be encouraged to set up VOs in 
unreached rural areas so th at the services of voluntary 
organisations are available to all  regions of the country. 
 
18. The Committee note that Disability Action Division  
(DAD) was set up in CAPART in the year 1995. Though  
India was the first country in South Asia to sign the 
Proclamation of  Full Particip ation and Equality of People 
with Disabilities in Asia and Pacific  Region at the inception 
of the Asia and Pacific Decade of Disabled Persons 1993-
2002,   much is required to be done for the upliftment of 
people with disabilities, th at range from 4% to 10%, 
especially in rural areas.  The Committee are distressed to 
note that during the Decade, CAPART could support only 
129 projects and  an amount of Rs. 4,93,68,796 only was 
released out of the total sanctioned amount of  Rs. 
7,08,99,464.  The Committee recommend that CAPART 
should make concerted  efforts to implement the Disability 
Action Scheme in letter and spirit.    More and more VOs 
which have experience in disability development 
programmes should be encouraged to come forward for 
the upliftment/rehabilitation of  extremely vulnerable 
people with disability in rural areas. 
 
19. The key mandate of CAPA RT with respect to rural 
development is to promote innovative rural technologies in 

the villages, especially t hose catering to disadvantaged 
sections of the society.  According to the Review 
Committee Report although the Department of Science had 
presented 79 projects developed through a process of 
intensive field studies for the approval of CAPART, only 26 
projects could be sanctione d by CAPART due to non 
availability of expertise in  CAPART to scruitinise the 
projects.  It is also seen th at despite maintaining a data 
bank of 74 listed technologies  for rural areas, CAPART has 
covered only 33 rural technologies and sanctioned 1933 
projects with an assistance of Rs. 96.13 crore.  The 
Committee are quite disappointed with the performance of 
CAPART in the area of Advan cement of Rural Technology 
Schemes and recommend that the Rural Technology 
Division be further strengthe ned and qualified personnel 
with adequate experience  be inducted immediately for 
timely and expeditious appraisal and advancement of 
technology and related projects. 
 
20. CAPART provides annual grant to Technology 
Research Centres (TRCs), which are VOs equipped with 
laboratory facilities  for development of appropriate 
technology and dissemination of the  same through a 
network of small VOs within  their areas of operation.  
Presently, there are 22 TRCs  set up in the country.  
According to the Review Comm ittee  set up to go into the 
functioning of CAPART, its objective is to set up at least 

one TRC  in every State at the ra te of five TRCs every year.  
The goal set for the future  by  the Review Committee is to 
set up a TRC in every district.  The Planning Commission 
has also recommended that the number of TRCs should be 
increased.  On the other hand it  is surprising to note that  
the Review Committee had  found out that only 13 TRCs 
were functional.  From the data available with the 
Committee, it is quite evident that neither  are all the 22 
TRCs fully functional nor is  the target of setting up 5 new 
TRCs every year being met.  Ho wever, it is encouraging to 
note that CAPART is  now stated to be entering into MoU 
with IITs, ICAR, National Institute of Design,  etc. to further 
upgrade the technologies and designs and help their 
dissemination. The Committee stress that CAPART should 
achieve the target set  by the Review Committee for  
setting up new TRCs and take  immediate  steps to 
upgrade the functioning and  standards of the existing 
TRCs. 
 
21. CAPART has become a major funding agency for 
Voluntary Organisations   associated with rural 
development.  It is distressing to note that till October, 
2004, there were as many as 294 VOs which were 
blacklisted and 1400 VOs which we re placed under Further 
Assistance Stopped Category.  An  amount of Rs. 10 crore  
is outstanding for recovery by CAPART from such VOs.  
The system quite  recently d eveloped by CAPART is to 

recover from the VOs amount upto Rs. 25,000 by 
persuasion and to file FIR in case of amount exceeding 
this.   FIRs have been file d in respect of 166 cases.  The 
DG, CAPART conceded  that  most of the cases involving 
huge amounts relate to pre-1995  period.  The witness also 
admitted before the Committee : “Only since last one year 
or so lodging FIR in order to recover the amount  has been 
introduced as a mechanism”.  The Committee take very 
serious note of such an indiffer ent attitude on the part of 
Council in such serious matters.  It is quite evident that the 
process of recovery and filing of FIRs, etc. was set in 
motion only after the Committee took up the subject for 
examination.  The Committee place on record their 
displeasure for the inaction on the part of CAPART to 
initiate  action against the defaulting VOs and pursue 
recovery of the dues.  Even at th is stage it is essential  for 
CAPART to pursue earnestly each case so that the amount 
is actually recovered.  The  Committee also recommend 
that discretionary powers of the President/DG to sanction 
projects/write off the dues should be discontinued.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the follow up action 
taken in this regard and th e progress made by CAPART in 
the recovery of outstanding dues. 
 
22. Yet, another area of concern is the  rampant 
corruption which had been pr evalent in CAPART over the 
years that almost went unchecked.  It is surprising to note 

that about fifty officials  of CAPART  were found 
responsible for sanctioning the funds to the blacklisted 
organisations, but only minor penalty of censure was 
imposed in a number of cases.  In some cases, one or two 
increments were stopped and in some other  cases penalty 
of reduction of pay by one or  two stages and that too for 
specified period of one or two years was imposed.  The 
Committee deprecate such laxity on the part of CAPART  
that  tantamount to aiding and abetting malpractices  
among the  officials.  In the circumstances stated above, 
the Committee strongly recommend that  an in-depth and  
thorough  enquiry into the matter by a suitable agency, 
preferably outside CAPART/Mini stry, be initiated.  The 
rules and guidelines should be made more stringent to 
avoid recurrence of such instances in CAPART. It  should 
also take measures to  ensure  that only VOs with proven 
track record are chosen fo r future  projects.  The 
Committee would  await  the action taken in this regard. 
 
23. With a view to ensuri ng that the objectives of the 
projects are  achieved,  CAPART follows a three-tier 
system of monitoring of projects, viz. pre-funding approval, 
mid-term evaluation and pos t-evaluation.  Impact 
Assessment studies are also done in those cases where 
VOs have been given  assistance of more than Rs. 1 crore 
in a period of four years or Rs. 50 lakh for a single project.  
For this purpose, Project Evaluators and Institutional 

Monitors  are empanelled by  CAPART.  According to 
CAPART,  there are 38 institutions empanelled as 
Institutional Monitors and 590 individuals empanelled as 
Facilitators-cum-Evaluators. From  the  list of Evaluators 
furnished to the Committee, it is found that a number of 
them do not have  specific qualifications or relevant 
experience in rural  development .  It is not surprising that 
Tata Consultancy Report had pointed out that “improper 
selection of monitors and corrupt practices associated 
with them are the most common problems faced by the 
VOs”.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a Panel 
including  a representative from the Ministry  should be set 
up to review the entire list of  Institutional Monitors and 
Evaluators and retain only eligible institutions and 
individuals.  The procedure should be streamlined in such 
a manner as to eliminate any loo phole for corruption in the 
process of evaluation and monitoring of projects.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the follow-up 
action taken in this regard. 
 
24. With a view to providin g  marketing  outlets to the 
goods produced through income generation activities and 
to  make  their presence fel t in urban markets, CAPART 
Headquarters has been organising ‘Gram Shree Melas’ in 
different State Capitals and Regional Committees have 
been organising similar me las at regional levels.  The 
Council also organises the exhibition, called ‘SARAS’ 

during the India International Trad e Fair in Pragati Maidan.  
In addition to this, CAPART  has participated in three 
International Fairs.  The Committee stress that  it should be 
made mandatory during such melas that at least half of the 
entrants  should be new artisans  from the rural areas in 
order to ensure that talented new artisans are not deprived 
of the opportunity to market their products.  The 
Committee are also of the firm  view that an organisation 
like CAPART should set up, in a phased manner, a 
marketing complex like ‘Delhi Haat’ in the national capital  
and  permanent showrooms  similar to those of State 
Emporiums at  Baba Kharak Singh Marg, New Delhi at the 
State Capitals to provide ongoing marketing outlets and 
exposure to rural artisans.  This recommendation should 
be examined at the Ministry and CAPART levels and the 
decision taken be intimated to the Committee. 
 
25. With a view to publicising its projects and 
programmes among voluntary organisations,  local bodies, 
people’s representatives and the general public, the Media 
Division of CAPART has been publishing a bi-monthly 
newsletter and a quarterly magazine, ‘People’s Action’.  
Besides organising workshops, seminars, etc.,  the Council 
has also produced nearly 100 films on successful VOs and 
appropriate technology.  In orde r to ensure transparency 
and accountability of functioni ng of the Council, the 
Committee were informed th at steps are being taken to 

furnish to people’s represen tatives like MPs and MLAs  
information regarding  existing projects in their respective 
areas and also to endorse copies of sanction letters of  
projects in future so that th ey could also  follow up the 
projects in their respective constituencies.  To bridge the 
communication gap between CAPART and the local bodies 
it was also stated that steps would be taken to  keep DMs, 
SDMs, Zila Parishads, etc. informed about various 
schemes and projects being   undertaken in their 
respective areas through interaction  sessions. The 
Committee also desire that in formation regarding CAPART 
funded projects in each District should be furnished to the 
Vigilance and Monitoring Committee of the District. The 
Committee suggest that CAPART’s newsletter and 
magazine  be circulated  among people’s representatives 
and other agencies involved in   rural development.  Steps 
should be taken to promote the films produced by CAPART  
among VOs and the rural mass es. They also  trust that 
people’s representatives and local bodies will henceforth 
be kept informed about CAPART’s schemes and projects in 
their respective areas. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                        C. KUPPUSAMI, 
April     25, 2005                           Chairman, 
Vaisakha 5,1927(S)                   Committee on Estimates. 
 

 
Vacancy position as on 17.11.2004 
Sl. No.  Name of the post & pay Scale Vacancy 
Position 
                    Remarks 
1. Joint Director (12000-16500/-)    ONE (Vacant from 31.8.2000) Ministry of information and Tec h
provide JD on deputation basis. Reply is awaited. 
2. LIO                                          (Rs.10000-
325-15200/-) 
   ONE  (Vacant from 24.03.2000) Post is required to be filled up on p
working in the feeder grade is not yet eligible for the promotion
3. Chief Administrative Officer 
(Rs.10000-325-15200/-)    
   ONE (Vacant from 03.06.2004) Proposal to fill up the post is under pr
4. Dy. Director 
(Rs.10000-325-15200/-) 
   ONE (Vacant from 19.03.2004) Recommendations of DPC has been k
5. System Manager 
(Rs.10000-15200/-) 
   ONE (Vacant from 04-01-2001) Ministry of information and Tec h
provide SM on deputation basis. 
6. Assistant Director 
(Rs.8000-275-13500/-)  
   TWO (Vacant from 07.05.2003) Recommendation of DPC has been ke
7. Accounts Officer 
(Rs.7450-11500/-) 
   TWO (Vacant from 05.08.2000 & 01.04.2004) Against both the posts 
CA working on contact basis as there is no eligible candidates av
8. Programmer   
 (Rs.5500-175-9000/-)  
   ONE (Vacant from 11.09..2002) 
9. Research Assistant       (Rs.5500-175-
9000/-) 
   FOUR (Vacant from 22.12.2002) Two posts vacant since 9.7.2004) Ad
likely to  filled up shortly. 
10. Personal Assistant        (Rs.5500-175-
9000/-) 
   TWO (Vacant from 24.06.2002, 2.8.2002) Necessary Requisitions 
Exchange for nomination of suitable candidates. 
11. Accountant  
(Rs.4000-6000/-) 
   TWO (Vacant from 20.10.1998) Promotional post. However, a propos
the competent authority to adjust one UDC against the post aft e
who is presently working as DTP Operator-cum-Designer on de
12. Stenographer Gr. III 
(Rs.4000-6000) 
   TWO (Vacant from 1.8.2002) Posts advertised and applications h
nominations form the Employment Exchange. Selection pr o
shortly. 
13. Editor (Rs.8000-13500/-)    ONE (Vacant from 21.1.2004) Post of Editor has been advertised and 
14. LSC    (Rs.3050-4590/-)   THREE (Vacant from 09.2.1996) under surrender 
15. Technician (Rs.2550-3200)   ONE  (Vacant from 07.11.1995) 
16. Safaiwala   (Rs.2550-3200)   ONE  (Vacant from 4.4.1996) 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 STATEMENT SHOWING STATE-WISE LIST OF BLACK 
LISTED ORGANISATIONS AND ACTION TAKEN AGAINST THEM 
 

Andhra Pradesh 
 
 
S. 
No.  
VOs Name & Address File No.  Date Status 
1. Brighter Integrated Rural 
Development Society 1/180-4, Lal 
Bahadur Nagar, Dist. Anantapur, 
A.P. 
701-88/92-
ARWSP 
 03/03/94 The matter was reported to  
S.P. Dist. Anantapur on 
18/04/2000 
2. Velankhanni Social and Educational 
Society  
 
402-190/95-96-
552 CRSP 
04/08/2003 Letters sent to the VO in Feb 
2004 to SP, DC & action for 
lodging FIR initiated by RC 
 
3. Rural Awakening & Development 
Organization Sai Nagar, Dist. 
Anantapur, A.P. 
 
8.44(4C  -  
1440)/91 -TM 
31/01/95 Action has been taken by RC 
for filing FIR dated 8/4/2004 
4. Rural Education Agriculture & 
Community Health Society 16 – 3218 
A, Dharmavaram, Dist. Anantpur, 
A.P. 
 
701 – 7/93 – 
CRSP 
10/01/92 Action has been taken by RC 
for filing FIR dated 8/4/2004 
5. Talamarla Integrated Rural 
Development & Social Educational 
Society Talamaria, Sathya Sai Taluk, 
Dist. Anantapur, A.P. 
 
101 – 16/89 – 
IRDP 
13/10/2000 Action has been taken by RC 
for filing FIR dated 8/4/2004 
 
6. Young Evangelistic Society 12/742 
Sai Nagar, Dist. Anantapur, A.P. 
 31/01/95 Action has been taken by RC 
for filing FIR dated 8/4/2004 
 
7. Cuddapah District Gram Seva Samiti 
13/310, Hazi Rahamthulla Street, 
Dist Cuddapah, A.P. 
 
701 - 20/90 - 
APWS - RW – 
CAPART 
03/07/92 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
8. Cuddapah District Harijana Christava 
Venukabadina Jathula Vimochana, S 
21/46 Seven Roads, Dist. Cuddapah, 
A.P. 
501 – 13/81 PC 25/08/92 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
9. Downtrodden Development  Society 
Village Thoorpuppali, Elimaripuram, 
Dist. Cuddapah, A.P.  
1101 – 17/93 – 
JRY – HSG – 
CAPART 
04/10/01 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
 
10. Girijana labour Welfare Contact 
Society Railway Kodur, Dist. 
Cuddapah, A.P. 
1301 – 41/92-
TMC-GLWCS 
26/6/92 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
 
11. Jyoti Mahila Mandali Kodur (P) TQ. 
Dist. Cuddapah, A.P 
Not Known 26/07/93 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
 
12. Multipurpose Social Development 
Society Village Gundlapalli, 
Duggannagaripalli TQ. Pulivendala, 
Dist. Cuddapah, A.P. 
501 – 2/8-PC 19/01/02 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
 

 
13. Navjeevan Rural Development 
Society 9-237, Akkayapalli, Road 
Mariapuram, Dist. Cuddapah, A.P. 
 26/06/1992 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
 
14. Rayalaseema Nellore and Prakasam 
Districts Weaker Sections Rur 
Hazi Ramthula St. Distt. Cuddapah. 
A.P. 
 26/06/1992 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
 
15 Rural Labour Welfare Board Dist. 
Cuddapah, A.P. 
101-17/88-
IRDP 
08/11/1989 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
 
16. Social Service Society 
Ramachandrapuram, 
Devarajupalli TQ Kamlapuram PO 
Appayapalli, Distt. 
Cuddapah A.P. 
101-5/88-IRDP 11/07/1992 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
 
17. Social Welfare Society for  
Rural Communities 
Muddanur, R.S. Dist 
Cuddapah A.P. 
801-9/92-
DWCRA 
27/07/1992 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
 
18. Society for Promotion of Health 
Education 
Rehabilitation & Ed 
3/958 Y.M.R. Co-operative 
Colony, Proddalur TQ Dist 
Cuddapah, A.P.  
8.44(4.C-
1791)/ 91-TM 
31/1/1995 FIR has been lodged against 
the VO to SP Dist Cuddapah on 
05/02/2004. 
 
19. Shri Lakshmi Harijana Mahila 
Mandali, 
Nallajerla, Bommuru, 
Rajamundry Rural Distt. East 
Godavary, A.P. 
 4/8/2003 Action has been taken by  RC 
for filing FIR on dated 8.4. 2004 
20. Shri Laxmi Harijan Mahila Mandali, 
Amberapeta, Bhimabola Mandal, 
Dist. West Godavari 
  Action has been taken by RC 
for filing FIR dated 8.4. 2004 
21. Nirmala Weaker Section 
Mahila Mandali 
Kothapet, Gunturuvari Thota, 
Dist. Guntur, A.P. 
 22/08/1994 Decision taken in Mar 2001 on 
file to call the file no. 701-81/91 
and 701/35/93 from concerned 
division.  Action to be taken. 
22. Artisans (India) International 
Foundation 
B-50, S.B.H. Colony, 
Saidabad, Hyderabad A.P. 
0802-0080/96-
97 IGP – 
DWCRA/ SSZ 
04/08/2003 FIR was filed at Saidabad 
Police Station.  Hyderabad Dist. 
A.P. on 16.06.04. 
23 Rural Development & Integrated 
Social Evolution Society 
3-6-551/1, Himayat Nagar, 
Dist. Hyderabad A.P. 
 
 14/08/1992 The matter is discussed with 
DGP, Hyderabad relation to 
recovery of grant on dated 
16.06.04. 
24. Society for Natural Studies 206, 
Khanapuram Haveli, Industrial Area, 
Dist. 
Khamma, A.P. 
801-7/89 
DWCRA 
04/10/1993 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on dated 8.4.04 
25. Divya Jyoti Mahila Mandali  
1-9-31, Main Bazar, 
(a) 801-105/ 
92 DWCRA 
06/04/1995 The matter is discussed with 
DGP, Hyderabad relation to 

Allagadda, Distt. Kurnool, A.P. (b) 901-116/ 
92 08 ORP 
recovery of grant on dated 
16.06.04 
26. Rural People Development Society  
Koyyalagudem Vill., 
Chowtuppal Mandal, 
Nalgonda, A.P. 
1101-8/93-JRY 12/10/2000 The matter is discussed with 
DGP, Hyderabad relation to 
recovery of grant on dated 
16.06.04 
27. Collective Rural Operation of the 
Poor 
2-86, C/O Pothedar, Narsimhulu, 
APSED Sub 
Station Pargi, Dist. Ranga 
Reddy 
0402-0406/97- 
98 – RSP/SSZ 
04/08/2003 Filed FIR at Parigi Police 
Station, R.R. Dist. A.P on 
18/06/04 (copy of FIR yet to 
receive) 
28. Ambedkar  Yuvajana Sangham 
Gandhinagar Nidadavalu, W.G. Distt. 
A.P. 
 04/08/2002 Action has been taken by RC 
for filing FIR dated 8/4/2004 
29. Arundhatee Yuvajana Sangham 
Bayyanagudem, 
Koyyalagudem-Mandal, Dist. – 
West Godavari, A.P. 
 17/11/1994 No further action is needed 
because the founder of the VO 
is acting as a social worker 
according to SP, West 
Godavari, Eluru 
30. Arya Chandra Handicrafts 
Artisans and Social Welfare 
Association 
Madepalli, Eluru Rural Mandal, Dist. 
West Godavari, A.P. 
 04/08/2003 Action initiated for lodging of 
FIR by RC on 8/4/2004 
31. Joint Effort of suppressed upliftment 
services 
36th Ward Pedapadu Road 
Near R.C.M.  Church, Eluru, 
W.G. Dist. A.P. 
402-61/95-96 04/08/2003 Action has been taken by RC 
for filing FIR dated 8/4/2004 
32. Paschim Godawari Zila Adi 
Andhra Christian Association 
Bhimadole, West Godavari, 
A.P. 
CSRP/APR/10/
96-97 
04/08/2003 Action for lodging FIR initiated 
by RC on dated 8/4/2004 
33. Health and Welfare Service Centre, 
Vill. Gaddipadu, 
Pedakakni Mandal, Dist. Guntur 
901-9/94-ORP 09/06/1995 Not assisted by CAPART 
34. Kishan Development Society, 
Peddanapalli, B Sittypali, 
Chilamathur, Dist. Anantapur 
101-80/92 07/08/2002 Letter has been sent to DC & 
SP on 5/2/2004 
35. Nagamani Film and TV Training 
Institute of Acting, Madadam, 
Mangalagiri (SO), Dist. Guntur 
 03/03/1994 Fund not assisted by CAPART 
 
 

  
 
ASSAM 
 
 
S. 
No.  
VOs Name & Address File No.  Date Status 
1. Swahid Kanaklata Silpa Kala 
Mendra, PO-Kawripathar, 
Dist. Sonitpur 
503-2/92-PC 24/12/1996 FIR lodged and the no. is 
P.S.C./No.-13/02 dated 
20/2/2002 
 
 
 
 
   B I H A R 
 
S. 
No.  
VOs  Name & Address File No.  Date Status 
1. Akhil Bharatiya Dalit  Vikas Parishad, 
Anisabad, Patna 
 
1304-2/92 TMC 30/6/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/2004 
2. Akhil Bharatiya Gramin Vikas Seva 
Parishad, Goshala Road, PO 
Mokama, Patna 
 
804-05/92 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
3. Akhil Bharatiya Samajik Artik Evam 
Shaikshik Vikas Sansthan, 209 
Ashina Tower,. Exh. Road, Patna 
 
804-186/92 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
4. Akhil Bharatiya Samajik Pratishtan 
Parishad, Kila Road Patna 
 
804-102/91 
DWCRA 
1/5/95 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/04 for filing FIR 
5. All India Rural Research Centre, Beli 
Road, Patna 
 
804-166/92 
DWCRA 
30/6/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
6. All India Society for Research in 
Rural Area, North Krishnapuri, 10 Lal 
Bahadur Shastri Marg, Patna 
 
804-187/92 
DWCRA 
30/6/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
7. Amba Samajik Vikas Sansthan, Hazi 
Ganj, Patna City, Patna 
 
904-26/93OB 1/05/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
 
8. Bharat Mahila Vikas Sansthan, Urdu 
Bazar, Darbhanga 
804-29/93 
DWCRA 
3/06/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
9. Bhartiya Gramin Kalyan Parisad, 
Parsi Mohala Mukama, Patna 
 
104-87/92 
IRDP 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
10. Bhartiya Gramin Yuva Vikas, 
Jhauganj, Patna City, Patna 
804-71/92 
DWCRA 
1/5/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 

11. Bhartiya Mahila Vikas Sangh, AT 
Bazifpur Road, PO RS Barh, Dist. 
Patna 
 
904-21/93 ORP 28/07/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
12. Bhartiya Samajik Samta Nyay 
Parishad, DB Road, PO/Dist. 
Saharsa. 
 
804-155/92 
DWCRA 
6/6/95 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR 
13. Bihar Gramin Seva Parishad, 
Gaushala Road, PO- Mokama, Dist. 
Patna 
 
804-93/91 
DWCRA 
24/03/95  
14. Bihar Mahila Pargatisheel Kendra, 
Pragati Niketan , Mahatma Gandhi 
Nagar, Patna 
 
804-20/91 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR 
15. Bihar Nagrik Seva Parishad, VPO-
Sabalpur, Dedarganj, Dist. Patna 
804-168/92 24/3/95 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR 
 
16. Bihar Paramparik Urja Vikas 
Sansthan, Opp. Hathwa Market, Bani 
Road, Dist. Patna 
 
704-9/89 
ARWSP 
30/6/95  
17. Bihar Pragatisheel Mahila Utthan 
Seva Kendra, Dariba Bad, Badaru 
Road, Serma Patna City 
 
504-3/93 PC 1/05/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
18. Bihar Samaj Kayan Vikas Parishad, 
AT/PO Mukama, Dist. Patna 
 
804-22/87 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
19. Bihar Seva Chetna Niketan, 
Kachahari Road, PO/Dist. Nawada  
 
804-100/91 
DWCRA 
1/02/94 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR 
 
20. Darbhanga Zila Khadi Gramodyog 
Sangha, H.O-Bet Road, PO-Laheriya 
Saray, Dist. Darbhanga  
 
104-4/88/IRDP 10/8/90 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR 
 
21. Desh Bhakti Chetna Parishad, 
Mohalla Purandarpur, GPO-Patna 
 
8.44 4C1105) 
90TM 
30/6/95 Likely to be De-listed from BLA 
category 
22. Dr. Ambedkar Gramabhimukh Vikas 
Sansthan, Farsi Mohalla, Mukama, 
Patna 
8.44(4C-
2787)/92TM 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
23. Dr. Ambedkar Samaj Kalyankari 
Yojana Samitii,Goshala Road, PO- 
Mokama, Dist. Patna 
 
804-83/92 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
24. Gramin Vikas Evam Anusandhan 
Kendra, AT Bajitpur, PO RS Barh, 
Dist. Patna 
 
804-121/92 
DWCRA 
28/7/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
25. Guru Govind Singh Mahila Vikas 
Parishad, Harimandir Gali, Dist. 
Patna
804-101/92 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 

Patna 
 
 
26. Guru Nanak Mahila Shilp Kala 
Kendra, Harimandir Gali, Dist. Patna 
Sahib 
 
8.44(4C-
1068)/TM 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
27. Harijan Girijan Alpsankhayak Utthan 
Parishad, Faarri Mohalla, PO- 
Makam, Dist. Patna 
 
804-118/92 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR 
 
28. Hind Seva Sadan, Chamdoriya, 
Kachighat, Patna City, Dist. Patna  
 
1304-16/92 
TMC 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
29. Indira Antyodaya Gramabhimukh 
Prashikshan Kendra, Dak Bunglow 
Road, Mokama, Dist. Patna 
 
804-160/92 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
30. Jai Prabha Gramabhimukh 
Antyodaya Vidyapeeth, AT/PO 
Mokama, Dist. Patna 
 
804-10/88 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
31. Jai Prabha Gramin Chetna Vikas 
Samiti, Chomoriya, Patna City, Dist. 
Patna 
 
104-78/92 
IRDP 
1/5/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
32. Jan Vikas Parishad, Haru Napur 
Colony, Sector-1, PO-Phulwari 
Shariff, Patna 
 
704-1/87 
CRSP 
28/2/92 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR 
 
33. 
 
 
Jan Vikas Samiti, Phulwari Shariff, 
Patna 
 
704-1/87 
CRSP 
 
28/2/92 
 
 
RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
34. Janabhimukh Vikas Sansthan Vill. –
Chattipar, PO- Khusharupur, Dist.. 
Patna 
 
704-210/92 
CRSP 
30/6/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
35. Kamla Nehru Samaj Kalyan Kendra, 
Goplanganj, Shosha Ram, Dist. 
ROhtas 
704-101/92 
CRSP 
18/1/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
36. Kanta Gramin Vikas Sansthan, RS 
Barh, Dist. Patna 
804-54/88 
DWCRA 
7/7/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
37. Kasturba Pratisthan Mahila Silai 
Centre, Vill. Neura, Bihta, Dist. Patna 
704-3/92 
CRSP 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/2004 
38. Koshikanchal Audyoggik Vikas 
Parishad, AT/PO-Sharda Nagar, 
Ward No. 1, Dist. Saharsa 
704-47/92 
CRSP 
6/6/95 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR. 
39. Lohiya Seva Parishad, Doctor Toli, 
Mokama, Dist. Patna 
804-178/92  
DWCRA 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
40. Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Ashram Seva 
Parishad, Killa Road, Dist. Patna 
8.44 (4C-
2790)/ 92 TM 
1/5/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 

41. Mahila Mandal, Lalookar, Rupan 
Bhavan, Bihar Sharif, Dist. Nalanda 
 28/8/89 Not assisted by CAPART. 
 
42. Mata Jan Kalyan Pragatisheel Vikas 
Parishad, Bela Moni, Hathidah, Dist. 
Patna 
704-180/92 
CRSP 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
43. Md. Dr. Zakir Hussain Samajik 
Adhyayan Vikas Chetna Parishad, 
Ward No. 4, Mokama, Dist. Patna 
804-
68/DWCRA 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
44. Narayani Mahila Silai Katai 
Prashikshan Kendra, Purba Gali, 
Patna City, Dist. Patna 
804-165/92 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
45. Nav Chetna Samiti, AT/PO Barhna 
Road, Barh, Dist. Patna 
504-8/88 PC 7/7/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
 
46. Parivartan Samajik Vikas Sansthan, 
Pharsi Mohalla, Mokama, Dist. Patna 
504-17/93 PC 25/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04. 
47. Patliputra Bal Mahila Kalyan 
Sansthan, Killa Road, Dist. Patna 
804-77/92 
DWCRA 
1/5/95 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR. 
48. Patliputra Gramin Seva Vikas 
Pratisthan, Hajiganj, Patna City, Dist. 
Patna 
104-86/92 
IRDP 
1/5/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04. 
49. Pidit Shoshit Harijan Evam Adivasi 
Kalyan Sansthan, B-31, Vijay Nagar, 
(Hanuman Nagar), Dist. Patna. 
704-2/93CRSP 30/6/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04 
50. RACHNA, Boring Road, Chauraha, 
Dist. Patna 
8.44(4C-
2280)/91 
1/5/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/04. 
51. Ramwati Prashikshan Kendra, 
Saitara, Katihar, Dist. Khagariya. 
904-76-OB 24/6/94 Funds not assisted by CAPART 
52. Rashmi Rathi Nav Chetna Samiti, 
HQ. Rashmi Jyotu Bhawan, New 
Jakkanpur, GPO – Patna. 
1204-
180/93/SAT 
3/6/95 Mis utilized funds has been 
refunded by the VO. 
53. Rashtriya Manav Kalyan Samiti, Vill. 
Sinuar Gopal, PO Laheria Sarai, Dist. 
Darbahanga 
704-65/94-95 
ARWSP 
27/3/95 Not assisted by CAPART. 
54. Roopa Mahila Prashikshan 
Sansthan, AT/PO Buniyadganj, 
Manpur, Dist. Gaya 
704-50/91 
CRSP 
12/8/94 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR. 
55. Samajik Shaikshanik Vikas Kendra, 
AT/PO Pathrahi, RS Jhanjharpur, 
Dist. Madhubani. 
1304-12/93 
TMM 
28/1/2000 Writ petition filed by the VO in 
High Court Patna. 
56. SAMARPIT AT Paschim Palli, 
PO/Dist. Kishanganj. 
904-111/94-
95ORP 
21/6/96 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/2004 
57. Savodaya Ashram, Balavapur, 
Asthawanm Dist. Nalanda 
704-57/93 28/8/89 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/2004 
58. Shri Rajendra Samaj Seva Sansthan, 
Khajpura, PO Bihar Veterinary 
College, Dist. Patna 
8-44(4.C-
2722)92TM 
24/3/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/2004  
59. Veer Kunwar Singh Samajik Jagriti 
Parishad, Chamoriya, Patna City, 
Dist. Patna 
804-73/92 
DWCRA 
1/5/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 26/2/2004 

60. Vinoba Gramabhimukh  Chetna 
Kendra, Bahadur Shah Road, 
Mangal Talab, Patna City, Dist. Patna
804-161/92 
DWCRA 
24/3/95 Document has been sent to 
DC, SP on 3/2/2004 for filing 
FIR. 
 
 
 
 
   D E L H I 
 
 
S. 
No.  
VOs Name & Address File No.  Date Status 
1. Vikas Educational And Social 
Welfare Society, 456/S-1, Vikas Puri, 
New Delhi. 
705-34/93-94 
CRSP 
 26/8/96 Mis utilized funds has been  
refunded by the VO 
2. Sanchetna, 237 Sector III, RK 
Puram, New Delhi. 
924-48/86 OB 8/5/91 No  need for filing FIR.  Very 
few amounts are to be 
recoverable 
3. All India Association for Social 
Welfare of Down Trodden, 10/111, 
Khichripur, Delhi. 
924-23/86 OB 28/12/92 Documents sent to the Addl. 
DCP, Delhi for filing FIR on 
dated 8/8/2003 
4. Samaj Sudhar Society, F-18, 
Dharmapura, Najafgarh, New Delhi 
705-33/93 
CRSP 
29/10/96 Mis utilized funds has been  
refunded by the VO 
5. Gram Bharati Seva Ashram, Chandra 
Tilak House, Indira Marg, East 
Babarpur, Delhi 
1124-46/92 
RLEGP 
28/12/92 Not assisted by CAPART 
6. Children and Widow Women Welfare 
Society, P-49/1(X-103/4, Gali No. 2), 
Gali No. 17, Brahmpuri, Delhi 
724-66/91 
ARWSP 
10/10/94 Documents sent to the Addl. 
DCP, Delhi for filing FIR on 
dated 8/8/2003 
7. Bharat Seva Samiti, Opp. Nagar 
Nigam Primary School, Sadatpur 
Karawal Nagar Road, Delhi 
105-2/89IRDP 25/6/90 Documents sent to the Addl. 
DCP, Delhi for filing FIR on 
dated 8/8/2003 
8. North India Welfare Society, 279/1, 
Block X Gali No. 4, Brahmanpuri, 
Delhi 
705-5/93 10/10/94 Documents sent to the Addl. 
DCP, Delhi for filing FIR on 
dated 8/8/2003 
9. Summer Field Education Society, H. 
No. (31 Gali No. 13-14) X-159, X- 
Block, Gali No. 9, Brahmapuri Delhi 
705-30/93-94 
CRSP 
10/10/94 Documents sent to the Addl. 
DCP, Delhi for filing FIR on 
dated 8/8/2003 
10. Lalit Koshi Seva Ashram, 77 Bank 
Colony, Nand Nagari, Delhi 
705-11/93 
ARWSP 
10/10/2000 Documents sent to the Addl. 
DCP, Delhi for filing FIR on 
dated 8/8/2003 
11. All India Samajotthan Samiti, A-3-
51/1, LIG, Rohini, Sector 7, Delhi 
724-8/87 
CRSP 
10/4/92 Mis utilized funds has been  
refunded by the VO 
 
 
HARYANA 
 
 
 
S.No. VOs name & Address File No. Date Status 
1.  Shaheed Club 
Vil./PO Sanjarwas, Distt. 
Bhiwani, Haryana 
708-5/93 ARWSP 11/7/2000 RC has been 
instructed for filing 

 FIR on 2/4/2004 
2. Anil Gramodyog Mandal , 
House of Satpal S/o Sarda 
Ram, Vil. Bari, VPO – 
Thanser, Khurukshetra, Dist. 
PC/HAR/18/1/2000 4/8/2003 FIR filed by RC, 
Chandigarh 
3. Anjum Udyog Mandal, Banso 
Gate, Karrnal 
PC/HAR/18/8/99 4/8/2003 FIR filed by RC, 
Chandigarh 
4. Mahila Pragati Mandal, Vill/PO 
Kirdan, Dist. Hissar 
408-2/94-95CRSP 6/1/2004  
5. Hindustan Processing Cereal 
and Pulses Gramodhyog 
Institute, Banso Gate, Dist. 
Karnal 
708-7/88 15/1/93 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 2/4/2004 
6. Kausik Grama Udyog Mandal, 
Jogi Dass Building, Chaura 
Bazar, Karnal 
ARWSP/HAR/2/98-99 
PC/HAR/18/31/99 
4/8/2003 FIR filed by RC, 
Chandigarh 
7. Khadi Seva Niketan, 
Chamanlal S/o Sh. Teluram, 
Vill/PO Tundla, Dist. Karnal 
708/17/93 ARWSP 
PC/HAR/18/4/2000 
4/8/2003 FIR filed by RC, 
Chandigarh 
8. Rastriya Khadi Gram Udyog 
Mandal, Vill Rawar, Dist. 
Karnal 
PC/HAR/18/31/2000 
ARTS/HAR/18/2/2000 
4/8/2003 FIR filed by RC, 
Chandigarh 
9. Saraswati Khadi Gramodyog 
Samiti, Vil. Ranwar, Karnal 
PC/HAR/18/57/20
02 
4/8/2003 FIR filed by RC, 
Chandigarh 
10. The Pawan Gramodyog 
Mandal, Vil. Jani, PO – 
Nelokheri, Dist. Karnal 
PC/HAR/18/8/2000 4/8/2003 FIR filed by RC, 
Chandigarh 
11. Dehat Vikas Kendra, Dogda 
Ahir, Kas Khand Kanina, Dist. 
Mahendergarh, 
907-7/90-OB 10/4/92 FIR  has been filed to 
local DC and SP on 
5/2/2004 
 
12. Karan Khadi Gramodyog 
Samiti, Vil. Kabari, Block- 
Panipat 
PC/HAR/18/34/1999 4/8/2003 FIR filed by RC, 
Chandigarh 
13. Banjar Bhum Sudhar Mandal, 
19/563, Delhi Road, Sonepat 
Stand, Dist. Rohtak 
   
14. Gulia Gramodyog Sangh, 
Vil./PO Jahangiripur, Teh 
Jahajjar, Dist. Rohtak 
708-3/87-RW-LCS 17/10/89 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 2/4/2004 
15. Lok Seva Dal, 137, Poo Chand 
Health Club, M.T. Dist. Rohtak 
508-28/93-PC 9/8/96 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 2/4/2004 
16. Rathi Gramodyog Sangh, 10-
A, MIE, Bahadurgarh, Dist. 
Rohtak 
808-19/90-DWCRA 14/9/94 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 2/4/2004 
17. Rural Development and 
Research Centre, Delhi Road, 
Sonepat Stand, Dist. Rohtak 
 8/1/92 Not assisted by CAPART 
18. Social Welfare and Society for 
Weaker Communities, 246 
Bhola Niwas, Circular Road, 
Jhajjar, Dist. Rohtak 
108-11/93-IRDP 18/3/2001 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 2/4/2004 
19. Women Social Welfare 
Society, 798/27, Medical 
510-4/95-96-PC 19/6/2000 Not assisted by CAPART 

Crossing, Model Town,  Dist. 
Rohtak 
20. Saraswati Educational 
Association, 484/18, Shivaji 
Park, Dist. Gurgaon 
709-19/92-CRSP 29/10/96 RC ha s been instructed 
for filing FIR on 2/4/2004 
 
 
 
 KERALA 
 
 
 
S.No. VOs name & Address File No. Date Status 
1.  Bapuji Sevak Samaj, PO- 
Chakkupallam, Kumily, Dist. 
Idduki 
 
512-7/92 PC 9/4/94 RC has been 
instructed for filing 
FIR on 25/3/2004 
2. P Kunjam Pillai Memorial  
Mahila Samajam, PO 
Aduthala, Dist. Kollam. 
812-2/90/DWCRA 8/10/93 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 8/4/2004. 
3. Thrikkadavoor Fish Cultivating 
Society, Kureepuzha, PO 
Perinad, Dist. Quilon 
512-8/85-PC 28/9/89 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 8/4/2004 
 
 
KARNATAKA 
 
 
 
S.No. VOs name & Address File No. Date Status 
1. A NEED, Chikka Kurungoda, 
TQ Ganribidanur, Dist. Kolar 
1111-24/92-JRY 30/10/95 RC has been 
instructed for filing 
FIR on 25/3/2004.
2. Adarsh Rural Development 
Society, Vil. Mittemari, TQ 
Bagepally, Dist. Kolar 
111-9/88-IRDP 30/10/95 RC has been 
instructed for filing 
FIR on 25/3/2004.
3. Amar Association, 
Veerandahalli Extn., Gauri 
Bindpur, Dist. Kolar 
711-2/92CRSP 30/10/95 RC has been 
instructed for filing 
FIR on 25/3/2004.
4. Bhagya Jyoti Education Trust, 
Ratna Niwas, 11-889/6, 
Ramanagar, Gulbarga, Dist. 
Bidar 
1111-6/90- HOUSING 30/10/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
5. CHETNA, C/O Bodanna Fort, 
Gauribidanur, Dist. Kolar 
911-19/87OB 30/10/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
6. Chinthalu Education and Rural 
Development Socity, PO 
Ramapatna, Chikkaballapur 
TQ., Dist. Kolar 
111-5/88-IRDP 30/10/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
7. Harijana Girijan Kalyan Samiti, 910-28/93-ORPP 30/10/95 RC has been instructed 

Gudibanda, Dist. Kolar for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
8. Janardan Khadi and 
Gramodyog Industries Assn., 
Nandanazanam Mittahalli; 
Chintamani, Dist. Kolar 
610-5/93-JRY 
 
25.9.01 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
9. Karthik Fondation, K.P. 
Temple Street, Gauribidnaur, 
Dist. Kolar 
711-33/93-94-
CRSP 
30/10/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
10. Khadi Gramodyog Vikas 
Mandal, Malagur K.R. Pet TQ, 
Dist.  Mandya  
711-7/91 CRSP 3/3/94 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
11. Kumar Gramodyog Sangh, PO 
Thirumani, Via Persandra, 
Dist. Kolar 
111-4/89IRDP  24/9/92 RC ha s been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
12. Mahalakshmi Mahila Mandal 
Via Peresandra, Diabanda, 
Dist. Kolar, Karnataka 
910-14/89-OB 4/8/2003 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
13. Lakshmi Narayan Rural 
Development Society 
Ramaswamypalli, Bahepally 
TQ. Distt. Kolar Karnataka 
111-5/89-IRDP 30/10/95 RC ha s been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
14. Mamta Religious Association 
Nilugomba, P.O. 
Hampasandra, TQ. Gudibanda 
Distt. Kolar, Karnataka 
1111-15/89-Housing 30/10/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
15. Mysore Socail Education 
Centre, AT/PO Magadi, Distt. 
Bangalore, Karnataka 
111-10/88IRDP 22/9/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
16. Nalanda Education And 
Economic Development 
Society, Beedagena Halli, PO 
Doddamarli, Chiickballapur 
Distt. Kolar, Karanatka  
1210-35/90SAT 30/10/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
17. Sacred Rural Development 
Society  
Bagepalli, Distt. Kolar, 
Karnataka 
 
610-13/88 Hosuing 30/10/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
18. Shanthala Mahila Mandal 
Chickballapur Taluk. Distt. 
Kolar, Karnataka 
1111-68/92-JRY 30/10/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
19. Shri Maruti Gramodyog 
Sangha  
Dodda Chinnahali, Oorgaeom, 
KGF, Distt. Kolar, Karnataka 
111-9/91-IRDP 14/9/94 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
20. Shri Venkateshwara Silk Khadi 
Gramodyog Sangha 
PO Gunlakothur, Taluk 
Gauribindanur, Distt. Kolar, 
Karnataka 
610-16/88 Housing 30/10/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 
21. Tripathi Welfare Soceity 
Chowtathimmanahalli, PO 
Guidbanda, Distt. Kolar, 
Karnataka 
8.44(4C –939)/90 TM 
1210-31/90SAT 
30/10/95 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
25/3/2004 

 
 
 
MANIPUR 
 
 
 
 
S.No. VOs name & Address File No. Date Status 
1. Uneven Rural Development 
Organisation, H.Q Thoubal 
Bazar, Dist. Thoubal 
715-54/93-94 CRSP 8/5/96 The blacklisting 
was done from 
F.N. 
Manipur/95/4/PC/
2/CAPART/2202.  
This file is not 
showing in PIMS. 
2. Maram Khunon Women 
Society, TM School, 
Katommei, PO –Senapati, 
Dist. Imphal 
*715-1/93-CRSP 
*715-6/93ARWSP 
5/9/94 FIR lodged.  The 
FIR No. is 
2(4)03SPT-PS 
3. All Manipur Mushroom 
Growers’ Association, 
Mushroom House, Post Box 
No. 36, Dist. Imphal 
No 18/1/92 File not available 
with MED. 
4. Sapermeina Women Society, 
Vill. & PO Sapermaina, Sadar 
Hills, Dist. Senapati 
614-8/92/JRY 11/10/2000 A FIR lodged in 4.4.03 by 
MED  fer. Recovery of 
Rs. 376500.  The FIR no. 
is 15(4)2003G-SPM-PS 
and a letter for de 
registration of VO sent to 
Registrar on 7.5.2004. 
5. Banghringlon Christian 
Women Society, Chandel, 
Office cum Rest House, AR 
Ex-Servicemen Association, 
Dist. Imphal 
0518-0068/95/96-
PAP/NEZ 
4/10/01 Action initiated by RC for 
filing FIR. 
6. Tamei Area Tribal 
Development Association, 
Taloulonag Village, PO Tamei, 
Dist. Tamenglong 
*614-10/93-RLEGP 11/10/2000 Matter is being pursued 
with Police and DRDA by 
RC 
7. Women Community Welfare 
Association, Sega Road, 
Khwariakpam 
Leikai, Dist. Imphal 
715-85/93-94-CRSP 5/7/96 In June, 2004 RC has 
informed that the matter 
is being pursued with the 
VO who has requested 
for more time. 
8. South Eastern Child Care 
Centre, Khanarok, B.P.O. 
Keirao  
Wangkhem 
*715-2/89-
CRSP/RW(CRSP/Masn/1
45/88-89) 
 
2/7/96 In June, 2004 RC has 
informed that the matter 
is being pursued with the 
VO who has requested 
for more time. 
 

MAHARASHTRA 
 
 
 
S.No. VOs name & Address File No. Date Status 
1. Social Economic Assistance 
for Rural and City Habitant, 
1/A, Prince of Wales Drive, 
Dist. Pune. 
913-27/94-95CRSP 30/8/96 RC has been 
instructed for filing 
FIR on 25/3/2004 
2. Shri Yoganand Shikshan 
Prasarak Mandal, Partur, Dist. 
Jalna 
814-12/89 12/10/93 RC has been 
instructed for filing 
FIR on 25/3/2004 
3. Gayatri Education Society, 89 
East Wardhaman Nagar, Dist. 
Nagpur 
514-4/88PC 19/5/92 RC has been 
instructed for filing 
FIR on 25/3/2004 
4. Madhubani Kushth Rog 
Nirmulan Sansthan, 
Jambhulghat, TQ Chimur, Dist. 
Chandrapur 
814-28/88 15/6/90 RC has been 
instructed for filing 
FIR on 25/3/2004 
 
MIZORAM 
 
 
 
S.No. VOs name & Address File No. Date Status 
1. Centre for Development of 
Rural Areas, T-14 
Thikhuahtlang, PB No. 121, 
Dist. Aizawl 
CRSP/MIZ/2/95-96PC 11/1/2002 A comprehensive 
evaluation was 
conducted in 
June, 2003.  The 
monitor has 
recommended 
that the VO 
should refund Rs. 
27202 (Rs. 
17727+9478) 
against piggery 
project and 
housing.  Further 
decision has to be 
taken by MED. 
2. Samaritan Society of Mizoram, 
Bungk-awn, Dist. Aizawl, 
PC/MIZ/16/98-99 
(0520/0001/98-
99/PAP/NEZ) 
4/10/2001 The PFA report 
was negative 
stating that VO 
had furnished 

forged RC.  On 
the basis of the 
report and 
subsequent 
enquiry the VO 
was placed under 
BLA. 
3. Mizoram Buddhist 
Development Welfare 
Association, Vill. Tablabagh, 
PO-Demagiri Tlabung 
CRSP/MIZ/1/95-96 11/1/2002 Presently the 
case is with CBI 
the file has been 
sent to them.  On 
examining the 
PIMS, it appears 
that both the files 
are one and the 
same. 
 

MADHYA PRADESH 
 
 
 
S.No. VOs name & Address File No. Date Status 
1. Abhay Shiksha Prasar Samiti, 
AT/PO Gughra, Dist. Jabalpur 
813-09/91DWCRA 28/3/90 Not assisted by 
CAPART 
2. Adarsh Gramin Seva Samiti,  
Dist. Bhopal 
8-1/89 ADMN 31/12/99 Not assisted by 
CAPART 
3. Banvasi Adivasi Utthan Seva 
Samiti, Sohagi, Dist. Reeva 
513-8/93PC 22/8/94 The letter has 
been sent to local 
DC & SP on  
dated 4/2/04 for 
filing FIR 
4. Chambal Shiksha Prasar 
Samiti, Ganeshpura, Dist. 
Gwalior 
813-4/87 30/5/90 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
21/4/2004 
5. Lok Kalyan Samiti, C-8, 
Kaushal Nagar,  Dist. Gwalior 
713-2/88CRSP 11/10/2000 The letter has 
been sent to local 
DC & SP on  
dated 4/2/04 for 
filing FIR 
6. Madhya Bharati, B-36, Kamla 
Nagar, Dist. Gwalior 
612-2/87LREGP 26/9/89 The letter has 
been sent to local 
DC & SP on  
dated 4/2/04 for 
filing FIR 
7. Manav Vikas Samiti, 
Ganeshpura, Dist. Morena 
713-10/88 30/5/90 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
21/4/2004 
8. Priya Samajik Kalyan Seva 
Samiti, House of Lamte, 203, 
Ansar Colony, MIG Behind 
Police Station, Indore 
116-7/97-98IRDP 25/2/2000 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
21/4/2004 
9. Resource Development 
Institute, 1100 Qtrs Area, Dist . 
Bhopal 
12-94/85/MLG 20/10/92 The letter has 
been sent to local 
DC & SP on  
dated 4/2/04 for 
filing FIR 
10. Satpurda Integrated Rural 
Development Institution, E-
7/60, Ashok Housing Society, 
Shahpura, Bhopal 
613-22/85RLEGP 11/10/2000 The letter has been sent 
to local DC & SP on  
dated 4/2/04 for filing FIR 
11. Self Employed Women 
Association, Gandhi Bhawan, 
713-12/89-CRSP 12/10/2000 RC has been instructed 
for filin g FIR on 

Shyamal Hill, Dist. Bhopal 21/4/2004 
 
NAGALAND 
 
 
S.No. VOs name & Address File No. Date Status 
1. Tening Youth Association, 
Tening Town, PO Kohima Post 
Box No. 168, Distt. Kohima, 
Nagaland – 797001 
717-194-95-ARWS-RW-
CAPART 
23/4/96 FIR No. 0027/04 
Police Station 
(south), Kohima 
on 8/5/04 
2. Children Welfare Society PB 
No. 284, Kohima 73, East 
View, D-Block Distt. Kohima, 
Nagaland –797001 
9…..517-6/93/PC 
(PC/NAG/20/93-94) 
 
2)717-6/93-CRSP-RW-
CAPART 
(CRSP/NAG/14/93-94) 
23/4/96 FIR No. 0027/04 
Police Station 
(south), Kohima 
on 8/5/04 
3. Western United Club 717-11/94-95-ARWS-
RW-CAPART 
23/4/96 Police Station 
(South) Kohima 
on 8/5/04 
4. Wisemen’s Fellowship 
Enterprise, PB No. 283, 
Kohima, Dist. Kohima, 
Nagaland-797001 
717-6/94-95-ARWS-RW-
CAPART 
23/4/96 The complaint delivered 
at the Police Station 
(South), Kohima in 
person by Mr. Hutovi 
Swu, YP on 4/6/04 
5. Centre for Rural Uplfitment, 
PB No. 287, Kohima-Imphal 
Road, CRU Building, Kohima, 
Distt. Kohima, Nagaland 
717-10/94-95-ARWS-
RW-CAPART 
16/10/2000 FIR No. 0027/04 
Police Station 
(South) Kohima 
on 8/5/04 
6. Study and Action for 
Comprehensive Development , 
PB No. 26, Dimapur Dist, 
Dimapur, Nagaland – 797112 
727-3/92-CRSP-RW-
CAPART 
19/9/2000 The SP Dimapur 
was met by Mr. 
Swu, YP at the 
Dimapur Police 
Station for filing 
FIR. It was 
informed that the 
complaint was 
already received 
and a letter was 
sent to the 
Director, MED. 
7. Lovitso Welfare Society Village 
Viswema, Dist. Kohima, 
Nagaland 
321-1/95-
96/SFD/2559/517 
3/6/96 FIR has been lodged on 
6/2/2004 at the Police 
Station Kohima 
8. Zricon Club 
Lirie Colongy, Kohima 
Nagaland-95-6-JRY (H)-
2/CAPART 
2/7/96 FIR has been lodged on 
6/2/2004 at the Police 
Station Kohima 

9. Likya Women Society, Likya 
Colony, Workha Town 
Workha/Forest Colony, PB No. 
213, Dist. Dimapur 
517-6/94-95PC 3/6/96 FIR has been 
lodged on 
6/2/2004 at the 
Police Station 
Kohima. 
10. Association of Tribal Welfare 
Development , PB No. 117, 
Woodlands Mansion, 
Naharbari, Dist. Dimapur 
616-2/94-95JRY 4/10/2001 FIR has been lodged on 
6/2/2004 at the Police 
Station Kohima 
 
ORISSA 
 
 
S.No. VOs name & Address File No. Date Status 
1. Abaj Adivasi Harijan Seva 
Sangha, Santhasara, PO 
Santhapur, Via Gondia, Dis. 
Dhenkanal 
718/5/92ARWSP 11/10/2000 RC has been 
instructed for filing 
FIR on 16.6.2004.
2. Community Action for Rural 
Development, AT/PO Santala, 
Dist. Dhenkanal 
617-4/87RLEGP 25/8/92 RC has been 
instructed for filing 
FIR on 16.6.2004.
3. Manav Sambhal Vikas Samiti, 
Buddheshawari Colony, Dist. 
Bhubaneshwar 
518-18/93PC 6/1/97 Document has 
been sent to DC, 
SP on 7.2. 2004 
for filing FIR 
4. Rajiv Gandhi Youth Club, New 
Danapashi, Dist. Dhenkanal 
718-22/92ARWSP 18/3/2002 RC has been instructed 
for filing FIR on 
16.6.2004. 
5. Shri Aurbindo Pathagar, 
AT/PO Barada, Via/Dist. 
Dhenkanal 
718-25/93CRSP 5/7/96 Document has 
been sent to DC, 
SP on 7/2/2004 
for filing FIR. 
6. Yug Shakti Palli Unnayan 
Club, Vill. Baidya Kateni, PO 
Lan. Dist. Dhenkanal 
 22/11/94 Fund not assisted 
by CAPART. 
 

 RAJASTHAN  
 
 
S. 
No.  
VOs Name & Address File No.  Date Status 
1. Chetna Public School Shiksha 
Samiti, B-22, Sanjay Colony, Behru 
Nagar, Jaipur 
712-
19/91CRSP 
18/1/96 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
2. Gramin Vikash Society, Samogar 
Khareri, The Bayana, Sawai 
Madhopur, Rajasthan Lapawali, 
Hindaun City, Sawai Madhopur 
721-36/93-
ARWSP 
12/10/94 The letter has been sent to 
local DC&SP on dated 4/2/04 
for filing FIR 
3. Gandhi Yuva Mandal, Baman 
Baroda, Gangapur City, Sawai 
Madhopur 
920-12/92-
ORP  
920-20/94- 
95ORP 
22/11/94 Not assisted by CAPART 
4. Narottam Vidya Mandir Backside of 
Kotwali, Dist. Bharatpur 
721-7/90- 
ARWSP-RW 
23/3/92 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
5. Akhil Bhartiya Vikas Sansthan, Near 
New Hospital, Hinduan City, Sawai 
Madhopur 
721-3/92-RA 12/10/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
6. Kishori Shiksan Evam Prashiksan 
Audyogik Sansthan, Kumavhaheri, 
Block Nagar, Dist. Bharatpur 
920-14/92-OB 24/6/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
7. Rural Education Development 
Society, 154 Nasiya Colony, 
Gangapur City-32201 
721-20/93 
ARWSP 
21/4/95 The letter has been sent to 
local DC&SP on dated 4/2/04 
for filing FIR 
8. Child Home Public School Shiksha 
Samiti, Plot No. 2, Barket Nagar, 
Kisan Marg, Jaipur 
721-4/91 
ARWSP 
23/7/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
9. Adarsh Bal Vidya Mandir, Krishna 
Colony, Hinduan City, Dist. Sawai 
Madhopur 
721-1/90 12/10/91 The letter has been sent to 
local DC&SP on dated 4/2/04 
for filing FIR 
10. Shri Tilak Balika Modern Shikha 
Samiti, 396-Dhru Marg, 
Gurunanakpura, Adarsh Nagar, 
Jaipur 
721-20/91-
CRSP 
29/6/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
11. Gandhi Nav Yuvak Mandal, The 
Ganga Nagar City, Dist. Sawai 
Madhopur 
721-17/92 
ARWSP 
22/11/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
12. Gandhi Shiksha Sansthan Samiti, 
Ward No. 17, Gangapur City, Dist. 
Sawai Madhopur, Rajasthan 
721-13/90-
ARWSP 
13/9/93 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
13. Victoria Montessory Social Shiksha 
Samiti, D-16 Ramnagar (Nahri Ka 
Naka Puro) Dist. Jaipur 
721-
19/91CRSP 
721-2/91-
CRSP 
18/1/96  RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
14. Nav Jeevan Education and 
Evangelical Society, Station Road, 
Gangapur City, Rajasthan, District – 
Swai Madhopur 
821-16/88-
DWRCA 
6/12/93 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
15 Sarvajanik  Vikas Sewa Sansthan, 
Near Bawadi Barmer, (Lapawali, 
Hinduan, Swaimadhopur) 
721-3/88 
ARWSP 
4/5/92 The letter has been sent to 
local DC & SP on dated 4/2/04 
for filing FIR 

16. Adarsh Bal Vidya Mandir Society, 
Ward No. 3, Khairahiganj, Dist. Alwar 
8.44(4C-
1786)/91 
12/10/91 The letter has been sent to 
local DC & SP on dated 4/2/04 
for filing FIR 
17. Rural Development Society, Vill/PO 
Jatav Basti, Layawali, via Hindon 
City, Dist Sawai Madhopur 
920-1/94-95 
ORP 
12/10/94 The letter has been sent to 
local DC & SP on dated 4/2/04 
for filing FIR 
18. Gramin Mewar Seva Samiti Vill/PO 
Verur (Nagar) Dist. Bharatpur, 
Rajasthan 
721-13/92 4/4/95 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
19. Rajasthan Mahila  Bachchey Vikas 
Samiti, Bharatpur 
721-33/93-94 
CRSP 
12/1/94 Not Assisted by CAPART 
20. Navodaya Samaj Kalyan Vikas 
Samiti, 38 Arya Nagar, Dist. Alwar 
1125-22/95-96 
JRY 
19/7/96 Not Assisted by CAPART 
21. Rajasthan Gramin Vikas Samiti, 
Rewari Walen Ki Gali, Kakwadi 
Bazar, Rajgarh, Dist. Alwar 
121-3-93-IRDP 11/1/96 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
22. Nehru Vidya Mandir Samiti Mathura 
Gate, Dist. Bharatpur 
721-
16/88/CRSP 
21/3/94 RC has been instructed for 
filing FIR on 21/4/2004 
23 Rural Development Society, Vill 
Samogar, Khareri, The Banaya, 
Samogar, Khareri, The Banaya, Dist. 
Bharatpur 
821-18/89 
DWCRA 
12/10/94 The letter has been sent to 
local DC & SP on dated 4/2/04 
for filing FIR 
24. Rajasthan Mahila Bal Vikas Samiti, 
Gher Kote, Bhaniya Kumhare Gate, 
Dist. Bharatpur 
721-33/93-
94CRSP 
15/11/94 Not Assisted by CAPART 
25. Adarsh Bal Vidya Mandir Samity 
Ward No. 2, Mahashay Colony, 
Kedliganj, Dist. Alwar 
721-4/91 
ARWSP 
12/10/94 The letter has been sent to 
local DC & SP on dated 4/2/04 
for filing FIR 
 
 
 
    TAIML NADU 
 
 
S. 
No.  
VOs Name & Address     File No.     Date     Status 
1. Weal Organization Vill. 
Chathirapatti, PO 
Poovarassakudi, Dist- 
Pudukattai, T.N 
1222-55/90-SAT 18/1/92 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
8/4/2004 
2. Raja Educational And 
Charitable Trust, Raja 
Nagar, Vadakkangulam, 
Tiruneveli Kattabomman 
Dist.  
722-54/94-95-ARWSP 11/10/2000 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
8/4/2004 
3. Suchetna Kripalani Rural 
Development Centre, 
3/128, Main Road, Sikkal, 
Dist Ramanathapuram 
822-11/89-DWCRA 17/11/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
8/4/2004 
4. Selvam Educational and 
Charitable Trust, 4/59, 
Anbu Street, 
Ponnappandar Colony, 
Nagercoil, Dist. 
Kanyakumari 
722-53/94-95-ARWSP 12/10/2000 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
8/4/2004 

5. Village Development 
Organization, 
Adamangalam Podur, 
Polur TQ, 
Thiruvannmalai, 
Sambhhuvarayar 
922-51/OB- CAPART 29/11/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
8/4/2004 
6. Society for Action in Rural 
Development, 11/B1, 
Sukur Street, Polur, TSR 
Dist.  
CRSP/TND/14/8/94 4/8/2003 FIR has been 
lodged to local 
SP on dated 
9/2/2004 
 
   
 
    UTTARANCHAL 
 
 
 
S. 
No.  
VOs Name & Address  File No.  Date  Status 
1 Mahila Vikas Sansthan, 68/3, 
Chandra Nagar, Distt. 
Dehradun 
124-13/88 IRDP 13/08/2002 Letter has been 
sent to SP and 
DC on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
 
 
    W E S T  B E N G A L 
 
 
S. 
No.  
VOs Names & Address  File No.  Date  Statu
s 
1. Asha Welfare Society, VPO-
Ganesh Nagar, South 24 
Parganas 
623-51/93-JRY 19/8/2002 Mis utilized funds 
has been 
refunded by the 
VO 
2. Bayar Singh Sibajee Sangha, 
VPO-Taldi, South 24 
Parganas 
725-49/88 CRSP 14/9/94 Document has 
been sent to DC, 
SP on 6/2/2004 
for filing FIR 
3. Jan Kalyan Brotochari 
Sanstha, Vill. Morjada, PO-
Hotar, South 24 Parganas 
1325-136/92 18/10/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
16/6/2004 
4. Kaliganj Block Gramin Khudra 
And Kutir Silpa Jankalyan 
Samiti, AT- Dangapara, PO-
Devagram 
623-3/92 RLEGP 11/10/2000 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
16/6/2004 
5. Management Society of Dr. 
Ambedkar-Abasik Shiksha 
Niketan, PO Karpana Bhati, 
Bhatar, Dist. Burdwan 
1125-10/92 JRY 20/8/96 Not Assisted by 
CAPART 
6. Matangini Seva Sangha, Vill. 
LalmahanChak PO-Purba 
Chandrapur, South 24 
Parganas 
1225-157/93 
SAT 
18/1/95 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
16/6/2004 

7. Nari O Shishu Kalyan Samiti, 
Ganesh Nagar, Via 
Namkhana, Dist South 24 
Parganas  
525-2/91 PC 17/7/96 Mis utilized funds 
has been 
refunded by the 
VO 
8. Rural Poor People Welfare 
Association, 4 Sankari Pukur, 
Nichu Colony, PO-Sripally, 
Dist. Burdwan  
1125-30/89 JRY 8/9/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
16/6/2004 
9. Sevak Samiti, Atal Bihari Jan 
Bhawan, Vill. Kismat Dewan 
Chak, PO Chawka, Via 
Khirpai, Dist. Midnapore 
725-6/90 CRSP 14/9/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
16/6/2004 
10. Unemployed Young Worker 
Society, 4, Shankeri 
Pukur(nichu Colony) PO- 
Sripalli, Dist. Burdwan  
1125-19/92 
RLEGP 
8/9/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
16/6/2004 
11. Vivekananda Child Welfare 
Home, AT/PO Kakdwip, Dist. 
24 Parganas 
825-
16/88DWCRA 
18/7/96 Mis utilized funds 
has been 
refunded by the 
VO 
 
    
     U T T A R  P R A D E S H 
 
 
S. 
No.  
VOs Name & 
Address 
File No.  Dat
e  
Sta
tus 
1. Adarsh 
Gramodyog Seva 
Sansthan, Vill. 
Sambhal, Dist. 
Moradabad 
MED/ CAPART/10NGOs 
MIRBD/2002-03 
04/08/03 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
2. Adarsh 
Gramodyog Vikas 
Sansthan, Guyya 
Talab, Dist. 
Rampur 
124-34/88/IRDP 21/08/90 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
3. Akhil Bharatiya 
Kalyan Parishad, 
AT/PO Arhera, 
Dist. Agra 
622-14/93 JRY 17/12/93 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
4. Akhil Bharatiya 
Mahila Evam Bal 
Utthan Samiti, 
Kamta Prasad Ki 
Gali, Baslignj, 
Dist. Mirzapur 
724-53/90CRSP 13/8/2002 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
5. Anjana Samaj 
Kalyan Samiti, 
AT/PO Pratapur, 
Dist. Firozabad 
824-28/92 DWCRA 6/6/95 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
6. Arjunwahi 724-39/93 CRSP 15/11/94 Letter has 

Audyogik Vikas 
Seva Sansthan, 
Shiyadeeh, Dist. 
Allahabad 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
7. Arya Gyanodaya 
Vidya Mandir 
Trust, C-44, 
Jalvayu Vihar, 
Sector-21, Noida, 
Ghaziabad 
824-201/93 DWCRA 7/9/94 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
8. Bharatiya 
Gramodaya 
Vikasa Samiti, 
Jwalanagar, Dist. 
Rampur 
924-52/86 11/2/92 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
9. Bharatiya Gramya 
Vikas Society, Vill. 
Jamaraon, PO 
Harauni, Dist. 
Lucknow 
724-63/90 ARWSP 9/6/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
10. Bharratiya Mahila 
Vikas Sansthan, 
Dhanoura, Dist. 
Moradabad 
622-1/87 14/9/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
11. Bharatiya Vikas 
Sansthan, Purdil 
Nagar, Dist. 
Aligarh 
824-162/91 5/4/93 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
12. Bhawani Shiksha 
Samiti, Vill/PO 
Chinaulti, Dist. 
Lucknow 
824-15/87 9/6/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
13. Child And Women 
Educational 
Development 
Society, 2E-1824, 
Rajajipuram, Dist. 
Lucknow 
824-12/90 DWCRA 16/2/93 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
14. Deepak 
Gramodyog 
Sansthan, Vill. 
Tiwaya, Tiwaya 
PO, Saharanpur 
MED/CAPART/10NGOs 
MRBD/2002-03 
4/8/03 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
15. Forestry And 
Rural 
Development 
Organization, 9 
State Bank 
Colony, Dist. 
Muzaffarnagar 
524/30/89PC 27/7/2000 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
16. Gram Vikas 
Sanstha, AT/PO 
Pawasara, Dist. 
Bulandshahar 
1224-194/93SAT 23/694 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 

17. Gramin Vikas 
Mandal, AT 
Shahpur Jainpur, 
PO-Arnavali, 
Bhola Road, Dist. 
Meerut 
124-21/88IRDP 9/12/92 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
18. Gramin Vikas 
Sansthan, Vill/PO 
Mirlha, Dist. Agra 
824-160/88 DWCRA 21/5/91 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
19. Gramodaya, Vill. 
Tehri PO-Singha, 
Dist. Deoria  
724-98/90 ARWSP 19/9/2000 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
20. Gramodaya, C-
21, Lohiya Nagar, 
Dist. Gaziabad  
124-22/88IRDP 12/1/93 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
21. Gramodaya Vikas 
Mandal, 147, 
Rambagh, 
Surajkund, Dist. 
Meerut  
824-25/87DWCRA 19/8/92 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
22. Gramodyog Seva 
Sadan, Rudrayan, 
Sarnabal, Dist. 
Moradabad  
MED/CAPART/10NGOs 
MRBD/2002-03 
4/8/2003 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
23. Gramodyog Seva 
Sansthan, Kaili 
Patrasi, PO 
Rudayan, Dist. 
Moradabad 
MED/CAPART/10NGOs 
MRBD/2002-03 
4/8/2003 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
24. Indrani Gramin 
Viikas Samiti, 
Mohalla Patla, 
Dist. Rampur 
124-9/88IRDP 9/3/92 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
25. Jagdev Seva 
Sansthan, Vill. 
Deoria Khas, 
PO/Dist. Deoria  
8.44(4.C-2415)/91 8/10/92 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
26. Jai Bharat 
Nursery School 
Samiti, Gosai 
Talab, Civil Lines, 
Dist. Mirzapur 
724-155/92ARWP 11/10/2000 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
27. Jai Ma Padmavati 
Kalyan Samiti, 
332 Hanuman 
Garh , Dist. 
Firozabad 
124-107/92IRDP 19/3/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
28. Jan Kal yan ART806/93 18/1/95 Letter has 

Sansthan, Baldev 
Bhawan, Jalkal 
Verad, Dist. 
Deoria 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
29. Jan Udyog 
Gramin Vikas 
Kalyan Samiti, 
Ambedkar 
Colony, Dist. 
Firozabad 
724-76/90ARWSP 22/9/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
30. Kala Niketan 
Mahila Evam Bal 
Kalyan Samiti, 
Vill. /PO  Itagaon, 
Dist. Lucknow 
724-72/91-CRSP 9/6/94 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
31. Khadi Gramodyog 
Seva Sadan, 
AT/PO Khempur, 
Dist. Rampur 
724-31/89CRSP 10/2/92 Mis-uilised 
funds has 
been 
refunded by 
the VO 
32. Khadi Gramodyog 
Vikas Samiti, Vill. 
Salkana PO 
Chaukini Dist. 
Moradabad 
824-54/86 15/10/97 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
33. Lakshmi Vikashit 
Seva Sansthan, 
Vill/PO Jogia, The 
Hathras, Dist. 
Aligarh 
724-36/92CRSP 18/10/94 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
34. Mahila Evam Bal 
Kalyan Samiti, PO 
– Naini Lar, Dist. 
Deoria 
1224-127/92-SAT 23/2/92 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
35. Manav Kalyan 
Samaj Utthan 
Sansthan, 
Sukhdev Nagar 
Colony, Sonkh 
Road, Dist. 
Mathura 
PC/Misc/RH/MONITORS/2000 11/1/2002  
36. Mitrapal Khadi 
Gramodyog Seva 
Sansthan, AT/PO 
Nandrauli, Dist. 
Badaun 
MED/CAPART/10NGOs 
MRBD/2002-03 
4/8/03 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
37. Nutan Gram Vikas 
Samiti, AT/PO 
Gohawar, Dist. 
Bijnour 
124-68/91IRDP 11/10/2000 Mis-uilised 
funds has 
been 
refunded by 
the VO 
38. Phool Gamodyog 
Sansthan, Vill. 
Khelia, Rehra, 
MED/CAPART/10NGOs  
MRBD/2002-03 
4/8/93 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 

Dist. Moradabad on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
39. Pragati Seva 
Sansthan, 151 
Boarding House, 
Dist. Hardoi 
724-26/90 25/3/92 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
40. Pushpa Vikas 
Samiti, 45E, Civil 
Lanes, Dist. 
Badaun 
124-37/90IRDP 24/8/92 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
41. Raja Chet Singh 
Shiksha 
Sansthan, J 12/78 
A, Nati Imali, Dist. 
Moradabad 
724-34/89CRSP 24/2/92 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
42. Rural Reforms, 
Sagar Sarai 
Kumar Kunj, Dist. 
Moradabad 
824-130/93DWCRA 10/10/94 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
43 Sahyog 
Gramdoyog Vikas 
Sansthan, C 100, 
Gandhi Nagar, 
Dist. Moradabad 
724-23/88CRSP 29/9/92 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
44. Serve India, 51 
Kailash Puri, Dist. 
Meerut 
12-123/86-FUND 15/2/90 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
45. Sharda Seva 
Samiti Chirgoda, 
PO Kindarpatti, 
Dist.  Deoria 
8.44(4.C-1391)/91 23/2/92 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
46. Shri Durga Devi 
Seva Samiti, 
Paliaraisingh, PO 
Toriya, Dist. 
Hardoi 
824-88/88DWCRA 28/12/89 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
47. Tara Devi Shiksha 
Samiti, Nehru 
Nagar, Dist. 
Deoria 
724-85/90ARWSP 23/2/92 Funds not 
assisted by 
CAPART. 
48. Shri Vidyanath 
Vidyalaya Samiti, 
D-428, 
Rajajipuram, Dist. 
Lucknow 
824-138/88DWCRA 6/9/94 Mis-uilised 
funds has 
been 
refunded by 
the VO 
49. Vikas Sansthan, 
Rakaba, Amila, 
Dist. Mau 
ARTS/660/92 27/3/95 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
50. Vinoba Adarsh 513-9/93PC 22/8/94 Letter has 

Shiksha Samiti, 
Vinoba Nagar, Nai 
Bazar, Naini, Dist. 
Allahabad 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
51. Vishnu Swarg 
Ashram, Rasulpur 
Dhatra, PO – 
Sambhal, Via 
Sarayatareen, PO 
Sherpur, Dist. 
Moradabad 
MED/CAPART/10NGOs 
MRBD/2002-03 
4/8/03 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
52. Vivek Sadhna 
Mandir, Vill/PO-
Gahmar Patti, 
Chaudhary Rai 
Dist. Ghazipur 
ARTS/619/92 17/6/96 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
53. Vivekananda 
Sansthan, 
Bisheswar 
Ashram, 
Akbarpur, Dist. 
Faizabad 
ARTS/556/92/1 10/4/95 Letter has 
been sent to 
SP and DC 
on 4/02/2004 
for filing FIR 
54. Youth Association 
for Rural 
Development, Vill. 
Behta, Dist. 
Bulandshahar 
524-56/90PC 26/10/960 Mis-uilised 
funds has 
been 
refunded by 
the VO 
55. Yuva Evam Bal 
Vikas Samiti, Ram 
Gulam Tola, Dist. 
Deoria 
ARTS/806/93 18/1/95 RC has been 
instructed for 
filing FIR on 
19/03/2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2004-2005) 
 
 
    THIRD SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 27 th September, 2004 
from 1500 to   1700  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 

 
    Members 
 
2.   Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
3.  Shri  Jai Prakash 
4.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 
5.   Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
6.   Shri Prabodh Panda 
7.   Shri Harikewal Prasad 
8.   Prof. M. Ramadass 
9.   Shri K.S. Rao 
10.   Shri Laxman Singh 
11.   Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
2. Shri Cyril John  -      Under Secretary 
3. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Assistant Director 
 
Witnesses 
 
    CAPART 
 
1. Smt. Komal Anand, Director General, CAPART 
2. Shri V. Subramanian, Additional Secretary  & Financial 
Advisor, Ministry of Rural Development. 
3. Dr. P.V. Thomas, Chief Economic Adviser, Ministry of Rural 
Development. 
4. Shri A.K. Angurana, Deputy Director General, CAPART 
5. Shri A. Bhattacharyya, De puty Director General, CAPART 
6. Shri R.P. Meena, Chief Vigilance Officer, CAPART 
 
2. The Committee took evidence  of the representatives of  
CAPART on the subject ‘Council for  Advancement of Peoples’ 
Action  and Rural Technology (CAPART)’.  The evidence was not   
concluded. 
 
     3.       A verbatim record of the  proceedings was kept. 

  
        The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
FOURTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 28 th September, 2004 
from 1100 to   1300  hours. 
 
Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
     Members 
 
2. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
3. Shri Anant Gudhe 
4. Shri  Jai Prakash 
5. Shri Samik Lahiri 
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 
7. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
10. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
11. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
12. Prof. M. Ramadass 
13. Shri K.S. Rao 
14. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
15. Shri Laxman Singh 
16. Shri Sartaj Singh 
17. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
18. Shri Vijay Krishan 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 

2.   Shri A.K. Singh  - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
3.      Shri Cyril John  -      Under Secretary 
    4.       Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Assistant Director 
 
Witnesses 
CAPART 
 
1. Smt. Komal Anand, Director General, CAPART 
2. Dr. P.V. Thomas, Chief Economic Adviser, Ministry of Rural 
Development 
3. Shri A.K. Angurana, Deputy Director General, CAPART 
4. Shri A. Bhattacharyya, De puty  Director General, CAPART 
5. Shri R.P. Meena, Chief Vigilance Officer, CAPART 
 
 
2. The Committee took further ev idence of the representatives 
of CAPART on the subject ‘Council for  Advancement of Peoples’     
Action  and Rural Technology (CAPART)’. The evidence was  concluded. 
 
3.   A verbatim record of the  proceedings was kept. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2004-2005) 
 
 
    EIGHTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the  16 th November, 2004 
from 1500 to   1635  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 

 
2.   Shri Chander Kumar 
3. Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
4. Shri Anant Gudhe 
5.  Shri  Jai Prakash 
6. Shri Samik Lahiri 
7.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 
8.   Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
9.   Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
11.   Shri Harikewal Prasad 
12.   Prof. M. Ramadass 
13.   Shri Laxman Singh 
14.   Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
15. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S Deo 
16. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
2. Shri Cyril John  -      Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses 
 
 
MINISTRY OF  RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
1. Shri M. Shankar  -  Secretary(RD) 
 
CAPART 
 
1. Shri L.V. Saptharishi -  Director General 
2. Shri A.K. Angurana -  Dy. Director General 
3. Shri A. Bhattacharyya -  Dy. Director General 
 
3.    The   Committee    took    evidence  of  the  representatives 

of Ministry of  Rural Development (Department of  Rural Development) 
on the subject ‘Council for  Advancement of Peoples’ Action  and Rural 
Technology (CAPART)’.  The evidence was  concluded. 
 
 4.      A verbatim reco rd of the  proceedings was kept. 
  
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2004-2005) 
 
 
    FOURTEENTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19 th April, 2005 from 
1500 to   1620  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
3. Prof. Chander Kumar 
4. Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
5.  Shri Anant Gudhe 
6.   Shri  Jai Prakash 
7.   Shri Samik Lahiri 
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahatab 
9. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
10.   Shri Zora Singh Mann 
11.    Shri Prabodh Panda 
12.   Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
13.   Shri Harikewal Prasad 
14.   Prof. M. Ramadass 
15.   Shri K.S. Rao 
   16.   Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 

Secretariat 
  
1. Shri John Joseph  - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
3. Shri B.D. Swan   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Cyril John   -      Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Assistant Director 
 
2.   The   Committee considered t he draft Report on Ministry of 
Rural  
Development (Department of Rural Development) – ‘Council for 
Advancement of People’s Action an d Rural Technology (CAPART)’  
and adopted the same with some modifications/additions as given in 
the Annexure.  
 
 3.  The Committee authorised t he Chairman to finalise the Report 
in the light of verbal and other consequential changes, if any, arising 
out of factual verification by the Mi nistry and present the same to the 
House. 
 
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Amendments/Modifications made by the Estimates Committee in the Draft 
Report on Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development) – ‘Council for Advancem ent of People’s Action and Rural 
Technology (CAPART)’ 
      ***** 
 
Para No.     Amendments/Modifications  
 
2         For  The overall………… dismal. 
 Substitute Having gone into the 
working of CAPART, the 
Committee are of the view that  
there is an urgent need for the 

Government to review the overall 
functioning of CAPART and 
restructure the organisation in 
such a manner that it fulfills its 
aims and objectives purposefully. 
 
2      For The Committee………thereon. 
 Substitute The Committee expect 
the Government to set up a High 
Powered Committee to review the 
working of CAPART, take prompt 
corrective measures to regulate its 
functioning and apprise them of 
the follow up action taken thereon. 
 
3       Delete in Goa there was no  
beneficiary at all and 
 
3       After policy measures. 
 Insert The Committee recommend 
that  Ministry/CAPART should 
work out a formula to provide 
assistance to VOs to develop rural 
technology for the States in 
proportion to their rural population 
and incentives should be given to 
VOs to motivate them to work in 
the rural areas of  those States 
which have received  lesser 
assistance from  CAPART. 
 
       4      For The Committee………regard. 
 Substitute The Committee 
recommend that CAPART should 
not indulge  in such practices and 
a provision  be incorporated in the 
Memorandum of Association/ 
Rules in this regard.  
 
   6                 Delete  and to check …………… 

            the guidelines. 
 
  2 1      After   actually recovered. 
 Insert The Committee also 
recommend that discretionary 
powers of the President/DG to 
sanction projects/write off the dues 
should be discontinued. 
 
25     After interaction sessions 
Insert The Committee also desire 
that information regarding 
CAPART funded projects in each 
District should be furnished to the 
Vigilance and Monitoring 
Committee of the District. 
 

 
 