E.C. No. 1433
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
       (DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION)
          UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
Presented to Lok Sabha on March 13, 2008
      LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
                       NEW DELHI
 March 13, 2008/ Phalguna 23, 1929(S)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

       CONTENTS
               Page
Composition of the Committee on Estimates    (iv)
Introduction          (v)
Chapter I  Genesis, Mandate, Goals and Responsibilities        1-5
A. Genesis         1
B. Mandate, Goals and Responsibilities     1
C. Fulfillment of Responsibilities      4
Chapter II  Organisational Structure                 6-11
A. Commission        6
B. Secretariat        8
C. Bureaux and Divisions      9
D. Regional Offices       10
E. Inter University Centres      11
Chapter III  Finance and Grants                12-23
A. Budget Allocation and Utilization    12
B. GDP spending on Higher Education   14
C. Grants to Universities and Colleges   18
Chapter IV  Plan Schemes and Implementation             24-34
A. Tenth Plan                24
B. Eleventh Plan               27
Chapter V  Standard of Higher Education              35-53
A. Importance of Higher Education             35
B. Ranking of Indian Universities             36
C. Role of UGC                36
D. Regulations of UGC               39
E. Assessment by National Accreditation   40
and Assessment Council
F. Programme for Promotion of Quality
and Excellence        47
G. Model Curriculum     50
H. Vocationalisation of Higher Education  51
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Chapter VI Regional disparities and Gender and Social Equity            54-62
A. Regional disparities in development of   54
higher education
B. Gender and Social Equity    60
Chapter VII  Faculty and Research               63-89
A. Faculty 63
(a) Faculty Vacancies     63
(b) Retention of meritorious Faculty   65
(c) Involvement of Faculty in designing   69
curriculum and decision making
(d) Pay Scales of Faculty     71
(e) Academic Staff Colleges              74
B. Research                                                            75
(a) Research in Universities    75
(b) Faculty Improvement Programme   76
(c) Junior Research Fellowship   77
(d) National Eligibility Test    81
(e) Digital Repository of Research and
Teaching Material        82
(f) M.M. Sharma Committee    85
Chapter-VIII  Fee Structure and facilities to students            90-98
   A. Fee Structure                90
   B. Loans for pursuing higher education    93
Chapter-IX Consideration among various professional councils      99-104
A. Regulatory overlappings               99
   B. National Knowledge Commission      101
Observations/recommendations              105-182
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

ANNEXURE
Statement showing the grants paid by UGC           183-189
   to the universities and colleges (state-wise)
during the period from 1997-98 to 2006-07.
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 29.05.2007      190-191
II. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 23.10.2007       192-194
III.  Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 7.01.2007       195-197
IV. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 25.01.2007      198-199
V. Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee held
on 11.03.2007      200-201
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

   COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2007-2008)
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, MP   - Chairman
MEMBERS
2.  Shri Lal  Muni Choubey
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5. Shri Anwar Hussain
6. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
7. Shri P. Karunakaran
8. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi*
9. Shri Vijoy Krishna
10. Vacant #
11.  Shri Samik Lahiri
12. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
13.  Shri Zora Singh Mann
14. Shri Hemlal Murmu
15. Shri D. Narbula
16. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
17.  Shri Prabodh Panda
18.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan
19. Shri Sachin Pilot
20. Shri R. Prabhu
21. Shri Tufani Saroj
22. Smt. Tejaswini Gowda
23. Shri Arjuncharan Sethi
24. Choudhary Bijendra Singh
25. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
26.  Shri Lakshman Singh
27. Kunwar Manvendra Singh
28. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
29. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
30. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary
 2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint Secretary
 3. Shri C.V. Gadgil   - Director
 4. Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Deputy Secretary-II
5. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram  - Committee Officer
______________________________________________________________
*Elected on 28th November, 2007 Vice Shri Vijaykumar Khandelwal, MP passed
  away on   13th November, 2007.
#  Vacant since 03.03.2008 due to resignation of Shri B. Vinod Kumar, MP.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been authorised by
the Committee to submit the report on their behalf present this Seventeenth
Report on the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher
Education) ±µUniversity Grants Commission¶.
2. The subject was selected for detailed examination by the Estimates
Committee (2006-2007). The Estimates Committee (2006-2007) heard the
briefing on the subject on 29 th May, 2007, undertook a study visit to INFLIBNET,
Ahamedabad on February 12 th, 2007 and held informal discussion with the
faculty of University of Hyderabad during their study visit to Hyderabad on
February 15 th, 2007. The Committee(2007-08)  took the oral evidence of
representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development and University
Grants Commission on 23 rd October, 2007. The Committee held informal
discussion with the faculty of University of Calcutta and Jadhavpur University
during their visit to Kolkatta on October 30 th, 2007. They also heard the views of
the Vice-Chancellors and faculty of University of Delhi and Jawaharlal Nehru
University in the presence of the representatives of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development and UGC on January 7th, 2008 and January 25th, 2008.
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry
of Human Resource Development and University Grants Commission for placing
before them the detailed written notes on the subject and for furnishing
information desired in connection with examination of the subject. The
Committee also appreciate the frankness with which the faculty of University of
Delhi, University of Hyderabad, Jawaharlal Nehru University, University of
Calcutta and Jadhavpur University expressed their views on the subject.
4. The Committee would also like to express their gratitude to the Estimates
Committee 2006-07 for the able guidance and right direction provided by them in
obtaining information for indepth and comprehensive study of the subject.
5. The Committee  considered and adopted the report at their sitting held on
March 11th, 2008.
6. The Report is divided into nine chapters. The Committee have inter alia
made the following important observations/recommendations:
(i) In case of State Governments which are in financial difficulties, the UGC
should provide maintenance grants for a certain period to enable
universities and colleges to come to the mainstream
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(ii) The Ministry of Human Resource Development should appoint an
independent, renowned and suitable agency to conduct a thorough and in-
depth study of UGC ¶s functioning with reference to its functions on
maintenance of standards of universities and colleges funded by it. Based
on the outcome of the study, which may be completed within two years,
suitable reforms should be implemented in the functioning of UGC in this
regard.
(iii) The Union Government should share the burden of those states which are
at the bottom of the rankings based on incidence of poverty and which
may find it difficult to increase their share of funds for higher education
commensurate with Union Government¶s increase.
(iv) The Ministry and UGC should finalise the estimates of physical and
financial targets of various schemes only after duly examining the
requirements and the feasibility of achieving the same.
(v) The Ministry, UGC and Planning Commission sit together to examine
threadbare the requirements of UGC for the Eleventh Plan and increase
the plan allocation to UGC accordingly.
(vi) The needs of our existing institutions of excellence like Delhi, Kolkatta,
Mumbai, Madurai, Aligarh, Banaras and Pune universities, JNU IITs, IIMs,
IISs etc. should be studied and high levels of assistance should be
provided to them to make them world-class institutions and to improve
their rankings in the globally recognized ranking systems.
(vii) Entire functioning of National Accreditation and Assessment Council
including its new methodology of assessment and accreditation process
should be reviewed and the standard of methodology  of the proposed
statutory body should be equivalent to that of the similar bodies in
developed countries or that of international organizations engaged in
assessment and accreditation process.
(viii) The Ministry and UGC should explore the possibility of permitting highly
meritorious faculty members of our universities to take up joint
appointment in a foreign university to spend half the year there and half
here as well as allow foreign scholars to teach in our universities.
(ix) The Government should set up the Higher Education Finance Corporation
immediately as earlier recommended by CABE Committee.
(x) The Government first set up the National Commission on Higher
Education to coordinate the activities of various regulatory bodies in
Higher Education such as UGC, AICTE and MCI etc. and simultaneously
hold wider consultations on the recommendations of National Knowledge
Commission including that of Independent Regulatory Authority for Higher
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Education, setting up of 1500 universities by 2015 etc. and take concrete
and appropriate steps in the matter.
5. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold type in the body of the report.
NEW DELHI;
March 11, 2008
Phalguna 21, 1929(S)
C. KUPPUSAMI,
Chairman,
Committee on Estimates.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 CHAPTER-I
Genesis, Mandate, Goals and responsibilities
A. Genesis
1.1 A University Education Commission was set up in 1948 under the
Chairmanship of Dr. S Radhakrishan ³to report on Indian university education
and suggest improvements and extensions that might be desirable to suit the
present and future needs and aspirations of the country ´. It recommended that
the University Grants Commission be reconstituted on the general model of the
University Grants Commission of the United Kingdom with a full-time Chairman
and other members to be appointed from amongst educationists of repute.
1.2 In 1952, the Union Government decided that all cases pertaining to the
allocation of grants-in-aid from public funds to the Central Universities and other
Universities and Institutions of higher learning might be referred to the University
Grants Commission. Consequently, the University Grants Commission (UGC)
was inaugurated by late Shri Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the then Minister of
Education, Natural Resources and Scientific Research on 28 December, 1953.
1.3 Entry 66 of the Union List at the 7 th schedule of the Constitution of India
states that the Parliament has power to make laws in regard to coordination and
determination of standards in institutions for higher education or research and
scientific and technical institutions. In pursuance of the above entry, the UGC,
was formally established in November, 1956 as a statutory body of the
Government of India through the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
B. Mandate, Goals and Responsibilities
1.4 The UGC Act provides that the general duty of the Commission is to take,
in consultation with the Universities or other bodies concerned, all such steps as
it may think fit for the promotion and co-ordination of University education and for
the determination and maintenance of standards of teaching, examination and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

research in universities. The Commission also provide financial support to
universities and colleges for their development. The functions and powers of the
Commission are provided in the Act which are briefly mentioned below :-
1. To allocate and disburse, out of the Fund of the Commission,
grants to Universities, established or incorporated by or under a
Central Act, and Colleges. The grants to the Central Universities
are provided for the maintenance and development. For State
sponsored universities, the UGC provides assistance under Plan
development assistance and also under other schemes aimed at
quality and Excellence and development of infrastructure.
2. To establish institutions for providing common facilities, services
and programmes for a group of universities or for the universities in
general and maintain such institutions or provide grants for their
maintenance.
3. To recommend to any University the measures necessary for the
improvement of University education and advise the University
4. To advise Central Government or any State Government on the
allocation of any grants to Universities for any general or specified
purpose out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated
Fund of the State.
5. To advise any authority, if such advice is asked for, on the
establishment of a new University, or on proposals connected with
expansion of the activities of any University.
6. To advise the Central Government or any State Government or
University on any question which may be referred to the
Commission by the Central Government or the State Government
or the University, as the case may be.
7. Perform such functions as may be prescribed or as may be
deemed necessary by the Commission for advancing the cause of
higher education in India or as may be incidental or conducive to
the discharge of the above functions.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

8. To specify the degrees which could be awarded by the Universities
in the country by the institutions or class of institutions which may
be recognized by the Commission.
1.5 The Commission is also empowered to make Rules and Regulations on
the following subjects :
a) Specifying the institutions or class of institutions which may be
recognized by the Commission under the relevant provisions of its
Act.
b) Defining the qualifications that should ordinarily be required of any
person to be appointed to the teaching staff of the University,
having regard to the branch of education in which he is expected to
give instruction
c) Defining the minimum standards of instruction for the grant of any
degree  by any University
d) Regulating the maintenance of standards and the co-ordination of
work or facilities in Universities.
e) Specifying the matters in respect of which fees may be charged,
and scales of fees in accordance with which fees may be charged,
by a college
1.6 In regard to the provisions of the UGC Act and autonomy of UGC, the
Secretary, Department of Higher Education in the Ministry of Human Resource
Development further briefed the Committee as follows :-
³The Act provides for the composition of the Commission, the terms and
conditions of the service of its members and other establishment matters,
its powers and functions under which the Commission can regulate the
working of the Universities and consequences of the failure of the
University to comply with these. Sir, UGC has full autonomy as far as
academic matters are concerned. It is only in case of any policy issues
that the Central Government have, under Article 20 of the UGC Act,
powers to give them direction. Otherwise, in all matters of day-to-day
academic issues, curriculum quality, maintenance of standards etc. the
UGC is fully autonomous.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

C. Fulfillment of responsibilities
1.7 When asked how far UGC has succeeded in achieving the mandate given
to it and in fulfilling its responsibilities, the Committee were informed in a written
reply as follows :-
³By and large the UGC has succeeded in achieving the mandate given to
it. However, the number of Universities and educational institutions has
grown manifold over the years but the allocation of funds has not kept
pace with the increase of institutions. Non-availability of adequate
resources is one of the reasons for UGC not being able to implement
some of the intended programmes for upgrading standards of higher
education. This position has been changing since 2004-05 when Plan
Allocations to the UGC have been steadily enhanced, even though not
fully satisfactorily. However, substantial increases in outlay for the UGC is
expected during the XI Plan.´
1.8 In regard to steps that are proposed to be taken by UGC to bridge the gap
between the mandate and the achievements made so far, UGC informed the
Committee in a written reply that the plan funds made available by the
Government of India were grossly inadequate to meet the targets set by the
UGC. Hence there was a gap between the mandate and the achievements. The
Commission proposed to address the following issues :-
1. Decline in real expenditure on higher education on per capita basis
which leads to poor education infrastructure in some areas and
sectors.
2. The enrolment ratio in higher education remained comparatively
low.
3. About 57% of state universities or 45% of the universities and about
40% of colleges were covered at present under UGC development
funding; others were not covered simply because these institutions
did not have adequate level of physical and academic infrastructure
and were required to be brought at par with others by providing
them development grants. There was a quality gap even between
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

educational institutions which received grants. A sample analysis
by the UGC indicated that only about 30% of universities and 10%
of colleges are of µ$¶ grade by NAAC assessment.
4. The growth of higher education system had not been uniform and
there were many disparities and imbalances across regions and
social groups. These imbalances would have to be corrected
urgently in order to make the higher education system equitable
and inclusive for all. Therefore, programmes had been prepared
with the objective to :-
a) increase enrolment rate in higher education from 10% in
2006 to 15% in 2012.
b) Improve the quality of physical and other infrastructure of
universities and colleges, including quality of faculty. Special
focus on scholarship/fellowship for research students, and
also on science education.
c) Provide equal access to educationally lacking groups and
bring inclusiveness, so as to develop a policy of ³Inclusive
Education´.
d) Focus on educationally lagging regions/districts.
e) Promote relevant education.
f) E-governance and computerization of UGC, its regional
offices and inter-connectivity with universities and colleges
for coordinating the allocation of grants and monitoring.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER-II
Organisational Structure
A. Commission
2.1 The Commission consists of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and 10
other members appointed by the Government of India. The Chairman is chosen
from the persons who are not officers of the Central Government or of any State
Government. Out of the ten members, two are chosen from among officers of
Central Government to represent the Government. Not less than four are chosen
from among persons who are at the time they are so chosen, shall be teachers of
the universities. The remaining are chosen, from among persons (1) who have
knowledge of, or experience in agriculture, commerce, forestry or industry, (2)
who are members of engineering, legal, medical or any other learned profession
and (3) who are Vice-Chancellors of Universities or who, not being teachers of
universities, are in the opinion of the Central Government, educationists of repute
or have obtained high academic distinctions.   The Secretary in the Ministry of
Human Resources Development (Deptt. of Higher Education) and the Secretary
in the Department of Expenditure are the members of the commission.  In this
regard the Secretary, Deptt. of Higher Education, stated during the briefing as
below:-
³Myself, as Secretary, Deptt. of Higher Education is also a member of the
Commission and so is the Secretary, Deptt. of Expenditure.  The
availability of these two officers from the Government in the Commission
facilitates coordination with the Commission and it leads to a smooth
functioning of the Commission and a better understanding between the
Commission and the Government.´
2.2 Regarding number of sittings of the Commission and the attendance of its
members, the Ministry informed the Committee in their written reply that 23
sittings of the Commission were held during the period 2005-07.  Perusal of the
information provided by the Ministry shows that Secretary (Expenditure) did not
attend twenty-two sittings.  In one special meeting held on 23.01.2007 it was not
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

mentioned whether the Secretary (Expenditure) attended the meeting or not.
Secretary (Higher Education) did not attend five sitting during this period.
2.3 Even though the Secretary is a member of the Commission, the Ministry
examines afresh the recommendations/decisions of the commission.  When
asked about the necessity of the same, the Additional Secretary in the Ministry of
Human Resource Development clarified during the evidence as follows:-
³You had raised this very important issue about examination of UGC
recommendation.  I would just like to submit that participation of
Secretaries of HRD and Expenditure, technically they are members of the
University Grants Commission but when they go and participate in a
meeting of the Commission, it is still a decision or a recommendation of
the Commission.  There are only one or two provisions where the
recommendation of the UGC requires the approval or the orders of the
Central Government.  But the Central Government, as the Committee
would agree is more than the Secretary, HRD and Secretary, Expenditure-
of course, very often Secretary Expenditure is not able to personally go
but that issue apart, the fact is that there is the Minister in charge, there
may be other Departments which may be involved, notably the Planning
commission or sometimes may be the AICTE, the Ministry of Health or
whatever.  So, the decision making process in the Government is a larger
process and the Transaction of Business Rules of the Government clearly
lay down that wherever an issue concerns more than one Ministry each
one of them has to be consulted.  Of course, within the nodal Ministry also
orders have to be obtained at the level of the Minister which is why even
though the Commission has representation of HRD and Ministry of
Expenditure at the official level their proposals and recommendations
have to be processed at the Govt. level.  But your point is well taken that
this should be done expeditiously and unnecessary examination and
noting etc. at lower levels, should be minimized or avoided.  I am sure we
would try to address that.´
2.4 When asked whether Government/UGC received any
suggestions/complaints regarding composition and functions of the Commission,
the Ministry in a written reply furnished as under:-
³A Task Force was constituted under the Chairmanship of Prof. Amrik
Singh, which made recommendations, in February 1999, suggesting
certain amendments to the UGC Act.  The recommendations included the
following four features ± (i) provisions regarding fake universities were
suitably revised; (ii)  it was proposed that five members of the Commission
be made whole time members and total membership be raised from 12 to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

15; (iii)  provisions regarding foreign universities have been incorporated
into the proposed amendments; and (iv)  suitable amendments have also
been recommended for giving opportunity for the establishment of private
or self-financing universities in the country.  The recommendations of the
Task Force were not implemented in view of the need subsequently felt for
a more comprehensive amendment to the UGC Act.
 The National Knowledge Commission (NKC) have also suggested
changes in the functioning of the UGC.  It has, among other things,
suggested that the role of the UGC should be re-defined to focus on the
disbursement of grants to, and maintenance of, public institutions in higher
education and for the regulation of Universities, a new Independent
Regulatory Authority for Higher Education should be created.  As there is
no broad consensus on the recommendations of the NKC, the
recommendations of the NKC have not yet been accepted by the
Government.  A wider consultation process has been initiated ´.
B. Secretariat
2.6 The executive head of the UGC is the Secretary. The following is the staff
strength of the Commission¶s Secretariat:-
Sanctioned Strength  Actual strength
2005-06 Present 2005-06 Present
Group µ$¶ 112   92   68   72
Group µ%¶ 124 123 110 111
Group µ&¶ 473 473 336 321
Group µ'¶ 101   99   70   66
Canteen   19   19   15   13
Total 829 806 599 583
2.7 The above table shows that 583 employees, constituting 72.33%, are
working in UGC against the sanctioned strength of 806.   In regard to decrease in
staff strength, the Ministry in a written reply furnished the following information:-
³As per Ninth Report of the Expenditure Reforms Commission submitted
in September 2001, UGC was required to reduce its staff strength, by
abolishing 264 posts.  The UGC were also required to reduce its number
of schemes and thus reduce the requirement of staff.  UGC issued orders
on 15.12.2003 abolishing 55 posts.  As 146 posts were lying vacant for
more than one year UGC were required to abolish them.  The UGC
informed on 13.09.2004 that in view of depleting staff support, they would
like to fill up 65 posts immediately by way of revival of vacant posts.
However as per the Expenditure Reforms Commission Report, UGC is
entitled to fill up only 36 additional posts beyond 583 filled up posts and
that too, if Finance Ministry gives approval for revival of posts, which were
lying vacant for more than one year.  The UGC had also informed that it
has requested the Government for inspection by Staff Inspection Unit of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the Ministry of Finance to determine the staff strength of the Commission.
According to the UGC inspection by Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) has not
taken place and they have requested the Administrative Staff College,
Hyderabad to conduct a study of the UGC.  However, sanction of any
additional posts can be done only with the approval of the Finance
Ministry who generally insist on the recommendation of the SIU ´.
2.8 When asked whether the present organizational structure is adequate,
UGC in a written reply stated that it has requested the Administrative Staff
College of India, Hyderabad to conduct a study of the functioning of the UGC and
to suggest necessary modifications and changes in its structure.  In view of the
proposed expansion of the higher education system, the commission has further
stated that there may be a need for review of the organizational structure of the
UGC.
2.9 In regard to organizational structure of the UGC, the Additional Secretary
in the Ministry of Human Resource Development while deposing before the
Committee stated as under :-
³The Commission oversees higher education system comprising about
400 degree granting institutions which include universities, deemed
universities and institutions of national importance so declared by Acts of
Parliament and State Legislatures, about 18,000 colleges. The
Commission functions through about 14 Bureaux dealing with different
areas, six Inter University Centres, 57 Academic Staff Colleges and seven
Regional Offices.´
C. Bureaux and Divisions
2.10 As per the information provided by the Ministry, the Secretariat of UGC
operates through the following Bureaux and Divisions:-
1. Finance and Internal Audit
2. Administration, Vigilance and e-governance
3. Information and Statistics
4. Policy, Planning, Annual Plans as well as Pay-Scales of
teaching staff and Basic Scientific Research in Universities
5. Fellowships and Awards
6. National Eligibility Test
7. State Universities including Monitoring and Evaluation,
Publication and Website
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

8. Bureau dealing with Regional Languages, Legal Matters,
SAP, Special Programme and Computer Technology
9. Library, Right to Information, Monitoring of Research
Projects, Mal-practices and Rajbhasha
10. Central Universities and Inter-University Centres
11. Parliamentary Work, Autonomous Colleges, International
Cooperation and Academic Staff Colleges and Schemes
relating to Value Education, Human Rights and Duties
12. Deemed to be universities and declarations under Section
2F and 12 B and Scheme for Potential for Excellence
13. Physical Education, Yoga, Adventure Sports, Non-formal
Education, Adult Education and Carrier Oriented Education.
14. Bureau dealing with Divisions relating to SC/ST as well as
OBC reservation, remedial coaching welfare schemes
relating to minorities, Women Studies and Population
Education.
D. Regional Offices
2.11 Six Regional Offices of UGC are located at Hyderabad, Pune, Bhopal,
Kolkata, Guwahati and Bangalore. The Northern Regional College Bureau
(NRCB) of UGC Head Office works as Northern Regional Office. In the Annual
Report of UGC, 2005-06, it has been mentioned that these Regional Offices have
been set up for implementation of various schemes/programmes relating to
college sector.  In regard to regional offices, the Chairman, UGC apprised the
Committee during the briefing as under:-
³We have six regional offices.  A decision was taken several years ago
that we should decentralize the functioning of University Grants
Commission so that it improves the delivery system, working improves,
and the grants are released on time.  So there are six regional offices
covering two-three states.  We have offices in Pune, Hyderabad,
Bangalore, kolkata, Delhi and Guwahati.  We have taken a review of the
regional offices as part of the 11 th Plan and we are going to increase the
regional offices.  Two more regional offices will be added.  The regional
offices primarily deal with the college sector because there are about six
thousand colleges that we support for various purposes like development
grants, travel grants and other grants.  So, everything is done by the
regional offices in the vicinity of the college and that has improved the
delivery system of the University Grants Commission quite a lot.  We also
transfer some of the schemes to State Universities to the regional offices
so I think it has brought quite a bit of improvement in its working and
helping the colleges. ´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

E. Inter University Centres
2.12 Regarding Inter University Centres, the Additional Secretary, in the
Ministry during oral evidence informed the Committee as under: -
³The Inter University Centres are meant to provide common facilities for
the university and collegiate system.  Three of the six Inter University
Centres are concerned with facilities in various areas of science. One is
Accelerator Centre. The other is meant to enable universities to avail
facilities with Department of Atomic Energy and the third is the Inter
University Centre for Astronomy and Astro physics.  Apart from these,
there are three other centers. One is the National Assessment and
Accreditation Council which assesses and accredits institutions of higher
education including universities and colleges. The next is the Centre for
Educational Communication which generates software for use in higher
education, and the last is INFLIBNET which is supposed to network
university and college libraries and give them facilities of access to e-
journals, etc.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

      CHAPTER – III
       FINANCE AND GRANTS
A. Budget allocation and utilization
3.1 When asked about the budget allocation and utilization, UGC in its written
reply furnished to the Committee stated that the budget allocations (Plan and
Non-Plan) made by the Government of India to UGC and the expenditure
incurred by it during the last ten financial years are given below:-
                                                                                                          Plan
S. No. Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates/
Actual
Receipts
     (Rs. in lakhs)
Expendiutre
1. 1997-1998   32310.00   38317.23   39113.31
2. 1998-1999   32310.00   38969.61   40387.37
3. 1999-2000   34800.00   43977.00   44396.27
4. 2000-2001   40700.00   46300.00   47588.25
5. 2001-2002   46008.00   47788.38   48709.59
6. 2002-2003   51675.00   55976.00   55954.87
7. 2003-2004   51675.00   51675.00   61408.49
8. 2004-2005   75775.00   71975.00   75132.66
9. 2005-2006   78540.00   78630.00   80874.38
10. 2006-2007 126980.00 121872.00 125025.08
                                                                                                 Non-Plan
S. No. Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates/
Actual
Receipts
     (Rs. in lakhs)
Expendiutre
1. 1997-1998   45000.00   54500.00   54521.31
2. 1998-1999   84700.00   99897.00   99990.53
3. 1999-2000   64000.00   97500.00   97633.06
4. 2000-2001 100000.00 100000.00 100396.29
5. 2001-2002 103068.00 102068.00 100430.99
6. 2002-2003 110000.00 110000.00 112626.22
7. 2003-2004 111380.00 113230.00 113389.18
8. 2004-2005 111380.00 118285.00 119223.57
9. 2005-2006 121835.00 138961.00 138981.86
10. 2006-2007 146070.00 156070.00 153647.84
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.2 A representative of the Ministry informed the Committee during evidence
that in 2007-08 Plan and Non-Plan Budget allocation for UGC was Rs. 2,374
crore and Rs. 1,639 crore respectively.
3.3 UGC further informed the Committee that the Government of India is the
only source of funding for UGC.  The Administrative/ Establishment expenses
incurred by UGC and its regional centers during the last financial years are as
follows:-
S.No. Year UGC’s Administrative/Estt. Charges including
UGC’s Regional Centres
(Rs. In lakhs)
1 1997-1998 1478.51
2 1998-1999 1927.21
3 1999-2000 1552.07
4 2000-2001 1720.38
5 2001-2002 1711.88
6 2002-2003 2041.43
7 2003-2004 2221.98
8 2004-2005 2329.40
9 2005-2006 2615.40
10 2006-2007 2883.70
3.4 About 100% increase in administrative expenses, during the last ten
years, can be noticed from the above table.  According to UGC, the reasons for
increase in administrative expenses include:-
(a) manifold increase in the salaries of the employees during the last
ten years;
(b) the number of expert committees on various issues has also
increased involving expenditure on travel, boarding and lodging of
members; and
(c) general price rise in different goods and services due to inflation.
3.5 When asked whether the budget allocations received from the
Government of India are adequate to fulfill the administrative responsibilities of
UGC,  UGC in a written reply stated that it will need more funds to cater to the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

administrative support for the proposed expansion of higher education in the XI th
Plan period.
B. GDP Spending On Higher Education
3.6 In September, 2004, the Government of India constituted seven
Committees of the Central Advisory Board of Education (CABE) to examine in
detail the critical issues relating to education system. Two committees were
constituted to examine the issues relating to  µAutonomy on Higher Education
Institutions¶ and µFinancing of Higher and Technical Education ¶. These
Committees made certain recommendations regarding funding of higher
education.  The recommendations are as follows :-
(i) There is need for preparing a detailed perspective plan for the
development of Higher and Technical Education, including detailed
estimates of resource requirement.
(ii) The Government ± Union and the States ± must make a firm
commitment to sustained funding of higher education institutions, in
such a way that the basic teaching and research extension
activities are not affected in their quality and quantum due to
paucity of financial resources.
(iii) With respect to State funding for higher education, as a thumb rule,
25% of the total allocations for education has to be allocated to
higher and technical education.
(iv) Approach the Planning Commission for the enhancement of
allocation to higher education sector to the level of 2% of GDP.
3.7 In regard to the action taken on the above recommendations, the Ministry
in a written reply stated that the Ministry had set up a Committee, vide order
dated 3.10.2005, under the Chairmanship of Prof. Tapas Majumdar, with the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

following terms of reference :- (i) To quantify actual allocation of public resources
(Central & State Governments and Local Bodies) to education during the first
four years of the Tenth Plan (2002-2006), in absolute terms and as percentage of
GDP, and to estimate likely allocation of resources, based on current growth,
projections, for the period 2006-12 and (ii) To quantify total resources which
would become available for education during the above period 2006-12, if public
expenditure on education were to equal 6% of GDP during each of six years. The
Committee gave its report on 17 th November 2005. It was indicated that for
raising public expenditure on Education to the level of 6% of GDP, an additional
average amount of Rs.1,27,000 crores per year, over and above the existing
level of public expenditure, would be required during the XIth Plan assuming a
growth rate of 7% per annum in GDP.
3.8 Regarding GDP spending on education, the Secretary, Higher Education
informed the Committee during evidence as follows:-
³In India, we have been having several Commissions which have
recommended that at least 6 percent of GDP should be spent on
education.  Unfortunately, till now, we have been able to spend only about
3.5 percent of our GDP on education.  On higher education, it is even
lower at the level of only about 0.65 to 0.7 percent of the GDP which is
spent on higher education.  Whereas in developed countries this would be
of the order of 1.4 or 1.5 percent of the GDP.  We have been requesting
that in the Eleventh Five Year Plan we should reach this level of 6 percent
of GDP as expenditure on education.  Again, in our federal setup, almost
75 percent of the expenditure on education is done in the States.  Only
about 25 percent is Government of India share.  So, for reaching this 6
percent of the GDP, both the State Governments and the Central
Government will have to raise their resources and we will have to come up
to this level «.   As I submitted, while 75 percent of the expenditure on
higher education is met by the States and 25 percent by the Central
Government, private educational institutions almost spend 50 percent of
the total requirement of higher education.  That means 50 percent of the
funding for higher education in the country comes from private sources
and the balance 50 percent comes from our Government sources «.
Between the Government of India and State Governments, the ratio is
75:25 or 80:20, that is, 80 percent of expenditure is done by the State and
only about 20-25 percent expenditure is done by the Centre´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.9 The Secretary, Higher Education further informed the Committee that 0.17
percent of GDP is being spent by the Union Government on higher education as
on date.
3.10 The Chairman, UGC also stated in this regard, ³My urgent request to you
as representatives in Parliament is that you may try to impress upon the body
that expenditure on higher education should increase.  It has been mentioned
that one percent of our GDP should go to higher education.  But at the moment, it
is 0.37 or 0.4 percent.  You can see that there is a huge gap in what is
recommended five to six years before and what we are allocating to higher
education today.  So, there is a need to allocate more to higher education. ´
3.11 When it was pointed out that the per capita expenditure on education has
declined despite the education cess levied by the Government, the Additional
Secretary in the Ministry clarified during evidence as under:-
³On the issue of per capita expenditure declining despite the cess, I
would like to submit that the decline in per capita expenditure was
essentially a trend which was continuing till about 2003-04.  I am
happy to report that this trend has since been arrested and
reversed.  It is now growing.  There has been a very significant
increase in the plan outlay for higher education of the Central
Government especially in the current year with the imposition of the
Secondary and Higher Education Cess.  Until this year, the cess
which was introduced in 2004 was a Basic Education Cess of two
per cent and it was meant exclusively for basic education, namely
to fund programmes like Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and Mid Day Meal.
But the one percent cess which has been introduced from this year
is meant for secondary and higher education and with that we have
been able to step up very substantially our outlay for secondary and
higher education from this year.  We expect further substantial
stepping up in the 11 th Plan.  As I have already submitted, we hope
to get a nine times increase during the 11 th Plan.´
3.12 Regarding parity in expenditure on education between the Centre and
States, the representative of the Ministry further stated as below:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³The other things which we have been stressing with the Planning
Commission that the responsibility to take it up towards six percent cannot
be said to be responsibility exclusively of the Central Government.  It is
the joint responsibility of the Central and State Governments.
Unfortunately, many  a time, what tends to happen is as Central
Government increases its commitment, its funding to education, State
Governments tend to withdraw theirs.  That is an extremely unfortunate
situation because in the end, the sector as a whole does not gain enough.
If today State is putting in Rs.100, Central Government is putting Rs.70
and if Centre increases its share to Rs.100, States should also increase
their share to Rs.130 or at least take it to Rs.120 or Rs.110 or at the very
least, maintain it at Rs.100.  But what they tend to do is - because Central
Government is giving extra Rs.30, they would reduce their ¶s from Rs.100
to Rs.85 or Rs.80 with the result that even the net additionality provided by
the Centre does not necessarily become the net additionality for the sector
as a whole.  We have requested the Planning Commission to look into this
aspect because they are the ones who approve the States ¶ annual plans
and Five Year Plans.  We have requested them to make sure that States
do not renege on their commitment and in fact continue to increase their
allocation for education.  Only then, can we move towards five or six
percent of GDP, because otherwise, there is this tendency and so, it is a
kind of three steps forward and two steps or one step backward.
Therefore, the entire net additionality of the Central Government does not
get translated into net additional its for the sector as a whole. ´
3.13 When asked whether 25% of allocation to higher education out of total
allocation to education would suffice, the representative stated :-
³In a country like India with its vast needs, almost nothing would quite
suffice.  But 25% of the total education allocation for higher education, we
consider to be a fair share for higher education.  Technically and
theoretically it is possible to allocate higher share but then there are so
many competing demands on the national kitty and so many competing
sectors.  So, out of the total outlay for education, needless to say a very
substantial part has to continue to go to the elementary education and
secondary education.  If elementary and secondary education are not
strong enough, we would not have proper candidates to be given higher
education.  So, the CABE Committee recommendations regarding roughly
50 percent for elementary education, and 25 percent each for secondary
and higher education and technical education, we consider to be a fair
allocation at the moment.´
3.14 CABE Committee on Financing of Higher and Technical Education made
the following recommendations in the issue :-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³If 50 percent of the total education budget is being allocated to
elementary education, for balanced development of all levels of education,
25 percent to secondary education and 25 percent has to be allocated to
higher and technical education together. Presently about 15 percent is
allocated to higher and technical education. The suggested normative
ratios, however, assume significance, if the total allocation is raised to the
level of six percent of the gross national product (GNP) from the current
level of about four percent, as promised by the government. This would
mean higher and technical education would together get about 1.5 percent
of the GNP ± approximately one percent for higher education and 0.5
percent for technical education. Currently hardly 0.4 percent is being spent
on higher education, and 0.1 percent on technical education. ´
C. Grants to Universities and Colleges
3.15 Regarding number of universities in the country, the Ministry in a written
reply furnished the following information:-
1. Central Universities :    24
2. State Universities:   228
3. Private Universities:     18
4. Deemed Universities:  116
--------
Total Number of Universities:   386
--------
There are 20,676 colleges in the country.
3.16 The University Grants Commission provides financial assistance to eligible
universities/colleges which are included under Section 2(f) and declared fit to
receive central assistance under Section 12(B) of UGC Act, 1956 as per
approved pattern of assistance under various schemes.  Allocation of the grants
under five year Plan to various universities and colleges is based on the
recommendations of the duly constituted expert committees and the availability
of overall fund with UGC.  The UGC provides development grant under Plan, to
eligible State Universities and Colleges whereas plan and non-plan grant is
provided to Central Universities/eligible deemed universities and colleges.  UGC
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

releases grant in instalments to the Institutions on receiving the utilization
certificate of the previous grants.  Development assistance is intended to improve
infrastructure and basic facilities in universities and colleges, so as to achieve at
least the thresh-hold level of infrastructure apart from bringing about qualitative
development.
3.17 The Ministry informed the Committee that the pattern of assistance is
uniform for all state universities for general development plan grants based on
following parameters as per UGC (Fitness of Institutions for Grants) Rules,
1975:-
1. Age of the University
2. Enrolment at different levels
3. Number of Departments
4. Number of Faculty
5. Enrolment of Women
6. Enrolment of SC/ST
7. Location
3.18 The number of Universities and Colleges included under Section 2(f) and
declared fit to receive central assistance under Section 12(B) of the UGC Act, as
on 31.03.2007 and receiving development assistance is given below:
1. Central Universities:         18
2. State Universities:    124
3. Deemed Universities:     25
4. Colleges:         5661
3.19 A statement showing the grants paid by University Grants Commission to the
universities and colleges (state-wise) during the period from 1997-98 to 2006-07 is at
Annexure-I.
3.20 When asked the reasons for not funding all the universities, the Secretary,
Higher Education furnished the following information during briefing:-
³Sir, there are two reasons for our not being able to fund all of them.  One
is the scarcity of resources.  The total allocation of budget to UGC, does
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

not permit us to spread it thinner than what we are already doing.
Secondly, as per the regulations of UGC for an institute or somebody to
be eligible for UGC funds, they have to qualify under section 12B of the
UGC Act and for qualifying under that, they have to have some minimum
standards.  These standards are that they should have at least five
Departments, they must have a ratio of 1 Professor to 2 Readers and to 5
or 6 Lecturers, in their teaching faculty.  They must also have some
minimum standard of library and other infrastructural facilities.  This is a
typical egg-chicken situation, whether the egg came first or the chicken
came first.  The colleges which are not in good condition cannot be helped
by UGC because they do not fulfill the guidelines.  Some of the States
have been complaining that how do we come up to that level that you will
be able to fund us.  On the other side, our dilemma is that if we do not
have this minimum standard, there could be mushrooming growth of
universities which will start, if I may be permitted to say, with very inferior
infrastrucal facilities and people can start some educational institution in
just a small tenement and then, come to UGC for funding.  So, we are in a
dilemma.  In fact, we are trying to deliberate on this as to how do we make
progress on that.´
3.21 The Secretary, Higher Education further stated, ³Of course for the state
universities which came after 1972, some kind of a decision has been taken that
they will not be supported by UGC for want of enough resources.  But, even for
others, we find at time that our resources are not enough to give to everyone.
That is why, out of about 18,000 colleges and about 6,500 which are under 12B,
we are able to support only 5,500 colleges. ´    In regard to universities which
have been established after 1972, the Ministry subsequently clarified in a written
reply that UGC has been supporting state universities which have been declared
fit to receive assistance in terms of Section 12 (B) of the Act, 1956 including
those established after 1972.  Regarding colleges which are not given grants by
UGC, the Chairman UGC further stated during briefing, ³As has been pointed
out, we are supporting only those colleges which are recognized under section
12B.  These are colleges which get permanent affiliation from the university after
they meet the minimum standards.  There are 8000 colleges which do not meet
the minimum standard and so, we do not support them and so, they do not have
funds.  They do not invest.  Since they do not meet our minimum conditions, we
do not help them and the colleges remain where they are.  So, the State
Governments should spend money on them so that they are brought at par with
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the minimum standards and then we can help them.  I think increase in public
expenditure on higher education is an issue which should be taken care of at the
political level. ´
3.22 When asked to comment whether there is any need to review section 12B
of UGC Act so as to provide grants to all the universities/colleges in the country,
the Ministry in a written reply commented, ³since the institutions not recognized
under Section 12B are also contributing to higher education, there is a need to
review the procedure for grant of approval under Section 12B to bring non-
approved institutions under the purview of UGC funding. ´
3.23 When asked whether grants given by UGC are sufficient to carry out the
activities of the Universities, Calcutta University stated during study tour of the
Committee to Kolkata that approximately 10% of the UGC ¶s annual budget is
presently spent as developmental grants for State Universities. In Calcutta
University¶s annual budget the UGC ¶s share does not exceed 5%. UGC ¶s
financial support to State Universities like Calcutta University is extremely
inadequate to meet the present challenges in the realm of higher education and
the UGC should consider the possibility of providing both development and
maintenance grants to State Universities. In this regard, Jadavpur University
stated that funds released by the UGC towards disbursement of grants be linked
with NAAC rating and excellence in academic activities in addition to adhoc rule
of thumb of 10% increase.
3.24 During Committee ¶s study visit to Hyderabad, faculty of the University of
Hyderabad stated in a written reply that they are of the unanimous opinion that
the present level of funding to the University of Hyderabad is not just grossly
inadequate but is completely out of tune with the realities at the ground level as
well as global developments in the area of higher education.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3.25 The Committee heard the views of the Vice-Chancellors and faculty of the
University of Delhi and Jawaharlal Nehru University on the subject.  Both are
central universities.  When asked whether faculties of the University of Delhi and
JNU think that the grants given by UGC to them are sufficient to carry out the
activities of the university particularly to excel further in higher education, Delhi
University in its reply stated that the existing levels of grants are not enough.  In
2006, Delhi University proposed a minimum input of Rs. 150 crore to create basic
facilities for good education at the University.  Only Rs. 39.84 crore has been
provided so far- this figure includes the special allocation of Rs. 32.4 crore in the
last year of the X th Plan and Rs. 7.44 crore as XI th Plan grant.  In this regard,
Jawarharlal Nehru University stated in its reply that the grants received by JNU
from UGC is inadequate to carry out basic activities of an international standard
University.  The maintenance grant has remained almost static during the 10 th
Plan period sufficient only to pay the salaries, pension and to make non-salary
payment towards electricity and water charges, health facilities etc.  The
allocation to the Schools for lab running expenditure [LRE] is very meager.  JNU
received Rs. 21 crores as Development Plan Grant during the 10 th Plan as
against the plan demand of Rs. 87.7 crores.
3.26 The projected requirements of JNU during 11 th Plan for infrastructure
development, renovation and expansion of existing infrastructure, campus
development, up-gradation of Library, purchase of equipment, development of
new areas/research activities, extension activities and outreach programmes etc.
have been estimated at about Rs. 633 crores whereas funds requirement for
additional staff during the Plan Period has been estimated at Rs. 95 crores.
UGC should enhance its grants to universities like JNU/DU by ten folds during XI
Plan to develop state of the art teaching and research in higher education.
3.27 There are 66 Deemed Universities run by private sector. When asked
whether UGC provides any grants to these private deemed universities, Ministry
in a written reply stated ³all eligible deemed universities conferred status of
deemed to be universities upto 1992 have been receiving UGC grants.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Subsequently, it was decided that no grant would be provided to deemed
universities which are promoted by trust/society. However, in the recent past,
UGC has provided token developmental grant to Ramakishna Mission Research
Institute, Howrah for their contribution in value education. ´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

       CHAPTER-IV
Plan schemes and implementation
A. Tenth Plan
4.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that the funding strategy of UGC in
tenth plan was to balance the complimentary demands. It was informed that the
Commission had adopted multi-layered funding strategy, which had following key
elements at focus:
1. Pursue, at enhanced level of funding, normal development grant to
colleges and universities.
2. Provide special funding for backward area location as well as
young colleges and universities.
3. Identify colleges and universities with potential and fund them to
reach excellence in teaching and research with greater academic,
administrative and financial flexibility.
4. Cultivate and support credit based µcriteria¶ approach education
especially in autonomous colleges as well as colleges and
universities with potentials for excellence.
5. Promote effective clubbing of open and conventional system of
address increasing demand in higher education.
6. Intensify education with good grounding and fortify it with add-on-
utility specialization.
7. Propagate parallel education concept to do degree and diploma or
dual degree in shear conventional and/or clubbed open and
conventional system.
8. Promote college-University  joint degree conferring concept.
9. Create information flow network between colleges and universities.
10. Promote creation and effective use of multi-media to supplement
classroom and laboratory teaching.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

11. Create institutions, in link with research laboratories, for promoting
integrated 5 years teaching in science disciplines with imbibed
research component.
12. Pursue skill improvement activity for teachers.
13. Reward innovativeness in teaching and research.
14. Strengthen individual research and support research-ambience
creation activities.
16. Support outreach activities.
17. Focus programmes for women, SC/ST and differently-abled groups
in society.
18. Develop ambience and culture for professional management of
higher education institutions through use of computers and training
of administrators.
19. Promote internationalization and export of higher education.
20. Give incentives for academic, administrative and financial reforms.
21. Encourage resources mobilization.
4.2 The Ministry further stated that the funding philosophy for tenth plan, as
spelled into action through initiation of new schemes and continuation of
appropriate old schemes, incorporated all the above mentioned key elements.  It
was an attempt to push higher education to advantageous position.  With the
closure of X Plan on 31st March, 2007, the assistance under various programmes
has come to an end.  The Committee were informed that some of the
Programmes will continue in XI Plan.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4.3 The details of Physical and financial targets fixed and achievement made
under major schemes of the UGC during Xth Plan are given below:
         (Rs. in crores)
S.
No.
Name of the
Scheme
Physical Target
Fixed
Physical Target
achieved
Financial
target fixed
Financial
target
achieved
1. Development
Grants to Central
Universities
18 eligible Central
Universities
including 3 medical
colleges
18 Central
Universities 3
Medical Colleges
789.75 720.88
2. Development
Grants to State
Universities
124 eligible state
universities
124 400.00 386.00
3. Development
Grants to
Managements
Deptts.
19 Deptts. 90   15.00     4.45
4. Women ¶s
Hostels
All eligible
Universities &
Colleges based on
the availability of
funds.
5 universities+1470
colleges
  80.00 216.23
5. General
Development
Grants for
Colleges State
Colleges
All eligible colleges
under section 2(F)
& 12(B) of the UGC
Act.
1801 465.00 129.06
6. Delhi Colleges 59 colleges 57 colleges   20.00   11.33
7. Autonomous
Colleges
29 colleges   50.00     7.39
8. NET coaching for
SC/ST Minorities
20 71     2.00     4.90
9. Entry in service
for
SC/ST/Minorities
100 444   10.00    23.20
10. Special
Development
Grants for
Universities in
backward areas
All eligible
universities located
in backward area
31   30.00    12.30
11. SC/ST Cell All eligible
Universities &
Colleges based on
the availability of
funds
111   10.00    78.00
12. Remedial
Coaching for
SC/ST &
Minorities
All eligible
Universities &
Colleges based on
the availability of
funds.
8.23 20.00 39.90
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4.4 When asked the reasons for non-achievement of the financial targets in
some of the above mentioned schemes and excess expenditure incurred in some
of the schemes, UGC in a written reply stated as follows:-
³A major part of the unutilized amount pertains to building projects and
creation of teaching and non-teaching posts.  In case of building projects,
some of the Universities and colleges failed in timely submission of
documents required for granting final approval for building proposals.  This
results in non-utilization of sanctioned grants. In case of teaching and non-
teaching posts in the Universities and colleges, the UGC provides
assistance for the plan period only and after that the concerned state
Government is required to maintain the post.  It has been observed during
the successive plan periods that the State Governments are reluctant to
assure that they would maintain the post after the plan.  In the absence of
written assurance from the State Government, the universities and
colleges are unable to fill up the posts sanctioned by the UGC.  This
results in non-utilization of sanctioned grants.  Keeping this difficulty in
view, the Commission during the Xth Plan period allowed filling up of posts
on contractual basis but even then most of the Universities were hesitant
for fear of litigations and legal problems ´.
4.5 In regard to the steps proposed to be taken to achieve financial targets
during the XI th plan, UGC in a written reply stated, ³ For XI th plan, the
Commission will be deputing committees to each University to evaluate its
performance during the X th plan and assess the financial requirements for XI th
Plan Period.  The UGC proposes to request the State Governments to depute
their nominee in these committees who can take on-the-spot decision about the
state¶s share in various development projects ´.  UGC further informed the
Committee that in some schemes, such as Construction of Women¶s Hostel, NET
Coaching for SC/ST/Minorities, Entry in Service for SC/ST/Minorities, Remedial
Coaching for SC/ST/Minorities, etc., the expenditure has been made in excess of
the target in view of unexpected higher demands from the Universities.
B. Eleventh Plan
4.6 In regard to Eleventh Plan, the Ministry in a written reply submitted the
following as UGC¶s approach and strategy :-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

A. Access
To increase enrolment ratio from 10% in 2006 to 15% in 2012 and
give development grant to enhance intake capacity of universities
and colleges.
B. Inclusiveness
To implement ³Inclusive Policy´ and develop programmes for
(a) ³Educationally backward regions ´ which include backward
districts, rural areas, remote hilly and border areas, where
educational capacity is relatively low
(b) ³Educationally backward Groups ´ which include
SC/ST/OBC/Women/minorities/poor.
through ±
(i) more scholarships, hostels, remedial coaching, preparation
for NET and other programmes
 (ii) support to colleges/universities with higher number of
students from educationally lagging groups
C. Quality and Excellence
Bridging Quality gap
i) Grants to improve physical infrastructure particularly
science laboratories
ii) Improvement in library through E-Journal schemes
iii) Teachers improvement through Research Project,
faulty improvement, travel grant etc.
iv) Students-through fellowship schemes and hostel
facilities etc.
D. Relevance and Value Based Education
i) Community colleges
ii) Career Orientation to Education
iii) Innovative Courses
iv) Career and Counselling Cell
v) Area Studies
vi) Centres for Studies in Social Exclusion and
Inclusive Policy
vii) Non-Formal Education including Special Studies,
Adult Education/Women Studies/Population
Educaiton
viii) Special Studies
ix) Adult Education
x) Women ¶s Education
xi) Population Education
xii) Value Education and Human Right
E. Governance
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Ø E-Governance of UGC and regional offices
networking of universities and colleges with UGC
for grant giving and monitoring
Ø Digital Repository in University and Colleges
Ø Internet Connectivity in Universities and Colleges
Ø ICT for Universities and Colleges
Ø E-content Development
Ø Incentives for resource mobilization
Ø Training for Academic Administrators of
Universities, Colleges, UGC officers
     The following is the summary of financial requirements of UGC under XIth
Plan :-
Sl. No  Scheme     Total Amount
(Rs. in Crores)
1. Enhancing Aggregate Access    21815.00
 2. Promoting Inclusiveness and Equity     8130.00
 3. Quality and Excellence     21436.23
 4. Relevance and Value Based Education     1465.00
 5. ICT Integration        3020.00
 6. Governance and Efficiency Improvement      496.04
          _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
  Grand Total       56,326.27
__________
4.7 When asked about the justifications for the above allocation the Ministry in
their written reply explained as under:
1. During past five plans the share of higher education in total plan
expenditure has declined from about 28% in V Plan to a mere 6%
in the X Plan. The situation has led to overall deterioration due to
under-investment in higher education and the situation calls for
correction;
2. The Gross Enrolment ratio in higher education has been quite low
which makes India compare quite poorly with even the transition
economy. Given the commitment that the same has to be increased
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

by 5%, massive investments will have to be made in higher
education;
3. As indicated earlier, a large number of higher educational
institutions, colleges and universities, are presently left out from the
UGC development funding simply because these institutions do not
have adequate level of physical and academic infrastructure. We
must now bring them at par with the rest of the institutions by
providing them development grants;
4. The growth of higher education system so far has not been
inclusive and there are many significant discrepancies and
imbalances across regions and social groups. These imbalances
will have to be corrected urgently in order to make the higher
education system equitable for all;
5. Under-investment over a sustained period of time has led to quality
deterioration in higher education and we need to rejuvenate and
revive the higher education system in the country for which we
need to make substantive investments.
4.8 Secretary, Higher Education while explaining the XI Plan proposals during
briefing stated as follows: -
³In the Eleventh Five-year Plan, the motto given is that we have to expand
our higher education and raise its quality to the highest global standards
so that India can become and remain a knowledge power. Today our
gross enrolment ratio in the higher education sector is about ten percent.
At the end of the Eleventh Five-year Plan, the target given is that it should
become at least 15 percent. In the words of the hon. Prime Minister, if I
may be permitted to quote- ³For too long we have viewed the size of our
population as an economic and social liability. However, an educated,
skilled, healthy, empowered people are an asset. The challenge before us
is to ensure that each and every citizen of India is an asset ´. Our higher
education is standing on three pillars of access, equity and quality. On the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

aspect of access, as I mentioned the 10 per cent gross enrolment ratio
has to be raised to 15 per cent. On the equity aspect, we have to ensure
that the S.C., S.T., socially and economically backward classes,
minorities, differently abled persons and women, who belong to the
weaker sections, get equal opportunities. In fact, they should get slightly
better opportunities so that they can make up for the lost ground. The third
is the quality aspect. In quality, though we have number of institutions in
the country, we have almost 380 Universities and about 18,100 colleges,
my submission is that only about 10 per cent of the colleges come up to
the highest standard of quality and only about 30 per cent of the
universities are assessed at the highest level of quality. So, our challenge
is to see that these, where quality is slightly low, are also brought up to the
higher standards of education. In additions, we have the problem of
regional imbalances. That is in some areas we have many Central
Government institutions, whereas in some other States do not have them.
Keeping that in mind, in the Eleventh Five-Year Plan there is a proposal
that in every State which does not have a Central University till now, at
least one State University should be given the funding to the level of a
Central University so as to raise its standard. ´
4.9 The Secretary further informed the Committee during the oral evidence of
Vice-Chancellors of Delhi University and Jawaharlal Nehru University as under:-
³In the Eleventh Five Year Plan, which has been approved by NDC, we
are given to understand that our Budget allocation (for higher education)
would go up by almost 8.5 times.  In the Tenth Five Year Plan our Budget
allocation was of the order of Rs. 9,500 crore and we are given an
impression, after the NDC approval, that we will get roughly Rs. 84,943
crore for the Eleventh Five Year Plan which would be a substantial jump.
But, in the immediate year which will now commence in 2008-2009 the
indications are not that bright.  In fact, we are told that it is yet to be
finalized; but the impression we are getting is that the increase would not
be that substantial and the major increase would take place in the third,
fourth and fifth years of the XIth Plan ´.
4.10 In regard to XI th Plan allocation to UGC, the Ministry in a written reply
stated, ³The UGC has submitted a plan proposal of Rs. 56,362.27 crores for
implementing the XI th Plan policies and strategies.  Recently the National
Development Council has approved XI th Plan (2007-2012) outlay of Rs. 84,943
crores for the Department of Higher Education.  The share of the University
Grants Commission in the XI th Plan is Rs. 45,471 crores, including a sum of Rs.
3,298 crores earmarked for implementing the Oversight Committee ¶s
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

recommendations.  The allocation to the UGC provides not only for the existing
schemes of the UGC but also for new schemes´.
4.11 In this regard, the Chairman, UGC further informed the Committee during
evidence as under: -
³We are keen that in the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the quality of faculty
and availability of faculty improves. There are other initiatives for quality
improvement that we are taking under the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The
State Universities constitute bulk of our universities. We have proposed a
scheme under which we will support the State Universities and colleges
which are of ³'´ and ³&´ grade so that their quality is improved and they
are brought on par with A grade universities. Similarly, we have also
developed a proposal where by non-12 B colleges and universities will
also be given some grant on matching basis form the States ´.
4.12 While explaining Eleventh Plan priorities on Gross Enrolment Ratio, the
representatives of the Ministry of HRD stated, during evidence, ³The main focus
will be on increasing the participation rate as reflected in the enrolment ratio from
the present 10 to 11 percent to atleast 15 percent by the end of the Eleventh
Plan and 21 percent by the end of the 12th Plan.
4.13 CABE Committee on Financing of Higher and Technical Education in its
report dealt with international comparison of Gross Enrolment Ratio and
recommended as follows:-
³Though international comparisons have their own known limitations, they
nevertheless provide some broad indications on the relative position a
country in comparison with others. The current enrolment ratio in India is
less than the average of lower middle income countries in the world. While
on average high income countries have a ratio above 60 percent, the
same is more than 25 percent in the group of upper middle income
countries. For instance, the corresponding ratio is above 80 percent in
USA, above 70 percent in Sweden, Norway, New Zealand, above 60
percent in UK and Australia, and above 40 percent in several European
countries, and more than 20 percent in many developed countries and
also in several developing countries such as Mexico, Malaysia, Thailand,
Chile and Brazil. ´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4.14 The following bar graph shows the Gross Enrolment Ratio in higher
education of low, lower middle, upper middle and high income countries:-
Gross Enrolment Ratio in Higher
Educataion
6 9
15
35
8
15
26
62
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1980
2000
      (Source : World Development Indicators 2003)
6-8 denotes Low Income Countries
9-15 denotes Lower Middle Income Countries
15-26 denotes Upper Middle income Countries
35-62 denotes High Income Countries
4.15 CABE Committee has also further stated in its report that country-wise
evidence shows that no country could become an economically advanced
country, if the enrolment ratio in higher education is less than 20 percent. We find
actually no country in the group of the developed countries whose enrolment
ratio in higher education is less than 20 percent, and conversely we find very few
countries with an enrolment ration of above 20 percent among the developing
countries with very few exceptions of some countries in Latin America and
Philippines. Thus a level of 20 percent of enrolment ratio seems to be the
threshold level of higher education to contribute to rapid and sustainable
economic progress. However, it has to be noted that a 20 percent enrolment ratio
in higher education may not necessarily and automatically lead to high economic
growth, but such a ratio in high quality higher education can be expected to
contribute to high economic growth, subject to other conditions.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER-V
Standard of  Higher Education
A. Importance of Higher Education
5.1 CABE Committee on financing of Higher and Technical Education in its
report has dealt with the importance of higher education such as: creation and
dissemination of knowledge; supply of manpower, specifically knowledge
workers; attitudinal changes for modernization and social transformation;
formation of strong nation-state, and promotion of higher quality of individual and
social life. It is widely recognized that these traditional functions of higher
education are ever relevant for all societies- modern as well as traditional, and
developed as well as developing. These functions are performed through
teaching, research and extension activities, and all the three are important facets
of a sound higher education system and all the three need to be well-nurtured
and strengthened.
5.2 In CABE Report, it has further been stated that the strong wave of
globalization and trends of internationalization of higher education further
reinforce the need to develop a strong and vibrant higher education system for
the following reason, ³our institutions of higher education have to become centers
of excellence and be internationally competitive. Global competition in higher
education put additional emphasis on the need for serious efforts to improve the
quality of higher education. After all, only those societies could reap gains of
globalisation that have strong and widespread higher education systems, while
the countries that have not made much progress in higher education suffered
severely.´
B. Ranking of Indian Universities
5.3 Indian Universities are poorly ranked in the globally recognized ranking
systems. In this regard, the Secretary, Higher Education stated as under during
the hearing :-
³On the ranking of various higher educational institutions, there are two
globally recognized ranking systems. One is the Times Higher Education
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Supplement Rankings. In 2007, they have come out with a ranking which
my colleague Shri Deepak Pental has mentioned. Delhi University is
ranked 254 th in that ranking. IIT, Mumbai is ranked 269 th. IIT, Delhi is
ranked 307 th. Then, they have also given a List of Universities and
institutions which fall in the List between 401 and 500. That consist the
names of University of Calcutta, IIT, Kanpur, IIT, Madras, IIT Roorkee,
University of Mumbai and the University of Pune. These are the ones
which have been mentioned in the Times Higher Education Supplement
Rankings. Of course, they have changed their system of ranking last year.
In the previous year, 2006, the IITs were ranked 57 th, the IIMs were
ranked 68 th. The JNU was ranked 183 rd. It had figured in the last year ¶s
Times Higher Education Supplement Rankings. So, they have made some
changes. We were told that some details were not given in time. But an
attempt would be made to see that we give all the details in time. The
Universities concerned should give the details in time.  The other ranking
system is by the Shanghai Jiao Tong University. It ranked the various
Universities. In that, we have got only the Indian Institute of Science,
Banglalore, the IIT, Kharagpur which were listed in the range between 305
and 402. So, on the whole, I must submit to the Committee that these
rankings are not very satisfactory. An attempt is being made to see that
we have as many Universities as possible in the top 50 or 100 of these
rankings. So, keeping that in mind, the Government of India and the
Planning Commission are also envisaging setting up of 14 additional new
Central Universities with world-class infrastructure with a view to aim at
reaching the world standards. Of course, world-class standards in our
Universities cannot be created overnight. It takes time. So, one of the
efforts would be to see that our institutions of excellence ± like Delhi
University, JNU, IITs, Indian Institutes of Management, Indian Institutes of
Science, Universities of Calcutta, Pune, Mumbai -  are given further
assistance so that they can compete at the world level. They have already
come to a certain standard´.
C. Role of UGC
5.4 UGC was established in 1956 for the coordination, determination and
maintenance of standards of university education. Even after its existence of 50
years only 30% of the universities and 10% of the colleges are of high quality.
When asked for comments whether UGC has failed in its responsibilities to
maintain standards in university education, the Ministry in their written note
furnished to the Committee stated that more than 90 percent of the Universities
and Colleges funded by the UGC are under the administrative control of the
concerned State Governments. The administrative structure of universities and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Colleges varies from state to state. The state universities are solely dependent
on the concerned state government for funds, which are always very limited. The
UGC provides development grants and some other plan grants to the
Universities and colleges. The basic responsibility of providing maintenance
grants to the State Universities lies with the concerned State Government. The
inadequacy in  maintenance grants leads to deterioration in standards which
cannot be set right by the UGC ¶s development grants only. Hence the quality
issue needs to be collectively addressed by the Central Government, UGC and
State Governments. Even so, it is admitted that quality of higher education
institutions is a matter of concern and the present situation has been brought
about due to years of under-funding. Inadequate funding of institutions by both
Centre and States Governments is sought to be rectified and since 2005-06,
there has been increase in outlays in higher education through UGC. It may also
be submitted that higher level of funding of university by itself would not improve
quality unless several other complimentary measures are taken. It is in this
regard that the UGC has introduced several schemes such as (i) Scheme of
Universities with Potential for Excellence (UPE), Scheme of Centres with
Potential for Excellence, Scheme of Colleges for Excellence (CPE), National
Education Testing for Teaching and Research, Major/Minor Research Projects,
Junior Research Fellowships (JRFs) and Research Associateships (RAs) for
Foreign Nationals, Junior Research Fellowships for Indian Nationals, Rajiv
Gandhi National Fellowships for SC/ST, Post-doctoral Scholarships for SC/ST,
Post-Graduate Scholarships for SC/ST students in Professional Courses,
Research Scientists, Research Awards and Emeritus Fellowships.
5.5 The Ministry also informed the Committee that there are substantial
number of vacancies of teachers in universities and colleges, which is a matter of
concern. While the concerned authorities in the State Governments and Central
Universities have been urged to take expeditious action for filling up these
vacancies, the Government has recently enhanced the age of superannuation of
universities and colleges teachers from 62 years to 65 years in centrally funded
higher and technical educational institutions under the purview of the Ministry of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Human Resource Development. A Pay Review Committee has also been
constituted by the University Grants Commission to review the pay structure and
service conditions of teachers with a view to attracting and retaining talents in
teaching profession.
5.6 During evidence, the Committee pointed out the poor quality of education.
In this regard, the Chairman, UGC, replied as under :-
³Let me take the first question about the quality. There are a number of
issues, which have been raised with respect to quality of higher education.
The Ministry of Human Resource Development and the UGC do recognize
that there has been a significant improvement in the number of colleges
and even in the quality of the education system. But at the same time,
there are inter-institutional disparities. Some universities are good, some
universities are mediocre and some universities are of relatively lower
quality. We have recognized these issues. The UGC has undertaken
studies based on the data of National Assessment and Accreditation
Council and under the 11 th Five Year Plan, we have made specific
proposals, which have not been made earlier to bridge the quality gap.
Therefore, one of the schemes that is proposed is that all those colleges
and universities, which are of C and D grades, will be given special grant
in addition to the regular normal development grant. Over and above, this
special grant will be given on a matching contribution by the State. There
would be equal contribution by the States to bring these universities and
colleges on par with A grade colleges and universities.  The related issue
is about the non-12B colleges which at present do not get grant. I must
say that the colleges which do not get grant from UGC are not essentially
or necessarily the colleges of low quality. Our condition is that any college
which gets permanent affiliation from the university becomes entitled for a
grant. There are a large number of colleges, close to 7,000 or 8,000,
which are given affiliation on an annual basis. They do not meet some of
the conditions. Under the Eleventh Five Year Plan, we have again made a
very bold suggestion and proposition to the State Governments and
proposed a scheme. The requirement of all those universities and
colleges, about 8,000 colleges and about 57 to 60 universities, will be
assessed  by the State Government as to how much fund they do require
to make them eligible for 12 B and it is proposed that requirement will be
equally shared by the Centre and the State Governments in the case of
university and in the case of colleges, by the institutions as well. This is
our proposal to bring these non-12 B colleges in the fold of UGC grant-
making process.  It will require a considerable amount of support from the
States because, about 60 percent of the universities and most of the
colleges are under the domain of the States. In this regard, we had a
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

discussion with some of the States. We had discussed it with Education
Minister of Maharashtra and they are willing to come forward and
contribute their share. This is with regard to quality. ´
D. Regulations of UGC
5.7 In regard to the question of failure of UGC to maintain standards and
norms in Indian Universities, the Ministry in their written reply has further stated
that UGC has been instrumental in maintaining standard of teaching, research
and examination in Higher Education in the country by way of notifying
regulations on different subjects under the relevant provisions of the UGC Act.
These regulations are reviewed, modified and updated at regular intervals and
new regulations are notified as and when required. The Ministry further stated
that it would not be appropriate to say that the University Grants Commission
failed to maintain standards and norms and universities and colleges. The
Commission has prescribed various norms and standards for bringing qualitative
change in higher education. These norms include establishment and
maintenance of institutions, regulations, minimum standard for instructions for
grants of degree, minimum qualification for appointment of teachers, minimum
workload for teachers, minimum teaching days and establishment and
maintenance of standard of education in private universities etc. The
Commission has brought qualitative improvement through accreditation by NAAC
and by initiating quality-based schemes such as Potential for Excellence for
Universities and Colleges. Our Higher Education system has managed to meet
the demand of the economy in various fields both within and abroad. This system
has produced many able noble laureates such as Dr. C.V. Raman, Dr. Hargovind
Khurana, Prof. Amartya Sen etc.
E. Assessment by National Accreditation and Assessment Council
5.8 The assessment of quality of institutions is done by  NAAC. In this regard,
the Ministry in their written note furnished that the assessment covers only about
16-17% of the total number of about 18,000 colleges and 378 universities. Out of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

378 universities and 18,064 colleges (2007), only 140 universities (including 10
re-accredited universities) and 3492 colleges (including 111 re-accredited
colleges) have been accredited by NAAC. It is also submitted that assessment by
NAAC being voluntary at present, all eligible institutions have not submitted
themselves for assessment by the Council.
The Ministry then informed the Committee that NAAC through its various
reports had thrown light on various areas of deficiencies. A proposal for giving
NAAC legislative status and to make assessments by NAAC mandatory in
nature, is under consideration. NAAC¶s assessments have indicated the following
weaknesses in our universities and colleges :-
Narrow Programme options Absence of Research Culture
Lack of ICT facilities Lack of library resources
Lack of Career Guidance services Absence of linkages and collaboration
Inadequate infrastructure and lack of
any master plan
Faculty Development Programmes
needed
Need for modern teaching methods
and curriculum upgrade
Remedial measures needed
5.9 The National Assessment Accreditation Council, Bangalore was
established in 1994 by UGC as an Inter University Center for accreditation and
assessment of University and Colleges.  Approval for setting up of NAAC was
given by the Ministry of Human Resources Development under section 12(ccc) of
the UGC Act.  NAAC is an autonomous body. NAAC has been registered as a
society under the Societies Registration Act at Bangalore.   UGC provides 100%
financial assistance to NAAC.  The procedure for accreditation and other related
issues are decided by NAAC itself.  The NAAC has so far evaluated 140
Universities and 3496 Colleges.
5.10 NAAC functions through its General Council (GC) and the Executive
Council (EC) and Finance Committee (FC).  The Chairman of UGC shall be
President of the General Council.  The Chairperson of Executive Committee shall
be an eminent academician in the area of relevance to the NAAC and he/she will
be nominated by the President of the Governing Council.  The composition of
these committee¶s are as under:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

General Council
1. President of the General Council (Chairperson of UGC)
2. All the Members of the Executive Council, Ex-officio Members
3. The Secretary, Deptt. of Education, MHRD, Govt. of India
4. The Secretary General, Association of Indian Universities
Nominated Member
5. Four Vice Chancellors (2 from State University, 1 from Central
University & Deemed University)
6. Four Principals (Affiliated/Autonomous Colleges)
7. Director of the NAAC as Member-Secretary
The Members other than the members of the Executive Committee (ex-
officio members) will be nominated by the Chairman, UGC.  The nominated
members shall have a term of three years and not permitted to attend the GC
meetings.  Meetings of the Council shall be called by the Member-Secretary
under the direction of the President.
Executive Council
1. Chairperson, EC Shall be appointed by the President of the Council
2. Vice-Chairman, UGC
3. Secretary, MHRD, Deptt. of Education
4. Chairperson of other specialty Councils (AICTE, DEC, NCTE, AIU)
by rotation on reciprocal basis
5. Secretary, UGC, Nominated Members
6. One Academic Teacher
7. One member nominated the Chairman, UGC
8. Three Vice-Chancellors of University & Director of Institutes of
Higher Learning and Research to be nominated by UGC
9. Four eminent academicians (two from universities, one from
colleges and one from the NAAC)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

10. One Academician/Teacher nominated by Deptt. of Education,
MHRD, Govt. of India
11. Director of NAAC as Member-Secretary
Every meeting of the EC shall be presided over by the Chairperson of the EC.
Normally two meetings of the Executive Committee shall be held in each year.
5.11 The objectives of NAAC is to asses and accredit institutions of higher
learning, universities and colleges or one or more of their units, i.e. departments,
schools, institutions, programmes, etc.   The main objectives of assessment and
accreditation are to:-
a) grade institution of higher education and their programmes;
b) stimulate the academic environment and quality of teaching and research
in these institutions;
c) help institutions realize their academic objectives;
d) promote necessary changes, innovations and reforms in all aspects of the
institutions working for the above purpose;
e) encourage innovations, self-evaluation and accountability in higher
education.
5.12 As part of its academic activities NAAC is in constant collaboration with
the State Governments by establishing Quality Assurance Cell (QAC) and State
Level Quality Assurance Coordination Committee (SLQACC) in each state.  It is
stated that many quality improvement programmes have been organized jointly
by NAAC and QAC of States for Colleges.
5.13 The Committee were informed that the New Methodology of Institutional
Assessment and Accreditation of NAAC, has been designed with a view to
overcome some of the limitations of its earlier methodology and to enhance its
rigour, reliability and validity.   Besides envisaging significant reduction in inter-
team variations, the New Methodology, which is user-friendly is also expected to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

enable NAAC to conduct the assessment of large number of institutions
effectively.
5.14 The NAAC has adopted the New Methodology of Assessment and
Accreditation from 1 st April, 2007.  While there are diverse types of Higher
Education Institutions in the country, some coming under the provision of
alternate Regulatory Bodies, with their own Quality Assurance Agencies.  The
review and accreditation by NAAC is for the whole institutions.  NBA is
functioning under AICTE and accreditation is for subject/discipline.  NAAC
Assessment and Accreditation shall cover the following institutions as per the
eligibility criteria mentioned below:-
1. Universities recognized under Section 2(f) and 12 (B) of the UGC Act,
1956 or established under Section 3 which have completed 5 years
since establishment or with a record of at least 2 batches of students
having completed their degree programme.
2. If any University under Section 2 (f) or 3 of the UGC Act has not
completed 5 years of operation, but has Affiliated/Constituent Colleges
under its jurisdiction which on their own standing have completed 5
years since establishment, then, such Colleges shall be eligible for
Assessment and Accreditation by NAAC, on their own independent
standing i.e. the College alone and NOT the University to which it is
affiliated, shall be eligible for Assessment and Accreditation.
3. Institutions coming under the jurisdiction of Professional Regulatory
Council and their Accreditation Bodies can be considered for
Assessment and Accreditation by NAAC, if such Councils desire to
enter into appropriate MoUs with NAAC for their Assessment and
Accreditation requirements.  The process/methodology/modus
operandi in these cases, shall be as per the provisions of the said
MoU.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5.15 There is an option available for the accredited institution to see re-
assessment for accreditation, if required, after one year of its 5 years
accreditation period.  The New Methodology of Assessment and Accreditation is
also applicable for such cases.  After the competition of a five-year tenure for
accreditation, an institution may seek re-accreditation by NAAC.  The re-
accreditation procedure is also based on pre-determined criteria for assessment
and includes the submission of SSR by an institution, Peer Team visit for
validation and final decision by NAAC.
5.16 Secretary, Higher Education briefed the Committee about NAAC as
follows:-
³National Accreditation and Assessment Council which accredits and
assesses the educational institutions about their quality. They visit these
institutions, inspect them through an expert committee and then they
come out with grading, like A,B, C and D.  As I had submitted, only about
10 percent of our colleges and 30 percent of our universities come and
achieve that top grade of A, which is, say around 80 percent or above
marks, while the rest of them have lower ratings.  This is not mandatory in
our country.  Universities and colleges can choose to apply for NAAC or
NBA (National Board of Accreditation), which accredits courses in
technical education institutions.  Course by course, they will say this
course is okay.  Until 31 st of March, 2004 only 1,034 colleges and 104
universities had got themselves assessed, but in the last six to seven
months or one year, a lot of impetus was given to this.  Now, in 2007,
2780 colleges and 128 universities have got themselves accredited.  I
would also like to submit that it is not mandatory, but at the same time,
wherever UGC can motivate the universities and colleges to go for
accreditation, they have started doing this.  Recently, in the UGC meeting,
they have decided that if any university or any institution wants to become
a deemed university, it must have a NAAC assessment and accreditation
before they apply for such a deemed university status.  Earlier, it was not
so.  The decision would also help in motivating various institutions to go
for NAA accreditation.  Another good thing is that the UGC meets the
entire cost of inspection through NAAC, that means, an institution which
wants to go for NAAC accreditation does not have to spend money. The
entire thing, the entire bill for inspection is picked up by UGC.  The is also
to encourage quality.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5.17 During the hearing of Vice-Chancellors of Delhi University and Jawaharlal
Nehru University, the Secretary further informed the Committee regarding NAAC
as below:-
³NAAC today is formed by UGC.  It was set up by UGC in 1994.  This is
based on the National Education Policy 1986 and Programme of Action
1992.  Today, NAAC does not have a statutory basis because it was
created by UGC.  It is under the consideration of Government to give a
statutory basis to NAAC.  We also had a Vice-Chancellors Conference
recently where this point was debated as to whether NAAC accreditation
should be made compulsory and mandatory for all educational institutions.
There is no unanimity on this yet whether it should be made mandatory.
What is being planned and discussed is that at least for such educational
institutions which receive grant from UGC, UGC can put some kind of a
precondition.  But there are reservations including, you would perhaps
hear, from my colleague from JNU.  There is resistance to NAAC
accreditation being made compulsory because some of our institutions of
higher learning feel that the Peer Team or the team sent by the NAAC
would not be able to do justice because they are already at a much higher
level of education and their quality of education is very good.  So, one of
the ways of getting over this would be to bring credibility to NAAC
accreditation by, I think, improving Peer Team group which goes for
inspection and involving our best of institutions like JNU, IIT, Delhi
University, IIMs and IISc and Bangalore, etc., in the NAAC Peer Team
itself so that they feel that it is doing its job well.  On making it mandatory
a final view has still not been taken while efforts are on to see that at least
any institution which wants to become a deemed university must have
NAAC accreditation.  Also, UGC is considering whether for giving financial
assistance they can make NAAC accreditation a precondition ´.
5.18 In regard to assessment of quality by NAAC, the Vice-Chancellor of
Jawaharlal Nehru University expressed his opinion as under:-
³NAAC could be a good idea for UGC to improve quality of education in
less endowed universities but we believe universities like JNU and Delhi
University have already attained a certain standard and we maintain
ourselves through our in-house periodic review on a continuous basis.
So, there is no need immediately for a national level committee coming
and judging it every year.  We believe until the time an atmosphere is
created, the peers would be coming to review us even higher standard
than us so that we can take their views with utmost respect. ´
5.19 When the Committee enquired whether Jawaharlal Nehru University has
the highest standards, the Vice-Chancellor replied, ³Sir, we are not saying that
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

we are the highest but we are among the top few institutions in the country.
Therefore, until the time there is a situation in which peer review would also be
even higher level of standard of persons.  There is otherwise a danger of experts
coming and not fully appreciating the way we design our curricula, priority of the
subjects and things like that.  So, we thought till that time we would like to do it in
our own way.  In any case in every centre of our university, special assistance
programme is being reviewed by the UGC, which has given us very high ranks
for that.  We have already been granted by the UGC the status of University with
potential of excellence. ´
5.20 The Committee asked about the reasons for not fixing a grade µ$¶
accreditation for recognition as deemed university.  In this regard, the Ministry in
a written reply stated, ³the matter relating to accreditation by NAAC was
considered by the Commission and the Commission  decided that (a) NAAC
accreditation with B Grade shall remain one of the essential eligibility criteria for
general institutions seeking deemed to be university status, (b) in respect of
Engineering and Management Institutions accreditation with B or equivalent
grade by NAAC or NBA for at least 75% of the total eligible courses, which are
eligible, (c) NAAC should have a MoU with other statutory bodies viz. MCI, DCI,
INC, PCI, NCTE, etc. to assess their institutions (d) the condition of accreditation
by NAAC or NBA in respect of institutions applying for deemed to be university
status under de-novo category, under (a), (b) & (c) above, will not apply. ´   When
the Committee further asked, whether UGC will make it conditional for all the
existing deemed universities to have minimum B Grade accreditation by NAAC;
the Ministry in a written reply stated that UGC has already instructed all existing
deemed universities vide its letter No. 6-1(7)/2006 (CPP-1) dated 12 th March,
2007.
F. Programme for Promotion of Quality and Excellence
5.21 The Ministry in a written reply, to a question on promotion of quality, stated
that UGC is implementing a scheme called Universities with Potential for
Excellence (UPE) and Colleges with Potential of Excellence (CPE). Grant of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Rs.30.00 crore is given under this scheme to each university during the plan
period and grant to the colleges ranges from Rs. 35.00 lakh to Rs. 1.00 crore per
college on the basis of the category to which it belongs. If it is just an affiliated
college, it shall receive only Rs.35.00 lakhs. If it is Autonomous or Accredited, it
shall receive Rs.60.00 lakhs. It shall receive Rs.1.00 crore if it is both
Autonomous and Accredited. In the annual report 2005-06 of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development it was stated that the target for identifying
universities and colleges would be 5-15 universities and 100-150 colleges
respectively during Tenth Plan period by giving weightage to factors like
geographic region, urban and rural areas, backward region, women colleges and
SC/ST.
5.22 The objectives of the scheme are as under :-
(i) To strengthen the academic and physical infrastructure for
achieving excellence in teaching, research and outreach
programmes.
(iii) To promote flexible and effective governance.
(iv) To enhance the quality of the learning process and teaching at the
undergraduate and postgraduate level with the help of a flexible
credit based modular system, and a whole range of innovations
currently accepted across the world.
(v) To promote academic programmes relevant to the social and
economic needs of the nation
(vi) To improve undergraduate education in colleges by the interfacing
of the PG programme.
(vii) To promote networking with other Centres/Departments and
laboratories in the country.
(viii) To achieve excellence in education, training and research to race
the challenge of globalisation.
5.23 The eligibility criteria for identification of universities is as follows :-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(i) Accreditation by NAAC
(ii) Should have had at least 25% of the existing post-graduate
departments identified by the UGC under SAP/COSIST
programme/National Facility/innovative programmes.
(iii) Proven evidence of successful academic, administrative and
financial reforms during the last decade.
(iv) Substantial research and development activity initiated through
projects from external funding during the last decade.
(v) Potential for evolving an effective academic and management
system that can serve, in general, as a model for reorganizing the
university system in the country.
5.24 Eligibility criteria for identification of colleges is as under: -
Colleges should be minimum 10 years old or more. Autonomous Colleges
are given preference. Every College must have NAAC accreditation or must have
applied for accreditation.
5.25 During the IX Plan period the five universities were selected based on the
presentations made by the Vice-Chancellors of the universities before the Expert
Committees. During the Xth Plan Period, 4 more universities had been selected.
In addition, 12 Centres in specialized areas have also been identified in different
universities under the scheme called Centre with Potential for Excellence.
5.26 The details of the amount released under UPE scheme are given below :-
               (Rs. in Crores)
S. No. Name of University Total Amount
approved
Total amount
released as on
date
1. Madras University 30.00 30.00
2. Jadavpur University 30.00 30.00
3. Pune University 30.00 30.00
4. University of Hyderabad 30.00 30.00
5. Jawaharlal Nehru University 30.00 30.00
6. Madurai Kamraj University 30.00 10.00
7. North Eastern Hill University 30.00 10.00
8. Calcutta University 30.00 10.00
9. Mumbai University 30.00 10.00
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The details of the amount released under the scheme of Centre with Potential for
Excellence in a Specialized Area :-
S.  No. Name of University Total amount released as
on date (Rs. in crores)
1. Punjab University 5.00
2. Guru Nanak Dev University 5.00
3. Cochin University of Science & Technology  5.00
4. Madurai  Kamraj University 5.00
5. Himachal Pradesh University 5.00
6. Sardar Patel University 5.00
7. Karnataka University 5.00
8. Anna University 5.00
9. Rajiv Gandhi University 3.00
10. Allahabad University 5.00
11. Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth 3.00
12. Devi Ahilya University 3.00
5.27 In addition to above, total number of 97 colleges were selected by UGC
under the scheme Colleges with Potential for Excellence during Xth Plan period.
The grant released to these colleges till date is Rs.52.15 crores. When asked
what steps are proposed to be taken by UGC to raise the standards of all the
other universities and colleges in the country to that of the universities/colleges
already identified, no specific reply was furnished by UGC.
G. Model Curriculum
5.28 During briefing, the Secretary, Higher Education informed the Committee,
³Similarly, UGC has got model curriculum designed and circulated for 32
subjects. That has been circulated to all the universities. But in our system
universities have been given autonomy. They are at liberty to adopt them based
on their own democratic systems they follow. Some of them can even say that
we are maintaining a standard higher than this syllabus. So, perhaps they would
not adopt that. But by and large, this model curriculum which has been given,
has been very useful and its is being adopted by many of them. ´
5.29 In regard to procedure being adopted by UGC to design model curriculum,
the Ministry in a written reply stated that the UGC prepared model curriculum
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

with the help of experts at national level and the same was circulated to the
Universities for consideration, for adoption or modification by the respective
Board of Studies of the universities. The most of the universities have done the
above exercise.
5.30 When it was enquired by the Committee whether the model curriculum is
periodically updated in consonance with the new developments in the subject at
international level, the Ministry in a written reply stated that the curriculum
revision and updating is a continuous process and all universities are expected to
do it on regular basis. The Committee was further informed that this was also
emphasized in the Vice-Chancellors ¶ Conference held on 10 th and 11 th October,
2007. But the Ministry did not furnish any reply whether it updates the model
curriculum periodically.
5.31 In regard to curriculum updation, National Knowledge Commission has
stated in its report as follows:
³The syllabi of course in universities, which remain unchanged for
decades, need to be upgraded constantly and revised frequently. The
laws of inertia reinforced by resistance to change must be overcome.
Universities should be required to revise or restructure curricula at least
once in three years. These revisions must be subjected to outside peer
review before implementation. The process for such revision should be
streamlined and decentralized, with more autonomy for teachers, through
a change in statutes wherever necessary. For existing systems often act
as major impediments to a timely or speedy revision of curricula. There
should be some mode of censure for departments or universities that do
not upgrade their courses regularly. It needs to be recognized that it is
very difficult to introduce new courses or innovative courses in universities
because of departmental divides. Appropriate institutional mechanisms
should be put in place to resolve this problem. ´
H. Vocationalisation of higher education
5.32 The University Grants Commission had introduced and implemented
vocational education programme, way back in the year 1994-95 having an
objective to provide vocational education to the students pursuing graduate
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

programme at the University as well as college level right across the country and
across all the three disciplines of the study i.e Arts, Science and Commerce.  It
was envisaged that the vocational course may be introduced by the
University/Colleges at the undergraduate level by way of restructuring the
existing course combination across all the three disciplines of study at graduate
level.  The Committee were informed that the purpose of this programme was to
provide the students hand on training besides an in depth theoretical knowledge
of the vocational course to be opted by them.  The vocational education
programme was also conceived as a platform to provide the students an
opportunity in gaining meaningful employments as such hands on training
component was to be carried out in collaboration with the relevant agencies as a
part of the programme.  In addition, the degree obtained by the student does not
get used as a large number of  students often after graduation are not able to opt
vertical mobility in higher education either due to poor/ average performance or
due to financial constraints or both. As such, the vocational education would
prepare and provide them an opportunity to be job worthy.
5.33 In order to ensure that the vocationalisation of higher education does not
loose its rhythm as a result of changing need of the job market owing to the
globalization of education and opening up the  economy causing changes and
approach adopted towards the job market leading to demand in terms of more
and more trained man power, the vocational courses has since been redesigned
in the year 2003-04 and this modified scheme is termed as career orientation to
education/ career oriented programme.  The objective of the scheme is to ensure
that the graduates who pass out after completing these courses, have
knowledge, skills and aptitude for gainful employment in wage sector in general
and self employment in particular so as to reduce the pressure on institutions of
higher learning for Master Degree.  These courses run parallel to the
conventional B.A., B.Com and B.Sc degree.  The successful students are
awarded certificate/diploma/advanced diploma  under this programme.  The
courses offered are in the form of Certificate/Diploma/Advance Diploma which
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

students may opt parallel to their conventional B.A/ B.Com/ B.Sc degrees.  The
coursed offered are inter-disciplinary in nature.  The students shall have the
freedom to diversify into various fields, not necessarily related with their core
discipline, e.g. a science student could side by side pursue course in Event
Management and student of Arts background have the option to pursue a course
in Science Journalism.  In this regard, the Chairman, UGC further informed the
Committee during evidence as under:-
³The UGC has a special scheme under which it give grant to all the
colleges to start career development course which run parallel to the
regular courses so that students doing BA/B.Com and other Bachelor
degrees can also do a certificate course in vocational or a one-year
diploma and turn out with two degrees- one regular degree and a short
duration diploma which is skill-oriented- so that they become employable. ´
5.34 The Ministry in a written reply stated that the schemes of Vocationalisation
of Education (Career Oriented courses) is being implemented since 1994-95.  An
amount of Rs. 286.78 crore was provided to 3383 colleges and 43 universities.  It
was further stated that keeping in view the availability of funds, the UGC would
extend the scheme of vocationalisation of education to cover more universities
and colleges and enlarge introducing a number of courses to meet the
requirements of the country in the wake of globalization and liberalization of
economy.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER-VI
Regional disparities and Gender and Social Equity
A.  Regional disparities in development of higher education
6.1 CABE Committee on Financing of Higher and Technical Education has
inter-alia stated in its report that inter-state variations in the development of
higher education are glaring in India. Some States have expanded their higher
education systems fast, but many are lagging behind. For example, the
enrolment ratio is as high as 29 percent in Chandigarh, but less than five percent
in Jammu and Kashmir and Nagaland in 2002-03. In as many as 15 out of 31
States/Union Territories on which estimates are presented in the Table given
below, the enrolment ratio is below the national average, less than nine percent.
6.2 Policies of development of higher education vary from State to State,
particularly in terms of emphasis on provision of access to higher education,
improvement in quality, funding, etc., though most States follow broadly the
national policies and in conformity with the policy guidelines periodically
formulated by the apex education organizations such as the University Grants
Commission, All India Council of Technical Education and other similar bodies.
There are, however, several other factors responsible for inter-State variations in
the development of higher education. The following table shows these inter-State
variations :-
 Gross Enrolment Ratio in Higher Education, 2002-03(%)
State/Union Territory Ratio State/Union Territory Ratio
Andhra Pradesh 9.51 Meghalaya 10.94
Arunachal Pradesh 6.37 Mizoram 9.51
Assam 8.67 Nagaland 4.33
Bihar 7.30 Orissa 8.71
Chattisgarh 7.27 Punjab 8.53
Goa 13.47 Rajasthan 8.77
Gujarat 9.65 Sikkim 6.29
Haryana 10.56 Tamil Nadu 10.91
Himachal Pradesh 12.76 Tripura 5.84
Jammu & Kashmir 4.95 Uttar Pradesh 7.03
Jharkhand 8.12 Uttaranchal 12.25
Karnataka 9.92 West Bengal 8.21
Kerala 7.66 Chandigarh 28.68
Madhya Pradesh 7.77 Delhi 10.94
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Maharashtra 12.30 Pondicherry 17.88
Manipur 13.19 All India 897
6.3 During briefing, the Chairman, UGC briefed the Committee regarding rural
urban difference in development of higher education as under :-
³There are one or two issues that I would like to mention. One is the rural
urban difference in the development of higher education. We recognize
that, if you look at the enrollment ratio in higher education, there is
disparity between rural and urban. About 7 to 8 per cent enrollment ratio is
there in rural areas and it is almost 27 per cent in urban areas and we are
conscious about that. In this Plan, we have taken a decision to make
available funds to these universities and colleges which are primarily
located in rural areas and they will get an additional grant in addition to the
regular development grant that we give. We will define what is rural
college. If a college is located in Gram Panchayat jurisdiction or any
settlement having less than 5000 population is described as village by the
census. So, we are going to have some focus on the rural colleges and
universities.´
6.4 During the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Human
Resources Development and UGC, the Committee pointed out the regional and
urban-rural disparities in development of higher education. In this regard, the
Chairman, UGC stated as follows:
³Number of Members from Orissa, UP and West Bengal have made
reference to regional disparities in education. Sir, there are regional
disparities and also there are urban-rural disparities. For the first time, we
have estimated rural-urban disparities. We have also measured the
disparities between districts and we recognized that hilly, remote, tribal,
border districts have much lower enrolment ratio as compared to other
regions. Therefore, we developed a policy of reducing regional
imbalances. You will recall that we identified about 370 districts with a
enrolment ratio lower than the national average and the Hon. Prime
Minister has announced one college in each of these districts on a
matching contribution from the State. These colleges will be model
colleges.
Then, we have also taken a number of other steps. We proposed
an additional grant to those colleges and institutions  which are located in
hilly, tribal, remote, border, small town areas ± these are precisely the
areas where the enrolment rate is lower ± so that we try to bring them on
par with other colleges.  Some of the districts to which reference has been
made, like Kalahandi and others, these are also essentially districts with
relatively high tribal population. We proposed a special policy for removing
imbalances between social groups. So, the colleges having a relatively
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

larger population of SC, ST, OBC, and Muslims will get an additional
grant. These are precisely the colleges which fall in districts like Kalahandi
and others. So, in brief, we have a policy under the Eleventh Five Year
Plan under which we develop a strategy to try to reduce the inter-regional
imbalances and inter-social group imbalances as also the urban-rural
disparities.  We will have some special development grant for rural areas
and also smaller towns. Strictly speaking there are very few colleges, in
rural areas. Rural areas is defined as a settlement with  population of
5,000 and 75 per cent agriculture workforce. There are very few colleges
located in these settlements but bulk of these colleges are in small towns.
We proposed some special grant for them. ´
6.5 The Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Human Resource Development
supplemented on the issue of regional disparities as under:
³There was an issue raised about what is being done to bring up the north
more or less on par with the south in terms of educational facilities. This is
an important issue, it is not just a question of north and south, it is a
question of regional disparities in general. It applies equally to the east
and north-east, Jammu & Kashmir, and other hilly States like Uttarakhand,
as was mentioned about hilly districts of West Bengal and so on and so
forth. These also happen to be the districts and areas and regions and the
States where Gross Enrolment Ratio in higher education is lower.
Therefore, for example, when we implement the scheme of establishment
of 370 degree colleges in the 11 th Plan to be set up in States having low
GERs, the very large majority of those colleges in fact will go to precisely
districts and the regions of those States, including KBK, which were
mentioned as being deficient. ´
6.6 When asked during the oral evidence how the State Governments are
going to finance these 370 colleges which will be established with the Central
Government¶s help, the Secretary, Higher Education stated as follows:-
³Hon. Member has raised a very important issue about State finances not
permitting running some of these institutions«. But for these 370 colleges,
basically degree colleges are to be run by the State Governments.  In fact,
till now, there have been no schemes where the Government of India
funds the new colleges which are to be started anywhere.  This is for the
first time a scheme is being worked out where Central Government would
give some assistance for the buildings and other infrastructure to be
created. Our experience is that while of course some States may lag
behind but generally in most of the States, if some Central Government
assistance is coming, and if they have to match resources, most of the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

States to come forward and make use of that Central resources.
Otherwise, that would go elsewhere.  But the tendency of most of the
States is to tap those resources of the Central Government which are
available for starting of these new institutions.  These 370 colleges are
also to be started in educationally backward areas, also where the gross
enrolment ratio is low.  Even politically, in all the States there would be a
pressure on them also to come forward and take care of those areas or
the regional balance and regional development point of view.  While there
could be some difficulty, the Planning Commission has also assured us
that at the time of approval of annual plans that they will also make use of
that exercise to see that States bring forward the required finances for
taking care of these educational institutions which are primarily in their
domain.  So, while we do appreciate the concern of the Hon. Member but
we would try to persuade the State Government.  In fact, the Hon. Minister
of HRD had a meeting with all the State Education Ministers wherein
again he had emphasized that there is a need for the State Governments
to do their part of the duty in taking care of these institutions of higher
learning for which they are primarily responsible for running and the
Central Government is only basically meant to take care of coordination
and maintenance of standards´.
6.7 Regarding setting up of new Central Universities to reduce the regional
disparities and to improve the standard of higher education, the Secretary,
Ministry of Human Resource Development further informed the Committee during
evidence as below:
³Also, at the same time, I would like to mention about the new Central
Universities which are expected to be set up. There would be altogether
30, out of which 16 Central Universities would go to States which do not at
all have any Central Universities at the moment. Out of the total 28 States,
16 States have no Central universities at the moment. Each one of them
will get consultation with the State Government concerned. The remaining
14 Central Universities would aim to eventually attain world class
standards. There was a mention made about what we are doing to
improve our universities to bring them on par with world standards. Of
course, at the moment a university like Jawaharlal Nehru University
already figure in the list of world ¶s leading universities. But our attempt
would be to have more and more such universities to attain those
standards. The Government has decided to give a grant to the tune of
Rs.100 crore to each of the three universities which are completing 150
years namely Kolkata, Chennai and Mumbai for development of centers of
higher education and so on. Likewise, these 14 other universities will
ab initio aim at world class standards. Their location will not necessarily be
confined to States which have Central universities or do not have Central
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Universities at the moment. The overriding concern would be to establish
universities which can compete at the global level in a short span of time. ´
6.8 Ministry of Human Resource Development in their written reply furnished
to the Committee stated that in the meeting of the Planning Commission on
13.9.2007, the Prime Minister had, among other things, remarked as under
regarding promotion of higher education: -
³The Higher Education System has been relatively neglected in the past
decades. It was the investment made in this system in the 50s and 60s
which has given us a strong knowledge base in many fields. We are
committed to rapidly expanding this sector as well. There is now general
agreement on setting up 16 Central Universities in States which do not
have a university, 14 Central Universities in other States, 8 IITs, 7 IIMs
and 5 Indian Institute of Science, Education & Researches. I am already
getting requests from a large number of States for locating these
institutions in their States. I am sure that with the large number of
institutions we are considering, we would be able to satisfy every State to
some extent. Some of these universities/institutions should ab initio, be
targeted to achieve world class standards. For the Central Universities
aimed at world class standards it will be necessary to be more ambitious
in terms of infrastructure, especially if they are to include departments of
science, medicine and engineering. This involves higher costs. The scope
for private participation in these universities should therefore be
systematically explored. The location of these institutions should be
determined in a manner which balances the desire for achieving a greater
geographical spread with the potential synergies arising from co-location.
Location decisions should not be purely based on land availability. We
should encourage States to compete for the location of these prized
Central institutions. These are decisions which would define the
educational growth trajectory of State for many decades to come and must
be taken with utmost care. The details and the roll-out of this high visibility
programme should be worked out by an Inter-Ministerial Group consisting
of the Ministry of HRD, the University Grants Commission and the
Planning Commission and outside experts which the Planning
Commission can appoint within a fortnight. Location decisions should be
taken within the next two months. Once the broad policy framework is
clear, we should make a start with detailed planning for the proposed
Central Universities aiming at world class standards. The proposal in the
Planning Commission note to set up distinct teams, to go into details of
the structure and operationally relevant issues for each university is a
good idea. We should have a creative approach to the design of these
new centers of learning. Ideas such as common entrance tests, the
semester system, flexible syllabi, student body diversity, inter-institutional
students transferability, faculty recruitment and transferability, autonomy
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and governance reform should all be well thought out in this design. The
final approval of funding for these universities should be given on the
basis of the reports of these teams«´
6.9 In regard to setting up of Inter Ministerial Group, the Ministry has stated
that no such group has been constituted so far. However, a draft Central
Legislation or setting up of 16 Central Universities in uncovered States is under
process. When asked what role has been assigned to UGC in the
implementation of the proposed scheme, the Ministry in a written reply stated that
the UGC will continue to play its role for coordination and maintenance of
standards of the Universities/Colleges in terms of the provisions of the UGC Act,
1956,and a proposal to constitute a UGC Review Committee is also under
consideration.
6.10 The Secretary, Higher Education further informed the Committee during
the oral evidence, ³As far as 16 Central universities and 370 colleges are
concerned, there are two Committees which have been set up and both the
Committees are working out a proposal as to what the structure of the 16 Central
universities and 370 colleges would be.  That will lay down the whole framework
for the setting up of these institutions ´.
6.11 As regards number and size of universities, National Knowledge
Commission has also stated in its Report as follows: -
³India has about 350 Universities. This number is simply not enough with
reference to our needs in higher education, or in comparison with China
which has authorized the creation of 1250 new universities in the last
three years. Yet, some of our universities are much too large, for ensuring
academic standards and providing good governance. We need to create
more appropriately scaled and more nimble universities. The moral of the
story is not only that we need a much larger number of universities, say
1500 nationwide by 2015, but also that we need smaller universities which
are responsive to change and easier to manage. ´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

B. Gender and Social Equity
6.12 The following table has been given in the report of the CABE Committee
on Financing of Higher and Technical Education regarding enrolment of SCs,
STs and women in higher education: -
Enrolment of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Women in Selected Areas
in Higher Education in India
(% of total enrolment)
Total PG and
Ph.D.
Degree
Level
Engg* B.Ed/BT Medicine*
Scheduled
Castes
1990-91 8.6 8.7 8.7 5.7 8.4 8.6
2002-03 11.3 11.4 12.0 6.7 13.9 13.2
Scheduled
Tribes
1990-91 2.1 1.8 2.2 1.1 2.3 0.7
2002-03 3.6 2.7 3.7 3.2 5.0 5.0
Women
Students
1990-91 33.8 32.2 34.7 10.9 44.2 34.3
2002-03 40.1 42.3 42.0 22.6 52.0 41.6
*are related areas
6.13 CABE Committee have further stated in its report that the social hierarchy
by social groups that we find in enrolment in higher education institutions can be
found with more intensity in the distribution of population by social groups as
shown in the following table :-
Percentage of Population (7+) with Higher Education, by Social Group, 1999-2000
  Rural   Urban
Male  Female All Male Female All
Scheduled
Tribes
1.2 0.2 0.7 9.1 4.7 7.0
Scheduled
Castes
1.3 0.3 0.8 4.1 2.0 3.1
Other
Backward
Castes
2.1 0.6 1.4 1.1 3.7 5.5
Others 4.4 1.4 3.0 18.2 12.7 15.6
All 2.6 0.8 1.7 12.7 8.2 10.5
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

6.14 On gender equity, the Secretary, higher education briefed the Committee
as follows :-
³On the gender equity side, I am happy to submit that the enrolment ratio
of girls is about 40 percent in  higher education system, though in the
management and engineering side, it may be only about 30 per cent. The
UGC has encouraged the girls and women hostels in a very big way. It
was thought that if we provide  hostel facility for women, they will find it
much easier to take part in higher education studies. So, last year, they
have spent almost Rs.150 crore on construction of women hostel buildings
and they are providing about Rs.2 crore of assistance in metropolitan
areas and Rs.1 crore in non-metropolitan areas for creation of hostels.
Then, they have got special schemes for preparing women for taking up
managerial positions. They have set up 42 women study centers. They
have day care centers; they have got :Women in Technology courses´ etc.
Women-related courses are supported by UGC specifically. Then, there is
a special scheme under which they provide infrastructural facilities like
toilets, crèche rooms and things like that in the universities. Knowing that
perhaps some of the women may find it difficult to take up a full-time
research work etc., they have a very special scheme under which part-
time research associateship for women is encouraged and 100 slots are
there, under which they are given this special associateship where they
get Rs.6,000 to Rs.10,000 per month depending on what kind of research
associateship they are taking up. Then, for women-specific amenities,
they spent Rs.57 lakh on infrastructural facilities last year and a cell has
been created in each university to look into the cases of sexual
harassment etc.
 UGC is also giving Rs.2000 per month to a single girl child who
take up post-graduate studies. In various Committees, UGC ensures that
women members are nominated by them. These are some of the things
which I would like to submit that UGC has taken up, to give help to the
women candidates.´
6.15 On social equity, the Secretary, higher education stated as under during
briefing :-
³Similarly for encouraging minorities, they have constituted a Committee
under the Chairmanship of Prof. Chaddha which will come up with a
diversity index. The idea is that this diversity index would give an
indication as to which of the universities or colleges are representing our
rainbow of population more strongly. If a university or college is having a
widespread representation of our various social groups, then it will get
higher entitlement for UGC grant. Also, they will be giving additional help
to the colleges and universities which are located in minority concentrated
districts. Centres for Multi-cultural and Minority Studies in AMU, Maulana
Azad National University, Jamia Milia Islamia University etc. have been
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

proposed to focus on the rich traditions of Indian multi-culturism and study
of minority related issues. Our SC/ST category of friends need special
attention. Now Centres for Studies on Exclusion and Discrimination both
by ethnicity, caste, religion etc. have been supported by UGC. A number
of scholarships,  details of which are also given in the replies given to the
hon. Committee, have been started basically by the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment but they are being disbursed through UGC.
There are a number of coaching centers, and remedial courses are being
undertaken through UGC to encourage ST/SC students to come up to
those levels so that they can move with their other colleagues while taking
instructions in the higher educational institutions. UGC also coaches
students for taking up civil services and other competitive examinations.
These are some of the things that are being done.
6.16 In regard to establishment of National Tribal University, the Additional
Secretary stated, ³I would like to mention in this connection that National Tribal
University is proposed to be established at Amarkantak. That is meant
specifically for the education of scheduled tribes and for tribal studies. That Bill
has been introduced and it is now being examined. Amarkantak is on the
Madhya Pradesh Chattisgarh Border.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER-VII
FACULTY AND RESEARCH
A.  Faculty
(a)  Faculty Vacancies
7.1 During briefing, the Secretary Higher Education informed the Committee
regarding faculty vacancies as follows:-
³One more thing which I would like to submit is that our problem has been
that there are a large number of vacancies in the faculty. Unfortunately,
some of the States also had put a ban on recruitment of teachers in the
higher education system.  Our hon. Human Resource Development
Minister had a meeting with the State Education Ministers where he has
appealed to all of them to see that such a ban, if any, is lifted, and these
positions are filled up because without there being teachers, the quality
gets affected.  As far as the Central Government is concerned, knowing
that there is an acute shortage of teachers, we have raised the age of
retirement of faculty members from 62 to 65 years.  There could be some
criticism that this perhaps stops or adversely affects the youngsters or the
younger generation who want to take on the teaching profession. Our
submission is that ours is now an expanding education system with this 54
percent increase under Moily Committee recommendations and also the
fact there is, on an average, 25 percent vacancies in various educational
institutions, we feel this measure would help in reducing this critical
shortage of faculty and would help us in improving quality. ´
7.2 When asked as to what extent the State Governments have been
persuaded to fill up faculty vacancies, the Chairman, UGC stated during
evidence as under:-
³Sir, we have consistently been requesting State Governments not merely
through letters but in the month of April this year a conference was held of
all the State Education Ministers where this was one of the main things
which was impressed upon by the Minister of HRD that, above all, (a)
there should be no vacancy and (b) that the profession of teaching in
colleges and universities should not be casualised.  It is not proper to
appoint short term contract teachers as many States are unfortunately
doing; that it is necessary to have proper full time regularly appointed
professional teachers.  Higher education is far too serious a business to
be left to casual contract teachers.  We are continuing to pursue with
them.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7.3 In regard to vacancies in faculty position in various universities, the
Ministry in a written reply furnished to the Committee stated that the University
Grants Commission, as also the Ministry of Human Resource Development had
written to the State Governments reiterating the need for regular appointment of
teachers in universities/colleges.  However, barring a few States no response
has been received.  The Ministry further stated that the State Governments were
also requested to furnish the number of vacant faculty positions but no response
has been received from the State Governments.  Based on the available
information, the Ministry submitted a statement showing the vacancies of
teachers in State Universities/Colleges as on 01.5.2007.  Average percentage of
vacancies filled up in all the 69 universities was about 64% only.  In some
universities more than 50% of vacancies were vacant viz. University of Mumbai-
38.4% of posts, Punjab University ± 46.6% of posts, University of North Bengal ±
94.7% of posts, RTM Nagpur University ± 71.6%, Bharatiyar University,
Tamilnadu ± 53.3%, University of Rajasthan ± 69.8% of posts were vacant.
7.4 In so far as Central Universities are concerned the Ministry informed that
each Central University is governed by its individual Act of Parliament and the
Statutes made thereunder.  In terms of the relevant Statutes, the appointments to
the teaching posts in a University are made by its Executive Council on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted in accordance with the
provision of these Statutes.   The Selection Committee for the posts of Professor,
Reader and Lecturer, amongst others, includes, inter-alia, a nominee of the
President, as the Visitor of the University.  In view of the foregoing, while this
Ministry¶s role is limited to providing the Visitor nominees to the Selection
Committees for the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer and certain other
specified posts, the Government, through the University Grants Commission
(UGC), keeps reminding the Central Universities to fill the vacant posts.  This is,
thus, a continuous process.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7.5 The Ministry provided the following information on central university-wise
sanctioned teaching strength and vacant posts as on 31 st March, 2007.
S. No. Name of the University Sanctioned
Strength
Vacant
Posts
Percentage
1 Aligarh Muslim University 1396 280 20.06
2 Banaras Hindu University 1832 527 28.77
3 University of Delhi 1251 408 32.61
4 University of Hyderabad   366   47 12.84
5 Jamia Millia Islamia   732 132 18.03
6 Jawaharlal Nehru University   569 119 20.91
7 North-Eastern Hill University   339   48 14.16
8 Pondicherry University   217   36 16.59
9 Visva Bharti   655 101 15.42
10 Tezpur University  148   43 29.05
11 Nagaland University   201   83 41.29
12 Mizoram University   237   24 10.13
13 Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar
University
   86   48 55.81
14 MGA Hindi Vishvidyalaya  44  12 27.27
15 Maulana Azad National Urdu
University
 126  13 10.32
16 University of Allahabad  538 229 42.57
17 Manipur University 193   74 38.34
18 Rajiv Gandhi University 124   47 37.90
Total 9054 2271 25.08
(b) Retention of meritorious faculty
7.6 In regard to the problem of retention of meritorious faculty by Indian
Universities, the Committee enquired whether UGC considered any
arrangements like joint appointments whereby faculty of Indian Universities can
work six months in a foreign university and six months in India.  In this regard,
the Ministry in a written reply stated ³pay scales of the university and college
teachers have been increased much more substantially as compared to other
services keeping this in mind.  At present there is no provision of Joint
Appointments of faculty in Indian and foreign universities.  However, Indian
universities are free to appoint a teacher on contract from a university as Visiting
Professor/Visiting Fellow. ´
7.7 During Study tour of the Committee to Kolkata and Jadavpur Universities
were asked whether there is any proposal to offer joint appointments to eminent
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

scholars by a foreign universities/ institute. In this regard, the reply of the Kolkata
University is as follows:-
³We have noticed that many of our colleagues are not only opting to take
up permanent/short-term assignments in foreign universities and
institutions, but also in central universities and institutes because of better
service conditions and infrastructure facilities. This trend is visible in all
State Universities and is gradually eroding the presence of high quality
faculty members in such institutions.
Our University is considering a proposal to create Adjunct
Professorships to arrest the threat of migration of eminent colleagues.
Such a system will not only enable such colleagues of our to maintain their
links with the University, but will also enable the University to provide
attachments to foreign scholars of eminence.  We are also creating
opportunities of consultancy work, better research facilities, and greater
scope for national and international interactions under the UGC ¶s
University with Potential For Excellence, the World Bank ¶s TEQIP and
other related schemes to retain our Colleagues.
One possible way of ensuring bright post-graduate students to
continue their higher studies in Calcutta University is to provide them with
good Fellowships and adequate facilities for undertaking research and
developing national and international networks.  We may also think of
offering Teaching Assistantships or Tutorships to doctoral students as
incentives to develop a sense of attachment to the institution. At the same
time facilities available to the faculty of central universities should be made
available to their colleagues in state universities so that the state
universities will be able to retain high quality faculty. ´
7.8 Reply of the Jadavpur University is as under:-
³It is true that bright Post Graduate (PG) students of Jadavpur University
and some faculty members go to reputed foreign Universities for the
pursuit of doctoral degrees and / or higher studies.  Provision for doctoral/
Post-doctoral fellowship of higher values to bright students/ faculty
members to pursue higher studies may be made by UGC.  There is no
proposal to have joint appointment of teachers from foreign Universities in
Jadavpur University, but there is Visiting Professor (either foreign/national)
scheme of the UGC which is in operation in some subjects.  The
University is also interested to have positions of Adjunct Professors. ´
7.9 In regard to autonomy to universities in the case of hiring of faculties, the
Vice-Chancellor, Delhi University stated as below:-
´As my colleague, Prof. Bhattacharya mentioned, we need to strengthen
our autonomy further.  In that direction, we would like five percent to ten
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

percent faculty positions to be made floating faculty positions.  If today we
want to hire scientists in the area of nuclear physics or materials, which
are thrust areas of the Government of India in the Department of Science,
then we should be able to hire them immediately.  If there is a bright
scholar, we should be able to hire him/her.  Now the jobs are assigned to
the Department.  Let us say the Physics Department can have only 40
positions but let us say we want to strengthen our Physics Department.
We are getting five brilliant scientists who are sitting abroad but we want
to get them back.  But we cannot do that.  Getting them back, it is a very
long-winded process.  We have to go to UGC with a request that in the
next Plan give us five more positions in the Physics Department.  So, I
think we have to more mobility and flexibility ´.
7.10 In regard to migration of Indian faculty to abroad, the Vice-Chancellor,
Delhi University stated as under:-
³In fact, sometimes it is difficult to keep them here because the necessity
of Indian Faculty Member is increasing.  Our good scholars in History and
Political Science are very much in demand because some American or
European University wants to start Indian centric course and so they take
an Indian Professor, give him a reasonable amount of money and get him
there. Because it is prestigious to go there, our teachers are willing to
abandon their own students ¶ teaching session and go there.  I am sorry to
say so.  Right now I think we will have to be very-very smart, clever and
open to make sure that we maintain levels of standards in our
universities.´.
7.11 Delhi University in a written reply has stated that joint appointments are
good idea to get talent from abroad for areas where there are major weaknesses.
The joint appointees may be required to put in a specified number of man hours
in the Indian universities.  Jawaharlal Nehru University has also welcomed the
provision of joint appointments for meritorious teachers by the Universities in
India and any reputed University abroad.  UGC/Govt. should also make a
provision in the regulation that would enable Universities to appoint foreign
scholars as regular faculty members.  This will certainly ensure induction of
highly talented faculty members.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7.12 When asked whether the Government has considered joint appointment of
faculty by universities in India and universities abroad, the Secretary, Higher
Education stated during the hearing as follows:-
³Joint appointments of teachers may be difficult between foreign
universities and Indian universities, but what we have today is a system of
faculty where people from the industry who are knowledgeable in certain
subjects can come and teach in universities in our country.  Similarly,
professors who are very renowned in foreign university can come and
teach in India and our professors can go and teach abroad.  There is also
a provision that all those persons of Indian origin can be invited and can
be given regular appointments also in India, but for foreign citizens they
can be given only a contract appointment in India.  These are the
provisions today´.
7.13 The Secretary, Higher Education further stated during evidence as
follows:-
³While the idea looks to be novel and good but in our system, today, we
have already a system of visiting faculty, a system of a adjunct faculty,
which is generally anybody from the industry, coming and teaching in the
universities not full-time employees of any universities or educational
institutions but they are doing something else but they do come and they
are on the rolls of the university for teaching a few subjects or few
courses, etc.  So, we have this system of adjunct faculty and visiting
faculty but this idea of joint appointment is yet to be seen.  There are
apprehensions that this may also mean that, if they are appointed by two
universities in the country itself, there are possibilities and apprehensions
that they may not do justice to either of the two universities.  So, keeping
that in mind, UGC has set up a Committee under Prof. Govardhan Mehta,
who is supposed to go into details and give some guidelines as to under
what circumstances and so what kind of emoluments can be given to
visiting faculty, adjunct faculty or casual faculty, etc.  We are awaiting the
report of this Committee.  Once we get the report, we would take action on
that.  While both the Universities of Delhi and JNU have said that it is good
idea to think of joint appointments but, I think, joint appointments, to our
mind with all humility, in today ¶s context perhaps we can think of some
kind of contract appointments where a foreign faculty member, who has
some links with India and wants to visit India every year or sometime, he
can be given give a contract of two or six months, and it could even be on
a basis where he fixes or has a contract for serving on this kind of a basis
for five or 10 years, that kind of thing perhaps looks more feasible as on
date but exact joint appointments where the professor or the teacher is
jointly appointed by two universities looks to be something where we have
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

apprehensions today´.
(c) Involvement of faculty in designing curriculum and decision making
7.14 When asked whether an individual faculty member or a department of the
universities enjoy sufficient freedom to design his own course for teaching in a
subject with the given syllabus or does he/she feel constrained by the system or
approvals required from Head of Deptt./Committees of Academic Council/UGC.
Kolkata University in a Written reply, during the study tour of the Committee,
Stated as follows:-
³Every post-graduate Department has complete academic autonomy to
design its course and teaching-learning process.  Each Department has a
Departmental Committee and a Board of Studies attached to it.  The
teaching programme of the Department is prepared by these bodies,
which is, of course, ratified by the Faculty Council and the Syndicate to
ensure that it is in conformity with the UGC guidelines.  The Vice-
Chancellor with the help of the concerned Faculty Councils monitors the
post-graduate teaching programmes.
 The Undergraduate Boards of Studies, subject to ratification by the
Undergraduate Council and the Syndicate, formulate the under-graduate
courses.  The teaching programme and the functioning of the colleges are
monitored by the Undergraduate Council, which is chaired by the Pro
Vice-Chancellor for Academic Affairs. ´
7.15 In this regard Jadavpur University stated that ³there is sufficient freedom
of faculty members to revise course curriculum periodically ± such proposals are
generated in Boards of Studies of departments, and approved by Faculty
Councils of Arts, Science and Engineering & Technology respectively at
Jadavpur University before being executed through the Executive Council and
the University Court-the entire process does not take more than one month. ´
7.16 Delhi University in its reply to the question relating to involvement of
faculty in designing curriculum has stated as follows:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³Teachers at undergraduate level have very little incentive to innovate.
Courses are made by the Courses Committees which include college
teachers and the faculty in the postgraduate departments.  Courses are
cleared by the Academic Council and then reported to the Executive
Council.  The Academic Council is the custodian of Academic standards.
In many cases there is a huge reluctance to change as teaches are not
ready to cope with the latest advances in the subject.  In subject areas like
Commerce, where the number of teachers is very large, revisions and
improvement become very difficult as everyone has a viewpoint ´.
7.17 In this regard JNU has inter-alia stated, as under:-
³The structure of a programme, viz. B.A., M.A., M.Sc. etc. is prepared and
proposed by the Centre and then it is recommended by the board of
studies of the School and then is approved by the Academic Council.
Within the overall frame work of the approved structure, the Individual
teacher in-charge of the course is free to conduct the course as per his
methods and imagination.  JNU faculty member doesn ¶t feel constrained
by the system in developing his/her own courses ´.
7.18 When asked whether decisions are taken in a collegiate manner in the
university, Kolkata University replied during study tour of the Committee that ³all
academic decisions are made in a collaborative manner.  Revision of curricula,
formulation of rules and regulations of examinations etc. are carried out by the
teachers collectively and discussed by the Under Graduate and Postgraduate
Faculty Councils before being sent to the Syndicate for approval.  So far as
administrative decisions are concerned, these are made in (in accordance with
the overall policy guidelines laid down by the Senate and the Syndicate) by the
Vice-Chancellor in consultation with Pro Vice-Chancellors and implemented by
the office of the Registrar.  In this regard, Jadavpur University stated that ³all
policy decisions at Jadavpur University are taken by Executive Council and the
Vice-Chancellor, and at the Faculty level by the Deans of respective faculties and
decisions of UGC and State Governments are routed and circulated through the
Executive Council and issued by the Office of Registrar.  Certain decentralized
decisions are taken by the Deptt./Faculties at Jadavpur University.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7.19 In this regard, Delhi University has stated that decisions with regard to
academic and other policy matters are processed through Academic Council and
Executive Council.  JNU has stated that at JNU decisions are taken in a
democratic and collegiate manner and generally unilateral decisions are not
taken by Vice-Chancellor.
(d) Pay scales of Faculty
7.20 When asked whether all central universities adopt the pay commission
awards or does the existing legislation allow them to decide their own pay scales,
the Ministry in a written reply stated that ³the Executive Council of each Central
University is empowered, inter-alia, to determine the emoluments of teaching and
academic posts in the University.  The UGC Act also vests powers in the
Commission to make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules made
there under aimed, inter-alia, at regulating the maintenance of standards and co-
ordination of the work or facilities in Universities.  As a measure for the
maintenance of the standards in higher education, the UGC, in exercise of the
said power, notifies the revision of pay-scales, minimum qualifications for the
appointments of teachers in the universities and colleges and other measures for
the maintenance of standards, periodically in pursuance of the recommendations
in this behalf made by the Pay Review Committee constituted by the Commission
from time to time on the advice of the Central Government.  UGC being the
funding agency, the Executive Councils/Boards of Management of Central
Universities have invariably been adopting the UGC ¶s regulation on the subject .
7.21 The Ministry further informed the Committee that UGC in consultation with
the Government of India has constituted a Pay Review Committee on 8 th August,
2007.  The Committee has been given one year ¶s time to finalise its
recommendations.  The terms of the reference of the Committee are as follows:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(a) To review the implementation of the previous decision of the
Government/UGC under the Scheme of Revision of Pay scales
approved of University and College Teachers, Librarians, Physical
Education Personnel and other academic staff in Universities and
Colleges, and in the process, to evaluate the extent to which the
earlier recommendations in relation to qualifications, service
conditions and pay-scales etc. have been implemented.
(b) To examine the present structure of emoluments and conditions of
service of University and College Teachers, Librarians, Physical
Education Personnel and other academic staff in Universities and
Colleges and to suggest revision in the structure, taking into
account the minimum  qualifications, career advancement
opportunities, and total packet of benefits available to them (such
as superannuation benefits, medical, housing facilities, etc.)
(c) To make recommendations on the ways and means of attracting
and retaining talented persons in the teaching profession, as well
as for the furtherance of  research in the University System and
also for their career advancement in teaching and equivalent
positions in order to improve the quality of higher education.
(d) To look into the cases of anomalies, if any, in the matter of pay
structure and/or career advancement opportunities for any
categories of academic staff, consequent on revision of pay scales
based on the recommendations of the preceding Pay Review
Committee and to suggest remedial measures.
7.22 In this regard, the Secretary, Higher Education also briefed the
Committee, ³of course, we have the problem of low salary of the teachers
because in the private sector they find that with the same qualification they can
get much higher salary.  So, with a view to look into these issues a Pay Review
Committee has also been constituted by UGC which is going into the details of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the salary structure of the university education system.  After that Report is
received, it will be considered suitably by both UGC and Government ´.
7.23 In regard to the problem of payment of less salaries than due to faculty in
private educational institutions, the Secretary, Higher Education informed the
Committee as under:-
³Sir, we are painfully aware of the fact that in some of the educational
institutions, they do not pay their teachers the salaries that should be paid.
Unfortunately, this is more in the nature of cheating because they do take
signatures at times for the amount which they should be paying, but give
them less.  This is a typical case of cheating.  If any specific cases come
to our notice, we can ensure that such an institution does not get any
grant or their recognition and other things could be looked into.  But
unfortunately what happens is that even the teachers do not complain.
There is no evidence to the fact that less amount has been paid.  Because
of that I think this unfortunate situation is continuing. We have written to
the State Government to look into this issue.  Because this is a concurrent
subject, basically the State Governments have to look into it ´.
7.24 When asked whether UGC propose to fix any responsibility on faculty to
impart quality education alongwith the pay hike, the Ministry in a written reply
stated as below:
³While the primary responsibilities lies with universities for ensuring that
faculty impart quality education, the Pay Review Committees notified by
the UGC make recommendations in this regard.  The recommendations of
the Pay Review Committee generally include enhancement in the salary
on the one hand and the accountability of teaches on the other.  For
example, in its Report submitted in May, 1997, the last UGC Pay Review
Committee headed by Shri R.P. Rastogi, had made many
recommendations including those regarding minimum qualifications for
Teachers, period of probation for Teachers, their pay-scales, Career
Advancement Scheme, teaching days, and workload of teachers.  The
universities are expected to follow the policy decision on the
recommendations of the Pay Review Committee, which ensures
accountability and quality alongwith the pay revision.  To improve the
quality of teaching the Pay Review Committee recently constituted by the
UGC is expected to recommend many steps which may include students
and peer evaluation, continuous updatation of knowledge etc.   At present
also the UGC has framed regulations giving the minimum qualification of
teachers to ensure quality.  In addition, the teachers are required to attend
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

orientation and refresher courses to update their knowledge on a
continuous basis.
7.25 In regard to student ¶s evaluation of faculties, Delhi University in a written
reply stated, ³Students¶ evaluation of teaching of courses is must.  It takes place
in IITs and IIMs.  It should be done in a constructive manner and used to improve
the classroom performance of the teachers ´.   JNU has also welcomed students ¶
anonymous evaluation of teachers.  In this regard, UGC in a written reply stated
that some of the universities are adopting students evaluation as a mode of
assessing the faculty members.  However, no formal guidelines on this subject
have been issued by UGC.  It has, however, been debated whether the student
evaluation should be used as mode of evaluating teachers, only at PG level or
even at UG level.
(e)   Academic Staff Colleges
7.26 In the annual report 2006-07 of the Ministry of Human Resources
Development, it was stated that ³the UGC has established 57 Staff Colleges
during the Tenth Plan for conducting specially designed Orientation Programmes
of 4 weeks duration for newly appointed teachers and Refresher Courses of 3
weeks duration for in-service teachers.   The Orientation Programmes are
intended to inculcate in young lecturers, the quality of self-reliance through
awareness of the social, intellectual and moral environment as well as to
discover self-potential and confidence.  The Refresher Course provides
opportunities for serving teachers to exchange experiences with their peers and
learn from each other.  It is a forum for keeping abreast with the latest advances
in their subjects.  It is also mentioned in the Annual Report that the UGC has also
identified 31 universities and specialized institutions as UGC-Refresher Course
Centres (UGC-RCC).  During the academic year 2006-07, 222 programmes (182
Orientation Programmes & 40 Workshops) and 671 Refresher Courses have
been approved and allocated to the ASCs and Refresher Course Centres
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(RCCs) and Rs. 15.02 crores has been made available upto 28 th February 2007
to these Academic Staff Colleges/RCCs for Programmes and Courses.
7.27 During the hearing of Vice-Chancellors of Delhi University and Jawaharlal
Nehru University, the Secretary, Higher Education stated, ³There are academic
staff colleges.  As I mentioned, 55 of them are being revamped and we intend to
have summer schools starting with this summer where we would like to upgrade
the knowledge of our teachers.  There is a World Bank Project also.  We are
entering Phase 2 of that Project.  It will provide 7000 crores of rupees.  Under it,
we will have some mentor institutions which, in turn, will upgrade the colleges of
education in their attached units ´.
B. Research
(a) Research in universities
7.28 Regarding quality and quantity of research, the Secretary, Higher
Education stated during briefing as follows:-
³On the quality side, we are also conscious of the fact that the number of
PhDs produced by us in the country is slightly less than what we should
be having.  We seem to be producing only about 5000 PhDs in a year.
Today we had a Joint Working Group form Brazil.  They have informed us
that they produce about 10,000 PhDs in a year; in China, though we do
not have exact figures, it is likely to be somewhere around 35,000 to
40,000 PhDs; and in USA, the figure would be around 25,000 PhDs.
Similarly, on the patents, in India, in the year 2005, we had only about 648
patents; China had 2,452, USA had 45,111 patents, and Japan had
25,145 patents.  Similarly, in the number of research papers which are
published by us, I think we have only a share of about 2.5 percent in the
total number of research papers which are published in the world,
whereas the share of our friends, like China, would be somewhere around
3.5 percent to 5 percent, while in USA, it may be of the order of 38
percent. This give us an impression that on the quality side, we have to
further improve.´
7.29 UGC implements certain programmes for the development of research by
universities and colleges viz. Faculty Improvement Programme, Major and Minor
Research projects, Research Awards, part time Research Associateship for
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Women, etc.   Inter-Universities Centres and National Facilities Centres provides
universities common facilities and also serve as resource centres.
(b) Faculty Improvement Programme (FIP)
7.30 In the Annual Report 2006-07, it was stated that Teacher Fellowships
under FIP provide an opportunity to teachers of universities/colleges to pursue
their academic/research activities leading to the award of M.Phil/PhD degree.
Permanent teachers with at least 3 years of teaching experience and not more
than 45 years of age (relaxable by 5 years in the case of women and SC/ST) are
eligible for Teacher Fellowship.  Out of Fellowships allocated to
university/colleges,  15% of fellowships are reserved for SC and 7.5% of
fellowships for the ST teachers.  The tenure of fellowship for Ph.D Programme is
two years and for M.Phil Programme is one year.  Under this scheme
reimbursement of actual contingency expenditure subject to a maximum  of Rs.
10,000/- per year, actual train or bus fare for joining the research centre and
return to the parent institution and the salary of the substitute teacher, is
provided.  In the annual report it is mentioned that for 2006-07, an amount of Rs.
13.76 crores has been reimbursed upto 28 th February, 2007 to
universities/colleges.
(c)   Junior Research Fellowships (JRFs)
7.31 Under this scheme, students/research scholars who qualify national level
tests conducted by the UGC-CSIR, SLET are awarded fellowships to pursue
research leading to M.Phil/Ph.D. degrees in various disciplines.  The fellowship is
tenable for a period of four years initially and it is extendable by one more year
subject to the prior approval of the Commission.  The fellowship amount for the
first two years is Rs. 8,000/- p.m. and Rs. 9,000/- for the remaining three years.
The contingency for the first two years is Rs. 10,000/- p.a. and Rs. 20,500/- p.a.
for subsequent years.  However, in the case of Sciences, the contingency is Rs.
12,000/- p.a. for the first two years and Rs. 25,000/- p.a. for subsequent three
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

years.  Admissible HRA and Department Assistance of Rs. 3,000/- p.a. are also
provided to these fellows.  During 2006-07, an expenditdure of Rs. 2.3.28 crores
has been incurred upto 28 th February, 2007 towards the payment of these Junior
Research Fellowships.
7.32 In regard to research fellowship, the Secretary, Higher Education informed
the Committee during oral evidence that the research grant also was mentioned
by hon. Members besides JRF, i.e., Junior Research Fellowship and Senior
Research Fellowship.  Roughly, 50% increase has been made in the research
fellowship a few months back.  The idea was that those who want to go in for
research will have to forego the remuneration as is payable to a teacher during
that period and they could have the choice to become a teacher during the same
period.  As we also need teachers, we have tried to see that by having 50%
increase in JRF for the NET-qualified students, their remuneration would be
almost on par with the entry-level of a lecturer.  That also should facilitate
attracting good students for research/PhDs.
7.33 When the Committee enquired about the amount of scholarship being
given to JRF at present, the Secretary further informed the Committee as under:-
³As I say, junior research fellows get Rs. 12,000 p.m.  If they are not
getting facilities, they get HRA also.  In metropolitan areas, it could be
30% of Rs. 12,000.  Along with that they are getting contingency amount
of Rs. 20,000 per year.  For those candidates who do not quality NET,
UGC gives Rs. 5,000 to all such candidates who are doing Ph.D. in
Central educational institutions.  This scheme is under revision now
because we want to fix some parameters so that there is a criterion for
those who get admitted.  There is no point in somebody with a third class
degree doing research.  I think, we will have to have some minimum
standards for those who are getting into research.  Similarly, we have a
programme for teachers where existing teachers are sent to training and
they can get Ph.Ds., etc.   During that period, they get their salary and
also separately some stipend.  These are the measures which can help us
remove faculty shortages.  There are two more schemes which I would
like to mention.  There is Ramanujam Fellowship.   Under this scheme,
some of our bright teachers who are of Indian origin and are working
abroad are invited to come to India and take up research here.  During this
period, they are paid Rs. 50,000 per month in the first two years and this
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

amount becomes Rs. 60,000 after the first two years.  Its duration is 5
years.  In addition to this, they are given Rs. 5,00,000 as contingency
grant and for other expense to take up research.  This is one scheme.
Similarly, for those who are very bright and who are teachers or faculty
members and are undertaking research and who have contributed
significantly to their research areas, there is the Bose fellowship.  Under
this, Rs. 20,000 per month is given and also Rs. 5,00,000 towards
contingency and research grant per year for a total period of 5 years.
Under Ramanujam fellowship, the enrolment is only 8-10, while in Bose
fellowship, it is 40 to 50.  That is my recollection.
7.34 When asked whether University of Delhi and JNU would consider raising
the amount of scholarship for Ph.D students to atleast Rs. 18,000 or so for a
period of three years from the date of registration, Delhi University in a written
reply stated that in certain areas like management and economics, very few
bright students are interested in working for doctoral degrees.  There are two
ways they can be encouraged:-
(a) Higher levels of scholarship;
(b) Incentives like co-supervisor abroad (in some key areas) and joint
degrees with western universities.
7.35 JNU welcomed the proposal for raising the amount of scholarship for
Ph.D. students to Rs. 18,000 per month.  However, it has further stated that it
would be difficult for a student to complete the Ph.D. in three years.  The
fellowship need to be provided for at least 4 years period from the date of their
registration/confirmation to the Ph.D. programme with a provision to be extended
to 5th Year.
7.36 In this regard, the Secretary, Higher Education explained to the
Committee as under:-
³Sir, our submission would be that we have Junior Research Fellowship
Scheme, under which there are two types of schemes.  One is those who
have passed the National Eligibility Test, that is, NET examination.  For
those students who have passed NET and are entering Ph.D., under our
UGC Scheme we give Rs. 12,000/- per month by way of Junior Research
Fellowship along with whatever HRA is applicable in that city.  So, in
Delhi, they get Rs. 12,000/- plus 30% HRA if they are not given hostel
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

accommodation.  There is also another Scheme because NET qualified
candidates are comparatively limited and they are about 1100 in a year.
Keeping that in mind we need to increase the number of Ph.D.  UGC has
also another Scheme under which they give Rs. 5,000/- of this research
fellowship to those who are non-NET qualified Ph.D. students.  This
number, of course, is much larger.  We are trying to revamp this Scheme
by prescribing some criteria as to who will be eligible for this Scheme in
future.  But, as of now, all those who are registered in Ph.D. with the
Central Universities are getting this amount.  Mainly this is being utilized
by BHU, Delhi University and JNU.  These three are utilizing it to a great
extent.  Of course, if we are able to give further incentive for doing Ph.D.,
it would obviously be good.  We have also to encourage our students to
do Ph.D. but at the same time the same students can either take Ph.D.
courses or some of them can also go for teaching.  So, we have to also
strike a balance because there is a faculty shortage  also in many
institutions.  Keeping that in mind, keeping in mind the resources available
and also the budgetary constraints, it was felt that this amount of Rs.
12,000/- per month plus 30 percent HRA is a reasonable amount.  Delhi
University has started teaching assistantships for doctoral students on an
experimental basis.  The Vice Chancellor of Delhi University is here and
he can give us more details.  I understand that four to five teaching such
assistantships had been granted where the students along with doing
Ph.D., they will also be taking classes.  They have prescribed some
guidelines and they will be getting Rs. 18,000/- per month.  The idea is
that while taking up their Ph.D. programme, they will also be able to teach.
So, they will also be able to help in teaching.  This is limited to very bright
students.  So, on an experimental basis, on a pilot basis, they have started
it this year only.  These are my submissions.  Of course, both Delhi
University and JNU have said that increasing the fellowship is a good
proposal but as I submitted the budgetary constrains will come in the
way´.
7.37 During evidence the Vice-Chancellors of University of Delhi and
Jawaharlal Nehru University raised the issue of dropout of students who are
registered for Ph.D.  In this regard, the Chairman, UGC informed the Committee
as follows:-
³Since we are discussing the fellowship issue, I would like to add to what
my esteemed colleague has said.  I think, the issue of fellowship is very
important.  In fact, it is the UGC which brought to the notice that of the
total students that registered for Ph.D. by 2004, little less than 3 percent of
them are given fellowships.  So, we can see that the financial coverage
and assistance given to the Ph.D. student is very low.  As has been rightly
pointed out by VC, Delhi University, at the Ph.D. level, we cannot expect a
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

student, after having completed post-graduation, to undertake education
through self-financing mode.   If we want him/her to take teaching and a
researcher as carrier, we need to support him/her for Ph.D.  The situation
is such that only 3 percent of them get financial assistance.  As a result,
we have discovered that those who registered for Ph.D. at all India level,
approximately 70 percent of them drop out before completing their Ph.D.
This is a situation we had brought out to the notice of the Ministry as well
as in a presentation to the Hon. Prime Minister and Hon. Prime Minister
has taken a major initiative on this issue.  The other issue, which Prof.
Bhattarcharya has rightly referred to, is that unfortunately many States in
the country till recently had put a ban on recruitment of faculty in the
universities and colleges.  On the one hand, we put a ban on the
recruitment of teachers; and on the other, we do not have a substantial
fellowship program.  Hence, there was no motivation for the students to go
for PhD. Because they say no future for them in terms of getting job in the
universities.  The Ministry of Human Resource Development and UGC
had written to different states to remove this ban and many of the State
Governments such as Tamil Nadu, Bihar, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh ±
have removed the ban and now resumed faculty recruitment.  So, our
effort is to improve the situation on the demand side.  On the supply side,
we are introducing fellowship initiative whereby we provide incentive to the
students to go for PhD.
7.38 In this regard, the Secretary, Higher Education further stated as under:-
³But still, on the whole, the problem does remain that in the society, the
respect for the teachers and the professors has to go up, and their
emoluments have to go up.  Then only there would be interest for many
for doing PhDs and taking up the teaching jobs.  If I remember correctly,
18,000 to 19,000 students get PhDs every year in the country.  We have
to increase this number much more, if we have to keep our rate of GDP
and remain a knowledge-based economy.  Even out of 18,000 or 19,000
PhDs who pass out every year, the number of students doing PhDs on the
Science and Technology side is comparatively very low.  That figure is
only about 4,500 to 5,000 and that has to go up.  Of course, we are aware
of some of these problems and we are trying to see, within the budgetary
constraints, how best to get over them´.
(d) National Eligibility Test
7.39 The University Grants Commission conducts National Level Tests for
Lectureship Eligibility and Junior Research Fellowships (JRFs) to ensure
minimum standards for the entrants in the teaching profession and research in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Universities and Colleges.  The test for Science subjects is conducted by the
CSIR jointly with the UGC.  These tests are conducted twice a year, generally, in
the months of June and December.  The UGC has allocated a number of
Fellowships to the Universities for the candidates who qualify the test for the
JRF.  Presently, these tests are being conducted in 82 subjects at 66 Centres
spread across the country and six centres abroad.  The UGC also grants
accreditation to various States to conduct State Level Eligibility Test for
lectureship.  At present 15 States are conducting SET.  In the UGC-NET
examination held in December, 2005 1.10 lakhs candidates appeared.  Out of
which , 8363 (7.61%) candidates were declared eligible for lectureship and 1081
candidates (UGC-JRF:300, CSIR-JRF-781) eligible for Junior Research
Fellowship.
7.40 In regard to NET, the Secretary, Higher Education briefed the Committee
and stated that ³There was also a problem that we were not able to get National
Eligibility Test qualified candidates in the faculty.  So, a small relaxation has been
given based on Dr. Mungekar Committee Report that for those who have done
Ph.D., NET qualification would be waived and they can teach in the Post-
Graduate level.  For under-graduate level, for M.Phil., candidates this NET
qualification was waived with a view to improve the teacher availability in the
higher education system´.
(e) Digital Repository of Research and Teaching Material
7.41 The University Grants Commission provides electronic assess to scholarly
literature through internet in all areas of learning to the University Sector in India.
The programme is fully funded by the UGC.  All Universities which come under
the UGC ¶s purview are members of the programmes, and it is being gradually
extended to all eligible colleges as well. The programme is coordinated and
executed by Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Centre, Ahmedabad.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Programme covers all fields of learning of relevance to Universities including
Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences, Physical and Chemical Sciences, Life
Sciences, Computer Sciences, Mathematics and Statistics.  During 2006-07, an
amount of Rs. 11.00 crores has been made available upto 28 th February, 2007
under the programme to the INFLIBNET Centre.
7.42 Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) is an autonomous inter-
university center of the University Grants Commission (UGC) located at Gujarat
University Campus, Ahmedabad.  It is engaged in modernization of libraries and
information centres for information transfer and access, to support scholarship,
learning and academic pursuits by establishing a national network of libraries and
information centres in Universities, deemed-to-be Universities, Colleges,
institutions of higher learning and R&D institutions in India. The automation of
University Libraries is an important activity of the Centre, since it is also a pre-
requisite of libraries and resource sharing under the INFLIBNET Programme.
INFLIBNET through University Grants Commission has been providing grants
(initial and recurring) to the universities identified under the programme.  Every
year 15-30 libraries are identified and initial grant to the tune of Rs. 6.5 lakhs is
provided.  This enables the university libraries to purchase computers, modem,
telephone, printer, air-conditioner, softwares (OS) etc.  These selected
universities are also provided with recurring grant for the first five years after the
installation of systems.  Till September 2007, 142 universities have been given
grants for the automation purpose.  The Centre has provided technical guidance,
including configuration of the systems, modality, execution and retrospective
conversion of the data, common  standards etc.  The Centre has developed
many databases to support libraries and academic community.  The Centre has
designed and developed a state-of-the-art comprehensive Library Management
Software called SOUL (Software for University Libraries) through its R&D
pursuits.  It is aimed at accelerating the library automation movement in the
country, which has gained lots of popularity in past few years and the installation
base has reached to 1242 as on 31 st Jan. 2007 across the country.  INFLIBNET
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

has been conducting various training courses/workshops of short and long
duration; International Conventions like International CALIBER and PLANNER
are regular feature too.   So far about 22000 professionals/academicians in
various disciplines got benefited out of 336 activities and majority of them are
from library, information and computers science disciplines.   The Centre has
been able  to realize its one of the objectives by setting up a major
communication network of universities and it has successfully interlinked 149
universities through UGC-Infonet which has been planned, implemented and
monitored by INFLIBNET using ERNET India, New Delhi (a Govt. of India society
under Ministry of Information Technology) backbone with state-of-art technology.
The academic community in India is effectively using UGC-Infonet infrastructure
for accessing international scholarly e-journals, Internet and Intranet services.
This program was dedicated to the Nation by the Hon ¶ble Prime Minister in 2002.
7.43 The Scheme of INFONET covers three scheme.
1. Broad Band connectivity to the Universities
Upto 31.05-2007, 149 Universities have been covered
2. E-Journals scheme for Universities
Under this scheme 4450 (approx.) e-journals are available through
internet to the teachers, researcher and students in the university
system.  This facility has been provided to 100 Universities.  This
initiative is called as UGC-Infonet: E-Journals consortium.  INFLIBNET
informed the Committee during its visit to the centre that 58 lakhs
articles were downloaded during three years of its operation.
3. Network Resource Center for colleges
Under the scheme UGC provides financial assistance to the colleges
for purchase of computers and internet connectivity.  Under this
scheme 3486 colleges have been covered upto Xth Plan period.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7.44 The Committee during their visit to INFLIBNET were informed that out of
42 sanctioned posts, 21 posts were vacant including the post of Director.  During
the Committee¶s visit, the centre was headed by a scientist as acting Director.  In
this regard, the Committee were subsequently informed that in order to cope with
the increase in number of universities/colleges, a proposal has already been
included in the XIth Plan projections showing the activity-wise requirement of
additional manpower,  in addition to the existing sanctioned posts.  The
Committee found that the centre is functioning from a residential flat in the
Gujarat University campus.  In this regard, the Committee were informed that the
Government of Gujarat has offered land to INFLIBNET Centre in INFOCITY,
Gandhinagar free of cost.  However, the documents of title and possession is
awaited.  The centre is constantly in touch with Government of Gujarat to speed
up the process.  The land of 10,000 sq. mtrs. (equivalent to 2.5 acres) is allotted
to the Centre and the demarcation of the same has already been done.
(f) M.M. Sharma Committee
7.45 The Ministry had appointed a Task Force under the Chairmanship of Prof.
M.M. Sharma, to
(a) Make an assessment of the present status of scientific
research and training in Universities in the area of scientific
research and training
(b) Make an assessment of the resources required both in
physical and financial terms to implement the solutions and
its modalities.
7.46 The recommendations of the Task Force have been accepted by the
Government for implementation through the University Grants Commission.
 The following are the recommendations of the task force:-
1. There are a large number of sanctioned faculty position in Universities that
have been lying vacant for a prolonged period.  These positions should be
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

expeditiously filled in by inducting talented faculty with a view to
strengthening the research base.
2. 1000 positions of Research Scientists at various levels equivalent to that
of Lecturer, Reader and Professor need to be created.  These positions
may be filled in through a rigorous selection procedure in a phased
manner over a period of five years.  Performance of these scientists be
reviewed after every five years by a dully constituted Expert Committee.
In order to ensure enabling environment on a continuous basis for these
prospective scientists, an MOU should be signed between the State
Universities and the implementing agency.
3. There is a need to create 10 networking centres in Basic Sciences (two
centers each in Physical Sciences, Chemical Sciences, Life Sciences,
Material Science s and mathematical Sciences) in leading Departments of
Universities in different parts of the country to promote collaborative
research, access to advanced facilities and imp0arting training in frontier
areas.  These centers should be supported on a long term basis in a
substantial manner to enable them to realize internationally competitive
status.
4. Formal linkage between the Universities and national level institutions
including CSIR laboratories be promoted through joint research projects
and training.  Linkages of Universities and their faculty with industries and
user organizations should be encouraged.  There should be provision for
joint appointments/visiting professorship to stimulate collaborative
research.
5. The system of both Winter and Summer Schools must be supported.
Each subject area of Basic Sciences may offer upto ten programmes a
year.  There should be a provision for visiting Fellowships for faculty within
the country.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

6. In order to promote quality scientific research in universities, infrastructural
facilities ought to be upgraded by providing development grants for
modern laboratories, physical infrastructure including uninterrupted power
supply, water safety requirements of international standards, high level
equipment with built-in maintenance mechanism, exclusive research
student¶s hostel and a research starter fund etc.
7. The number of Ph.Ds from Indian Universities should increase five-fold
within a span of ten years with proper standards.  This should be seen in
the context of extremely low India in relation to M.sc./B.Tech., as
compared to what it is in USA, UK, Germany, Japan, etc.  The emphasis
for research will eagerly emerge if we have universities with only
Departments and separately Universities having affiliated colleges.
8. A new autonomous body headed by an eminent scientist/academician
with an Advisory Board comprising scientists and engineers shall be set
up by the UGC for the purpose of implementing the aforesaid initiatives.
9. The Ministry of Human Resource Development should provide earmarked
grants of Rs. 600 crores per annum for implementation of the programme
of improving scientific research in universities.
7.47 Facilitating Recommendations
(a) The eligibility qualification for a Lecturer in the University Science
Departments should be Ph.D.  However, in the departments of
engineering and medicine, initially a lecturer may be appointed with
M.Tech./M.D. or MS qualifications respectively with the stipulation of
acquiring Ph.D. within 7 years of appointment.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(b) Teachers guiding research scholars should be given credit in terms of
their work load.  For every research scholar, the teacher should be
credited 2 hours per week in the prescribed work load.
(c) The age of retirement of University teachers must be uniform all over the
country.
(d) Women participation in basic science research should be enhanced by
way of removing age bar and introducing flexi-time approach.
(e) Five-year integrated M.Sc. Programmes for higher secondary students
and Integrated Ph.D. programmes for graduates should be introduced in
select central and state universities.
(f) All post-graduate programme pertaining to science and technology should
have an inbuilt component of research.
(g) The present system of National Eligibility Test (NET) for determining the
eligibility for Lecturer and for award of Research Fellowship ought to be
revisited with a view to bringing about qualitative improvement in the
selection procedure.
(h) In addition to Research Fellowship awarded by different National Funding
Agencies, every university shall be provided, for pursuing Doctoral
Research 50 fellowships in Basic Sciences based on past performance of
Departments.  Post-doctoral Fellowships should be introduced for a
maximum period of two years on a highly selective basis.
(i) All UGC-SAP Departments, DST-FIST Departments and the research
centres funded by national agencies should be conferred complete
autonomy with academic, administrative and financial powers.  The Acts
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

of the States Universities may have to be revisited to bring about
necessary amendments to this effect.
(j) Every Institutions of higher learning should earmark 5% of its non-plan
budget for the furtherance of research in basic sciences.  10% of the
capital grant allocated to each University should be provided as annual
maintenance grants towards spare parts, annual maintenance contracts,
some add-on facilities and repairs etc.  The overhead charges provided to
the Universities should be made uniform at 15%.
7.48 In regard to M.M Sharma  Committee, the Secretary, Higher Education
briefed the Committee as below:-
³As far as science research is concerned, it was also felt that this is one of
the weak areas and there was a need to give more impetus because it
was felt that not enough research is being done as is evident from the
number of patents and research papers and PhDs etc., which I had earlier
submitted.  The Government and the UGC together constituted one M.M.
Sharma Committee, which had gone into the entire details of the science
education system. They have given their recommendations and it is one of
those rare cases that the Committee which gave the recommendations
had itself been converted into a Task Force.  So, the same Committee
which gave recommendations is now overseeing and monitoring the
implementation of their recommendations.   They have suggested that
about Rs. 600 crore should be spent every year exclusively for science
education.  We are trying our best to allocate those kind of resources, but
this year because of the resource constraints, we have been able to
allocate about Rs. 205 crore specifically earmarking for taking care of the
recommendations of the M.M. Sharma Committee.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 Chapter-VIII
Fee Structure and facilities to students
A. Fee Structure
8.1 Fee structure of various courses offered by higher educational institutions
varies from institution to institution.  Some institutions charge exorbitant fee from
students/parents. When asked, what is role of UGC in regard to fee structure,
the Ministry in a written reply stated that ³the Commission under its Act has been
empowered to specify the matters in respect of which fee may be charged and
the scale of fee in accordance with fee shall be charged.  The Commission is
also empowered to make regulations.   The relevant provisions in the UGC Act
are reproduced below:
 8.2 ³12 (2) (c) the minimum standards which a person possessing such
qualification should be able to maintain in his work relating to such activities and
the consequent need for ensuring.  So far as may be that no candidate secures
admission to such course of study by reason of economic power and thereby
prevents a more meritorious candidate from securing admission to such course
of study, and
(d) all other relevant factors, the Commission is satisfied that it is
necessary so to do in the public interest, it may, after consultation, with the
university or universities concerned specify by regulations the matters in
respect of which fees may be charged, and the scale of fees in
accordance with which fees shall be charged in respect of those matters
on and from such date as may be specified in the regulations in this
behalf, by any college providing for such course of study from, or in
relation to, any student in connection with his admission to, and
prosecution of, such course of study.
Provided that different matters and different scales of fees may be so
specified in relation to different universities or different classes of colleges or
different areas´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

8.3 The Committee enquired whether UGC has issued any
guidelines/regulations on fee structure for various courses offered by higher
educational institutions in the country.  In this regard, the Ministry in a written
reply furnished that ³under the UGC Act, 1956, the UGC is empowered to make
regulations for Admissions and Fee Structure in Universities and Colleges with
prior approval of the Central Government.  UGC had issued regulations in
October, 1997, to regulate admission and levy of fees in private unaided
professional educational institutions; self-financing deemed universities and joint
venture universities in public interest.  It has issued regulations in December,
2003 namely, UGC (Admission to Specified Professional Programmes) Interim
Regulations, 2003.  This Regulation provided for admission to specified
professional programmes in the country for the years 2004-05, on the basis of
merit determined through common entrance examinations.  The Committee were
further informed that UGC in its meeting held in June, 2004 approved draft
Regulations for Admission and Fee Structure in Private Aided and Unaided
Professional Educational Institutions, 2004 and had referred the same to the
Ministry.  The UGC has been asked to make consultations with the universities
as required under the UGC Act, and thereafter refer it to the Central Government.
At present UGC has constituted a Committee in August, 2007 to formulate-
(i) Regulations with regard to admission and fee for self-financing,
private professional institutions, including deemed to be
universities.
(ii) Regulations for admission and fee for self-financing courses in
aided Universities/Colleges.
(iii) Regulations for admission and fee for aided courses in aided
Universities and Colleges.
8.4 In this regard, the Chairman, UGC, apprised the Committee during
evidence, ³I may mention that the UGC has set up a Committee to decide the
structure of the fee of the self-financing colleges, private universities as well as
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

public universities and State and Central Universities.  There will be a review of
the fee structure and the UGC, in consultation with the Ministry, will develop a
policy on the fee structure ´.
8.5 When asked whether UGC propose to consider increase in fee levels,
UGC in a written reply stated that it is a fact that fee paid for different courses of
studies in Govt. funded universities is very low.  A number of committees have
been constituted by the UGC in the past to rationalize the fee structure in Central
Universities.  These include Ponniah Committee, Pylee Committee, Powar
Committee and Kaw Committee.  However, till now the unit cost approach
suggested by various committees for devising the fees structure has not been
adopted in the universities.
8.6 In this regard, University of Delhi stated that the fees paid by the students
have remained virtually static since the University was established.  The average
charges to student at the Colleges of the University of Delhi are in the range of
Rs. 5,000-Rs. 6,000.  This includes some resources raised as µDevelopment
Charges¶.  The fee system needs to be reformed.  Further, UGC should consider
a system in which resources raised by the University as fees etc. are not
deducted from the grants-in-aid awarded to it.  There has to be a system of
charging fees from the students who can afford and helping students who come
from economically weaker sections of the society.  All the students who have
studied in Government, MCD schools should get fee concessions.
8.7 JNU was of the view that the fee increase may be done in phased manner
so that the students coming from under privileged background and poor families
are not adversely affected.  Further, it has further stated that universities may be
allowed to expend the fees so collected on the academic and development
activities of the University and shall not be deducted from the overall budget
allocation of the Universities ´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

8.8 In regard to fee hike the Ministry informed the Committee that at the
recent meeting of the Planning Commission, the Prime Minister had advocated
that ³we should also seriously look at the proposal for fee increases to
reasonable levels in a graduated manner accompanied by a scheme of extensive
scholarships and loans which would ensure that no student is denied education
because of his or her financial constraints.  This is a reasonable approach and
the Planning Commission should work out these proposals in greater details. In
this regard, the Ministry further submitted that the matter was, among other
things, discussed in the Conference of the Vice-Chancellors of Universities
organized by the UGC on 10-11 October, 2007.  The general view of Vice-
Chancellors was in favour of the CABE Committee recommendations that fee
should not exceed 20% of university revenues.
B. Loans for pursuing higher education
8.9 Central Advisory Board of Education Committee on Financing of Higher
and Technical Education in its report has stated that rates of cost recovery in
higher education are already fairly high in many universities, and the scope for
any further increase in cost recovery is extremely limited.  Further increase in the
same, particularly through student fees, will be highly regressive in effect.
(a) Earlier committees have recommended raising of resources
through fees and other sources to the extent of about 20 percent of
the recurring requirements of the universities.  This may be
considered as a desirable upper level. Revenue generation through
student fees beyond 20 percent may seriously affect access to
higher education.
(b) There cannot also be a uniform ratio for all universities and
institutions of higher education.  It has to be different for central and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

state universities, general and professional institutions, under
graduate and post graduate colleges, etc.
(c) Fees, for this purpose, include tuition fee, examination fees, and all
other types of fees paid by the students.
8.10 Given the practical difficulties in having a sound differential fee system in
higher education, based on the principle of  µability to pay ¶ though desirable, the
best option left is progressive taxation system, where the affluent are taxed more
to benefit the middle and lower income groups.  One may have to search for
ways and methods of improving the progressiveness in the taxation system,
looking beyond the income tax.
8.11 CABE Committee in its report has further stated that extensive reliance on
student loan programmes may be counter productive in the long run, creating a
view that higher education is not a public good, but a highly individualized private
good, as the responsibility of funding  shifts from state to households (through
introduction of fees) and within families from parents to the children themselves
(through loans).
(a) Careful monitoring mechanisms have to be developed so that the
loans are available mainly to the economically needy and
educationally deserving students to pursue higher education and to
protect social and educational values.  Educational loan
programmes have to be designed keeping educational
considerations, and they cannot be run solely on commercial lines
by commercial banks.
(b) A body like Higher Education Finance Corporation (HEFC) may be
set up with contributions from the government and corporate sector,
to coordinate the student loan schemes being operated by several
banks and to provide on its own scholarships and soft loans to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

students.  Scholarships need to be an important area of focus.
Both scholarships and loans are to be designed in such a way that
economically needy and meritorious students feel assured of the
financial assistance.
8.12 When asked what is the amount of loan offered by banks to pursue higher
education at present, the Ministry stated that under the revised Model
Educational Loan Scheme of the Indian Banks ¶ Association, need based finance
subject to repaying capacity of the parents/students with margin and is provided
with the following ceilings:-
 Studies in India - Maximum Rs. 7.50 lakh
 Studies Abroad ± Maximum Rs. 15 lakh
Margin
(a) Upto Rs. 4 lakh: Nil
(b) Above Rs. 4 lakh: Studies in India: 5%
 Studies abroad: 15%
8.13 When it was further enquired whether most public sector banks demand
collateral security to be shown by the candidate or his/her guardians seeking
loans, the Ministry stated that under the aforesaid scheme, the requirement of
collateral security is as under:
(a) Upto Rs. 4 lakh : No security
(b) Above Rs. 4 lakh and upto Rs. 7.5 lakh : Collateral in the form of a
suitable third party guarantee.  The bank may, at its discretion,
waive third party guarantee if satisfied with the net-worth/means of
the parent who would be executing the document as ³joint
borrower´.
(c) Above Rs. 7.5 lakh : Collateral security of suitable value or suitable
third party guarantee along with the assignment of future income of
the student for payment of installments.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

8.14 The Committee also asked whether the Ministry has ascertained from
bankers (through the Ministry of Finance) regarding insistence of mortgages or
property for educational loan in violation of guidelines.  The Ministry in this regard
replied that no such reference has been made by this Ministry since the scheme
is administrated by the Ministry of Finance.  There may be stray cases of
violation of norms prescribed in the Scheme of the Indian Banks ¶ Association.  In
this regard, the Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Human Resource
Development further stated during evidence as under:-
³On the issue of loan, you wanted to know as to whose scheme it is
whether it is our or that of the Ministry of Finance.  It is, in fact, belongs to
the Ministry of Finance because the banks are under them.  You have
mentioned that there have been instances where banks have not carried
out the directive of the Finance Ministry.    From time to time, we have
taken it up with the Ministry of Finance ourselves and we will continue to
do so and in particular if any specific instances are brought to our notice
then we would be able to take it up in an even more effective manner. ´
8.15 The Committee enquired the Ministry about the action taken on the above
recommendation on the CABE Committee that Higher Education Finance
Corporation may be set up.  In this regard, the Ministry in a written reply stated
that one of the commitments under the National Common Minimum Programme
is to ensure that nobody is denied professional education because he or she is
poor.  There is, therefore, a need for providing financial assistance to the
economically weaker sections, as such students are unable to access it due to
market/commercial rate of interest being charged by banks, the insistence on
collateral, early commencement of repayment, and that there is no specific
means based targeting.   Accordingly, it has been proposed to introduce a
scheme, named as ³Scheme of Subsidy on Students Loan for Professional
Education´  to provide total interest subsidy to the needy students, availing loan
from Banks and Financial institutions under the existing Educational Loan
Scheme of IBA, for pursuing professional education.  Under the proposed
Scheme, the entire interest for the moratorium period on the loan provided by the
Bank shall be borne by the Government in order to ensure that no poor but
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

deserving student is denied an opportunity to pursue professional education in
India, for want of financial support.
8.16 The Secretary, Higher Education also informed the Committee during the
hearing as follows:-
³I would just like to touch upon one or two small issues.  There is also a
commitment to see that no student is denied higher education, especially
in professional courses, merely because he or she is poor.  For this, the
Government have a plan to introduce a subsidy for the interest on the
loans that are taken for professional courses and this scheme is under
consideration.  Of course, it has not yet been finalized, but the idea is to
see that especially those whose parental income is less than Rs. 2.5 lakh
per annum get interest subsidy during the moratorium period, that is,
during the period when they are undergoing the courses ´.
8.17 In regard to setting of Higher Education Finance Corporation, the Ministry
Stated, there is a proposal for setting up of Higher Education Finance
Corporation.  However, the proposal has been kept in abeyance in view of the
proposed scheme for Interest Subsidy on Loan Taken by Students under the
Educational Loan Scheme of the Indian Bank ¶s Association for pursing education
in India.´
8.18 When the Committee further asked, what efforts have been made by the
Government and UGC to make the students aware of the loan scheme under
which loans are given by banks without any demands such as collateral security,
the Ministry replied that the  details of the educational loan scheme have been
put on the University Grants Commission¶s website.
8.19 During the evidence, the Committee brought to notice of the
representatives of the Ministry that in top universities aboard, be it in America or
England, no student pays for his higher education.  They are all funded by
scholarships or by research.  They have tie-ups with various industries and
management consultants.  The Committee observed that the Ministry of Human
Resource Development and UGC should facilitate this kind of interaction with
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the industry and with consultancy services and financial services so that the
students would have free education.  In this regard, the Additional Secretary in
the Ministry of Human Resource Development replied, ³«.. organizing financial
assistance from various sources, if fact, even now it is happening to a certain
extent.  IIMs for example and even many of the IITs do have such schemes.  We
could certainly expand the scheme.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Chapter-IX
Consideration among various professional councils
A. Regulatory overlappings
9.1 Various statutory professional councils such as AICTE, MCI, CAR etc. are
responsible for recognition of courses, promotion of professional institutions and
to provide grants to undergraduate programmes. In this regard, when asked,
what is the role of UGC with respect to educational institutions recognized by
various professional councils including jurisdiction of UGC regulations over those
institutions, the Ministry in a written reply stated that the UGC is the apex body
for coordination of standards of teaching, Research and examinations in
universities.  The Commission carries out these functions in coordination and
consultation with other Statutory Bodies wherever and whenever, required.
However, the other Statutory Bodies are not under the administrative control of
the UGC.   Each statutory body is responsible for carrying out its own mandate.
9.2 When further enquired, whether UGC provides funds/grants to the
educational institutions/universities/colleges which are under the purview of
various statutory professional council, the Ministry in a written reply furnished to
the Committee stated that the Commission provides funds to the Engineering,
Medical and other professional institutions affiliated to Universities or
constitutions of universities under several schemes.   The Committee also
enquired whether there is any coordination between UGC and the statutory
professional councils in regard to promotion of various professional courses in
the country.  In this regard, the Ministry stated that there is coordination between
UGC and other professional councils and prima facie there is no conflict between
the Regulations made by the UGC and that of the other councils for maintaining
minimum standards.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

9.3 In regard to interrelationship between various professional councils, the
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Human Resources Development stated as under
during oral evidence:
³Likewise you had raised and question about the interrelationship of these
various bodies like AICTE, MCI, UGC, etc.  As things stand, it is the
Parliament which has by law defined the jurisdiction of each of these
institutions.  But, as a general rule, when it comes to a technical issue,
whether it pertains to technical education, medical education, nursing
education, pharmacy education, those issues which are content specific to
that area are regulated by the specialized statutory regulatory body.  And
issues which pertain to functioning of a university as a whole are the ones
which are looked by the UGC.  I can say with some degree of satisfaction
that by and large, there have not been major instances of conflict.  If at all
there are some issues on which two statutory bodies do not see eye to
eye, they sit together and resolve it.  There is also a considerable amount
of cross-representation, for example, as between UGC and AICTE.  The
Chairman UGC is on the AICTE board and vice versa.  There are also
mechanism which help in resolving inter-council issues.  But we do not
have any major instances of conflict or problems in coordination.  Such as
there are, we have by and large managed to resolve ´.
9.4 On this subject, the Secretary, Higher Education, briefed the Committee
as follows:-
³We also have a proposal to have a National Commission on Higher
Education.  The idea is that UGC is one regulatory body and similarly we
have AICTE, we have MCI, we have Dental Council of India.  So there are
several regulatory bodies and there should be one body which will
coordinate the working of the various regulatory bodies.  But the idea is
not that it should be another mammoth organization.  It fact, it would be a
very skeleton kind of an organization, a very lean organization.  In fact,
may be Chairman of the National Commission on Higher Education.  But
this is under various stages of consideration.  It is not yet finalized.  I just
thought I will submit that´.
9.5 When asked to comment whether it is conducive to have multiplicity of
regulatory and coordinative bodies in the field of higher education particularly
when a number of countries and moving towards a single regulatory body in each
specific field, the University of Delhi in its reply stated, ³we must decide what to
regulate and what not to regulate.  The separation of technology education
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(AICTE) from natural sciences education (UGC) has been the most retrogressive
decision.  In most of the universities in advanced countries, technical education
coexists with liberal education in sciences.  We should therefore merge AICTE
and UGC or create a new body ´.  In this regard, Jawaharlal Nehru University
commented, ³One should try to reduce the multiplicity of regulatory bodies.
However, due to diversified areas within the sector one may need to bear with
different coordinating bodies in the field of higher education ´.
B. National Knowledge Commission
9.6 National Knowledge Commission in its first report to the nation has inter-
alia stated that the higher education system needs a massive expansion of
opportunities, to around 1500 universities nationwide, that would enable India to
attain a gross enrolment ratio of at least 15 percent by 2015.  The focus would
have to be on new universities.  But some clusters of affiliated colleges could
also become universities. Such expansion would require major changes in the
structure of regulation.
9.7 In regard to change in the system of regulation for higher education, NKC
has stated that the present regulatory system in higher education is flawed in
some important respects.  The barriers to entry are too high.  The system of
authorizing entry is cumbersome.  There is a multiplicity of regulatory agencies
where mandates are both confusing and overlapping.   The system, as a whole,
is over-regulated but under-governed.  NKC perceives a clear need to establish
an Independent Regulatory Authority for Higher Education (IRAHE).  The IRAHE
must be at an arm ¶s length from the Government and independent of all
stakeholders including the concerned Ministries of the Government.  The
following are the NKC¶s recommendations:-
Ø The IRAHE would have to be established by an Act of Parliament,
and would be responsible for setting the criteria and deciding on
entry.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Ø It would be the only agency that would be authorized to accord
degree-granting power to higher education institutions
Ø It would be responsible for monitoring standards and settling
disputes
Ø It would apply exactly the same norms to public and private
institutions, just as it would apply the same norms to domestic and
international institutions.
Ø It would be the authority for licensing accreditation agencies
Ø The role of the University Grants Commission would be redefined
to focus on the disbursement of grants to and maintenance of
public institutions in higher education.  The entry regulatory
functions of the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE),
the Medical Council of India (MCI) and the BCI would be performed
by the IRAHE, so that their role would be limited to that of
professional associations.
9.8 NKC in its report has further stated that the proposed IRAHE will
rationalize the principles on which entry is regulated.  There are two aspects to
this rationalization: what is to be regulated and what are the principles used for
regulation.  In higher education regulators perform five functions:
(i) Entry: license to grant degrees
(ii) Accreditation: quality benchmarking
(iii) Disbursement of public funds
(iv) Access: fees or affirmative action
(v) License: to practice profession
9.9 India is perhaps the only county in the world where regulation in 4 of the 5
function is carried out by one entity, that is, the UGC. The purpose of creating an
IRAHE is to separate these functions.  The proposed IRAHE shall be responsible
for setting the criteria and deciding on entry.  It would, in addition, license
agencies to take care of accreditation.  The role of the UGC will be limited to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

disbursing public funds.  Issues of access will be governed by state legislation on
reservations land other forms of affirmative action.  And, professional
associations may, in some institutions, set requirements to determine eligibility
for conducting a profession.  All other regulatory agencies such as the AICTE will
need to be abolished while the MCI and the BCI will be limited to their role as
professional associations.  These professional associations could conduct
nationwide examinations to provide licenses for those wishing to enter the
profession.
9.10 In regard to the suggestion of NKC, the Secretary, Higher Education,
Stated during briefing as follows:-
³As regards National Knowledge Commission, it was mentioned that they
have suggested that an independent regulatory authority should be
established for higher education.  Our hon. Prime Minister has gone on
record that National Knowledge Commission report is worthy of debate
and there is a need for evolving a wider consensus on the
recommendations of the NKC before it can be implemented.  So we are in
the process of having various consultations and in fact as I submitted the
National Commission on Higher Education would be in the nature of a
body which will be coordinating the work of various regulatory bodies. ´
9.11 Jadavpur University ¶s views on the IRAHE are as follows:-
³There should not be contradictory positions taken by the UGC or the
proposed Integrated Regulatory Authority, as such contradictory stances
hamper growth and maintenance of higher education in the country and
delays implementation of programmes resulting from administrative
bottlenecks.  It will not be proper to replace UGC at this moment ´.
9.12 Kolkata University ¶s views on the issue are as under:-
³The University of Calcutta does not accept the Knowledge Commission ¶s
idea of an Integrated Regulatory Authority.  It rests on the notion of
centralization of the higher education system through the assumption of all
powers of the central government, state governments, the UGC,
Universities, Statutory Professional Councils and the NAAC.  In the
process the very basis of our federal polity will be threatened, especially
when education falls within the concurrent list of the Indian Constitution.
The proposed body is out of tune with the present stress on
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

decentralization in the decision making process.   The creation of an
independent regulatory authority will be a boon for a free market based
approach to higher education, leading to the decontrol of the state.  But in
a pluralistic society stae intervention and commitment is called for.  In fact,
the international trend today is not the state ¶s abdication of its role in
higher education, but retention of its role and responsibility in a market-
powered higher education scenario.  The creation of an overarching
centralized and undemocratic body goes against this trend. ´
9.13 In this regard University of Hyderabad stated during the Committee ¶s
study visit to Hyderabad that, ³The entire proposal of the National Knowledge
Commission overlooks the fact that there is an interplay between regulatory and
funding roles that is presently exercised by the UGC as well as the States.
These roles of interconnectivity are interdependent and therefore what is needed
is to reinforce the powers given to the UGC to regulate the standards of higher
education and quality assessments and quality control of the same ´.
9.14 When asked whether the faculties of the University of Delhi and
Jawaharlal Nehru University think that Integrated Regulatory Authority for Higher
Education should replace UGC as suggested by NKC, the faculty of University of
Delhi replied, ³We can reform existing bodies or create new ones.  What makes
us believe that new bodies will not get stagnant?  If we refuse to evolve,
ossification is bound to occur´ and the faculty of JNU, inter-alia, stated, ³UGC can
continue to handle higher education with a mandate of functioning as a facilitator
for teaching and research with improved efficiency without having a regulatory
and control function.  The faculty of JNU do not recommend setting up of an
integrated regulatory authority for higher education ´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
1. University Grants Commission (UGC) was established in November,
1956 as a statutory body of the Government of India by the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956.  The Act mandated UGC to
take all such steps for the promotion and coordination of university
education and for the determination and maintenance of standards
of teaching, examination and research in universities.  The
commission also provides financial support in the form of grants to
universities and colleges for their development.  In the present day
world, knowledge economy has brought into focus the strong
linkages between higher education, knowledge and wealth creation.
As such, higher education occupies a special place in a knowledge
society which in turn creates a strong economy. Unfortunately our
university standards are not upto the level of internationally
renowned universities and our universities do not figure in the lists
of globally popular ratings.  In this context, functioning of UGC which
is the national level nodal organization engaged in promotion of
higher education, is very significant.  Hence, the Committee selected
this subject for examination.  After the examination of various
activities of UGC, the Committee feel that by its own admission
regarding very poor facilities and standards in colleges and
universities, there is immense scope for improvement in various
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

areas of its functioning.  These aspects are dealt with in greater
details by the Committee in succeeding paragraphs.
2. The Committee regret to note that majority of universities lack high
standards even after the existence of UGC for fifty years.  It is
disheartening to note that only 30% of the universities and 10% of
the colleges are of high quality.  Rest of the universities and colleges
are of mediocre standards which churn out large number of
graduates and post graduates every year who also possess
mediocre academic standards.  This kind of poor quality higher
education will not serve to achieve the country’s goal of becoming a
strong knowledge power.  The Committee view the situation as a
failure on the part of UGC to fulfill its responsibilities to maintain
standards in university education.  The reasons cited by the Ministry
for the situation are that more than 90 percent of the universities and
colleges funded by UGC are under the administrative control of the
concerned state Governments. The administrative structure of
universities and colleges varies from state to state.  UGC only
provides development grants to State Universities while providing
maintenance grants is the sole responsibility of the state
Governments.  The inadequacy of maintenance grants is one of the
factors which leads to deterioration in standards.  National
Accreditation and Assessment Council based on its assessment has
indicated some weaknesses in our universities and colleges.  They
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

are : narrow programme options, lack of master plan, absence of
research culture, lack of modern teaching methods and curriculum
upgrade, ICT facilities, infrastructure, library resources and faculty
development programmes.  The Committee, while noting the
resource crunch as the major reason for poor standards, are of the
firm view that bureaucratization has also contributed to this state of
affairs. Greater regard for the autonomy of universities, enabling
improved administration by universities, better servicing and
coordination by UGC, optimum utilization of the available resources
by the universities, and dedication of the faculty are equally
important to effectively overcome most of the above mentioned
weaknesses in our university system and to boost the standards of
higher education in the country.  The Committee, therefore,
recommend the following measures to address the issue:-
(i) The Ministry of Human Resources Development and UGC should
impress upon the State Governments about the necessity and
importance of their providing maintenance grants to universities as
per their actual requirements. This should be a conditionality for
giving any grants to State Universities;
(ii) UGC Should provide incentives to State Governments so that they
provide adequate level of maintenance grants to its universities and
colleges by way of enhanced development grants to universities and
colleges to create world class infrastructural faculties;
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(iii) In case of State Governments which are in financial difficulties, the
UGC should provide maintenance grants for a certain period to
enable universities and colleges to come to the mainstream;
(iv) All those colleges and state universities which are of C and D grades
should be given a special one time grant in addition to the regular
development grants to bring them on par with A grade universities
and colleges.
(v) The Ministry should appoint an independent, renowned and suitable
agency to conduct a thorough and in-depth study of UGC’s
functioning with reference to its functions on maintenance of
standards of universities and colleges funded by it, including its
rules and regulations, regarding incentive schemes for improving
standards in universities. Based on the outcome of the study, which
may be completed within two years, suitable reforms should be
implemented in the functioning of UGC in this regard.
(vi) The model amendments in the Acts of the State Universities should
be framed to enable the State Universities to discharge their
responsibilities of management and for faculty members to improve
the standard of a state university and the State Governments should
be persuaded by the Ministry to make suitable amendments
accordingly.
(vii) Special development grants should also be given to State
Universities to set up well equipped laboratories, to introduce
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

modern teaching methods, to introduce ICT facilities and to
strengthen library resources to meet international standards.
(viii) An exclusive university centre should also be launched by UGC to
take care of the needs of faculty development programmes.
(ix) A definite time frame should be fixed for NAAC accreditation of all
the State universities to a minimum standard.
3. The Committee are concerned to note the inadequate level of quality
and quantity of research in universities funded by UGC.  It is
disheartening to note that only about 5000 PhDs are produced in a
year in this country whereas in China they produce more than 35000
PhDs in a year and in USA the figure is about 25000 PhDs.  On the
patents side also we are far below the other countries.  In 2005, we
had about 648 patents, China had 2452 patents, USA had 45,111
patents and Japan had 25,145 patents.  At present the country’s
share in number of research papers in the world is about 2.5 percent
while the USA publishes 32 percent of the research papers in the
world.  The Committee note that UGC implements certain
programmes for the development of research initiatives in
universities such as Faculty Improvement Programme, Major and
Minor Research Projects, Research Awards, Junior Research
Fellowships etc.  But these programmes have not delivered the
desired results and these research initiatives in the universities are
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

still below the international standards. The Committee note that
recommendations of the MM Sharma Committee have been accepted
by the Government. The Committee were informed that only Rs205
crore instead of Rs600 crore has been earmarked for the current
financial year to take care of the recommendations of the said
Committee. The Committee are unable to understand how, in the
absence of infrastructural and human resource facilities, UGC will be
able to improve scientific research at various levels. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should
definitely earmark Rs. 600 crore for improving scientific research in
universities from the next financial year onwards.  They should also
take into consideration the cost overrun due to administrative delays
in implementation of the recommendations and the allocation for the
purpose should be increased accordingly.  The Committee should be
informed about the implementation status of the recommendations
of M.M. Sharma Committee on the subject.
4. The Committee note that the Commission consists of the
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and ten other members which include
Secretary (Education) and Secretary (Expenditure).  The Secretary,
Higher Education, informed the Committee that the availability of
these two officers from the Government in the Commission
facilitates coordination with the Commission and leads to its smooth
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and better understanding between the Commission and the
Government. However, the information provided by the Ministry
shows that the Secretary (Expenditure) attended none of the
meetings of the Commission during the period of three years from
2005 to 2007.  The secretary (Higher Education) did not attend the
meetings on five occasions.  This is very unfortunate and
symptomatic of bureaucratic indifference. The Secretarys’
membership in the Commission is by virtue of their position as
Secretary in the Departments of Higher Education and Expenditure.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the prior permission of
Cabinet Secretary be invariably obtained after adducing detailed
reasons in writing by the Departmental Secretaries concerned, to
excuse themselves from any meeting of the Commission.
5. The Committee note with concern that there are 223 vacancies out of
the sanctioned strength of 806 posts in the Secretariat of UGC at
present i.e. about 28% of the posts are vacant in UGC.  There are 20
vacancies in Group ‘A’ posts out of the sanctioned strength of 92
Group ‘A’ posts.  As the higher education is poised for large scale
expansion in near future and present organizational set up of UGC
with its present weaknesses and short comings may not be able to
handle the work load of the future. As per Ninth Report of the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Expenditure Reforms Commission 2001, UGC had to reduce its
number of schemes and thus it was required to abolish 264 posts.  In
2003, UGC had to abolish 55 posts as 146 posts were lying vacant for
more than one year.  In view of the depleting staff support, UGC
requested for revival of 65 vacant posts in 2004.  However, as per the
Expenditure Reforms Commission Report, UGC is entitled to fill up
only 36 additional posts and that too only if the Ministry of Finance
gives approval for revival of posts which are lying vacant for more
than one year.  In this regard, the Ministry of Finance generally insist
for recommendations of Staff Inspection Unit.  Eventhough UGC has
requested the Government for inspection by Staff Inspection Unit,
inspection has so far not been carried out.  The Committee take a
serious view of such lapses on the part of the Government. The
Committee, recommend that immediate steps should be taken by the
Ministry of Human Resource Development and the Ministry of
Finance to carry out a comprehensive inspection regarding staff
strength of UGC. The Committee also note that UGC has requested
the Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad to conduct a
study of the functioning of UGC and to suggest necessary
modifications and changes in its structure.  In this regard, the
Committee recommend that a comprehensive study should be
conducted on the present organisational/administrative structure of
UGC particularly on its suitability to the present and future
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

requirements of higher education and thereafter, prompt steps
should be taken to re-structure the organisational set up of UGC
accordingly.
6. The Committee note that there are six regional offices of UGC at
Hyderabad, Pune, Bhopal, Kolkata, Guwahati and Bangalore.  The
Northern Regional College Bureau of UGC Head Office works as
Northern Regional Office.  These regional offices were set up so that
they improve the delivery system, working improves and the grants
are released on time.  The regional offices primarily deal with the
college sector because there are about six thousand colleges that
are supported by UGC for various purposes like development grants,
travel grants and other grants.  During the Eleventh Plan it is
proposed to open two more regional offices.  At present, there are
only two regional offices at New Delhi and Bhopal for entire northern
region, two regional offices at Bangalore and Hyderabad for
southern region, one for entire Eastern region at Kolkata, one at
Guwahati for North-Eastern region and one regional office at Pune
for entire Western region.   The Committee are of the firm view that
the present number of regional offices is not sufficient to handle the
work load particularly in view of the multifarious functions of UGC
and growing number of colleges. Regional offices may play a vital
role to monitor the performance of universities and colleges under
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

their purview including the utilization of funds for intended purposes.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that UGC should open offices
in every state to coordinate the functions of UGC at state level and
develop a sophisticated web-based computerized system to
discharge functions of the  Regional Centres.
7. The Committee note that there are six inter-university centres of UGC
for providing common facilities to university and collegiate system.
These centres comprise, National Accreditation and Assessment
Council which accredits universities and colleges, the Centre for
Educational Communication which generates software for use in
higher education, INFLIBNET which networks university and college
libraries and provide them facilities to access to e-journals etc. Only
three centres are meant for scientific research viz. Accelerator
Centre, the second one is for availing facilities from Deptt. of Atomic
Energy and the third one is for astronomy.  The Committee feel that
many areas of new and frontier technologies such as nano-
technology, electronics, bio-technology, etc. are not covered by
existing inter-university centres.  Inter-university centres can play a
very vital role in scientific research initiatives of universities in
various fields of science and technology such as physical sciences,
chemical science, bio-science and mathematical science by offering
them common facilities in research work, equipment and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

technologies.  This may also reduce the cost of research of
individual universities.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that
existing inter-university centres should be strengthened by UGC to
offer common facilities in various fields of scientific research.  These
centres may facilitate scholars by offering board and lodging and
arrangements for face-to-face interactions among scholars from all
disciplines, providing internet access to all international academic
journals, arranging seminars and conferences on specialized
subjects, documenting and disseminating the results of such
interactions. These centres may also pool facilities of various
universities together for common research in various disciplines of
science and technology.
8. The Committee regret to note that GDP spending on higher
education sector is very low and the sector has been relatively
neglected in the past decades.  As stated by the Prime Minister
recently, it was the investment made in this sector in the 50s and 60s
which has given us a strong knowledge base in many fields and after
that the sector has been sidelined for decades as a non-priority
sector as far as resource allocation is concerned.  Only 0.37 or 0.4
percent of GDP is currently spent on higher education, whereas in
developed countries about 1.5 percent of GDP is spent on higher
education.  The Committee take a very serious view of such low
spending on higher education which may affect the country’s
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

competitive potential. Unfortunately, till now, we have been able to
spend only about 3.5 percent of GDP on education.  As a result,
allocation to higher education has also suffered. It is high time that
the Ministry of Human Resource Development takes serious and
detailed discussions with Ministry of Finance and the Planning
Commission to take immediate and concrete steps to ensure that
Government allocate at least 2% of GDP for higher education i.e. at
least 25% of total allocation for the education sector.
9. The Committee regret to note that the Union Government’s share in
total GDP spending on higher education is merely 0.17 percent.
Private educational institutions spend almost 50 percent of the
country’s total requirement of higher education.  Remaining 50
percent of the funding for higher education in the country is met by
the State Governments and the Union Government in the ratio of
80:20.  This shows that a very small amount is being allocated by the
Union Government for the development of higher education in the
country.  So, there is an urgent need to increase centre’s budgetary
allocations for higher education.  Higher Education being critical to
the country’s economy, both the Union and State Governments
should act in tandem with each other and ensure that standard and
quantum of higher education are up to the international level and
according to the specific needs of the country. In this regard, the
Committee also note that the responsibility of raising GDP spending
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

on education to six percent, and in turn to two percent on higher
education, rests both with the Union Government and State
Governments.  It is unfortunate that, many a time when the Union
Government increases its budgetary allocation for education, the
State  Governments tend to decrease their share. Education sector
as a whole does not gain in such a situation.  This is the reason why
the higher education which is receiving a relatively less allocation
suffers the most.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the
following:
(i) to convene a meeting of State Education Ministers to discuss
and arrive at a definite fund allocation formula for education
sector
(ii) Planning Commission should prevail over the states at the
time of approval of their five year plans and annual plans to
allocate a definite proportion of their resources for higher
education
(iii) the Union Government should share the burden of those
states which are at the bottom of the rankings based on
incidence of poverty and which may find it difficult to increase
their share of funds for higher education commensurate with
Union Government’s increase.  The Union Government may
even offer incentives to the State Governments which come
forward to increase their allocation on higher education.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

10.  The Committee note that the Government has levied a Basic
Education Cess of two percent since 2004-05.  It is exclusively meant
for funding programmes pertaining to basic education like Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan and Mid Day Meals scheme.  One percent cess is
being separately levied from this year for secondary and higher
education.  With the help of this cess the Government was able to
increase substantially its outlay for secondary and higher education
this year (2007-08).  In this regard, the Committee are of the view that
secondary education and higher education should also be separated
for cess purpose.  If one percent cess is separately levied for
secondary education and higher education, it would pave the way for
separate and higher mobilization of resources for higher education
and at the same time it will also facilitate development of secondary
education.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that separate cess
should be levied for secondary and higher education sectors to
enable the Government to meet the large scale investment needed
for the expansion of higher education.
11.  The Committee note that the University Grants Commission provides
financial assistance to eligible universities/colleges which are
included under section 2(f) and declared fit to receive central
assistance under section 12 (B) of UGC Act, 1956.  Central
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Universities are eligible to receive both the development and
maintenance grants whereas state universities are eligible only for
development grants as their maintenance expenses are taken care of
by the State Governments.  In this regard, the Committee are
concerned to note that even central universities which have been set
up by the Central Acts and find a mention in the Union List (item no.
63) of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India are not receiving
adequate funds from UGC.  The Committee held discussions with
three central universities, viz. Hyderabad University, Delhi University
and Jawaharlal Nehru University.  All of them have stated that the
present level of grants being provided by UGC is not just grossly
inadequate but it is completely out of tune with the realities at the
ground level as well as global developments in the area of higher
education.   The Committee take a serious view of such apathy on
the part of the Government which leads to undermining of the
importance of higher education, and they, therefore, recommend that
the Government should take immediate steps to conduct in-depth
study of the fund requirements of each central university and
increase budgetary allocation (both plan and non-plan) accordingly
to make them world class universities and to serve as models for
State universities.
12. The Committee regret to note that even those state
universities/colleges which are eligible under 12 (B) of the UGC Act
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

are not given grants by UGC.  The reasons put forth by the Ministry
for this sorry-state-of-affairs was scarcity of resources. Out of 6,500
colleges which are eligible under 12 (B) of the UGC Act, only 5,661
colleges are receiving development assistance from UGC.  The
Committee further learnt from Calcutta University which is a State
University that only 10% of the UGC’s annual budget is presently
spent as development grants on State Universities.   In Calcutta
University’s budget, the share of UGC grants does not exceed even
5%.  In this regard it had suggested that UGC’s financial support to
state universities is extremely inadequate to meet the present
challenges in the realm of higher education and the UGC should
consider the possibility of providing both development and
maintenance grants to state universities.  The Committee
recommend that a comprehensive review should be conducted on
the financial needs of all the state universities and they should be
given enhanced level of funding by UGC according to their size, as
well as present and future needs.  Importance should be accorded to
performance of individual universities.  The universities which
perform better should be rewarded with more funds.
13. The Committee note that financial targets fixed for several schemes
were not achieved by UGC during the Tenth Five Year Plan.  A
financial target of Rs. 789 crore was fixed for development grants to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

central universities but only Rs. 720.88 crore was actually disbursed,
out of a target of Rs. 465 crore, only Rs. 129 crore was given to
colleges as development grants, a target of Rs. 20 crore was fixed for
providing development grants to universities in backward areas but
only Rs. 12.30 crore was actually disbursed. For Inter University
Centres only Rs. 13.45 crore were spent against a target of Rs. 125
crore.  For Special Assistance Programme, a target of Rs. 205 crore
was fixed but only Rs. 134 crore was spent.  With such slow pace of
spending of plan allocation by UGC, the development of higher
education and raising its standards to that of international level will
remain a distant dream.   The Committee is not satisfied with the
excuses put forth by the Government i.e. the failure on the part of
universities and colleges to submit the documents required for
obtaining the approval of building proposals in time and delay by the
State Universities in creation of teaching and non-teaching posts
sanctioned by UGC. The Committee feel that such an unfortunate
situation arises only when the implementing agencies fail to service
grants in a spirit of dedication to development. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry and UGC should finalise the
estimates of physical and financial targets of various schemes only
after duly examining the requirements and the feasibility of achieving
the same.  Once targets have been fixed, UGC should take proactive
steps to achieve the same.  Any lacunae on the part of UGC in this
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

regard will lead to unnecessary locking of several crores of rupees
and at the same time intended benefits not reaching the beneficiaries
viz. universities, colleges, faculty and ultimately the students and
higher education as a whole.
14. The Committee note that UGC proposes to depute its Committees to
each university to evaluate its performance during the X th Plan and
assess the financial requirements for XI th Plan Period.  In this regard,
UGC also proposes to request the State Governments to depute their
nominee in those Committees to take on-the-spot-decisions about
the state’s share in various developmental projects.  The Committee
are skeptical of success of this proposal as it would be very difficult
to take on-the-spot decisions by the state representatives without
consulting the State Government concerned.  Moreover, this
approach may not yield result in every scheme as UGC would have
to be very considerate towards some state universities due to their
financial constraint. The Committee, therefore, recommend that while
making on-the-spot assessment of the performance of state
universities, UGC should simultaneously embark on high level
discussion with State Governments on allocation of development
funds to state universities including matching grants by State
Governments.
15. The Committee note that plan allocations for UGC were raised from
Rs. 383 crore in 1997-98 to Rs. 2374 crore for 2007-08.  This is an
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

increase of more than six times.  However, alongwith increase in
fund allocation, the number of universities has also grown several
folds.  At present there are 386 universities and 20,676 colleges.
Higher Education, owing to its importance in the present world of
knowledge economies, is poised for further expansion in future.
UGC has also demanded more funds to cater to the increased
requirements owing to the proposed expansion of higher education
sector in the XIth Plan period.  UGC has projected its financial
requirements for XIth Plan as Rs. 56,326 crore. But the share of UGC
in the recently approved XIth Plan outlay of Rs. 84,943 crore for
higher education is only Rs. 45,471 crore which is less than the
UGC’s demand by Rs. 10.855 crore. As Prime Minister stated in his
address at the meeting of Planning Commission recently, the Union
Government propose to set up 16 new central universities in those
States which do not have a university and 14 new central universities
in other states which would eventually aim to attain world-class
standards.  Moreover, the universities already in existence have to
be strengthened as most of them are of mediocre standards.  In view
of the above, the Committee are of the view that plan allocations
made for UGC for Eleventh Plan may not be adequate to meet the
multifarious necessities of the universities at this crucial juncture of
development and higher plan allocation is required and they,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Human Resources
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Development, University Grants Commission and Planning
Commission sit together to examine threadbare the requirements of
UGC for the Eleventh Plan and increase the plan allocation to UGC
accordingly.
16.  The Committee are concerned to note that Indian Higher Education
Institutions are very poorly ranked in two globally recognized
ranking systems.  Apart from IITs, Delhi University (254 th), University
of Calcutta, University of Pune are the only universities which find
their names in Times Higher Education Supplement Rankings.  None
of other higher education institution find its place from 1 st to 253 rd
rankings.  Even IITs are lagging far behind in the rankings.  In 2006,
in Times’ rankings IITs were ranked 57 th, IIMs were ranked 68 th and
JNU was at 183 rd but in 2007 rankings IIMs and JNU could not find
any place in the rankings.  The Committee note that the organization
which administers the Times rankings has changed its system of
ranking last year  and subsequently IIMs and JNU could not find a
place in the ranking and IITs had low ranking.  The other global
ranking system is administered by Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
Only IIS, Bangalore (305 th rank) and IIT, Kharagpur (402 nd rank) are
the Indian higher educational institutions which find a place in this
ranking.  The Committee in this regard were informed that Planning
Commission is envisaging setting up of 14 new central universities
with world-class infrastructure so as to achieve world standards.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Committee recommend that a mission mode be adopted to cut
through bureaucratic red tape to ensure that these universities are
set up within the Eleventh Plan Period. The Committee also
recommend that needs of our existing institutions of excellence like
Delhi, Kolkatta, Mumbai, Madurai, Aligarh, Banaras and Pune
universities, JNU IITs, IIMs, IISs etc. should be studied and high
levels of assistance should be provided to them to make them world-
class institutions and to improve their rankings in the globally
recognized ranking systems.
17. The Committee note that UGC notifies regulations on different
subjects under the relevant provisions of the UGC Act to maintain
standards of teaching, research and examination in higher education
in the country.  These regulations are reviewed, modified, updated at
regular intervals and new regulations are notified as and when
required.  The Commission has prescribed various norms and
standards for bringing qualitative changes in higher education.
These norms pertain to establishment and maintenance of
institutions, minimum standards  for instruction and grants of
degrees, minimum qualification for appointment of teachers,
minimum workload  for teachers, minimum teaching days and
establishment and maintenance of standard of education in private
universities etc.  In Committee’s view these regulations and norms of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

UGC have not yielded the desired result as our universities are way
behind foreign universities in quality and standards.  The Committee,
therefore, recommend that standards and norms prescribed by
parallel bodies in other countries, whose universities excel in
standards, should be studied by UGC and appropriate steps should
be taken by UGC to bridge the gap in standards of Indian universities
and those of world-class universities. The Committee further
appreciate that mere prescription of standards, norms and
regulations will not yield the desired results. The Members of UGC
should demonstrate leadership abilities to inspire confidence and
elicit cooperation of distinguished faculty members in universities
towards these efforts. The Inter-university centres should be geared
up to activate working with universities towards a common cause.
18. The Committee note that National Accreditation and Assessment
Council  (NAAC) assess the quality of educational institutions and
grants accreditation accordingly.  NAAC, after making assessment of
a university/college, comes out with grading like A, B, C and D.
Accreditation is not mandatory in our country.  Universities and
colleges can choose  to apply for NAAC or NBA (National Board of
Accreditation) accreditation which accredits courses in technical
education institutions.  Only 128 universities and 2780 colleges have
come forward for accreditation upto 2007 eventhough the entire
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

expenditure on accreditation is met by UGC.  In this regard, the
Committee note that universities like Jawaharlal Nehru University
feel themselves above such accreditation necessity because of their
already proven records.  The Committee is of the view that for
improving quality of higher educational institutions, it is necessary
that all the institutions, irrespective of their past records, should be
accredited by a designated accreditation agency and they, therefore,
recommend that all the central and state universities should get
themselves accredited by a designated accreditation agency for
being eligible to receive grants from UGC.  Development grants to
state universities should also be based on their accreditation status.
In regard to state universities and colleges which are of ‘C’ and ‘D’
grade, the Committee note that UGC propose to implement a specific
scheme of providing special grant in addition to the regular
development grant. This special grant will be given on a matching
contribution by the State Government.  The Committee feel that this
scheme should be implemented in letter and spirit so as to improve
the standards of state universities and colleges which are of ‘C’ and
‘D’ grade.  In this regard the Committee recommend that a definite
time frame should be fixed for the implementation of the scheme viz.
3 years and UGC should initiate steps accordingly.  The Committee
further recommend that UGC should give recognition only to such
educational institutions and deemed universities which obtain ‘A’
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

grade accreditation from the designated accreditation agency.  It
should also be made compulsory for all the existing deemed
universities to obtain ‘A’ grade accreditation within a definite time
period.
19. The Committee note that National Accreditation and Assessment
Council is a registered society under the Societies Registration Act,
Karnataka.  It is one of the inter-university centres of UGC and
functioning as an autonomous body under UGC.  As such, NAAC
does not have any statutory basis.  In Committee’s view NAAC
should function independently without any influence of any super
agency over it.  Moreover, statutory status can bring more credibility
to NAAC accreditation.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry should take immediate steps to introduce a Bill in
Parliament to accord statutory status to NAAC.  In this regard, the
Committee further recommend that entire functioning of NAAC
including its new methodology of assessment and accreditation
process should be reviewed and the standard of methodology  of the
proposed statutory body should be equivalent to that of the similar
bodies in developed countries or that of international organizations
engaged in assessment and accreditation process.  Moreover, the
proposed statutory body should be independent of UGC in every
respect.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

20. The Committee note that UGC is implementing a scheme called
Universities with Potential for Excellence (UPE) and Colleges with
Potential of Excellence.  Under this scheme, a grant of Rs. 30 crore is
given to the identified university during the Plan Period and the grant
to colleges ranges from Rs. 35 lakh to Rs. 1 crore  per college on the
basis of the category to which it belongs.  The scheme is under
implementation since IXth Plan.  During Ninth Plan only five
universities were selected and during Tenth Plan four more
universities were selected.  As such, only nine universities have
been benefited under the scheme.  Apart from this, 12 centres in
specialized areas have also been identified in different universities
under the scheme called Centre with Potential for Excellence.  97
colleges were also selected by UGC during Tenth Plan under this
scheme.  Considering the number of universities and colleges in the
country, the number of universities and colleges benefited, so far,
are very miniscule in number eventhough the scheme is under
implementation since last ten years.  Only two reasons may be
adduced   in this regard, either the standard of vast majority of
universities in the country is very poor or the criteria stipulated by
UGC for selection under the scheme are of very high standards.  The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the scheme should be
revamped so as to benefit more universities and colleges during the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

XIth Plan.  Quantum of assistance given to selected universities and
colleges should be reviewed and the amount of assistance should
accordingly be raised for further development of universities and
colleges which have potential for excellence.
21. The Committee note that UGC designed model curriculum on 32
subjects and circulated the same for adoption by universities in the
country. UGC proposed model curriculum with the help of experts at
national level.  Model curriculum is not compulsory.  Universities
have been given autonomy to adopt the model curriculum based on
their own democratic systems they follow.  Most of the universities
have done this exercise. Some of the universities have informed
UGC that they maintain a standard higher than this syllabus.
National Knowledge Commission (NKC) has stated in its report that
the syllabi of course in universities, which remain unchanged for
decades, need to be upgraded constantly and revised frequently.
NKC has suggested that the universities be required to revise or
restructure curricula at least once in three years and this provision
must be subjected to outside peer review before implementation. The
Committee, however, would like to reiterate the well known principle
that in the context of higher education it is the autonomy of faculty
members rather than standardization that is the vital element in
quality education.  Therefore, instead of a  routinised drill in division
of syllabi, it would be more appropriate to hold a series of seminars
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and conferences every year where scholars gather to appreciate the
advances in their fields of study and are in addition facilitated by
UGC to devote one session to curriculum development.
22. The Committee note that a scheme called Career Oriented
Programme is being implemented by UGC to impart vocational
training to undergraduates.  These courses run parallel to the
conventional BA, B.Com and B.Sc degrees.  This scheme is being
implemented since 1995-96 but only 43 universities and 3383
colleges have been covered so far.  In this regard, the Ministry stated
that keeping in view the availability of funds, UGC  would extend the
scheme to cover more universities and colleges and also would
introduce more vocational courses to suit the requirements of the
country in the wake of globalisation and liberalization of economy. In
Committee’s view this programme is very important as a large
number of students, after completing their graduation, are unable to
opt for vertical mobility in higher education either due to average
performance or due to financial constraints.  This programme would
ensure providing gainful employment after graduation and thus
would reduce educated unemployment.   The Committee, therefore,
recommend that steps should be taken by the Ministry of Human
Resources Development and UGC to extend this programme to all
the colleges and universities in the country within a definite time
frame. Non-availability of funds should not be a problem for the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

expansion of this programme and hence, the Ministry of Human
Resource Development should hold talks with the Ministry of
Finance, the Planning Commission and leaders of industry for the
allocation of required funds and the expansion of the programme
with industry links throughout the country.
23. The Committee are constrained to note the imbalances in
development of higher education among various social groups. Out
of the total enrolments in degree courses and above, only 3.6% were
that of STs and 11.3% of SCs in the year 2002-03.   The Committee
note that Government propose to set up a National  Tribal University
at Amarkantak which is situated in the Madhya Pradesh –
Chattisgrah border.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that
concrete steps should be initiated for the setting up of the National
Tribal University within a year.  Similar Tribal universities or the
campuses of the National Tribal University should be opened in
other parts of the country where the concentration of tribals is more.
The Committee also note that UGC propose to provide additional
grant to universities and colleges which are either having relatively
larger strength of SCs, STs, OBCs and minorities or located in
minority concentrated districts.  At the same time, UGC also
constituted  a Committee under the Chairmanship of Prof. Chaddha
which will come up with a diversity index.  Based on the index, the
universities and colleges having widespread representation of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

various social groups will be eligible for higher entitlement to UGC
grants.  The Committee are happy that atleast now UGC propose to
address the issue of inequalities among various social groups in
getting higher education.  In this regard, they recommend that
additional grants should be provided from 2008-09 onwards and
quantum of additional grants should be more so as to really serve
any useful purpose for the development of the particular university
or college.  However, the Committee are of the view that diversity of
student  body in any  university or college will enable the students to
respect the value of equality.  The Committee, therefore, recommend
that based on the diversity index which will be recommended by
Prof. Chaddha Committee, university and colleges should be
provided enhanced level of UGC grants for catering to widespread
representation of various social groups.  The Committee also
recommend that special classes to learn better English be started in
all universities to enable students from less privileged sections to
cope with their basic difficulty in relating to higher education in any
field.
24. The Committee take a serious view of large scale faculty vacancies
in universities.  Perusal of information provided by the Ministry
regarding vacancies of teachers in 69 state universities as on
01.05.2007 shows that average percentage of vacancies in all the 69
universities was 36%.  In some universities, more than 50% of the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

faculty positions were vacant.  Reasons put forward by the Ministry
for this sorry-state-affairs is the ban imposed by state Governments
on recruitment of teachers in the higher education system.  The
Committee are constrained to note that many states resort to
appointment of short term contract teachers.  In this regard, the
Committee are of the view that appointment of regular professional
teachers is necessary for the development of higher education in the
country.  Large scale faculty vacancies and subsequent resorting to
contract teachers has compromised the quality of education in many
universities.  The Ministry of Human Resource Development has
taken up the matter with states and in the conference of State
Education Ministers.  The Committee hold UGC responsible for this
situation.  UGC’s assistance to State Universities for filling up of
vacancies is only for a specific plan period.  To be eligible to receive
assistance in the next plan period, state universities have to maintain
the posts and many of them are unable to do so hence, they become
ineligible to receive assistance from UGC.  The plan allocation made
for this purpose also remains unutilized.  The Committee, therefore,
recommend that UGC should take this matter as of national
importance and treat state universities on par with central
universities in regard to sanctioning of faculty positions.  The faculty
positions should be permanent and not lapse with plan periods.   The
Ministry may prepare a detailed note on operationalising such a
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

recommendation, including considerations such as involvement of
UGC in selection process for appointment to be made by State
universities under such a dispensation, and submit it for
consideration at the next meeting of Central Advisory Board on
Education for its decision.
25. The Committee take a serious view of large number of vacancies in
faculty positions in Central Universities as well.  As on 31 st March,
2007, out of the total sanctioned strength of 9054 faculty positions,
2271 were vacant in 18 central universities i.e. about 25.08% of the
total faculty vacancies remained vacant.  On the one hand the
Ministry of Human Resource Development tries hard to impress
upon the State Governments to fill up faculty positions vacant in
their universities on the other hand large number of vacancies exist
in central universities which are under its direct purview.  In this
regard, the Ministry taken the plea that it plays only a limited role of
providing visitor nominees to the selection committees of central
universities as all of them are governed by individual Acts of
Parliament.  Ministry just keeps on reminding the central universities
through UGC to fill up vacancies.  The Committee are not satisfied
with the steps taken by the Government and UGC to fill up faculty
positions in central universities.  The problem needs to be addressed
with reference to redtapism at the offices of Registrars in universities
and the need for incentives to attract meritorious faculty to join these
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

universities. The Committee recommend that UGC should direct all
the central universities to fill up vacancies forthwith.  The Committee
also recommend that ad-hoc appointment of faculty members upto
fifty percent of the existing vacancies be resorted to immediately, if
any university finds after reviewing the facts, department-wise, that
sufficiently meritorious candidates are not available for the posts to
be appointed on a permanent basis.
26. The Committee note that faculty of universities are increasingly
opting to take up permanent/short-term assignments in foreign
universities and institutions. Such a  trend is gradually ending the
presence of high quality faculty members in the universities.  Even a
central university like Delhi University expressed the same opinion
that its faculty members join foreign universities because of the
better facilities, pay and prospects offered there.  As of now, the
UGC guidelines permit only a visiting faculty, an adjunct faculty or a
casual faculty to take up these assignments on contract basis.
These are aimed at providing permission to bright teachers to gain
exposure and experience abroad and on a reciprocal basis to permit
some scholars to teach temporarily at Indian universities.  However,
these are still reviewed within an insular framework of discouraging
brain drain rather than in a more contemporary perspective of
recognizing the power of brain gain.  The Committee recommend
that the Ministry of Human Resource Development and UGC should
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

explore the possibility of permitting highly meritorious faculty
members of our universities to take up joint appointment in a foreign
university to spend half the year there and half here as well as allow
foreign scholars to teach in our universities.  This may also pave the
way for further development of our faculty when they have an
opportunity to deal with a different set of curriculum and teaching
methods in foreign universities.  Such appointees may be required to
put in a specified number of man hours in the Indian universities.
UGC should workout a scheme and incorporate suitable provision in
its regulation in this regard to operationalise this recommendation at
an early date.
27. The Committee note that UGC in consultation with the Government
of India has constituted a Pay Review Committee on 8 th August, 2007
to review and make recommendations regarding pay scales of
university and college teachers, librarians, physical education,
personal and other academic staff in universities and colleges.  The
Committee has been given one year’s time to finalise its
recommendations.  Pay scales of university teachers should be
enhanced  and pegged at a level higher than class ‘A’ Civil Services
since the qualifications required for appointment at universities is
much higher than the simple graduation required for Civil Services.
It is high time the country recognizes this basic change required in
pay structure.  Along with higher pay package, they should also be
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

offered proper medical facilities, housing facilities on campus etc.
Career advancement should be built in by providing greater freedom
to interact with faculties abroad.  The Committee recommend that
UGC should refer the above aspects to the Pay Review Committee
and ensures attractive benefits to the faculty.
28. The Committee feel that quality of teaching is as important as the
facilities offered to faculty. Quality of teaching in many universities
and colleges is not up to the mark and this is one of the reasons for
poor standard of universities and colleges.  As such, college
teachers should be made accountable for imparting quality
education to students.  In Committee’s view teachers’ classroom
performance and their effective laboratory demonstration are
essential for proper understanding of the subject matter by students.
Any lacunae in this regard may lead to the poor quality of college
education.  Students’ anonymous evaluation of teachers and peer
evaluation are important inputs for ensuring quality of teaching by
teachers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that UGC should
come up with formal guidelines in regard to anonymous student
evaluation and peer evaluation of teachers.   UGC should also reward
best teachers so as to encourage other teachers to excel in teaching.
29. The Committee note that 57 academic staff colleges were opened
during the Tenth Plan for conducting specially designed orientation
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

programmes of 4 weeks duration for newly appointed teachers and
refresher courses of 3 weeks duration for in-service teachers.  UGC
has also identified 31 universities and specialized institutions as
UGC- Refresher Courses centres.  In Committee’s view, orientation
course should inculcate moral and ethical responsibilities in young
teachers and should teach them the practical nuances of preparing
for classes, classroom teaching skills and use of different
pedagogues to teach.  Refresher courses should ensure that in-
service teachers are acquainted well with the latest advances in their
subjects.  The Committee note that 55 academic staff colleges are
going to be revamped, summer schools are intended to be started to
upgrade the knowledge of teachers and there will be a World Bank
project under which some mentor institutions will upgrade the
colleges of education in their attached units.  World Bank will
provide Rs. 7000 crore for the project.  The Committee recommend
that revamping of academic staff colleges should be completed
within a year and teachers from both the central and state
universities should be trained there.  The Committee recommend
that such efforts should be guided more by the relevance of teaching
and research interest in India rather than by mere elegance in
conducting classes or preparing learning materials. The Committee
also desire that information should be furnished to the Committee
annually on the implementation of World Bank project, the pattern
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and amount spent each year and the qualitative achievements as a
result of the implementation of the World Bank project.
30. The Committee note that under Junior Research Fellowships (JRFs)
Scheme students/research scholars who qualify  National Eligibility
Tests (NET) conducted by UGC are awarded fellowships to pursue
research leading to M.Phil/Ph.D degrees in various disciplines.  At
present Junior Research Fellows are getting Rs. 12,000 per month
and 30% of Rs. 12,000/- as H.R.A.  The Committee are constrained to
note that only three per cent of those who are registered for Ph.D get
this assistance and rest of them get Rs. 5000 as they are not NET
qualified.  As a result, approximately 70 per cent of them dropout
before completing their Ph.D. In 2005, only 300 candidates, were
selected for Junior Research Fellowship of UGC. The Committee are
not convinced with the reasons put forth by UGC for large scale
drop-out that the financial assistance given to the Ph.D students is
very low and there is bleak future for the students in terms of job in
universities.  The Committee view the situation seriously and
recommend that the amount of scholarship to JRFs should be
increased to Rs. 18,000/- plus 30% for HRA so as to attract many
prospective Ph.D candidates.  Moreover, same amount of
scholarship should be offered to Non-NET candidates who had
outstanding scores in their university examination and come forward
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

for Ph.D. and a strong computerized system should be created for
payment of scholarships in time. The Committee also urge the
Ministry to take immediate steps to attract more Ph.D candidates,
particularly in science and technology fields by offering special
incentives to them.
31. The Committee note that Information and Library Network
(INFLIBNET) is one of the inter-university centres of UGC engaged in
modernization of libraries and in establishing a national network of
libraries and information centres in universities.  INFLIBNET is
providing Rs. 6.5 lakh to each university library to purchase
computers and hardware for the computerization of libraries. Upto
February, 2007 142 universities were given assistance under this
scheme.  A major communication network of universities called
UGC-INFONET was set up by INFLIBNET.  Broad band connectivity is
provided to universities and under this scheme, 149 universities
were networked upto  May 31, 2007.  Under the E-journals Scheme
for universities, approximately 4450 e-journals are available.  The
Committee note that academic community in the country can
effectively use INFONET infrastructure for accessing international
scholarly e-journals, databases, internet and intranet services.
Further augmentation of this network will strengthen research
initiatives of faculty and students in universities.  But networking
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

through INFONET and assistance to purchase computers has not
been granted to half of the universities in the country so far.
Moreover, faculty members have not been provided with computers
and net facilities at their residences.  The Committee recommend
that all the universities in the country should be networked during
the Eleventh Plan Period and the scheme of providing assistance to
universities to purchase computers etc. should be discontinued and
replaced by the requirement that computer and net facilities be
provided at the residence of every faculty member. The Committee
see no reason why this cannot be done when the same is being
provided to members of the Civil Services.  All the college libraries in
the country should also be computerized and networked through
INFONET.  A time frame should also be fixed by the Government in
this regard.
32. INFLIBNET is an Inter-university Centre of UGC engaged  in
networking of university libraries and providing allied services to the
universities.  However, out of 42 sanctioned posts, 21 posts
including the post of director are vacant.  Moreover, the centre is
functioning from a residential flat in the Gujarat University campus.
The Committee are of the view that staff strength of INFLIBNET
especially of scientists and other allied staff should be reviewed
according to the increase in the network of INFONET and e-journals
etc. and staff strength should be augmented suitably and vacant
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

posts should be filled up. The Committee also note that land has
been allotted free-of-cost by the Government of Gujarat for the
construction of a permanent building for the centre.  The Committee
desire that expeditious steps should be taken by the Ministry of
Human Resource Development and UGC for the construction of
permanent building for INFLIBNET.
33. The Committee note that UGC has constituted a Committee in
August, 2007 to formulate its regulations with regard to admission
and fee for self-financing, private professional institutions, including
deemed to be universities and for self-financing and aided courses in
aided universities and colleges.  In Committee’s view regulations on
admission and fee structure in self financing private professional
colleges and deemed universities should be immediately formulated
by UGC as these colleges and universities often indulge in collection
of huge fees at the time of admission.  After the due formulation of
regulations, UGC should ensure that the regulations are
implemented by these institutions in letter and spirit.  UGC should
also have an effective monitoring mechanism over these institutions.
If any university/college is found to be violating UGC regulations,
stringent action should be taken against them.  UGC regulations
should also address the above views of the Committee.  The
Committee also note that the fee paid for different courses of study
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

in Govt. funded universities is very low.  University representatives
who appeared before the Committee have suggested that the fee
system needs to be reformed.  The Prime Minister had also recently
advocated that we should take a serious look at the proposal for fee
increases to reasonable levels in a graduated manner accompanied
by a scheme of extensive scholarships and loans which would
ensure that no student is denied education because of financial
constraints.  In this regard, the Government should take into account
CABE Committee’s observation in its report that revenue generation
through student fees beyond 20 percent may seriously affect access
to higher education.  Fees, for this purpose, include tuition fee,
examination fees and all other types of fees paid by the students.
The Committee weighed the considerations of efficiency on the one
hand and access for poorer sections on the other and regard the
recommendation of the CABE Committee 2005 as a very balanced
view.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that revision of fees to
raise it to 20% should be done forthwith. This should be coupled with
grant of scholarships to students from weaker sections.
34. The Committee note that there is a need for providing financial
assistance by way of soft loans to the meritorious students to
pursue higher education as such students are unable to access it
due to market/commercial rate of interest being charged by banks,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the insistence on collateral and early commencement of repayment,
etc.  Under the Education Loan Scheme of the Indian Banks’
Association, a need based finance of Rs. 7.5 lakh is provided for
studies in India and Rs. 15 lakh for studies abroad subject to
repaying capacity of the parents/students with margin.  Under the
aforesaid scheme there is no need for any collateral security upto
Rs. 4 lakh.  Unfortunately, there are instances of insistence  on
mortgages or property by banks for educational loan in violation of
the above guideline.  To address all the issues relating to
educational loan to students, CABE Committee on Financing of
Higher and Technical Education in its Report has made a valid
recommendation that a body like Higher Education Finance
Corporation (HEFC) may be set up with contributions from the
Government and corporate sector, to coordinate the student loan
schemes being operated by several banks and to provide its own
scholarships and soft loans to students.  The Committee are
unhappy to learn that this proposal has been kept in abeyance by the
Government in view of the proposed “Scheme of subsidy on
students Loan for Professional Education.” Under this Scheme, the
entire interest, especially of those whose parental income is less
than Rs. 2.5 lakh per annum,  for the moratorium  period on the loan
provided by the banks shall be borne by the Government.  The
Committee urge the Government to also consider the feasibility of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

bearing interest on loan during the moratorium period of parents
whose annual income is less than Rs. 5 lakh as the middle class
families are also equally burdened by the higher cost of professional
education of their children. The Committee, while  appreciating the
proposed scheme of subsidy and recommending a wider scope for
its operation,  is of the firm view that it is necessary that an
independent body may be set up to coordinate, to ameliorate the
grievances of students in getting loans from banks and to provide
scholarships and soft loans on its own.  The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the government should set up the Higher
Education Finance Corporation immediately as earlier recommended
by CABE Committee.  The Committee also recommend that the
government should immediately launch the proposed subsidy
scheme with the modification suggested by the Estimates Committee
regarding educational loan and implementation of this scheme may
also be coordinated by the proposed HEFC.
35. The Committee note that another important aspect of CABE
Committee Report is scholarship to meritorious students.  The Prime
Minister has also recently proposed extensive scholarships for the
development of higher education.  In this regard it is pertinent to
note that in top foreign universities student fees are either funded by
scholarships or borne by sponsors from industry etc.  The
Committee are also of the view that scholarships and sponsorships
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

will be of great help to ensure that no student is denied higher
education especially professional education because of his or her
financial constraints.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry of Human Resource Development and UGC should take
immediate steps for the creation and operation of various enabling
and attractive scholarships and sponsorships for meritorious
students to pursue higher and professional education irrespective of
their economic backgrounds.
36. The Committee note that a number of Professional Councils such as
All India Council of Technical Education, Medical Council of India
etc. are responsible for recognition of courses, promotion of
professional institutions and to provide grants to undergraduate
programmes etc. UGC is the apex body for coordination of standards
of teaching, research and examination in universities besides giving
grants to them.  The Commission carries  out these functions in
coordination and consultation with other statutory bodies wherever
and whenever required.  There is a proposal with the Government to
establish a National Commission on Higher Education which will
coordinate the working of various regulatory bodies.  However,
National Knowledge Commission (NKC) in its Report has suggested
that there is a multiplicity of regulatory agencies where mandates are
both confusing and overlapping.  The system is over-regulated and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

undergoverned.  NKC has suggested that an Independent Regulatory
Authority of Higher Education (IRAHE) should be established.  This
authority will perform the regulatory functions of AICTE, MCI and BCI
so that their role would be limited  to that of professional
associations.  The role of UGC will be limited to disbursing grants to
universities.  On this suggestion of NKC, the Committee obtained the
comments of universities of Calcutta, Jadavpur, Delhi, Hyderabad
and Jawaharlal Nehru University.  None of them support the idea of
establishment of IRAHE. University of Hyderabad even stated that
the entire proposal of the National Knowledge Commission
overlooks the fact that there is an interplay between regulatory and
funding roles presently exercised by UGC.  The Committee, in this
regard, recommend that the Government first set up the National
Commission on Higher Education to coordinate the activities of
various regulatory bodies in Higher Education such as UGC, AICTE
and MCI etc. and simultaneously hold wider consultations on the
recommendations of NKC including that of IRAHE, setting up of 1500
universities by 2015 etc. and take concrete and appropriate steps in
the matter.
37. The Committee note that the Secretariat of UGC operates through
many Bureaux and Divisions.  There are 14 divisions in the
Secretariat to deal with various areas of functioning of UGC.  The
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Committee are unable to understand the rationale behind the
allocation of work to these divisions.  For example, the subject of
Basic Scientific Research in Universities is looked after by Policy
and Planning Bureau whereas monitoring of Research Projects is
assigned to the Bureau dealing with regional languages.  The
Division dealing with State Universities is also entrusted with
monitoring and evaluation, publication and website.  Assignment of
work to various divisions in the Secretariat presents a grim scenario
of quality consciousness in UGC.  When un-related subjects are
clubbed together, the divisions of the Secretariat cannot  be
expected to show the desired results.  Information and Statistics and
library, publication and website would be a natural mix.  Likewise,
legal matters and Right to Information should be given to one Bureau
to deal with.  There should be a separate division to deal with central
universities, state universities and inter-university centres.
Monitoring, evaluation and malpractices should be clubbed together.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that a study should be
conducted on the present organization of the Secretariat of UGC and
work allocation among various divisions should be rationalized
accordingly.
38. The Committee are constrained to note that there are a large number
of colleges, close to 7000 or 8000 which are given affiliation in a year
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

by universities, do not meet some of the conditions set by UGC to
receive grants.  However, UGC has stated that any college which
gets permanent affiliation from a university becomes entitled for a
grant.  The Committee are of the firm view in this regard that
universities should grant affiliation to any college only after a
thorough examination of the standards of the college.  The
Committee, therefore recommend that UGC should impose a
minimum standard for affiliation of any college by universities
through its regulations.
NEW DELHI
March 11, 2008
Phalguna 21, 1929(S)
C. KUPPUSAMI,
Chairman,
Committee on Estimates.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Statement showing the grants paid by University Grants Commission to the
Universities and colleges (State-wise) during the period from 1997-98 to
2006-07.
(Rs. in Lakhs)
Sl.
No.
STATE 1997-98 1998-99 1999-
2000
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
1. ANDHRA
PRADESH
(a) Universities 4429.33 6174.97 6609.23 7955.26 7502.59 8235.53 9255.25 9465.53 10204.43 18509.52
(b) Colleges 886.21 1036.24 554.73 855.43 825.01 946.50 876.11 1306.94 1149.28 2054.79
2. ARUNACHAL PRADESH
(a) Universities 57.09 59.09 84.64 130.18 349.04 199.56 19.34 1082.86 180.61 164.50
(a) Colleges 8.77 5.27 5.01 9.49 7.51 8.04 25.46 12.43 27.32 70.44
3. ASSAM
(a) Universities 1310.73 2045.50 4178.48 1849.46 1521.68 3973.17 4588.79 6260.53 2165.17 3429.7
3
(b) Colleges 466.26 445.73 529.78 629.87 531.43 572.58 671.31 720.28 2043.23 2283.6
5
4. BIHAR
(a) Universities 464.37 406.57 502.55 390.28 243.55 530.73 96.42 506.36 714.49 966.91
(b) Colleges 373.19 707.67 565.37 699.72 706.81 761.42 663.58 1070.82 1043.91 2453.9
3
Sl.
No.
STATE 1997-98 1998-99 1999-
2000
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-
07
5. CHATTISGARH
(a) Universities 177.91 126.00 238.83 158.59 100.98 234.33 205.19 369.95 95.27 670.63
(b) Colleges 235.34 243.48 293.11 354.38 325.90 276.26 43.41 223.73 446.96 1059.6
6
6. DELHI
(a) Universities 12700.19 21216.03 20713.71 27974.90 21073.37 27419.07 27163.44 32634.86 35852.40 41127.
90
(b) Colleges 12018.61 25257.92 25710.52 24428.67 28206.09 26901.99 27230.35 29368.87 32044.83 36005.
41
7. GUJARAT
(a) Universities 1376.35 1868.54 1616.89 4446.39 2087.35 1987.36 2089.44 2029.26 1355.39 2400.2
5
(b) Colleges 515.07 475.63 473.60 3025.49 434.80 404.60 451.65 798.88 552.57 808.65
8. GOA
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(a) Universities 87.36 122.58 123.90 86.36 186.16 177.30 56.01 174.17 23.70 277.04
(b) Colleges 33.75 53.44 43.87 34.83 44.78 29.33 52.37 119.34 60.58 126.20
Sl.
No.
STATE 1997-98 1998-99 1999-
2000
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-
07
9. HARYANA
(a) Universities 322.61 260.58 310.71 354.32 369.16 422.36 217.90 438.03 462.89 750.32
(b) Colleges 344.27 320.03 345.78 210.52 657.71 264.54 679.50 536.49 408.95 517.78
10. HIMACHAL PRADESH
(a) Universities 155.11 113.74 142.88 170.15 614.47 203.19 150.41 316.91 814.51 142.59
(b) Colleges 101.49 78.53 52.43 21.60 67.26 47.49 165.37 56.83 56.42 58.33
11. JAMMU & KASHMIR
(a) Universities 303.04 289.04 229.02 268.55 211.47 2336.34 2277.97 574.30 417.25 601.28
(b) Colleges 85.73 76.88 67.81 52.76 134.82 37.93 247.47 148.15 166.08 47.19
12. JHARKHAND
(a) Universities 1314.65 203.67 215.84 265.98 344.55 486.72 429.88 528.15 251.68 445.74
(b) Colleges 124.92 207.97 124.60 130.19 143.30 162.46 165.56 159.79 228.23 207.02
13. KARNATAKA
(a) Universities 991.82 1354.35 1689.10 937.27 1766.88 1242.57 1283.23 1774.77 1569.66 2365.1
9
(b) Colleges 859.68 914.50 588.25 861.67 997.91 975.55 1173.55 1567.53 1521.79 2909.1
0
Sl.
No.
STATE 1997-98 1998-99 1999-
2000
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-
07
14. KERALA
(a) Universities 517.12 650.89 625.59 678.82 1044.38 787.99 706.15 1130.80 878.02 2413.3
4
(b) Colleges 563.54 612.21 524.38 908.54 953.79 1017.24 1132.34 1237.51 1409.14 2470.8
8
15. MANIPUR
(a) Universities 165.50 140.59 142.32 95.48 123.25 165.92 228.76 1082.36 1759.68 4733.7
5
(b) Colleges 113.90 180.25 182.10 108.97 121.66 166.31 134.49 160.07 330.56 309.14
16. MADHYA PRADESH
(a) Universities 915.87 783.05 1251.8
0
951.15 1034.22 1110.59 877.30 1064.00 1277.21 1440.5
7
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(b) Colleges 693.83 952.06 1014.9
4
967.56 1082.29 874.01 270.39 1028.14 1100.51 2360.6
3
17. MAHARASHTRA
(a) Universities 2238.73 2863.90 2535.2
4
3131.04 4042.29 3606.99 2571.69 5822.55 6855.44 5615.7
7
(b) Colleges 1733.78 1892.14 1706.0
5
1996.77 2020.89 1750.19 1953.68 2977.97 3363.64 7339.8
2
Sl.
No.
STATE 1997-98 1998-99 1999-
2000
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-
07
18. MEGHALYA
(a) Universities 2338.74 3571.24 4095.1
9
3840.83 3369.31 4035.21 5683.15 7217.36 5082.79 7353.3
6
(b) Colleges 45.48 51.89 93.34 86.97 58.60 55.33 56.56 66.79 114.45 221.07
19. MIZORAM
(a) Universities 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1320.27 2127.98 743.60 2851.03 2547.96 2566.5
7
(b) Colleges 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 19.30 35.47 15.41 53.52 16.53
20. NAGALAND
(a) Universities 840.49 1707.41 1755.5
7
1669.15 1249.02 2010.34 6422.85 2441.43 2089.06 2134.6
1
(b) Colleges 14.74 12.00 18.53 12.20 11.22 12.00 18.13 21.31 51.72 103.42
21. ORISSA
(a) Universities 420.33 379.13 802.54 514.32 362.98 622.07 269.49 442.14 516.74 1320.1
3
(b) Colleges 494.19 730.70 752.99 895.28 919.96 972.96 673.88 1028.39 1174.26 2559.4
1
Sl.
No.
STATE 1997-98 1998-99 1999-
2000
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-
07
22 PUNJAB
(a) Universities 743.06 588.49 756.08 853.37 2017.87 1172.01 1432.42 1121.77 1377.87 1235.3
4
(b) Colleges 589.11 743.05 672.08 390.72 1161.62 492.79 1013.25 777.05 802.56 1419.0
4
23. PONDICHERRY
(a) Universities 998.42 1708.02 1710.9
9
1043.62 1507.35 1683.83 1507.42 1682.70 2494.52 5562.6
8
(b) Colleges 25.86 10.20 4.08 4.41 8.71 15.53 11.02 34.69 29.32 25.92
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

24. RAJASTHAN
(a) Universities 832.16 1081.39 887.73 1134.28 1570.53 1418.00 1970.87 1391.55 1611.97 2452.5
9
(b) Colleges 414.13 515.55 653.50 651.11 632.35 478.55 238.84 498.19 959.90 2254.2
5
25. TAMILNADU
(a) Universities 2332.55 3063.08 2791.5
9
3558.46 4681.05 3784.28 5179.28 4552.06 9461.95 5477.2
2
(b) Colleges 1194.24 1006.37 914.42 1340.58 1154.23 1274.33 1472.27 2426.09 2108.31 2770.2
5
26. TRIPURA
(a) Universities 98.62 61.29 69.05 56.70 37.57 81.26 7.72 1001.74 235.02 63.03
(b) Colleges 18.73 19.37 9.70 31.43 13.79 22.13 14.42 13.77 0.00 58.69
Sl.
No.
STATE 1997-98 1998-99 1999-
2000
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-
07
27. UTTAR PRADESH
(a) Universities 22818.93 35777.85 34016.
38
33568.29 33512.61 37787.91 38679.27 38234.38 52061.56 67184.
76
(b) Colleges 1089.23 1116.49 1080.2
1
876.67 1401.52 965.93 2749.46 1882.72 1748.12 2440.4
1
28. UTTARANCHAL
(a) Universities 975.29 1226.38 1144.4
3
1363.03 1024.98 903.99 791.26 880.42 959.90 1425.4
2
(b) Colleges 74.54 93.00 70.23 23.93 93.03 80.78 229.22 81.79 44.68 155.32
29. WEST BENGAL
(a) Universities 4373.22 5681.20 5541.3
1
6258.73 5934.70 6700.74 7264.46 7078.56 10409.98 12356.
77
(b) Colleges 863.71 931.34 1055.0
6
1345.21 848.83 978.07 1434.16 1092.52 1392.46 2888.8
7
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

          A P P E N D I X I
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
 SECOND SITTING
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29th May, 2007 from 1500 hours
to 1725     hours.
Present
 Shri C. Kuppusami   -  Chairman
Members
2.  Shri Lal  Muni Choubey
3. Shri Vijoy Krishna
4. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
5.  Shri Samik Lahiri
6. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
7.  Shri Prabodh Panda
8.  Shri Sukdeo Paswan
9. Shri R. Prabhu
10. Shri Tufani Saroj
11. Smt. Tejaswini Seeramesh
12. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
13. Kunwar Manvendra Singh
14. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
Secretariat
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint Secretary
2.      Shri  Rajeev Sharma   - Director
3.      Smt. Manju Chaudhary  - Deputy Secretary II
Witnesses
Ministry of Human Resource Development
            (Department of Higher Education)
1. Shri R.P. Aggarwal  - Secretary
2. Shri Sunil Kumar  - Joint Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

University Grants Commission
1. Prof. Sukhdeo Thorat - Chairman
2. Dr. R.K. Chauhan  - Addl. Secretary & FA
2.  The  Committee   took   a   briefing  from  the  representatives of
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education)
and University Grants Commission on the subject µUniversity Grants
Commission¶.
3.            A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

       APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
 EIGHTH SITTING
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 23rd October, 2007 from 1500
hours to 1740 hours.
    PRESENT
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, MP   - Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Lal Muni Choubey
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5. Shri P. Karunakaran
6. Shri Vijoy Krishna
7. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
8. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
9. Shri D. Narbula
10.  Shri Prabodh Panda
11.       Shri R. Prabhu
12.       Shri Tufani Saroj
13.       Smt. Tejasvini Gowda
14.      Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
15.      Shri Lakshman Singh
16.  Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
17.       Shri Rewati Raman Singh
18.       Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary
2. Shri C.V. Gadgil  - Director
3. Smt. Manju Chaudhary - Deputy Secretary II
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

WITNESSES
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION
1. Shri K.M. Acharya  -  Additional Secretary
2. Shri Sunil Kumar  - Joint Secretary
3. Shri SK Ray   - Joint Secretary and Financial
Advisor
         UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
1. Shri Sukhdeo Thorat - Chairman
2. Dr. TR Kem   - Secretary
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & LITERACY
1. Ms. Vrinda Sarup  - Joint Secretary
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
1. Shri K Ramamurthy  - Joint Secretary
ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION
1. Shri RA Yadav    - Vice Chairman
2. At the outset Hon ¶ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Ministry of Human Resources Development, University Grants Commission and
Department of Health and AICTE. The Committee then took their oral evidence
on the subject University Grants Commission.
3. Since the Hon ¶ble Chairman had to attend to some urgent work at
Chennai, he left the meeting after initiating the discussions. As per Rule 258(3) of
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, Shri R. Prabhu,
MP and Member of the Committee acted as the Chairman for the rest of the
sitting.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4. The discussions centred around the issues such as insufficiency of grants
given  by University Grants Commission  to  universities, regional imbalances in
development of higher education, enhancement of enrolment ratio in higher
education, vocationalisation of higher education, fee structure, granting adequate
quantum of loans by banks to students, making Indian universities globally
competitive etc.
5. The representatives of the Ministry were asked to send written replies to
the questions to which oral answers were not readily available with them.
6.            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

        A P P E N D I X I I I
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
 ELEVENTH SITTING
The Committee sat on Monday, the 7th January, 2008 from 1100 hours
to 1335 hours.
      PRESENT
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, MP   - Chairman
MEMBERS
2.  Shri Lal Muni Choubey
3.  Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5.      Shri P. Karunakaran
6.      Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
7. Shri Vijoy Krishna
8. Shri Samik Lahiri
9.      Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
10.      Shri Zora Singh Mann
11.      Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
12.      Shri Sachin Pilot
13.      Shri Tufani Saroj
14.      Shri Lakshman Singh
15.      Kunwar Manvendra Singh
16.  Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
17.  Shri Rewati Raman Singh
18.      Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary
2. Shri C.V. Gadgil  - Director
3. Smt. Manju Chaudhary - Deputy Secretary II
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

WITNESSES
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION
(i) Shri R.P. Agarwal, Secretary, Higher Education
(ii) Shri Ravi Mathur, Joint Secretary, Higher Education
(iii) Shri R.D. Sahay, Director
(iv) Shri R. Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
(i) Shri Moolchand Sharma, Vice-Chairman
(ii) Shri R.K. Chauhan, Officiating Secretary
(iii) Dr. (Mrs.) Renu Batra, Joint Secretary
 UNIVERSITY OF DELHI
(i) Prof. Deepak Pental, Vice-Chancellor
(ii) Prof. S.K. Tandon, Pro-Vice Chancellor
(iii) Dr. A.K. Dubey, Registrar
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU UNIVERSITY
(i) Prof. B.B. Bhattacharya, Vice-Chancellor
(ii) Prof. Rajendra Prasad, Rector
(iii) Shri Avais Ahmad, Registrar
(iv) Dr. S. Chandrasekaran, Co-coordinator
2. At the outset Hon ¶ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Ministry of Human Resources Development, University Grants Commission,
University of Delhi and Jawaharlal Nehru University. The Committee first heard
the presentation of the Secretary, Higher Education µUniversity Grants
Commission¶ and then heard the views of the Vice-Chancellors of University of
Delhi and Jawaharlal Nehru University on the subject. The representatives of the
Ministry, UGC and the Vice-Chancellors answered the questions raised by the
Members of the Committee. The discussion centered around the issues
pertaining to higher education such as low-standards of universities, less GDP
allocation for higher education, enrollment ratio in higher education, less
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

budgetary allocation for research, accreditation of universities by NAAC, faculty
vacancies in universities, joint appointment of faculty, etc.
3. The representatives of the Ministry were asked to send written replies to
the points raised by the Members to which replies were not given by them during
the hearing.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

         A P P E N D I X I V
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
 TWELFTH SITTING
The Committee sat on Friday, the 25th January, 2008 from 1030 hours
to 1145 hours.
PRESENT
1. Shri Anwar Hussain   - Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Lal Muni Choubey
3.  Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Anant Gudhe
5.   Shri P. Karunakaran
6.  Shri Vijoy Krishna
7.      Shri B. Vinod Kumar
8. Shri Samik Lahiri
9.     Shri Hemlal Murmu
10.     Shri Arjuncharan Sethi
11.      Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
12.      Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary
2. Shri C.V. Gadgil  - Director
3. Smt. Manju Chaudhary - Deputy Secretary II
WITNESSES
    DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION
1. Shri R.P. Agrawal   - Secretary
2. Shri Ravi Mathur   - Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.D. Sahay   - Director
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4. Shri Anil Kapoor   - Director
5. Shri R. Chakravarty                     -           Deputy Secretary
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
1. Prof. Sukhadeo Thorat  - Chairman
2. Prof. Moolchand Sharma  - Vice-Chairman
3. Dr. R.K. Chauhan   - Officiating Secretary
4. Dr. (Mrs.) Renu Batra  - Joint Secretary
5. Ms. Pankaj Mittal   - Joint Secretary
   UNIVERSITY OF DELHI
1. Prof. Deepak Pental  - Vice-Chancellor
2. Prof. S.K. Tandon   - Pro-Vice Chancellor
3. Dr. A.K. Dubey   - Registrar
  JAWAHARLAL NEHRU UNIVERSITY
1. Prof. B.B. Bhattacharya  - Vice-Chancellor
2. Prof. Rajendra Prasad  - Rector
3. Prof. Ramadhikari Kumar  - Rector
4. Shri Avais Ahmad   - Registrar
2. As the Hon ¶ble Chairman could not attend the sitting, the Committee
chose Shri Anwar Hussain to act as Chairman for the sitting under rule 258(3) of
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset Hon ¶ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Ministry of Human Resources Development, University Grants Commission,
University of Delhi and Jawaharlal Nehru University.  The Committee first heard
the elaborate replies given by the Secretary, Higher Education on the points sent
by the Committee for discussion.  Then the representatives of the Ministry, UGC
and the Vice-Chancellors answered the questions raised by the Members of the
Committee. The discussion centered around the issues pertaining to higher
education such as the reasons for dropping out of Ph.D students before
completion of their research, raising the amount of scholarship for Ph.D.
students, faculty vacancies in universities, joint appointment of faculty,
establishment of 370 colleges in backward area districts, XI th Plan allocation for
higher education. etc.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

        A P P E N D I X V
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2007- 08)
 THIRTEENTH SITTING
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th March, 2008 from 1500 hours
to 1530 hours.
PRESENT
1. Shri C. Kuppusami, MP   - Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
3. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal
4. Shri D. Narbula
5.  Shri Prabodh Panda
6. Shri R. Prabhu
7. Shri Tufani Saroj
8.  Shri Lakshman Singh
9.  Kunwar Manvendra Singh
10.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi
      SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary
2. Shri C.V. Gadgil  - Director
3. Smt. Manju Chaudhary - Deputy Secretary-II
2. The Committee considered the draft Report on Ministry of Human
Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) on the subject,
µUniversity Grants Commission ¶ and adopted the same with the following
modifications:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 6   (Page Number-119 )
(i)  Line 6: delete ±µeither¶
(ii) Line 7:    for µor¶ substituteµand¶
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report in the light
of the above modifications and also to make verbal and other consequential
changes, if any, and present the same to the House.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages