       EC No.1417 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TOURISM 
 
 
(Action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report of Estimates Committee 
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of  Tourism- 
`Development of  Infrastructure for Growth of  Tourism- 
Development of  Ajmer City’ 
 
 
                                    S 
E 
     A 
 
                      L                                       
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.12.2004. 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December   , 2004/Agrahayana    , 1926(S) 
 
 

CONTENTS 
    
             PAGE 
 
 Composition of the  Estimates  Committee  ………..       (iii) 
(2004-2005)  
 
Introduction             (v) 
 
Chapter I  Report ………………………………………       1  - 16 
 
APPENDICES                                                                                                      
 
1. Minutes of sitting of the Estimates  Committee held 
on 27.09.2004. 
2. Minutes of  sitting of the Estimates  Committee held 
on 13.10.2004. 
3. Minutes of sitting of the Estimates Committee held 
on 17.11.2004. 
4. Analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report 
of Estimates Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha).  

 
COMPOSITION OF ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
2.       Shri A. Sai Prathap 
3.       Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4.       Shri Chander Kumar 
5.       Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
6.       Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
7.       Shri Anant Gudhe 
8.       Shri Jai Prakash 
9.       Shri N.N. Krishnadas 
10.       Shri Samik Lahiri 
11.       Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
12.       Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato 
13.       Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
14.       Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15.       Shri Prabodh Panda  
16.       Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
17.       Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
18.       Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
19.       Shri Harikewal Prasad 
20.       Prof. M. Ramadass 
21.       Shri K.S. Rao 
22.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
23.       Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
24.       Shri Manabendra Shah 
25.       Shri Laxman Singh 
26.       Shri Sartaj Singh 
27.       Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
28.       Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
29.       Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
30.       Shri Vijay Krishan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   -   Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. P.K. Sandhu   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.  Singh   - PCPI 
4. Shri Cyril John   - Under Secretary 
5. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma  - Committee Officer 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I,  the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the  Report on their behalf, 
present this  Fifth   Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of Estimates 
Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on t he  Ministry of Tourism –
‘Development of Infrastructure for Growth of  Tourism- Development 
of  Ajmer City’. 
2. The  Fifteenth Report (Thi rteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 25 th April, 2004.  The Government furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in 
that Report  on 5
th February, 2004.  
3.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of  Tourism, Ministry of  Road Transport and Highways,  
Ministry of  Urban Development  and the Department of Tourism, 
State Government of  Rajasthan on 13
th October, 2004 on the action 
taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the  
Report. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of 
the Government of India and the Government of  Rajasthan for  
placing before them the information desired in connection with the 
examination of the subject.  
4. The Draft Report was considered and adopted  by Estimates 
Committee (2004-05) at their sitting held on  17
th November, 2004. 
 
 
 

5.       The Report has been divided into the following Chapters: 
   I.  Report; 
 II. Recommendations/Observations which have been   
accepted by the Government; 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies; 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been  accepted by the  
Committee; and 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which  
final replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
6. An analysis of action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of Estimates 
Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix IV.  It would 
be observed therefrom that out of 19 observations/recommendations 
made in the Report, 12 recomm endations, i.e. 63.16% have been 
accepted by Government. Final Replies of Government in respect of 
7 recommendations, i.e. 36.84% are still awaited.  
 
   
 
NEW DELHI                    C.KUPPUSAMI, 
December 1, 2004                                   Chairman, 
Agrahayana  10, 1926(S)   Committee on Estimates. 
 

      
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by 
Government on the recommendations contained in their Fifteenth 
Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on t he Ministry of  Tourism-
`Development of  Infrastructure for Growth of  Tourism – 
Development of Ajmer City’. 
 
1.2 The Committee’s Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 25th April, 2003.  It contained 19 observations/recommendations.  
Action Taken notes on all these recommendations/observations have 
been received from the Ministry of  Tourism. 
 
1.3 The Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives 
of Ministry of Tourism and ot her related Ministries/Departments on 
the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report. 
  
1.4 Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in 
the Report have been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Sl.Nos. 1 to 7,9 to11,15,17   
       (Total   12, Chapter II) 
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
                               NIL 
       (Total  NIL, Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendaitons/Observations in respect of  which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee: 
 NIL 
       (Total NIL, Chapter IV) 
- 1 – 

- 2 – 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
Sl.Nos.8,12 to 14,16,18,19      
       (Total  7,  Chapter V)    
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by 
Government on some of the recommendations. 
 

     - 3 - 
Road Transport Facilities 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para No.6.9) 
1.6 Keeping in view the fact that roads and road  transport 
facilities play a vital role in the development and growth of 
tourism, the Committee had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee need hardly point out that road transport 
facilities play a vital role in  the development and growth 
of tourist destinations.  While there is a good network of 
roads in Ajmer and Pushkar,  those need to be 
augmented and strengthened and the fleet and quality of 
public transport system which mainly consists of ordinary 
Government buses and average quality private buses 
need to be improved.  The Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways have reportedly initiated a study for 
inventorisation and improvement of the condition of 
National Highway No. 89 connecting Ajmer and Pushkar.  
The Committee desire that the work for improving the 
geometrics of the road on the basis of the study should be 
taken up and completed expeditiously. The Government 
of Rajasthan through an Asian Development Bank project 
is improving the roads in  entire Rajasthan including the 
roads connecting  Ajmer. Three National Highways 
namely NH 8, NH 79 and NH 89 are touching Ajmer.  
Major portions of NH 8 and NH 79 form part of the Golden 
Quadrilateral component of the National Highway 
Development Project,  which  will have at least four lanes, 
major portion of which shall be completed by December, 
2003.  The riding quality of the remaining portion of the 
National Highways is being improved and is expected to 
be completed in two years. 
  
The Committee are hopeful that improvement of roads in 
Ajmer and Pushkar would give necessary boost to 
tourism in the absence of air connectivity available to 
tourists.”  
 

 
     -  4  - 
1.7 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of  Tourism had 
stated as under: 
“The issue was taken up with the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways.  They have reported that 
Kishangarh to Ajmer is about 30 Km. (Km.366/0 to 396/0). 
Out of these 30 Km, riding quality of 10 Km. (Km366/0 to 
376/0) was improved during 2001-2002.  Remaining 20 
Km. i.e.Km. 376/0 to 396/0 was improved during 2002-03 
along with strengthening of the section.  Also in Km 377/0 
to 388/0 road stretch has been widened with provision of 
hard shoulders for smooth flow of  traffic.  Thus, the road 
stretch between Kishangarh to Ajmer has been kept with 
good riding quality.  The traffic  in the stretch is 23000 
PCUs with 7400 CVD which just qualifies for four laning.  
Four laning will be taken  up based on availability of funds 
and inter-se priority. The work of Golden Quadrilateral is 
continuing.” 
 
1.8 Giving the latest position regarding progress of work for 
improving roads, the Secretary, Department of Tourism, 
Government of  Rajasthan during the evidence held on 13 th 
October, 2004 stated as under: 
“....Jaipur-Kishangarh road on National Highway is being 
turned into a six-lane highway. Work is in full progress.  It 
may not be the entire effort of the State Government, but 
it is a combined effort of the Government of  India and the 
State Government.”   
 
1.9 The witness further stated: 
 
“.....It is going to be the most ambitious project in the 
Northern India and between Kishangarh and Ajmer road, 
the work has been undertaken.  It is a good road.  The  

-5- 
connectivity on roads between Kishangarh and Ajmer and  
between Ajmer and Pushkar has also improved.  We 
have also put lighting facilities on these roads for 
commuters to travel  easily at night time.” 
 
1.10 Commenting on road transport in Ajmer and Pushkar, the 
 
 witness stated as under: 
 
“As far as transport is concerned, we are still partially 
banking on private operators.  We have the buses of 
Rajasthan Roadways Corporation. Presently, they are 
enough to cater to the requirements of the inland tourists 
within Rajasthan.  Rest is in the hands of private sector. 
We have tempos, jeeps and other vehicles. For  
improving transportation in Ajmer and Pushkar,  presently  
there is no specific scheme with us to start in transport 
sector particularly in these two cases, but we are 
concentrating more on the infrastructure to improve the 
roads. We do not want to get into the transport sector 
because we find that this sector should be left open to the 
private sector only, except that we must provide them with 
basic facilities.  They are already getting loans and other 
concessions from the banks.  As a policy, we are not 
thinking in terms of taking any initiative to have our own 
transportation except that we want to improve the 
services of Rajasthan Roadways Corporation and in case, 
we find that the services is not enough to cater to the 
entire requirement, we ply extra buses during the festival 
seasons.” 
 
1.11 On an observation of the Committee that  Rajasthan State 
Corporation buses only  ply  between Ajmer and Pushkar  and 
this service is not even  connected to the Railway Station which 
causes inconvenience to pilgrims/tourists travelling by trains, 
the witness stated as under:- 

-6- 
“I would like to say that right now I am not aware of the 
fact that only one service is plying.  But,  I can assure you 
that if there is need for additional services, I at the State 
level will also request that this service should be 
increased as per the requirement.”    
 

-7- 
1.12 The Committee note that action is  being taken by the 
State Government to improve the condition of roads in 
Ajmer and Pushkar.  National Highway No.8 from Jaipur to 
Kishangarh is being converted into a six-lane highway and 
road connectivity between Kishangarh and Ajmer and 
between Ajmer and Pushkar h ave also been improved. The 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways had reportedly 
initiated a study for inventorisation and improvement of the 
condition of National Highway No. 89 connecting Ajmer 
and Pushkar. The Committee would  like to be apprised of 
the progress of work for im proving the geometrics of 
National Highway No.89.  
          Another recommendation of the Committee was to 
improve the fleet and quality of  public transport system in 
Ajmer and Puskhar which mainly consists of ordinary 
Government buses and average quality private buses. The 
Secretary, Department of Tourism, Government of 
Rajasthan stated during evide nce before the Committee 
that for public transport in Aj mer and Pushkar they rely on 
Rajasthan Roadways Corporation and on private buses, 
tempos, jeeps and other vehicles.  It has also been brought 
to the notice of the Commi ttee that buses plying between 
Ajmer and Puskhar are not connected to the Railway 
Station, which is causing cons iderable inconvenience to 
outstation tourists and pilgrims travelling by train. In view 
of    this,   the   Committee    recommend    that   Rajasthan  

-8- 
Roadways Corporation should take steps to improve the 
fleet and quality of buses plyi ng in Ajmer and Pushkar. 
Private bus operators also  should be motivated to upgrade 
the quality of public transport and strengthen their fleet. 
The Committee also desire that bus routes should be 
redesigned in such a manner that the buses plying 
between Pushkar and Ajmer  pass through  the Railway 
Station for the convenience of outstation tourists and 
pilgrims travelling by train. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by Government in this regard. 
  

     -9- 
Budgetary allocation for development of tourism  
Observation/Recommendation(Sl.No.17, Para No.6.17) 
 
1.13 Taking note of the limited resources and severe 
financial constraints faced by Rajasthan Government for 
investing in tourism sector in recent years, the Committee 
had recommended as follows:- 
“The total allocation during the Ninth Five Year  
Plan for tourism sector in Rajasthan was Rs. 36.04 
crore and the actual expenditure was Rs. 33.66 
crore .  The expenses incurred by the State Tourism 
Department on fairs and festivals in Ajmer and 
Pushkar registered an increasing trend from 1998 to 
2000, but came  down in 2001.  However, the  
Government of Rajasthan, taking a right view on 
tourism, has dedicated 2002-2003 to tourism and 
doubled the budget allocation for tourism from Rs. 
10 crore in the previous year to Rs. 20 crore in the 
current year.  Even this allocation is not considered 
to be adequate and needs to be enhanced 
considerably to meet the needs of tourism sector in 
the State. While taking a sympathetic view of the 
severe financial constraints faced by Rajasthan 
Government in recent years due to drought and 
other factors beyond its control,  the Committee  
would like to emphasise that   in terms of generating 
income, tourism industry pays higher dividends for 
the investment made in this sector.  In view of the 
limited resources available,  they  suggest that the 
Department of Tourism should chalk out other 
alternatives for mobilising the required investment in 
the tourism sector. Keeping in view the fact that 
tourism has been identified by the Government as a 
high priority industry for private investment, the 
Committee recommend that private sector should  

 
-10- 
be encouraged to invest in tourism projects in order 
to upgrade the infrastructure facilities.  The 
Committee also recommend that in order to attract 
more investment, the possibility of offering more 
incentives and concessions  to private sector  in the 
tourism sector should also be considered. Since 
allocations made for the development of other 
sectors like  roads, public utilities, civil aviation, 
urban development, etc.  also contribute  towards 
development and growth of tourism, the Committee 
stress  that limited resources of other Departments 
of the Central   and  State Governments should also 
be utilised in a coordinated manner so as to help 
development of infrastructure for growth of tourism.”  
 
1.14 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Tourism  
has stated as under: 
“The State Government has reported that liberal 
concessions have been extended in the `New 
Investment Policy’ of the State Government and that 
the budget of Pushkar Fair was enhanced to Rs.10 
lakhs for 2003.  Besides the Ministry of  Tourism, 
Government of India in order to, inter–alia 
encourage investment by the private sector is 
providing assistance for large revenue generating 
projects and has also rationalised its old scheme of 
`Interest Subsidy Scheme’ for hotels and substituted 
with `Incentive for Accommodation Infrastructure’ in 
which scheme, Capital Subsidy is provided to 
eligible hotel units.”
  
       

-11- 
1.15 Elaborating on the `New Investment Policy’, the 
Secretary, Department of Tourism, Government of Rajasthan  
stated during evidence as follows:- 
“….. We are already having an `Investment Policy-2003’ 
but that is applicable to all the sectors, including tourism.  
We are, now working on a specific investment policy for 
tourism sector and that would contain the policy of 
promoting the private sector-both as a stand-alone 
participation as also in the form of public and private 
partnership.” 
 
1.16 He further stated as under:- 
“... Primarily, Sir, it is to provide exemptions in luxury, that 
is, tax exemption of 50 per cent, stamp duty, conversion 
charges, etc. In the Budget, the State Government has 
also reduced the luxury tax for hotels from 10 per cent to 
8 per cent for expansion of accommodation sector.” 
 
1.17 Commenting on the response of private sector towards 
the incentives offered, the witness stated as under: 
“The response has been very good as far as the bigger 
hotel chains are concerned.  We are having too many 
investments as far as small budget accommodation or 
hotels are concerned.…. The pace is picking up. New 
areas are also picking up. ……I would say that we still 
have to do a lot of promotion of the investment policy and 
the concessions that we are giving.  May be, we have not 
been fully able to promote these concessions and 
remissions.  But all this we have incorporated in our policy 
to the people at large.  We are not trying to propagate 
that.” 
   

       -  1 2  -   
1.18 The Committee desired to know as to whether the 
allocation made for the tourism sector was proportionate to the 
contribution of the tourism industry to the SDP in the State of 
Rajasthan. The witness replied as under: 
“We have a plan of about Rs.5600 crore.  We have a total 
plan outlay for Rs.22.5 crore.  As I mentioned earlier, that 
is pretty meagre.”  
 
1.19 The Committee further enquired about the percentage of  
allocation earmarked for tourism to which the witness replied: 
 
“It is 0.5 per cent.” 
 
 
1.20 On being further asked whether it was much less than the 
contribution of tourism sector to the economy in the State, the 
witness replied in affirmation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

      -  13 - 
1.21       In terms  of ge nerating income, tourism industry 
pays higher dividends for the investment made therein than  
other sectors. In view of the limited resources available for 
tourism development, the Committee had suggested that  
private sector should be encouraged to invest in tourism 
projects in order to upgrade th e infrastructure facilities.  
The Committee note that  respon se of the private sector to  
various concessions extended in the new Investment Policy 
announced by the State Government has been 
encouraging. They trust that as assured by the Secretary, 
Department of Tourism, Gover nment of  Rajasthan during 
the course of oral evidence that the State Government will 
draw up a specific investmen t policy for tourism sector 
which would promote private sector both for stand-alone 
participation and in the fo rm of public and private 
partnership. They desire th at the specific investment policy 
for  tourism  sector  should  be formulated at the earliest so 
as to encourage better private participation in tourism  

      -   14   - 
sector  which  would  help  in  further development of 
tourism. 
   The Committee  had also recommended that limited 
resources of other Departmen ts of the Central Government 
and that of the State Governmen t  should be utilised in a 
coordinated manner so as to help integrated development 
of infrastructure for growth of  tourism. The reply furnished 
by Government is silent on the action taken by Government 
on this recommendation of the Committee.  They, therefore,  
desire that the allocation made for the development of  
other sectors  like roads, public utilities, civil aviation, 
urban development, etc. shoul d be invested in such a 
manner that it helps towards integrated development of 
infrastructure for  growth of tourism.  
Out of total plan outlay of  Rs.5600 crore by the 
Government of  Rajasthan,  an amount of  only Rs.22.5 
crore has been earmarked fo r tourism which is even less 
than 0.5%. As already stated by the Committee, the tourism 
industry pays higher dividends for the investments made in  

      -  15 - 
this sector and plays an impor tant role in the overall 
development of the region. While expressing their serious 
concern on the low percentage of allocation being made for 
tourism sector, the Committee would impress upon the 
State Government to augment the allocation for tourism 
development in the State.    

-16- 
Implementation of Recommendations 
1.22 The Committee would like to emphasise that 
they attach the greatest importance to 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by 
the Government.  They would, therefore, urge that the 
Government should keep a close watch so as to 
ensure expeditious implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by them.  In case it is not 
possible to implement the recommendations in letter 
and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. 
 The Committee desire that replies in respect of 
the recommendations contained in Chapter V of the 
Report may be finalised and final replies of the 
Government furnished to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
NEW DELHI                  C.KUPPUSAMI, 
December   1, 2004                             Chairman, 
Agrahayana  10, 1926(S)    Committee on Estimates 
 

-17- 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE   
(2004-2005) 
SECOND SITTING 
  The Committee sat on Monday,  the 27th September, 2004 
from 1100 hours  to 1250 hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
1.       Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
2.       Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
3.       Shri Jai Prakash 
4.       Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5.       Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
6.       Shri Prabodh Panda  
7.       Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
8.       Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
9.       Prof. M. Ramadass 
10.       Shri K.S. Rao 
11.       Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
12.       Shri Laxman Singh 
13.       Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt.P.K. Sandhu   -  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri  A.K. Singh   -  P.C.P.I.  
3. Shri Cyril John   -  Under Secretary 
4.      Shri  M.K. Madhusudan -  Assistant Director 
5. Smt. Manju Chowdhary -  Assistant Director 

          
      -  18  - 
 
2. The Committee considered the draft Report on action taken 
by Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fifteenth Report  of Estimates Committee (13 th Lok Sabha) on 
the Ministry of  Tourism - `Development of  Infrastructure for 
Growth of  Tourism – Development of Ajmer City’ and decided to 
take oral evidence of the representatives of  Ministry of  Tourism 
on 13th October, 2004 on the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report. 
 
3.  xxxx   xxxx    xxxx 
 
4.  xxxx   xxxx    xxxx 
 
5.  xxxx   xxxx    xxxx 
  
 
The  Committee then adjourned.  
 

-19 - 
     APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
    (2004-2005) 
 
    FIFTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 13 th  October, 2004 
from 1500 to   1645  hours. 
 
    Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
    Members 
 
2.   Shri Samik Lahiri 
3.  Shri  Sunil Kumar Mahato 
4   Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
5   Shri Prabodh Panda 
6. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
8. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
9. Prof. M. Ramadass 
10.   Shri K.S. Rao 
11.   Shri Sartaj  Singh 
12. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
13. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh       - Principal Chief  
Parliamentary Interpreter 
3. Shri Cyril John         -  Under Secretary 
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan          - Assistant Director 
 

- 20  - 
 
Witnesses 
 
MINISTRY OF TOURISM 
 
 
1.  Shri Amitabh Kant      - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri G.S. Dhar   - Joint Director General 
3.   Dr. Venu V.     - Deputy Director General(V) 
4.   Shri Atul Chaturvedi  - Director  
5.   Shri Vinod Zutshi       -  Secretary (Tourism) 
       Government of Rajasthan 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
6.   Shri. P. Haldar   -  Superintending Engineer   
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
7. Shri S.C. Sharma  -  Under Secretary 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of  
Ministries of Tourism, Road Transport and Highways and Urban 
Development on  action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of Estimates 
Committee (13
th Lok Sabha) on  ‘Development of Infrastructure for 
Growth of Tourism – Development of  Ajmer City’. The evidence was   
concluded. 
 
  3.       A verbatim record of the  proceedings was kept. 
  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
The Committee then adjourned 

 
-21- 
 
APPENDIX-III 
 
MINUTES OF  SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES      COMMITTEE 
(2004-2005) 
 
NINTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17 th  November, 
2004 from 1100 to  1130  hours. 
 
Present 
 
Shri C. Kuppusami  - Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
3. Shri Chander Kumar 
4. Shri Lalmuni Chaubay 
5.   Shri Anant Gudhe  
6. Shri Jai Prakash 
7. Shri  Sunil Kumar Mahato 
8. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Shri Sukhdeo Paswan 
11. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
12. Prof. M. Ramadass 
13.     Shri Laxman Singh 
14.     Shri Sartaj Singh 
15.     Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
16.     Shri V. Kishore Chandra S Deo  
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh      - Principal Chief Parliamentary  
Interpreter 
2. Shri Cyril John     -  Under Secretary 

  
 
      -22- 
 
2.     The Committee considered and adopted the  draft 
Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth  Report of 
Estimates Committee (13 th Lok Sabha) on Ministry of 
Tourism-`Development of  Inf rastructure for Growth of  
Tourism – Development of Ajmer City’ without any  
modification.  
 
 
3.    The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
Report in the light of verbal and other consequential 
changes, if any, arising out of factual verification by the 
Ministry and present the same to the House.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  -23- 
  
APPENDIX IV 
 
(Vide Introduction to Report) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTEENTH REPORT 
OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I. Total Number of  Recommendations/observations 19  
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted   by the Government                                                
(Nos.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9,10,11,15,17)              12  
 
Percentage                                      63.16%  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies 
                 NIL 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which Government’s replies have not been                   NIL 
accepted   by the Committee. 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final replies of Government are still 
awaited.                    
(Nos.8,12,13, 14,16,18,19)      7 
 
Percentage                   36.84%   
 
 
 
 
 
 