1 
 
24 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Estimates] 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2012-2013) 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

2 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION OF 
CIVIL AVIATION 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Estimates] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30 April, 2013 
 
 
 
 
            
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
___April, 2013/Vaisakha ___, 1935 (Saka) 

3 
 
EC No. ____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price Rs.____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press , Minto Road, New 
Delhi. 
 
 

4 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                                                                  PAGE NO. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2012-13)                         (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 (v) 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations w hich have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
13 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government‟s reply 
 
49 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
Government‟s replies  have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
 
53 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
54 
 APPENDICES  
I. Copy of Order and Judgement of Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court regarding the Airport Development Fees 
76 
II. Copy of Order and Judgement of Delhi High Court 
regarding stay on Development Fees at Delhi 
Airport. 
99 

5 
 
III Copy of Order in the matter of levy of Development 
Fees by Delhi International Airport (P) Ltd. (DIAL) 
at IGI Airport, New Delhi. 
109 
IV Copy of Order in the matter of determination of 
Development Fees in respect of Chhatarpati Shivaji 
International Airport, Mumbai. 
156 
V. Copy of Report showing the achievements of the 
company against the milestone set by the 
Government of India. 
175 
VI. Copy of Report of the Group of Officers to examine 
the Turn Around Plan and Financial Restructuring 
Plan for Air India, October, 2011. 
176 
VII List of Major Airports 242 
VIII Details regarding case of fake pilot licences and 
fake flying schools 
243 
IX Details of development of AAI Airports (Completed 
Projects) 
245 
X Details of development of AAI Airports (Work in 
Progress) 
 
255 
XI Minutes of Twenty Second Sitting of the Committee 
on Estimates held on 26.4.2013 
 
258 
XII Analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report of Committee on Estimates 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
260 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2012-13) 
  Shri Francisco Sardinha, MP  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
  2. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, MP 
  3. Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty, MP 
  4. Shri N.S.V. Chittan, MP 
  5. Shri Khagen Das, MP 
  6. Shri Harish Chaudhary, MP 
  7. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, MP 
  8. Shri Pralhad Joshi, MP 
  9. Shri K. Bapi Raju Kanumuru, MP 
  10. Shri Chandrakant Khaire, MP 
  11. Dr. Thokchom Meinya, MP 
  12. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik, MP 
  13. Shri Mukul Wasnik, MP 
  14. Kum. Meenakshi Natrajan, MP 
  15. Shri Prabodh Panda, MP 
  16. Dr. Vinay Pandey, MP 
  17. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana, MP 
  18. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao, MP 
  19. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia, MP 
  20. Shri S. Semmalai, MP 
  21. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi, MP 
  22. Shri M.I. Shanavas, MP 
  23. Shri Adhi Shankar, MP 
  24. Shri Jagdish Sharma, MP 

7 
 
  25. Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP 
  26. Shri Ganesh Singh, MP 
  27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh, MP 
  28. Shri Radha Mohan Singh, MP 
  29. Shri Uma Shankar Singh, MP1  
  30. Smt. Annu Tandon, MP 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  1. Shri A. Louis Martin   -     Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda  -     Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  -     Additional Director 
  4. Shri Mohit Rajan  -     Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            (iv) 
 
 
  
                                                           
1 Expired on 24.01.2013 

8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2012 -13) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Fourth Report on action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report  of the 
Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject „Development and Regulation of Civil 
Aviation‟ pertaining to Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
 
2. The Fourteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 26 April, 2012. The Ministry of 
Civil Aviation furnishe d their action taken replies on the recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 21 January, 2013. Further, specific information 
regarding a number of points in the Recommendations was called for which was furnished by 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 16 April, 2013. The draft report was considered and adopted 
by the Committee at their sitting held on 26 April, 2013.  
 
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fourteenth Report of Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix 
XII.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
29 April, 2013              
Baisakha 9,1935(S) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA 
  CHAIRMAN 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES 

9 
 
CHAPTER - I 
                                                              REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the R ecommendations/ observations contained in the  Fourteenth  Report  (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on the subject „ Development and Regulation of Civil Aviation‟ pertaining to 
Ministry of Civil  Aviation. 
   
1. 2. The Committee‟s  Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented  to 
Lok Sabha on 26.04.2012 . It contained 17  Recommendations/ Observations. Action 
Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations / Observations were received from 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation on  21.01.2013. It was however observed that no specific 
response was given by the Ministry to a number of points in the recommendations. The 
Ministry of Civil Aviation were, therefore , asked to give further information which was 
furnished on 16.04.2013.  
 
1.3 R eplies to the Recommendations / observations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government  
              Sl. No. 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, & 16                                                                  
                                   (Total 9)   
(Chapter-II)   
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government‟s reply   
Sl. No. 4                                                          (Total 1) 
                                                                                     (Chapter-III)                            
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the     
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
       Sl. No. Nil                                                           (Total Nil)    
                                                                                                   (Chapter IV) 
   

10 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final repl ies of the 
Government  are  still awaited 
Sl. No. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15 &17                          (Total 7)  
                (Chapter V) 
 
1.4   The Committee desire that final replies to the recommendations nos. 5, 6, 
7, 8,9,15 & 17 and response to comments contained in Chapter -1 of this Report 
should be furnished expeditiously.  
 
1.5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.  
                                                   
A.  Need to improve Safety of the aircraft operations  and control noise 
pollution at  airports  
            Recommendation / Observation (sl. no. 6)  
 
1.6   In the light of tragic aircraft incidents at Mangalore and Arunachal Pradesh,  the 
Committee,  emphasizing the need for improving the safety of operations at 11  
airports identified as „critical airports‟ , inter - alia   recommended  that (i)   DGCA must 
not lose any time in addressing all issues pertaining to flight operations at these 11 
critical airports to avoid any more tragic incident in future , (ii) t hey be apprised of the  
timelines fixed and the actual planning done by the Ministry to bring the said  airports in 
the safe category , (iii) there is a need to  review and streamline all existing mandatory 
procedures related to flight operations at all the airports in the country which also 
include controlling noise pollution at metro airports, and; (iv) the suggestions made by 
Civil Aviation Safety Advisory Council (CASAC) for training of inspectors, ground staff, 
pilots etc. and the need to improve the quality of training imparted by training institutes 
should be implemented in letter and spirit. 
 
 

11 
 
1.7. The Ministry of Civil Aviation stated, inter-alia, in their reply dated 21.01.2013 that   
Inspection of all these 11 critical airports has been carried out by a team of officials 
from Directorate General of Civil Aviation. Their report is   forwarded to the respective 
aerodrome operators for taking necessary action. The report broadly su ggests the 
following measures:    
 Providing of Runway End Safety Areas (RESAs) 
 Ensuring proper marking on runways.  
 Proper maintenance of basic strips and ensuring frangibility criteria. 
 Periodic calibration of Nav Aids. 
 Maintenance of Runway Surface within appropriate friction Levels. 
 Removal  of obstacles and proper marking and lighting  of permissible 
obstacles  
 Safety risk assessment in respect of non-compliances. 
 
1.8. As the Ministry‟s reply was silent on remaining points in the recommendations, the 
Ministry were  asked to  furnish specific replies to the same. The Ministry vide their OM 
dated 16.04.2013 provided further information as under: 
„‟11 Airports were identified as Critical airports from flight operations point of 
view.  Inspection of these airports was  carried out by the team of officials from 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation and reports were forwarded to the respective 
aerodrome operator for taking necessary action. 
Various steps have been taken to enhance the safety at these aer odromes 
which included: 
 Provision of Runway End Safety Areas   (RESAs) 
 Ensuring proper marking on runways  
 Proper maintenance of basic strip and ensuring frangibility criteria. 
 Periodic calibration of Nav Aids 
 Maintenance of Runway Surface  within appropriate friction Levels  
 Removal of obstacles and proper  marking and lighting of permissible   
      obstacles and  
 Safety risk assessment in respect of non-compliances. 

12 
 
(ii) All operators have been directed to carry out safety assessment of the 
aerodromes in accordance with Flight Standards Directorate circular no.02 of 
2012 and depending upon the safety risk assessment, the operators shall 
define the training and qualifi cation requirements for the flight crew operating 
to the said aerodrome.  The circular also gives guidelines to categorize the 
aerodromes based on the safety assessment.   
(iii) With regards to controlling noise pollution at metro airstrips, it is stated t hat 
as per the direction of Delhi High Court, DGCA has commissioned undertaken 
a pilot study for noise mapping &  monitoring of Delhi  Airport.  The study is 
being carried out M/s NLR.    
 The recommendations of this study will be forwarded to the Central Po llution 
Control Board for developing permissible noise limits for the Airport.  In a 
similar way, noise limits for other Airports will also be evolved.‟‟ 
 
1.9.  The Committee  note that subsequent to their  observation regarding critical 
airports , DGCA has inspected the same , proposed measures to improve safety 
and forwarded the same to respective aerodrome operators .  Besides DGCA has 
reportedly commissioned a pilot study f or noise mapping and monitoring of 
Delhi Airport and the subsequent recommendations would be forwarded to 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) . The Ministry have also committed to 
evolve noise limits for other airports in  similar way. However, the Committee are 
constrained to note that the Ministry have not furnished information sought by 
them on  the timelines  fixed and the actual planning done to bring the 11 
identified airports under safe category. The reply is also silent as to  whether the 
suggestions of the Civil Aviation Safety Advisory Council (CASAC) for  training 
of inspectors, ground staff and the need to improve the quality of training 
imparted by training institutes   is implement ed  in letter and  spirit. The 
Committee,  in view of  utmost importance  attached to the safety of operations 
in all airports  and  training of the manpower  being   critical element in enabling  
and enhancing  the safety of the operations reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and  await specific replies  on these aspects.                                    

13 
 
                                            B.   Airport licensing 
                            Recommendation/ Observation (sl. no. 7)  
1.10 Unhappy to note that several airports  in the country are allowed to operate  
without valid license  which goes against the ICAO policy  mandate adopted by the 
Ministry in 2007,  the Committee desired  that they be apprised of the reasons for 
allowing these airports running without license as well as the responsibility fixed in the 
matter ; and,  (ii)    the remedial measures taken, if any, to grant licenses to the 
applicant airports and the results thereof as well as the revenue earned by the DGCA 
so far by granting licenses . The Committee also urged the Ministry to complete all 
certification/licensing for all the Airports in the country at the earliest and ensure that no 
such lapse occurs in future.‟ 
 
1.11 The Ministry of Civil Aviation vide their action taken reply stated as under: 
“Presently, all the airports in the country except one are having a valid license 
issued by DGCA. License of Patna in Bihar is under process by DGCA‟‟.  
 
1.12 As the action taken reply furnished by the Ministry d id not contain specific reply 
to the Committee‟s recommendation as to the reasons for allowing the substantial 
number of airports without  license, the Ministr y were asked to provide specific reply. 
The Ministry stated in response on 16.04.13 that all AAI airports where scheduled 
operations take place have been licensed  except one namely Patna in Bihar which is 
operating as per provisions of Rule 78 of Aircraft Rule 1937. This provision permits the 
airport to operate till aerodrome operator obtains license from DGCA by the date 
notified by Central Government. The date no tified as per SO 038 (E) dated 1 st January 
2013 is 30th June, 2013.‟ 
 
1.13 It is also not clear from the reply as to why the Patna Airport alone is 
allowed to operate under Rule 78 of the Aircraft Rules 1937  while other AAI 
airports are allowed to operate with license. The Ministry also have not indicated 
the revenue earned by DGCA by grant of licenses . The Committee would await 
information in this regard.       

14 
 
    C.  Prevalence of fake Pilot licenses, fake flying schools and role of DGCA  
                                    Recommendation (sl. no. 8)  
1.14. Inviting the attention of the Ministry of Civil Aviation to the prevalence of   fake 
pilot licenses & fake flying schools and  the danger it poses to the safety of 
passengers, the Committee found it distressing that  the involvement of DGCA 
personnel too had been suspected in the matter, as certain private flying training 
institutes, in possible connivance with some DGCA officials, had been found to be 
certifying unfit candidates  as pilots.  Besides certain fake pilots were found to be 
relatives of DGCA officials.   The Committee were informed later that apart from the 
investigation by Delhi Police, the DGCA had started scrutinizing all licenses issued by 
them, and that an Expert Committee had been set up in March 2011 to re -examine the 
entire system of examination as well as licensing. The report of the said Committee 
was submitted in July, 2011. The Committee desire d to be apprised of the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee as  well as the arrests and prosecutions 
made in the case following the internal checking done by DGCA and the follow up 
action taken on the recommendations of the Experts Committee. The Committee also 
expressed their concern over media reports of  a fake flyi ng school in the national 
capital. The overall laxity  on the part of the regulatory body to check such 
developments shocked the Committee and they strongly recommended that the DGCA 
personnel involved in this whole episode be identified urgently. Deeply anguished to 
note that a premier regulator like DGCA was plagued with nepotism, the Committee 
strongly fel t for a complete  overhauling of DGCA . As  the Ministry is  reportedly 
working on restructuring of the existing DGCA into an autonomous aviation safet y 
regulatory organization named Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) in line with ICAO's 
recommendations and international standards and practices, the Committee desired to 
be informed about the  said restructuring as soon as it is completed.  
 
1.15.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation in its  action taken reply stated that a  public notice 
dated 18 July 2012 ha s been issued and the guidelines to the candidates applying for 
Pilot License Examination (Issued V, October, 2012) has been published on DGCA‟s 
website stating that attested copy of Verification Certificate issued by University/ Board 

15 
 
should be submitted at the time of allotment of computer No and original verification 
certificate is to be submitted at the time of applying for issuance of License.  Besides, 
DGCA has examined the pilot licenses issued in the past and the examination history 
available in CEO records in respect of 1704 ATPL holders were scrutinized thus 
revealing that  s ix candidates did not pass  all  the examination papers required for  
issue of ATPL and  submitted fake mark sheet s  for these paper(s) for  issue of ATPL 
.The ATPL licenses of the above pilots were stated to be  placed under suspension 
and a case  registered with the Delhi Crime Branch for  investigating  the matter. 
 
Further, it was stated that t he examination history in respect of 6331 CPL 
holders were scrutinized and it was observed that 11 candidates who did not pass the 
required examination papers had  submitted fake mark sheet s  for these paper(s) for 
issue of CPL.  These cases were reportedly handed over to Delhi Police Crime Branch.  
 
As regards fake flying schools, the Ministry stated that cases of bogus entries in 
the flying log book of trainee pilots by Chief Flying Instruc tor of Rajasthan Flying 
School, Jaipur  were reported by A nti Corruption Bureau (ACB), Rajasthan. On the 
basis of preliminary report received from them, licenses of the pilots were suspended 
by DGCA.  
 
It was further informed that DGCA  has started procedure  for more detailed 
verification while issuing the licenses.  For conversion of foreign licenses into Indian 
licenses, the licenses are being verified from the concerned regulatory authority of the 
respective countries.  Verification of the recency flying i s also being obtained from the 
flying training institute before processing the case. 
 
 1.16. As the Ministry had not furnished reply to the points regarding (i) identification of 
the DGCA personnel involved in issuing fake pilot licenses and (ii) informing the 
Committee of the restructuring of DGCA into Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), the Ministry 
were asked to  furnish the same.. 
 

16 
 
1.17. The Ministry vide OM dated 16.04.13 furnishing the reply regarding identification 
of the DGCA personnel involved in fake pilot licenses merely stated that the Ministry 
have taken note of the fact.  However, no specific reply was provided regarding  
restructuring of DGCA into Civil Aviation Authority (CAA).   
 
1.18. Though the Ministry have taken action against certain fake pilots, they have 
not given information about (i) involvement of personnel of DGCA in issuing fake 
licenses to pilots some of whom reportedly found to be   their  kith and kin ; and 
(ii)  allowing the operations of  a fake flying school   in the  capital right under 
their nose. The Ministry’s reply is also silent on restructuring of DGCA into Civil 
Aviation Authority. The Committee, take serious note of the recalcitrant attitude 
of the Ministry in giving response to the Committee’s recommendations and 
require them to furnish specific response to the points.  
 
                     D. Need to augment Training infrastructure  
                                    Recommendation (sl. no. 9) 
1.19 .  The Committee, in their report , expressing concern over the existing mismatch 
between a fast growing aviation sector and a limited  availability of skilled manpower 
emphasized that it is absolutely necessary to augment the training capacity for pilots, 
cabin crew, engineers and ground staff to meet the demands of the aviation industry, 
while keeping a very strict vigil on the quality of such training. The Committee 
recommended that the Ministry should assess and upgrade the existing infrastructure 
at various Government Training Institutes to stop the exodus of Indian citizen s to 
foreign training institutes. Further they urged the Ministry to carry out periodic audits/ 
inspections as well as efficiency and aptitude tests on the trainers to find out the 
degree of compliance of laid out norms for imparting proper training and enforce 
remedial measures, in case any lapse is found. The  Committee also desired that 
DGCA should tighten t he norms set for the Government recognized private flying 
training institutes.  
 

17 
 
1.20. The Ministry of Civil Aviation stated  in response that DGCA grants approval to 
Flying Training Organizations on meeting the requirements i.e. manpower, 
infrastructure as  per CAR Section 7 Series D Part I, and that as per CAR section 7 
series D part II DGCA has a system for Safety Oversight and Surveillance of Flying 
training Institutes. Through this system DGCA is keeping strict vigil on the quality of 
training, human resources & infrastructure requirements. 
 
1.21. When asked to indicate the action taken on assessing and upgrading the existing 
infrastructure at various Government Training Institutes to stop the exodus of Indian 
citizens to foreign training inst itute, the Ministry stated on 16.04.2013 that DGCA has 
started monitoring the training imparted abroad. Trainees who undergo such training 
abroad have to necessarily clear examinations in India before obtaining conversion of 
license. 
 
1.22.  The C ommittee are constra ined to point out that the Ministry ha ve not 
indicated the steps / measures taken to augment the  existing  infrastructure for 
imparting  training  for civil aviation personnel such as pilo ts, cabin crew, 
engineers,  and ground staff,  thus  ensuring that the civil aviation sector,  which 
is growing at 15% per annum and whose  requirement of skilled manpower is 
expected to be three times than that of the current strength by 2020 do es  not 
suffer from lack of availability of skilled manpower. The Committee, therefore , 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and require the Ministry to apprise them 
of the concrete steps taken o r proposed to be taken to augment the training 
infrastructure to fulfill the skilled  Personnel requirement for meeting the 
projected growth of c ivil aviation in the country. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should furnish details of number of accredited/recognized Airline 
Transport and Commercial Pilots training institutes, training institutes operating 
without valid  license and the fee charged by these institutes for training 
purposes. The Committee also desire that details of the training institutes 
operating without valid licenses be displayed on the website of the 
DGCA/Ministry of Civil Aviation.   

18 
 
 
                                  E.  Helicopter services and Heliports   
                                     Recommendation (sl. no. 14) 
1.23. Drawing attention on the issue of safety in helicopter services , the Committee  
endorsed the need for commencement of helicopter services  for medical evacuation  at 
affordable prices at national level and the consequent requirement for building helipads in 
major Government Hospitals and heliports in metro cities  for the purpose. The Committee 
expressed hope that the Ministry has initiated action in the matter. Further they desired to 
know the progress of the heliports in four metros as on date, particularly in Delhi, for which 
Rs 7 Crore was allocated. The Committee further note d that while the Strategy Plan 2010-
15 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation lays emphasis on increasing the fleet of helicopters and 
exploring new sectors, no plan to increase the skilled personnel to man helicopter services 
was in place. The Committee recommended for inclusion of the same in the Strategy plan 
of the Ministry.   
 
1.24.  The Ministry in their action taken reply   stated inter-alia,  that  apart from 47 
helicopters owned by Pawn Hans Helicopter Ltd,  22 new helicopters and 2 sea planes are 
planned to be acquired during XII plan period by the company. In addition, the plan outlay  
for capital asset  creation by C entral Ministries covered purchase of 249 helicopters and 
10 seaplanes as well as creation of suitable infrastructure  of city port, heliport and training 
centres  for the same ,  at a  total cost of 1030 crore . Relevant details pertaining to 
DoNER, M/o Tourism and M/o Home affairs were provided. The Ministry sated that   the 
distribution of the proposed 249 Nos of helicopters adequately covers provision of services 
for Disaster Management/NDMA, Medivac (NHAI and others) etc.   
 
1.25. The Committee note that the Ministry have not given information as to whether 
or not the budgetary allocation of Rs. 7 crore made during FY 2011-12 was utilized  
for construction of heliport in Delhi.  Further, there is nothing in the reply about  
inclusion of manpower augmentation to man helicopter services in their strategy 
plan (2012-17) recommended by the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 

19 
 
their earlier recommendation and expect the Ministry to furnish the information at 
the earliest.   
                                                F.  Deployment of CAT III System   
                                          Recommendation (sl. no. 16) 
1.26. Emphasizing the need for up gradation of infrastructure at various airports for better 
air traffic management, the Committee desired, inter- alia, to be apprised of the status of 
the implementation of ambitious, Rs 774 crore GAGAN (GPS aides Geo Augmented 
Navigation) project with ISRO . Further they urged the  Ministry to acquire all necessary 
modern technologies and equipment and streamline the procedure for air traffic 
management.  Pointing out that the Instrument  Landing System (ILS) are of CAT -I level at 
most of the airports in the country they strongly urged the Ministry to upgrade the same at 
all the airports. The Committee further  pointed out that in spite  of ILS CAT -III system 
installed at Delhi Airport, there are still long delays experienced during every winter 
season. The Committee thus were convinced of the need to improve the air  traffic 
management system. They recommended that the Ministry should also ensure tha t all 
airlines deploy CAT - III trained pilots, particularly during the fog period to ensure on time 
arrivals and departures. 
 
1.27. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in its  action taken reply dated 21.01.2013 to the above 
mentioned recommendations  provided the status of GAGAN project and stated that when 
operational it will improve safety at these airports which are not equipped with ILS. It also 
stated that at present CAT II Instrument Landing System is available at Amritsar, Lucknow 
and Kolkata Airports and CAT  III Instrument Landing System is available at IGI Airport, 
Delhi on RWY 11, RWY 28 & RWY 29. 
 
1.28.   As the  GAGAN Project is likely to be formally commissioned by June, 2013, 
the Committee desire to be apprised of the status of its aviation use in due course. 
However, the Ministry’s reply is silent on the Committees’ specific recommendation 
on deployment CAT - III trained pilots  by all airlines particularly  during the fog 
period, to  ensure arrivals  and departures  on time . The Committee hope that 

20 
 
necessary action has been taken in this regard . The Committee would like to be 
informed of the same.  
  

21 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The civil aviation sector in India has come a long way in the last 100 years of its 
existence and growth. From a solely Government regulated area, it has transformed 
into a more open and liberalized sector with several prominent private players in the 
field. Currently India is considered among the largest aviation markets of the world. In 
this context, the committee note that around 140 million passengers were handled by 
the Indian Airports in the year 2010, which may increase upto 420 million by the year 
2020, thus becoming the third largest market in the world. 
Such growth prospects have posed several challenges too. The committee note 
that the Ministry of Civil Aviation is striving to face these challenges as well as achieve 
the desired growth rate for the aviation  sector in the coming years through various 
measures. Infrastructure development to meet the future growth in air traffic has been 
given priority with construction projects of 15 'Greenfield' airports. Modernization of 64 
metro and non -metro airports is cu rrently being undertaken to augment capacity and 
facilities at these airports. Economic regulation of the sector as well as protection of 
consumers' interests has also emerged as an area of crucial importance. Further, the 
Committee also note the steps tak en by the Ministry in liberalizing capacity 
enhancement/ traffic rights by the allowing domestic airlines to fly to International 
destinations and to have alliances with various foreign airlines to serve a bigger 
market. 
However, despite these positive signals, the committee find it extremely 
distressing that the National Carriers, Air India is fast losing its dominant market 
position and has accumulated huge outstanding debts amounting to over Rs.40,850 
crore, as in Decem ber 2010. The committee further learnt during the course of the 
examination that the national Carrier has negative net worth and is in deep financial 

22 
 
trouble to the extent that it is unable to meet even its own expenditure and needs 
unprecedented Government support to remain afloat as an airline company. 
As regard the functioning of others aviation related bodies, the Committee feel 
that the reports of fake pilots flying aircraft, unpaid pilots refusing to fly and near 
misses of air mishaps have severely de nted the credibility of the Directorate General 
of Civil Aviation (DGCA), the aviation regulator. Even some of the leading private 
airlines have started facing financial crunch. Overall, the Indian aviation scenario 
seems quite bleak. In this backdrop, the  Committee feel that there is an urgent need 
for finding practical solutions and deft handling of the Indian Aviation sector. It is high 
time that the aviation regulators improved their functioning too. The subsequent 
paragraphs deal with various issues as sociated with the subject and the Committee's 
observations and recommendations on the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
This is a statement of fact. The main reasons for the Air India losses are as under: 
1. Unprecedented increase in fuel prices. 
2.   Increase in interest and depreciation cost due to the addition of new fleet 
3.   Increase in staff cost as a result of implementation of wage agreement. 
4.   Decrease in revenue on account of extreme competition and entry of Low Cost 
Carriers. 
5.  Global recessi on as a result of which reduced travel on both domestic and 
international sectors. 
The aviation industry in general is under great financial stress on account of 
unprecedented increase in the fuel prices over the past few years. The aviation 
industry is ca pital intensive and the returns/margins on capital invested is very low.  
Hence any changes in the cost structure influence the industry to a substantial extent.  
In India the price of fuel is 70% more for domestic supplies than the neighbouring 
countries.  This has an adverse impact on the operating economics of the airline. 
The Government has approved a Turn Around Plan (TAP) and a Financial 
Restructuring Plan (FRP) of Air India which inter -alia envisage additional equity 
investment in Air India by Govt. of India over a period of 10 years.  The equity infusion 

23 
 
would be incumbent AI achieving specific milestones in terms of load factors, yield and 
on time performance.  With these measures Air India is likely to emerge EBITDA 
positive in 2012-13, cash positive in 2018 and PAT positive in 2020. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 The Committee note from the deposition of the Ministry that the Government of 
India does not follow the open skies policy, which allows unrestricted access by any 
foreign carrier into the sovereign territory of a country without any written agreement 
specifying capacity, ports of call or schedule of service. Presently the Government 
regulates international destination/ travel through bilateral agreements, as is the 
practice followed by the European Union, UK, USA, Japan, Australia and countries in 
South Eastern Asia. The Committee do understand the demerits of allowing 
unrestricted access of any foreign carriers into the sovereign territory of our country 
particularly in the light of an increased threat of terrorist activities. At the same times, 
they are constrained to note that inspite of having bilateral agreements with 108 
countries, India has air connectivity with just half the number, i.e. around 53 countries. 
The Ministry has  attributed it to the commercial judgments based on market demand, 
viability of operations, flow of traffic etc. The Committee have leant that the Ministry 
had formal and informal bilateral talks with 27 countries in the year 2010 on mutual 
aviation relations, which include countries with witnessing heavy air travel by Indians, 
for instance,  Malaysia, Hongkong, USA, Canada and Singapore. The Ministry, in their 
deposition before the Committee, had taken the stand that the Government does not 
interfere in commercial matters of airlines of any country . Still one cannot lose sight of 
the fact that air travel for business or leisure is gaining good momentum all over the 
world. The committee, accordingly desire that the Ministry should work out the 
modalities of establishing air connectivity with the remaining 55 countries and improve 
connectivity at least in the profitable routes. The Committee feel that even if the routes/ 
destinations cannot be serviced by the National Carrier at present, the same should be 
made available to scheduled carriers/ foreign airlines judiciously in order to improve 
tourism, trade and other bilateral activities with foreign countries. In this connections, it 
is understood that recently the Government has decided that the 'right of fir st refusal' 

24 
 
enjoyed by the National Carrier so far, will cease to exist for all foreign routes or 
bilateral agreements signed between India and other countries. As a result, now all 
domestic carriers will be allowed to use bilateral trade rights to fly to foreign countries. 
The Committee feel that it is a step in the right direction and would impress upon the 
Ministry to utilize the bilateral agreements to the optimum for overall benefit of the 
aviation sector and the subsequent impact on other sectors like  tourism and industry. 
They would like to be apprised of the Government's decisions and plans during this 
fiscal with regard to establishing air connectivity with countries with whom formal 
negotiations are underway, and result thereof. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry grants traffic rights to the eligible Indian carriers based on their requests 
and availability of such rights. The Ministry has granted additional traffic rights to the 
Indian carriers on this basis for the Summer & Winter 2012, aft er giving due 
consideration to the operational plans of Air India up to summer 2013. This would 
increase the utilization of bilateral traffic rights by the Indian carriers and improve 
connectivity. 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government dated 16.04.2013 
 
(i)  Ministry of Civil Aviation requested Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to forward 
copy of model Air Service Agreements (ASAs) to the countries with whom there was 
no Bilateral Agreement in air services matters. MEA has forwarded the ASA to the 
countries as per list below: 
COUNTRIES WHOM MEA HAS SENT ASA 
1. Argentina  2. Bahamas 3. Belize  
4. Bolivia 5. Burundi 6. Guatemala  
7. Costa Rica  8. Cuba  9. Haiti  
10. El Salvador 11.  Peru 12. Panama  
13. Venezuela 14. Grenada  15. Uruguay  
16. Paraguay  17. Guyana  18. Nicaragua 

25 
 
  However, MEA does not favour signing of ASAs „en masse‟ with the West 
African countries (list given below). MEA is of the view that even in countries in West 
Africa with which India has ASA, no aviation activity has been noticed. In their view, 
proceeding to sign such ASA should be done in cases which offer us potential value 
addition. 
COUNTRIES WHOM MEA HAS NOT SENT ASA 
 
1. Congo  2. Mali 
3. Côte d‟Ivoire 4. Mauritania  
5. Equatorial Guinea 6. Guinea-Bissau  
7. Liberia  8. Monaco 
9. Niger  10. Angola  
11. Sao Tome and Principe 12. Benin  
13. Togo  14. Cape Verde 
15. Somalia  16. Central African 
Republic 
17. Chad 18. Gabon  
 
(ii) Ministry of Civil Aviation has a planned Scheme viz. „ Enhancing competitiveness of 
Indian carriers in international operations & aviation studies‟ . During 2011 -12, the 
Ministry has signed/initialled ASA with Indonesia, Brazil, Uganda, Jamaica, Korea, 
Dominical Republic, Trinidad and Tobago. Further, MoU were signed with Sri Lanka, 
Afghanistan, Slovenia, Singapore, Australia, Switzerland, Austria, Ethiopia, Finland, 
Uganda, Czech Repu blic, Korea, Kenya, Mozambique, Sri Lanka. Apart from above 
Agreed Minutes were signed with Sri Lanka, Italy, ASEAN, Canada, USA, Lao PDR, 
Nigeria, Botswana, Malaysia, and Macedonia. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
Access to funds is a critical iss ue for the aviation industry, with most domestic 
airlines registering huge losses in 2011 -12. The Committee note that Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) for airport development in Greenfield Projects and Brownfield 

26 
 
Projects is 100 percent through the automati c and the FIPB (Foreign Investment 
Promotion Board) routes respectively. However, as regards FDI in domestic scheduled 
passenger Airlines, only foreign financial and non - airline investors can invest upto 49 
percent in Indian Airlines, as on date. In this connection, the Committee note that while 
presenting Union Budget (20012 -13) in the Parliament on 16th March 2012, the 
Finance Minister has announced that a proposal to allow foreign airlines to participate 
upto 49 percent in the equity of an air transport  undertaking engaged in operation of 
scheduled and non -scheduled air transport services is under active consideration of 
the Government. 
The Committee do not see any valid reasons for maintaining a cap on the FDI 
in domestic scheduled passenger airlines sector to 49 percent by foreign investors and 
100 percent by a Non - Resident Indian (NRI). The cap for FDI is 74 percent in 
passenger/chartered flights and cargo and 100 percent by NRIs with no direct or 
indirect participation by any foreign airlines in passenger/chartered airlines. 
The Committee considers that such a cap is limiting the growth of aviation 
sector in India. The benefits of opening up the passenger airlines sector for investment 
by foreign airline companies are manifold. Apart from addressing t he shortage of 
funds, this would help raise the level of services for the consumer and promote healthy 
competition. The Committee are of the opinion that in a business environment, healthy 
competition ensures optimum level of services for consumers. They, therefore, would 
like to be apprised of the final decision of the Government on the matter concerning 
the ceiling on FDI as the same has already been under active consideration of the 
Government this fiscal. At the same time, the Committee would stress tha t FDI cannot 
be the sole solution to the Indian aviation sector's debt problems and a holistic 
approach is required not only to attract funds towards it but also bring down the 
colossal losses being suffered by it year after year. No doubt, the problem nee ds 
immediate attention and the Committee would like to be apprised of the decisions 
taken in this regard at the earliest. 
        
 
 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
   Earlier FDI upto 49% in domestic scheduled passenger airlines was allowed by 
foreign investors by  not by the foreign airlines. Despite friendly FDI framework for 
civil aviation sector, free flow of capital had not been witnessed due to lack of interest 
by non aviation private equity funds in a risky business like airlines. This was 
considered by the G overnment and now the, foreign airlines are also allowed to 
invest in the capital of Indian carriers operating scheduled and non -scheduled air 
transport services up to 49% of their paid up capital. Such investment would be 
subject to certain conditions. Th e purpose of removing the existing restriction on 
investment by foreign airlines is to bring in strategic investors. The prospective 
investors can now be from the civil aviation industry itself, who may derive benefits of 
synergy. It will be one of the too ls available to ailing airlines to access capital from 
abroad.  
 Deptt. of Industrial Policy and Promotion has already issued Press Note No. 6 
(2012 Series) on 20.9.2012 allowing investment by foreign airlines to invest in the 
capital of Indian carries, operating scheduled  and non -scheduled air transport 
services, up to the limit 49% of their paid-up capital subject to certain conditions.  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
The Committee note that the Airport Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) 
has been established to act as the economic regulator for all airports in the country to 
determine tariffs, other airport charges and development fees including the User 
Development Fee (UDF) for aeronautical services and also to monitor the performance 
standards of 13 major airports. With regard to UDF, the Committee note that the 
concerned license may levy and collect the same under the rules. However no 
methodology has been prescribed in the Aircraft Rules for determining the User 
Development Fee and is determined on case-to-case basis. 
The UDF is recovered directly from the passengers. In this connection, from the 
information furnished to them, the Committee noted that two airports at Udaipur and 
Vizag are not charging any UDF from international customers while charging it from 
domestic travellers. The Committee fail to compre hend the logic behind it, particularly 

28 
 
for Udaipur, which is a favourite tourist destination of high -profile international 
travellers category on whom UDF ought to be levied. Besides, Delhi and Mumbai 
Airport are reported to be charging 'advance developmen t fee' albeit there is a huge 
variation in the fee being charged by both. The Committee would desire to be apprised 
both the reasons for charging an 'advance' fee from passengers. As the amount of 
levy is subject to periodic review by AERA, the Committee d esire that AERA should  
review these issues and issue suitable directions with a view to streamlining the  
system. The Committee may also be apprised of the same. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The power to levy and collect Development Fee (Airport Development  Fee) is 
incorporated in section 22A of AAI Act, as per which the AAI may, - 
"…………………..  
 
(ii) Levy on, and collect, from the embarking passengers at major airport referred to 
in clause (h) of section 2 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of Indi a Act, 
2008 the development fees at the rate as may be determined under clause (b) of sub -
section (1) of section 13 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 
2008, and such fees shall be credited to the Authority and shall be regulated an d 
utilized in the prescribed manner, for the purposes of - 
(a) Funding or financing the costs of Upgradation, expansion or development of the 
airport at which the fees is collected; or 
(b) Establishment or development of a new airport in lieu of the airport referred to in 
clause (a); or 
(c) Investment in the equity in respect to shares to be subscribed by the Authority 
in companies engaged in establishing, owing, developing, operating or maintaining a 
private airport in lieu of the airport referred to in cl ause (a) or advancement of loans to 
such companies or other persons engaged in such activities." 
 

29 
 
 
Hence, AAI may levy and collect development fee embarking passengers at a 
major airport at the rates as may be determined by the Authority (Section 22A  (ii) of 
the AAI Act. 
As per AERA Act 2008, AERA is mandated to carry out certain functions, one of 
which is determination of Development fees under section 13 (1) (b) of the AERA Act 
with Section 22A of the AAI Act, 1994. However, the Development fees (re ferred to as  
Advance Development Fee by the Committee) is a capital receipt (which is colloquially 
called Airport Development Fee), and is a pre -financing measure, a measure of last 
resort and is permitted only if all available means of finance are inadeq uate to fund the 
project.   
Regarding levy of DF at Delhi and Mumbai airports, it is stated that the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation (i.e., MoCA) determined the rate of airport development fee in respect 
of Delhi airport in February, 2009 vide letter no. AV.240 11/002/2008-AD dated 
09.02.2009, @ Rs. 200/ - per departing domestic passenger and @ Rs.1300/ - per 
departing international passengers.  Further, vide letter no. AV.24011/001/2009 -AD 
dated 27.02.2009, development fee in respect of Mumbai airport was determin ed by 
MoCA @ Rs. 100/ - per departing domestic passenger and @ Rs. 600/ - per departing 
international  passenger. This was done by the Government as AERA had not become 
functional by than.  However, this levy was challenged before various appellate fora 
and finally the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order and judgment dated 26.4.2011 in the 
CA No. 3611 of 2011 ( copy enclosed as Annexure-I) ordered MIAL to stop levy and 
collection of DF & held as under: 
"(i) We hold that development fees could not be levied and co llected by the lessees 
of the two major airport, namely, DIAL and MIAL, on the authority of the two letters 
dated 09.02.2009 and 27.02.2009 of the Central Government from the embarking 
passengers under the provisions of Section 22A of the 1994 Act. 
(ii) We declare that with effect from 01.01.2009, no development fees could be 
levied or collected from the embarking passengers at major airports under Section 22A 
of the 1994 Act, unless the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority determines the 
rates of such development fee. 

30 
 
(iii) We direct that MIAL will henceforth no levy and collect any development fee at 
the major airport at Mumbai until an approprirate order is passed by the Airports 
Economic Regulatory Authority under Section 22A of the 1994 Act as amended  by the 
2008 Act.  
(iv) We direct that DIAL and MIAL will account to the Airports authority the 
development fee collected pursuant to the two letters dated 09.02.2009 and 
27.02.2009 of the Central Government and the Airports Authority will ensure that the 
development fees levied and collected by DIAL and MIAL have been utilized for the 
purposes mentioned in clause (a) of Section 22A of the 1994 Act. 
 
Thus, as per the SC Order dated 26.4.2011, the levy of DF was upheld and it 
was ordered that no DF can be le vied or collected the enabling passengers at major 
airports unless the AERA determines the rate of such DF. Subsequently, the levy of 
DF at Delhi airport was stayed by the Delhi High Court vide its order and judgment 
dated 1.06.2011 in the matter of WP No.  3889/2011 ( copy enclosed as      
Annexure-II). 
Thereafter, on an application from Delhi airport, AERA issued a Consultation 
Paper No.02/2011-12 dated 21.04.2011 for levy of DF at Delhi airport.  The Authority 
also held a consultation meeting with the stak eholders.  After considering the 
submissions of the Delhi airport as well as that of various stakeholders, the Authority 
decided that an amount of Rs. 3415.35 crores  is required to be collected through DF 
to bridge the funding gap of the Delhi airport project.  The rates of levy of DF were also 
determined @ Rs. 600/ - per departing domestic passenger and Rs. 1300/ - per 
departing international passenger (copy of the Order No. 28/2011 -12 dated 
14.11.2011 is annexed as (Annexure - III). 
In the case of Mumbai a irport, upon receipt of application for determination of 
DF, the Authority, after due stakeholder consultation, determined an amount of Rs. 
872 crores to be funded through in order to bridge the funding gap of the project. The 
rate of DF was also determine d at Rs. 100/ - per departing domestic passenger and 
Rs. 600/ - per departing international passenger vide order no 02/2012 -13 dated 
18.04.2012 is annexed as Annexure-IV.  

31 
 
The rates of DF in respect of Delhi and Mumbai airports were kept at the same 
level as were earlier determined by MoCA as the Authority had observed that these 
rates had been successfully implemented at the two airports during the earlier 
currency of the levy. Further, as stated supra, as per AAI Act, 1994, DF can be levied 
and collected fo r the purposes of funding or financing the cost of development, 
upgradation, expansion etc. of an airport at which such development fee is collected.  
As there were funding gaps in the means of finance for Delhi and Mumbai airports, the 
Authority determined the amount of ADF to bridge this funding gap as a measure of 
last resort under section 13(1)(b) of the AERA Act read with section 22A of the AAI 
Act.  
Regarding the non -levy of UDF on international passengers at Udaipur and 
Vizag airports, it is submitte d that at the time of tariff fixation, these airports were not 
declared as international airports and hence the question of levy of DF on international 
passengers did not arise. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
The Committee are pained to note tha t the National Carrier has suffered 
irreparable damage due to multiple issues which inter -alia include incomplete merger 
of the erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines businesses, surplus and unproductive 
aged contract staff, skyrocketing fuel prices, stro ng competitors, non-availability of the 
required number of Boeing 787 wide -bodied aircraft for its international operations etc. 
Consequently, the company has gone into a severe crisis and its performance is far 
from satisfactory. As all the Public Sector Undertakings are required to sign  an MoU 
with the Government so that their performance could be monitored constantly, the 
Committee would like to be apprised about the MoU, if any, signed between the Air 
India Limited and the Government as well as steps taken by the Government to ensure 
that the overall expenditure of the company does not accumulate into such a gigantic 
debt burden. Further, the Committee are surprised to note the imbalance in its staff 
structure as on the one hand Air India has surplus st aff in terms of ground handling, 
ground transport and back office functions as started by the then CMD, Air India, on 

32 
 
the other, it has shortage of skilled personnel in terms of pilots, cabin crew and 
engineers. Out of 27,738 employees, only 1518 are pilots. The Committee have further 
been informed that the aircraft to personnel ratio of Air India is 1:226, which  is three 
times as compared to the  international standards. The Agreements with Employees 
Union are also understood to be affecting the efficienc y of the National Carriers and 
obstructing its effecting the efficiency of the National Carriers and obstructing its efforts 
to respond positively to the fast changing business environment. Besides, even after 
five years of the integration of Air India and  Indian Airlines, their merger is still not 
complete due to which the issue of pay parity has not been resolved. As on date, only 
71 percent of the merger is complete. As far as integration of HR is concerned, out of 
30 critical activities, only 10 are com pleted and rest are in progress. The Committee 
are convinced that lack of foresight, initiative and proper planning by the Government 
is responsible for the dismal state of affairs in Air India. Before embarking upon the 
merger of the two separate business  entities, the Government should have devised 
clear-cut ways to address the issues relating to employees of the two airlines and 
prepared a meticulous plan of action as well as a contingency plan on merging Airlines 
with two different cultures by studying the merger of several Airlines the world over. 
The Committee are aware that recently the three member panel headed by justice 
Dharmadhikari (appointed by the Ministry to streamline wages), has submitted its 
report to the Government. The Committee hope that  their recommendations would be 
implemented expeditiously for setting the salary issue of employees. The Committee 
feel that grievances of the employees need to be settled fast to make them a 
motivated and productive workforce. The Committee also recommend  that the Ministry 
should look at the structure of Air India, in terms of its aging employees and initiate a 
suitable voluntary retirement scheme for them. Considering the excess of manpower in 
the company, especially the ground support staff, the Committe e suggest that some 
younger surplus employees can be given proper profession training to be redeployed 
in catering and hospitality subsidiaries also. Overall, the Committee urge the Ministry 
to act expeditiously on all legacy issues and help the airline ga in the dominant 
position, it had enjoyed in the past among all domestic Airlines. 

33 
 
In so far as availability of wide -bodied aircraft for augmentation of fleet of Air 
India is concerned, the Committee find that out of 27 B787 aircraft, which were 
expected to  be received by the year 2008, only 7 were delivered till 2011. As the 
competitors in international routes offer better flight experience to travellers with wider 
aircraft, Air India loses customers due to its aging and narrow -bodied aircraft. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for such a long delay by the USA 
based Boeing commercial planes company in delivering the ordered aircraft to India 
and penalties/ compensation imposed on them. They would also like the Ministry to 
apprise them whether the Boeing Company, has actually paid the compensation to the 
Indian Government for the delay. The Committee would also like to know as to how 
many aircraft have been delivered out of the 8 expected this year so far. 
 
Reply of the Government 
MOU: 
The status of MoU between Air India and the Government is as under: 
Year  Remark 
2007-08     MOU signed with DPE on 18 April 2007 
It contained only one line that merger of Air India  
and Indian Airlines into the new company shall be  
completed in 2007-08. The merger was completed in the year and 
National   Aviation Company of India Ltd was formed in 2007 -08.  
 
2008-09      MOU signed and submitted to DPE on 16th April 2009.  
   Composite Score not finalized 
 
2009-10     Draft MOU submitted by AI in September 2010 
      Composite Score not finalized 
   
2010-11       Draft submitted to DPE on 28th October 2010 
Provisional Composite Score of FAIR submitted to DPE on       
29th September 2011 

34 
 
   
2011-12       Draft submitted to DPE on 29th Sep 2011 
 
2012-13     Draft submitted to DPE on 22nd Sep 2012 
     The MoU targets are laid down after approval by the Board and sent to the 
Ministry. These are constantly monitored by the Ministry at frequent intervals through 
review of performan ce of Air India. Apart from this, under the TAP/FRP specific 
milestones have been given to Air India to be achieved over a period of time i.e. up to 
the year 2020.  The achievement of these milestones is regularly monitored by the 
Oversight Committee consi sting of representatives from Finance Ministry, Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, SBI Caps and Air India.  The Government has also taken several other 
measures in order to contain cost viz. operationalisation of subsidiary companies, 
reduction in contractual emp loyment, grounding and disposal of old fleet, induction of 
new fleet on domestic and international routes, providing equity infusion to reduce the 
debt content and so on. 
MANPOWER:- 
 
Consequent upon the merger of erstwhile Indian airlines and Air India, in  order 
to examine the merger related issues like pay parity, level mapping and seniority 
integration of manpower at all levels, the Government had constituted a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Retd. Justice D.M.Dharmadhikari. The Committee 
submitted its report on 31.01.2012 and the recommendations of the Committee have 
since been accepted by the Government. 
The Committee has, inter alia, recommended a comprehensive assessment of 
manpower to determine the number of posts at various levels as per the requ irements 
and the revised organogram for the merged entity to be put in place to avoid over -
staffing and waste of manpower.  For this purpose, Air India had constituted a 
Manpower Restructuring Committee which has since completed its deliberations and 
submitted its report.  In the meantime, Air India has resorted to multi -skilling and 
redeployment of manpower from areas of surplus manpower to areas of critical 
shortages to take care of existing/additional workload with the existing strength. 

35 
 
The number of Pi lots as on 30.09.2012 is 1496 out of a total strength of 25881 
employees. The aircraft to employee ratio varies from airline to airline depending on 
the nature and extent of functions performed in -house as well as the operational 
network of the airline.  While most of the airlines have outsourced majority of their non-
core functions such as Aircraft Major Maintenance activities, Ground Handling 
activities, Vigilance, Transport, Medical, Civil Engineering, etc. and these functions are 
performed in-house by A ir India. The private airlines also do  not maintain manpower 
for dealing with Parliament matters,  Raj Bhasha, Internal Audit, etc. for which Air India 
is required to have dedicated manpower. 
Further, as per the Turn Around Plan and Financial Restructurin g Plan of Air 
India, as approved by the Government, AI proposes to operationalise two subsidiaries, 
namely Air India Engineering Services Ltd. (AIESL) and Air India Air Transport 
Services Ltd. (AIATSL) and hive off MRO, Cargo and Ground Handling activities  to 
them consequently about 15400 employees would get transferred to these 
subsidiaries. It would drastically bring down the number of employees of Air India and 
thus bring down the employee to aircraft ratio below 100. 
 
MERGER:- 
The integration update as on November 2012 is as under:- 
Performance dependency total Completed progress Not initiated 
Operational Integration 123 103 15 5 
Contingent on management 
decisions 
38 33 3 2 
Contingent on IT readiness 35 27 8 0 
Contingent on HR 
Integration decisions 
30 11 29 0 
Total 228 174 45 7 
% Completed  77% 20% 3% 
 
 
 

36 
 
JUSTICE DHARMADHIKARI COMMITTEE: 
The Justice D.M.Dharmadhikari  Committee constituted by the Government 
submitted its report to the Government on 31.01.2012 and has given its 
recommendations broadly in four areas, namely: 
1. Level mapping: 
a) Level mapping for employees of both the Companies has been recommended 
based on pay scales in the erstwhile companies. 
b) The guiding principle of inter -se seniority with length of service in that grade in 
the erstwhile AI and IA except where the promotion is consequent upon passing 
requisite qualifying examination or attaining mandatory c ertification.  In that 
case, the date of passing the examination or attaining the certificate shall be 
determining factor. 
c) In fixing inter-se seniority, a member having longer period of service in either AI 
or IA has to be placed above the member in the sa me grade having lesser 
period of service. 
d) The principle of fixation of inter -se seniority based on length of service in IA or 
AI shall be applied from the date of acquiring qualification or license wherever it 
is a mandatory requirement for career progression. 
 
2. Career Progression: 
a) The Committee has defined the career progression for all employees of the 
company in all departments. 
b) The Committee has recommended a fair and comprehensive promotion policy 
through constitution of Departmental Promotion Committee s (DPC) and each 
DPC will have a fair representative from both the erstwhile companies and will 
also include an outside expert. 
c) The process of promotion will start after fixation of inter se seniority for all 
employees in all departments. 
 
 
 

37 
 
3. Wage and Salary structure:-  
a) Pay scales – the Committee has recommended that here will be uniform pay 
scales for the company for all employees.  For the Executive cadre below 
Board level, pay scales will be as per the DPE guidelines and pay scales for 
below Executive cadre has been harmonized by the Committee. 
b) The pay scales will be effective from 01.04.2007 but no financial implication 
would be applicable retrospectively and the pay in the revised pay scales 
will be fixed from 01.01.2012. 
c) The Committee has recommended a formula for calculation of the Basic Pay 
in the revised pay scales taking into account the gross emoluments 
including part of PLI being paid by the company. 
d) The DPE pay scales as recommended by the Committee will be effective 
01.01.2007.  NACIL is viewed as a new Company, to whom the restrictions 
of profitability would not be made applicable and adopting the DPE pay 
scales would bring the company‟s pay scales in consonance with the DPE 
pay structure for which a Committee has been constituted. 
e) With the revision of pay and allowances in consonance with the DPE 
guidelines, the PLI for all categories will stand abolished.  However, it will be 
subsumed in determination of basic pay to the extent admissible in the DPE 
guidelines.  The Committee has also recommended profit related pay as per 
the DPE guidelines, which will be linked to the profit earned by the company 
and achievements of various targets. 
f) The Committee has recognized the need for certain allowances which are 
given to certain class of em ployees like Pilots, cabin crew and engineers to 
be as per the industry standard.  However, they fall outside the scope of 
DPE guidelines.  This would need an approval of the Union Cabinet before 
these are implemented at variance with DPE guidelines.   
 
4. Other related issues like VRS, Pension scheme, etc. 
The Committee has also recommended that the company put out an attractive 
Voluntary Retirement Scheme with a sizeable proportion of their benefits in the form of 

38 
 
Employment Stock Option scheme.  Further, it  has suggested that the company, in 
view of its severe financial constraints, may approach the Government for financial 
support. 
The recommendations of the Committee have been accepted by the 
Government. 
While seniority integration at the level of EDs and GMs has already been 
completed, the seniority of all levels as on 01.04.2007 has already been 
displayed.  Further, Air India has constituted the following committees for 
carrying out implementation of the same in a smooth and transparent manner. 
i) Implementation & Anomaly Rectification Committee 
ii) Pay Fixation Committee for fixation of salary for each employee within the 
broad guidelines laid down by Justice Dharmadhikari Committee  
iii)  Manpower Restructuring Committee for carrying out a fresh exercise for 
determining the number of posts at various levels as per the requirements of 
the fresh set up with revised hierarchy of posts in the merged entity.  
iv) Committee for supervising activities related to monetizing of properties as 
stipulated in the Turn Around Plan.  
 
DELIVERY OF B787 AIRCRAFT: 
Air India Ltd has signed purchase agreement for 27 B787 aircraft with M/s 
Boeing.   The Purchase Agreement was signed on 30th December 2005. 
The contracted delivery schedule of B787 aircraft were from September, 2008 
to October, 2011.  
The B787 aircraft deliveries have been delayed due to the production problems 
experienced by Boeing. The reasons for the delay are as under: 
 
- Challenges in completing assembly of the first airplane 
- Slower production rate than previously planned 
- Mechanic Strike and fastener installation rework 
- Due to need to reinforce an area within side of body section of aircraft etc., 

39 
 
Air India Board had constituted an Overseeing Committee for negotiating with Boeing 
for B787 aircraft delay compensation. The Delay Settlement has been finalized by the 
Oversight Committee appointed by the Board and approved by GoM. 
The  revised  B787 aircraft delivery schedule is as given below : 
   
Year No. of Acft 
2012 6 
2013 7 
2014 5 
2015 6 
2016 3 
Total 27 
 
 
Now after a prolonged delay, the delivery of the first aircraft took place on       
7th September, 2012. As on date, Air India has received three (3) B787 -8 aircraft from 
M/s. Boeing. 
 
Inflight Service: 
In continuation with various steps taken to turn around the company, a 
Customer Focus Programme has been undertaken whereby the frontline staff/ Cabin 
Crew are being trained to deal with Customers and to develop a customer focused 
behavior that would result in better customer satisfaction and this training is being 
conducted by trained and experience personnel for both the Wide Body and Narr ow 
Body Cabin Crew. 
In order to serve the passengers better, Passenger Suggestion Cards are given 
out to passengers for their valuable comments and in case of passenger complaints, 
immediate corrective action is taken. The Passenger feedback provides insig hts into 
passenger expectations and helps to improve our own services and compete with 
services of other carriers.  

40 
 
Catering-wise both Narrow Body and Wide Body, serve the best food from 
reputed caterers.  It is the USP for both Wide Body and Narrow Body o ver other 
airlines on international routes.   
Inflight Entertainment content on B787 has been updated twice since inception 
and currently AI has the Maximum library of content ever achieved without any extra 
cost, due to the Holdover Content clause in the new contract. The total number of 
Movies in itself stands at 172 and the break up is provided below. 
 
Movie-172  
 
04 Latest Hollywood, 08 Classic Hollywood, 93 Hindi, 67 Regional  
 
Short Subject Content - 74  
 
50 English, 18 Hindi, 03 Cartoons, 03 Stories,  
 
14 Hindi Music Videos, 95 Audio CD Albums, 20 Games Interactive.  
 
Graphic User Interface (GUI) for the B787 is user friendly & bi-lingual - Hindi & 
English. 
Hollywood Movies can be accessed on the Graphic User Interface in four languages - 
English, French, German & Japanese. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
The Committee are distressed to note that despite being in the industry for 60 
years, Air India Ltd. has completely lost its dominant position to private airlines due to 
severe financial cris is. It has accumulated a working capital debt to the tune of Rs 
22,000 crore, as on November 2011. Further, the operating loss of Air India per day 
has been Rs 21 crore. Apart from these staggering figures, the Committee also note 
that Air India was at an unenviable 6th position in terms of non -time performance 

41 
 
among the scheduled airlines of the country in the year 2010 which in itself is enough 
to trigger its decline in terms of market share and profitability. 
Furthermore, the Committee note that the debt  equity ratio of Air India is more 
than 40:1 as compared to the industry standards of 5:1. They are very disappointed 
that the net worth of Air India is negative owing to its inability to even meet its daily 
expenses as well. The Committee have been informed that the yield per seat kilometer 
for the Financial year 2010 has decreased by 13 percent as compared to 2009 and 
that it has exhausted the Rs 20,000 crore working capital. The government of India 
has been constantly infusing fresh equities amounting to  crores of rupees into Air 
India, latest being Rs 3200 crore particularly for its salary components, yet it has not 
made much of a difference to the overall financial health of the company .  An 
estimated Rs 30,231 crore equity is still required in the nex t 10 years, as per the 
Turnaround Plan. The Committee fail to understand as to how the Situation was 
allowed to deteriorate to this extent despite the fact that Air India was once a show 
piece PSU and a matter of pride for the Government. Appointing a new chief 
Operating Officer for the National Carrier could not help the airline a bit. The Ministry 
had argued that several airlines of other countries have also experienced decline, 
nonetheless the Committee feel that the fall of Air India has been really steep.  
The Committee cannot help but opine that unscrupulous and vested interests 
have worked overtime to suck the life out of this public enterprise. Failure to check its 
deterioration is nothing but utter callousness on the part of the Government too.  
 
Reply of the Government 
GoI has laid down several operational parameters/benchmark which the 
company has to achieve in terms of on time performance, load factors, yield and 
monetisation of properties.  These parameters are likely to improve the operational 
performance of Air India considerably.  AI‟s performance is being monitored by the 
Ministry very closely. As a result of this, the on -time performance of AI has become 
about 85%, which is next only to Indigo Airlines.  The number of  
 
 

42 
 
 
passengers carried per day has also significantly improved. It crossed 50,000 on a 
particular day.   
 
The debt equity ratio of the company was very high due to its abysmally low 
equity base of Rs.145 crores. However, with the infusion of additional equity in the last 
3 years, by the Govt. of India, the paid -up capital of Air India is Rs.7345 crores (as of 
Nov. 10, 2012) and as such, its debt equity ratio is now 4:1.   
 
As regards yield, Air India‟s current results show an improvement in yield for 
April/September 2012 as compared to same period last year as  indicated below:- 
 
 
 Apr/Sep. 2011 
Prov. 
Apr/Sep. 2012 % Variation 
Yield per 
RPKM in Rs. 
3.43 4.31 25.7 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
The Committee are utterly disappointed that a 'Turnaround Plan' prepared with 
much consultations initially failed to convince the lenders to convert 40 percent of Air 
India's total debt into equity and the situation came back to square one. They are 
aware that the Government has begun consultations all over again on a fresh loan 
restructuring plan alongwith SBI Caps, the advisor to Air India. In this connection, the 
Committee feel that the Banks should not have been forced to agree to a plan which 
was detri mental to their own growth particularly in present economic and financial 
scenario world wide. Besides, converting part of a loan into equity cannot rid Air India 
of its entire debt burden therefore the Committee feel that Air India should be given at 
least interest free loan to partially ease the situation. 

43 
 
The Committee, therefore, hope that the Ministry might have by now come up 
with a viable turnaround plan which is agreed to by the lenders. Besides, since the 
Government is solely responsible for the Co mpany's financial woes, it should not shy 
away from taking care of the interest liability on its loan, and payments for acquiring 
new fleet, if the company is to stay afloat. Recently, a panel set up by the Group of 
Ministers on the issue has reportedly re commended the Government to consider 
selling a part of its stake in Air India to strategic partner too, apart from infusing further 
equity into the ailing entity. Monetisation of some of the key assets/properties of Air 
India is also being considered. The Committee would like to be apprised of the final 
decisions taken on the issue. The Committee also suggest that all routes being 
serviced by Air India as a matter of policy and having lower load factors than required, 
be subsidized by Government of India to the extent of the operating cost of the flight to 
cut down Air India's losses. The Committee would like the Ministry to submit a detailed 
note to them on the financial restructuring exercise as well as the results achieved at 
the earliest. As an Expert Co mmittee has already been examining various options for 
financial revival of Air India Limited, the Committee desire that their views may be 
conveyed to them. The Committee hope that any financial restructuring exercise 
suggested by the said Committee would  be strictly time -bound since much delay has 
already occurred resulting in an unprecedented damage to the overall image and 
financial health of Air India. They also desired to be apprised of the recommendations 
made by the said Expert Committee in this regard. 
The Committee also feel that Air India should revisit its expenses judiciously 
and weed out unnecessary expenditure to augment its financial condition till a decision 
on the debt restructuring is reached and the plan is implemented on ground. Though 
the company would still run in losses for few more years, yet the Ministry has 
expressed confidence that it would experience positive growth from the Financial Year 
2018. The Committee have been apprised that using Delhi airport as a hub, acquiring 
Boeing 787 aircraft for its capacity enhancement, setting up of cargo infrastructure etc. 
are some of the significant steps taken by Air India to match the growth in aviation 
sector. They desire that the Government should give maximum attention to ensure that 
Air India performs better in the year to come. 

44 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Financial Restructuring Plan of Air India has been approved by the lenders 
and the Government on 12 th April 2012 and the salient features of the same are as 
under: 
 On Time Performance moving from 71.7% to 75% to 85% to 90% within 
two years. 
 Passenger Load factors reaching 73% by 2015 and moving to 75% by 
2020. 
 Yields steadily increasing from Rs. 3.41 per pkm to Rs. 3.86 per pkm by 
FY 2020 excluding increases due to fuel increase. 
 Aircraft Utilization to be achieved as given in the TAP which is as per 
Industry benchmarks. 
 PLI only after PBT is generated. 
 MRO/GH to be hived off in current year. 
 Asset Monetization to be planned and initiated. 
 IT systems like PSS and Sabre to be totally functional. 
 Routewise analysis and planning to be in position before induction of 
aircraft. 
 VRS package to be worked out in 3 months. 
 Professionalize CTE in Hyderabad within a year. 
 Bring down cash losses on day to day basis. 
 
Under the TAP, the lenders have agreed to convert Rs.10448 crores into long 
term working capital, Rs.3650 crores by way of cash credit arrangement and Rs.7400 
crores to be repaid to different banks by issue of nonconvertible debentures.  This will 
reduce t he interest burden of Air India going forward and would also provide 
necessary relief to Air India in the repayment of its loans.   
In the process of financial restructuring, banks have not suffered any major 
losses and they have only made marginal provisi oning in their books as a result of the 

45 
 
restructuring.  The Government has already been approached for infusion of equity in 
Air India so as to reduce the debt burden. 
Monetisation of property: 
It is true that monetisation of certain properties would bring  in a financial 
resource which could be used for repayment of long term loans.  The company has 
already appointed Property Consultants to review its properties in India and abroad 
and to suggest a road map for the monetisation of the same. 
Route rationalization: 
AI‟s capacities have been deployed on the routes that have the maximum traffic 
potential both in the domestic and international markets.  
The routes that Air India operates are commercially viable. It may be added that 
Air India being the network ca rrier generates feeds on its flights from different points 
on its network. As such profitability of any one of the flights cannot be considered in 
isolation while deciding the commercial viability.  
The airline industry in general and AI in particular has come under the 
onslaught of steep increase in ATF prices. 
On the domestic front the revenues have been under pressure in view of 
increasing competition especially from the increasingly popular LCC  services on 
domestic and regional international sectors which meant that AI had to match the low 
fares offered by the LCC airlines on these routes.  
The combined impact of these pressures was declining profitability owing to 
increasing costs and declining revenues and yields. 
AI‟s domestic network is also determined significantly by the socio -economic 
obligations placed on the airline owing to its Government ownership. Arising from this, 
AI‟s capacities tend to be thinly spread over on a more wide spread n etwork. As such, 
the airline does deploy more capacity on remote and sensitive sectors to a much 
greater extent than mandated by the DGCA. For instance, AI‟s capacities on routes to 
North-East, J & K, Port Blair, etc are nearly double of what is mandated u nder the 
Route Dispersal Guidelines of the Ministry. These capacities could perhaps be 
more gainfully deployed elsewhere in the domestic market.  

46 
 
With reference to International operations the revenue increases achieved by 
AI have not been quite adequate t o cover the increase in the cost of operations which 
has gone up significantly mainly due to steep increases in the cost of ATF. There has 
been pressure on yields and the main reason for this has been recession in the global 
economy, competition from Indian and foreign carriers etc. 
 
It may be mentioned that AI systematically monitors the performance of various 
routes through analysis of the following key parameters: 
 
 load factors on each of the services & for the network 
 sector-wise carriage & network carriage  
 Average yields - city pair-wise & network 
 Revenues - city pair-wise & network 
 passenger market share – city pair-wise & market-wise 
 competitors‟ activities  
o capacities – city pair-wise 
o future capacity induction & deployment plans  
o yields & PLF  
o cost structure 
 Route Economics   
 Costs flight-wise & network 
 
Based on its analysis, the airline has initiated many scheduling/network related 
initiatives to improve its services, increase revenues & reduce costs by rationalizing 
operations on many routes, varying  the capacity / frequency of services offered on 
some of the routes based on demand seasonality, restructuring / rescheduling & 
withdrawing services on some of the routes, changing type of aircraft deployed, 
introducing new services, etc in line wi th the AI‟s long term network strategy & 
pressures to improve profitability of operations in the short term. 
A report showing the achievements of the company against the milestone set 
by the Government of India is enclosed at Annexure ‘V„. 

47 
 
Expert Committee views/recommendations: 
A Turn Around Plan (TAP)/ Financial Restructuring Plan (FRP) was presented 
by Air India/Ministry of Civil Aviation to the Group of Ministers (GoM) on June 22, 
2012. The GoM  decided the Group of Officers in the Finance Ministry would examine 
the TAP /FRP and furnish their recommendations/observations. The Group of Officers 
examined various scenario under which Air India could operate in future and came up 
with the set of reco mmendations/milestones which Air India should achieve over a 
period of time.  A copy of the GoO report dated 28.10.2011 is enclosed at Annexure 
‘VI‘.  The report was later accepted by the GoM which in turn referred the same to 
CCEA for approval.  The CCEA in its meeting on 12th October2011 approved the said 
report of the Group of Officers along with the TAP/FRP proposed for Air India. 
The various expense heads of Air India are continuously being monitored by the 
GoI in order to rationalise the same.  The Go vernment has accepted the 
recommendation of the Dharmadhikari Committee to introduce rationalisation in the 
pay structure and abolition of PLI.  The committee has looked into the salaries and 
allowances of the pilots, engineers and cabin crew and the revis ed pay package for 
them eliminating unnecessary allowances in the revised package, is under 
consideration.  Since this involves payments over and above the DPE guidelines, 
special dispensation is being sought from Government.  As a result of rationalisatio n 
measures as well as operationalisation of subsidiary companies, it is expected that the 
company's financial result would improve over a period of time.  As regards induction 
of 787s, Air India has already taken delivery of 3 aircraft and it is expected t hat the 
induction of 27 aircraft would be completed by March 2016.  These aircraft are fuel 
efficient and likely to replace the current capacity on various routes which are loss 
making.  Besides, the company has also decided to sell five 777 -200 from its f leet 
since the operation of these aircraft has been considered uneconomical.  Due to the 
measures taken by the Government, it is expected that Air India's financial and 
operating performance would considerably improve going forward and company would 
be able to emerge into a profitable situation. 
 
 

48 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government dated 16.04.2013 
(i) As per part of the Financial Restructuring Plan (FRP) and Turn Around Plan(TAP) 
of Air India, the Govt. has  approved by following:- 
 
(i) Induction of upfront equity of Rs 6,750 Crore, including Rs 1,200 crore provided in 
the budget of 2011-12 and already released, in the Financial Year 2011-12. 
 
(ii) Equity for Cash deficit support of Rs 4,552 crore from FY 2012-13 to FY 2017-18. 
 
(iii)  Equity for already guarantee aircraft loan of Rs 18,929 Crore till FY 2021. 
 
(iv)  GOI Guarantee for repayment of Principal amount and payment of Interest on the 
Non-Convertible Debentures (NCDs) of Rs 7400 crore  to be issued by Air India 
Limited to the financial in stitution, Banks, LIC, EPFO, etc. In case of GOI guaranteed 
NCDs, Government outgo will be Rs 11, 951 crore towards interest and Rs 7400 crore 
towards principal with NPV of Rs 8,637 crore on both principal and interest (as on 
September 30, 2012 at a discount rate of 8 percent ). 
 
(v) Till date the Government has infused equity to the extent of Rs.9,200 crores as 
under: 
 
            Year                  Rs. (in crore) 
 
            2009-10              800.00 
            2010-11            1200.00 
            2011-12            1200.00 
            2012-13            6000.00 
 
 
  Government does not decide the domestic routes on which the scheduled 
airlines of India, including Air India, are to operate the flights. However, with a view to 

49 
 
achieve better regulat ion of air transport services, taking into account the need for air 
transport services of different regions of the country (including North East Region), 
Government has laid down Route Dispersal Guidelines and airlines are free to operate 
anywhere in the country subject to compliance of these Route Dispersal Guidelines. 
  
2.  Air India, being a commercial organization, is free to decide the routes on which it 
wants to operate. But being the National Carriers it sometimes operate flights to 
remote and inacce ssible sectors, which are loss making. The North East Council was 
providing Viability Gap Funding (VGF) to Alliance Air, a wholly owned subsidiary of Air 
India, from 2003 to 2011 for operating flights to/in the North East Region (NER). But 
the VGF was stopped from 2012 and Alliance Air had to restructure its operations to/in 
NER from January 2013 to contain its losses. NEC has, however, been requested to 
provide the VGF for 2012 and beyond. Similarly, Alliance air provides connectivity 
between mainland and Lakshadweep Islands despite incurring losses. Ministry of 
Home Ministry and Lakshadweep Administration have been requested to provide the 
VGF to Alliance Air for these operations. 
 
3.  However, it is not possible to compensate Air India for every route on which it  is 
incurring losses since these losses are not due to any Government intervention/policy.  
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)  
The Committee are glad to note that Pawan Hans Helicopter Ltd. (PHHL ) has 
been a profit making entity since 1991 -92 and paying dividends to the Government of 
India and ONGC. The Committee are, however, distressed to note that the safety 
record of PHHL is not satisfactory. The crash of two of its Bell choppers in the recent  
past have raised questions about the maintenance aspect and fleet adequacy. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry enquire into the mishaps and take corrective 
measures, without delay. 
   The Committee appreciate that PHHL has been a frontrunner in pro viding 
connectivity to the hilly regions of the country, particularly for Arunachal Pradesh 

50 
 
where helicopters are the sole means of transportation in certain inhospitable terrains 
and suggest that it should augment the fleet as part of transport, rescue an d relief 
infrastructure by adding more helicopters to its fleet since a fleet of 40 helicopters is 
inadequate for the needs of such a vast country. 
             The Committee desire that the Government should explore the medical 
evacuation/air- ambulance s egment vigorously and start its services at affordable 
prices at a national level as medical evacuation would be a major driver of helicopter 
growth in the country through the National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA) and 
National Highway Authority of Ind ia (NHAI) requirements. However, construction of 
helipads in major Government hospitals needs to be undertaken first, for which 
engagement with other Ministries is necessary. The Committee hope that the Ministry 
has initiated action in the matter. They wou ld also like to know the progress of the 
heliports in four metros as on date, particularly in Delhi, for which Rs 7 Crore was 
allocated this fiscal. The Committee further note that the strategy Plan 2010 -15 of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation lays emphasis o n increasing the fleet of helicopters and 
exploring new sectors, where its services can be optimally utilized. While various 
important aspects have been identified in the said plan, the Committee find it 
surprising that there is no plan to increase the manpower, be it flights safety inspectors 
or helicopter pilots. Acquiring more helicopters and venturing into newer areas will 
boomerang in the absence of qualified and trained inspectors and pilots. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend for inclusion of these aspects in the said 
strategy plan of the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Most respectfully the concerns regarding safety and maintenance aspect have 
been noted. It is informed that now, the investigation for the accidents is over and final 
investigation reports have been released to the public at www.dgca.nic.in. The 
following actions have been taken as a preventative measure to ensure greater 
safety:- 
a. Standard Operating Procedure are amended. 
b. Additional checks for doors have been incorporated. 

51 
 
c. Check list has been revised and amended. 
d. Instructions would be issued to all crew members to follow Challenge 
and response procedure religiously. 
e. CVR to be monitored frequently to ensure all instructions are complied 
with. 
f. Engineering Dept. to ensure the serviceability check of CVR regularly. 
                
Regarding inadequacy of fleet it is submitted that at present Pawan Hans has 
47 helicopters of its own. Further, as per Pawan Hans IEBR – Proposed Fleet 
Acquisition and Estimated Cost Projections – 2012-17, 22 Nos helicopters of  various 
capacities and 02 Nos seaplanes are planned to be acquired during the XII Plan 
Period.  
               It is also submitted that as per the concept paper submitted to MoCA, the 
Plan Outlay during the XII Five Year plan period (2012 -2017) covering Capital Asset 
Creation by the Central Govt./Ministries such as acquisition of helicopters and creation 
of other infrastructure at a total cost of Rs 10030 Crores to be entirely funding through 
Central Govt. Budgetary Support consisting of:- 
 
o Purchase of 249 helicopters in various categories/purposes. 
o 10 seaplanes and creation of heliports/helipads and related infrastructure. 
The above capacity addition, as it materializes, is expected to address the 
concerns that have been raised. 
             As brought out above, the distribution of the proposed 249 Nos of helicopters 
adequately covers provision of services for Disaster Management/NDMA, Medivac 
(NHAI and others) etc and details are as under: 
 
Through GBS forming part of the XII Five Year Plan of other Ministries:- 
DoNER  
Acquisition of 21 Nos. Helicopters to enhance connectivity of the North East 
Region for running regular passenger services.  These projections are based on the 
detailed deliberations with DoNER/NEC and studies carried out in North Eastern 

52 
 
States by Pawan Hans.  The Report submitted by Pawan Hans has been in principle 
accepted.   It is pertinent to mention that Pawan Hans was nominated as a Nodal 
Agency for carrying out this study to support enhanced connectivity in the North 
Eastern Region. 
Ministry of Tourism 
Acquisition of 20 Nos. of helicopters for developing new tourist sectors which 
otherwise are not operational at present due to lack of connectivity & infrastructure at 
the important tourist destinations.   The projections are based on s tudies & surveys 
carried out at important tourist destinations in West Bengal (incl. Sunderbans Region), 
Bihar (Buddhist Circuit), Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala etc.   
Ministry of Home Affairs 
 Acquisition of 20 Nos. fully equipped medium helicopters for maintenance of 
law & order, anti naxal activities, coastal surveillance and for metro cities in 
India. 
 Acquisition of helicopters to provide heli support to  618  districts in India by 
deploying initially upto 178 helicopters, equivalent to 30% of the total number of 
districts,  ensuring wide coverage for Disaster Management, Emergency and 
primary medical care, medivac, Law enforcement etc.   
 Further in line with the suggestion for infrastructure development, heliports and 
resource development, following has also been proposed: 
Through GBS forming part of the XII Five Year Plan of Ministry of Civil Aviation  
 Create infrastructure like atleast 1 No. heliport in 8 North Eastern State Capitals 
and  up to 1 or more helipads per district in all NE States totalling around 40 
helipads overall as projected in the Study for improvement of connectivity at the 
NE Regions submitted to the DoNER. 
 Create 3 Nos. Cityport/heliport projects/Extension of heliport in M etro locations 
(apart from Rohini, New Delhi) in India and therefore giving a fillip to helicopter 
usage to facilitate enhanced capacity for helicopter industry and other 
requirements such as  Medivac, Disaster Management, law & order etc.   
 Acquisition of  10 Nos. Seaplanes for inter -island connectivity at A&N Islands, 
Lakshadweep Islands and other coastal areas and connecting the islands to the 

53 
 
mainland for passenger services to the local people, medical evacuation and 
promotion of tourism etc.  In this re gard Pawan Hans has already carried out 
Feasibility Studies for seaplane operations in A&N Islands & Lakshadweep 
Islands. 
 Create infrastructure at Hadapsar Pune like Training Centre for Pilots & 
Engineers, MRO, Simulators, Flight monitoring/Following Syste ms etc.  for HR 
capacity building to produce skilled manpower to cater to growing demand of 
the Helicopter Industry  
 Create infrastructure for Safety Training for the Aviation Industry. 
 Development of Aero -sports offering model building/flying, motorized g liding,  
paragliding, parasailing, hot air ballooning activities to professionals as well as 
enthusiasts in order to generate awareness and interest in the Aviation Industry. 
On the Committee‟s observations of pilots, it is submitted that Pawan Hans is 
meeting major requirements of pilots who retires from Defence Forces as well as from 
open market. For requirements of qualified inspector and pilots, the Govt. may also 
take up with the Flying Training Schools like IGRUA, National Flying Training Institute -
Gondia, HAL Academy-Bangalore. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.25 of Chapter – I) 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
The Committee have been informed that the Ministry has initiated a programme 
for upgradation of infrastructure at the various airports in the country of Air Traffic 
Management. They further note that AAI has embarked upon the ambitious, Rs 774 
crore GAGAN (GPS aides Geo Augmented Navigation) project with ISRO, which will 
provide correction signals to the GPS signals to meet the accuracy, integrity, 
availability and continuity requirements of aviation sector. An amount of Rs 313 crore 
is stated to have been spent on the project. The Committee would like to know the 
progress and timelines for completion of this project. The  committee further desire the 
Ministry to acquire all necessary modern technologies and equipment and streamline 

54 
 
the procedure for air tra ffic management. In the light of airports being developed 
through the PPP route, the role of the ATC becomes even more critical in ensuring 
safe air traffic movement. Moreover, the Committee note with concern that Instrument 
Landing System (ILS) are of CAT-I level at most of the airports in the country and thus 
strongly urge the Ministry to upgrade the same at all the airports. The Committee 
would like to point out that inspite of ILS CAT-III system installed at Delhi Airport, there 
are still long delays ex perienced during every winter season. The Committee, thereof, 
are of the opinion that the Ministry should work hard to improve their air traffic 
management system. They should also ensure that all airlines deploy CAT - III trained 
pilots, particularly during the fog period to ensure on time arrivals and departures. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Status Of Gagan Project Is given below : 
 
1. Airports Authority of India with ISRO has jointly launched the Satellite Based 
Augmentation System, namely GAGAN [GPS Aided Geo A ugmented 
Navigation] which is currently in advance stage of implementation and is 
planned to be made operational after certification by DGCA in July‟2013. 
2. The GAGAN when operational will improve safety at such Airports/Runways not 
equipped presently with I nstrument Landing System(ILS) as it will be able to 
provide vertical guidance as near to a precision approach provided by ILS.  It 
will also provide service for the en-route cruise operations also. 
3. GAGAN will provide seamless navigation across Indian skies  for aircraft with 
high level of position accuracy, Integrity, Availability & Continuity with 
appropriate warnings/ alarms when position accuracy is beyond tolerance limits 
for specific periods of time as per standard laid down by ICAO (International 
Civil Aviation Organization).  
 
 
 
 

55 
 
Physical Progress 
1. 15 Ground stations called Indian Reference stations (INRES) have been 
installed and networked with 2 Indian Master Control Centres(INMCC) at 
Bangalore. The GAGAN complex at Kundalahalli, Bangalore also houses  the 2 
Indian Land Uplink stations (INLUS) that transmit GPS corrections to the users. 
3rd INLUS is getting ready to add up geographical redundancies at Nangloi, 
Delhi. The signal -in space is available since 15th December 2011 through 
GSAT-8 and many organ izations are making use of the same. However, for 
aviation purposes, the SIS is required to be certified by Director General of Civil 
Aviation.  
2. Recent launch of GSAT -10 on 29th September 2012 has added redundancy in 
space segment which allows us to procee d for certification of GAGAN for 
aviation use.  GAGAN signal is expected to be made available for aviation use 
from July 2013.  
3. GAGAN Final System Acceptance Test (FSAT)  was successfully conducted 
on 16th July 2012. It is a day of great significance to Indian Aviation as Airports 
Authority of India and ISRO who are jointly started the GAGAN Project during 
2001.The objective of Final System Acceptance Test was to evaluate the 
system performance and its critical parameters in the integrated live 
environment using the satellite signals and ground based systems on integrity, 
accuracy, continuity and availability for aviation use.  
The successful completion of Final System Acce ptance Test has boost pave 
way for further process of system certification by Regulatory authorities and 
formal commissioning by June 2013. 
 
Instrument Landing System: 
AAI has provided CAT II and CAT III ILS at airports affected by Low Visibility. At 
present CAT II Instrument Landing System is available at Amritsar, Lucknow and 
Kolkata Airports. CAT III Instrument Landing System is available at IGI Airport, Delhi 
on RWY 28, RWY 29 and RWY 11. 
 

56 
 
ATS Automation system at 38 airports (ATC Centres): 
 
The install ation of Indra Aircon 2100 ATS Automation system has been 
completed at 38 airports spread across the country, including major ATC Centers such 
as Trivandrum, Nagpur, Ahmadabad, Varanasi, Mangalore, Guwahati, Cochin, 
Amritsar and smaller centers such as Bhu baneswar, Patna, Tirupati and Hubli. 
Bhubaneswar has been identified under the Kolkata Upper Airspace Harmonization 
program as a major Lower Area Control Center and its  ATC Center shall be upgraded 
commensurately. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.28 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
  

57 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLY 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee observes that there was a sudden surge in domestic airfares by 
various Airlines during the winter tourist season in the year 2010. Through domestic 
fares are determined by market forces and thus are not Government regulated the 
Committee wish  to emphasize the need to ensure that air -fares are not hiked in a 
sudden and unreasonable manner. They note from the Ministry's deposition in 
December 2010 that a Civil Aviation Economic Regulatory Council has already been 
set up in May 2009 to address ec onomic issues of air transport with special focus on 
airfares. The Committee wish to point out that this is only a relatively recent 
development. In fact the DGCA is already empowered under Rule 135 of the Aircraft 
Rules, 1937 to direct Airlines to establi sh their tariffs according to certain board 
principles for maintaining   transparency and the Director - General of the DGCA is 
empowered to issue directives to the Airlines indulging in excessive/predatory pricing. 
However, the Committee have doubts about DGCA taking any cautionary step on 
these lines otherwise the case of excessive air tariffs during 2010 would not have 
happened. The Ministry had also referred to the DGCA's directive to all scheduled 
airlines to display route -wise tariffs and category -wise fares on their respective 
websites. But on visiting the various websites, it is found that very few scheduled 
Airlines are following the said directive. The DGCA is understood to have a Tariff 
Analysis Unit functioning under its preview also to monitor tariff on regular basis. While 
being dissatisfied with the current state of affairs despite several powers already 
available to the Government, the Committee recommended that the DGCA or the 
newly set up Civil Aviation Economic Regulatory Council should moni tor this aspect 
with clarity and find out measures to ensure proper compliance of the directives issued 
to scheduled Airlines so as to prevent harassment of the consumers. The Committee 
would also like to be apprised about the concrete proposals devised by  the Economic 
Regulatory Council in the last one year on airfares, since a scrutiny of the 10 orders 

58 
 
passed by them revealed that they related to the User Development Fee and fuel 
charges only. As the DGCA has also reportedly set up a Working Group to prot ect 
consumer interests in 2010, the Committee would only hope that the two regulatory 
setups work in-sync so that their respective recommendations complement each other. 
The Committee would like to know as to what perceptible difference has been 
achieved in the field of airfare regulation by the Government in the recent months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Action Taken (A) 
        Air fares are not fixed by the Government as they are determined by the 
interplay of market forces.  Scheduled airlines offer different fare buckets for each 
flight and the airfares offered by the airlines in lower bucket are affordable. The airfar e 
increases with the increase in demand for seat, as the lower fare buckets get sold out 
fast. This practice is followed the world over.  
           It may be stated that as per Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rule 1937, every carrier is 
required to indicate tari ff showing fares, rates and charges for air transportation 
between the points served by them.  
In order to prevent excessive charging and sudden surges in airfares and to 
promote transparency by scheduled domestic airlines, DGCA has issued Air Transport 
Circular 2 of 2010 wherein airlines are required to display on their respective websites 
the tariff sheet route -wise across their network in various fare categories and the 
manner it is offered in the market. The intention behind the above directions is to k eep 
the passengers informed of pricing pattern of airlines.  
DGCA has also set up a Tariff Monitoring Unit in 2010 that monitors airfares on 
certain routes on monthly basis to ensure that the airlines do not charge airfares 
outside the range declared by th em. The analysis has shown that the airfares 
remained well within the fare bucket uploaded by the airlines on the respective 
websites.       
All scheduled domestic airlines are reported to be displaying route -wise tariffs 
and category -wise fares in their r espective websites with an intention to keep the 

59 
 
passengers informed of pricing pattern of airlines and providing them an opportunity to 
choose the flights as per their convenience.  
The Civil Aviation Economic Advisory Council (CAEAC) has been mentioned as 
Civil Aviation Economic Regulatory Council (CAEAC) in the Estimate Committee 
report, which may please be corrected.  
Further the orders of AERA on UDF/Fuel charges seem to have been 
inadvertently mentioned as issued by CAEAC. Here it is clarified that C AEAC is only 
an advisory body and does not pass any orders. 
 
Action Taken (B) 
This observation refers to the sudden surge in domestic airfares by various 
airlines during the winter tourism season in the year 2010.  It has, inter -alia, been 
stated that "a C ivil Aviation Economic Regulatory Council has already been set up in 
May 2009 to address economic issues of air transport with special focus on airfares".  
 It further states that "the DGCA is understood to have a Tariff Analysis Unit 
functioning under its  purview also to monitor tariff on regular basis.  While being 
dissatisfied with the current state of affairs despite several powers already available to 
the Government, the Committee recommend that the DGCA or the newly set up Civil 
Aviation Economic Regu latory Council should monitor this aspect with clarity and find 
out measures to ensure proper compliance of the directives issued to scheduled 
Airlines so as to prevent harassment of the consumers.  The Committee would also 
like to be apprised about the co ncrete proposals devised by the Economic Regulatory 
Council in the last one year on airfares, since a scrutiny of the 10 orders passed by 
them revealed that they related to the User Development Fee and fuel charges only".  
It appears that the "Civil Aviati on Economic Regulatory Council" - which has 
been statedly set up in May 2009 is referring to the Airports Economic Regulatory 
Authority of India (i.e., AERA) which was set up in May, 2009 under the AERA Act, 
2008.  
In this regard, it is submitted that Airp orts Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) is 
entrusted with the following functions under section 13 of the AERA Act: 
(a) To determine the tariff for the aeronautical services taking into consideration- 

60 
 
(i) The capital expenditure incurred and timely inves tment in improvement of 
airport facilities; 
(ii) The service provided, its quality and other relevant factors; 
(iii) The cost for improving efficiency; 
(iv) Economic and viable operation of major airports; 
(v) Revenue received from services other than the aeronautical services; 
(vi) The concession offered by the Central Government in any agreement or 
memorandum of understanding or otherwise; 
(vii) Any other factor which may be relevant for the purposes of this Act  
(b) To determine the amount of the development fees in respect of major airports. 
(c) To determine the amount of the passengers‟ services fee levied under rule 88 
of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 made under the Aircraft Act, 1934 
(d) To monitor the set performance standards relating to quality, continu ity and 
reliability of services as may be specified by he Central Government or any 
authority authorized by it in this behalf.  
(e) To call for such information as may be necessary to determine the tariff under 
clause (a) 
(f) To perform such other function s relating to tariff, as may be entrusted to it by 
the Central Government or as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of 
this Act.  
 Thus, the Authority is mandated to determine the tariffs in respect of 
aeronautical services in respect of the major airports (currently 16 in no. – details are 
at Annexure VII).  Further, the Authority is required to determine the amount of 
development fe es, passenger service fee and to monitor the standard of quality of 
service at these airports.  In discharge of its functions, the Authority has issued 61 
orders (upto October, 2012) whereby the tariffs for various aeronautical services (as 
defined in section 2(a) of the AERA Act) have been determined.   
 It is apparent from the above, that fixation of the airfares is not within the 
regulatory ambit of the Authority. Hence, the issue of sudden increase in domestic 
airfares by airlines cannot be attributed to AERA.  
 

61 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Observation/Recommendation 
NIL 
  

62 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note with concern that the aviation industry is heavily burdened 
with taxis and levies like Sales Tax on Aviation Turbi ne Fuel (ATF), levy withholding 
tax on leased aircraft/engines, high airport charges and levy of royalty, service tax on 
agency fees, expenses incurred abroad on loans raised and also services rendered 
and consumed abroad etc. The hefty Sales Tax on Aviati on Turbine Fuel has been 
causing an adverse effect on the growth of the aviation sector over a period of time. 
The sales tax on ATF charged by the State Governments ranges from 4 percent to 
around 30 percent. The tax on ATF forms nearly 35 -40 percent of the cost component 
of the airlines. During their deposition, the representatives of the aviation industry 
underlined the need to declare ATF under ' Declared Goods' Category so that it 
attracts uniform sales tax of 4 percent across India, though it has not y et been 
conceded by the Govt. as the Ministry of Finance is more keen on establishing a GST 
(Goods & Services Tax) regime first. The Government is currently considering this 
proposal. The Committee desire that an early decision in this regard should be tak en 
in the interest of domestic airlines. They are of the view that conducive tax regime is 
essential for the growth of the aviation sector and hence recommend that due 
consideration may be given to reduce sales tax on ATF and categorize it as 'Declared 
Goods' under Central Sales Tax Act, since the proposed GST regime is not likely to be 
in place very soon and thus, the Ministry of Finance should not defer a decision on this 
matter. The Committee desire that their suggestions may be conveyed to the Ministry 
of Finance. At the same time, the Committee appreciate the announcement made by 
the Finance Minister, while presenting Union Budget (2012-13), that to reduce the cost 
of ATF, Government has permitted direct import of ATF by Indian carriers, as actual 
users. 
The Committee also were convinced by the Ministry's stand that classification of 
aviation as an "infrastructure sector" enables companies for external commercial 

63 
 
borrowings (ECB) through the automatic route and since aviation is a capital intensive 
business, easy access to working capital at competitive rates is a must for the healthy 
growth of the sector. In this connection, the Finance Minister, in his Budget speech 
(2012-13) has proposed to permit ECB for working capital requirements of the airline 
industry for a period of one year, subject to a total Ceiling of US Dollar one billion. The 
Committee hope that this would address the immediate financing concerns of the Civil 
Aviation sector and would like to apprised of the factual position on the said pro posal 
at the action taken stage. 
Another instance which the Committee are concerned to point out is that out of 
a total fleet of 174 aircraft, NACIL (now renamed as Air India Limited) has leased 
around 37 aircraft, which is highly expensive, as lease renta l payments for 
aircraft/engines are subject to levy of Withholding Tax under Income Tax Act. The 
Committee were informed that such payments were exempt from taxation under 
Section 10 (15 A) of Income Tax Act but the exemption was subsequently withdrawn 
for lease on or after April 2007, which was a great blow to the already sagging 
financial health of the national carrier and the aviation industry as a whole. 
Overall, the Committee as dismayed that the incidence of taxes on air fares is 
quite substantial thus adversely impacting competitiveness of Indian Carriers vis -à-vis 
foreign carriers. They urge the Ministry to take up the matter with the ministry of 
Finance on priority basis and work towards simplification of the tax regime which is 
imperative for the g rowth of the aviation sector. The Committee hope that the Ministry 
of Finance would take a reasonable view on the matter as not only NACIL but also 
scheduled carriers are facing acute financial crunch of late and this would not augur 
well for the Indian Civil Aviation Industry in the long run. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
On the matter of rationalization of VAT on ATF, the Hon‟ble Minister of Civil 
Aviation has written to the Chief Ministers of the States on 23.2.2012. In response, 
only the State Government Chhattisgarh has brought down VAT on ATF to 4% 
whereas the other State Governments have expressed their inabililty to do so.  

64 
 
         The details of the leased aircraft in the present operating fleet of the Air India   
and its subsidiaries are given below: 
 
Aircraft type Lease arrangement No.  
A320 Sale and lease back 6 
A319 Dry lease 5 
B747-400 Sale and lease back 2 
A330 Dry lease 2 
B737-80 Dry lease 4 
ATR-42 Dry lease 7 
CRJ Dry lease 4 
Total  30 
 
          As per the revised guidelines from RBI, limit of USD 1 Billion is for the Aviation 
Sector and limit for each airline is USD 300 Million. Air India had uploaded a request 
for proposal on it‟s website for USD 300 Million in May 2012.  Only M/s. Bar clays bank 
had responded to Air India‟s Public Tender. M/s. Barclays Bank had recommended 
raising finance via US Dollar loan transaction and US Dollar Bonds which should be 
backed by a Guarantee of Government of India (GOI).  The proposal received from 
M/s. Barclays Bank was forwarded to the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) and 
requested to process the GOI Guarantee with Ministry of Finance (MoF) so that USD 
Bonds issue can be launched.  
Air India Limited had also received a suo motu offer from M/s. Charte red Bank 
Management LLC. The offer of M/s. Chartered Bank Management LLC is for financing 
done by Bank Muscat. As per their original offer, financing has to be done through a 
wholly owned SPV (Special Purpose Vehicle) or a GSA (General Sales Agent) of Air 
India Limited to be set up in Oman. We have been given to understand that this 
borrowing will fall outside the ambit of ECB rules as per RBI guidelines. Hence, we 
had discussions directly with M/s. Bank Muscat to give an alternate proposal. 
Recently, we ha ve been advised by M/s. Bank Muscat that during their informal 
discussions with some banks in Oman, Banks have indicated an appetite for lending to 

65 
 
Air India Limited backed by an unconditional guarantee or stand by letter of credit from 
acceptable banks in  India. The syndication size may be about USD 150 Million. Air 
India Limited has asked M/s. Bank Muscat for their clarification on their tie up with 
Banks/Institutions in Oman for the proposal of USD 150 Million. Air India has also 
requested them for completing formalities for the above financing.  
Air India has also contacted Deutsche Bank who had shown an interest for ECB 
financing. The proposal for ECB financing was discussed in detail with them and they 
should revert with their proposal subject to inter nal credit approvals in M/s. Deutsche 
Bank. 
Pending GOI letter for M/s. Barclays Bank and final proposals from M/s. Bank 
Muscat and M/s. Deutsche Bank, Air India was unable to raise ECB borrowing allowed 
by RBI. Air India has been regularly following up wi th concerned parties to avail 
financing under ECB borrowing within the RBI deadline of March 2013. 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government dated 16.04.2013 
(i) The Ministry has taken the matter of ATF with the State Govts . and has 
requested them to align ATF with „ Declare Goods‟ status. Only Govts of Chhattisgarh 
and Jharkhand have reduced VAT on ATF to 4% 
 
(ii) Ministry has taken the issue of pricing of ATF and other related issues with M/o 
Finance and M/o Petroleum & Natural  Gas. A meeting between  Minster of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas and Minister of Civil Aviation was held on 4.12.2012  to discuss the 
issue of the pricing and tax regime governing ATF, wherein Minster of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas assured Minister of Civil Avi ation that issues will be discussed with  the  
Oil Marketing Companies for and appropriate decision in the matter. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee note that the mandate to regulate flight operations, 
airworthiness, and air traffic control services lies with the Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation (DGCA). However, the Committee find it strange that such a significant 

66 
 
regulatory body is  headed by an officers holding additional  charge in the Ministry. 
Since in their view, this administrative dispensation would not allow DGCA to render 
requisite vigilance and regulation of civil aviation sector, the Committee desire that 
DGCA should be headed by an officer with exclusive charge. 
In so far as safety issues are concerned, tragic incidents in Mangalore and 
Arunachal Pradesh, reports of aircrafts coming dangerously close to each other or 
hovering over the airports for a long time before landin g, have led the Committee to 
believe that the DGCA needs to revisit their procedures and regulatory mechanism 
thoroughly. The Committee have been informed that the DGCA has now set up a Civil 
Aviation Safety Advisory Council to suggest ways to enhance the safety of the aircraft 
operations at the aerodromes, and has ordered the inspection of critical airports in 
order to review the systems and facilities at these aerodromes. The Committee take 
serious view of the fact that 11 airports have been identified as  critical airports from 
flight operation point of view. It simply means that these airports are potentially very 
dangerous for the fliers as well as the crew and the aircraft. The Committee strongly 
recommended that the DGCA must not lose any time in addre ssing all issues 
pertaining to flight operations at these 11 critical airports to avoid any more tragic 
incident in future. They would like to know the timelines fixed and the actual planning 
done by the Ministry to bring these airports in the safe categor y. The Committee also 
emphasize that there is need to review and streamline all existing mandatory 
procedure related to flight operations at all the airports in the country which also 
include controlling noise pollution at metro airports. The Committee sug gest that 
surprise checks/inspections be carried out in flights, hangars, cargo areas, public 
areas in airports etc. at regular intervals to keep the system foolproof to the maximum 
extent possible. 
The Committee are convinced that the safety of the passengers can be ensured 
by introducing latest technology  and equipment such as radar satellite systems to 
minimize human errors as well as having alert, efficient, qualified and well -trained 
personnel to operate these equipment effectively. The Committee, the refore, desire 
that the suggestions made by Civil Aviation Safety Advisory Council (CASAC) for 

67 
 
training of inspectors, ground staff, pilots etc. and the need to improve the quality of 
training imparted by training institutes should be implemented in letter and spirit. 
An amount of Rs 10 crore has been given as budgetary support during 2011 -12 
for setting up of Civil Aviation Security Training Academy. The Committee would like to 
know the progress made in this regard. Further they note from the data furnishe d by 
the Ministry that an amount of Rs 84 crore was allocated to the Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security (BCAS) for purchase of body scanners, radiological detection equipment and 
Bomb detection & Disposal   equipment. The Committee would like to be apprised  of 
the purchases made so far in this regard. The Committee further feel that post -
accident operations need to be undertaken in a speedier manner. As suggested by 
Civil Aviation Safety Advisory Council (CASAC), an Independent Accident 
Investigation Board s hould also be set up without further delay. The search & rescue 
operations, another weak area, should also be strengthened with adequate support   
from all concerned organizations/agencies and state Governments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Action Taken (A) 
The amount of Rs. 10 Crores given as budgetary support during 2011 -12, for 
setting up of Civil Aviation Security Training Academy, it is stated that a decision has 
been taken to set up a Joint Training Academy for BCAS, DGCA and AAI. In this 
regard an MoU has already been signed between BCAS, DGCA and AAI. 
Regarding the utilization of an amount of Rs 84 Crores allocated to the BCAS 
for purchasing various security equipments including Radiological Detection 
Equipment (RDE), it is stated that the amount has no t been utilized as the 
procurement process has not yet been completed.  
Action Taken (B) 
On the observations of the Committee regarding 11 critical airports, following 
actions have been taken: 
a.  Inspection of all these 11 critical airports has been carried out by a team of 
officials from Directorate General of Civil Aviation. Their report is   forwarded to the 

68 
 
respective aerodrome operators for taking necessary action. The report broadly 
suggests the following measures:-    
 Providing of Runway End Safety Areas (RESAs) 
 Ensuring proper marking on runways. 
 Proper maintenance of basic strips and ensuring frangibility criteria. 
 Periodic calibration of Nav Aids. 
 Maintenance of Runway Surface within appropriate  friction Levels. 
 Removal of obstacles and proper marking and lighting  of permissible 
obstacles  
 Safety risk assessment in respect of non-compliances. 
b.  The suggestion of the Committee to carry out surprise checks/inspections of 
flights, hangers, cargo areas, public areas at airports etc. at regular intervals, it is 
submitted that it is being done through planned surveillance, regulatory audits and 
spot checks.  
c.  The aircraft (Investigation of Accidents & Incidents) Rules 2012 has been 
notified in the Gazette of India on 5th July 2012. The notification is available on website 
of AAIB. An independent Aircraft Accident Investigation bureau (AAIB) has been set 
up under the Ministry of Civil Aviation  vide Ministry of Civil Aviation notification no AV. 
11012/01/2011-DG dated 30 th July 2012.The Search and Rescue Service in India is 
dealt in Manual of Air Traffic Services of Airports Authority of India. 
d.  It is to inform that rules for licensing of ATCOs have been incorporated in  The 
Aircraft Rules 1937 vide GSR 64(E) dated 3 rd February, 2012, which stipulate the 
necessary training requirements for ATCOs  for obtaining and maintaining ATC 
license. 
Subsequent reply of the Government dated 16.04.2013 
 
(i)  A regular officer has been posted as DGCA since July, 2012.   
 
11 Airports were identified as Critical airports from flight operations point of view.  
Inspection of these airports were carried out by the team of officials from Directorate 

69 
 
General of Civil Aviation and reports were forwarded to the respective aerodrome 
operator for taking necessary action. 
Various steps have been taken to enhance the safety at these aerodromes which 
included: 
 Provision of Runway End Safety Areas (RESAs) 
 Ensuring proper marking on runways  
 Proper maintenance of basic strip and Ensuring frangibility criteria. 
 Periodic calibration of Nav Aids 
 Maintenance of Runway Surface within appropriate friction Levels  
 Removal of obstacles and proper marking and lighting of permissible obstacles and 
Safety risk assessment in respect of non-compliances. 
 
(ii) All operators have been directed to carry out safety assessment of the aerodromes 
in accordance with Flight Standards Directorate circular no.02 of 2012 and depending 
upon the safety risk assessment, the operators shall define the training and 
qualification requirements for the flight crew operating to the said aerodrome.  The 
circular also gives guidelines to categorize the aerodromes based on the safety 
assessment.        
(iii) With regards to controlling noise pollution at metro airstrips, it is stated that as per 
the direction of  Delhi High Court, DGCA has commissioned undertaken a pilot study 
for noise mapping  & monitoring of  Delhi Air port.    The study is being carried out M/s 
NLR.T   The recommendations of this study will be forwarded  to the Central Pollution 
Control Board for developing permissible noise limits for the Airport.  In a similar way, 
noise limits for other Airports will also be evolved. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.9 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee are unhappy to note that several airport in the country are 
functioning without license as per the policy mandated by the International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO) in2003 and adopted by the Ministry since 2007. Since 
these licenses are a certification of fulfilling all necessary requirements by an airport, 
the very absence of it may mean a compromise in terms of safety and standard of 
services at the airport which are functioning without it. As five years have already 
elapsed, the licensing procedure should no longer be viewed as a new concept. Thus, 
the Committee desire to know the reasons for the following these airports running 
without license, which by any standards, is a substantial number, as well as the  
responsibility fixed in the matter. They would also like to be apprised of the remedial 
measures taken, if any, to grant licenses to the applicant airports and the results 
thereof as well as the revenue earned by the DGCA so far by granting licenses. The 
Committee strongly urge the Ministry to complete all certification/licensing for all the 
Airports in the country at the earliest and ensure that no such lapse occurs in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Presently, all the airports in the country except one are having a valid license 
issued by DGCA. License of Patna in Bihar is under process by DGCA.  
 
Subsequent reply of the Government dated 16.04.2013 
All the AAI airports where scheduled opera tions take place have been licensed 
except one namely Patna in Bihar which is operating as per provisions of Rule 78 of 
Aircraft Rule 1937. This provision permits the airport to operate till aerodrome operator 
obtains license from DGCA by the date notified  by Central Government. The date 
notified as per SO 038 (E) dated 1st January 2013 is 30th June, 2013. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.13 of Chapter – I) 
 

71 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
The Committee note with alarm that some that pilots who either did not possess 
a proper pilot's license or were unfit to fly aircraft, had been found to be flying planes 
or private airlines thus gravely endangering the lives of passengers. What is further 
distressing is that the involvement  of DGCA personnel too had been suspected in the 
matter, as certain private flying training institutes, in possible connivance with some 
DGCA officials, had been found to be certifying unfit candidates as pilots. Further 
surprising is the facts that some f ake pilots were also found to be among the kith & kin 
of DGCA officials, which perhaps, explains as to why this issue was never unearthed 
by DGCA. The Committee were informed later that apart from the investigation by 
Delhi Police, the DGCA had started scr utinizing all licenses issued by them, and that 
an Expert Committee had been set up in March 2011 to re -examine the entire system 
of examination as well as licensing. The report of the said Committee was submitted in 
July, 2011. The Committee desire to be apprised of the recommendations of the 
Expert Committee as well as the arrests and prosecutions made in the case following 
the internal checking done by DGCA and the follow up action taken on the 
recommendations of the Experts Committee. The Committee are further appalled by 
the news reports of a fake flying school functioning in the national capital itself. 
Obviously such schools cannot be established overnight. Besides, it is Difficult to 
accept the DGCA was completely unaware of such developments. The la xity on the 
part of the regulatory body has shocked the Committee and they strongly recommend 
that the DGCA personnel involved in this whole episode be identified urgently. The 
Committee are deeply anguished to note that a premier regulator like DGCA is 
plagued with nepotism which raises a question mark on its role. The Committee 
strongly feel that the time is ripe for its complete overhauling. While the Ministry is 
working on restructuring of the existing DGCA into an autonomous aviation safety 
regulatory organization named Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) in line with ICAO's 
recommendations and international standards and practices, the Committee 
recommend that vested interests must not be allowed to dilute its efficacy otherwise 
Indian aviation industry may  continue to suffer setbacks and miss growth 

72 
 
opportunities. The Committee would also like to be informed about the restructuring of 
DGCA into Civil Aviation Authority, as soon as it is completed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
A public notice dated 18 July 2012 have been issued and the guidelines to the 
candidates applying for Pilot License Examination (Issued V, October, 2012) has been 
published on DGCA‟s website stating that attested copy of Verification Certificate 
issued by University/ Board should be submitted at the time of allotment of computer 
No and original verification certificate is to be submitted at the time of applying for 
issuance of License. 
DGCA has examined the pilot licenses issued in the past and to establish  a 
procedure for detailed verification while issuing such licenses.  The examination 
history available in CEO records in respect of 1704 ATPL holders were scrutinized and 
it was observed that the six candidates have not passed all  the examination papers 
required for  issue of ATPL and have submitted fake mark sheet  for these paper(s) for  
issue of ATPL . 
The ATPL licenses of the above pilots have been placed under suspension and 
a case has been registered with the Delhi Crime Branch who is investigating i n the 
matter. Details of such pilots are at Para „A‟ of the Annexure - VIII. 
The examination history in respect of 6331 CPL holders were scrutinized and it 
was observed that 11 candidates have not passed  the required examination papers 
and have submitted fake mark sheet  for these paper(s) for issue of CPL.  These 
cases have also been handed over to Delhi Police Crime Branch.  The details are at 
Para „B‟ of the Annexure - VIII. 
Cases of bogus entries in the flying log book of trainee pilots by Chief Flying  
Instructor of Rajasthan Flying School Jaipur were reported by anti corruption Bureau 
(ACB), Rajasthan. On the basis of preliminary report received from anti Corruption 
Bureau Rajasthan, licences of the pilots were suspended by DGCA. Details are at 
Para „C‟ of the Annexure -VIII. 
Subsequent to above, DGCA has started procedure for more detailed 
verification while issuing the licences.  The result submitted by the candidate for his 

73 
 
passing the examination is verified from the result folder provided by CEO.  For 
conversion of foreign licenses into Indian licenses, the licenses are being verified from 
the concerned regulatory authority of the respective countries.  Verification of the 
recency flying is also being obtained from the flying training institute befo re processing 
the case. 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government dated 16.04.2013 
8(i) Recommendations of the Expert Committee on Examination and Licensing have 
been spelt out in  detail in para 8(ii) below.   
 
(8) (ii) As a follow –up to the statement made by the  Minister of Overseas Indian 
Affairs and Civil Aviation on 15.3.2011 in the Rajya Sabha regarding Issue of 
Licenses, Ministry of Civil Aviation constituted an Expert Committee to look into the 
current System of Examination and Licensing of Pilots and r ecommended to make the 
system secure, credible and efficient and in tune with modern and best practices.  The 
Terms of Reference of the Committee include the  following: 
 
i) To examine the current system of examination of pilots, engineers etc., and make 
recommendations to make examination system secure, credible and efficient and in 
line with modern and best practices; 
ii) To examine introduction of electronic technology, online examination and make 
recommendations; 
iii) To examine the current system of licensing,  procedure and processes and make 
recommendations for improvement; 
iv) To examine and make recommendations for introduction of effective system of 
cross-verification of  documents of licensing field by candidates; 
v) Any other task assigned by the Ministry. 
 
The Expert Committee carried out a review of the existing Examination System of 
pilots and engineers including the licensing system in DGCA and made 12 
recommendations. While, action on most of recommendations has been taken, action 

74 
 
on recommendation (3) relat ing to comprehensive licensing system, merging of 
examination date with licensing data, gathering of flying data is being taken up in the 
e-Governance project of DGCA.  
 
The completed actions include: 
 
i) Verification of basic qualification of a candidate. 
ii) Computerization of all the activities related to the examination included online 
registration for examination, allotment of roll number, scheduling of examination 
dates, conduct of online/ computer-based examination, processing. 
iii) Making available the list study material for the students including the syllabus. 
iv) Enhancement of question bank.  
8 (iii) This fact has been taken note of Ministry  of Civil Aviation 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.18 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee have already commented on the serious issue of fake pilots and 
flying institutes in their earlier recommendation. They further find that at present, there 
are 23 private Flying Training Institutes and 17 Government Flying Training  Institutes 
in the country for training of pilots. They note with concern that as the aviation sector is 
growing at an average rate of 15 percent, lack of skilled personnel should not restrain 
the growth of the sector. The demand for pilots, engineers and cabin crew is going to 
be three times than that of the current strength by 2020 as per certain studies. In this 
regards, concerns about the quality of human resource in Indian aviation sector are 
being openly expressed now. The Committee, therefore, would like to emphasize that 
it is absolutely necessary to augment the training capacity  for pilots, cabin crew, 
engineers and ground staff to meet the demands of the aviation industry, while 
keeping a very strict vigil on the quality of such training. The Comm ittee are of the 

75 
 
opinion that any slackness on this issue can cost the country dear in the near future. 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should assess and upgrade the 
existing infrastructure at various Government Training Institutes to stop the exodus of 
Indian citizen to foreign training institutes. Besides, the Ministry must carry out periodic 
audits/ inspections as well as efficiency and aptitude tests on the trainers to find out 
the degree of compliance of laid out norms for imparting pro per training and enforce 
remedial measures, in case any lapse is found. 
The Committee also recommends that DGCA should tighten the norms set for 
the Government recognized private flying training institutes and ensures that all such 
institutes meet the desired criteria. 
 
Reply of the Government 
DGCA grants approval to Flying Training Organizations on meeting the 
requirements i.e. manpower, infrastructure as per CAR Section 7 Series D Part I. 
 
As per CAR section 7 series D part II DGCA has a system for Safety  Oversight 
and Surveillance of Flying training Institutes. Through this system DGCA is keeping 
strict vigil on the quality of training, human resources & infrastructure requirements. 
 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government dated 16.04.2013 
(i) DGCA has starte d monitoring the training imparted abroad. Trainees who undergo 
such training abroad have to necessarily clear examinations in India before obtaining 
conversion of license. 
 
(ii) DGCA carries out surveillance of Flying Training Organisation (FTO) as per 
Civil Aviation Requirement Section 7, Series D, Part II on such institutes. The validity 
of FTO approval is one year and the approval is renewed on annual basis after 
inspection is carried out by the DGCA. 
 
 

76 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.22 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
The Committee note that Airports Authority of India (AAI), a consistently profit -
making organization, has initiated the development of Airports in the country at a large 
scale either on its own or through the PPP mode. The Committee further note that 2 
Metro airports and 62 non -metro airports have been shortlisted for modernization and 
Upgradation for which around 1500 crore was given as budgetary support during 
2011-12. Apart fro m metro airports, several non -metro airports are experiencing a 
substantial rush of domestic and international travellers for tourism and business 
purposes. Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to ensure that all such projects 
are completed in a time bound manner. They would like to be apprised of the progress 
on a case-to-case basis.   
Further, the Committee are constrained to note that the Upgradation of airport 
at Bhubaneswar has been delayed. They feel that not only the Upgradation of the said 
airport needs to be speeded up but more cities in Orissa should be considered for 
creating airport infrastructure in view of the transit of the State. Similarly the 
development of new Civil Enclave at Bhatinda Airport is delayed due to coordination 
required with the Indian Air Force as its taxiway and runway fall within the IAF 
operational area. The status of Patna airport is in limbo too due to non -availability of 
land. For Hubli airport, 27 acres of land is yet given by the State Government. Through 
Kota a irport has not been included in the list of 62 non - metro airports to be 
modernized, the committee are of the opinion that the city, which is third largest city in 
Rajasthan, needs a good aviation infrastructure for its growth, and thus, feel that the 
Ministry should consider including the city airport for modernization and diverting air 
traffic through it. In so far as Gwalior airport is concerned, the Committee are not 
convinced by the reasons cited by the Ministry for not including the same in the list o f 
airports where modernization will be taken up and desire that the matter may be 
reconsidered. Another airport requiring AAI's  attention is Nagpur, where the project of 

77 
 
multi- modal hub airport has been delayed for the last three years. As regards, North - 
East, the Committee are disappointed to note that the Itanagar airport, which was 
envisaged in the special package, has so far received a meager sum of Rs 1 crore 
only. Arunachal Pradesh, due to its sensitive location, needs special attention. Thus, 
the committee recommend that the construction of Greenfield airport at Itanagar must 
be speeded up urgently. The Committee strongly urge the Ministry to look into all the 
above- stated matters and respond accordingly. Besides the Ministry must expedite 
the upgradation programme of all the 64 airports to prevent any cost escalations and 
time overruns, in consultation with the airport Advisory Committees at various airports. 
In the meantime, the Committee desire to be apprised of the scheduled and actual 
date of commencement, cost estimates, progressive actual expenditure upto 31 
March, 2012, delay, if any, along with reasons thereof and cost escalation of each of 
the 64 projects taken up by AAI. The Committee also desire that the responsibility may 
be fixed for delay and time- overruns in these projects. 
As regards other smaller airports, the Committee feel that airports providing 
connectivity to certain world famous shrines like Tirupati and Shirdi not only have great 
potential in terms of passenger load but are vital to promote religious tourism too. The 
Committee are happy that construction of terminal building for Shridi airport has 
already commenced, while obtaining of land clearance for Tirupati Airport terminal 
building needs to be pursued further. The comme ncement of night landing facility at 
Tirupati with due commercial and operational assessments, needs attention too. In this 
connection, the Committee appreciate to note that in response to the concern shown 
by them during their Study Visit in January 2012,  all the requisite logistic and other 
related requirements for night landing facility have been put in place at Tirupati Airport 
in the recent past. Some of the chartered flights have already started operating. 
Regarding the scheduled flights, it has been informed that many of the airlines have 
shown their keenness to start their services for night landing very soon. The 
Committee desire that all necessary steps should be taken by the concern authorities 
so that the various airlines operate their night serv ices at Tirupati Airport and the 
Committee be informed accordingly. Besides, in view of the great demand to connect 
Tirupati with Bangalore, which reportedly is not lucrative to the National carrier, the 

78 
 
Committee would like to suggest that the matter migh t be discussed with other 
scheduled airlines to explore a feasible solution.  
In so far as the metro airports are concerned, the Committee note that 
availability of buggies at Terminal- III of the Delhi Airport to the needy travellers  needs 
to be looked i nto, since many such passengers are unable to make use of the facility. 
The Committee would urge the Ministry to take up the matter with DIAL authorities and 
ensure compliance of Committee's suggestions. The noise pollution levels at all metro 
airports, particularly the Mumbai Airport, need to be brought down to the permission 
limits too. The Committee desire that the matter be appropriately addressed and would 
like to have a comprehensive report on all the issues raised herein. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Action Taken (A) 
Status of various airport projects: 
 
(i) Bhubaneswar: 
 Upgradation of the Airport is in progress. Works for strengthening and 
expansion of apron, taxiway and construction of additional taxiway has been 
completed at a cost of Rs.15 Crores. Construction of new domestic terminal building is 
nearing completion and is likely to be commissioned by December, 2012. After 
completion of the new Domestic Terminal Building, the operation shall be shifted from 
the existing Terminal Building, which shall be renovated and modified to cater to 
international flight operations and is expected to be completed by April, 2013. 
 
(ii) Bhatinda: 
 After necessary co -ordination with IAF, development of new Civil Enclave at 
Bhatinda Airport is completed. Pre -commissioning activities including obtaining of 
regulatory approvals is in progress. The new Civil Enclave shall be commissioned in 
the near future. Details are being sent to airline operators for attracting civil flight 
operations. 
 

79 
 
(iii) Patna: 
 The existing Airport is constrained due to non -availability of land and presence 
of obstacles in both directions of the Runway, such as Railway Track and Highway 
towards the West and Botanical Garden & Government Building in the East. Need for  
an alternate to Patna Airport has been emphasised upon the State Government. The 
State Government has to finalise a new location for construction of a new Airport at 
Patna. AAI has given comparative analysis for two sites i.e. (1) Nalanda Greenfield 
Airport and (2) Bihta Airport (Civil Enclave only, being a Defence Airport). AAI has also 
conveyed to the State Government to consider development of Greenfield  
 
(iv) Hubli 
 State Government of Karnataka has handed over the balance 27 Acres of land 
to AAI for development of the Airport. Action is initiated to provide a boundary wall 
around the acquired land to protect the land from encroachments. Further upgradation 
and development of Hubli Airport is at planning stage. 
 
(v) Kota: 
 The existing Airport is constrained for further development due to urbanisation 
around the airport. To facilitate operationalisation of the Airport for scheduled 
operation of ATR type of aircrafts,the St ate Government has been requested to 
transfer 14 Acres of land and undertake removal of identified obstacles. Response 
from the State Government is awaited. 
 
(vi) Gwalior (Civil Enclave): 
 Upgradation of Civil Enclave has been planned and proposed at an estimat ed 
cost of Rs.30 Crores. Request has been sent to the Planning Commission through 
MoCA for Grant-in-Aid from the Government. 
 
(vii) Nagpur: 
As per the information furnished by MIHAN India Limited, the Joint Venture 
Company that is executing this project, the pro ject of Multi -Modal Hub at Nagpur 

80 
 
continues to be stalled owing to the issue of vacation of land in the airport premises by 
Indian Air Force (IAF). The matter is under consideration of a joint committee of 
officers from Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Defence. 
 
(viii) Itanagar: 
 In view of the technical and operational suitability, the State Government of 
Arunachal Pradesh has given its acceptance of the new proposed site at Holongi in 
lieu of the earlier preferred site at Banderdeva. AAI has prepared the draft Master Plan 
for development of the Airport at Holongi. It is noted that the terrain at Holongi site 
permits operationalization both directions of the runway, as compared to Banderdeva 
site, which allowed unidirectional operatio n. AAI has requested the State Government 
to acquire 320 Hectares of land for development of new Greenfield Airport at Holongi. 
Pre-feasibility Study Report for the project has been submitted to MoCA and proposal 
also sent for DGCA and Defence clearances. 
 
(ix) Tirupati: 
 The State Government has made available 293 Acres of land out of the 
projected land requirement of 718 Acres. In the land made available, AAI has planed 
to construct a new integrated terminal building of capacity to handle 500 domestic 
passengers and 200 international passengers at a time &construction of new apron. 
An amount of Rs.174 Crores has been sanctioned towards the above works. AAI has 
completed the work for construction of new apron of size 330m X 140m with six 
parking bays at a cost o f Rs. 13 Crores. The work for construction of new terminal 
building was awarded, but the contract for the same had to be terminated on account 
of non -performance of the Contract Agency. Action for recall of tender has been 
initiated and the work is expecte d to be awarded by January, 2013. Further action for 
extension of runway, provision of approach lights & other facilities shall be taken up on 
balance land of 425 acres being made available to AAI. The State Government has 
also to take action for diversion  of Telugu Ganga Water Pipelines, Road, HT & Lines, 
Pylon Masts, etc, from the land to be acquired. 

81 
 
Details of the works completed and works -in progress indicating projects 
wherein revised cost has been obtained are enclosed as Annexure-IX & X . It is 
further to inform that compensation for the unjustified period of delay directly 
attributable to the Contract Agencies is levied on the Contract Agencies, as per the 
provisions of the agreement. 
 
Noise pollution levels at airports  - At Mumbai airport, noise abatement procedures 
have already been implemented for departing aircraft. These noise abatement 
procedures restrict aircraft sound dispersion on ground in the take -off direction only. 
Implementation of Continuous descent operat ions are being implemented at major 
airport in order to reduce noise impact on ground and promote emission reduction 
also. 
 
Action Taken (B) 
Delhi International Airport (P) Ltd. (DIAL) has posi tioned 32 buggies at 
Terminal-3 to assist PRMs (Passengers with  Reduced Mobility), Senior Citizens, 
Expected mothers and Infants. This Service is provided free of cost at all the times 
both at Arrival & Departure levels. Prominent & Conspicuous Signage's are placed on 
these buggies to enable passengers identify and avail the services.  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
The Committee note that the Strategic Plan prepared by the Ministry for the 
period 2010-15 has already identified inadequate trained manpower as a weakness in 
the Indian aviation sector while main taining a view that the existing training 
infrastructure may not be adequate to support the sector's growth from the currently 
nearly 32000 personnel to 90000 personnel by the year 2020. The said Plan has also 
identified the Indira Gandhi Rashtriya  Udan A cademy (IGRUA), Rae Bareli, the 
National Flying Training Institute, Gordia and the training institute of Pawan Hans 
Helicopters Ltd. as a combined resource to meet the required standards of 
performance of Human Resource (HR) in aviation. Further, the Commi ttee have learnt 
that it has been proposed that the National Institute of Aviation Management and 

82 
 
Research (NIAMR) at Delhi would be developed as a major resource for training of 
aviation related managers and personnel. The Committee are of the strong opin ion 
that more Government Institutes need to be added to the 17 existing institutes so as to 
train adequate personnel as per the requirements of the sector. The Committee desire 
to be apprised of the progress made in respect of each component of the Strateg ic 
Plan at the action taken stage. 
       From the Budgetary Outlays for the year 2011 -12, the Committee note that an 
amount of nearly Rs. 50 crore has been approved for HR development and 
establishment of training academies during the Year. Out of the sai d Outlay, an 
amount of RS. 30 Crore is allotted to the DGCA for creation of a helicopter academy 
as well as training academy  and the IGRUA has also received RS. 10 crore to 
establish a civil aviation training academy. An amount of Rs.6 crore has also been  
approved for the Aero Club of India for the purpose of flying training. The Committee 
would like to know the status of utilization of the allotted outlay and the progress on 
establishing the training academies, as the aviation sector is facing an acute la ck of 
suitably trained personnel. The Committee would also like to be apprised of further 
measures taken by the Ministry to meet the ever increasing demand for aircraft and 
helicopter pilots, Aeronautical engineers, cabin crew, aviation safety inspectors a nd air 
traffic controllers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Action Taken (A) 
IGRUA had received Rs.446.95 Lacs for up -gradation/creation of assets in the 
financial year 2011-12 as under:- 
1. Construction of Swimming Pool and conversion of existing Simulator Hall 
to Auditorium-Rs. 297.50 lacs. 
As IGRUA not have any ex pertise in the field of civil works, the project has been 
awarded to Airpo rts Authority of India as a deposit work for execution and Is in 
progress 
2. Projectors and Computers for Simulators- Rs. 18.00 lacs 
Orders were issued to the venders and the material under supply 

83 
 
 
3. Computer for Online Exam-Rs.37.00 lacs 
Order were issued to the venders and the material under supply 
4. Aircraft Engines- 46.50 lacs 
Order issued and engines are under supply. 
5. Furniture & Fixtures- Rs. 22.95 lacs 
Procurement of furniture is completed. 
 
Action Taken (B) 
Indian Aviation Academy was set up in the year 2010 with DGCA, AAI & BCAS 
as its three wings to cater to  the training requirement s of the staff of its member 
organizations. It is an off -shoot of NIAMAR society, registered under the Societies 
Registration act (1860) of the Govt. of India. Affairs of the NIAMAR Society are being 
managed by an apex body called  Governing Council. Chairperson, AAI is the 
President and DGCA is one of the Members. The Governing Council is assisted by the 
Governing Body which deals with administrative issues of NIAMAR Society 
A training directorate in DGCA with 19 Posts has been app roved. A list of posts 
sanctioned is enclosed. The process of recruitment for the different directorates is still 
going on. Once that is completed, the required number of officers form the directorates 
will be posted to the Training Directorate  
During the  financial year 2011 -2012, an amount of Rs.30.00 crore was 
allocated under the head “major works” and no money was released towards 
establishment of Training Academy of DGCA. In this SFC meeting held on 24.04.2012, 
clearance has been given for investment o f Rs. 43.54 crores for creating requisite 
infrastructure for the Academy. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
29  April, 2013              
Vaisakha 9, 1935(S) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 

84 
 
Appendix - I 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2012-13) 
--- 
  The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 26th April, 2013 from 1000 to 1100 hrs in 
Chairman‟s Chamber (52 B), Parliament House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
   Shri Francisco Sardinha - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
   2. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
   3. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
   4. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
   5. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
   6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
   7. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
   8. Shri S. Semmalai 
   9. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
   10. Shri Ijyaraj Singh      
  
   11. Smt. Annu Tandon 
 
SECRETARIAT 
   1. Smt. Anita B. Panda- Director 
   2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda – Additional Director 
   3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar – Deputy Secretary 
 

85 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee.     
****  ****  ****  ****  ****  **** 
****  ****  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft report on  
the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  on the subject „Development and Regulation 
of Civil Aviation‟ pertaining to the Ministry of Civil Aviation and adopted the same 
subject to following addition to para number 1.22 of Chapter-I of the draft Report:- 
“The Committee desire that the Ministry should furnish details of number of 
accredited/recognized Airline Transport and Commercial Pilots training 
institutes, training institutes operating without valid license and the fee charged 
by these institutes for training purposes. The Committee also desire that details 
of the training institutes operating without valid licenses be displayed on the 
website of the DGCA/Ministry of Civil Aviation”. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the report 
 
****  ****  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
5. As the Committee‟s term will end on 30.04.2013 and this being the last sitting of 
Committee on Estimates (2012 -13), the Chairman thanked to Members for extending 
their full cooperation in smooth functioning of the Committee placed on record, his 
appreciation for their valuable contribution to the work of the Committee. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
    

86 
 
APPENDIX -II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FOURTEENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i)  Total number of recommendations/observations    17   
(ii)  Recommendations/observation which have been   9 
accepted by the Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 &16) 
Percentage of total recommendations          52.94% 
(iii)  Recommendation/observation which the Committee   1 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s reply 
(Sl. No. 4) 
Percentage of total recommendations          5.88% 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of    0 
which Government‟s replies have not been accepted 
by the Committee 
(Sl. No. Nil) 
Percentage of total recommendations               0% 
(v)  Recommendation/Observation in respect of which   7 
final replies of Government are still awaited.  
(Sl. Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15 & 17) 
Percentage of total recommendations          41.18% 
 
 
 