 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
PROCUREMENT AND STORAGE OF 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
_______ ______________________________________ 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION 
 
PROCUREMENT AND STORAGE OF 
FOODGRAINS 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2013-2014) 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
______________________________________ 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 29 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
PROCUREMENT AND STORAGE OF 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]  
______________________________________  

 
TWENTY 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
PROCUREMENT AND STORAGE OF FOODGRAINS 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report ( Fifteenth 
Presented to Lok 
     …………..December, 2013/ ……Agrahayana, 1935(S) 
______________________________________________________ 
 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION 
PROCUREMENT AND STORAGE OF FOODGRAINS 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
_______ 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 December, 2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
…………..December, 2013/ ……Agrahayana, 1935(S) 
______________________________________________________ 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
PROCUREMENT AND STORAGE OF FOODGRAINS  
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]  
Sabha on 12 December, 2013  
…………..December, 2013/ ……Agrahayana, 1935(S) 
______________________________________________________ __ 

 
 
 
EC No. ____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price Rs.____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2004 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Gove rnment of India Press, Minto Road, New 
Delhi. 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE  NO.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14) (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
11  
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
40  
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
46  
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect o f which final replies 
of Government are still awaited 
60  
 APPENDICES   
I Minutes of the sitting of the Study Group of the Co mmittee on 
Estimates held on 09 December, 2013 
88  
II  Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Committee o n Estimates 
(2013-14) held on 09 December, 2013 
90  
III  Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on t he 
recommendations/observations contained in the Eight eenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  
92  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14) 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
4 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
5 Shri Khagen Das 
6 Shri Pralhad Joshi 
7 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
8 Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
11 Kum. Meenakshi Natrajan 
12 Shri Prabodh Panda 
13 Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu ” 
14 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
15 Shri R. Sambasiva Rao 
16 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
17 Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
18 Shri S. Semmalai 
19 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
20 Shri M.I. Shanavas 
21 Shri Adhi Sankar  
22 Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
23 Shri Ganesh Singh 
24 Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
25 Shri Jagada Nand Singh 
26 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
27 Smt. Annu Tandon 
28 Shri Mukul Wasnik 
29 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
  
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
 1.        Shri A. Louis Martin    -         Joint Secretary   
 2.        Smt. Anita B. Panda            -        Director  
 3.        Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar   -        Deputy Secretary 
 4.        Shri L. Shantikumar Singh   -        Com mittee Assistant    
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2013-14 ) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, pr esent this Twenty Ninth Report on action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations cont ained in the Eighteenth Report of the 
Committee (2012-13) on the subject ‘Procurement and  Storage of Foodgrains’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distr ibution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution).   
2. The Eighteenth Report of the Committee on Estima tes (2012-13) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 19 December, 2012. The Government furnishe d their replies indicating action taken 
on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report on 17 June, 2013. Additional 
Replies on the Recommendations numbering 7 and 8 we re furnished by the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperat ion) on 25 October, 2013. The draft report 
was considered and approved on 9 
 December, 2013 by the Study Group of the Committee on 
Estimates, constituted to consider the action taken  replies furnished by the Government. 
Thereafter, the Report was adopted by the Committee on the same day. 
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on  the recommendations contained in 
the Second Report of Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix III.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
     December, 2013              
Agrahayana ___,1935(Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Rep ort of the Committee on 
Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Pro curement and Storage of 
Foodgrains’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
1.2 The Committee’s Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lo k Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 19 December, 2012. It contained 25 Recomme ndations/Observations. Action 
Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/O bservations were received from 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public D istribution (Department of Food and 
Public Distribution) on 17 June, 2013. Action Taken  Notes in respect of two 
recommendations were also received from the Ministr y of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation) on 25 October, 2013. 
1.3 Replies to the Recommendations/Observations con tained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been ac cepted by the 
Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 7, 10, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21 & 24  
Total = 12 
(Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
 Sl. No. 6, 22                                 
Total = 2 
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich the Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos. 11, 18  
Total = 2 
(Chapter IV) 

 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 2, 5, 8, 9, 12, 13, 17, 23 & 25  
Total = 9 
(Chapter V) 
 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that final replies to the Recommendation Nos. 2, 5, 8, 
9, 12, 13, 17, 23 and 25 and response to comments c ontained in Chapter I of this 
Report should be furnished expeditiously. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by Government on some of 
the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.  Inadequate and Ineffective Procurement, Storage  and Distribution 
 Management System 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
1.6 In the light of the sharp increase in foodgrain s production and the inadequacy of 
the existing storage capacity, the Committee, in th eir original report, had recommended 
that the Ministry and the Food Corporation of India  (FCI), which coordinates the overall 
foodgrains operation, should analyse and deal with procurement, storage and 
distribution scenario so that the problems of abund ance and distribution of foodgrains 
are resolved. In this connection, the Committee des ired to be apprised of the 
procurement centres opened in the country during th e current year for wheat, rice and 
coarse grains. Besides, the Committee had also recommended for the creation of better 
logistics support without any delay so that FCI and  other procuring agencies can 
manage the bountiful harvest in the most effective manner. The Committee had also 
desired to be informed, in detail about revised buf fer norms, automation and 
strengthening of Targeted Public Distribution Syste m (TPDS), expansion of Antodaya 
Anna Yojana (AAY), etc., which are currently underw ay for better management of 
foodgrains. 

 
 
1.7 In response, the Department of Food & Public Di stribution, in its action taken 
reply dated 17 June, 2013, has stated that it holds  conference of the State Food 
Secretaries and the representatives of the Ministry  of Agriculture and other relevant 
agencies including FCI twice every year, one before  the onset of Kharif Marketing 
Season and the other before Rabi Marketing Season s o as to analyse the production 
estimates made by the Ministry of Agriculture for t he concerned crop year and to make 
a procurement plan including the number of procurem ent centres required, requirement 
of packaging material and making estimates of procu rement. Accordingly, various 
arrangements for the procurement operation are made  by FCI and concerned State 
agencies. In this connection, the information regar ding 49219 purchase centres for 
Kharif Marketing Season 2012-13 and those of Rabi M arketing Season 2013-14 
(provisional) has been furnished to the Committee. The Ministry is stated to be regularly 
monitoring the programmes of procurement for ensuring flow of price support benefits to 
the farmers and proper storage of foodgrains. Detai ls of various steps taken to address 
the issue of mismatch between production, procureme nt, storage and distribution of 
foodgrains have also been furnished.  
1.8 The Committee note the steps taken to correct m ismatch between 
production, procurement, storage and distribution o f foodgrains as well as 
measures like automation and strengthening of TPDS,  revision of buffer norms, 
etc. to have better coverage of public distribution  of foodgrains and desire to be 
apprised of their status as on date. Further, they feel that with the passing of the 
National Food Security Bill by the Parliament, the Ministry now faces an onerous 
task of undertaking necessary reforms in the TDPS a nd  to re-engineer strategies 
for procurement, storage and distribution of foodgrains, without any delay. In this 
connection the Committee cannot but reiterate their  earlier recommendation for 
creating better logistics support to manage the bou ntiful harvest and to improve 
current procurement in the most effective manner, o n which no specific 
information has been furnished. The Committee would  like to be informed about 
the plans of the Government accordingly. Besides, t he Committee would like to 
be updated about the buffer norms which have report edly been under revision to 
meet the requirement of foodgrains under the Nation al Food Security Bill, 2013. 

 
 
As regards purchase centres opened for wheat and pa ddy for the farmers during 
the current year in various States, the Committee d esire to know the reasons for 
non-opening of any purchase centre in Jharkhand by either FCI or State 
Agencies. 
B. Under-achievement of Decentralized Procurement (DCP) Scheme 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)  
1.9 Expressing serious concern over the mismatch be tween estimated procurement 
and actual procurement of wheat and rice during 200 7-08 to 2011-12 across the 10 
DCP States/UT viz. Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Chhat tisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Uttarakhand, West B engal and Tamil Nadu, the 
Committee had inter alia urged the Ministry to critically examine the reason s for under-
achievement of procurement of wheat and rice and ac cordingly take urgent steps to 
maintain the buffer stock position and achieve the objective of food security. Further, 
noting that the State of Uttar Pradesh has withdraw n from the DCP system from 
KMS/RMS, 2010-11, the Committee desired to know rea sons therefor. The Committee 
had also urged the Ministry, if need be, to have a relook at the DCP Scheme and bring 
about requisite changes with inputs from the DCP States.  
1.10 The Department of Food & Public Distribution i n its action taken reply, has inter-
alia  stated that although meetings are held for determi ning estimates of procurement of 
wheat and rice for a particular year, the actual pr ocurement, however, varies due to 
factors such as the open-ended policy of procuremen t, market availability, market 
prices/trade, announcement of bonuses by the State Governments, etc. Further, as 
there is no shrinkage of stocks in the Central Pool  during the last few years, and 
procurement is much higher than the estimates, ther efore, no immediate need is felt to 
review the DCP Scheme at this stage. As regards wit hdrawal of UP from DCP scheme 
on the stated reasons of pending procurement incide ntals and delay in receipt of food 
subsidy bills, it has been stated that in certain c ases, the delay was on the part of the 
State Government in submitting their claims. It has  further been stressed that the 
payment of food subsidy under DCP mode is more advantageous to State Governments 
than under non-DCP mode. 

 
 
1.11 Though the Department of Food & Public Distribution  has taken a stand 
that under DCP mode, payment of subsidy, being rele ased as advance upto 90% 
of the value of likely offtake, is more advantageou s to States, one of the reasons 
cited by the U.P. Government, which is among the la rgest wheat producers, to 
withdraw from the scheme is delay in receipt of foo d subsidy bills. The 
Department of Food & Public Distribution has stated  that in certain cases, the 
delay was on the part of the State Government in su bmitting their claims. The 
Department of Food & Public Distribution has not ho wever given any details in 
this regard. Under such instances the Committee are  unable to accept the 
Ministry’s stand that no immediate need is felt to review the DCP scheme. As few 
more States like Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan have adopted the DCP mode 
recently, the Committee desire that the modalities of the scheme may be looked 
into to ensure that such complaints do not take place in future.  
 
C.  Low Awareness among farmers about Minimum Support Price and the 
 National Level Procurement Agency 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
1.12 While noting the report of National Sample Sur vey Organisation which revealed 
extremely low awareness among the farmer households with regard to MSP, i.e. only 19 
per cent and out of this, only 10 per cent were awa re of the concept of MSP but not of 
the national level procurement agency, the Committe e had recommended that the 
Ministry should carry out an impact assessment surv ey to study the extent of denial of 
benefits of MSP among farmers which might have led to distress sale of their 
foodgrains. The Committee had also recommended for better coordination between the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distrib ution and the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting for telecasting programmes which f ocus on disseminating updated 
information on the trends of prices in national, re gional and local mandis, fair price 
shops, regional procurement agencies, etc. so that the farmers can realize the best 
price for their agricultural produce. 
 

 
 
1.13 The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Publi c Distribution in the action taken 
reply dated 17.06.2013 had informed that in so far as procurement of wheat and rice is 
concerned, the MSP for these items are announced we ll ahead of the start of crop year 
and are well published through mass media as well a s by sufficient purchase centres. 
The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricult ure & Cooperation), in their action 
taken reply dated 25 October, 2013, has inter-alia  stated that the Ministry is presently 
implementing a Central Sector Scheme called "Mass M edia Support to Agricultural 
Extension" and furnished details of the same. Under  this scheme, existing infrastructure 
of Doordarshan and 96 rural FM Radio Stations under  All India Radio are being utilized 
to make farmers aware about agricultural inputs, mo dern farm technologies and 
researches related to agriculture and allied areas.  The Ministry has also stated that 
Doordarshan is being further requested to ensure th at while airing and telecasting 
programmes for farmers like Krishi Darshan, special  thrust is given on disseminating 
updated information on the trends of prices in nati onal, regional and local mandis, fair 
price shops, regional procurement centres, etc. so that farmers can judge the best price 
for their agriculture produce. 
 
1.14 While noting the efforts of both the Ministrie s in bringing better awareness 
among farmers on the trends of prices for agricultu ral produce, it appears that no 
impact assessment survey has been conducted by the Ministry of Agriculture to 
study the extent of denial of benefits of MSP among farmers which might have led 
to distress sale of their foodgrains. The Committee  reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire to be apprised of the out come of the impact 
assessment survey. 
 
D. Vigilance Mechanism in Targeted Public Distribution System (TDPS) 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
1.15 Expressing their disappointment over the incom plete information furnished by the 
Ministry with regard to disposal of 587 complaints in connection with the functioning of 
the TPDS (Targeted Public Distribution System), the  Committee had urged the Ministry 
to expeditiously devise mechanism for an early redr essal of complaints registered by 

 
 
individuals, organizations, etc. against the Fair P rice Shops (FPS). Further they had 
opined that quality control of the foodgrains distr ibuted under the TPDS should be a 
matter of priority, for which the Vigilance Committ ees in States must meet regularly. 
Besides, for increasing transparency in functioning  of FPS, the Committee had 
recommended for compliance of instructions issued i n 2008 to State/UT Governments 
to have monthly certification by Village Panchayats /Vigilance Committee/Urban Local 
Bodies/Self Help Groups for delivery of foodgrains to ration card holders by all State 
Governments/UTs. 
1.16 In the action taken reply, the Department of F ood & Public Distribution has inter-
alia  stated that there is a set procedure of joint insp ection/sampling of stocks by State 
Government and FCI to ensure that quality of foodgr ains issued under PDS are as per 
prescribed norms. The Committee have been apprised that whenever complaints about 
irregularities in implementation of TPDS including quality of foodgrains distributed under 
the PDS in certain regions/States in the country ar e received, these are sent to the 
State/UT Governments concerned for inquiry and appr opriate action. Steps taken to 
ensure that only good quality foodgrains are issued  for PDS have been furnished which 
inter-alia  include supplying of only good quality foodgrains free from insect infestation 
and conforming to Prevention of Food Adulteration A ct; collection of sample of 
foodgrains from the stocks of foodgrains to be issued under the TPDS jointly by FCI and 
State Food and Civil Supplies Department; deputation of an officer not below the rank of 
Inspector from State Government to take the deliver y of foodgrains stocks from FCI 
godowns; regular inspection to check the quality of  foodgrains by the officers of State 
Government and surprise checks by the officers of Q uality Control Cell of the Ministry, 
etc. It has been stated that the State Government, where the decentralized procurement 
is in operation, should ensure that the quality of foodgrains issued under TPDS and 
other welfare schemes should meet the desired stand ards under the Food Safety and 
Standards Act (formerly PFA). 
 The Department of Food & Public Distribution has a lso informed that during the 
Conference of State Food Secretaries on Best Practi ces and Reforms in the Targeted 
Public Distribution System held on 12-13 July, 2010 , it was inter-alia  resolved that 

 
 
grievance redressal should be undertaken by States/ UTs through toll free call centres 
and web-based complaint registration and monitoring  systems. The Central 
Government has issued Guidelines dated 31.01.2013 t o all States/UTs for setting up of 
a toll free helpline number in States/UTs for redre ssal of grievances under the TPDS. 
Financial assistance for setting up of helpline num ber is also being provided by 
Department of Consumer Affairs for State Consumer Helpline and under the scheme for 
Computerisation of TPDS Operations.  
 In response to the specific issues raised by the C ommittee, the Department has 
informed that for the State of Uttar Pradesh, the M inistry has advised them to 
expeditiously devise suitable mechanism including s pecial drive for early redressal of 
the complaints.  
 As far as implementation of the revised model Citi zen Charter is concerned, the 
Committee have been informed that all States have a dopted/implemented it except the 
State of Jharkhand for which the matter is being pursued by the Ministry.  
 With regard to the functioning of Vigilance Commit tees, the Committee have 
been apprised that the Central Government has been requesting the State/UT 
Governments from time to time to activate these Com mittees and reconstitute them, if 
not done so already. 
 As far as the implementation of monthly certificat ion system by Village 
Panchayat/Urban Local Bodies/Vigilance Committees, Women’s Self Help Groups, the 
Ministry has apprised the Committee that so far 23 States/UTs have reported 
introduction of the said certification and for the remaining 12 States/UTs, the 
Department has reportedly advised them to take nece ssary measures for its 
introduction.   
1.17  Though the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Pub lic Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) has acce pted that there have been 
reports about irregularities in implementation of T PDS, their action taken reply is 
completely silent on the updated status on the redr essal of 587 complaints as 
status of only 9 complaints was made available to t he Committee earlier. The 

 
 
Committee would, therefore, urge for expeditious ac tion in this regard, if not 
already done and submit a status report within one month from the presentation 
of this report.  
 The Committee further note that in pursuance to th eir recommendation, the 
Ministry has taken suitable steps to check and ensu re quality control of the 
foodgrains distributed under the TPDS for instance,  issuing of Guidelines to 
States/UTs for setting up of a toll free helpline n umber, requesting the State/UT 
Governments to activate vigilance committees etc. T he Committee hope that the 
Ministry will ensure strict and timely compliance s o as to rule out any complaints 
against the quality of the foodgrains distributed under PDS. 
 
E.  Inadequate Storage Capacity 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
1.18 Alarmed over the inadequate storage capacity i n the country, the Committee had 
exhorted the Ministry to make sincere efforts to cr eate additional storage capacity at the 
earliest so that at least one big godown is constru cted in each State. The Committee 
had also desired that storage gap should be periodi cally calculated and construction 
targets set accordingly to attain a perfect balance  between procurement and storage of 
foodgrains. The Committee had also recommended that  proper and regular pest control 
and humidity treatments of godowns should be given top priority by the Ministry. 
1.19 The Department in the action taken reply has inter-alia stated that as on 
01.03.2013, the Central Warehousing Corporation (CW C) is operating 466 warehouses 
with 105.55 lakh MT capacity for storage of foodgra ins, agri input and produce and 
other notified commodities. The Department has also  informed that during the last 5 
years, the percentage of utilisation of the storage capacity is consistently increasing and 
CWC has plans to construct 2.20 lakh MT in various States during the year 2013-14. As 
on 28.02.2013, total covered storage capacity avail able to FCI is 310.01 lakh MT. A 
capacity of 197.14 lakh MT has been approved under PEG Scheme in 19 States of the 
Country. On completion of sanctioned capacities und er PEG total covered capacities 

 
 
available with FCI would be more than 500 lakh MT; the sufficient stock of buffer and 
strategic reserves for the Public Distribution Syst em. Apart from covered capacities, 
26.37 lakh MT CAP capacities are owned by FCI and 1 1.12 lakh MT CAP capacity is 
hired which can be used for short-term storage of w heat in procuring States.  Also 194 
lakh MT of covered storage capacity and 147 lakh MT  CAP capacity exists with the 
State Government agencies in the Country.  
Further, the Department has informed the Committee that under PEG Scheme, it 
is being ensured that all consuming States have a m inimum storage capacity of 4 
months of PDS requirement. Additional capacities ha ve been sanctioned in the 
emerging surplus States like Bihar, West Bengal, et c. North-Eastern States are the 
beneficiaries under Plan Scheme with proposals for construction of 5.37 lakh MT 
capacity, which would remove the regional imbalance s in storage capacity. After the 
total capacity approved under Plan and PEG scheme i s realized, the country will have 
sufficient capacity to handle buffer and strategic reserves.  
 
1.20 The Committee had, inter alia, suggested expeditious implementation of 
the Supreme Court order to have at least one big go down in each State. From the 
reply, it appears that at present storage capacity exists only in 12 States viz. 
Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh , Chandigarh, Odisha, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Gujarat, Ke rala and Rajasthan. The 
Committee desire to be apprised whether the storage  requirements of remaining 
States/UTs have been identified and addressed suita bly. They desire that a note 
on the action taken on the same may be furnished to  them providing State-wise 
information. 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
   India is bestowed with rich and diverse agro-cli matic conditions favourable for the 
cultivation of various foodgrains and commercial crops. With the various initiatives taken 
by the Government to augment agricultural productio n, the era of foodgrains shortage 
and dependence on imports has transformed into self -sufficiency and occasional 
surpluses. Today, the country is the largest produc er of wheat, cashew nuts, milk and 
tea and second largest producer of vegetables and f ruits in the world. In the last fifty 
years, wheat production has increased almost ten ti mes and rice production has shown 
a growth of around four times. However, as around 3 7 per cent of the total population 
falls Below Poverty Line (BPL), problem of hunger is still widespread. Consequently, the 
procurement of foodgrains, maintenance and shortage  of stocks and effective 
distribution to the people through the Targeted Pub lic Distribution System (TPDS) and 
Other Welfare Schemes (OWSs) continue to be big cha llenges faced by the 
Government.  
 
An effective and efficient management of foodgrains  policy should aim at 
ensuring farmers to get the remunerative price for their produce and also pave the way 
for distribution of foodgrains at subsidized prices to the poor and needy. The Committee 
note that India’s foodgrains management policy emph asizes the need to achieve the 
twin objectives of providing remunerative prices to  farmers and building up a buffer 
stock, together with availability of foodgrains at affordable prices to the BPL population 
under the TPDS and Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY). At the same time, the Committee 
observe that in the recent years, even with bountif ul harvest of Rabi and Kharif crops, 
there has been substantial amount of loss of 50,000  MT of foodgrains due to 
mismanagement of procurement as well as inadequate and faulty storage techniques. 
This has brought renewed focus on the twin challeng es of feeding the poor and 
overhauling the procurement, storage and distributi on infrastructure for foodgrains. The 

 
 
paradoxical situation of record foodgrains producti on as well as its wastage on one 
hand and a substantial part of the population wallo wing in poverty, famine and hunger 
on the other hand led the Committee to select this subject for detailed examination and 
report to Parliament. In the process, the Committee  obtained Background Note, Annual 
Report and written replies on several points from the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Pub lic Distribution) and also had 
thorough deliberations on the subject with the repr esentatives of the Ministry on 30th 
April, 2012. Based on consolidated written and oral  information, the Committee has 
identified certain critical issues for instance, sa turation for procurement in North and 
North-Western parts of the country, non-existence o f an efficient and well developed 
machinery for foodgrains management in the non-trad itional procuring States, non-
adoption of Decentralized Procurement of foodgrains  by many States even after 15 
years of the implementation of the scheme, problem of universal Minimum Support 
Price (MSP), problem of increasing food subsidy cos ts, complaints regarding Public 
Distribution System (PDS), ineffective mechanism of  quality control of foodgrains, 
absence of Vigilance Committees in some of the Stat es/UTs, acute storage gap 
between intermediate and actual storage capacity, inadequate godowns/warehouses for 
storage of foodgrains, faulty techniques of storage  and the challenge before the 
Government regarding procurement and distribution o f foodgrains to complement the 
various provisions enunciated in the Draft National  Food Security Bill, 2011. The 
Committee’s observations and recommendations on the se issues have been 
enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 While examining the issue of production and procure ment of foodgrains all over 
India, the Committee observe that production and pr ocurement of foodgrains in the 
Northern and North-Western parts of the country hav e already reached dizzying heights 
following the Green Revolution. The Committee stron gly feel that the time has come for 
the Ministry to pay special attention to increase p rocurement from the non-traditional 
procuring States through an efficient and well deve loped machinery. The Committee also 
recommend that efforts should be made by the Minist ry to effectively utilize the State 

 
 
Government agencies by equipping them with the requ isite capability to handle complex 
process of procurement of foodgrains. In this regar d, the Committee would like the 
Ministry to come out with a detailed plan of action  after due consultation with the 
representatives of the non-traditional procuring St ates. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the action taken and the progress ma de in this regard during the action 
taken stage. 
Reply of the Government 
 In  non-traditional States, the procurement of wheat an d rice has increased 
considerably during the last few years and the deta ils are appended as Annexure III  and 
IV respectively. 
 
 In order to improve procurement operations in non- traditional procuring States, 
the Department of Food & Public Distribution has be en emphasizing upon the States to 
undertake procurement operations in decentralized m ode. This method of procurement 
has certain advantages such as the efficiency of pr ocurement and public distribution 
system is enhanced, local procurement is encouraged  and the out go of subsidy is 
reduced. The surplus of foodgrains procured by DCP States, in excess of their TPDS 
requirement, is handed over to FCI for the Central Pool stocks and deficit, if any, is met 
by FCI. The State Governments have also been advise d to improve their marketing 
infrastructure, availability of credit and resource s, storage facilities and manpower 
through State agencies for having effective procure ment operations. Some States have 
adopted innovative methods like E-procurement operations for creating data base of the 
farmers in advance to ensure that the produce of th e farmers only is procured at the 
purchase centres with genuine identification etc. a nd the payment is made to these 
genuine farmers only through cheques drawn in their  favour. In major producing areas 
of these non-traditional States, the FCI is also im proving its storage capacity through 
PEG scheme to take care of storage of procured food grains by the State agencies in 
future.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Annexure-III  
 
 
 
Wheat Procurement during Five Previous Seasons (RMSs) 
 
(fig. in LMTs) 
 
Marketing Year  
 
M.P.  Rajasthan  Gujarat  Bihar  U.P.  
2008-09 24.1 9.35 4.15 5.0 31.38 
2009-10 19.68 11.52 0.75 4.97 38.82 
2010-11 35.38 4.76 0.01 1.83 16.45 
2011-12 49.65 13.03 1.05 5.56 34.61 
2012-13 84.93 19.64 1.56 7.38 50.63 
 
 
 
Annexure-IV 
 
 
Procurement of Rice during Five Previous Seasons (KMSs) 
 
 
(fig. in LMTs) 
 
Marketing Year  
 
Chhattisgarh  Orissa  Tamil Nadu  Bihar  
2007-08 27.43 23.57 9.69 5.55 
2008-09 28.48 28.01 12.01 10.83 
2009-10 33.57 24.96 12.41 8.9 
2010-11 37.46 24.65 15.43 8.83 
2011-12 41.15 28.66 15.96 15.34 
 
  

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee observe that with the objective to r educe the over-dependence of 
the State Governments on the Food Corporation of In dia (FCI), the Government 
introduced the scheme of Decentralised Procurement (DCP) of foodgrains in 1997-98. 
Under this scheme, the State/UT Governments themsel ves undertake direct purchase 
of paddy and wheat and procurement of levy rice on behalf of Government of India. 
They also store and distribute foodgrains under TPD S and OWSs. The scheme is 
currently being implemented in 10 States/Union Terr itories viz. Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil 
Nadu, Uttarakhand and West Bengal. The Committee no te that the scheme has been 
successful particularly in procurement of rice in n on-traditional States viz. Chhattisgarh, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Tamil Nadu durin g the period 2007-08 to 2011-
12. In case of procurement of wheat, three Decentra lized Procurement States viz. 
Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat have shown tremendous pr ogress. The State of Uttar 
Pradesh (2007-08 to 2009-10) has also shown remarka ble increase in the procurement 
of wheat, however, as per the Ministry, it has with drawn from the DCP System from 
Kharif Marketing Season/Rabi Marketing Season 2010-11. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the reasons for the same. The examin ation of the DCP scheme has 
further revealed some grey areas. For instance, the re has been a mismatch between 
estimated procurement and actual procurement of whe at and rice across the 10 DCP 
States during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12. It has  also been observed that the actual 
procurement of wheat by the State of Uttarakhand ha s remained below its estimated 
procurement since 2007-08 i.e. out of estimated pro curement range of 1 to 1.45 lakh 
tonnes, the achievement has been less than its esti mation except in 2009-10. Whereas 
the actual procurement of rice has remained below i ts estimated procurement in the 
State of Karnataka i.e. the estimated procurement i s in the range of 0.5 to 2 lakh tonnes 
whereas the actual procurement has been in the range of 0.19 to 1.8 lakh tonnes during 
the said period. The Committee would like the Minis try to critically examine the reasons 
for the underachieved procurement of wheat and rice  in these States and would like to 
be apprised of the steps/measures taken for ensurin g pro-active procurement by these 
States. The Committee apprehend that unless urgent steps are taken, it might affect the 

 
 
buffer stock position and consequently put food sec urity at risk in these States. They, 
therefore, recommend that if need be, the Ministry should have a relook at the DCP 
scheme, especially its present procurement system, and bring about the requisite 
changes with the inputs from these States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government of Uttar Pradesh had been procuring  rice under the DCP 
Scheme upto KMS 2008-09, but have discontinued the system after this period, on the 
stated grounds of pending procurement incidentals a nd delay in receipt of food subsidy 
bills. It is clarified that the delay, in certain c ases in this regard, was on account of delay 
on the part of the State Government in submitting their claims.  
 
Under DCP mode, the payment of food subsidy is more  advantageous for the 
State Government/Agencies as in the beginning of ea ch quarter, 90% of the value of the 
likely offtake is released as advance.  Further, im mediately after the end of the quarter, 
as soon as claim is submitted by the State Governme nt/Agencies, 100% of the fixed cost 
and 95% of the variable cost is released as provisi onal subsidy.  However, in case of 
non-DCP State, there is no system for payment of ad vance and subsidy is released to 
the State Government/Agencies only after delivery of the foodgrains for central pool. 
 
Regarding the estimates of procurement it is stated  that meetings are held with the 
Food Secretaries of the respective states before th e commencement of Rabi / Kharif 
marketing season, and estimates are prepared on the  basis of inputs given by the 
respective states. The actual procurement however, varies due to various factors such 
as the open ended policy of procurement, market ava ilability, market prices/trade, 
announcement of bonuses by the State Governments et c. However, there is no 
shrinkage of stocks in Central Pool during last few  years, and procurement is much 
higher than the estimates. Therefore, no immediate need is felt to review the DCP 
Scheme at this stage. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I) 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 Fixing of Minimum Support Price (MSP) for rice, whe at and coarse grains plays a 
major role in the procurement of foodgrains. From t he information provided by the 
Ministry, the Committee note that the Commission of  Agricultural Cost and Price (CACP) 
recommends the fixing of MSP to the Government base d on a complex process of 
assessment by consulting the State Governments and other stakeholders.                
  
          In this connection, the Committee note th at an expert Committee appointed in 
2003 had recommended certain other items of costs t o be included in MSP such as, the 
premium actually paid by farmers for crop insurance , marketing and transport charges 
incurred by farmers, imputing value of family labou r on actual market rate for casual 
labour in cost estimates, cost of living, level of wages, cost structure of agro-based 
products and the competitiveness of agriculture and  agro-based commodities. As per 
the Ministry though these factors were considered, yet MSP is finally declared on an 
average basis uniformly for a single crop in the wh ole country to avoid distortion of 
market economies and also to check inter-State grai n movement to get higher MSPs. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry should find ways and means to correct the bias 
against certain other coarse cereals like Kodo/Vara gee and pulses (those not covered 
under MSP) grown in rain fed regions and mostly by poor farmers. The Committee feel 
that the poor farmers need incentive and support to  grow coarse cereals which 
undoubtedly have high nutritive value and would urg e the Government to explore the 
possibility of providing incentive on acreage basis  to the farmers to cultivate coarse 
cereals in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 Since Department of Agriculture & Co-operation are  concerned with the 
recommendation, the matter was taken up with them and their comments are as under:- 
 
1. Extension 
 :- A provision of Rs.4000/- acre has been made under A TMA scheme 
for conducting Front Line Demonstrations in differe nt crops.  Scheme also provides that 
at least 50% beneficiaries must be small & marginal farmers.  
2. CROPS :- 

 
 
 
a. Pulses :-  As far as MSP is concerned, ruling price of Pulses  is quite high and 
major crops are covered under MSP, i.e. Pigeonpea, Blackgram, Greengram, 
Bengalgram and Lentil.  Crops not covered under MSP , viz., Fieldpea, Cowpea, 
Lathyrus (Khesari), Frenchbean (Rajmash), Cowpea (L obia), Mothbean and Horsegram 
(Kulthi) may be considered by CACP under MSP to protect the farmers’ interest.  
 
  In the past few years, the MSPs of pulses crops h ave been enhanced significantly 
ranging from 70% to 160% over the last five years.  The Producer-Farmer Organization 
through small Farmers Agri-business Consortium (SFA C) is being promoted for 
aggregation for effective backward and forward link ages with market.  The Central 
Agency like NAFED and State Governments are asked t o open purchasing centres in 
major pulses growing areas to benefit the pulses growers by ensuring MSP. 
b. Coarse cereals 
 :-   MSP is available in case of coarse cereals na mely maize, 
sorghum, pearl millet and finger millet.  CACP may be requested to consider MSP for 
small millet like kodo (Varagee), kutki, cheena, barnyard and foxtail millet etc.  
 
2. NRM/RFS :-  In order to ensure agriculture growth in the ra infed areas, this 
Department is implementing “Rainfed Area Developmen t Programme (RADP)”  as a 
sub-scheme under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKV Y).  RADP is a farmer centric 
programme focusing on Integrated Farming System (IF S) based on agri-climatic 
conditions for enhancing productivity.  Under IFS d ifferent Cropping Systems (CS) 
including Coarse cereal bases system are integrated  with livestock, horticulture, 
fisheries etc., for enhancing farmers’ income and food security at farm level.  
 
Reply of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (Ministry of Agriculture) 
dated 25.10.2013 
In order to promote cultivation and consumption of millets based food products, 
the Government is implementing a subscheme under Ra shtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
(RKVY) on “Initiative for Nutritional Security thro ugh Intensive Millets Promotion 
(INSIMP)” which aims to demonstrate the improved pr oduction and post-harvest 
technologies in an integrated manner with visible i mpact to catalyze increase in 

 
 
production of millets in the country. Besides incre asing production of millets, the 
Scheme through processing and value addition techni ques is expected to generate 
consumer demand for millet based food products. The  implementation of the scheme 
was allowed with an allocation of Rs.175 crores dur ing 2012-13. The scheme is also 
under implementation during 2013-14 with an allocation of Rs. 100 crores. 
 
 Technology demonstration kits of critical inputs o f nutrients and plant protection 
measures comprising of micro-nutrients, fungicides and bio-fertilizers, DAP, urea, 
potash and pesticides including weedicides at a tot al cost of Rs. 3,000/- per ha for 
sorghum, pearl millet and finger millet and Rs. 2,0 00/- per ha for small millets would be 
supplied to all the farmers in the units. These kit s would be supplied free of cost to the 
beneficiary farmers subject to maximum area of 2 he ctare. Besides, to popularize the 
improved varieties/hybrids of millet crops, seed mi nikits for 0.40 ha area for every one 
hectare of area covered under demonstration was als o to be supplied. Scheme also 
provides support for setting up small processing unit through Entrepreneurs/Progressive 
Farmers/ NGOs on pilot basis and support for organising awareness campaigns.  
 
 The scheme is implemented through State Government s. Sixteen States namely 
Arunachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh Chhattisgarh, Guj arat, Haryana Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Raj asthan, Sikkim, Tamilnadu, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal are covered under the scheme.  
 To generate consumer demand for millet based food products and to meet the 
requirement of Refinement/Retrofitting and demonstr ation of post-harvest technologies, 
Capacity building of entrepreneurs, market linkages  between producer and processors 
two commodity-wise Centre of Excellences (CoE) each  for Sorghum and Pearl Millet 
have been operationalised at the Directorate of Sor ghum Research (DSR), Hyderabad 
and CCS Hisar Agriculture University, Hisar respect ively. Third CoE for Small Millet is 
being established at University of Agriculture Sciences, UAS, Bengaluru.  
 INSIMP has been subsumed in NFSM. The Cabinet Comm ittee on Economic 
Affairs has approved NFSM for 12 
th  Plan. The various interventions for increasing 

 
 
production and productivity of Coarse Cereals would  be taken under NFSM from next 
year ( 2014-15). 
 Further, Government implements Market Intervention  Scheme (MIS) on the 
request of State/UT Government for procurement of a gricultural and horticultural 
commodities not covered under the Minimum Support P rice. The MIS is implemented in 
order to protect the growers of these commodities f rom making distress sale in the event 
of bumper crop when the prices tend to fall below t he economic level/cost of production. 
Losses, if any, incurred by the procuring agencies are shared by the Central Government 
and the concerned State Government on 50:50 basis ( 75:25 in case of North-Eastern 
States).  Other initiatives of the Ministry include  facilitating better price discovery by 
farmers by aggregating farmers, mainly farmers in r ainfed areas, into Farmers Producer 
Organisation’s (FPO’s); Nutrifarms; attempts to inc lude millets etc. into Macro-
management Scheme etc. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 The Committee also urge the Government to revisit t he definition of BPL with the 
concerned authorities as they find it confusing that India’s poor population rises and falls 
with every statistical redefinition, which can be gauged from the fact that the Tendulkar’s 
Committee report puts the poor population of India at 81 million families whereas 
Ministry of Agriculture is stated to have put the r ecord as 65 million poor families. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to clarify to this point too.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Planning Commission is the nodal authority for esti mation of poverty at the 
National and State levels in the country . The Planning Commission estimates poverty 
from a large size sample survey on Household Consum ption Expenditure carried out by 
the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) after an i nterval of five years approximately.  
As per Tendulkar methodology, number of persons liv ing Below Poverty line for year 
2004-05 was 407 million.  If average family size as  five is taken, the number of families 
living Below Poverty Line would come out as 81 mill ion.  After 2004-05, Household 
Consumption Expenditure survey by NSSO was conducted in 2009-10, the latest survey 

 
 
for which results are available.  For 2009-10, Plan ning Commission has estimated the 
number of persons living Below Poverty Line familie s using Tendulkar Methodology as 
354 million, which would come out as 71 million Bel ow Poverty Line families if the 
average family size as five is taken.  Further, Pla nning Commission, in June 2012, has 
constituted an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan to review the 
methodology for measurement of poverty. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 The Committee note that food subsidy is provided by  the Government to meet 
the difference between economic cost of foodgrains and their sales realization at 
Central Issue Prices fixed for TPDS and OWSs. In ad dition, the Government procures 
foodgrains for maintaining buffer stock, thus a par t of the food subsidy also goes 
towards meeting the carrying cost of buffer stock. As per the Ministry, since 2004-05, 
the MSP of wheat has increased from Rs.630 per quin tal to Rs.1120 per quintal in RMS 
2011-12. Similarly MSP + bonus of paddy (Common) ha s increased from Rs.560 per 
quintal to Rs.1080 per quintal in KMS 2011-12. Howe ver, the Central Issue Prices (CIP) 
of wheat and rice for AAY, BPL and APL families hav e not been raised during this 
period. This has increased the gap between economic  cost and CIPs and consequently 
the food subsidy incurred by the Government has ris en substantially. The Committee 
also note that the subsidy is provided to FCI, bein g main instrument of the Government 
of India for procurement and distribution of wheat and rice under TPDS and OWSs and 
for maintaining the buffer stock of foodgrains as a  measure of food security. In addition, 
for 10 DCP States/UTs, State specific economic cost  is determined by the Government 
of India and the difference between the economic co st so fixed and the Central Issue 
Prices is passed on to them as food subsidy.  
 
The Committee observed that the food subsidy to FCI  and the DCP States has 
grown multifold during the period 2005-06 to 2011-1 2. The total food subsidy released 
during 2005-06 was Rs. 23071 crore. It has reached upto Rs. 61362.55 crore as on 
27.03.2012 which denotes that the food subsidy has increased nearly three times in 
seven years. The break-up of food subsidy released to FCI and the DCP States as 

 
 
provided to the Committee, revealed that the food s ubsidy released to FCI during 2005-
06 was Rs.19871 crore which rose to almost four tim es i.e. Rs.49537.31 crore, as on 
27.03.2012. During the said period, the food subsid y released to the DCP States also 
increased almost four times from Rs.3200 crore duri ng 2005-06 to Rs.11825.24 crore 
as on 27.03.2012. Justifying the increase in the su bsidy bill the Secretary deposed 
before the Committee that due to an open ended proc urement system, all the stocks 
that reach the mandis have to be purchased irrespec tive of whether there are adequate 
facilities for the storage of foodgrains or not. Be sides, owing to the increase of around 
15 per cent in the MSP, the subsidy bill is likely to increase further. The Committee also 
learnt that, if the subsidy is calculated on 2011 c ensus population, instead of the 
present 2000 census population, the estimated amoun t required for the food subsidy 
would be a staggering Rs.1,11,000 crore, which mean s an additional amount of about 
Rs.50,000 crore. However, the Committee were inform ed that the Expert Group of 
Ministers on food subsidy has restricted the amount  of food subsidy to Rs.74,000 crore 
presently.  
 
With regard to the measures taken to contain food s ubsidy, the Committee have 
been apprised that decentralized procurement and it s distribution by States themselves 
has been encouraged to reduce the economic cost. Ot her measures are also reportedly 
being taken to improve the operational efficiency o f FCI as well as to increase the 
Central Issue Prices (CIPs) of wheat and rice for A PL categories, for which the approval 
of the EGoM/Cabinet was awaited. The Committee also  note that in view of record 
production and procurement of foodgrains in the Cen tral Pool stock and to overcome 
the temporary constraints of storage space, the Gov ernment has allowed export of non-
basmati rice and wheat from privately held stocks s ince 9.9.2011. As on 3.7.2012, a 
quantity of 53.72 lakh tonnes of non-basmati rice a nd 12.51 lakh tonnes of wheat have 
been exported under Open Government License. Furthe r, a quantity of 91,490 MTs of 
non-basmati rice and 5,59,415 MTs of wheat have bee n registered for export through 
Land Custom Stations (LCS).  
 

 
 
From the above, the Committee conclude that a sharp  increase in the food 
subsidy is a matter of serious concern and the Gove rnment needs to take concrete 
initiative to lower the huge fiscal burden. The Com mittee, while concurring with the 
views of the Ministry that the open ended system of  procurement and a vast network of 
PDS are substantially contributing to the increasin g subsidy bill, opine that although it 
would be rather premature to roll back the system o f open ended procurement, 
nevertheless, the possibility of close ended procur ement system needs to be explored 
seriously, which has been reflected in the earlier recommendation of this report. The 
question of downsizing the Public Distribution Syst em is not the solution as the 
Government has committed itself to fulfilling the objective of universal food security. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should also explore innovative ways 
to generate the requisite funds for bearing the inc reasing subsidy costs. As the National 
Food Security Bill is already under examination by a Parliamentary Committee, the 
Committee would await its outcome. Nonetheless they  wish to emphasize that the 
solution lies not in withdrawing food subsidy but p utting in place a system that is 
equipped with the capability of funding the food su bsidy bill. The Government cannot 
deviate from the responsibility of distributing foo dgrains to the hungry by citing 
economic hardships. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Food Subsidy is provided in the budget of the Depar tment of Food and Public 
Distribution to meet the difference between economi c cost of foodgrains and their sales 
realization at Central Issue Prices fixed for TPDS and other welfare schemes.  In 
addition, the Central Government also procures food grains for meeting the 
requirements of buffer stock.  A part of the food s ubsidy is utilised for keeping buffer 
stocks.  Any increase in requirement of food subsid y is sought from the Ministry in 
budgetary allocation/supplementary grants. 
 
 However, the Government has taken several measures  to contain food subsidy, 
which include:- 
 

 
 
(i) Encouraging decentralized procurement and its d istribution by States themselves 
to reduce the economic cost 
(ii) Improving the operational efficiency of FCI. 
(iii) Issue of bonds by the FCI at lower coupon rat es, backed by Government 
guarantee. 
(iv) Negotiations with the banks of the consortium of food credit to reduce the rate of 
interest on cash credit. 
(v) Bringing in overall cost-effectiveness in the o peration of FCI. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 The Committee are concerned to note the frequent c omplaints about the poor 
delivery mechanism of foodgrains that exists in our  country through the Fair Price 
Ration Shops. As per the reports many ration-shop o wners sell subsidized foodgrains in 
the open market at higher prices, thus depriving th e legitimate beneficiaries is a 
common occurrence. This only shows the failure of t he Ministry in providing an efficient 
delivery mechanism. The Committee cannot rule out t he possibility of collusion of 
officials of Government agencies in such scandals. They, therefore, recommend that 
officials found guilty of indulging in such malprac tices should be identified and stringent 
action taken against them. Not only the delivery me chanism needs to be revisited, but 
inspection of Fair Price Shops also needs to be inc reased. More effective monitoring 
mechanism should be designed to ensure that the foo d subsidy is not misused. In this 
regard, digitalization of ration card database and automation of Fair Price Shop 
operations has been proposed by the Government and all State Governments, except 
Goa, have sent their action plans to Central Govern ment. The Committee desire that 
concrete action on the same must be taken at the ea rliest. The Committee hope that 
once implemented, this system would ensure fair dea ls for the beneficiaries and at the 
same time would check the unwanted pilferage of foo dgrains. The Committee also 
recommend that changes that have been brought by th e introduction of Bar Coded 
Coupons/Ration Cards under TPDS in Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, 
Meghalaya, Sikkim and Odisha need to be analyzed to  replicate the same in other 
States too. They would like to be apprised of the l atest status of the Government’s 

 
 
efforts in curbing leakages/diversion of foodgrains  by FPS owners and elimination of 
bogus ration cards etc.  
Reply of the Government  
Action Plan for Computerization of TPDS have been r eceived from all 
States/UTs. With a view to provide necessary infras tructure and financial support, the 
Department has prepared a Plan Scheme on End-to-end  Computerization of TPDS 
Operations to be implemented under the 12 th  Five Year Plan (2012-17) on cost-sharing 
basis with States/UTs. Component-I of the scheme wi th an outlay of Rs. 884.07 crore 
has been approved in October, 2012 for implementati on during 2012-17, which 
comprises activities, namely, digitization of ratio n cards/ beneficiary and other 
databases, computerization of supply-chain manageme nt, setting up of transparency 
portal and grievance redressal mechanism. Proposals  for financial assistance have 
been received from 25 States/UTs. During 2012-13, f unds of Rs.40.44 crore were 
released to 7 States. For this scheme funds of Rs.2 00 crore have been allocated in BE 
2013-14. 
 
As regards Component-II i.e. FPS Automation, it wil l be taken up by the 
Department in due course, keeping in view the progr ess of Aadhaar and National 
Population Register (NPR) enrolments in the country , availability of connectivity at 
FPSs, etc. The exact model of FPS automation, that is, Aadhaar based authentication 
through Point of Sale (PoS) devices, Smart Cards, e tc. would be finalised by the 
Government in consultation with States/UTs. 
 
In consultation with the State/UT Governments, a Ni ne Point Action Plan was 
evolved in 2006, which inter-alia includes strict a ction to be taken against the guilty to 
ensure leakage free distribution of foodgrains. Sta te/UT Governments are responsible 
for implementing TPDS and competent to take action against those indulging in 
malpractices in TPDS by invoking provisions of the clauses 8&9 of the PDS(Control) 
Order, 2001.  
 

 
 
 Strengthening and streamlining of TPDS is a contin uous process. Government 
has regularly reviewed and has issued instructions to States/UTs to strengthen 
functioning of TPDS by improving monitoring mechani sm and vigilance, increased 
transparency in functioning of TPDS, adoption of revised Model Citizen’s Charter, use of 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) tool s and improving the viability of 
Fair Price Shop operations.  
 
 The recommendation of the Committee for action aga inst guilty officials, 
strengthening the delivery mechanism and increasing the inspection of Fair Price Shops 
have been conveyed to all States/UTs. 
 
 As regard elimination of bogus ration cards, it is  submitted that in terms of the 
PDS (Control) Order, 2001, State/UT Governments are  to review the lists of BPL and 
AAY families every year for the purpose of deletion  of ineligible families and inclusion of 
eligible families. The exercise of deletion of bogu s/ineligible cards and inclusion of 
eligible families is a continuous process and State Governments are to periodically carry 
out the same. Instructions were also issued to all State/UT Governments to carry out an 
intensive campaign from October, 2009 to December, 2009 to review the existing lists of 
BPL/AAY families and eliminate ineligible/bogus rat ion cards. Instructions have also 
been issued to all State/UT Governments to issue wa rning to the bogus ration card 
holders, through advertisements in the newspapers, to surrender the bogus cards and 
to initiate criminal prosecution against bogus card holders etc. 
 
 As per reports received upto 31.12.2012, 28 State/ UT Governments have since 
July 2006 reported deletion of 362.26 lakh bogus/in eligible ration cards. Further, 
State/UT Governments have been directed to ensure t hat genuine and needy 
beneficiaries are being included against the number s deleted/eliminated by them, within 
the accepted number of BPL/AAY families as conveyed by the Central Government. 
 
 All State/UT Governments have been requested for s trict 
compliance/implementation of the observations of th e Committee and to send an action 

 
 
taken report on the issues regarding curbing leakag es/diversion of foodgrains by FPS 
owners and elimination of bogus ration cards. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
  In view of the surplus availability of wheat and rice in the Central Pool, the 
Committee note that the Ministry of Food and Public  Distribution has made a proposal 
to the Ministry of Rural Development to consider pa yment of part of wages under 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) in kind 
(foodgrains). The Committee recall that the then Fi nance Minister, during the Budget 
Session of Parliament, had made a statement to the same effect, while admitting a 
mismatch between procurement and storage. As per th e Ministry, the operational 
modalities and also the rate at which the foodgrain s that may be provided under 
MGNREGA are required to be considered on receipt of  response from the Ministry of 
Rural Development. The Committee further note that once the decision is taken by the 
Ministry of Rural Development, the exact quantity o f surplus foodgrains to be utilized 
and also the saving on account of additional storag e cost could be worked out, after 
knowing the percentage of wages that may be given a s foodgrains under the 
MGNREGA. The response from the Ministry of Rural De velopment is stated to be 
awaited. The Committee feel that the step taken up by the Ministry is in positive 
direction to address the issue of problems of abund ance. However, the onus is on the 
Ministry of Rural Development to take an early deci sion on the matter, otherwise the 
very purpose of the proposal would stand defeated. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the matter should be taken up expedi tiously with the Ministry of Rural 
Development and the EGoM so as to arrive at an early decision.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 For exploring the possibility of providing foodgra ins as a part of MGNREGA 
wages, the matter was taken up with Ministery of Ru ral Development on 13 
th  April, 
2012.  This issue was also discussed with Hon’ble R D Minister on 21.6.2012.  The 
Department as per the directions of Estimates Commi ttee has been pursuing the matter 
with Ministry of Rural Development to proceed furth er in the matter.  Hon’ble MOS(IC), 

 
 
CAF&PD has written a D.O. letter to Hon’ble Ministe r of Rural Development on 13 th  
March, 2013.  However, further course of action in the matter depends solely on the 
reply of Ministry of Rural Development. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 The Committee note that storage of foodgrains in s ilos ensures longer period of 
safe storage and maintenance of quality of foodgrai ns. They further note that the 
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) had approved a proposal on 7 February, 2012 
to create a storage capacity of two million tonnes through construction of standalone 
silos. The silos are to be constructed under PPP mo de for which FCI is the nodal 
agency. The location of silos are also to be decide d by the FCI, after taking into 
consideration the analysis and recommendations of t he consultants as well as the 
recommendations of the Working Group set up by the Planning Commission. The 
Committee note that the consultants have since subm itted their final report and 
locations have been identified in 10 States i.e. Bi har, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh (DCP), 
Maharashtra, Punjab, UP, West Bengal (DCP), Assam, Kerala and Gujarat for the 
scheme along with silo capacity for each State. The  Committee would like to know 
State-wise progress of the scheme.  
 
The Committee are also of view that besides the FCI , CWC and SWC, the 
Government should explore the possibilities of prov iding incentives to the farmers too 
for the purchase of metallic storage structure and/ or construction of modern non-
metallic storage as this would encourage them to st ore their produce with themselves 
thereby lessening the storage burden on the Governm ent procurement agencies. The 
Committee desire that a pilot study may be undertak en to access the impact of such a 
move which, if found suitable, can be replicated on a wider scale.  
 
Reply of the Government 
In order to educate the farmers on scientific stora ge of foodgrains at farm level 
and to create awareness on the concept of public wa rehousing and the Negotiable 

 
 
Warehouse Receipt System, CWC organizes training pr ogrammes for farmers on Post 
Harvest Storage Practices.  At the end of the 2-day s training programme, metallic 
storage bins are provided free of cost to the train ee farmers under its Corporate Social 
Responsibility scheme.  
 
 As regards impact evaluation of the farmers traini ng programme of CWC, the 
same was conducted through an independent agency na mely, M/s. Midstream 
Marketing and Research Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi during 2010 which revealed that such 
training programmes are quite useful in educating t he farmers for safe storage of 
foodgrains and minimization of storage losses in foodgrains at farm level. 
 
CREATION OF 20 LAKH MT CAPACITIES IN THE FORM OF SILOS 
 
EGoM in its meeting held on 07.02.2012 approved the  creation of 20 lakh MT 
capacity in the form of Silos throughout the country 
.  The progress is as under:-  
 
/head2right Board of Directors(BoD) of FCI has finalized the S tate-wise distribution and 
locations of 20 lakh MT capacities of Silos.  
/head2right FCI appointed IFC as Strategic Partner to provide support in executing the 
project on PPP mode.  
/head2right In the meeting held on 28.06.2012, it was decided that an Integrated Transaction 
Advisor-cum-Technical Consultant would be appointed through two bid tendering 
process.M/s. CRISIL Risk and Infrastructure Solutio n Ltd. was appointed Project 
Consultant on 31.10.2012.  
/head2right The Project Consultant has submitted Manual on Sta ndards, Design and 
Specifications of Silos. Draft copy of Concession A greement has also been 
finalized which is being placed being for appraisal  and approval of the 
Appropriate Authority. 
/head2right Draft of RFQ & RFP would be finalized shortly.  
 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
  The Committee note that with a view to augment th e storage capacity, the 
Government has formulated a Private Entrepreneurs G uarantee (PEG) scheme for 
construction of godowns through private entrepreneu rs in July, 2008 wherein the FCI 
gives a guarantee of 10 years for assured hiring to the private entrepreneurs. As per the 
Plan of the Ministry, as on 31.3.2012, a capacity o f about 151.96 lakh tonnes was to be 
created in 19 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Ch hattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kar nataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tam il Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal under the scheme through pr ivate entrepreneurs and Central 
and State Warehousing Corporations for which tender s have been finalized for creation 
of storage capacity of about 107.04 lakh tonnes by the private entrepreneurs. The 
Committee have also been informed that Central Ware housing Corporation (CWC) and 
State Warehousing Corporation (SWC) are constructin g storage capacity for 5.4 and 
14.75 lakh tonnes respectively under PEG Scheme.  
 
The Committee acknowledge the fact that the PEG sch eme has the potential to 
achieve the target of not only the balanced distrib ution of godowns at macro level in 
different parts of the country but also at micro le vel among different districts of a region. 
However, they are distressed to note that the progr ess of work under the scheme is 
very slow. The information furnished by the Ministr y indicates that no construction has 
ever commenced in Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal, Jh arkhand, Kerala and Gujarat, 
which is quite surprising. Besides, though a capaci ty of 36.13 lakh MT should have 
been completed by the end of March, 2012, there is still 7.96 lakh MT capacity which is 
yet to be created. Further, the Committee note that  out of the total storage capacity of 
107.04 lakh tonnes tendered, only 19.57 lakh tonnes  storage capacity could be 
completed as on 31 March, 2012, and around 8.58 lak h tonnes capacity was in 
advanced stage of completion. They would like to be  apprised of the Statewise capacity 
completed till date alongwith the latest status of the capacity under construction.  
 

 
 
The Committee are not at all convinced with the jus tification put forth by the 
Ministry that several modifications in the scheme h ad to be carried out to make it 
investor friendly which resulted in some delay. Onc e private investor category was 
identified to be the part of PEG Scheme, it is stra nge why investor friendliness of the 
same was not ensured before proceeding with it. The  Committee regret the inability on 
the part of the Ministry to anticipate a structured  investor friendly scheme and are of the 
strong opinion that the Ministry should have antici pated the expectations of private 
investors before formulating the scheme. The Commit tee strongly recommend that 
Ministry should learn from its experience and chalk  out a detailed plan of action and 
ensure requisite flexibility to achieve the targets  set under the PEG scheme. Only then 
further delay due to any more modifications can be avoided. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the latest progress of the PEG Sc heme as well as the utilisation status 
of the capacity developed under the same by the FCI at the action taken stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
CWC has been allocated for creation of storage capa city of 5.3 lakh MT under 
PEG Scheme.  The State-wise and centre-wise details  of the storage capacity 
completed and the work in progress as on 28.2.2013 are as follows: 
 
State-wise and Centrewise capacity  completed  under PEG during the year 2012-
13 (Upto 28.02.2013) 
 
SL. No.  Centre  Capacity in MT  
 
Madhya Pradesh  
1. Bhind  5000 
2. Maksi  6600 
Punjab  
 
1. Amritsar, BD  3700 
2. Moga – II  1600 
Maharashtra  
1. Gondia  6600 
2. Yavatmal  10000 
Andhra Pradesh  
1. Bodhan  4000 

 
 
2. Gadwal  10000 
Chhattisgarh  
1. Bilaspur  4000 
2. Raigarh  8600 
Odisha  
1. Kendupalli – I  15000 
2. Kendupalli – II  11600 
3. Nabarangpur  10000 
4. Koksara 5000 
5. Jatni 5000 
Karnataka  
1. Gulberga -II 32000 
Himachal Pradesh  
1. Dehra  2500 
West Bengal  
1. Berhampur  11600 
2. Sargachi  2400 
 
Gujarat  
1. Vadod  4800 
Kerala    
1. Kunnamthanam 5000 
TOTAL     1,65,000 MT  
 
 
 
WORKS IN PROGRESS UNDER PEG DURING 2012-13 (AS ON 28.02.2013) 
 
S. No  Name of Centre  Capacity in MT  
Odisha  
1. Jatni 10,000 
2. Sambalpur(Kalamati) 10,000 
3. Bhadrak 10,000 
4. Marshaghai 10,000 
5. Aska 9,800 
West Bengal  
1. Kharagpur 3,600 
2. C.K. Road (Ph.-I) 12,000 
Utter Pradesh  
1. Hardoi 2,000 
2. Naini 4,200 
                                                                    
Total 
71,600  MT  

 
 
State-wise capacity completed alongwith the status of capacity under 
construction by 28 th  February, 2013 is at Annexure VII. 
 
 In the initial bids response of private entreprene urs was not encouraging towards 
the Scheme. Thereafter, investor’s meets were convened by FCI in States like Haryana, 
H.P., Punjab and also by FCI Hqrs. (in July, 2010 a t FICCI Auditorium) to explain the 
scheme to the prospective investors and based on th e feedbacks, Scheme was 
modified to make it more investors friendly. Since,  modified Scheme came in existence 
in August, 2010, tenders for construction of godown s have been awarded mainly in 
years 2011 and 2012. 
 
 Tender conditions were also modified to the extent  possible to make it investor 
friendly  
 
 Apart from above, following are the reason for del ayed starting and completion of 
godowns under the Scheme: - 
 
1. Delay in allotment / acquisition of land by Stat e Govts. for the capacity allotted to 
CWC/SWCs e.g. Punjab, Tamil Nadu. 
2. Delay in providing Change of Land Use approval b y local State Authorities to the 
successful bidders e.g. Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, etc. 
3. Poor investor response in Hilly states due to di fficult laws related to land transfer 
and Change of land use (CLU) as well as the cost of land e.g. J&K, H.P. 
4. Transfer of land ownership is difficult due to s pecific land laws especially in tribal 
areas i.e. Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand. 
5. Ban imposed by Supreme Court on sand mining affe cted construction works in 
the States of Punjab, Haryana and Andhra Pradesh. 
6. Performance of nodal agencies in some states lik e Bihar, West Bengal, J&K and 
Uttarakhand has not been satisfactory. FCI has take n up the nodal agency 
functions in some of these states such as Tamil Nad u, J&K, Himachal Pradesh 

 
 
and Uttarakhand after the state agencies had failed to elicit proper response from 
private investors. 
7. A number of NITs were floated in many of the sta tes for example West Bengal 
(NIT - 4 times), Bihar (NIT - 5 times), Uttarakhand  (NIT - 6 times), H.P. (NIT - 7 
times). The response of private investors to tender s has been poor despite 
several multiple times of tendering. 
 
The Scheme has been continuously reviewed on fortni ghtly/monthly basis. By 
March, 2013 a cumulative capacity of 69.02 lakh MT has been completed. Further in the 
year 2013 – 14, a capacity of 60 lakh MT is expected to be realized. 
 

 
 
 
Status of construction of godowns under PEG Scheme as on 28.02.2013  
   Fig. in MT 
Sl. 
No. State 
Total 
capacity 
approved 
Total capacity allotted/ sanctioned Work completed Work under construction 
   CWC SWC Private 
Investors Total CWC SWC Private 
Investors Total CWC SWC Private 
Investors 
1 Andhra Pradesh 451,000 30,000 55,000 366,000 451, 000 30,000 35,800 134,000 199,800   0 182,000 
2 Bihar 940,000 60000 100,000 155,000 315,000   20, 000 2000 22,000   10,000 83,000 
3 Chhattisgarh 542,600 50,000 492,600 0 542,600 25, 150 129,800   154,950   125,000   
4 Gujarat 100,000 5,000   45,000 50,000 4,800     4 ,800       
5 Haryana 3,952,800 5,000 599,376 2,477,840 3,082,2 16 5,000 93,828 721,673 820,501   234,450 1,162,577  
6 Himachal Pr. 142,550 2,500   43,350 45,850 2,500     2,500     5,000 
7 J & K Kashmir 361,690     246,510 246,510     10, 000 10,000     79,000 
8 Jharkhand 175,000     115,000 115,000             65,000 
9 Karnataka 355,300 50,520 187,850 75,000 313,370 5 0,520 81,850 7,000 139,370   101,000 58,000 
10 Kerala 55,000 5,000     5,000 5,000     5,000       
11 Madhya Pradesh 2,366,600 98,300 597,900 876,800 1,573,000 26,400 23,400 30,000 79,800   59,600 233, 200 
12 Maharashtra 699,900 47,400 298,370 253,000 598,7 70 42,400 158,370 78,000 278,770   140,000 175,000 
13 Odisha 300,000 187,500 112,500   300,000 92,000 72,000   164,000 60,000 20,000   
14 Punjab 4,999,000 78,150 219,150 4,021,738 4,319, 038 71,600 95,400 2,256,243 2,423,243 1550 73,800 1 ,585,645 
15 Rajasthan 250,000   45,000 205,000 250,000   10, 000 43,000 53,000   20,000 147,000 
16 Tamil Nadu 345,000 35,000 45,000 115,000 195,000  35,000   25,000 60,000   45,000 50,000 
17 Uttarakhand 25,000     10,000 10,000               
18 Uttar Pradesh 3,295,500 6,200 47,000 1,460,500 1 ,513,700   47,000 203,334 250,334 6,200 0 924,166 
19 West Bengal 356,600 90,180   40,000 130,180 20,7 00     20,700 8,900     
 Total*  19,713,540  750,750  2,799,746  10,505,738  14,056,234  411,070  767,448  3,510,250  4,688,768  76,650  828,850  4,749,588  
Note: A capacity of 5.83 lakh MT which is physically completed but has not been hired due to some pending minor ancillary works . 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
  The Committee’s analysis of the State wise overal l storage capacity with FCI, 
State Governments, CWC, SWC and Private Parties rev eals the alarming fact that in all 
the zones even the available storage capacity has n ot been fully utilized. Among the 
poor performing States are Arunachal Pradesh, Nagal and, Delhi, Bihar and Sikkim. In 
fact, an analysis of the percentage of effective ut ilization capacity of the availed storage 
capacity reveals that none of the States have fully  utilized it, particularly Arunachal 
Pradesh (23 per cent), Bihar (52 per cent), Himacha l Pradesh (54 per cent) and 
Meghalaya (58 per cent). The Committee are disappointed to observe that on one hand, 
there is problem of abundance and on the other, the  Ministry has been able to neither 
ensure fuller utilization of the available storage capacity nor an effective utilization of the 
availed storage capacity. It is not understandable how such a situation was allowed to 
be continued. Therefore, the Committee recommend th at the Ministry should 
immediately assess the performance of FCI, CWC, SWC in terms of handling of storage 
facilities and a status report on the same should be submitted to them.   
 
Reply of the Government  
The overall utilisation of the storage capacity ope rated by CWC & SWCs is 
constantly on the increase during the last 5 years and the current year as may be seen 
from the following table:  
 
Year  Overall Capacity utilization (in %age)  
CWC  SWC  
2007-08 73 80 
2008-09 82 103 
2009-10 85 83 
2010-11 88 84 
2011-12 91 86 
2012-13 
(upto Feb 2013) 
93  
 
 
In the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Delhi , Bihar, Sikkim, Meghalaya 
and Himachal Pradesh, the Committee has observed lo w percentage utilisation of 
storage capacity. In this regard, it is submitted t hat these states have very low storage 

 
 
capacity which is barely sufficient to keep one month’s allocation. In these states receipt 
of stocks in the godowns and off-take of foodgrains  takes place almost simultaneously 
thereby the closing balances remain low during most  of the time. This results in higher 
turnover but low capacity utilization. The average capacity utilization for Delhi for the 
year 2011-12 was 85.34% and for the current year is  82%, and these are higher than 
the optimum capacity utilization levels. In case of  Bihar, which is both procuring and 
consuming state, some capacity has to be kept reserved for procurement purposes. The 
procurement of both wheat and rice, unlike in the s tates of Punjab and Haryana, is 
staggered over the year and also slow. This combine d with simultaneous off-take 
results into lesser average capacity utilization. H owever, average capacity utilization for 
most of these states have increased considerably du ring the year 2012-13 which is as 
follows: 
 
Sl. No.  STATE  Average % age Capacity 
Utilisation for 2012-13 upto 
February, 2013.  
1. Nagaland 87.54 
2. Delhi 82.00 
3. Bihar 72.26 
4. Arunachal Pradesh 65.56 
5. Sikkim 54.55 
6. Meghalaya 82.87 
7. Himachal Pradesh 47.84 
 
The national average capacity utilisation during th e year 2011-12 was 80 % and 
for the year 2012-13 (upto Feb 13), the same is 85 %. This is well above the BICP norm 
of 75 %, which is considered as optimum capacity utilisation. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
  Though the Ministry claims that stocks are genera lly issued on the principle of 
‘First in First out’, several State Governments are  reportedly – approaching FCI to clear 
old stocks, before the arrival of new grains. The C ommittee are of the view that the 
problem of shortage of storage capacities can be so lved to some extent by 

 
 
expeditiously phasing out older stocks of foodgrain s before the arrival of new stocks. 
However, in one of their earlier recommendations th e Committee have already referred 
to the position in Punjab & Odisha where various re ports indicate that in most of the 
godowns, stocks of previous years, being not cleare d, are piled up in large quantities 
and little efforts are being made to move out the s ame to create space for new stock of 
foodgrains. The Committee, while deeply regretting such inaction, exhort the Ministry to 
take immediate steps to move out old stock of foodg rains as early as possible by 
distributing them to the poor people. As non-availability of adequate number of rail racks 
by the Ministry of Railways is a major issue in mov ement of foodgrains, the Committee 
also recommend that the Ministry should fine-tune t heir coordination with the Ministry of 
Railways to get rakes according to their concrete p lan of action prepared by FCI for 
moving out old stock of foodgrains at fixed interva ls of time so that the incidences of 
wastage of foodgrains could be minimized, and fresh  stocks could be accommodated in 
godowns. The Ministry should realise that timely ph asing out of old stocks of foodgrains 
can address the problem of inadequate storage space to a great extent.   
 
Reply of the Government 
Principle of ‘First in First out’ (FIFO) is followe d invariably in issuing foodgrain 
stocks. However in cases of operational exigencies,  as mentioned below, stocks are 
evacuated/moved/issued without following FIFO Principle:- 
 
i.) Stocks stored on vulnerable and unscientific/ka tcha plinths are accorded overriding 
priority so as to avoid deterioration and damage. 
ii.) Stocks procured under relaxed specifications (URS) are issued on top priority without 
following FIFO. 
iii.) Stocks of older crop year stored in covered and silo godowns are given lower priority 
for evacuation as compared to stocks of same crop year stored on CAP. 
iv.)At times stocks of older crop year are held up due to litigation. 
v.) In case of deficit States, stocks of older crop  year keep coming and  it takes some 
time to have them liquidated because at locations t he monthly offtake under PDS is not 
commensurate with the arrivals. 

 
 
 
The foodgrain stocks lying under Central Pool as on 01.02.2013 is as given below:- 
                                                                                                        (In lakh tonnes) 
Crop Year 
Wheat  Rice                       
(excluding Unmilled 
paddy) 
Unmilled 
Paddy in 
terms of 
Rice 
 
Stock as 
on 
1.02.2013  
% age of 
stocks 
Stock as on 
1.02.2013  
% age of 
stocks 
2012 -13  215.75  71.46  71.19  39.34  89.96  
2011 -12  76.04  25.19  98.56  54.46  6.09  
2010 -11  8.02  2.66  11.14  6.15  1.08  
2009 -10  1.64  0.54  0.07  0.04  0.85  
2008 -09 & 
earlier 
0.46  0.15  0.02  0.01  0 
Total         301.91        180.98  97.98  
 
As on 01.02.2013, only 0.69% stocks of wheat and 0. 05% stocks of rice of more 
than three crop year old are lying under Central Pool. 
 
Evacuation of old stocks of wheat and rice is monitored at every level including in 
FCI Headquarters by CMD FCI himself, every month. All Zonal Heads of FCI have been 
directed to  complete issue/movement of wheat and r ice stocks upto crop year 2009-10 
by February’2013.  
 
The issue regarding supply of adequate number of ra kes is being regularly 
reviewed by the Department with FCI and Railways. R eview meetings are held at the 
level of Secretary (F & PD) on case to case basis a nd regular meetings are held by ED, 
FCI with M/o Railways.   
 
Recently, the Department has constituted a Co-ordin ation Committee with Joint 
Secretary, D/o Food & PD as  Convener and  ED(T), F CI  &  EDTT(F), Railway Board  
as Members for better monitoring and resolving the issues arising between Railways 
and FCI on regular basis.  The meeting of the Co-or dination Committee is being held 
every week. 

 
 
CHAPTER III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLY 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 While examining the procurement of foodgrains, the  Committee note that the 
procurement takes place mainly in rice and wheat an d to a minimal extent in the coarse 
cereals like jowar, bajara and ragi. In this backdr op, they are of the opinion that the 
starting point of problem in procurement is the ado ption of an open ended scheme, 
where FCI has to perforce accept rice and wheat fro m farmers at MSP coupled with 
incentive bonuses too. The system tends to concentr ate only on rice and wheat 
cultivation. The Committee strongly feel that FCI h ad to procure larger quantities of 
wheat and rice year after year which has led to sur plus stock almost thrice above the 
buffer stock norms specified by the Government. Thu s FCI has become the biggest 
hoarder of foodgrains i.e. rice and wheat only. Thi s has led to anomalies, where 
shortages in the commercial market has resulted to higher prices for millers even when 
the production reaches peak levels. Taking into acc ount that the open ended 
procurement combined with higher MSPs for wheat and  rice has created serious 
problems for overall cultivation and is deterrent t o crop diversification, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should take steps to educate the farmers about the 
need to migrate to other crops such as oilseeds and  pulses which gives the country 
higher export values as well as coarse grains, whic h have a better nutritional value and 
are sturdier for long term storage too. The Committ ee also recommend that the Ministry 
should explore the possibility of putting appropria te checks on the procurement system 
where FCI may procure upto a certain limit over the buffer norms. The Committee are of 
the view that the procurement operations could be b ased on first-come first-served 
basis and unique ID can be used for fixing a quota where FCI would purchase only upto 
a certain level from every farmer. The Committee wo uld like to be informed about the 
precise comments of the Ministry on these suggestions as well as action taken, if any, in 
this regard.  
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Under the current Price Support Scheme, the procur ement of foodgrains is open-
ended as it intends to provide price support to the  farmers when market prices are 
depressed below Minimum Support Price (MSP).  Thus,  with the increasing MSP and 
assured purchase through a more robust procurement machinery in place compared to 
other crops, the percentage of procurement of foodg rains like wheat and paddy out of 
total quantity produced is increasing over the past few successive years.  Procurement of 
foodgrains at MSP assures a remunerative price for the farmers.  There is no compulsion 
on farmers to sell their produce to Government on M SP and they are free to offer it in 
open markets.  
 With regard to the recommendation of the Committee  for educating the farmers 
about the need to migrate to other crops such as oi lseeds and pulses, it is submitted that 
the matter comes under the purview of the Ministry of Agriculture and the Department 
has already taken up the issue with that Ministry for taking appropriate steps. 
 On the recommendation of the Committee for restric ting the procurement upto a 
certain limit or quota on first come first served b asis or based on individual quota linked 
to a unique ID, it is submitted that even though th e procurement at MSP is done primarily 
for the purpose of keeping it in buffer stocks and for public distribution, however, as per 
the present price support policy of the Ministry of  Agriculture, our MSP operations entail 
the theoretical possibility of procurement of the e ntire production of foodgrains by the 
Government beyond the buffer norms, if it is offere d by the farmers at MSP  due to 
depression in prices in open market.  The matter wa s also taken up with Department of 
Agriculture & Co-operation.  Their comments are as under:- 
Government has been taking concerted efforts to edu cate farmers in innovative 
agriculture technologies through its different scheme as per details given below:- 
1. Extension :-  ‘Extension Reforms Scheme’ popularly known as A TMA Scheme 
provides for educating farmers in demand driven agr icultural technologies through 
kisan mela, mobilization of farmers groups and sett ing-up of farm school in different 
thematic areas including promotion of oilseeds, pul ses and coarse cereals like Koda 
and Ragi Over 138 lakhs farmers have benefitted so far under the scheme since 
2005-06.  ‘Kisan Call Centres Scheme’ provides info rmation to the farmers  through 

 
 
Toll Free telephone lines in local language on quer ies raised by farmers on 
cultivation of oilseeds, pulses & Coarse Cereals, F ocused Advertisement Campaign 
on Pulse Production is being telecast under ‘Mass M edia Scheme’ besides 
broadcasting programmes in agri-production  technology including pulses, oilseeds & 
coarse grains production.  The candidates trained u nder ‘ACABC Scheme’ also 
provides need-based extension services to farmers. 
 
2. Crops : 
 
 
a. Pulses:-   In order to educate the farmers about the impoved technology of Pulses 
cultivation, the Government is implementing Nationa l Food Security Mission 
Pulses (NFSM-Pulses) since 2007-08.  This programme  also aims creating 
awareness about the use of improved seed and crop p roduction technology to 
increase the Pulses production in the country.  Pre sently, NFSM-Pulses covers 
468 districts of 16 major Pulses producing states i n the country.  The NFSM-
pulses is being implemented through State Governmen ts.  Moreover, new 
improved technologies are also being demonstrated d irectly to the farmers field 
through ICAR, State Agriculture Universities and KV Ks from Central level under 
Frontline Demonstration Programme.  Beside, the reg ular programme of NFSM-
Pulses.  Block Demonstrations are also being implem ented since 2010-11 under 
Accelerated Pulses Production Programme (A3P) for a ctive propagation of key 
technologies such as Integrated Nutrient Management  (INM) and Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) in a manner that creates catalyzin g impact.  Moreover, 
Government is (i) promoting pulses production throu gh inter-cropping pigeon-
pea/urad/moong/moth with cotton, oilseeds and coars e cereal, in-situ moisture 
conservation and critical inputs/plant growth regul ators/nutrient mixtures and (ii) 
targeting Additional Area coverage of pulses throug h area expansion of Rabi 
Pigeonpea, Gram, Pea and Lentil during Rabi and Gre en Gram and Black Gram 
during summer.  
 
b.   Coarse Cereals :- In order to promote cultivation and consumption of millets based 
food products, the government is implementing a scheme on “Initiative for Nutritional 

 
 
Security through Intensive Millets Promotion (INSIM P)” as a sub-scheme of RKVY.  
The programme aims to demonstrate improved producti on and post-harvest 
technologies in an integrated manner with visible i mpact to catalyze increase in 
production of millets in the country.  Besides, the  Scheme promotes processing and 
value-addition techniques which are expected to gen erate consumer demand for 
millet based food products.  
 
Technology demonstration kits of critical inputs of  nutrients and plant protection 
measures comprising of micro-nutrients, fungicides and bio-fertilizers, DAP, urea, 
potash and pesticides including weedicides for sorg hum, pearl millet, finger millet, small 
millets would be supplied free of cost to beneficia ry farmers subject to maximum area of 
2 hectare.  Besides, to popularize improved varieti es/hybrids of millet crops, seed 
minikits for 0.40 ha area for every one hectare of area covered under demonstration is 
also provided.  Scheme also provides support for se tting up small processing unit 
through Enterpreneurs/Progressive Farmers/NGOs on p ilot basis and support to the 
State for organizing awareness campaigns. Maize cultivation is being supported through 
Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil palm & M aize (ISOPOM).  Subsidy is being 
given to the farmer in the form of inputs. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
 The Committee note that the ceiling rate fixed for  hiring of godowns has been 
revised from Rs. 3.80 to Rs. 4.78 per quintal per m onth. They further note that in 
appropriate cases, a High Level Committee has been empowered to decide higher rates 
by recording reasons in writing. The Guarantee Sche me was also suitably modified 
based on the feedback obtained from the industry. D uring the briefing meeting, while 
discussing the constraints faced particularly by th e Government of Punjab on this issue, 
which is foremost among the States producing, procuring and storing foodgrains in large 
quantities, the Committee noted that the Punjab Gov ernment quoted and pressed for 
the rate of Rs. 6/-, Rs. 7/-, Rs. 8/-, finally, ten ders for the entire quantity of 45 lakh 
tonnes of foodgrains was sanctioned at about Rs. 5 per quintal. The Committee were 

 
 
informed that no unilateral offer of storage rent e xists. As per the detailed clarification 
tendered by the Ministry, the PEG scheme envisages market discovered storage rent 
based on open and transparent bidding and, therefor e, it is expected that all factors 
including land prices would be reflected in the rat es offered in the bidding process. The 
Ministry also insisted that there was no question o f FCI offering lower rate as FCI only 
provides upper ceiling and cap. The Ministry furthe r argued that storage capacity needs 
to be evenly distributed, and thus cannot be concen trated on locations having cheaper 
land. Nevertheless, the Committee are of the view t hat while fixing the tender for hiring 
of godowns, the Ministry should take into considera tion the cost incurred in the 
construction of the godowns as per the local condit ions too, particularly in States where 
land, being very fertile, is available at higher ra tes for construction of godowns. 
Otherwise, it would not incentivize the contractors  to construct more godowns and the 
problems of abundance and storage would always pers ist in the management of 
foodgrains.  
Reply of the Government 
The ceiling of rate of Rs. 4.78 per quintal per mon th has been fixed for State 
Level Committees to decide on the offers for godown s (lease with services) at their own 
level.  Further, High Level Committee has been empo wered to sanction higher rates by 
recording reasons under PEG Scheme.  HLC has always  taken note of investor’s 
response to various NITs in a state, land cost, ava ilability of land and higher rates of 
construction of godowns while sanctioning the rates  for construction of godowns under 
PEG Scheme.  Since, the PEG Scheme envisages market  discovery, storage rent 
based on open and transparent bidding, HLC cannot g o beyond these rates and make 
unilateral offers.  Based on established norms and considering local factors  HLC has 
sanctioned the rates of Rs. 18.87 per quintal per month in Leh, Rs. 10.00 per quintal per 
month in Srinagar, Rs. 9.50 per quintal per month i n Himachal Pradesh, Rs. 8/- per 
quintal per month in Jharkhand discovered through o pen and transparent bidding with 
not much investor’s response in a no. of NITs only because of the difficult terrain, state 
specific land laws and poor response from investors  in these states.  Many of the 
sanctioned rates are less than Rs. 4/- per quintal per month as these rates were 
discovered through transparent bidding with good in vestor’s response in the states of 

 
 
Haryana, Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.  HLC ha s always ensured that the 
tendering process is well publicized, transparent a nd open to ensure better competition.  
FCI and nodal agencies have also held investor’s me ets to attract more bidders for the 
tendering process.  States where investor’s respons e was poor have been requested to 
facilitate land transfers and change of land use.  This would incentivize the investors to 
come forward and create capacities so that targets approved under PEG Scheme is 
achieved.  State Governments have also been request ed to arrange for land at 
locations where there has been no investor’s respon se, so that stage agencies and 
CWC can create the desired storage capacities.   
  

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENTS REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
According to the Public Distribution System (Contro l) Order, 2001, all State 
Governments/UTs are to ensure issue of Utilization Certificates confirming that the 
quality foodgrains have been lifted and distributed  to the intended beneficiaries under 
the TPDS. The Committee have been apprised that an offence committed in violation of 
the provisions of this Order would invoke criminal liability under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955. Despite this Order, the Comm ittee are very much dismayed to 
note that there have been numerous reports about ir regularities in implementation of 
TPDS including complaints regarding quality and qua ntity of foodgrains distributed 
under the Public Distribution System in several reg ions/States in the country. For 
instance, during the period from January, 2006 to M ay, 2012 a total of 587 complaints 
were received with regard to the various problems p ertaining to TPDS. The State/UT 
wise analysis of the complaints received against TP DS revealed that the highest 
number of complaints were received from Uttar Prade sh (189) followed by Delhi (98), 
Bihar (41), Haryana (39) and Madhya Pradesh (34). T he Committee are unhappy over 
the fact that complete information has not been fur nished by the Ministry with regard to 
the disposal of complaint cases. Even in those case s where the status of redressal of 
the complaints have been mentioned, the Ministry ha s vaguely given information about 
the supply of poor quality of foodgrains. What is m ore surprising to the Committee is 
that the Ministry has reported the status of only 9  complaints cases for the States of 
West Bengal, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and  NCT Delhi in the last three years, 
vis-à-vis the total number of complaints received d uring 2009 to 2012, which was 587. 
The Committee desire that since maximum number of complaints i.e. 189 were received 
from Uttar Pradesh, the Government must launch a sp ecial drive there to weed out the 
root cause of glaring irregularities in the TPDS, i n coordination with the State 
Government. Also, while deploring the state of affa irs of the disposal of various 
complaint cases, the Committee also recommend that the Ministry should expeditiously 

 
 
devise mechanism for an early redressal of the comp laints registered by individuals, 
organisations etc. against the Fair Price shops. Th e Committee are of the view that 
even though there is a well defined procedure of jo int inspection/sampling of the stocks 
by State Government authority and FCI to ensure tha t prescribed quality foodgrains are 
issued under PDS, much more needs to be done. No im pact analysis of the Citizen’s 
Charter has been done by 32 State/UT Governments wh o have adopted the Citizen’s 
Charter. Besides, the Committee are concerned to no te that since 2006-07, no 
Vigilance Committees have been formed in the States  of Assam, Bihar, Goa, Haryana, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur, Meg halaya, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttarakhand, West Bengal and Puducherry. Further, t he Committee note that no 
meetings of the Vigilance Committees have been held  in Sikkim and Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands since 2006-07. In this backdrop, th e Committee cannot but opine that 
perhaps quality control of the foodgrains distribut ed under the TPDS is not a matter of 
priority at all for the Government. The Committee w ould like to know the reasons for the 
non-formulation of Vigilance Committees in 13 State s as well as for nil Vigilance 
Committee meetings in Sikkim and Andaman & Nicobar Islands since 2006-07. The 
Ministry must take suitable steps to initiate the f ormulation of Vigilance Committees in 
States where they do not exist and at the same time , should also ensure that the 
meetings are held regularly where such Committees h ave been formed. This would 
bring the problems of the beneficiaries in the fore front and at the same time the quality 
of the foodgrains distributed would be under constant watch.  
 
Further, the Committee note that in order to ensure  increased transparency in 
functioning of FPSs, the State and UT Governments w ere asked in 2008 to issue 
instructions to introduce monthly certification by Village Panchayats/Vigilance 
Committees/ Urban Local Bodies/ Self Help Groups fo r delivery of foodgrains to ration 
card holders. Such a certification of actual delive ry of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops in 
time and their distribution to ration card holders is also expected to streamline 
functioning of Vigilance Committees at Fair Price S hop level. Accordingly, all State/UT 
Governments were directed on 7th March, 2008 to introduce the system with effect from 
April, 2008. So far, 22 States have reported implem entation of certification. The 

 
 
Committee would like to know the reasons for non in troduction of this system by the 
remaining States/UTs. The Ministry must strive to h ave certifications from all the 
States/UTs of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The quality of foodgrains under Central Pool includ ing foodgrains issued from 
FCI godowns to State Government for distribution under PDS is monitored by this Deptt.  
The officers of Quality Control Cells (QCCs) inspec t procurement centers, food storage 
depots, loading/unloading points and fair price sho ps to assess the quality of food grain 
during procurement, storage and distribution.  Ther e is a set procedure of joint 
inspection/sampling of stocks by State Government a nd FCI to ensure that quality of 
foodgrains are issued under PDS as per prescribed n orms.  Besides, if any complaint is 
received from State Government, media, consumer, et c., about supply of poor quality of 
foodgrains under PDS, investigated either through c oncerned agencies or by deputing 
the officer from QCC.  It may be mentioned that Tar geted Public Distribution System 
(TPDS) is operated under the joint responsibility o f the Central and the State/Union 
Territory (UT) Governments.  Central Government is responsible for procurement, 
allocation and transportation of foodgrains upto th e designated depots of the Food 
Corporation of India. The operational responsibilit y for allocation and distribution of 
foodgrains within the States/UTs, identification of  eligible Below Poverty Line (BPL) 
families, issuance of ration cards to them and supe rvision over and monitoring of 
functioning of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) rest with the State/UT Governments concerned.   
 
There have been reports about irregularities in implementation of TPDS including 
complaints regarding quality and foodgrains distrib uted under the Public Distribution 
System in certain regions/States in the country.  A s and when complaints are received 
by the Government from individuals and organization s as well as through press reports, 
they are sent to the State/UT Governments concerned  for inquiry and appropriate 
action. 
 
The foodgrains are issued to State Governments/Unio n Territory Administrations 
for onward distribution under Public Distribution S ystem (PDS).  There is a well defined 

 
 
procedure of joint inspection/sampling of the stock s by State Government authority and 
FCI to ensure that prescribed quality foodgrains ar e issued under PDS.  In order to 
ensure that only good quality foodgrains are issued  for PDS, this Ministry has issued 
instructions to the Food Secretaries of all State G overnments and CMD, FCI. The 
following steps have been taken by the Government:- 
 
(i) Only good quality foodgrains free from insect i nfestation and conforming to 
PFA Standards are to be issued under TPDS. 
(ii) Ample opportunities are to be provided to the State Government to check 
the quality of foodgrains prior to the lifting of t he foodgrains stocks from 
FCI godowns. 
(iii) Sample of foodgrains are to be collected and sealed from the stocks of 
foodgrains to be issued under the TPDS jointly by F CI and State Food & 
Civil Supplies Department. 
(iv) An officer not below the rank of Inspector is to be deputed from State 
Government to take the delivery of foodgrains stocks from FCI godowns. 
(v) Regular inspection to check the quality of food grains is to be carried out 
by the officers of State Government and surprise checks are carried out by 
the officers of Quality Control Cell of the Ministry. 
(vi) It is the responsibility of the concerned Stat e Government/UT 
Administration to ensure that during transportation  and storage at different 
stages in the distribution chain, the foodgrains re tain the required quality 
specifications.  
(vii) The State Government, where the decentralized  procurement is in 
operation, should ensure that the quality of foodgr ains issued under TPDS 
and other welfare schemes should meet the desired s tandards under the 
Food Safety and Standards Act (formerly PFA). 
 
 Further, during the Conference of State Food Secre taries on Best Practices and 
Reforms in the Targeted Public Distribution System held in 12-13 July, 2010, it was 
inter-alia resolved that grievance redressal should be undertaken by States/UTs through 
toll free call centres and web based complaint regi stration and monitoring systems. 

 
 
Central Government has issued guidelines dated 31.0 1.2013 to all States/UTs for 
setting up of a toll free helpline number in States /UTs for redressal of grievances under 
the TPDS. Financial assistances for setting up of helpline number is also being provided 
by Department of Consumer Affairs for State Consume r Helpline and under the scheme 
for Computerisation of TPDS Operations.  
 The recommendation of the Committee for launching a special drive in the State 
of Uttar Pradesh for weeding out the root causes fo r irregularities in TPDS have been 
conveyed to the State Government, which has been ad vised to expeditiously devise 
suitable mechanism including special drive for earl y redressal of the complaints 
registered by individuals, organisations, etc. 
 As regards implementation of the revised model Cit izen’s Charter, all States/UTs 
have reported its adoption/implementation except St ate Government of Jharkhand. The 
matter is being pursued with the State Government i n this regard. Further, in terms of 
the recommendations of the Committee, States/UTs ha ve been requested to undertake 
impact analysis of the implementation of the provis ions of the revised Citizen’s Charter 
on the functioning of TPDS and to send their feedback.  
 
 In so far Committee’s recommendations regarding fu nctioning of Vigilance 
Committees in States/UTs are concerned, Central Government has been requesting the 
State/UT Governments from time to time to activate these Committees and reconstitute 
them, if not done so already. The recommendations o f the Standing Committee have 
been noted and the concerns of the Committee have a gain been conveyed to all 
State/UT Governments for taking stringent measures to remove the deficiencies in the 
system and to hold the meetings of the Vigilance Co mmittees at various levels on a 
regular basis. 
 
 As regards the implementation of monthly certifica tion system, so far 23 
States/UTs have reported introduction of  monthly certification by village 
panchayats/urban local bodies/vigilance committees/ women’s Self Help Groups for 
delivery of foodgrains to fair price shops in time and their distribution to ration card 

 
 
holders . The remaining 12 States/UTs namely Assam, Delhi, Go a, J&K, Jharkhand, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Uttar Prad esh, Uttarakhand, and 
Puducherry who have not reported the introduction o f monthly certification have again 
been advised to take necessary measures for its int roduction in their States/UTs and to 
report the same at the earliest.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 Out of the total storage capacity of 45.52 Million  Tonnes available with FCI, the 
Committee find that it is concentrated mainly in th e Northern Zone being about 56 per 
cent of the total available storage capacity. The S outhern Zone has about 22 per cent, 
the Western Zone 13 per cent, the Eastern Zone only  about 8 per cent and the North-
Eastern Zone has less than 1 per cent of the capaci ty. The Committee also note that 
about 63 per cent of the storage capacity is concen trated only in five major procuring 
States i.e. Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, while 
about 10 per cent storage capacity is available in the five newly emerging procuring 
States of Bihar, Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal and  Madhya Pradesh. Only 27 per 
cent of total capacity is available in the consumin g States. The Committee also note 
with great concern that the States of Jharkhand and  Himachal Pradesh have got 
storage capacities of even less than one month of t heir requirement, while some other 
States, especially in North East Region, have got s torage capacities of less than two 
months’ requirement.  
 
The Committee are aware that even States like Punja b and Odisha are 
continuously requesting FCI to lift old stocks of w heat & custom-Milled Rice, as 
godowns there are already bursting with the old sto ck while the new stock is arriving 
very shortly, for which no storage space is availab le. The Committee note that storage 
capacity is mainly required in the procuring States  to avoid double handling and 
secondary/backward movement as it is always better to store the foodgrains in the 

 
 
procuring States so that they can be moved to the d eficit/consuming States as per the 
requirement. The Committee have also been apprised that another reason for the 
requirement of storage capacity being more in the w heat procuring States is because 
the wheat procurement has to be made in a span of 3 0-45 days which makes it difficult 
to move the wheat stocks procured to the deficit re gions immediately, thus resulting in 
an increase in the requirement of storage capacity in the wheat procuring States. Five 
out of the six procuring States belong to the North ern Zone which is the main wheat 
procuring zone in the country. The Committee have a lso been informed that traditionally 
all consuming States are having a storage capacity for 2-3 months allocation. However, 
in all the hilly States, the available storage capa city is comparatively less as compared 
to other consuming States due to problems being fac ed for construction of godowns on 
account of issues related to acquisition of land. D uring the deliberations on the subject 
‘Procurement and Storage of Foodgrains’ the Ministr y were candid before the 
Committee that the period from 2007-08 to 2010-11 s aw the highest ever levels of 
procurement of foodgrains by Government agencies, r esulting in severe strain on the 
available capacities with the Government agencies f or storage. The Committee were 
also apprised that though higher MSP, better reach and consequent higher procurement 
have helped in ensuring better and remunerative pri ces to farmers; it has also caused 
strain on available storage capacities with FCI and the State Government agencies.  
 
From the foregoing, the Committee observe that thou gh over the years the 
procurement figures have continuously been increasi ng, the storage and distribution 
infrastructure in major grain producing areas of th e country has failed to keep pace with 
it. Taking cognisance of the frequently appearing m edia reports about deterioration of 
foodgrains stored in godowns in various parts of th e country and sacks of rotting 
foodgrains lying unattended in the open in railway yards with no precaution against rats, 
disease causing droplets and damp air, the Committe e fail to understand as to why 
construction of new warehouses and sufficient stora ge facilities to tackle the problem 
has not been done by the Ministry on war footing. T he Committee are of the view that 
when the Government is struggling to fine tune its National Food Security Bill, any 
wastage of foodgrains due to negligence is a crime against the people of this country.  

 
 
 
The Committee also recommend that sincere efforts s hould be directed towards 
creating additional storage capacities as early as possible and the direction of the 
Supreme Court that at least one big godown should be constructed in each State should 
be expeditiously implemented by the Ministry. They would like to be apprised 
particularly on the steps taken to ease the current  situation in Punjab, Odisha and such 
other States where the existing capacity is unable to stock fresh arrivals this year. The 
Committee also suggest that storage gap should be p eriodically calculated and the 
construction targets set accordingly so that storag e capacities can be developed in 
proportion to procurement for attaining a perfect b alance between procurement and 
storage of foodgrains. Besides, the Committee also recommend that proper and regular 
pest control and humidity treatment of godowns shou ld be given top priority by the 
Ministry.  
Reply of the Government 
The Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) is operat ing 466 warehouses with 
105.55 lakh MT capacity as on 1.3.2013 for storage of foodgrains, agri input and 
produce and other notified commodities. Priority is  given for utilization of the 
warehousing capacity for storage of foodgrains.  During the last 5-years, the percentage 
of utilization of the storage capacity by foodgrain s is consistently on the increase as 
may be seen from the following table:  
 
Year  Capacity  
(in lakh MT) 
Utilization by foodgrains  
(in %age) 
2007-08 98.78 38 
2008-09 105.25 45 
2009-10 105.98 48 
2010-11 102.47 54 
2011-12 100.85 57 
2012-13 
(upto Feb 2013) 
105.55 58 
 
  
 CWC has been making sincere efforts for creating a dditional covered storage 
capacity every year.  Storage capacity created duri ng the last 3 years for storage of 

 
 
foodgrains, fertilizers etc. which is also availabl e for storage of foodgrains under Central 
Pool is as follows: 
 Year  Capacity created  
(in lakh MT) 
2009-10 0.85 
2010-11 1.45 
2011-12 1.92 
2012-13 (upto Feb 2013) 2.00 
 
 
 The details of State-wise and centre-wise storage capacity created during the 
last 3 years are as follows: 
 
STATE-WISE AND CENTREWISE CREATION OF CAPACITY DURING 2009-10 
Sl. No.  Name of Centre  Capacity in MT  Total  
For FCI  
Under 
PEG 
For CWC  
For Agri 
produce 
For 
Industrial 
Purpose 
(1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  
Punjab       
1. Bhatinda 23400   23400 
2 Ropar  5000   5000 
3 Moga 9600   9600 
4 Mandigobindgarh  6200   6200 
Haryana       
1 Tohana 5000   5000 
2 Barhi  10800  10800 
3 Naraingarh  10000 
(Open 
plinth) 
 10000 
(Open 
plinth) 
Chhatisgarh       
1 Bhatapara-II 5000   5000 
Rajasthan       
1 Baran  5000  5000 
2 Sitapura-II  5000  5000 
 Total  54200  30800   85000  
 
STATE-WISE AND CENTRE-WISE CREATION OF CAPACITY DURING 2010-11 
Sl. No.  Name of 
Centre 
Capacity in MT  Total  
For FCI  
Under 
PEG 
For CWC  
For Agri 
produce 
For 
Industrial 

 
 
Purpose  
(1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  
Punjab       
1. Bhatinda 11600   11600 
Tamil Nadu       
1  Virudhunagar 5000 250  5250 
2 Hosur-II 15000   15000 
3 Cuddalore 8000   8000 
4 Tuticorin   7500 7500 
Rajasthan       
1 Chomu  10000  10000 
2 Sitapura-II  3400  3400 
3. Bikaner  5000  5000 
Andhra 
paradesh 
     
1 Bodhan 9000   9000 
2 Kakinada  10000  10000 
3 Guntur   1750 1750 
Odisha       
1 Choudwar  3000  3000 
2 Bolangir 6700   6700 
3 Junagarh 10000   10000 
Maharashtra       
1 Akola 16100   16100 
Uttar Pradesh       
1 Dadri   5000 5000 
Gujarat       
1 Surat-II  1500  1500 
Karnataka       
1 Tumkur  14613  14613 
Kerala       
1 Edathala   1700 1700 
 Total  81400  47763  15950  145113  
 
          
  TOTAL   :  145113   MT    
SAY    :1.45 Lakh MT 

 
 
STATE-WISE AND CENTREWISE CREATION OF CAPACITY DURING 2011-12 
SL. 
No. 
Name of Centre  Capacity in MT  Total  
For FCI  
Under PEG 
For CWC  
For Agri 
produce 
For Industrial 
Purpose 
(1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  
Karnataka  
1. Gadag (Ph-I) 10000   10000 
2. Gadag (Ph-II) 10000   10000 
Rajasthan  
1. Sitapura-II  6600  6600 
2. Hanumangarh–II (Ph-I)   10000  10000 
3. Kota-III  10000  10000 
Madhya Pradesh  
1. Narsinghpur 6500   6500 
2. Bhind 5000   5000 
3. Maksi 3400   3400 
Kerala  
1. Kakkanad   6850 6850 
2. Kannur   3650 3650 
Maharashtra  
1. Gondia 3400   3400 
2. Akola-II 1300   1300 
3. Yavatmal 5000   5000 
Odisha  
1. Bolangir 13300 10000  23300 
2. Junagarh 2000   2000 
3. Kenduaplli-I 5000   5000 
4. Kendupalli-II 8400   8400 
5. Sonepur 10000   10000 
Andhra Pradesh  
1. Bodhan 7000   7000 
2. Rajahmundry 5000 1000  6000 
Uttar Pradesh  
1. Greater Noida   21860 21860 
Tamil Nadu  
1. Cuddalore 7000   7000 
Punjab  
1. Moga-I 1250   1250 
2. Amritsar 1450   1450 
3. Chanalon 5000   5000 
4. Moga-II 3400   3400 
5. Mansa 1100   1100 
Chhattisgarh  
1. Bilaspur-II 4200   4200 

 
 
2. Raigarh 3400   3400 
 Total  122100  37600  32360  192060  
                                                  T OTAL: 192060 MT  
 
During the current year (2012-13), CWC has plans to  construct 2.10 lakh MT for 
various States including Punjab and Orissa out of w hich 2 lakh MT has already been 
created by February 2013 as per State-wise and Centre-wise details given below: 
STATE-WISE AND CENTRE-WISE CAPACITY  COMPLETED DURI NG THE YEAR 
2012-13 (UPTO 28.02.2013) 
SL. 
No. 
Centre  Capacity in MT  Total  
For FCI  
under PEG 
For Other 
depositors 
Madhya Pradesh  
1. Bhind  5000  5000 
2. Maksi  6600  6600 
Punjab  
1. Amritsar, BD  3700  3700 
2. Moga – II  1600  1600 
Maharashtra  
1. Gondia  6600  6600 
2. Yavatmal  10000  10000 
3. CFS, Distri Park D’ 
Node  
 3650 (Pre-fab) 3650  
 
Andhra Pradesh  
1. Bodhan  4000  4000 
2. Gadwal  10000  10000 
Chhattisgarh  
1. Bilaspur  4000  4000 
2. Raigarh  8600  8600 
Odisha  
1. Kendupalli – I  15000  15000 
2. Kendupalli – II  11600  11600 
3. Nabarangpur  10000  10000 
4. Koksara 5000  5000 
5. Jatni 5000  5000 
Karnataka  
1. Gulberga-II  32000  32000 
Himachal Pradesh  
1. Dehra  2500  2500 
West Bengal  
1. Berhampur  11600  11600 
2. Sargachi  2400  2400 
Gujarat  

 
 
1. Vadod  4800  4800 
2. CFS, Pipavav   6250   (Open 
Yard) 
6250 
  
Kerala  
1. Kunnamthanam 5000 5000 10000 
Rajsthan  
1. Baran   5000 5000 
2. Hanumangarh-II  10000 10000 
3. Udaipur  4700 4700 
TOTAL     1,65,000 MT  34,600 MT   
1,99,600MT  
 
 
Say  2.00 Lakh MT 
 
Further CWC has plans to construct 2.20 lakh MT cap acity in various States 
during 2013-14. 
 
CWC undertakes regular prophylactic and curative tr eatments of foodgrain 
stocks during storage so as to ensure avoidance of cross infestation as well as insect 
control for safe preservation of foodgrain stocks.  All new construction of godowns are 
being provided with pre-painted poly coated galvalu me sheet for roofing together with 
turbo ventilators so as to reduce ambient temperatu re inside the godown for better 
preservation of stocks 
 
As on 28.02.2013, total covered storage capacity av ailable to FCI is 310.01 lakh 
MT. A capacity of 197.14 lakh MT has been approved under PEG Scheme in 19 States 
of the Country. On completion of sanctioned capacit ies under PEG total covered 
capacities available with FCI would be more than 50 0 lakh MT; the sufficient stock of 
buffer and strategic reserves for the Public Distri bution System. Apart from covered 
capacities, 26.37 lakh MT CAP capacities are owned by FCI and 11.12 lakh MT CAP 
capacity is hired which can be used for short term storage of wheat in procuring States.  
Also 194 lakh MT of covered storage capacity and 14 7 lakh MT CAP capacity exists 
with the State Govt. agencies in the Country.  
 

 
 
Higher storage capacities are available in procurin g states such as Punjab, 
Haryana, U.P. A.P. etc as compared to consuming sta tes like Jharkhand, Himachal 
Pradesh, J&K, N.E. States etc mainly to avoid exces sive pressure on railway 
infrastructure during procurement.  However, under the PEG Scheme, it is being 
ensured that all consuming States have a minimum st orage capacity of 4 months of 
PDS requirement.  Additional capacities have been s anctioned in the emerging surplus 
States like Bihar, West Bengal etc. North-Eastern S tates are the beneficiaries under 
Plan Scheme with proposals for construction of 5.37  lakh MT capacity.  This will help to 
remove the regional imbalances in storage capacity. 
 
After the total capacity approved under Plan and PE G Scheme is realized, the 
country will have sufficient capacity to handle buffer and strategic reserves. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENTS ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 The policy on procurement of foodgrains emphasizes  the need to ensure that the 
farmers get remunerative prices for their produce s o as to reduce fluctuations in grain 
prices, avoid distress sale of foodgrains and to bu ild up stock of foodgrains in order to 
ensure the supply of subsidized foodgrains to the n eedy and poor. The Committee 
observe that as per the existing system, foodgrains  procurement is handled primarily 
through Food Corporation of India (FCI) in associat ion with State Governments and 
their procurement agencies. In this system, the State Government provides the requisite 
infrastructure at purchase centres. The working cap ital is either taken from Banks or 
provided by the respective State Government.  
 
From the information furnished to them, the Committ ee note that during the last 
five years, the production of wheat in the country has increased from 785.70 lakh 
tonnes in 2007-08 to 902.32 lakh tonnes (as per 3rd  Advance Estimates dated 
23.04.2012) in 2011-12, whereas during the said period, the procurement has increased 
from 111.28 lakh tonnes to 318 lakh tonnes. As far as rice is concerned, the Committee 
note that the production of rice at the All India l evel increased from 966.92 lakh tonnes 
in 2007-08 to 1034.06 lakh tonnes in 2011-12 wherea s during the said period, the 
procurement of rice increased from 287.36 lakh tonnes to 353.15 lakh tonnes. Thus, the 
production and procurement of wheat and rice has cl early been increasing over the 
years. The Ministry has also admitted before the Co mmittee that the present 
procurement of wheat and rice is much more than the  requirement for TPDS and OWSs 
and as a result, the level of Central Pool Stock is  rising over a period of time. An 
analysis of the State-wise trend of procurement of wheat during 2007-08 to 2012-13 by 
the Committee has indicated multifold increase in a lmost all the States except Gujarat. 
In terms of increase in procurement, Madhya Pradesh  is leading with an increase of 
almost 65 times, Bihar has shown around 15 times in crease, Uttar Pradesh almost 7 

 
 
times, Rajasthan four times and Punjab and Haryana two times. In procurement of rice 
too, there has been a tremendous increase in almost all the States for instance, Madhya 
Pradesh has shown an increase of almost eight times  and Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have shown an increase o f almost two times. Taking into 
account an estimated production of further 80 MT fo odgrains during 2012-13, which is 
two and half times more than the required norm i.e.  31.9 MT and the inadequate 
storage capacity, there is clearly a need for takin g urgent action for efficient handling 
and distribution of foodgrains. The Committee, ther efore, recommend that the Ministry 
and the FCI, which coordinates the overall foodgrai ns operation should analyse and 
deal with the production and procurement scenario s o that the problems of abundance 
and distribution of foodgrains are resolved at the earliest. They would like to be apprised 
of the procurement centres opened in the country du ring the current year for wheat, rice 
and coarse grains for the farmers.  
 
The Committee note that in view of record procureme nt and shortage of storage 
space in Central Pool, decisions have been taken to  export some quantity of non-
basmati rice, wheat and wheat products to some frie ndly countries in Asia and Africa. 
Export of foodgrains from private account has also been allowed. However, the 
Committee are of the view that exports of foodgrains to reduce the surplus will not be an 
optimal solution as India, like many other countrie s, has remained very selective in 
permitting export of foodgrains. Not only that the interest of the domestic consumers, 
particularly the poor, has to be given paramount im portance, at the same time they 
desire that the Ministry must shed it lethargic app roach and improve the Public 
Distribution System as it has been observed that in  many places, open market price of 
wheat is below MSP. Taking into account that the pr oblem will get exacerbated with the 
increase in production and there is very little cha nce of restricting each year’s 
procurement to actual production, the Committee str ongly urge the Government to 
create better logistic support without any delay so  that the FCI and other procuring 
agencies can manage the bountiful harvest in the mo st effective manner. The 
Committee observe that the Government undertakes mo nthly review of the foodgrain 
stock position in the Central Pool by FCI and the S tate Governments and their 

 
 
agencies. The Committee also are aware that several  measures are underway to 
correct the mismatch between production, procuremen t, storage and distribution of 
foodgrains which, inter alia , include, revised buffer norms, automation and 
strengthening of TPDS, expansion of AAY etc. The Co mmittee desire that ongoing 
projects be given the urgency they deserve. They wo uld like the Ministry to furnish a 
detailed note to them on the progress on various pa rameters set towards better 
management of foodgrains.  
Reply of the Government 
The Department of Food & Public Distribution holds a conference of the State 
Food Secretaries and representatives of the Ministr y of Agriculture and other relevant 
agencies including FCI every year twice, one before  the onset of Kharif Marketing 
Season and other before the onset of Rabi Marketing  Season to analyse the production 
estimates made by Ministry of Agriculture for the c oncerned crop year and to make a 
procurement plan including the number of procuremen t centres required, requirement of 
packaging material, requirement of storage faciliti es and making the estimates of 
procurement. Accordingly, various arrangements for the procurement operations are 
made by FCI and the State agencies concerned and th e Department regularly monitors 
the progress of procurement for ensuring flow of price support benefits to the farmers and 
proper storage and management of foodgrains. The pr ocurement centres opened during 
the current year for wheat and paddy for the farmer s is appended as Annexure I and II  
respectively.  With regard to procurement centres f or coarse grains, FCI has informed 
that no procurement centres are opened by FCI for c oarse grains which are procured by 
the State Agencies for distribution under the various welfare schemes. 
 
As observed by the Committee, the Department of Foo d & Public Distribution is 
much concerned about correcting the mismatch betwee n production, procurement, 
storage and distribution of foodgrains and is relen tlessly working towards automation and 
strengthening of TPDS, revision of buffer norms, enactment of National Food Security Bill 
to have better coverage of public distribution of foodgrains as indicated below:- 
 
(i) Automation and strengthening of TPDS 
 :  

 
 
An end-to-end computerization of TPDS operations ha s been taken up 
under the 12 th  Five Year Plan (2012-17) on cost-sharing basis wit h 
States/UTs for implementation of activities such as  digitization of ration 
cards/beneficiary and other databases, computerizat ion of supply-chain 
management, setting up of transparency portal and g rievance redressal 
mechanism. 
 
(ii) Revision of buffer norms 
 :  
The main objectives of Buffer Stocking Policy are t o meet the prescribed 
minimum Buffer Stock norms for food security, month ly releases of 
foodgrains through TPDS/other welfare schemes, to m eet emergency 
situations arising out of unexpected crop failure, natural disaster etc. and for 
marketing intervention to augment supply so as to h elp moderate the open 
market prices.  The buffer norms are under revision  to meet the 
requirement of foodgrains under the proposed Nation al Food Security Act 
and other schemes of the Government and market conditions etc. 
 
(iii) The National Food Security Bill, 2011 
:  
The Bill was introduced in Parliament on 22 nd  December, 2011, with the 
objective to provide for food and nutritional secur ity, in human life cycle 
approach, by ensuring access to adequate quantity o f quality food at 
affordable prices to people to live a life with dig nity.  Once enacted, about 
two third of the population will be legally entitle d to receive highly 
subsidized foodgrains under Targeted Public Distrib ution System (TPDS). 
The Bill places a special focus on nutritional supp ort to pregnant women 
and lactating mothers and children by entitling the m to meals, meeting the 
prescribed nutritional norms.  Pregnant women and l actating mothers will 
also be entitled to receive maternity benefit. 
 
(iv) Creation of additional storage capacity: To au gment the covered storage 
capacity, Government is implementing the Private En trepreneurs 

 
 
Guarantee (PEG) Scheme through private entrepreneur s, Central 
Warehousing Corporation (CWC) and the State Warehou sing Corporation 
(SWCs). The FCI guarantees to hire godowns construc ted under this 
scheme for a period of ten years, thereby, ensuring  for the investor, a fair 
return on his investment.  A capacity of about 197 lakh MTs as on 
31.3.2013 has been approved for the construction of  godowns in 19 States 
out of which a capacity of 140.73 lakh MTs has been  sanctioned for 
construction.  A capacity of 69.92 lakh MTs has bee n completed under the 
scheme.  For ensuring long-term scientific storage,  the Government has 
also approved construction of 20 lakh MTs of storag e capacity in silos 
within the overall sanctioned capacity of the PEG s cheme.  Besides the 
PEG scheme, the Government has finalized a Plan sch eme especially for 
the North East, for creation of an additional stora ge capacity of 5.40 lakh 
MTs through the FCI, in the next 3 to 4 years.  The se capacities once 
created in the NE region, would take care of the st orage requirements of 
about 3 to 4 months. 
 
As regards Export of Foodgrains, 
 in view of the record production and 
procurement of wheat and rice in the recent years, the Govt. allowed export of 20 lakh 
tonnes of wheat and non-basmati rice under OGL w.e. f. 9-9-2011 apart from export to 
the tune of 2,447.202 MTs to friendly countries on humanitarian grounds. 
 
Further considering surplus stock position in Centr al Pool and constraints of 
storage space in FCI godowns, the EGoM in its meeti ng held on 3-7-2012 approved the 
export of 20 lakh tonnes of wheat from Central Pool  through CPSUs.  The EGoM in its 
meeting held on 26-12-2012 has further allowed expo rt of an additional quantity of 25 
lakh tonnes of wheat from Central Pool.  Thus, the Govt. has so far allowed 45 lakh 
tonnes of wheat from Central Pool. This has been do ne to liquidate surplus stock of 
wheat which was about 308.09 MTs on 1-2-2013 and op ening stock of 250MTs is 
expected on 1-4-2013 as compared to 199.52 MTs on 1 -4-2012.  However, other steps 

 
 
to increase the storage capacity of foodgrains have  also been taken up by FCI under 
PEG Scheme as a long term solution for scientific and safe storage of foodgrains. 
Annexure-I 
STATEMENT SHOWING THE LIST OF PURCHASE CENTRES FOR RMS 2013-14  
 
REGION 2013-14 (Provisional)   
  FCI State Total 
    Agenencies   
PUNJAB 432 1343 1775 
HARYANA 63 309 372 
UTTAR PD. 40 4978 5018 
RAJASTHAN 106 232 338 
MADHYA PD. 0 2800 2800 
 DELHI 4 0 4 
BIHAR  0 8997 8997 
H.P. 4 0 4 
GUJARAT      20 180 200 
JHARKHAND 0 0 0 
CHHATTISGARH * * 0 
J&K 15 0 15 
MAHARASHTRA 0 79 79 
UTTRAKHAND 20 195 215 
WEST BENGAL 0 50 50 
 TOTAL  704 19,163 19,867 
        
Chattisgarh:  * The procurement is done through Cooperatives and 
Paddy is purchased in Rabi and Kharif season. The 
centres of Paddy is also used for Wheat procurement 
where ever required.    
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-II 
 
 
 STATEMENT SHOWING THE NUMBER OF PURCHASE CENTRES     
FOR KMS 2012-13 
 
 
 SL. 
No.   Region  FCI State Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 0 1800  1800  
2 Assam 14  17  31  
3 Bihar 0 9035  9035  
4 Chhatisgarh 0 1936  1936  
5 Delhi 4 0 4 
6 Gujrat 0 53  53  
7 Haryana 37  146  183  
8 Himachal Pradesh 4 0 4 
9 Jharkhand 10  610  620  
10 Jammu & Kashmir 5 0 5 
11 Karnataka 0 50  50  
12 Kerela 0 512  512  
13 Maharashtra 0 740  740  
14 Madhya Pradesh 0 750  750  
15 Odisha 30  2539  2569  
16 Puducherry 0 0 0 
17 Punjab 227  1543  1770  
18 Rajasthan 12  0 12  
19 Tamil Nadu   1700  1700  
20 Uttar Pradesh 50  3200  3250  
21 Uttrakhand 5 50  55  
22 West Bengal 38  4235  4273  
  GRAND TOTAL 436  28916  29352  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I) 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 The Committee are surprised to note the submission  made by the Ministry that 
quantification of savings under the DCP scheme is n ot possible as the Food Corporation 
of India’s economic cost is fixed on all India basi s whereas the DCP States’ economic 
cost is State-wise. As the scheme was introduced to  effect savings in the outgo of food 
subsidy as well as to extend the benefits of MSP to  local farmers, such a stand taken by 
the Ministry does not seem tenable. Besides, the Committee are of the view that until and 
unless a cost-benefit analysis of DCP scheme is qua ntified, the extension of this scheme 
to other States may not become easy. Also, since th e scheme has been extended to 
almost half of the total number of States in the co untry, it would be prudent on the part of 
the Ministry to coordinate with the DCP States/UT a nd calculate at least an average of 
the savings made with the implementation of the sch eme. The Committee are convinced 
that this would facilitate the Ministry to take up the matter of expanding the scheme to 
other non-DCP States with the EGoM/Planning Commission too.  
  
     The Committee, while observing that in almost all the DCP States procurement has 
gradually picked up over the years, recommend that the Ministry should explore the 
possibility of universal adoption of DCP scheme by all States/UTs. This would lead to 
considerable cost-savings in the procurement and th e amount thus saved could be 
channelized for other aspects of management of food grains such as enhancement of 
storage capacity, expanding network of public distr ibution system, etc. Moreover, it 
would help in spreading out the foodgrains cultivat ion uniformly across larger parts of 
the country and would also facilitate better access  for the poor and needy beneficiaries 
ensuring that the foodgrains actually reach them.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government of India makes active efforts to pur sue State Governments to 
adopt the decentralized system of procurement (DCP) scheme. Following benefits accrue 
to States under Decentralized Procurement System:- 
 

 
 
(i) The State is made self sufficient in procuremen t and distribution of 
foodgrains, thereby reducing the dependence on Cent ral Government 
agencies for procurement of foodgrains. 
 
(ii) The State can boost local cultivation and enha nce coverage of MSP to the 
farmers. 
 
(iii) Higher local production and procurement saves  cost towards freight in 
bringing the stocks from outside the State. 
 
(iv) Additional revenue will generate to the State Governments concerned by 
way of higher levy and taxes with increased procurement. 
 
(v) States are encouraged to contribute more foodgr ains towards the central 
pool, thereby enhancing food security. 
 
With the efforts made in this regard, Government of  Andhra Pradesh has 
adopted the Decentralised Procurement (DCP) Scheme of procurement from KMS 
2012-13 onwards. Government of Rajasthan has adopte d the DCP mode of 
procurement w.e.f RMS 2013-14, initially in the Alw ar district of the State.  State 
Government has been requested to adopt the DCP mode  in the entire State from 2014-
15 onwards.   Governments of Delhi, Haryana and Sik kim have conveyed their inability 
to adopt the DCP system of procurement of foodgrains due to infrastructural problems. 
The Committee’s observation for cost-benefit analys is of DCP scheme has been 
noted and an exercise will be undertaken to calcula te average of the savings made with 
the implementation of the scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 The Committee are concerned to note the Report of National Sample Survey 
Organisation which has revealed that the awareness among farmer households in the 
country about the MSP was extremely low i.e. only 1 9 per cent. It had further found that 
only 10 per cent were aware of the concept of MSP b ut not of the national level 
procurement agency. Taking cognisance of this Report, the Committee recommend that 
Ministry should carryout an impact assessment surve y to study the extent of denial of 
benefits of Minimum Support Price among farmers whi ch may have led to distress sale 
of their foodgrains. Further, they recommend that t he Ministry should coordinate with 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to ens ure that while airing and telecasting 
programmes for farmers such as Krishi Darshan, focu s may be kept on disseminating 
updated information on trends of prices in national , regional and local mandis, fair price 
shops, regional procurement centres etc. so that th e farmers can realize the best price 
for their agricultural produce. The development of a robust information dissemination 
system would empower the farming community and sign ificantly increase the efficiency 
of distribution from farmers to consumers, reduce t he intermediation costs and 
maximize returns to the farmers of their produce. T he Committee would like to have a 
specific response on this aspect.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The issue of fixing of MSP for the foodgrains and o ther related matters come 
under the mandate of Ministry of Agriculture. The a bove recommendation of the 
Committee has been referred to that Ministry for ta king necessary action and furnishing 
Action Taken Note to the Committee on Estimates.  A  copy of the letter sent is at 
Annexure-V. 
In so far as procurement of wheat and rice is conce rned, to ensure that farmers 
receive MSP, the MSP for these items are announced well ahead of the start of the crop 
year; MSP operations are given wide publicity throu gh pamphlets, sign boards and print 
& electronic media every year and State Governments  are encouraged to undertake 
decentralized procurement, so as to enhance the procurement of food grains.  Sufficient 

 
 
numbers of purchase centres are also opened by FCI in consultation with State 
Governments to facilitate the farmers to sell their produce. 
 
However, Committee’s observations have been noted a nd the dissemination and 
awareness system for farmers would be improved further. 
  

 
 
Annexure-V 
 
 
U.K.S. Chauhan, I.A.S., 
Joint Secretary (P&FCI), 
Tel.No. 23382512 
Email : 
jspolicy.fpd@nic.in  
 
 
D.O.No.7 (2)/2010-Py.I 
 
 
Dated  8 
th  May, 2013 
 
Dear 
 
 The Committee on Estimates, Lok Sabha has submitte d its report on 
“Procurement and Storage of Foodgrains” and the Dep artment of Food & PD is 
required to send Action Taken Note to the Committee  Branch on recommendations 
contained in the report.  I enclose a copy each of recommendations No. 7 & 8 in which 
the Committee has recommended (i) to provide incent ives through MSP to farmers to 
grow coarse cereals and (ii) to create awareness am ong farmer households about the 
MSP and trend of prices of various foodgrains as aw areness level among farmers 
about MSP is very low. 
 
2. Since the issues contained in these recommendati ons comes under the purview 
of Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), i t is requested that Action Taken 
Notes on these recommendations may be sent to the C ommittee Branch of the 
Committee on Estimates directly by DAC. 
 
 
 Yours sincerely, 
 
 
 
 (U.K.S.Chauhan) 
 
Shri Rajeev Lochan, 
Adviser, 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, 
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi 
 
Encl. : As above 
 

 
 
Reply of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (Ministry of 
Agriculture) dated 25.10.2013 
Ministry of Agriculture is presently implementing a  Central Sector Scheme “Mass 
Media Support to Agricultural Extension”.  Under th is scheme existing infrastructure of 
Doordarshan and All India Radio is being utilized t o make the farmers aware about 
Agricultural Inputs, modern farm technologies and r esearches related to agriculture and 
allied areas. A 30 minute programme is being teleca st 5-6 days a week through 
National, 18 Regional Kendras and 180 High Power/Lo w Power Transmitters of 
Doordarshan.  Similarly, 96 Rural FM Radio Stations of All India Radio are being utilized 
to broadcast 30 minutes of programme for farmers 6 days a week.  For telecasting 
success stories, innovations and for popularization  of change-setting technology and 
farming practices through the Saturday slot of Doordarshan’s National Channel,  DAC is 
producing films, which would consciously project inter-alia positive aspects in agriculture 
in India.  
 
With a view to increase viewership and provide enha nced content to the farmers, 
the transmission timings of Krishi Darshan programm e telecast from 25 out of 27 
Narrowcasting Programme Producing Kendras, where Re gional Kendras are also 
functioning have been changed so that the farmers c an view the programmes telecast 
by both Regional and NC Kendras, thereby, benefitin g farmers located in the range of 
125 High Power/ Low Power (HPT/LPT) transmitters wh o are now able to view 1 hr 
agriculture programmes against ½ hour which was earlier available.  
 
The Free Commercial Time (FCT) available under Kris hi Darshan and Kisanvani 
programme is being utilized for dissemination of Ad visories on Rabi/ Kharif, KCC Kisan 
Credit Card, package of practices available to the farmers under National Food Security 
Mission (NFSM), MSP, contingency plan developed by State Governments and 
emergent issues like Drought, Flood etc. Doordarsha n is also telecasting a capsule 
programme on ‘Agriculture News’ and ‘Mandi Bhav’.  The programme is being telecast 
through National and 18 Regional Kendras of DD 5 da ys a week and 2 days a week 
through Narrowcasting centres to provide informatio n on Farm Technologies, 

 
 
developments in agriculture, weather related adviso ries as well as market information 
and also the rates of the local Mandis.  
 
However, to emphasize the need of the farming commu nity of the country, 
Doordarshan is being further requested to ensure th at while airing and telecasting 
programmes for farmers like Krishi Darshan, special  thrust may be given on 
disseminating updated information on trend of price s in national, regional and local 
Mandis, fair price shops, regional procurement centres etc so that farmers can judge the 
best price for their agricultural produce. 
 
The Ministry is also striving for improvement of be tter price discovery by farmers 
through Agmarknet, Kisan SMS portal, etc. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I) 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
  The Committee note that in June 1997, the Governm ent of India launched the 
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) with foc us on the poor. Under this system, 
States are required to formulate and implement fool proof arrangements for identification 
of the poor for delivery of foodgrains and for its distribution in a transparent and 
accountable manner at the Fair Price Shop (FPS) lev el. The main objective of the 
scheme of TPDS is to benefit about six crore poor f amilies for whom a quantity of about 
72 lakh tonnes of foodgrains are earmarked annually . In order to make the TPDS more 
focused and targeted at the poorest of the poor, An tyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) was 
launched in December, 2000 for 1 crore families to be identified from the BPL families 
which later was raised to 2.50 crore.  
 
The AAY contemplates identification of such familie s from amongst the BPL families 
covered under TPDS within the States and providing them with foodgrains at a highly 
subsidized rate of Rs. 2/- per kg. for wheat and Rs . 3/- per kg for rice. The States/UTs 
are required to bear the distribution cost, includi ng margin to dealers and retailers as 

 
 
well as the transportation cost. Thus, the entire f ood subsidy is being passed on to the 
consumers under the scheme. The Committee note that  the identification of the poor 
under the scheme is done by the States as per State -wise poverty estimates of the 
Planning Commission for 1993-94 based on the method ology, suggested by an Expert 
Group. The coverage under AAY has been expanded thr ice i.e. during 2003-04, 2004-
05 and 2005-06, covering additional 50 lakh househo lds each time. Thus, the total 
coverage under AAY stands at 2.50 crore AAY familie s. From the Ministry’s deposition, 
the Committee note that against the target of 2.50 crore AAY families, ration cards to 
2.44 crore AAY families have been issued by the Sta te/UT Governments. This indicates 
that though 7 years have already passed since the l ast expansion of AAY, there are still 
6 lakh Targeted AAY families yet to be identified a nd issued ration cards. The Ministry 
took the stand that the identification of AAY famil ies is the sole responsibility of 
concerned State/UT Governments which is not accepta ble to the Committee. They, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry must take up  the matter and coordinate with 
such State/UT Governments where the identification of the targeted beneficiaries has 
not been completed and submit a status report to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
This Department had requested  States/Union Territories (UTs) to accelerate the 
pace of identification of AAY families and issuance  of distinctive ration cards to them so 
as to meet their respective targets. Further, the r ecommendations of the Committee 
have been conveyed to all State/UT Governments vide  this Department’s letter dated 
11.3.2013 for taking necessary action in the matter  and to send a report on the action 
taken. 
 
 Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
The Committee note that concurrent evaluation of TP DS has been conducted in 26 
States and UTs and that the responsibilities has be en entrusted to National Council of 
Applied Economic Research (NCAER) and Indian Instit ute of Public Administration 
(IIPA). The Committee were apprised that IIPA and N CAER have submitted their final 
study reports and the copies of the same have been sent to the concerned State/UT 

 
 
Governments for taking necessary remedial measures to remove the deficiencies 
noticed in the functioning of TPDS, which, inter-alia include, leakages and diversion of 
foodgrains, inclusion/exclusion errors, etc. In thi s regard, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should also conduct an objective analysis of the findings of IIPA and 
NCAER to review the scheme of TPDS. Further the con current evaluation of TPDS 
should also be conducted immediately in the States/ UTs of Sikkim, Goa, Gujarat, 
Meghalaya, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Puducherry, Andama n & Nicobar Islands, 
Lakshadweep and Daman & Diu so as to know their spe cific problems to take suitable 
remedial action.  
 
The Committee further note that modernisation of TP DS including its 
computerisation has been prioritised by the Ministr y to check the challenges faced by 
the scheme, which include digitalisation of benefic iary database by Octorber, 2012, 
computerisation of Supply-Chain Management by March , 2013 and Fair Price Shop 
automation by March, 2014. The Committee hope that would be strictly adhered to. 
They would specifically like to be apprised of the progress made on the same at the 
action taken stage.  
 
The Committee notice the introduction of Global Pos itioning System (GPS) on 
ground by the Ministry, on a pilot basis, in Chhatt isgarh, Tamil Nadu and Delhi for 
tracking movement of vehicles transporting TPDS com modities to eliminate 
leakages/diversions of foodgrains during transporta tion. They recommend that the 
outcome of the pilot project may be analysed promptly to replicate it to other States/UTs 
for better implementation of TPDS.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 As regards  the recommendation regarding review of TPDS, it is to state that 
strengthening and streamlining of TPDS is a continu ous process.  Based on the 
feedback received from evaluation studies among oth er sources, Government has 
regularly reviewed and has issued instructions to S tates/UTs to strengthen functioning 
of TPDS by improving monitoring mechanism and vigil ance, increased transparency in 

 
 
functioning of TPDS, adoption of revised Model Citi zen’s Charter, use of Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) tools and improv ing the viability of Fair Price 
Shop operations. As regards evaluation study recomm ended to be conducted in 9 
States/UTs, the matter is under consideration of the Department. 
 
In respect of the Plan Scheme component i.e install ation of Global Positioning 
System (GPS) sets on the vehicles carrying TPDS com modities in order to curb 
leakages and diversion of foodgrains, financial ass istance was given in 2007-08 to the 
State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Delhi and Chhattis garh for installation of GPS 
devices on the vehicles carrying TPDS foodgrains.   
 
 Government of Tamil Nadu who have implemented the system in two districts 
have reported that it has helped in (i) the quantit ies of foodgrains allotted from FCI to 
the indented godowns reached without single case of  diversion (ii) created moral fear 
among those involved in transportation of PDS items  and (iii) enabled the civil supplies 
department and other vigilance agencies to track th e movement of vehicles carrying 
PDS items at short notice and avoided delays in tra nsportation. Government of 
Chhattisgarh have reported that after installation of GPS sets on vehicles carrying 
TPDS commodities, from the distribution centers suc h vehicles are reaching their 
destination/intended places and no irregularities o f any kind have been noticed. 
Government of Delhi refunded the entire released am ount as they could not utilize the 
amount as per the schedule.  
 
 In view of the feedback received about success of scheme from the State 
Governments of Chhattisgarh and Tamil Nadu, it has been decided to extend the 
scheme for installation of Global Positioning Syste m (GPS) sets on vehicles carrying 
TPDS commodities in all States/Union Territories (U Ts).  Proposals have been invited 
from States/UTs for sanctioning funds under the sch eme.  Proposals received from 
State Governments of Manipur, Jammu & Kashmir and M adhya Pradesh are under 
examination. 
 

 
 
Computerization of TPDS  
 
The timelines stipulated for various activities und er Computerization of TPDS 
have been revised based on discussions with States/ UTs on account of uneven 
progress made by them, requests received from some for extension of timelines, 
financial support, etc. Under the scheme on End-to-  end Computerization of Targeted 
Public Distribution System Operations, Component-I of which has been approved by the 
Government in October 2012, digitization of benefic iary database is to be completed by 
March, 2013 and computerisation of supply-chain man agement is to be completed by 
October, 2013 by all States/UTs. Further, State tra nsparency portals and grievance 
redressal mechanisms for TPDS would be set up on pr iority by all the States/UTs. As 
regards Component-II i.e. FPS Automation, it will t aken up by the Department in due 
course, keeping in view the progress of Aadhaar and  National Population Register 
(NPR) enrolments in the country, availability of co nnectivity at FPSs, etc. The status of 
progress made in States/UTs for Computerization of TPDS is at Annexure-VI. 
 
  

 
 
Annexure-VI  
 
Status of progress made in States/UTs for Computerization of TPDS 
 
Digitization of Ration cards/ Beneficiary database has been completed in 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Daman and 
Diu, Delhi, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Lakshadweep , Punjab, Puducherry, Tamil Nadu 
and Uttar Pradesh. It is in progress in Arunachal P radesh, Bihar, Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Madh ya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Nagaland, Odisha, Rajasthan, Sikkim and Tripura.  
 
Automation of Supply-Chain has been completed in St ates of Chhattisgarh, Delhi 
and Gujarat. It is in progress in Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Daman and Diu, Haryana, 
Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Mahar ashtra, Odisha, Puducherry 
and Punjab.  
 
Transparency Portal with PDS related information ha s been created in Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat and Pudu cherry. It is in progress in Andhra 
Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, Karnataka, Kerala, Madh ya Pradesh, Maharashtra and 
Rajasthan. Dissemination of information through SMS  alerts regarding foodgrain 
dispatch/availability at FPS is operational in Chha ttisgarh and Puducherry. It is in 
progress in States of Assam, Chandigarh, Gujarat, K arnataka, Maharashtra and Uttar 
Pradesh. 
 
Call Centre/Toll free helpline number for PDS has b een established in Assam, 
Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Miz oram, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Online Grievan ce redressal mechanism for 
registration and tracking of grievances is availabl e in Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Gujarat, 
Mizoram, Odisha and Tamil Nadu. 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
  Another area of concern noticed by the Committee has been the rotting of 
foodgrains in the FCI godowns which has brought to the fore the issue of quality control 
of foodgrains too, apart from proper storage. The q uality specifications of foodgrains for 
procurement under Central Pool are formulated by Ce ntral Grain Analysis Laboratory 
(CGAL) for Rabi and Kharif foodgrains keeping in vi ew the interest of producers, 
consumers and the provisions under the Prevention o f Food Adulteration (PFA) Act. 
The Committee note that during the period from 01.0 4.2011 to 29.02.2012, a total of 
1584 samples of foodgrains were analyzed for physic al and chemical parameters by 
CGAL. They have been apprised by the Ministry that the uniform specification of Kharif 
foodgrains for Kharif marketing season 2011-12 for procurement under Central Pool 
have been formulated and issued on 08.08.2011. The Committee would like to have a 
status report of the impact analysis of the check o n the quality of Kharif Crop foodgrains 
distributed under TPDS. Besides, the Committee reco mmend that specification of Rabi 
Crop foodgrains should also be done at the earliest . The Committee note that to 
strengthen the quality control mechanism and also t o ensure proper monitoring of 
quality of foodgrains at the time of procurement, s torage and distribution, Quality 
Control Centres (QCCs) have been set up in Bengalur u, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Delhi, 
Hyderabad, Lucknow, Kolkata and Pune. These QCCs al so ensure that the 
Government guidelines about scientific storage and preservation of foodgrains are 
followed by FCI, CWC, SWC and State agencies. The C ommittee also note that a 
proposal for opening of seven new QCCs at Guwahati,  Patna, Chandigarh, Jammu, 
Jaipur, Chennai and Ahmedabad has been floated unde r Plan Scheme  for  the 12th 
Five Year Plan.  
It is disheartening to observe that even with such an elaborate infrastructure and 
guidelines about storage and preservation, the dete rioration of foodgrains has not been 
eliminated completely. An analysis of the inspectio n activities carried out by Quality 
Control Cells from 01.04.2011 to 31.12.2011 indicat es that there has always been a 
mismatch between the target and achievements of the  scheduled inspections to be 
carried out. For instance, as against the target of  inspection of 960 food storage depots 
in 2011-12, the shortfall was seen in 103 Depots. S imilarly there was deficit of 

 
 
inspection in 129 Procurement Centres and 85 Rail H eads. Further it was seen that 297 
Fair Price Shops and 83 Rice Mills could not be ins pected. The Committee, therefore, 
would like to be apprised of the procedure to set t argets for QCCs inspection, as well as 
the mechanism to take action on the deficiencies fo und during inspections. They also 
feel that since wheat is generally stored in CAP fa cilities, and thus, is prone to rotting 
due to vagaries of nature, the QCCs should set sepa rate targets for inspecting CAP 
facilities, apart from the storage depots. Overall,  the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should ensure that all the annual targets for inspections must be met to ensure 
a stringent check on the quality control of foodgra ins at the time of procurement, 
distribution and storage. The Committee desire that  the proposal to open seven new 
quality control centres during 2012 should be imple mented this year, and would like to 
be informed about progress on the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 After the issue of uniform specifications of foodg rains, detailed instructions about 
quality control measures to be taken by procuring a gencies, have been issued to all the 
State Governments and FCI.  Besides, States have be en requested to procure 
foodgrains strictly conforming to the uniform specifications.  State Governments and FCI 
have also been requested to take all precautionary and remedial measures for safe and 
scientific storage of foodgrains to avoid damages d uring storage.  There are well-
established guidelines for joint inspection and sam pling of foodgrains before issue to 
State Governments from FCI godowns for distribution  under TPDS and other welfare 
schemes.  The quality of foodgrains right from proc urement, during storage and upto 
distribution is monitored to check the deterioration of stocks.   
 
 Inspecting officers of QCCs have inspected 532 pro curement centres to monitor 
the quality of foodgrains including Kharif crops be ing procured for central pool by FCI 
and State agencies during 2011-12. FCI has an elabo rate procedure of 100% quality 
check of foodgrains including Kharif crops before p rocurement followed by inspection at 
various levels to cross check the quality of foodgr ains procured. Foodgrains are to be 
procured strictly as per uniform specifications. Du ring 2011-12, one complaint regarding 

 
 
supply of inferior quality of rice received from Ch hattisgarh for distribution under TPDS 
was received from Government of West Bengal.  The c omplaint was got investigated 
through FCI who informed that few rakes of rice fro m Chhattisgarh were the cause of 
complaint.  Although, the stock was within issuable  range, but keeping in view the 
insistence of State Government, FCI had moved out t hese stocks and issued them 
other stocks.  During 2012-13, no complaint of poor  quality Kharif foodgrains issued for 
PDS has been received from any State Government.  T he uniform specifications for 
Rabi foodgrains for Rabi Marketing Season 2012-13 h ave been issued on 13.3.2012  
well before the commencement of Rabi Marketing Season. 
 
 With regard to deterioration of foodgrains, it is submitted that some quantity of 
foodgrains may get damaged /become non issuable due  to various reasons such as, 
storage pest attack, leakages in godowns, procureme nt of poor quality stocks, during 
movement of stocks, exposure to rains, flood etc.  Detailed precautionary and remedial 
measures to be taken by FCI and State Government ag encies to check damages to 
central pool stocks have been reiterated for strict  compliance.  Owing to strict quality 
control measures adopted by FCI, there has been sha rp decrease in quantity of 
damaged/non-issuable foodgrains in FCI.  The quanti ty of damaged/non-issuable 
foodgrains in FCI has come down from 1.35 lakh tonn es in the year 2002-03 to 0.014 
lakh tonnes in the year 2012-13 (as on 1.1.2013).  In the percentage term, 
damaged/non-issuable stocks in FCI has come down from 0.10% in the year 2007-08 to 
0.004% in the year 2012-13 (as on 1.1.2013). 
 
 With regard to mismatch between targets and achiev ements, it is to mention that 
there is no mismatch in targets and achievements,  as the achievements in the text was 
shown upto 31.12.2011 (9 months) against the annual  target of 2011-12.  The actual 
achievements during 2011-12 against the annual targets are as under: 
 
 
SNo. 
 Item/activity Annual target(2011-
12) 
Achievement, 2011-
12 
1.  Inspection of food storage 
depots 
960 1086 

 
 
2. Inspection of Procuring 
Centres  
530 532 
3. Inspection of Railheads 400 411 
4. Inspection of Fair Price 
shops 
1200 1201 
5. Inspection of Rice Mills 240 251 
 
  
As may be seen, all the annual targets of inspectio ns have been fully achieved 
by the QCCs.  Annual targets for different activiti es for QCCs have been fixed based on 
number of Inspecting officers in QCC and procuremen t etc. in the State under area of 
operation.  During the inspections, the shortcoming s noticed are communicated to the 
concerned authorities for taking remedial measures including action against 
delinquents. These cases are pursued with the conce rned authorities till final action 
taken reports are received. So far as inspection of CAP storage is concerned, wherever, 
CAP storage are available these are inspected by th e Inspecting Officers of QCCs 
alongwith the inspection of food storage depots.  Since CAP storage is resorted to in the 
event of shortage of covered capacity and for trans it storage of wheat.  It depends upon 
the procurement of wheat in the States and stock av ailability vis-à-vis covered capacity 
in the States. CAP storage is used only in few Stat es. In compliance of the 
recommendation of the Committee, QCC field offices have been asked to inspect CAP 
complexes separately if available during the inspec tions and mention separately, the 
CAP complexes inspected and food storage depots ins pected, out of the total 
inspections carried out of the storage complexes. 
 
 As regards the proposal to open 7 new QCCs during 2012, it is submitted that in 
order to strengthen the Quality Control Mechanism of foodgrains, a plan scheme for 12 
th  
Five Year Plan envisaging inter-alia opening up of 7 new QCCs was proposed by the 
Department to Planning Commission. During the discu ssions in the Planning 
Commission for Budgetary Allocations during 2013-14  on 8.1.2013, it was desired that 
this scheme alongwith ongoing scheme “Consultancies , Training & Research” may be 
merged with another ongoing scheme “Strengthening o f PDS-Capacity Building” as 
additional components. Accordingly, SFC Memo has be en prepared and matter has 
been taken up with the Planning Commission/Departme nt of Expenditure for soliciting 

 
 
their comments.   Once the component is approved by  the SFC, the proposal for 
creation of posts for opening up of 7 new QCCs will  be taken up with Ministry of 
Finance. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
  The Committee observe that the foodgrain stock in  the country is maintained by 
the Government to meet the prescribed Minimum Buffe r Stock norms for food security 
as well as for monthly release of foodgrains for su pply through TPDS and OWSs. The 
stock is also maintained to meet emergent situation s arising out of unexpected crop 
failure, natural disasters etc. and for market inte rvention to augment supply so as to 
help moderate the open market prices. As per the Mi nistry, the total covered capacity 
available with FCI and State Governments for storag e of foodgrains is about 45.52 
million tonnes. According to the present Buffer Sto ck Policy, certain minimum stocks of 
foodgrains are to be maintained by FCI/State Agenci es in the Central Pool on the first 
day of each quarter. The Buffer Stocking Policy is reviewed from time to time, normally 
after every five years.  
 
An analysis of the quarterly stock position of the wheat and rice in the central 
pool vis-à-vis minimum buffer stock norms during 2007-2012 (till April) indicates that the 
stocks in the Central Pool have remained way above the prescribed norm except in 
three quarters for wheat and one quarter for rice d uring July 2007 to March 2008. The 
Committee further learn the trend of procurement of  rice and wheat during the current 
year (2012-13) again indicates higher procurement a s compared to last year (2011-12). 
The Committee have been informed that based on the stock position given by FCI and 
the allocations made by the Department, the estimat ed Central Pool Rice Budget for 
October, 2011 to September, 2012 and wheat budget f or 2012-13 indicates that the 
estimated stocks would be 233.41 lakh tonnes of ric e at the end of Kharif Marketing 
Season 2011-12 (as on 1st October 2012) and 247.20 lakh tonnes of wheat at the end 
of RMS 2012-13 (as on 1st April 2013). The Committe e are convinced that such heavy 
procurement would certainly lead to a giant surge i n the expenditure figures for holding 
the procured stocks, in light of the fact that the buffer subsidy incurred by FCI during 

 
 
2007-08 i.e. Rs.692.43 crore reached Rs.6168 crore at the Revised Estimates stage of 
2011-12 indicating an increase of almost nine times , compared to the subsidy amount 
incurred during 2007-08.  
 
In this backdrop, it is essential for the Governmen t to revise their buffer stock 
norms. A Technical Group under the Chairmanship of Secretary (F&PD) has already 
been constituted to review and recommend the revise d buffer stock norms, while taking 
into consideration the present stock position, revi sed requirement of foodgrains under 
various schemes of the Central Government, procurem ent situation, and market 
conditions etc, and recommend buffer norms. The Nat ional Center for Agricultural 
Economics and Policy Research (NCAP), was entrusted  by the said Technical Group to 
undertake a study for revision of Buffer Norms of f oodgrains, which has since presented 
their report. However, the Committee learn that sin ce the proposed National Food 
Security Bill envisaged higher requirement of foodg rains for distribution under TPDS, 
therefore, the recommendations of the NCAP are bein g looked at from the perspective 
of the proposed Bill. The Committee, while apprecia ting the steps taken by the Ministry, 
recommend that in the meantime the conclusions/reco mmendations in the NCAP report 
should be analyzed threadbare so as to match the re quirements of higher foodgrains as 
envisaged in the draft National Food Security Bill.  While acknowledging that the goal of 
food security is very legitimate, the Committee emp hasize that the Government should 
at the same time, take due care to concretely ident ify and revise the buffer stock norms 
in the changed scenario. Only then a correct estima te of the expenditure required could 
be identified and the consequent budgetary exercise  of the Ministry could be 
streamlined. The Committee would like to be apprise d of the action taken by 
Government in this direction.  
Reply of the Government 
In order to review and recommend revised buffer nor ms, a Technical Group 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (F&PD) has been constituted which held meetings 
on 9.8.2006, 25.2.2008, 6.6.2008, 20.2.2009, 25.8.2 009, 21.1.2011 and 20.7.2012. The 
National Centre for Agricultural Economics and Poli cy Research (NCAP), which was 
entrusted to undertake a study for revision of buff er norms of foodgrains in view of the 

 
 
proposed National Food Security Act, has also submi tted its final report in September, 
2011. The Technical Group considered the final repo rt of NCAP in its meeting held on 
20.7.2012 and requested the Planning Commission and  FCI to furnish its further 
comments.  Comments of Planning Commission and FCI have since been received.  To 
discuss the comments of FCI/Planning Commission and  the other aspects of the buffer 
norms, Secretary, F&PD took a meeting on 04.12.2012 . The case is under process in 
accordance with the deliberation in the meeting. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
  The Committee are concerned to note the huge gap between the required and 
actual intermediate storage capacity as various Sta tes have not able to lift three to six 
months of their Public Distribution System requirements. The Committee find it shocking 
that despite such huge gaps between required and ac tual intermediate storage 
capacity, the Ministry does not have the requisite data about the actual required 
intermediate storage capacity as the process of col lecting such data is stated to be 
under process. The Committee though acknowledge the  fact that it is primarily the 
responsibility of State Governments to create intermediate storage capacity yet they feel 
that the Ministry needs to show better involvement and play an effective role, 
particularly as a facilitator for creation of intermediate storage capacity in the States. For 
this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry sho uld assess requirement to 
encourage the State/UT Governments to create additional intermediate storage capacity 
for PDS foodgrains by designing an appropriate system of incentives.  
 
The Committee note that various Ministries/Departme nts are involved in creating 
storage needs for various Agri-Products. For Exampl e, financial assistance is being 
given by NABARD under the scheme of ‘Rural Infrastructure Development Fund’ (RIDF) 
wherein Rs. 1494 crore have been sanctioned to 13 S tates for creation of 9 MT of 
warehousing infrastructure. The Ministry of Agricul ture under the scheme “Grameen 
Bhandaran Yojana” has planned for capacities of 32 MT in 26 States and has 
sanctioned 27,000 projects. However, the Committee are distressed to observe that the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distr ibution is yet to come out with any 

 
 
particular plan or scheme dedicated for intermediat e storage. The Committee have 
been informed that the Ministry has now planned to give financial support to State 
Governments for creation of around 73000 MT capacit y in North-Eastern States and 
J&K with a financial allocation of Rs. 60 crore in the form of Grants-in-aid. The 
Committee would like to be informed about the outco me of the initiatives taken by this 
Ministry. The Committee also recommend that the Min istry must design an appropriate 
scheme under which funds could be released every year at regular intervals to the State 
Governments. Further, the Committee urge the Minist ry to immediately assess the total 
required intermediate storage capacity in the count ry and apprise them of the progress 
made in this direction.   
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India reiterates the fact that it  is primarily the responsibility of 
State Governments to create intermediate storage ca pacity. However, FCI is being 
asked to assess the total required intermediate storage capacity in the country. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 25) 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry has long b een storing foodgrains in 
excess of buffer stock level and as a result, a lar ge part of subsidy is being spent on 
storing foodgrains in excess of buffer stocks. The Committee though agree that 
sometimes it is necessary to store foodgrains in ex cess of buffer stock to meet large 
scale exigencies but this policy may push the level  of subsidy to an unimaginable 
extent. Therefore, the Committee are of the opinion  that there is an urgent need to 
reduce subsidy burden and recommend that the Minist ry should look into the possibility 
of diverting a portion of subsidy used for storing foodgrains in excess of buffer stock for 
creating additional storage facilities.  
The Committee recommend that just as the Ministry has set buffer norm, which is 
the minimum level of stock which has to be maintain ed under all circumstances, there 
also should be an upper ceiling for the stocks over  and above the buffer norms, upto 
which maximum stocks can be maintained and if stock s reach the identified optimal 
level, it should be obligatory to release foodgrain s through different channels, even for 
APL category.  

 
 
 
The Committee wish to emphasize that by restricting  stock level and saving 
subsidy for creation of storage facilities, the Min istry would be able to strike a perfect 
balance between procurement and storage. Therefore,  the Committee recommend that 
an expert technical group should be constituted to look into the feasibility of stock level 
reduction for the sake of cost saving, within a set  time frame and the Committee be 
informed accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to review and recommend revised buffer nor ms, a Technical Group 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (F&PD) has been  constituted which has held 
meetings on 9.8.2006, 25.2.2008, 6.6.2008, 20.2.200 9, 25.8.2009, 21.1.2011 and 
20.7.2012. The National Centre for Agricultural Eco nomics and Policy Research 
(NCAP), which was entrusted to undertake a study fo r revision of buffer norms of 
foodgrains in view of the proposed National Food Se curity Act, has also submitted its 
final report in September, 2011. The Technical Grou p considered the final report of 
NCAP in its meeting held on 20.7.2012 and requested  the Planning Commission and 
FCI to furnish its further comments.  Comments of P lanning Commission and FCI have 
since been received.  To discuss the comments of FC I/Planning Commission and the 
other aspects of the buffer norms, Secretary, F&PD took a meeting on 04.12.2012. The 
case is under process in accordance with the deliberation in the meeting. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
     December, 2013              
Agrahayana ___,1935(Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
  
 
 
  

 
 
APPENDIX I  
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STUDY GROUP OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON ESTIMATES (2013-2014)  
 
 
The Study Group of the Committee on Estimates sat o n Monday, the 9
th  
December, 2013 from 1545 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Room No. 52-B, (Chairman’s 
Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
          Shri Subodh Kant Sahai – Convener  
 
Members 
 
2. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
3. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
4. Shri Prabodh Panda 
 
5. Smt. Annu Tandon 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
       1.   Smt. Anita B. Panda    - Director   
       2.   Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar    - Deputy Secre tary 
 
2. At the outset, the Convener welcomed the Members  of the Study Group of the 
Committee on Estimates to the first sitting. The St udy Group took up for consideration 
the following Memorandum and draft Chapter-I of Action Taken Reports. 
 (i) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ** * *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
(ii) Memorandum No. 3 and draft Chapter-I of Action  Taken Report of 
Committee on Estimates (15 
th  Lok Sabha) on the recommendations 

 
 
contained in Eighteenth Report of the Committee on Estimates (2012-13) 
on ‘Procurement and Storage of Foodgrains’ pertaini ng to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Dep artment of Food and 
Public Distribution).  
3. The Study Group approved the categorization of r eplies as shown in the 
Memorandum and also approved the draft Reports without any modification. 
 
The Study Group then adjourned . 
 
 
  

 
 
APPENDIX II  
MINUTES OF TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES         
(2013-2014)  
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 9 th  December, 2013 from 1600 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Room No. 52-B, (Chairman’s Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
          Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
4 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
5 Shri Prabodh Panda 
6 Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu ” 
7 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
8 Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
9 Shri Jagada Nand Singh 
10 Smt. Annu Tandon 
11 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
       1   Smt. Anita B. Panda    -  Director 
       2   Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar    - Deputy Secret ary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the 
Committee. Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
(i) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  

 
 
(ii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ** * *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
(iii) Action Taken Report on the Recommendations co ntained in the Eighteenth 
Report of the Committee on Estimates (2012-13) on ‘ Procurement and Storage 
of Foodgrains’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consum er Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Public Distribution) as  approved by the Study Group 
of Committee on Estimates. 
3. The Committee adopted the abovementioned Reports  without any modification. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalise the above reports after 
factual verification by the Ministries concerned and present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee then adjourned . 
  

 
 
APPENDIX III  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE R ECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  ON ESTIMATES 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 25  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 7, 10, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21 & 24) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
12 
 
 
 
48% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committe e do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply 
(Sl. Nos. 6 & 22)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
2 
 
 
 
8% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
(Sl. Nos. 11 & 18)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
2 
 
 
 
 
8% 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final 
replies of Government is still awaited. 
(Sl. No. 2, 5, 8, 9, 12, 13, 17, 23 & 25) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
9 
 
 
 
36% 
 