 
 
1 
 
20 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
ROLE AND FUNCTIONING OF TELECOM SERVICE PROVIDERS IN 
MOBILE TELEPHONY 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN FIFTEENTH REPORT (FIFTEEN TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES] 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2012-2013) 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
 
2 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
ROLE AND FUNCTIONING OF TELECOM SERVICE PROVIDERS IN 
MOBILE TELEPHONY 
 [ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED 
IN FIFTEENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd April, 2013 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
22 April, 2013/ Vaisakha 2,1935 (Saka) 
 

 
 
3 
 
EC No.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price:______ 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Pro cedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the Manager, 
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110002. 
 

 
 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
PAGE NO. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2012-13) 
 
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations w hich have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
9 
CHAPTER III Recommendation/observation which the C ommittee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government‘s reply 
 
46 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
Government‘s replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
47 
CHAPTER V Recommendation/observation in respect of wh ich final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
59 
 ANNEXURES  
I Comparative growth of w ireline  verses wireless Connectivity in 
India and countries like  U.S.A., U.K., A ustralia, C anada and 
China* 
 
60 
II Guidelines for issue of clearance for installation of mobile towers. 
 
 
73 
III Letter issued by Ministry of Communications & IT (Department of 
Telecom) dated 8 April, 2010 regarding Instructions to Service 
Providers on implementation of radiation norms on EMF 
exposure by Base Transceiver Stations (BTSs) 
 
75 
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee on Estimates held on 13 th 
March, 2013 
 
78 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the 
Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
80 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2012-13) 
 
  Shri Francisco Sardinha, MP  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
  Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, MP 
 
  Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty, MP 
 
  Shri N.S.V. Chittan, MP 
 
  Shri Khagen Das, MP 
 
  Shri Harish Chaudhary, MP 
 
  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, MP 
 
  Shri Pralhad Joshi, MP 
 
  Shri K. Bapi Raju Kanumuru, MP 
 
  Shri Chandrakant Khaire, MP 
 
  Dr. Thokchom Meinya, MP 
 
  Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik, MP 
 
  Shri Mukul Wasnik, MP 
 
  Kum. Meenakshi Natrajan, MP 
 
  Shri Prabodh Panda, MP 
 
  Dr. Vinay Pandey, MP 
 
  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana, MP 
 
  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao, MP 
 
  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia, MP 
 
  Shri S. Semmalai, MP 
 
  Shri Arjun Charan Sethi, MP 
 
  Shri M.I. Shanavas, MP 
 
  Shri Adhi Shankar, MP 
 
  Shri Jagdish Sharma, MP 

 
 
6 
 
 
  Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP 
 
  Shri Ganesh Singh, MP 
 
  Shri Ijyaraj Singh, MP 
 
  Shri Radha Mohan Singh, MP 
 
   Smt. Annu Tandon, MP 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Director 
  3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar  - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Ms. Rachna Saxena  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2012 -13) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twentieth Report 
on action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the subject 
‗Role and Functioning of Telecom Service Providers in Mobile Telephony ‘ pertaining 
to the Department of Telecommunications (Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology).  
 
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2012. Action 
Taken Notes on all the observations/recommendations, were received from 
Department of Telecommunications (Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology)  in respect of 15 Recommendation s on 26th October, 2012, in respect of 
3 Recommendations on 15 th November, 2012, in respect of 2 Recommendations on 
21st December, 2012 and in respect of 1 Recommendation on 28 th February, 2013. 
The Draft action taken report was considered and adopted by t he Committee at their 
sitting held on 13th March, 2013. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report of Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
New Delhi;  
22 April, 2013  
Vaisakha 2,1935 (Saka)  
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
Chairman,  
Committee on Estimates  
 

 
 
8 
 
 
 CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the R ecommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Committee on 
Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject  ‘Role and Functioning of Telecom 
Service Providers  in Mobile Telephony ’ pertaining to the Department of 
Telecommunications (Ministry of Communication and Information Technology).  
1.2 The Committee‘s Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 2 6.04.2012. It contained 2 1 Recommendations/Observations excluding 
Para 7.1 which was a general observation . Action Taken Notes (ATN s) in respect of 
these Recommendations/Observations were received from the  Department of 
Telecommunications ( Ministry of Communication s and Information Technology ) in 
batches, first batch in respect of 15 R ecommendations on 26 th October, 2012 , in 
respect of 3 Recommendations on 15 th November, 2012 , in respect of 2 
Recommendations on 21st December, 2012 and in respect of 1 Recommendation on 
28th February, 2013.  
1.3 Replies to the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Para Nos. 7.2, 7.4, 7.7, 7.8, 7.9, 7.10, 7.12, 7.13, 7.14, 7.16, 7.17, 7.18, 7.20, 
7.21 and 7.22  
(Chapter II) 
Total = 15 
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government‘s reply: 
 Para No. 7.15 
(Chapter III) 
Total = 1 
 (iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government‘s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para Nos.  7.5, 7.6, 7.11 and 7.19    
         (Chapter IV)  
Total = 4 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply  of the 
Government is still awaited: 
 Para Nos. 7.3 
(Chapter V) 
 Total = 1 
 

 
 
9 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that  final repl y on R ecommendation in Para No. 
7.3 and response to the comments contained in Chapter – I of this R eport 
should be furnished expeditiously. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by  the Government on 
some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
A. Arresting declining growth in wireline connectivity  
Observation/Recommendation Para 7.2 
1.6 The Committee had expressed concern over the decline in the percentage 
share of wireline connectivity and urged the Department to take measures to check 
the same while judging and assessing the comparative growth of wireline versus 
wireless connectivity in India with other countries like USA, UK and Australia, Canada 
and China. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the same. 
1.7 In response, the Department has furnished details of the initiatives taken by 
BSNL to check the declining growth of wireline connectivity alongwith relevant data 
showing percentage growth rate of all operators and BSNL in wireless and wireline 
connections between 30 th March, 2007 and 30th June, 2012. As regards the 
Committee‘s recommendations to study and assess the same in other countries, the 
Department has furnished the report of the study conducted by their Economic 
Research Unit to compare the growth of wireless versus wireline telephones in India 
vis-à-vis Australia, Canada, China, U K, USA, Bangladesh and Nepal during the 
period from 2000 to 2010, which concluded that the number of wireline telephone 
subscribers has been declining internationally.  
1.8 The Committee  had, inter-alia, recommended that timely and suitable 
measures should  be taken to check the declining growth of wireline 
connectivity. The Committee are happy to note the initiatives taken by BSNL  in 
this regard with the resultant reduction in the decline in the percentage growth 
rate of BSNL from -9.36 per cent as on 31st March, 2011 to – 3.37 per cent as on 
31st June, 2012. The Committee hope that the pace of the initiatives taken  by 
BSNL in wireline connections will be maintained in coming years  and further 
decline in growth rate arrested to move towards positive growth. 
 
B.  Delay in implementation of projects  
Observation/Recommendation Para 7.4 
1.9 The Committee, in their O riginal Report, had emphasized that since adequate 
provision for rural telephony is Government‘s obligation , the Department should take 
all appropriate measures to bridge the gap between the urban and rural teledensity at 
the earliest.  The Committee had also highlighted the need f or improving the r ural 
telecom infrastructure and equipment as well as good relationship between the rural 
telecom providers with local bodies. Besides, the Committee had urged that projects 
such as ‗Digital Mandi for Indian Kisan‘ and ‗Cellular Backhand for Rural Accesses‘ 

 
 
10 
 
developed by IIT, Kanpur and IIT, Bombay respectively should be implemented in the 
future projects/scheme s carried out under the Universal Service Obligation Fund 
(USOF).  
1.10 In response, the Department in its action taken reply dated 26th October, 2012 
has furnished details about various USOF schemes to be implemented during the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan for expansion of rural telephony . With regard to the 
Committee‘s Recommendation to improve related telecom infrastructure, the 
Department has informed that  the Cabinet approved the scheme on t he National 
Optical Fibre Network (NOFN)  on 25.10.2011 , to connect a ll the 2,50,000 Gram 
Panchayats in the country by utilizing existing fibr es of various PSUs viz. BSNL, 
Railtel and Power Grid  as well as laying incremental fibre . Bids for laying of Optical 
Fibre Cable (OFC) were expected to be invited by September , 2012 and thereafter, 
the award of work for laying of  cable would commence . Pilot experiments in one 
block each have been planned in Gram Panchayats of Goa, Vishakhapatnam, Aj mer 
and North Tripura districts. 
With regard to the scheme for Optical Fibre Network Aug mentation i.e. 
Creation and Management of Intra -District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in service area 
of Assam, the Department has apprised that the objective of the scheme is to provide 
sufficient back-haul capacity to integrate the voice and data traffic from th e access 
network in the rural areas to their core network by strengthen ing the OFC network . 
The scheme envisaged to connect 354 locations in 21 districts of Assam within 18 
months from the date of signing of the agreement  i.e. 12.02.2010. As per the 
Department, about 190 nodes have since been installed.  
For the  Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of 
Intra-District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in North East - I Telecom Circle Scheme, the 
Committee have been informed that the States of Meghal aya, Mizoram and Tripura 
have been taken up to connect 188 locations i n 19 districts within 24 months. The 
agreement has been signed with Railtel on 16.01.2012.  
Under the Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of 
Intra-District SDHQ -DHQ OFC Network in North East - II Telecom Circle  the 
Department has informed that the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and  
Nagaland have been taken up to connect 407 locations in 30 districts within 30 
months for which the agreement has been signed with Railtel on 16.01.2012.  
 Regarding the suggestion of the Committee for maintenance of a good 
relationship between the Telecom S ervice Providers, local bodies and elected 
representatives of their area of operation, the Department  has informed about a 
proposal being envisaged to set up field units of USOF establishment.  
 With regard to the Committee‘s recommendations for incorporating projects 
like ‗Digital Mandi for Indian Kisan‘ developed by IIT , Kanpur and ‗Cellular backhaul 
for rural accesses‘ develope d by IIT , Bombay in future projects of USOF for rural 
telephony, the Department  has informed that  USOF follows open bidd ing process 
based on technology  and vendor -neutral ap proach and  USOF may suggest to the 

 
 
11 
 
concerned Telecom Service Providers about the projects. However implementation of 
the projects by the Service Providers would be driven by market dynamics. 
 
1.11 The Committee had recommended that appropriate measures should be 
taken at the earliest to bridge the gap between the urban and rural tele den sity. 
Though as desired by the Committee, the Department of Telecommunications 
has initiated various steps to improve rural telephony and telecom 
infrastructure, the Committee are constrained to point out that the progress in 
implementation of the proposal s has been very slow. The Committee in this 
connection note that though the Cabinet approval to National Optical Fibre 
Network project was accorded in October, 2011, the process of inviting bids 
started only in September, 2012, i.e. after eleven months. In  the Scheme for 
Optical Fibre Network Augmentation in service areas of Assam, as against the 
target of 354 nodes to be installed by September, 2011, only 190 nodes were 
installed. The Committee desire that taking note of the lapses in the past, the 
Department of Telecommunications should address the problems, if any, in 
implementing its projects and ensure strict adherence to the identified 
timelines. 
 
C. Wireless connectivity in villages  
Observation/Recommendation Para 7.5 
1.12 The Committee had, inter-alia, desired that the reasons for BSNL not making 
the expected progress in increasing the wireless connectivity in 37,184 uncovered 
villages be investigated and responsibility fixed. 
1.13 In their response, the Department of Telecommunications has indicated  the 
status of deployment of 3G and BWA network of BSNL  and has stated that following 
the launch of the 3G service on 27.02.2009, 760 cities have been planned to be 
covered initially. As on 31.03.2012, 963 cities have been covered with 3G network, 
covering all DHQs, commercially important towns and tourist places with the 3G 
network having 19298 Node ‘B‘. 
1.14 It appears that no investigation has been conducted nor any 
responsibility fixed on the question of BSNL not making the expected progress 
in increasing wireless co nnectivity in 37,184 villages, as recommended by the 
Committee. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire 
that action taken on the matter be intimated to them.  
 
D. Performance and quality of service in rural and remote areas   
Observation/Recommendation Para 7.6 
 

 
 
12 
 
1.15 The Committee  had inter-alia desired the Department to specifically ensure 
that all the Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) conform to the terms and conditions 
given in the license agreements for rollout oblig ations of 2G and 3G Spectrum s so 
that the spectrum provided are effectively utilized for expansion of telecom services 
in rural and remote areas too . The Committee had also emphasized that the TSPs 
should continuously strive to leverag e their quality of se rvice to custo mers including 
those in rural and remote areas , to promote healthy competition and resultant better 
service. The Committee desired a status report on the same in the last 3 years.  
1.16 The Department of Telecommunication in the action taken reply has stated 
that Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) in accordance with the provisions 
under Section 11(i) (b) (v) of TRAI Act, 1997 ( amended)  has issued regulations on  
the quality of ser vice standards for Basic Telephone Service (W ireless) and Cellular 
Mobile Telephone Service (CMTS). Elaborating further, the Department has informed 
that TRAI monitors the performance of service providers against the laid down 
benchmarks through quarterly Performance Monitoring Reports (PMRs) and monthly 
congestion reports sub mitted by the S ervice Providers. TRAI also undertakes audit 
and assess ment of the quality of service through independent agencies. The 
Department also informed that as the performance of Service Providers are assessed 
for service area as a whole, no separate information for rural areas is available in 
these reports, except those relating to fault repair in rural and hilly areas for Basic 
Telephone Service (Wireline). The Committee have also been app rised that TRAI is 
in the process of impl ementing random real time monit oring of quality of service of 
Cellular Mobile S ervice which could provide separate information for rural and hilly 
areas. According to the Department, though there are cases of non -compliance with 
the benchmarks, the Service  Providers are generally meeting the benchmarks for 
various quality of service paramet ers in different service areas . It has been stated 
that in the case of performance against the parameter ‗% Fault repaired within 5 days 
(for rural and hilly areas)‘, 21 licensees out of 88 licensees ( service area –wise) for 
year 2010, 18 licensees out of 88 licensee ( service area-wise) for the year 2011 and 
17 licensees out of 88 licensees ( service area-wise) for the year 2012 have not met 
the set benchmarks. 
1.17 The Com mittee had desired the Department of Telecommunications to 
ensure that all the Telecom Service Providers conform to the terms and 
conditions of the License agreements and effectively utilize 2G and 3G 
spectrums for expansion of telecom services in rural an d remote areas. 
Though the Government has not given any specific response to this point, the 
Committee hope that the Department has taken note of this recommendation 
and will ensure compliance. 
 
1.18 As regards the percentage of fault repaired within 5 day s in Basic 
Telephone Service in rural and hilly areas, the Department’s reply has 
disclosed that during the last three years as many as 17 to 21 licensees out of 
88 have not met the benchmarks set by TRAI. The record of quality of service 
in rural and remo te areas has obviously been dismal. The Committee urge that 
difficulties, if any, in improving the quality of service in rural areas should be 

 
 
13 
 
looked into and remedial action taken expeditiously to ensure that benchmarks 
in this regard are met. 
 
 
E. Expeditious setting up of NOFN 
Observation/Recommendation Para 7.7 
1.19 Regarding the matter of acquisition/renting of land or buildings, the Committee 
had, among other things, opined that complete responsibility should not be left on the 
service providers and desired that the Department should assess the problem in toto, 
take up the matter with  competent authority, if needed and the Committee be 
informed of the position. The Committee had also recommended that the signing of 
tripartite agreement s between, Govern ment of India, State Governments and 
Implementing Agency for free Right of Way ( ROW) and National Optical Fibre 
Network (NOFN) Scheme should be done expeditiously.   
1.20 The Department, in its action taken reply has stated that with regard to signing 
of the tripartite agreement between the Government of India, State Governments and 
Implementing Agency for free Right of Way for setting up of NOFN, a meeting was 
held with all the State Governments on 29.03.2012 under the Chairmanship of the 
Hon‘ble Minister of Communications and Information Technology to discuss the ROW 
issue. Letters have reportedly been written to State Governments by Hon‘ble Minist er 
of Communications and Information Technology and Secretary, Telecom for signing 
the tripartite agreement fo r free ROW.  It has been stated further that some of the 
States have already given their consent and others are being pursued. 
1.21 The Committee appreciate that considering the seriousness of the 
matter, a meeting was held at the level of the Minister of C ommunication and 
Information Technology which has yielded results. Some State Governments 
are stated to have given their consent for signing the Tripartite agreement 
between Government of India, State Governments and implementing agency 
for free Right of W ay. The Committee believe that the matter will be pursued 
vigorously with the rest of the State Governments to ensure expeditious 
setting up of NOFN. 
 
F. Findings of Empowered Committee; performance of BSNL 
Observation/Recommendation Para 7.10; 7.12 
 
1.22 The Committee had in Para 7.10 of the report, inter-alia, desired to be 
apprised of the findings and the implementation status of the Empowered Committee 
set up for the scheme o n National Optical Fibre Network  which has been especially 
planned to facilitat e implementation of various e -Governance initiatives such as e -

 
 
14 
 
health, e-banking, e -education, etc. ,  thereby facilitating inclusive growth. The 
Committee in para 7.12 of the report had desired to be apprised of the progress 
made in improving the physical and financial performance of BSNL. 
 
1.23 The Government ’s action taken reply does not contain any specific 
response to the aforesaid points. The Committee would await an explanation 
from the Department of Telecommunications as to why these issues have not 
been dealt with in their action taken reply. They would also expect a detailed 
response to those points within one month after presentation of the action 
taken report. 
G. Government guidelines on the procurement of new equipment 
Observation/Recommendation Para 7.11 
 
1.24 The Committee, while analyzing the performance of various Telecom Service 
Providers in the network expansion , had noted with concern that although there has 
been a stupendous growth in the telecom sector in India in the last five years, the  
share of Public Telecom Service Providers had declined from 34.69 per cent at the 
end of 2007 to 14.42 per cent at the end of July, 2011.  
1.25 It has inter-alia been stated in the action taken reply that one of the reasons 
for declining market share of M TNL vis-à-vis private players i s that MTNL, being a 
Public Sector Company , has to follow the Govt. guidelines on the procurement for 
new equipment and expansion / up gradation of existing equipment. This result in 
multiplicity of vendor for the same kind o f equipment leading to  inter 
operability/integration issues thus resulting in delay in commencing. Further, since 
technology is changing very fast in the telecom sector and new applications/services 
are being developed very frequently, it is not possible f or MTNL to induct the new 
developments due to absence of price reference in the tender. 
 
1.26 It is not clear how the Government is citing its own guidelines as a 
reason for declining market share of Public Telecom Service Providers. If there 
are any restr ictive aspects in its guidelines, it is for the Government to review 
the guidelines and make appropriate modifications. The Committee expect the 
Government to act on this issue immediately and the Committee be apprised of 
the outcome. 
 
 
H. Radiation from Mobile Towers 
Observations/Recommendations Para 7.19 
 
1.27 While noting that there are 18,123 service providers who had not submitted 
self-certificates regarding compliance of radiation norms  of mobile towers , t he 
Committee had recommended that modification s for  imposition of penalty for non 
submission of self certificates be finalized at the earliest. 

 
 
15 
 
 
1.28 In response, the Department of Telecommunications have stated that DoT is 
in the process of formulating detailed guidelines/instructions in case of EMR 
violations including the non -submission of self -certificates in time and also for non -
provision of signage by telecom service providers. 
1.29 The guidelines in case of EMR (Electro Magnetic Radiation) violations 
are stated to be in the process of formulati on. The Committee desire that the 
guidelines should be formulated expeditiously and implemented without delay 
to ensure that EMR violations, having a bearing on human health, do not take 
place. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.2) 
 
As network expansion has been one of the thrust areas identified by Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT), the committee observed that the positive impact of the 
rapid growth in the telecom network has resulted in an overall growth of teledensity in 
the country. They note that the achievement has surpassed the targeted teledensity 
of 15 per cent by 2010, as per New Telecom Policy (NTP), 1999. Further, the target 
of 500 m illion connections by the end of December, 2010 was achieved by 
September, 2009 itself. However, the committee find that although the telecom sector 
in India has witnessed a stupendous growth during the last five years, yet the 
percentage share of wireline  connectivity has declined sharply from 19.80 per cent 
during the year 2007 to a mere 3.53 per cent  as on December, 2011. In total 
contrast, the percentage share of wireless telephone vis -à-vis the total connectivity in 
the country, which was 80.19 per ce nt in 2007, has shown a tremendous growth rate 
reaching 96.47 per cent at the end of December, 2011.  In this backdrop, the 
committee is inclined to opine that both the Public & Private Sectors have not been 
focusing on the growth of wire line connections.  The committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend the Department to take timely & suitable measures to check the 
declining growth of wireline connectivity, particularly in the light of the fact that in 
many of the advanced economies of the world, it has been a ccepted that broadband 
connectivity provides better output on a wireline connection & thus many of these 
countries are planning to improve their wireline connectivity. In this regard, the 
committee also urges the Department to study & assess at the earlies t the 
comparative growth of wireline versus wireless connectivity in India vis -à-vis 
countries like U.S.A., U.K., Australia, Canada & China, & apprise the committee 
accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The comments of BSNL on the various observations/com ments made by the 
Committee are given below:-   
 
(a) Observation of the Committee : ― The Committee, strongly recommends the 
Department to take timely & suitable measures to check the declining growth of 
wireline connectivity….‖ 
 

 
 
17 
 
ATN: 
 
BSNL has taken followi ng initiatives to check the declining growth of wireline 
connectivity:-   
(i) Strengthening of sales and distribution channels for landline and broadband 
through Project Udaan. 
(ii) Fortification of stable revenue streams through concerted focus on broadband; 
a) Bundling computer with every broadband connections to remove major 
barriers in broadband adoption. 
b) Targeting bulk Govt. business like providing high speed broadband 
connectivity to Universities and colleges, providing broadband connectivity 
to Rural Common Serv ice Centre (CSCs) and also spreading broadband 
in rural areas with the support of USOF subsidy. 
c) Offering various value added services (VAS) such as Games on Demand, 
Music on Demand, Video / Movies on Demand, Education on demand, 
content on health, religion etc. 
(iii) Continuous improvement in customer care through Project smile. 
(iv) Rigorous monitoring of Quality of Service (QoS) parameters to adhere to the 
benchmarks stipulated by TRAI. 
(v) Modernization of telecom infrastructure such as TAXs & Local exchanges to 
Next Generation network (NGN), to optimise OPEX and offering new services 
to end customers 
(vi) Repositioning fixed line network to deliver high speed broadband service on 
committed basis. 
(vii)  Repositioning PCOs as multi activity Telecom centres where customers 
along wi th making calls can also purchase various pre -paid products, use 
broadband (Cyber Cafes) and apply for various telecom services. 
(viii) BSNL has initiated the process for upgradation of its C -DOT wireline telecom 
network to Next Generation Network in co -ordination with C -DOT. The 
upgradation is expected to reduce various operational issues related to 
maintenance of network by making the core network centralized and will also 
enable delivery of  various Value Added Services such as Personalized Ring 
back Tone (PRBT), Instant Messaging etc. 
 
(b) Observation of the Committee : ―…the committee also urges the Department to 
study & assess at the earliest the comparative growth of wireline versus wireless 
connectivity…‖ 
 
ATN: 
 
  The Comparative growth of Wireline versus Wi reless connectivity in India for 
the last five years is given below:-  
 

 
 
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub: %age growth rate of All Operators & BSNL in telephone connections 
As on  
Telephone connections (in million) %age Growth Rate 
Wireline Wireless Total Wireline Wireless Total 
All 
Optr. BSNL All 
Optr. BSNL All 
Optr. BSNL All 
Optr. BSNL All 
Optr. BSNL All 
Optr. BSNL 
31.03.2007 40.77 33.74 166.05 30.98 206.83 64.72 -1.90 -4.75 67.91 56.99 47.25 17.34 
31.03.2008 39.42 31.55 260.74 40.79 300.15 72.34 -3.33 -6.48 57.02 31.63 45.12 11.77 
31.03.2009 37.91 29.35 391.34 52.14 429.25 81.49 -3.83 -6.99 50.09 27.85 43.01 12.65 
31.03.2010 36.94 27.83 584.41 69.45 621.35 97.28 -2.54 -5.17 49.33 33.19 44.75 19.38 
31.03.2011 34.72 25.22 811.60 91.83 846.33 117.06 -6.00 -9.36 38.88 32.23 36.21 20.33 
31.03.2012 32.15 22.47 920.10 98.51 952.25 120.98 -7.41 -
10.93 13.37 7.27 12.52 3.35 
30.06.2012 31.40 21.71 931.42 98.28 962.82 119.99 -2.34 -3.37 1.23 -0.24 1.11 -0.82 
 
 
(c) Observation of the Committee : ― In this regard, the committee also  urges the 
Department to study & assess at the earliest the comparative growth of wireline 
versus wireless connectivity in India vis -à-vis countries like U.S.A., U.K., Australia, 
Canada & China, & apprise the committee accordingly.‖ 
 
ATN: 
 
Reply as given  by  ERU  wing of DoT :  

 
 
19 
 
 
The Economic Research Unit (ERU) of Department of Telecommunications has 
undertaken a study to compare the growth of wireline vs. wireless telephones in India 
vis-à-vis some of the other countries during the period from   2000 to 2 010 based on 
the data obtained from the web-site of International Telecom Union (ITU).  As per this 
study, it is concluded that the number of wireline telephone subscribers 
internationally have been declining. While internationally, the decline started aft er 
December 2006, the same happened in different countries at different points of time.  
In India, the decline started after December 2005.  In countries like USA, UK, Canada 
and Australia, the decline started much earlier.  In the case of Bangladesh, the 
number of wireline telephone subscribers continued to increase till December 2009.  
It is still increasing in Nepal.  In general, the decline in wireline telephone subscribers 
started earlier in the case of developed countries compared to developing countr ies.  
Against this, the number of wireless telephone subscribers has been continuously 
increasing globally as well as in individual countries included in this study. 
It is also observed that even though wireline subscribers are declining globally in 
countries like India, U.S.A., U.K., Australia, Canada and China, the number of 
internet subscribers are continuously increasing. Report of the study is enclosed at 
Annexure -I. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.4) 
 
Provision of rural telephony is one of t he significant focus areas that has been 
identified by DoT. In pursuance, the Department has taken up various initiatives 
through BSNL to improve the rural teledensity in the country. However, the 
Committee find that over the years it is the Private Teleco m Service Providers who 
have played a major role in improving the much required fillip in these areas. The 
Committee find that the percentage share of Private Telecom Service Providers in 
providing rural wireless telephones has improved from 70.74 per cent  in 2007 to 
88.98 per cent at the end of December, 2011. Further, the Committee find that 
although the telecom sector has witnessed a tremendous growth in the last decade, 
the overall trend of growth in rural telecom development is far from even being 
proportionate. To cite the figures provided to the Committee, although the rural 
telephony has increased from 47.10 million subscribers at the end of March, 2007 to 
315.39 million subscribers by the end of December, 2011, it is much less when 
compared to the g rowth witnessed in the urban areas. During the said period, the 
total number of urban subscribers has grown from 158.77 million to 611.16 million 
subscribers. The rural teledensity grew from 5.89 to 37.52 per cent from March, 2007 
to December, 2011, wherea s, the urban teledensity grew from 48.10 to 167.46 per 
cent during the said period. The Committee also note that as on December, 2011 
States/Telecom Circles like Himachal Pradesh (74.91 per cent), Punjab (63.66 per 
cent), Kerala (56.63 per cent), Tamil Nad u (53.95 per cent), Haryana (53.65 per 
cent), Gujarat (50.86 per cent) have rural teledensity much higher than the National 
average of 37.52 per cent. However, States/Telecom Circles like Bihar (24.27 per 

 
 
20 
 
cent), Madhya Pradesh (25.46 per cent), Assam (28.2 1 per cent), Jammu & Kashmir 
(29.27 per cent), Orissa (32.91 per cent), Andhra Pradesh (36.45 per cent) have rural 
teledensity below the National average. The Committee particularly observe that 
there is very low percentage of teledensity in Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand 
and in North East States -II. There is also huge difference between the teledensity of 
North East-I (59.40 per cent) and North East-II (8.79 per cent). 
 The reasons advanced by the Department before the Committee for the rural 
telephony falling way behind the impressive growth of urban telephony, include 
targeted areas being diversely located leading to no financial viability of the network 
expansion in these areas, very low Average Revenue Per User (ARPU), high CAPEX 
(Capital Expendit ure) and OPEX (Operational Expenditure) for development of 
telecom infrastructure, non -connectivity of these areas by roads leading to problems 
in developing the telecom infrastructure, irregular availability of electricity 
connections, lack of backhaul co nnectivity, problem relating to the Right of Way 
(RoW) and other permissions from State Government Agencies, falling of 
infrastructure site/areas in forest land/tribal land and their related clearance problem, 
disturbed / extremist / insurgency affected ar eas leading to law and order problems, 
incomplete or inconsistent revenue record of the land resulting in delay in conversion 
of land from agricultural to commercial, acquiring of land and signing of lease deeds 
and its registration thereof etc. The Commit tee are sad to learn that the growth of 
rural telephony is severely affected by these factors. According to the Committee, 
many of the reasons advanced by the Department are by themselves sufficient 
justification for putting in more earnest efforts for rem oving the disparities in rural 
telephony in these areas. Since the difficulties have been identified, the Committee 
recommend the Department to address each of the identified problems in a time 
bound manner and inform the Committee accordingly. In view of the fact that rural 
areas have immense economic potential, it has to be tapped suitably by the various 
service providers. Moreover, adequate provision of rural telephony is Government‘s 
obligation and thus the onus to make available supporting infrastructu re squarely lies 
with them. In this regard, the Committee recommend the Department to take all the 
appropriate measures, for overcoming the impediments and giving an impetus to 
rural telephony so that the network expansion in these areas is achieved and th e 
urban-rural divide is bridged. 
 The Committee further recommend that the need of the hour is not only 
improving the rural teledensity but also the related telecom infrastructure , better 
quality of telephone cables, setting up of infrastructure for intro duction of 
telemedicine in rural areas with special attention to the six category ‗C‘ States. The 
Committee are of the strong opinion that the various service providers need to 
maintain a good relationship with the Local Bodies and elected representative o f their 
areas of operation, so that locally felt needs of the people are addressed adequately 
by them while carrying out the various projects/schemes under the Universal Service 
Obligation Fund. 
In this connection, the Committee, note that the Draft National Telecom Policy, 
2011 has envisaged an enhancement of rural teledensity from the current level of 
around 35 to 60 per cent by the year 2017 and 100 per cent by 2020. In this regard, 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the specific measures envisag ed by the 

 
 
21 
 
Department to ensure that the set targets are achieved as per the stipulated time -
line. Further, the Committee recommend that projects such as ‗Digital Mandi for 
Indian Kisan‘ developed by IIT Kanpur and ‗Cellular backhaul for rural accesses‘ 
developed by IIT Bombay, which are ready for commercialization, should be 
implemented and maintained by the Department so that the applicability of these 
projects can be incorporated in the present and future projects of the 
schemes/projects carried out under the Universal Service Obligation Fund. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 (A) Financial support is being provided by USOF for provision of various telecom 
services in rural & remote areas of the country under various schemes. The 
Committee has recommended that the  need of the hour is not only improving the 
tele-density but also the related telecom infrastructure. In this context, USOF has 
launched the following schemes to be implemented in the 12th Five Year Plan:  
(i) National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN):  The opt ical fiber has predominantly 
reached state capitals, Districts and blocks at present. National Optical Fibre Network 
(NOFN) is planned to connect all the 2,50,000 Gram Panchayats in the country 
through optical fibre utilizing existing fibers of PSUs viz. B SNL, RailTel and Power 
Grid and laying incremental fiber wherever necessary. Size of the incremental 
network is Approx. 0.5 Million Km. Dark fibre network thus created will be lit by 
appropriate technology thus creating sufficient bandwidth at GPs level. N on-
discriminatory access to the network will be provided to all the telecom service 
providers. These access operators like mobile operators, Internet Service Providers 
(ISPs), Cable TV operators, content providers etc. can launch various services in 
rural areas. Various services for e -health, e-education and e -governance etc. will be 
provided. The project will be funded by USOF and initial estimated cost of project is 
Rs.20,000 Crore in 2 years. The project will be executed by a Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV ) i.e. Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL), which has been 
incorporated on 25.02.2012. 
Present Status : The NOFN Project has been approved by the Cabinet on 
25.10.2011. Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) constituted to recommend 
technology and architect ure of the proposed network has submitted its report on 
15.03.2012. Meeting of Advisory Body chaired by Hon‘ble MOC&IT with the 
participants from the industry, other ministries held on 29.03.2012. A meeting also 
held with all the State governments on 29.03.2012 under the chairmanship of Hon‘ble 
MOC&IT to discuss the Right of Way (RoW) issue. Bids for laying of optical fibre 
cable are expected to be invited by September 2012 and award of work for laying of 
fibre would commence thereafter. Pilot experiments i n one block each are planned in 
Gram Panchayats of Goa, Vishakhapatnam, Ajmer and North Tripura districts. 
(ii)  Creation of Intra-District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network   
a)  Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -
District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in service area of ASSAM 
 This Scheme has been launched to provide sufficient back -haul capacity to 
integrate the voice and data traffic from the access network in the rural areas to their 
core network by strengthening the OFC network. This schem e considers OFC 
Network augmentation between the blocks' HQ and Districts' HQ to begin with. 

 
 
22 
 
USOF, through this Scheme, shall provide subsidy support for augmentation, 
creation and management of intra-district SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network on the condition 
that it will be shared with other Telecom Operators at the rates prescribed in the 
Agreement. This OFC scheme would connect 354 locations in 21 districts of Assam 
within 18 months from date of signing of the agreement. Agreement has been signed 
with BSNL on 12.02.2010 in this respect with a subsidy quote of Rs.98.89 Crore. The 
Agreement shall be valid for a period of seven years from the date of signing of the 
agreement. 
At least 70% of the subsidized bandwidth capacity, created under the scheme, shall 
be shared wi th the licensed service providers in the area of ASSAM at a rate not 
more than 26.22% of the current TRAI ceiling tariffs. About 190 nodes have been 
installed so far (Out of 354).  
 
b) Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -
District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in North East - I Telecom Circle 
The states of Meghalaya, Mizoram & Tripura have been taken up in this scheme for 
OFC Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -District SDHQ -DHQ OFC 
Network. This OFC scheme would connect 18 8 locations in 19 districts within 24 
months from date of signing of the agreement. Agreement has been signed with 
Railtel on 16.01.2012 in this respect with a subsidy quote of Rs.89.50 Crore. The 
Agreement shall be valid for a period of eight years from t he date of signing of the 
agreement. 
At least 70% of the subsidized bandwidth capacity, created under the scheme, shall 
be shared with the licensed service providers at a rate not more than 12% of the 
current TRAI ceiling tariffs.  
c)  Optical Fibre Networ k Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -
District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in North East - II Telecom Circle 
The states of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur & Nagaland have been taken up in this 
scheme for OFC Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -District SDHQ -
DHQ OFC Network. This OFC scheme would connect 407 locations in 30 districts 
within 30 months from date of signing of the agreement. Agreement has been signed 
with Railtel on 16.01.2012 in this respect with a subsidy quote of Rs.298.50 Crore. 
The Agreement shall be valid for a period of eight years from the date of signing of 
the agreement. 
At least 70% of the subsidized bandwidth capacity, created under the scheme, shall 
be shared with the licensed service providers at a rate not more than 27% of the 
current TRAI ceiling tariffs.  
(B) Regarding recommendation of the Committee that various service providers, 
who are implementing schemes under USOF, should maintain a good relationship 
with the local bodies and elected representatives of their area  of operation, it is 
mentioned that for having first -hand experience of local requirements and monitoring 
of USOF schemes, a proposal is being envisaged to set up field units of USOF 
establishment. This will also strengthen the proper liaison of USOF with the local 
bodies and elected representative of the people. 
(C) Regarding recommendation of the Committee to implement and maintain 
projects like ‗Digital Mandi for Indian Kisan‘ developed by IIT Kanpur and ‗Cellular 
backhaul for rural accesses‘ developed b y IIT Bombay so that the applicability of 
these projects can be incorporated in the present and future projects carried out 

 
 
23 
 
under USOF, it is mentioned that USOF follows open bidding process based on 
technology neutral and vendor -neutral approach in its sc hemes. USOF may suggest 
to the concerned Service Providers about the projects recommended by the 
Committee. However, implementation of the same by the Service Providers would be 
driven by market dynamics. 
(D). The National Telecom Policy -2012 has been appr oved by the Cabinet on 
31.05.2012 which include inter-alia as under; 
i. Increase rural teledensity from the current level of around 39 to 70 by the year 
2017 and 100 by 2020. 
ii. Provide high speed and high quality broadband access to all village 
panchayats through a combination of technologies by the year 2014 and 
progressively to all villages and habitations by 2020. 
iii. Simplify the licensing framework to further extend converged high quality 
services across the nation including rural and remote areas. This will not cover 
content regulation. 
iv.  To lay special emphasis on providing reliable and affordable broadband 
access to rural and remote areas by appropriate combination of optical fibre, 
wireless, VSAT and other technologies. Optical fibre network w ill be initially 
laid up to the village panchayat level by funding from the Universal Service 
Obligation Fund (USOF). Extension of optical fibre connectivity from village 
panchayats to be taken up progressively to all villages and habitations. Access 
to this Optical Fibre Network will be open, non -discriminatory and technology 
neutral. 
v. Provide appropriate incentives for rural rollout. 
vi. To undertake periodic review of methodology adopted for utilising USO fund 
and benchmarking the same against the best  practices followed in other 
countries. 
vii. To provide continued support from USO fund for telecom services, including 
converged communication services in commercially unviable rural and remote 
areas. 
viii. NTP-2012 has the vision Broadband on Demand  and envisages leveraging 
telecom infrastructure to enable all citizens and businesses, both in rural and 
urban areas, to participate in the Internet and web economy thereby ensuing 
equitable and inclusive development across the nation. 
ix. Recognize telecom as  Infrastructure Sector to realize true potential of ICT for 
development. 
x. Address the Right of Way (RoW) issues in setting up of telecom infrastructure. 
xi. To recognise telecom, including broadband connectivity as a basic necessity 
like education and health and work towards ‗Right to Broadband‘. 

 
 
24 
 
xii. To emphasize the active role of both private sector and Government including 
the State Governments and Local bodies to enable the growth of telecom 
infrastructure necessary for meeting the telecommunication demand of the 
country and leveraging USOF where appropriate. 
xiii. To strengthen the regulator for ensuring compliance of the prescribed 
performance standards and Quality of Service (QoS) parameters by the 
Telecom Service Providers. 
DDsG and above level of ficers under DoT have been requested to initiate necessary 
action to implement the provisions contained in NTP-2012. 
(E). Initiatives taken by BSNL in this regard are given below: 
 BSNL is committed to inclusive growth of telecom services so as to ensure 
that the benefits of telecom services are available to the rural citizens of the 
country. The key initiatives taken / planned to be taken by BSNL with regard to 
rural area telephony are given below: 
i. During the 12 th Five Year Plan (2012 -13 to 2016 -17), BSNL plans to provide 
64.90 million Mobile Connections, a good percentage of which shall be 
provided in rural areas. 
ii. BSNL has initiated process for upgradation of its C -DoT wireline telecom 
network to Next Generation Network in co -ordination with C -DoT. The 
upgradation is expected to reduce various operational issues related to 
maintenance of network by making the core network centralized and will also 
enable delivery of various Value Added Services. 
iii. Opening new sales channel in rural areas. 
iv. Implementing agreement with Postal Department to increase rural reach. 
v. Offering highly affordable services to cater all segment of society, specifically 
in rural areas.  
vi. BSNL is the major stakeholder in the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) 
constituted to o versee and implement the Government‘s initiative of providing 
high speed and high quality broadband access to 2.5 Lacs Village Panchyats 
through Optical Fibre.  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.7) 
 
Difficulties in getting the Right of Way (RoW) and other permissions from State 
Government Agencies have been cited as constraints in increasing the network 
expansion in rural and remote areas.  The Committee note that as per the existing 
policy of the Government, Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing of  Department 
of Telecommunications (DoT) issues clearance of sites for installation of mobile 
towers. This clearance is reportedly issued without prejudice to applicable bylaws, 

 
 
25 
 
rules and regulations of Local Bodies such as Municipal Corporation/Gram 
Panchayat etc.  Accordingly, before installation of mobile towers, the Telecom 
Service Providers are required to obtain necessary permission from Local Bodies 
particularly the Gram Panchayat.  In this regard, the Department have informed that 
as per terms and co nditions of the Cellular Mobile Telephone Service (CMTS) and 
Unified Access Service (UAS) License and Infrastructure Provider-I (IP-I) registration, 
the responsibility of obtaining the Permission/Right of way for establishing towers lies 
with the Telecom Service Providers/IP-I companies and thus, DoT does not maintain 
any record of the same.  Accordingly, the copies of permission from Local Bodies for 
setting up of mobile towers was not available with DoT.  In this regard, the 
Committee, recommend that eith er the Department should maintain a record for 
obtaining such permissions or it should have a mechanism to coordinate with the 
service providers so that such records could be scanned or produced, whenever 
required. 
 
 With regard to the compensation to land  owner whose land is used for setting 
up of telecom towers, the Committee note that acquisition/renting of land or building 
for the purpose of installation of mobile tower is carried out by a mutual commercial 
agreement between land/building owner and the Telecom Service Providers.  The 
Department‘s contention that the responsibility to deal with issues of Right of Way 
and the compensation to land owners on whose land mobile tower has been installed 
lies completely with the Telecom Service Providers/ Infras tructure Provider -I (IP -I) 
companies is not acceptable to the Committee.  Even if this is the case, the 
Committee are of the opinion that it is imperative on the part of the Government to 
ensure that such provisions do not hinder the network expansion. The Committee are 
of the opinion that the complete onus/ responsibility should not be left only on the 
Service Providers.  In this regard, the Committee emphasize that the Department 
should assess the problem in toto, take up the matter with the Competent Authority, if 
needed, and inform the Committee accordingly.  Besides, the Committee recommend 
that the signing of the tripartite agreement between Government of India, State 
Governments and Implementing Agency for free Right of Way (RoW) for setting up of 
National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) should be done expeditiously taking into 
account that the Department has already approved this project for providing 
connectivity to 2.5 lakh village panchayats with an estimated expenditure of 
approximately Rs. 20,000 cr ore.  The Committee would await a specific response 
from the Department in this regard. 
          
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As suggested by the Hon‘ble Committee, DoT shall coordinate with the telecom 
service providers so that the records related to permis sion from Local Bodies for 
setting up of mobile towers could be obtained, whenever required. Further, a 
guideline for issue of clearance for installation of mobile towers has been issued by 
DoT to all the State Governments. A copy is enclosed as Annexure-II. 
  
With regard to the compensation to land owner whose land is used for setting up of 
telecom towers, it is to submit that whenever a grievance or complaint is received in 

 
 
26 
 
DoT, the matter is immediately taken up with the concerned Telecom Service 
Provider company or infrastructure provider company, as the case may be, for 
redressal.  
 
With regard to signing of the tripartite agreement between Government of India 
(Department of Telecommunications), State Governments and Implementing agency 
for free Right of Way (RoW) for setting up of National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN), 
a meeting was held with all the State Governments on 29.03.2012 under the 
chairmanship of Hon‘ble MOC&IT to discuss the RoW issue. Letters have been 
written to State Governments by Hon‘bl e MOC&IT and Secretary (Telecom) for 
signing the tripartite agreement for free RoW. Some of the States have already given 
their consent and others are being pursued. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.8) 
  
With a view to improving telecom development  in rural areas, the Government 
announced the Universal Service Support Policy on 27 th March, 2002 under which a 
separate fund for providing access to telegraph services to people in the rural and 
remote areas was set up. The Committee note that various sc hemes / projects of 
USOF include provision of Village Public Telephone (VPTs), replacement of Multi 
Access Rural Radio (MARR) based on VPTs, Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme, 
Rural Broadband Scheme, Optical Fibre Network Augmentation Scheme, provision of 
Rural Community Phones (RCPs), provision of Rural household Direct Exchange 
Lines (RDELs) in specified Short Distance Charging Areas (SDCAs) and Operation 
and Maintenance of Village Public Telephones. Telecom Service Providers such as 
BSNL, Bharti Airtel , Reliance Communications, Reliance Telecom Ltd., Idea, Aircel 
and Vodafone are stated to be involved in the various activities carried out under 
USOF. 
 Further, the Committee note that the resources for implementation of 
Universal Service Obligation  (USO ) are raised through a Universal Service Levy 
(USL) which has presently been fixed at 5 per cent of the Adjusted Gross Revenue 
(AGR) of all Telecom Service Providers except the pure value added service 
providers like voice mail, e-mail service providers etc. The Committee note that since 
the inception of USOF till 2011 -12, the total funds collected as USL till 31 st 
December, 2011 is Rs. 40574.16 crore. Out of this, the total fund allocated and 
disbursed for Universal Service Obligation till December 2011 are Rs. 15121.44 crore 
and Rs. 15059.46 crore respectively. The Committee are disappointed as in terms of 
percentage, the funds allocated and disbursed are only 37.26 and 37.11 per cent 
respectively when compared to the total amount collected as USL. The Com mittee 
feel that the percentage is quite small, taking into account the need for a real thrust in 
the rural areas in terms of network expansion to bridge the ‗digital divide‘ between 
rural and urban areas. 
 The Committee also note that States like Maharash tra (Rs. 1296.99 crore), 
Rajasthan (Rs. 769.70 crore), Madhya Pradesh (Rs. 764.50 crore), Andhra Pradesh 

 
 
27 
 
(Rs. 743.38 crore), Gujarat (Rs. 661.13 crore) and Karnataka (Rs. 620.99 crore) have 
got the major share of financial allocation from USOF. Other State s like North East 
States (NE -I Rs. 82.80 crore, NE -II Rs. 64.49 crore), Jharkhand (Rs. 75.36 crore), 
Uttarakhand (Rs. 147.88 crore) and West Bengal (Rs. 163.75 crore) have got very 
less allocation from USOF. The Committee would like the Department to assess as to 
why the major share of funds under USOF have gone mostly to the developed States 
whereas poor States like North -East States, Jharkhand and Uttarakhand have got 
less share. The Committee would like the Department to  have an assessment based 
on their observation and take necessary steps to increase the quantum of allocation 
to the States which are poor and require positive intervention on the part of the 
Government for their overall growth and development. The specific action taken in 
this regard may be intimated to the Committee. 
 The Committee wish to point out that improving the rural telecom network is an 
important ingredient for the welfare and development of rural India and has many 
advantages such as healthcare and other allied services in the time of urgency, 
timely information on business, price, market and demands, better coordination for 
delivery of administration and public services including health, education, information 
about employment, etc. Therefore, they recommend that the quantum of  allocation 
for the various schemes/projects carried out under the Universal Service Obligation 
should be enhanced so that the basic objective of the Universal Service Support 
Policy to improve telecom development in rural areas is achieved in letter and s pirit. 
The Committee also recommend that the monitoring mechanism of the performance 
of the schemes subsidized under USOF need to be further strengthened by the 
Department so that  suitable deductions in the subsidy amount may be made in the 
case of Teleco m Service Providers who do not conform to the terms and conditions 
of the agreements made under the Universal Service Support Policy. The Committee 
also recommend that the existing mechanisms such as regulation of Quality of 
Service (QoS) by TRAI, inspecti on of records by USOF Administrator or by the 
Designated Monitoring Agency, imposition of liquidated damages in case of not 
meeting the roll-out obligations within the specified period, sample verifications of the 
claims against installation of facilities by the offices of Controller of Communication 
Accounts (CCAs) etc. should be scrupulously followed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(a) Regarding Committee‘s observation that funds allocated and disbursed are 
37.26% and 37.11% respectively when compared to the to tal amount collected as 
Universal Service Levy, it is submitted that: 
 
(i)  Department of Telecommunications (DoT) has obtained the approval of 
Cabinet for implementation of a scheme called ‗National Optical Fiber 
Network‘ (NOFN) for providing broadband co nnectivity to 2.5 lakh Gram 
Panchayats with an estimated cost of Rs.20,000 Crore. This is to be funded by 
USOF.  
 

 
 
28 
 
(ii) A scheme is being planned for provisioning of mobile services from 2199 
locations in the Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas, as ide ntified by 
Ministry of Home Affairs, for which estimated subsidy support from USOF is 
about Rs.5,800 Crore.  
 
 
Thus, the bulk of the accruals of USOF over the next few years would be utilized in 
financing and implementing the on -going and upcoming USOF sch emes. This would 
lead to higher utilization of total amount collected as Universal Service Levy. 
 
(b) Regarding Committee‘s recommendation to increase quantum of USO Fund 
allocation to the States which are poor and require positive intervention on part of the 
Government, it is hereby submitted that: 
(i) There is no state -wise allocation of USO Fund for disbursement to various 
States. The disbursement of subsidy support from USOF is scheme -wise and 
it is spread over the whole country.  
(ii) The amount of USO F support given to a Universal Service 
Providers/Infrastructure Providers for a scheme in different States depends on 
the nature and extent of services such as rural telephone connections, 
broadband connections and mobile infrastructure etc.  
(iii) USOF is also providing subsidy support for some State -specific schemes e.g. 
‗Scheme for Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -District SDHQ-
DHQ OFC Network in service area of ASSAM‘ [subsidy outgo of Rs.98.89 
Crore], ‗‗Scheme for Augmentation, Creation a nd Management of Intra-District 
SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in North East -I Circle [subsidy outgo of Rs.89.50 
Crore], and ‗Scheme for Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -
District SDHQ -DHQ OFC Network in North East -II Circle [subsidy outgo of 
Rs.298.50 Crore].  
(iv) Further, USOF is working on a specific scheme involving establishing 2199 
mobile towers in the Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas in Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. 
(v) Allocations to USOF are made by the Planning Commission and Ministry of 
Finance as part of DoT Budget on an annual basis. It is the endeavour of 
USOF to fully utilize annual allocation. 
(c) Regarding Committee‘s observations on monitoring mechanism, it is submitted 
 that: 
(i) The observations of the Committee for further strengthening the monitoring 
mechanism have been noted by USOF establishment. 
(ii) The existing mechanisms for monitoring the USOF schemes are being 
followed meticulously. Regulation of Quality of Service (QoS) of TRAI and 
inspection of records by the Controllers of Communication Accounts (CCA) 
are being carried out regularly. Liquidated damages are also being imposed 
wherever there is any shortfall in rollout within the spe cified period. An amount 
of Rs. 14.92 crore has so far been recovered on account of liquidated 
damages, under different schemes. Sample verifications of the claims against 
installation of facilities under various schemes are being carried out by the 
CCA offices. The sample size varies from scheme to scheme. The minimum 

 
 
29 
 
sample size is 5% whereas in case of Mobile Infrastructure Phase -I scheme, it 
is 100%. 
(iii) Effective monitoring mechanism for the forthcoming USOF schemes will be 
evolved based on the experience gained from current schemes. 
 
(d) As per TRAI Act 1997 (amended), TRAI monitors the performance of the 
service providers against the Quality of Service benchmarks laid down by TRAI, 
through the quarterly Performance Monitoring Reports (PMRs) and mont hly 
congestion reports submitted by the service providers. TRAI periodically undertakes 
Audit and Objective Assessment of Quality of Service provided by Basic Telephone 
Service (Wireline) and Cellular Mobile Telephone Service and Broadband Services 
through Independent Agencies. TRAI also undertakes assessment of customer 
perception of service through surveys by independent agencies. All these reports are 
published through TRAI website for information of general public/stakeholders. 
 
Further, as per TRAI Act  1997, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) 
examined the compliance of 1 st phase of rollout obligations of 145 ‗private telecom 
service providers‘ (TSPs) to whom Unified Access Services (UAS) licenses were 
issued from the year 2006 to year 2008 and sent its recommendations to Department 
of Telecom (DoT). On examination of the recommendations of the TRAI alongwith 
the data available with the DoT, it was found that, out of above referred TSPs, many 
of them had fulfilled their 1 st phase of rollout obli gations with certain delays. 
Liquidated Damaged (LD) against the Licensee who have not fulfilled their roll out 
obligation within the stipulated time period have been imposed as per license 
conditions wherever delay in compliance  in roll out obligations w ere less than 52 
weeks. Further wherever delay in compliance of 1 st phase roll out were more than 52 
weeks, in addition to imposition of maximum LD amount, show cause notices for 
termination of licences have also been issued to 35 Licensees. Many of the 
Licensees to whom LD demand notices were issued filed petitions before Hon‘ble 
TDSAT. TDSAT delivered its judgment on 13.01.2012 in the matter and Department 
of Telecommunications has filed an appeal before the Hon‘ble Supreme Court of 
India against the judg ment dated 13.01.2012 of TDSAT. The matter is subjudice. 
Accordingly, it may be seen that process for monitoring of quality of service (QoS) 
and imposition of LD is being scrupulously followed. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.9) 
 
Broadband connectivity is increasingly being seen as an integral driver of improved 
socio-economic performance. In this background, the Committee note that 
Broadband Policy was announced on 14 October, 2004 with a vision to provide 
Broadband connectivity to 20 million subscribers by the end of 2010. As per the DoT, 
the number of Broadband subscribers has increased from 6.8 million at the end of 31 
August, 2009 to 13.35 million as on 31 December, 2011. This indicates that even 
after one year from the stipulated time -line, th ere are still 6.65 million Broadband 
subscribers left, who are yet to be provided the service. Further, as envisaged in the 
Broadband Policy, 2004, during the Eleventh Plan period (2007 -2012), the 
Government had planned for Broadband coverage for all the S econdary and Higher 

 
 
30 
 
Secondary Schools, Public Health Centres and Gram Panchayats under the USOF. 
As per the status furnished by the Department, the Committee note that only 1.43 
lakh Village Panchayats have been covered by the end of December, 2011 out of the 
total stipulated target of 2.5 lakh Village Panchayats to be covered by 2012. Besides, 
during the said period, 97005 Secondary Schools, 41864 Higher Secondary Schools 
and 17920 Primary Health Care Centers have been provided Broadband 
connectivity. The Committee feel that in a vast country like India, the achievement 
made by the Department in terms of Broadband connectivity during the Eleven Plan 
period leaves much to be desired. They, therefore, recommend that BSNL and 
MTNL, as well as other Private Tel ecom Service Providers must step up their efforts 
to provide adequate Broadband connectivity in rural and remote areas so that the 
target to provide 8,88,832 wire -line Broadband connections to individual users and 
Government Institutions and setting up of 28,672 kiosks by 2014 through BSNL is 
achieved as per stipulated time and cost. The Committee would like to have a status 
report on the matter at the action taken stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Regarding provisioning of 8,88,832 wire -line broadband connec tions in rural & 
remote areas of the country, it is submitted that USOF has signed an Agreement with 
BSNL on January 20, 2009 under the Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme to provide 
wire-line broadband connectivity to rural & remote areas by leveraging the ex isting 
rural exchanges infrastructure and copper wire -line network. The speed of each of 
the broadband connections shall be at least 512 kbps always on. Under this scheme, 
BSNL will provide 8,88,832 wire -line Broadband connections to individual users and 
Government Institutions and will set up 28,672 Kiosks over a period of 5-years, i.e. by 
2014. The subsidy disbursement is for, 
 
(i) Broadband connections, Customer Premises Equipment (CPE), 
Computer/Computing deices 
(ii) Setting up of Kiosks for public access to broadband services. 
 
 The estimated subsidy outflow is Rs. 1,500 crore in 5 years‘ time that includes 
subsidy for 9 lakh broadband connections, CPEs, computers/computing devices and 
Kiosks. 
 
As on 31.8.2012, a total of 3,91,245 broadband connections have been  provided and 
10076 kiosks have been set up in rural and remote areas. 
 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.10) 
 
The Committee note that out of the total of 12.65 million Broadband subscribers in 
the country at the end of 31 August, 2011, Maharashtra  and Goa are in lead having 
17.52 per cent Broadband subscribers in the country followed by Tamil Nadu (12.55 

 
 
31 
 
percent), Karnataka (10.10 per cent), Andhra Pradesh (9.85 per cent) and Delhi (7.98 
per cent). The Committee are dismayed to note that States/Cir cles like Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands (0.04 per cent), Jammu and Kashmir (0.45 per cent) followed by 
North-East States viz. Meghalaya, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland 
and Tripura (0.38 per cent), Himachal Pradesh (0.56 per cent) and Assam (0.64  per 
cent) have poor Broadband penetration. They have been apprised that the major 
constraints for this are non-availability of backhaul connectivity upto the villages, non-
availability of content in vernacular languages and low affordability of Customer 
Premises Equipment (CPE). As far as the steps taken by the Department are 
concerned, the Committee have been informed that provision of Broadband 
connection through setting up of broadband access centres, tele -centres, kiosks, and 
other public access points  and PCOs, connecting educational institutions to 
broadband networks, providing wireless internet services as primary aim of rural 
Broadband access, measure to make Cable Operators to provide Broadband service 
in rural areas and training of citizens to acc ess and use Broadband through digital 
literacy Programs have been undertaken. The Committee while not being satisfied by 
these steps desire that momentum to have better Broadband connectivity should be 
enhanced by the Department so that the set targets are  achieved particularly in 
above mentioned States where the Broadband penetration is poor. The matter needs 
immediate attention as one of the focus areas identified by the draft National 
Telecom Policy, 2011 is to recognize Telecom and Broadband connectivity as a basic 
necessity like education and health and work towards „Right to Broadband ‟ . In this 
regard the Committee strongly recommend that the scheme of National Optical Fibre 
Network (NOFN) to make available Broadband connectivity upto Gram Panchayats 
by utilizing the existing optical fibres of BSNL, Railtel and Power Grid should be 
implemented expeditiously. The Committee also desire to be apprised about the 
findings and the implementation status of the Empowered Committee set up by the 
Department for t he scheme of National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) which has 
been especially planned to facilitate implementation of various e -Governance 
initiatives such as e -health, e-banking, e-education etc. thereby facilitating inclusive 
growth. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Some schemes to enhance better Broadband connectivity in Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Tripura and Assam ect are given as below, 
 
(i) Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -
District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in service area of ASSAM 
 
This OFC scheme would connect 354 locations in 21 districts of Assam 
within 18 months from date of signing of the agreement. Agreement has 
been signed with BSNL on 12.02.2010 in this respect with a subsidy quote 
of Rs. 98.89 Crore. The Agreement shall be valid for a period of seven 
years from the date of signing of the agreement. 
   

 
 
32 
 
(ii)  Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -
District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in North East-I Telecom Circle. 
 
The states of  Meghalaya, Mizoram & Tripura have been taken up in this 
scheme for OFC Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -District 
SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network. This OFC scheme would connect 188 locations 
in 19 districts within 24 months from date of signing of the a greement. 
Agreement has been signed with Railtel on 16.01.2012. 
 
(iii) Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -
District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in North East-II Telecom Circle. 
 
The states of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur & Nagaland have b een taken up 
in this scheme for OFC Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra -
District SDHQ -DHQ OFC Network. This OFC scheme would connect 407 
locations in 30 districts within 30 months from date of signing of the 
agreement. Agreement has been signed with Railtel on 16.01.2012. 
 
The optical fiber has predominantly reached state capitals, districts and blocks 
at present. National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) is planned to connect all the 
2,50,000 Gram panchayats in the country through optical fibre util izing existing fibers 
of PSUs viz. BSNL, RailTel and Power Grid and laying incremental fiber wherever 
necessary. Non -discriminatory access to the network will be provided to all the 
telecom service providers. These access operators like mobile operators, I nternet 
Service Providers (ISPs), Cable TV operators, content providers etc. can launch 
various services in rural areas. Various services such as e-health, e-education and e-
governance etc. will be provided. 
 
 Regarding expeditious implementation of NOFN p roject, it is mentioned that 
for implementation of National Optical Fiber Network (NOFN) project, a Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) namely Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL) has been 
incorporated on 25.02.2012 under Indian Companies Act 1956. Pilot expe riments 
completed in Gram Panchayats Vishakhapatnam, Ajmer and North Tripura. The 
pilots conducted by the 3 CPSUs in one block each as per following details: 
S. No. CPSU Pilots to be conducted in No. of GPs to be 
connected 
State District  Block 
1 BSNL Rajasthan Ajmer Arain 30 
2 Railtel Tripura North Tripura Panisagar 11 
3 PGCIL Andhra Pradesh Vishakhapatnam Paravada 17 
 
 Tripartite MoU has been signed on 26 -10-2012, with 13 States viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karn ataka, Manipur, 
Mizoram, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and 3 Union Territories viz. 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Puducherry.   

 
 
33 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.12) 
 
 
Recommendations of the Committee (Para 7.12): The Committ ee note that in 
pursuance of National Telecom Policy, 1999, BSNL was formed on 1 October, 2000 
as a technology -oriented company providing telecom services namely telephone 
services on landline, Wireless in Local Loop (WLL) and Global System of Mobile 
(GSM), Broadband, Internet, leased circuits and long distance telecom Service. The 
Committee note that a on March, 2011 BSNL have provided 55.65 lakh WLL 
connections. However, the number of connections declined to 43.34 lakh at the end 
of 31 December, 2011.  Du ring the said period, internet connections also declined to 
35.76 from 36.78 lakh connections.  The Committee also note that BSNL earned a 
total revenue of Rs. 29.688 crore during the financial year 2010 -11.  However, due to 
intense competition and sharp d ecline in Average Revenue Per User (ARPU) the 
company had registered a substantial loss of Rs. 6,384 crore during the said period.  
The Committee were informed that various measures/initiatives have been taken by 
BSNL to increase the subscriber base in the  wake of competition from the Private 
Telecom Service Providers, for instance sustained operational focus on customer 
care, service delivery, service assurance, revenue management and asset 
management, aggressive push on Data usage and value added services .  In 
addition, steps like clear cut segregation of commercial activities from social 
obligation to ensure sustainable growth and progressive migration of BSNL‘s current 
network to Next Generation Network to ensure convergence, consolidation and 
seamless delivery of various services, enhancement in quality of service/ customer 
care through revamped call centres and improved network operations across critical 
parameters such as BTS availability, congestion, speedy redressal of complaints 
through call centres , special efforts for improving uptime of Mobile Network, 
replacement of poor batteries, efforts to bring the BTSs on ring etc. have also been 
taken.  Committee appreciate the measures taken/proposed to be taken by BSNL. 
However, the Committee recommend at the same time that in the intense competitive 
environment in Telecom sector, it is high time BSNL should improve their physical 
and financial performance taking into account that in the recent years the company‘s 
revenue and market share have plunged into  heavy losses due to intense 
competition in Indian telecommunications sector.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 The Committee also note that BSNL has not been able to procure any GSM 
equipment in the last four years thus affecting the quality of service provided by them 
as admitted by the CMD during the deliberations held by the Committee.  In this 
regard, the Committee desire that BSNL should furnish a note to them explaining 
their position on non -procurement o f GSM equipment in the last four years. The 
Committee also note that the tenders floated for procurement of equipment has also 
failed due to frivolous complaints and subsequently in 2011 the tender for 
procurement has again been floated on e-tender platform.  The Committee would like 
the department to apprise the Committee of the latest position in this regard. 
 

 
 
34 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The comments of BSNL on the present status of tender of 15 Million GSM lines are 
as follows:-   
 
Previous Mobile Tenders: 
 
The last successful tender for procurement of GSM equipment was floated in year 
2006 against which Advance Purchase orders were placed till 2008. 
 
The tenders for procurement of 93 million lines for GSM equipment was floated by 
the four zones of BSNL on  01.05.2008 under Phase VI project. This tender was 
having provision for quantity variation upto + / - 50 %. The procurement was 
proposed to be done in three phases for requirement of three to four years. In first 
phase capacity of 33 Mn lines was planned and the remaining two phases were to 
have capacity of about 30 Mn lines each. These capacities were planned based on 
BSNL Vision document envisaging to provide 3 Mn connections in each month to 
maintain reasonable market share at that time. Each tender was  further divided into 
four parts  
 
–Part I for 2G elements, Core and VAS elements 
–Part II for 3G elements 
–Part III for infrastructure items. 
–Part IV for operation and billing sub-systems. 
 
However, this tender was cancelled in early 2010 based on recommendations of Sam 
Pitroda Committee. 
 
BSNL Board took decision to procure 5.5 million lines GSM equipment to meet the 
immediate requirement of the circles of North and East zones through a single 
composite tender for 5.5 million lines, only for 2G equipment  along with associated 
infra and billing integration. This requirement was mainly to reduce congestion in the 
network including remote areas. The Board decided to invite bids from the bidders 
who had participated in Part-I and/or Part-II of Phase-VI tender in any of the zones as 
suggested by CVC. In view of the standing instructions relating to security guidelines 
from the Government, the Bids were called from only three vendors centrally for 
North and East zones. However, change in security guidelines comp elled  BSNL to 
call fresh bids from all the five vendors, who had participated in part I and/or part II of 
phase VI Tender as suggested by CVC, namely M/s Ericsson, M/s NSN, M/s Alcatel 
Lucent, M/s Huawei and M/s ZTE with existing tender document along wit h 
clarifications. Accordingly, the tender floated vide tender no. MM/NWP -
GSM/062010/000391 dated 23.06.2010 was cancelled and new tender was floated 
by MM cell vide tender no. MM/NWP-GSM/082010/000395 dated 31.08.2010. 
 
Only four out of five bidde rs participated in the Bid .M/s Ericsson did‘nt  participate in 
the bid. During the evaluation stage , M/s Ericsson represented that it had not 

 
 
35 
 
participated due to security related guidelines / requirements mentioned in the tender 
even though during pre bi d stage, neither any clarifications were sought by the M/s 
Ericsson nor M/s Ericsson  participated in the pre bid conference held on 13.09.2010 
for this tender. However, all the clarifications were provided by BSNL to all the 
prospective bidders including M/s Ericsson. M/s Ericsson chose to represent a case 
to the Independent External Monitors (IEMs) against this tender, even though the 
vendor was not interested in the bidding.  The IEMs recommended to re float the 
tender  and the tender was cancelled.   
 
Current Mobile Tender: 
 
BSNL Board in its 133 rd meeting held on 04/02/2011 decided for Procurement of 15 
Million GSM lines Equipment.  The tender  was floated by BSNL on 14.07.2011 for 
Procurement of 14.37 Million GSM lines equipment for North, East and So uth zones. 
The procurement of 0.63 Million lines for West zone was to be done through RQ from 
M/s ITI. In the tender floated for North , East and South zones the bids were received 
on 02.12.2011, from following five bidders: 
 
 M/s Ericsson India Ltd. 
 M/s Alcatel-Lucent 
 M/s ZTE Telecom India Pvt Ltd 
 M/s Huawei Telecom India Pvt Ltd 
 M/s Nokia Siemens Networks 
The Financial bids of all the above mentioned bidders were opened on 04.02.2012. 
 
L1 bidder was M/s ZTE Telecom India Pvt Ltd.  Authorization for placeme nt of PO 
has been issued to circles of North and South zones on 07.05.12. Purchase Order 
has already been placed by all the circles of North and South zones on L1 bidder. 
For East Zone, the offer was issued to L2, L3, L4 & L5 bidders for award of work at 
L1 prices which has since been declined by them. As per provision in the tender APO 
has been issued to L1 bidder on 24/08/2012,  which has since been accepted by the 
bidder. The work for West Zone was kept reserved for M/s ITI under reservation 
quota. M/s IT I was asked to submit its bid against the RQ, but M/s ITI has still not 
submitted its bid. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.13) 
 
The Committee note that  Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL )was formed  
on April, 01,1986 to assume responsibility  as the principal Service Provider for 
control, management, operation of the telecommunication‘s networks in Delhi and 
Mumbai. While analyzing its performance, the Committee note that during  2011 -12 
(upto December,2011) a total of 2.83 lakh new internet c onnections were added by 
MTNL, taking the total connections to 91.52 lakh. The Committee note that in the 
wake  of stiff competition from private service providers, MTNL  has achieved a 
financial turnover of Rs.3,673.95 crore during the year 2010 -11, as co mpared to the 
previous turnover of Rs.3656.10 crore. However, during the said period, it posted a 
loss of Rs.2801.91  crore too. During 2011 -12 as on December 2011, it has again 

 
 
36 
 
incurred a loss of Rs.1714 crore. The outstanding arrears to be collected by MTNL as 
on December, 2011 was Rs.1,129.17 crore. Undoubtedly, the financial performance 
of MTNL needs improvement.  The Committee, therefore emphasizes  that MTNL  
should focus on broadband and  enterprise business, new streams of revenue from 
sharing of re sources with other service providers, introduction of new schemes to 
attract landline subscribers, more emphasis on adding GSM and broadband, flexible 
tariff policies and rationalization of expenditure to reduce administrative and 
operational cost to impro ve its financial performance. Besides, the Committee feel 
that although the outstanding arrears to be collected has slightly reduced from 
Rs.1188.62 crore at the end of March, 2008 to Rs.1129.17 at the end of March,2011, 
if the company is serious about rec overy of outstanding arrears, it will have to come 
up with fresh and more effective initiatives on a priority basis, as the outstanding 
Rs.1129.17 crore is a huge liability, which if not liquidated urgently can have serious 
ramifications for a public Servi ce provider like MTNL. The Committee, therefore, 
would like to know the progress made, if any in regard to the financial health of MTNL 
post-these initiatives and further plans to stay as the leading PSU in Delhi and 
Mumbai telephone circuits. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Delhi and Mumbai are the most competitive telecom licence service areas. In Delhi, 
there are 15 mobile operators (GSM+CDMA) and 4 basic operators whereas in 
Mumbai, there are 14 mobile operators (GSM+CDMA) and 4 basic operators. The 
subscriber base for the MTNL‘s various services for the past 5 years is as under:  
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Total Wire -line 
Connections                     
(including WLL 
fixed 
connections) 
38,07,081 36,94,970 36,23,110 35,81,148 35,65,896 
Total Wi reless 
Connections 
including WLL 
mobile 
34,02,767 43,60,748 49,67,660 53,61,827 57,24,231 
Broadband 
Subscribers 
570591 695500 815830 942317 1040191 
Total  7780439 8751218 9406600 9885292 10330318 
 
It is submitted that despite facing fierce competition, a growth of over 5% has been 
maintained in the overall subscriber base.  

 
 
37 
 
Even though there is continuous growth in MTNL‘s wireless subscriber base in 
absolute terms, there is decline in market share due to increase in competition & 
number of service provid er in Delhi & Mumbai.  With entry of new players, market 
share of existing operators get shared and market share of some of our competitors 
has also declined.  MTNL gained market share in mobile from incumbent operators 
when it entered market.  
Despite being a late entrant in the GSM segment, MTNL mobile subscriber base has 
grown to over 5.6 Million as on March 2012. It is further submitted that MTNL is 
making its best efforts to sustain the growth in its GSM Services despite facing fierce 
competition in its service areas where the tele-density is already well over 150%. 
With regard to reduction in wire line percentage share, it is submitted that there is a 
general decline in the demand for the fixed lines telephone as there is a tendency to 
shift to mobile services because of its sheer convenience with regards to affordability 
and availability. This is worldwide trend that when liberalization takes place and 
monopoly is removed in telecom sector there is a churn in fixed line subscribers of 
incumbent operator.  
MTNL has been continuously making its best efforts to arrest the surrender of land 
line connections. Steps have been taken to arrest & reverse the negative Growth in 
Landline Telephone Services. With the following concerted efforts, the negative 
growth has been brought under 0.5% and the positive growth is expected to be 
achieved in next 2 years:-    
 Rollout of FTTH (Fibre to the Home)  Services. 
 Migration of TDM switching network to NGN / IP network progressively 
during 12th five year plan period. With  the proposed migration, a host of 
value added services will be made available to landline subscriber also.    
 
MTNL is giving major thrust on the expansion of capacity for GSM and Broadband to 
cater the further demand. Following actions are being taken to  generate fresh 
demands by providing quality services, customer care & satisfaction, introduction of 
new services / schemes and innovative marketing strategies.  
(i) Expansion / augmentation of existing 3G network to (High Speed Packet 
Access (HSPA+):  At p resent MTNL‘s 3G network is HSDPA (High Speed Data 
Packet Access) with download speeds up to 3.6 Mbps and uploads speed upto 384 
Kbps. After upgradation download speed upto 21.1 Mbps and upload speed upto 
5.76 Mbps will be supported by the network.  
(ii) Deployment of new technology state of art exchanges and Next 
Generation Networks (NGN)/ IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) :  MTNL has 
planned to replace its TDM (Time Division Multiplexing) Fixed line switches with NGN 
/ IMS switch in phased manner during 12th F ive year plan. Introduction of NGN / IMS 
based services will not only help MTNL in saving Opex, space but also enable MTNL 
to offer all data / video centric services which are currently enjoyed by Mobile 
subscribers to the fixed line subscribers also ultim ately leading to convergence of 
fixed and mobile services. 

 
 
38 
 
(iii) To bring optical fiber near / to subscriber’s premises by introducing 
FTTC (Fibre to the Curve) and reaching homes thereafter with FTTH (Fibre to 
the Home) on PON (Passive Optical Network) technology: MTNL is adding optical 
fibre in its access network and is deploying FTTH based on GPON (Gigabit Passive 
Optical Network). This will enable MTNL to provide access to this latest technology to 
its‘ esteemed customers with very high bandwidth. 
(iv) Expansion of broadband network to provide bandwidth on demand by 
deployment of ADSL (Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line) / VDSL (Very High Data 
Rate Digital Subscriber Line) , MLDN (Managed Leased Data Network) / PON etc. 
Introduction of more broadband services such as video on demand, video conference 
for public.   
(v) Expansion of high capacity IP -MPLS (IP Multiprotocol Label Switching) based 
backbone network to migrate to NGN (Next Generation Network) for establishing 
unified network for speech and data.  Introduction of VOIP in the backbone and 
access network. 
 Further, MTNL is also targeting to increase its revenue as detailed below: 
 Both Delhi and Mumbai units of MTNL are targeting to increase revenue upto 
5% amounting to Rs. 150 Crs. (approx)  
 Wireless Unit is targeting to increase revenue upto 15% amounting to Rs. 100 
Crs. (approx)  
 Land, Building & Enterprise Business is targeting to increase revenue by Rs. 
100 Crs. (approx)  
 In totality, increase in revenue will be around Rs. 350 Crs. (approx) which is 
10% of total revenue. 
The administrative and operational cost during 2010 -11 was Rs. 921.99 cores. This 
cost has been reduced to Rs. 819.34 crores during 2011-12.  
It is submitted that the outstanding arrears of Rs. 1129.17 cr as on Dec. 2011 has 
been further reduced to Rs. 1064.67 cr as on 31.03.2012. Thus, there is a reduction 
of 5.71% over the period of one year. The total billing of MTNL, since its inception in 
1986, is to the tune of Rs. 95998 cr (approx) and the accumulated outstanding arrear 
of Rs. 1064.67 cr, as on 31.03.2012, forms 1.11% of this total billed amount of MTNL.  
MTNL has been consistently making sincere efforts for reduction in outstanding 
arrears which are as under:- 
 Frequent revenue reviews held at various levels and strong monitor ing of 
outstanding at corporate level. 
 TR action plan is implemented whereby it is being ensured that all the bills are 
raised, issued, dispatched and delivered on time to recover the dues promptly.  
 Credit control module has been introduced to keep a chec k on credit limit of the 
subscriber. 
 Most recently launched two periodic amnesty schemes fetched fruitful results not 
only in terms of settlement of old outstanding but also restoration of old 
connections on the request of subscribers. 
 Recovery agents are employed for making recoveries. 

 
 
39 
 
 Automated telephonic reminders followed by manual calls by concerned AO(TR) 
are being made to subscribers who defaults in making payments of their bills. 
 
 
Further, MTNL now proposes to streamline  the effort to reduce outstanding by 
monitoring the implementation of various steps including the following: 
 Review of cases with outstanding greater than Rs.50000 
 Customer wise listing of pending dues in respect of customers having more than 
one telephone. 
 Review of outstanding against group bills. 
 Adjustment of Security Deposits of closed cases. 
 Review of DNP (Disconnected for Non Payment) cases i.e. disconnected 
numbers with more than one month outstanding. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.14) 
 
The Committee note that the work related to issue of license to various telecom 
services and spectrum allocation is under the overall charge of the DoT, Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology. The first phase of liberalization in 
Mobile telephone Service started with the issue of 2 (CMTS) Licenses in each of the 
four Metro Cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai to 8 Private Companies in 
November, 1994. Subsequently, 34 Licenses for 18 Territorial Telecom Circles were 
issued to 14 Private Companies during 1995 to 1998. State owned public sector 
undertakings i.e. MTNL and BSNL were issued Licenses for provision of CMTS as 
third operators in the various parts of the Country. Further, 17 fresh Licenses were 
issued to private companies and 4 Ce llular operators in September/October, 2001, 
one each in the four Metro Cities and 13 Telecom Circles. The Committee further find 
MTNL Outstanding in r/o Basic, GSM & CDMA  
 
1173.73 
1119.6 
1103.49 
1064.67 
1000 
1030 
1060 
1090 
1120 
1150 
1180 
31.3.2009 31.3.2010 31.3.2011 31.3.2012 
Rs. In Crs. 

 
 
40 
 
that the Guidelines for the Unified Access Services License (UASL) for basic as well 
as cellular mobile services were announce d by the Government on 11 November, 
2003 and were issued on 14 December 2005. One of the important impacts of the 
initiative taken by the Government is the enhancement in Foreign Direct Investment 
from 49 to 74 per cent. The Committee note that as on 31 Au gust, 2011, there are 
277 Unified services and cellular mobile licenses in the country. As on December, 
2011, 240 Unified Access Service (UAS), 2 Basic Service and 37 Cellular Mobile 
Service (CMTS) Licenses have been issued and permission for the usages of  dual 
technology (both CDMA and GSM) under the same CMTS/UAS License has been 
granted to 8 companies. 
 
In this connection, the Committee learn that 122 Unified Access Service Licenses 
issued in January, 2008 were recently cancelled by the Supreme Court. So me of the 
important reasons attributed by the Supreme Court for the cancellation of licenses 
were that the Court was of the view that although the State is the legal owner of the 
natural resources as a trustee of the people and is empowered to distribute t he 
same, the process of distribution must be guided by the constitutional principles 
including the doctrine of equality and larger public good. Second reason cited by the 
Court was that if the method of auction had been adopted for grant of license, the 
country would have been enriched by many thousand crores. Thirdly, the 
recommendations made by TRAI were flawed in many respects and implementation 
thereof by DoT resulted in gross violation of the objective of National Telecom Policy, 
1999 and the decision taken by the Council of Ministers on 31 October, 2003. The 
Committee also note that the Supreme Court had directed TRAI to make fresh 
recommendations for grant of license and allocation of spectrum in 2G band in 22 
Service Areas by auction, as was done for  allocation of spectrum in 3G band. The 
Union Government was directed to consider the recommendations of the TRAI and 
take appropriate decision within the next one month and the fresh license should be 
granted by auction. In this regard, the Committee have  been informed by the DoT 
that TRAI issued a pre -consultation paper on allocation of spectrum in 2G band by 
auction for 22 service areas on 3 February, 2012, requesting all the stakeholders to 
furnish their comments by 15 February, 2012. Subsequently, on t he basis of the 
comments / suggestions received from the stakeholders and as per the international 
practices, another written consultation paper was issued by TRAI on 7 March, 2012 
seeking comments from various stakeholders by 21 March, 2012, and counter 
comments by 28 March, 2012 by TRAI. The Committee have also been informed that 
TRAI is likely to submit its recommendations by the end of April, 2012. The 
Committee are of the opinion that in the light of various issues raised by the Supreme 
Court regarding the cancellation of 122 Unified Access Service Licenses, having a 
transparent and equitable policy for allocation of spectrum is inevitable. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that DoT needs to have a thorough analysis of various 
issues concerning allocat ion of Spectrum so that the Department may take them as 
guide post for the future allocation of Spectrum in the country. The Committee would 
like a note providing the latest position of the Government on the matter. They hope 
that by now TRAI must have fin alized their recommendations after analyzing all the 
comments and suggestions forwarded by various stakeholders. The Committee 
would like to have a status report on the recommendations made by TRAI and the 
action taken by the Department , if any, on the same. 

 
 
41 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
In pursuance to the Hon‘ble Supreme Court judgment dated 02.02.2012, TRAI 
gave its recommendation dated 23.04.2012 and 12.05.2012 on Auction of Spectrum. 
These Recommendations were examined by a committee constituted by DoT.  The 
Report of the DoT Committee was placed before the Telecom Commission. The 
Telecom Commission considered the Report of the DoT Committee on TRAI 
Recommendations on auction of spectrum dated 23.04.2012 and 12.05.2012 and 
provided its recommendations. 
The issued related to the auction of spectrum in 1800 MHz and 800 MHz 
bands were placed before EGoM for further consideration. The EGoM has decided, 
among others, the eligibility criteria, objective of Spectrum, amount of spectrum, 
number of blocks, size of blocks, validity period of auctioned spectrum in 1800 MHz 
and 800 MHz bands, roll out obligations, terms of payment , etc. Further, based on 
the recommendations of the EGOM, the Cabinet decided the Reserve Price for these 
bands and the Spectrum User Charges. 
Department issued the Information Memorandum on 27.08.2012. Further, 
Notice Inviting Applications has also been issued on 28.09.2012 for Auction of 
Spectrum in 1800 MHz and 800 MHz bands. The auction of spectrum in 1800 MHz 
band started on 12th November and completed on 14.11.2012. 
  
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.16) 
 
The Committee note that in accordance with the license agreement, all the Access 
Service Licensees are required to roll out their services within prescribed time 
periods. As per clause of  agreement, licensees are required to offer their services in 
the selected districts for cross - checking the quality/coverage and other parameters, 
prescribed by the DoT and termed as ‗Service Testing‘ . Apart from this , the 
committee note that Te lecom Enforcement Resource and Monitoring  (TERM) Cells 
also compile data pertaining to roll out obligation  for imposing Liquidated damages 
(LD) Charges on such Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) who do not comply to roll 
out obligation conditions. Further, as per terms and conditions of License Agreement 
of 2G spectrum, the licensee has an obligation of rolling out the service of the 
spectrum acquired by them within 52 weeks i.e. one year after the signing of the 
agreement. However, the Committee are distur bed to note that many of the 
Licensees have failed to roll out their services even after obtaining spectrum from the 
Government which is a limited and precious non -renewable resource. When probed 
by the Committee, the Department had informed about issue of  Show cause notices 
for termination of licences to various companies who had failed on the roll out  
obligations of their services. In this regard, the Committee are of the opinion that 
Government should have suitable mechanism in place to ensure that the licensees 

 
 
42 
 
strictly follow the terms and conditions of the license agreements. The committee 
strongly feel that the defaulting licensees are adopting a delay tactics for roll -out of 
their services and thus are of the strong opinion that clear penalty provis ions need to 
be included in the agreement with licensees in case they fail to roll out their  services 
within stipulated time period of 52 weeks. The Department should take stringent 
action against the defaulter licensees by issuing show cause notice for c ancellation 
of their licences and also impose the financial penalty clause so that the spectrum 
given to them are effectively utilized and managed.               
  
Reply of the Government 
 
For ensuring the compliance of terms and condition of the license a greements, at 
present following mechanisms are in place: 
 (i) As per TRAI Act 1997 ( amended ), one of the function of Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI) is to ensure compliance of terms and conditions of license. 
(ii) Telecom Enforcement Resourc e and Monitoring (TERM) Cells have been 
established in all the Licensed service areas and one of the monitoring functions of 
TERM is checking of the compliance by the licensee in respect of the license 
conditions and any directions issued by the licensor in public interest. 
 
Accordingly, with the existing mechanisms in place by which status report have been 
obtained by Ministry to monitor, analyze and detect cases of violation of rollout 
obligations. By this adopted mechanism, Ministry have acted to find out cases of non-
achievement of rollout obligations and taken punitive action for imposition of 
Liquidated damages (LD) and issue of Show Cause Notices against those defaulters 
service providers (SPs) who had not fulfilled the roll out obligation within stip ulated 
time frame as prescribed in the licence agreement.  
 
Further,  a review of the manpower requirement is going on to further strengthen the 
monitoring  mechanism.    
 
As regard to inclusion of clear penalty provision in the license agreement, it is to  
mention that provision for imposition of LD amount up to rupees 7 .00 crores for delay 
up to 52 weeks in meeting the roll out obligations and for delay beyond 52 weeks in 
addition to LD of rupees 7.00 cores, provision of termination of License exists in t he 
license conditions. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.17) 
 
As regards the use of 3G spectrum block for provisioning of Telecom Access 
Services as defined in the „Scope of the License ‟  in the Schedule Condition 2 of the 
UAS License agreement, the Committee note that the licensee is authorized to use 
the same from the date of award of right to commercially use the 3G spectrum i.e. 01 
September, 2010, till the validity of the UAS license  agreement or for a period of 20 
years from 01 September, 2010, whichever is earlier, subject to compliance with 
terms and conditions of the license agreement. Further, regarding the time period for 

 
 
43 
 
the roll-out obligation of 3G Spectrum, the Committee note that the licensee, to whom 
the 3G spectrum is assigned, is expected to provide required street level coverage 
using the 3G Spectrum in at least 90 per cent of the service area within five years of 
the „Effective Date ‟ . The Committee also note that if the licensee does not achieve 
its roll -out obligations, it shall be allowed a further period of one year to do so by 
making a payment of 2.5 per cent of the Successful Bid Amount (i.e. spectrum 
acquisition price) per quar ter or part thereof as liquidated damages. Further, the 
Committee note that if the licensee does not complete its roll -out obligations even 
within the extended period of one year, the 3G spectrum assignment shall be 
withdrawn. From the foregoing, the Commi ttee infer that the total time period of five 
years given to the licensees for roll-out of services of 3G spectrum is simply too long. 
They feel that a licensee is prone to misuse such a long time period which results in 
the spectrum remaining idle with th e service providers. The observation of the 
Committee can be corroborated by the fact that certain telecom service providers 
who had received license in 2010, are yet to start Broadband Wireless Access 
business. This is paradoxical given the fact that cert ain 3G service providers are 
struggling to grab subscribers. The Committee desire that the stipulation which allows 
a further period of one year for roll-out obligation, by making the payment of only 2.50 
per cent of the successful bid amount per quarter o r part thereof as liquidated 
damages, should be revisited as the amount prescribed is quite less, and thus may 
not act as an effective deterrent to the defaulters. The Committee firmly believe that 
had the Government put stringent roll -out obligations, man y of the Telecom Service 
Providers would have by now launched their Broadband Wireless Access Services 
and enhanced their 3G reach. The Committee would like to point out that the 
Government policy on the roll -out obligation of 3G and BWA would have a major  
impact on the business and thus a weak policy would ultimately result in decrease in 
net profit of the Government. The Committee, therefore, would like the Department to 
look into the nitty gritty of the problems which may arise due to the provision of 
unnecessary long period for the roll -out obligation of 3G and BWA services. The 
Committee expect a precise and expeditious action by the Department in this regard, 
under intimation to them. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of the committee regarding period of Roll-out obligation have 
been noted for action for future auction of 3G spectrum. 
 
However, the Department has also taken necessary action and incorporated 
more stringent Roll out conditions in the NIA for the action in the 1800 MHz and 800 
MHz band. As per the new Roll out obligation in the new 1800 MHz/ 800 MHz 
Spectrum, the licensee is required to complete Rollout in at least 10 %, 20% and 30 
% of the Block Headquarters of the Licensed Service Area at the end of 3 rd, 4th and 
5th year respec tively. The Roll out obligation conditions in NIA for auction of 1800 
MHz/ 800 MHz spectrum is reproduced below. 

 
 
44 
 
―Roll Out Obligations for 1800 MHz/800 MHz bands:   
2.1 The roll out obligations for spectrum in 1800 MHz and 800 MHz band to be 
allotted throu gh auction, have been decided by the Government as per NIA dated 
28.09.2012 for auction of spectrum in 1800 MHz and 800 MHz bands. However, as 
per Para 3.6.1(v) of this NIA dated 28.09.2012 which reads as under:    
Para 3.6.1(v):  
a) At least 10% of the Bl ock Headquarters (BHQs) of the Licensed Service Area 
(LSA) shall be covered by the end of three years from the effective date of Licences 
or date of allotment of spectrum won in the auction process, whichever is later. 
Additional 10% of the Block Headquarters of the LSA shall be covered in each of two 
subsequent years i.e. at least 20% and 30% coverage of the block headquarters of 
the LSA has to be achieved at the end of 4th and 5th year respectively. The list of 
Block Headquarters (BHQs) and its ‗to the sc ale‘ Map(s) will have to be obtained by 
the successful bidder from the respective State Governments/ Administrations/ local 
bodies. The boundary of the Block Headquarters will be as per map/ definition given 
by the State Government/ Administration/ Local B ody concerned. In cases where 
District Headquarter/Town (DHQ/ town) happens to be BHQ also, that particular 
DHQ/ town or BHQ would be considered as part of compliance of any one phase of 
rollout obligation only, as per the choice of licensee. 
b) Each milestone of the rollout obligations as mentioned in the clause (iv) and clause 
(v) (a) above, would be considered as separate phase of rollout obligations. Thus for 
a ‗New Entrant‘, there will be five phases of rollout obligations and for the ‗Existing 
Licensee‘ acquiring spectrum in this auction process, there will be three additional 
phases of rollout obligations. 
c) Coverage of Block Headquarters would mean that at least 90% of the area 
bounded by the local body limits should get the required street level co verage by 
mandatory setting up of Base station(s) (for example a BTS / node B/ e -node B) in 
the Block Headquarters. 
d) ‗Existing Licensee‘ may offer coverage of Block Headquarters already achieved in 
accordance with stipulation in clause (v) (c) above as a  part of compliance towards 
roll out obligation. However, testing of the coverage already achieved will be carried 
out by DoT as per prescribed test schedule/ procedure. The coverage of the BHQs 
as per the above mentioned rollout obligations will be over a nd above the DHQs/ 
towns covered as part of the existing rollout obligations mentioned in the UASL. 
e) The choice of Block Headquarters to be covered and further expansion beyond 
30% Block Headquarters shall lie with the Licensee depending on their busines s 
decision. 
f) In case of existing licensees having spectrum in both the bands (i.e. 900/1800MHz 
Band and 800MHz Band), the roll out obligation shall be applicable in respect to the 
network deployed using the spectrum acquired through auction.  Accordingly , the roll 
out already achieved shall be counted in the same spectrum band. The roll out 
obligation relates to frequency band in which the spectrum is acquired through 

 
 
45 
 
auction. For this purpose, 900MHz band and 1800MHz band will be treated as the 
same band. 
g) While the obligations under clause (iv) above will have to be met by setting up 
owned infrastructure with sharing of passive infrastructure as presently permissible 
i.e. on the date of issue of this NIA, the ‗New Entrants‘ and the ‗Existing Licensee‘ will 
have the flexibility to meet the roll out obligation mentioned in clause (v) (a) & (c) 
through shared infrastructure to the extent permissible as per guidelines/ instructions 
applicable from time to time. However it may be noted that rollout obligatio ns cannot 
be complied with using the Intra Service Area roaming arrangements.  
h) In the case of Metro Service Area, there will be no obligation relating to Block 
Headquarters for the ‗New Entrant‘ as well as ‗Existing licensee‘. However, the rollout 
obligations mentioned in clause (iv) above, which includes the rollout of the network 
in the Metro LSA‘s, as provided in the existing UAS license, will have to be fulfilled.‖ 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.18) 
 
The Committee note that the Telecom Servi ce Providers are required to obtain 
necessary permission from Local Bodies before setting up of mobile towers.  
However, obtaining the Right of Way (RoW) from Government Agencies/ Local 
Bodies for installation of tower is the responsibility of operator/ In frastructure 
Provider-I providers.  This policy is followed by Private and Public Telecom Service 
Providers both.  However, the Committee have come across instances where 
permissions from Local Bodies were not taken for installation of telecom towers, 
leading to disconnection of service and resultant call drops. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the Department should ensure that all service providers follow the 
requisite specific regulations in letter and spirit. 
 
 The Committee further note that as per  the Guidelines for setting up of 
telecom towers, the Telecom Service Providers are asked to avoid installation of 
Base Station Antennas within the premises of schools, hospitals and narrow lanes to 
reduce the risk caused by any natural disaster like an ea rthquake or wind storm.  
Beside, Access to Base Station Antenna sites should be prohibited for general public 
through suitable means such as wire fencing, locking of the door to the roof etc.  
Further, the access to tower site, even for the maintenance per sonnel, should be for 
a minimum period.  Sign boards/ Warning Signs are to be erected at the entrance of 
Base Station Antenna sites too.  The Committee desire the Department to ensure 
that these guidelines are followed stringently to avoid any risk to the residents of the 
areas where BTS tower sites are located. 
 
 The Committee have been informed that the Department had launched a 
scheme under Universal Service Obligation Fund to provide subsidy support for 
setting up and managing 7353 infrastructure sites/ towers in 500 districts spread over 
27 States for provision of mobile services int he specified rural and remote areas, 
where there is no existing fixed wireless or mobile coverage.  Villages or cluster of 
villages having population of 200 or more and not  having mobile coverage are taken 
into consideration for installation or towers under this scheme.  As per the 

 
 
46 
 
Department, at the end of December, 2011, 7296 towers out of the fixed target of 
installing 7863 towers had been installed. The Committee feel th at installation of 
telecom towers, especially in rural and remote areas, is very important for the 
telecom network expansion in these areas.  Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that the remaining 567 telecom towers be set up expeditiously and the Committee  
informed accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
DoT has already issued instructions to the Telecom Service Providers, vide 
letter dated 8 th April 2010, for implementation of radiation norms and compliance of 
test procedures including proper sinages at BTS towers and restrictive entry in the 
occupational zone of BTS as per Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC) 
specifications (copy is enclosed as Annexure-III. TEC has issued the test procedure 
on the subject vide GR no. TEC/TP/EMF/001.01 SEP 2009 and sup plement 
procedure vide addendum TEC Doc no. TEC/TP/EMF/001/01. SEP -2009 Issue 2; 
AUG 2010. As per the test procedure, the telecom service providers have to ensure 
the provision of proper signage showing prescribed warning for information of general 
public of the exclusion zones at the BTS site. The sign boards shall have the 
information, size, colour code, background for visibility and their placement as 
prescribed in test procedure. A site may be declared non -compliant due to improper 
signage or if signage is absent. TERM Cells of DoT are monitoring for compliance of 
these instructions.   
 Regarding setting up of pending towers under Shared Mobile Infrastructure 
Scheme of USOF, it is mentioned that 7307 out of the targeted 7353 towers i.e. 
about 99.37% towers have been set up till 31st May, 2012 under this scheme. Most of 
the remaining 46 towers are to be located in North East [30 in Manipur, 3 in 
Arunachal Pradesh, 3 in Nagaland]. The concerned Infrastructure Provider i.e. BSNL 
has reported that these sites  are in geographically difficult area which are also 
insurgency prone (there had been total economic blockades in Manipur), there is 
poor transport infrastructure and natural hindrance like landslides and heavy rainfall 
etc. USOF is regularly pursuing with  BSNL and other Service Providers to take their 
best efforts to commission these pending tower sites at the earliest. 
 
       
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.20) 
 
The committee has been informed that on 24 August 2010, an Inter -Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) consisting of officers from DoT, Indian council of Medical Research 
(Ministry of Health & Family Welfare), Department of Biotechnology and Ministry of 
Environment & Forest was constituted to examine the effect of EMF Radiation from 
base station & mo bile phones. The committee notes that the IMC, in its report, 
indicated that most of the laboratory studies were unable to find a direct link between 
exposure to radio frequency radiation and health & observed that the scientific 
studies as yet have not been able to confirm a cause-and-effect relationship between 
radio frequency radiation from mobile towers and health. The effect of emission from 
mobile towers is not known yet with certainty. Further, the IMC suggested certain 

 
 
47 
 
measures such as adoption of S pecific absorption Rate (SAR) level for mobile 
handsets limited to 1.6Watt/Kg and lowering the BTS RF exposure limits to 1/10 th of 
the existing prescribed limit. As the Department has endorsed the view point that so 
far scientific studies are not conclusiv e, the committee recommend that further 
studies be carried out to arrive as more authentic conclusions about the impact of 
radiations from mobile phones and mobile towers in the country. The committee 
would await the specific response from the Department in this regard. 
 
Further the committee are dismayed to note that DoT has deferred the 1 April 
2012, deadline to 1 September, 2012 for the implementation of the recommendations 
given by Inter -Ministerial committee on electromagnetic radiation being emitted f rom 
mobile towers. The committee would like to know the reasons from the Department 
for the postponement of the same. Besides, the committee is of the opinion that since 
ICNIRP guidelines adopted by India is intended to protect the public against short 
term gross heating effects and not pathological effects such as cancer, genetic 
damage and on birds and insects, the Department needs to have a thorough relook 
on the radiation norms as prescribed by ICNIRP. The Committee also recommends 
that the Department s hould provide incentive to Telecom Service Providers by 
allowing them access to carbon credit as in the proposed New Telecom Policy. At the 
same time the Government should look into the details on ‗Green Telecom‘ by 
adopting the use of solar panels across the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
o An Inter-ministerial Committee was constituted to examine the issues of EMF 
radiation from mobile towers and mobile phones including effects of EMF 
radiation on human health and committee has submitted its report. Th e 
recommendations of the committee have been accepted by the Government. 
 
o As regard to further studies to be carried out to arrive at more authentic 
conclusions about the impact of radiations from mobile phones and mobile 
towers in the country, the Departm ent has requested the Ministry of Health & 
welfare for conducting long term research related to health aspect of Electro -
magnetic field radiation exposure from multiple antennas and associated 
technologies.  
o To look into the concern of the stakeholders and  have a detailed examination 
and its implication on the increase in the exclusion zone due to lowering of 
RF exposure limit to 1/10 th of the existing limit and the impact on the area 
coverage of BTS towers of the existing networks, the Department has 
deferred the 1 April 2012, deadline to 1 September, 2012 for the 
implementation of the recommendations given by Inter -Ministerial committee 
on electromagnetic radiation being emitted from mobile towers.   
 
o The TRAI recommendations on Green Energy applications h ave been 
approved by government and Department has issued following directives to 

 
 
48 
 
the licensees/ all ILD service providers to adopt measures to green the 
Telecom sector setting broad directions & goals: 
 
(i) At least 50% of all rural towers and 20% of the urba n towers are 
to be powered by hybrid power (Renewable Energy Technologies 
(RET) + Grid power) by 2015, while 75% of rural towers and 33% 
of urban towers are to be powered by hybrid power by 2020. 
 
(ii) The Service providers to ensure that the total power consum ption 
of each BTS will not exceed 500W by the year 2020. 
 
o All service providers to evolve a carbon credit policy in line with carbon credit 
norms with an ultimate objective of achieving a maximum of 50% over the 
carbon footprint levels of the base year in rural areas and achieving a 66% 
over the carbon foot print levels of the base year in urban areas by the year 
2020.  The base year for calculating all existing carbon foot prints would be 
2011, with an implementation period of one year and the first year o f carbon 
reduction would be the year 2012. 
 
o All service providers to declare the carbon foot prints of their network twice in 
a year. Further based on the details of footprints declared by all service 
providers, service providers should aim at carbon emiss ion reduction targets 
for the mobile network at 5% by the year 2012 -2013, 8% by the year 2014 -
2015, 12% by the year 2016-2017 and 17% by the year 2018-2019. 
 
o DOT undertook 20 pilot projects using Green Energy (SPV & SPV -wind 
hybrid) in USOF phase – I sites in order to examine the  feasibility & financial 
viability and also to take care o f Environmental issues and arrive at green 
solutions for Indian Telecom sector with a focus of utilizing renewable power 
sources such as solar energy and wind energy, associa ted carbon emissions 
reduction, power saving, Energy efficiency and lowering the CAPEX & OPEX 
of mobile telecom networks. The renewable energy solar/solar -hybrid 
systems are found to be technically feasible and financially viable for mobile 
BTS towers. A c onsiderable carbon reduction has been noticed by way of 
reduction in DG operating hours. Since the capital expenditure (CAPEX) is 
high the operators look at subsidies from the govt. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.21) 
 
The Committee note that one of the major purpose of creation of TERM Cells is to 
curb the illegal telecom operation (not permitted under Indian Telegraph Act).  The 
Committee have been informed about the existence of as many as 700 illegal 
operators since 2004.   As per the DoT, the to tal notional loss to the country due to 
such illegal practice is approximately Rs. 770 Crores.   According to DoT, more than 

 
 
49 
 
540 such illegal setups have been unearthed and raided till now with the help of Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) i.e. local police, CBI, DRI.  These cases were stated to 
be handed over to the Law Enforcement Agencies for further action against the 
culprits.  However, the Committee are surprised to note the fact cited by DoT that 
there is no set technical method/procedure to block/jam i llegal messages/calls, as 
these setups use the network resources like a normal service provider.   The 
Committee were informed that these setups can only be caught through continuous 
monitoring and the same is being done through TERM Cells.  
      The Committee are not convinced by the stand taken by the Department and 
would like them to explore use of technologies to intercept illegal calls/messages, 
including the one available with defence authorities.   The situation warrants urgent 
attention taking into a ccount the huge total notional loss of approximately Rs. 770 
Crore, which otherwise could have been earned if the said calls were routed through 
the legal routs.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department 
needs to be proactive to dea l with the situation instead of showing laxity in the 
matter.  They would like to be apprised of the measures taken to identify and punish 
such illegal operators. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In case of grey market setups the resources are taken by the culpri ts as a genuine 
subscriber, however mixing of international traffic (entered in India through internet) 
with mobile/ basic traffic (which is not permitted in India) is carried by the 
mischievous persons using these resources. Such restrictions are not ther e in many 
of the countries. Since the resources are being taken as a genuine subscriber and 
the traffic is also passing through the same network as used by a normal subscriber, 
blocking/ interception of such traffic is not feasible. However, it is noticed that in such 
type of cases the CLI (Caller Line Identification) displayed on the handset of the 
called number is different from the CLI which could have been displayed if the call 
would have come from legal route. In order to proactively identify any such illegal 
network and their locations regular analysis of data/ CDRs is being carried out by 
TERM Cells. Besides this f ollowing sources are also being relied upon for detecting 
and curbing the grey market activities. 
 Public telephone no. 1800-110-420 of DOT. 
 Complaint by any other means. 
 Analyses of unusual traffic 
 Social contacts. 
 Already investigated/ under investigation cases. 
 Security/Law enforcement Agencies. 
When presence of any illegal network is suspected, a team of field officers rackies 
the area and  once its presence is confirmed, raid is conducted with the help of 
concerned Law Enforcement Agency (LEA) on location of the network. While 
conducting raid the equipments being used in the setup are seized by the LEA. The 
culprits identified during raids are also taken into custody by LEA along with all the 

 
 
50 
 
evidences for further actions by them. The illegal setups caught so far stand closed 
and no setup out of these is working at present. Regarding present status of the 
cases TERM Cells are pursuing with the concerned Law Enforcement Agencies.  
It has been observed that cases of illegal routing of international calls are on the 
decrease, since 2005 -06. Some of the main reasons are strict monitoring by TERM 
Cells, increased public awareness and dropping of ISD call rates and ISD termination 
charges. 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.22) 
 
The Committee note that in order to increase the share of domestically 
manufactured electronic products which includes telecom equipment, the 
Government, by its notif ication dated 10  February, 2010, has laid down policy for 
providing preference to domestically manufactured electronic products, instead of 
those electronic products which have security implications for the country.  They 
have also been informed that in or der to address the security concerns related to 
telecom and telecom network, suitable Amendments have been issued on 31 May, 
2011, for Access Service licenses and on 3 June, 2011, for other licenses, in 
consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs and af ter due deliberations with the 
industry.  The licensee shall induct only those network elements into his telecom 
network, which have been got tested as per relevant contemporary Indian or 
International Security Standards.  While the Committee appreciate th e steps taken 
by the Department to address the issue related to national security risk and import 
of telecom equipment, they recommend that the Department should take a cue from 
the recent investigation carried out by the United States House of Representat ives‘ 
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence which has gauged the level of threat to 
the United States and asked a detailed accounting of foreign made hardware / 
software on the service provider‘s network along with the information related to 
security incidence such as discovery of unauthorized electronic hardware of 
suspicious equipment capable of duplicating for redirecting data.  The Committee 
further recommend that the Department must take cognizance of the situation 
before it reaches an alarming pr oportion through continuous use of imported 
equipment and should take initiative to have a proper mechanism to test the telecom 
equipment in the country taking into account that Chinese companies are India‘s 
biggest supplier of hardware and software which include the import of SIM card.  
The Committee also recommend that the Government should assess the 
vulnerability risk of national security due to the import of telecom equipment from 
U.S, Europe and Japan too.  Further, the Committee recommend that the 
manufacturers / Importers should ensure that the indigenous / imported mobile 
equipment strictly conform to the Good Manufacturing Practices (GMPs) before 
entering the market so that safety measures are ensured to avoid any hazardous 
incidents such as bursting of mobile batteries or short circuits in mobile handsets. 
 
The risk to national security emerging out of import of SIM cards carrying embedded 
software for mobile phone cannot also be ignored. The Committee recommend that 

 
 
51 
 
the Department should address a ll the issues relating to security risk due to the use 
of imported SIM cards taking into account the fact that security threat gets 
aggravated as a telecom company provides the encryption key to the manufacturing 
facilities outside India as a part of stand ard trade practice. Besides, the Committee 
would also like to look into the issue of fake and duplicate IMEI numbers so that the 
national security is not at stake. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
measures taken to address various issues raised by them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The security guidelines issued in the form of license agreement on 31 st May, 2011, 
for Access Service Licenses and on 3 rd June, 2011 for other licenses, are very 
comprehensive. These security guidelines encompass the vario us issues like 
responsibility for security of telecom network owned by operators,  requirement of 
Network forensics, Network Hardening, Network penetration test, Risk assessment, 
compulsory testing of network elements before inducting into network, securit y audit 
of existing network, keeping record of supply chain, test results, audit trail of logs etc.  
 
Supply chain arrangement: Similar to investigation report of United States House of 
Representatives‘ Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, gauging t he potential 
threats from malware/spyware residing inside the equipment supplied, licensees 
have been mandated to keep a record of supply chain of the products vide license 
amendment May/June 2011, as follows: 
 “Licensee cell keep a record of supply chain of the products 
(hardware/software). This should be taken from the manufacturer/vendor/supplier at 
the time of procurement of the products. 
The licensee through suitable agreement clauses with vendor shall ensure that the 
Vendor/Supplier allow the Telecom Service Provider, Licensor/DoT and/or its 
designated agencies to inspect the hardware, software, design, development, 
manufacturing facility and supply chain and subject all software to a security/threat 
check any time during the supplies of equipment. The  number of such visits will be 
limited to two in a Purchase Order. The expenditure for such visits for order valuing 
more than Rs 50 crore upto 40 man -days per visit shall be borne by the licensee 
directly or through vendor”.   
 
Telecom testing and Securit y certification:  Vide license amendments May/June 
2011, government has already mandated that the “licensee shall induct only those 
network elements into his telecom network, which have been got tested as per 
relevant contemporary Indian or International Se curity Standards from any national 
/international recognized lab for the relevant standards until 31 st March 2013. From 
1st April 2013 the testing and security certification shall be got done only from 
authorized and certified agencies/labs in India”.   
 
Further, a pilot lab has already been set up at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 
to develop the security standards, test procedures and test tools. The pilot lab will be 
scaled up to full fledged  National lab for telecom testing & security certificat ion which 
will accredit the labs for telecom testing and security certification based on the 
security standards, test procedures and test tools developed by it. 

 
 
52 
 
Non-genuine and Fake IMEI : With regard to this issue, instructions have been 
issued vide letter  dated 27.11.2009 directing all the telecom service providers that 
calls from mobile handsets with any IMEI number which is not available in the latest 
updated IMEI database of GSMA or without IMEI or all ‗Zero‘ as IMEI should not be 
processed and must be rejected with effect from 30.11.2009.  
 
 The Ministry of Commerce and Industry has issued a notification No14/2009 -
2014 dated 14th Oct‘ 2009 that import of ‗Mobile Handsets‘ classified under ITC (HS) 
code ‗8517‘ without International Mobile Equipment Ident ity (IMEI) Number or with all 
zeroes IMEI is prohibited with immediate effect.  In the same notification, import of 
CDMA mobile phones (classified under ITC(HS) ‗8517‘ without Electronic Eerial 
Number (ESN) / Mobile Equipment Identifier (MEID) or with all zeroes as ESN /MEID 
is prohibited with immediate effect. 
 
Further, the issue of use of Non -genuine and duplicate IMEI in our mobile network 
has been acknowledged and a technical committee has been constituted to study 
and suggest the possible solutions to eliminate the use of Non-genuine and duplicate 
IMEI. 
 
(i)  Action Taken: 
 
SIM Cards: 
  
With a view to attain self sufficiency with regard to telecom equipment including SIM 
cards, following steps have been taken: 
Department of Information Technology (DIT), vid e Notification No.  8(78)/2010 -IPHW 
dated 10 th February 2012, has laid down the policy for providing preference to 
domestically manufactured electronic products, in procurement of those electronic 
products which have security implications for the country a nd in Government 
procurement for its own use and not with a view to commercial resale or with a view 
to use in the production of goods for commercial sale. The notification covers 
electronic as well s telecom products. For the implementation of above notif ication, 
this department has  constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Advisor (T) 
to recommend telecom product or products having security implications for the 
country and other actions to be taken by this department for the implementation of 
various provisions mentioned in the notification. T he Committee has given its 
recommendation on Government procurement and the same has been notified on 5 th 
October 2012 (Annexure-IV).  SIM cards being one of the telecom products having 
security implications w ill be covered under notification for security sensitive telecom 
products which is being worked out bt the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
53 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATION/ OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.15) 
 
The Committee note that with regard to formulation of a new comprehensive 
and integrated 'Spectrum Act‘, the Government had constituted a Committee on  6 
May, 2011. The said Committee was expected to submit its report on   30 September, 
2011, after convening 3 meetings. However, during the deliberations with the DoT, it 
emerged that even after a lapse of six months from the date of submission of the 
report, the issue remains inconclusive. The Committee fail to understand rea sons for 
the delay. They are of the opinion that the Department should take adequate steps to 
complete the formulation of a comprehensive and integrated Spectrum Act which 
would put in place a much  required statutory mechanism for spectrum management 
and licensing in the country. With technological advancement in the field of 
telephony, the matter needs urgent attention to avoid ambiguity, confusion and poor 
management of an important national asset. 
                             
Reply of the Government 
       i)   It may be mentioned that Vide OM No.30 -32/2011-Admn-I dated  6 th May, 2011, 
the Government constituted a committee for formulation of ―Spectrum Act‖, under the 
Chairmanship of Hon‘ble Justice Shivraj V. Patil (Former Judge of Supreme Court of 
India) consisting of four members and a Member Secretary. The committee was to 
submit its report by 30th September, 2011.  
   ii)   Subsequently,  the Chairman of the committee,  Hon‘ble Justice Shivraj V. Patil 
had informed that he will not be in a position t o continue as Chairman of the 
Committee in the above said Committee for personal reasons.  
iii)      It is mentioned in this context that the draft National Telecom Policy (NTP) 
2011 included ―To enact a separate Spectrum Act which inter -alia deals with al l 
issues connected with wireless (spectrum) licences and their terms and conditions 
including re-farming / withdrawal of allotted spectrum, spectrum pricing, cancellation 
or revocation of spectrum licence, exemptions on use of spectrum, spectrum sharing, 
spectrum trading etc.‖, which has not been approved by the Government in the final 
NTP 2012. 
iv)     It has been further decided that perhaps the matter need not be pursued further 
at this stage. The issue could be reviewed at an appropriate time later as a nd when 
considered necessary 
 
 
 

 
 
54 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.5) 
 
The C ommittee have learnt that presently there are 37,184 villages which aren‘t 
covered by any fixed, wireless or mobile telephone. To address the situation, as far 
as provision of fixed wireless or mobile coverage is concerned, the committee have 
been apprised about a proposal to launch a new scheme to facilitat e creating 
infrastructure & provision of mobile communication services (including access & 
backhaul) in those villages which have hitherto not been covered by any service 
provider. In addition, there is another plan to cover the Left Wing Extremism (LWE) 
affected locations through a scheme under Universal Service Obligation Fund 
(USOF). In this regard, the committees note that the tender for this scheme was to be 
floated by 20 February, 2012 & the process of evaluation & signing of agreements 
with the succe ssful bidders for provision of services was likely to be finalized by 31 
May, 2012. The committee would like to be apprised of the status of the scheme at 
the action taken stage. In this context, the committee, however observed that in view 
of the declining percentage share of sole public telecom service provider, i.e. BSNL, 
in wireless connections in the last five years i.e. from 29.26 per cent at the end of 
March 2007 to 11.02 per cent at the end of December, 2011, all expectations now 
rest with the priva te service providers, who have made significant contribution in the 
expansion of rural wireless service  from  a percentage share of 70.74 at the end of 
March, 2007 to 88.98 per cent as on December, 2011. Nevertheless, the committee 
felt that the penetrati on of BSNL in remote & rural areas is still substantial & thus 
desires that BSNL should be made the principal service provider in the newly 
launched schemes for rural areas. They expect BSNL to live upto the expectations of 
the people & increase the moment um of their efforts to provide connectivity in these 
areas at all costs. Further, the committee are  also of the opinion that since BSNL got 
the 3G spectrum & Broadband Wireless Access (BWA) in October 2009, which was 
one year ahead of the other service pr oviders, they should have capitalized on the 
facility provided by the Government and should have by now made a better break -
through in increasing the wireless connectivity in these 37,184 uncovered villages. 
The fact that this was not done is either compla cency or callousness on the part of 
BSNL. The committee desire that the reasons for BSNL not making the desired 
progress in this these villages should be investigated & responsibility fixed in this 
regard. The committee, also recommends that the schemes to have mobile telephony 
in the uncovered villages & Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas must be 
launched expeditiously without further delay & the committee apprised of the same. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The comments of BSNL on the various observatio ns/comments made by the 
Committee are given below 

 
 
55 
 
 
(a) Observation of the Committee: ―…another plan to cover the LWE affected 
locations through a scheme under USOF. ….tender for this scheme was to be floated 
by 20 February 2012 & the process of evaluation & si gning of agreements with 
successful bidders for provision of agreements with the successful bidders for 
provision of services was likely to be finalized by 31 May 2012. The committee would 
like to be apprised of the status of the scheme at the action taken stage.‖   
 
ATN:  
 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has identified and conveyed to Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT) 2199 locations in 9 states which are affected by Left Wing 
Extremism (LWE) and do not currently have any coverage by any service provider.  
These locations have been identified for installing towers and mobile equipment 
keeping in view the security and maintenance considerations. Mobile services shall be 
available for general public as well as security personnel around these locations. Out  
of these 2199 sites, BSNL has already installed Towers at 363 locations (3 in Andhra 
Pradesh, 351 in Chhattisgarh, 3 in Maharashtra and 6 in Madhya Pradesh).  
It has been proposed to seek approval of the Cabinet to extend USOF Subsidy 
Support to Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) on nomination basis, for providing & 
managing Mobile Services in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas. Draft Cabinet 
Note has been circulated to concerned Ministries. Department of Expenditure has 
recommended that the proposa l be formulated for appraisal of the EFC (Expenditure 
Finance Committee). Planning Commission has suggested that ―before giving the work 
to BSNL on nomination basis, it may be prudent to float a tender quickly and if no 
response is received then take up th is work on nomination basis through BSNL‖. 
Meanwhile, Telecom Commission has desired detailed feasibility report (DFR) of the 
project. Ministry of Home Affairs has reiterated their concurrence to nominate BSNL for 
implementation of this project. The  DFR has been submitted by BSNL. 
(b) Observation of the Committee : ―the committee, however observed that in view 
of the declining percentage share of sole public telecom service provider, i.e. BSNL, in 
wireless connections in the last five years i.e. from 29.26  per cent at the end of March 
2007 to 11.02 per cent at the end of December, 2011, all expectations now rest with 
the private service providers, who have made significant contribution in the expansion 
of rural wireless service  from  a percentage share of 70.74  at the end of March, 2007 
to 88.98 per cent as on December, 2011‖ 
 
ATN: 
 
The reasons for decline in market share is not attributed due to BSNL‘s less 
aggressive role in rural areas. It is predominantly because of: 
(i) Stiff Competition in the Mobile Secto r: The Mobile telephone market has become 
very competitive with an average 8 -10 operators per Circle introducing very 
aggressive tariff plans and bringing innovative packages. With reduced ARPU, the 
margins of the operators have been severely impacted. 

 
 
56 
 
 (ii) Fixed to Mobile substitution: The widespread availability of mobile services 
coupled with convenience of operation and affordable tariff has led to proliferation 
of mobile services.  Fixed line subscribers are churning to avail wireless services 
either from BSNL or other private operators. 
(iii) Delay in Capacity Augmentation: Private players reorient themselves to 
changing concision and procure equipment for providing services rapidly; that is 
often not possible for BSNL, which has to follow prescribed procedures. As a result 
BSNL faced major problem in its augmentation of GSM capacity 
 
 
(c) Observation of the Committee: ‖Nevertheless, the committee felt that the 
penetration of BSNL in remote & rural areas is still substantial & thus desires that it 
should be made the principal service provider in the newly launched schemes for rural 
areas.‖     
 
ATN: 
 
BSNL is committed to fulfill  social commitments of the country provided adequate 
compensation for its economic viability is made through USOF. 
 
(d) Observation of t he Committee: ‖….BSNL got the 3G spectrum & BWA in 
October 2009, …..capitalized on the facility provided by the govt. & should have by 
now made a better break -through in increasing the wireless connectivity in these 
37,184 uncovered villages…..reasons for..  not making the desired progress in these 
villages…..‖  
 
ATN: 
 
 The status of deployment of 3G & BWA Network of BSNL is indicated below: 
 
a) Status of 3G Network:  
BSNL was allotted the 3G spectrum on 11th August ‘08 & the service was launched 
on 27 th February ‘09. In the first phase 760 cities/towns were planned to be 
covered & as on 31.03.2012, 963 cities have been covered with 3G network, 
covering all DHQs, commercially important towns & tourist places with the 3G 
network having 19298 Node ‗B‘ presently. 3G  services are presently not being 
planned in villages. 
b) Status of BWA Network: 
The BWA network was planned to provide broadband connectivity to one lakh 
Community Service Centres, a initiative by Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology. There is no such plans to provide wireless connectivity to 
all remaining uncovered villages through the aforesaid BWA deployment.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
57 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.6) 
 
From the Telecom Service Provider -wise analysis of the mobile outreach in rural 
areas, the Committee note that Bharti Airtel has played a significant role in these 
areas.  Out of the total wireless connections provided in the country, its percentage 
share is 23.62 per cent followed by BSNL (11.02 per cent), Vodafone Essar (18.71 
per cent) , Idea Mobile Communications (18.92 per cent), Reliance Telecom Ltd. 
(10.85 per cent) and Aircel (7.06 per cent) as on 31 st December 2011.  The Private 
Telecom Service Providers which are not operating in rural areas so far include Loop 
Mobile, Etisalat DB Telecom  and Videocon.  The Private Telecom Service Providers 
which are making a break through in the rural areas include Sistema Shyam 
Teleservices Ltd., HFCL Infotel Ltd., S.Tel, Uninor etc.   In this  regard the Committee 
desire the Department to speci fically ensure that all the Telecom service Providers 
should ensure the conformity of the terms and conditions given in the license 
agreements for rollout obligations of 2G and 3G Spectrum so that the spectrum 
provided are effectively utilized for expansio n of telecom services in rural and remote 
areas too.  At the same time the quality of service provided by the various service 
providers should be satisfactory.  Although a number of measures are reportedly 
being taken by them, the Committee desire that the y should continuously strive to 
leverage their quality of service to costumers including those in rural and remote 
areas so that their is sustained and healthy competition amongst the various Telecom 
Service Providers in the country which will ultimately b enefit the rural customers. The 
Committee would like to be furnished with a status report on the quality of service 
provided by various service providers in the rural areas in the last three years.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Telecom Regulatory Authority o f India (TRAI)  in accordance with the provisions 
under Section 11(i) (b) (v) of TRAI Act, 1997 ( amended) , which mandate the TRAI  
to ― lay down the standards of quality of service to be provided by the service 
providers and ensure the quality of service  and conduct the periodical survey of such 
service provided by the service providers so as to protect interest of the consumers 
of telecommunication service‖, has laid down the quality of service standards for 
Basic Telephone Service (Wireline) and Cellula r Mobile Telephone Service ( CMTS) 
through Regulations issued from time to time. These regulations provide for network 
centric and customer centric parameters as well as parameters for assessing 
customer perception of service through survey. These paramete rs are for assessing 
the performance of service providers for service area as a whole. However, in the 
case of Basic Telephone Service (Wireline)  there is a parameter ‗% Fault repaired 
within 5 days ( For rural and hilly areas)‘ to assess the performance of operators in 
the repair of faults in rural and hilly areas.  
TRAI monitors the performance of service providers against the laid down 
benchmarks through quarterly Performance Monitoring Reports (PMRs) and monthly 
congestion reports submitted by the serv ice providers. TRAI also undertakes audit 
and assessment of quality of service through independent agencies. The customer 
perception of service is also assessed through periodic survey conducted by 
independent agencies. The quarterly PMRs, monthly congesti on reports and the 
report of the audit survey agencies are published through press releases and though 

 
 
58 
 
TRAI website for information of stakeholders. Since the performance of service 
providers are assessed for service area as a whole, no separate informatio n for rural 
areas is available in these reports, except those relating to fault repair in rural and 
hilly areas for Basic Telephone Service (Wireline). However, it may be mentioned 
that during audit and assessment of quality of service and assessment of cu stomer 
perception of service through survey by Independent Agencies the exchanges 
covered in the audit include rural exchanges and also the customers from the rural 
areas are surveyed to assess their perception of service. TRAI is in the process of 
implementing random real time monitoring of quality of service of cellular mobile 
service and this could provide separate information for rural and hilly areas. 
From these reports, it is seen though there are cases of non –compliance with the 
benchmarks, the service providers are generally meeting the benchmarks for various 
quality of service parameters in different service areas. In the case of CMTS,  the 
non-compliance with benchmark is observed mostly in respect of the parameters (i) 
Worst affected cells having  more than 3% TCH( call drop) rate, (ii) point of 
Interconnection Congestion, (iii) Percentage of calls answered by the operators and 
(iv) Termination/ Closure of service. In the case of Basic Telephone Service, the non -
compliance with the benchmark is obs erved mostly in respect of the parameters (i) 
Fault Incidences and Repair, (ii) Response time to the customer for assistance and 
(iii) Termination and closure of service. 
In the case of performance against the parameter ‗% Fault repaired within 5days ( 
For rural and hilly areas)‘, it is seen that 21 licensees out of 88 licensees ( service 
area –wise) for year 2010, 18 licensees out of 88 licensee ( service area-wise) for the 
year 2011 and 17 licensee out of 88 licensees ( service area -wise) for the year 201 2 
are not meeting the bench marks. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.11) 
 
The Committee, while analyzing the performance of various Telecom Service 
providers in the network expansion, observe that as on December,2011, PSU`s i.e. 
BSNL and MTNL still h ave  a large share of nearly 80.95 percent in the wire line 
segment. The Private Telecom Service Providers, on the other hand, have a share of 
88.54 per cent  in the wireless segment. As on December 2011, Bharati Group has 
the highest  share of 19.65 per c ent in the wire less segment followed by reliance 
group (16.79 per cent) and Vodafone Essar (16.53 per cent). In this segment the 
contribution of PSUs is to the tune of 11.46 per cent. Over all, Bharati Group with 
19.32 per cent of the total telephones in the country has the largest share followed by 
reliance Group(16.33 per cent), Vodafone Group (15.95 percent) BSNL (12.93 per 
cent) and Idea group (11.48 per cent). As on December,2011, the Public telecom 
Service Providers witnessed an increase of 0.51 lakh  phones whereas the Private 
telecom Service providers added 87.12 lakh phones in their kitty. During the period 
from April to December,2011, addition in the number of phone serviced by the Public 
Telecom Service Providers was 29.15 lakh as against 773.05 l akh by the Private   
Telecom Service  Providers. Consequently, the share of Private telecom Service 
Providers in the number of telephones have gone up to 86.09 per cent (7976.31 lakh) 
in December,2011 while the share  of Public Telecom Service Providers  is pegged at 

 
 
59 
 
13.91 per cent (1289.17 lakh only) The committee are concerned to note that 
although there has been a stupendous growth in the telecom sector in India in the 
last five years, the share of Public Telecom Service providers has declined from 
34.69 per cent at the end of 2007 to 14.42 per cent at the end of July,2011. The 
share of Private Telecom Service Providers on the other hand has phenomenally 
increased to 85.5.per cent. Such an increase on the part of the Private telecom 
Service providers has been mainly in the wireless segment, where MTNL and BSNL 
have lagged far behind. The Committee regret to note further that during the last five 
years; BSNL and MTNL had lost 16.64 per cent of their share in the telecom market. 
They feel that  such a loss i s a  matter of serious concern and needs to be pondered 
over. The Committee also like to highlight the fact that actual service provider to the 
subscriber by  both the PSUs particularly in semi -urban and rural areas, needs to be 
improved so that subscriber s refrain from porting out of their network or subscribing 
to another connection from a different Service Provider. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that BSNL and MTNL should focus on the technological up gradation 
and innovative marketing strategies to  appropriately cater to the customer 
requirements so that their strategies to improve network expansion catches up  to the 
Private Telecom Service  Providers especially in wireless segment in the coming 
years. Such efforts on the part of the Telecom PSUs p articularly BSNL should 
complement their social obligation of rural telephony. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the specific steps taken by BSNL and MTNL in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
BSNL 
The decline in the market share is not directl y attributed to BSNL‘s less aggressive 
role in Indian telecom market. It is predominantly because of: 
(i) Stiff Competition in the Mobile Sector:  The Mobile telephone market has 
become very competitive with 8 -10 operators per Circle, on an average, 
introducing very aggressive tariff plans and bringing innovative packages. With 
reduced ARPU, the margins of the operators have been severely impacted. 
(ii)  Fixed to Mobile substitution:  The widespread availability of mobile services 
coupled with convenience of operation  and affordable tariff has led to 
proliferation of mobile services. Fixed line subscribers are turning to 
wireless services either from BSNL or other private operators. 
(iii)  Delay in Capacity Augmentation:  Private players reorient themselves to 
changing situat ion and procure equipment for providing services rapidly; 
that is often not possible for BSNL, which has to follow prescribed 
procedures. As a result BSNL has faced major problem in its augmentation 
of GSM capacity. 
 
The steps initiated by BSNL to upgrade its telecom network are given below. 
(i) Upgradation of C -DOT wireline infrastructure:  In its drive to replace the 
entire circuit switched equipment/ digital telephone exchanges by IP enabled 
NGN equipments, BSNL is in process of replacing C -DOT exchanges with  

 
 
60 
 
NGN solution through its MAX -NG project. The migration shall result in 
reduction of operational cost, along with ease of induction of new VAS to the 
fixed line customers. Circles are also provided with UG PIJF cable & Caller 
Line Identification Phones (CL IP) to facilitate Enhanced Customer 
Satisfaction for our fixed line customers. 
(ii) Deployment of new technology state of art exchanges and Next 
Generation Networks (NGN)/ IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS):  To 
upgrade its new technology wireline infrastructure, BSN L has initiated 
process for upgrading the network to IP enabled NGN equipments controlled 
by IP Multimedia Sub -system which will enable seamless delivery of 
bandwidth intensive service in a converged manner across fixed and mobile 
network. 
(iii) Augmentation of GSM Network:  BSNL has initiated process for 
augmentation of GSM network capacity by additional 15 Mn lines on 
countrywide basis based on the latest specification of 3GPP (3 rd Generation 
Partnership Project). 
 
The marketing strategies initiated by BSNL to a ppropriately cater to the customer 
requirement especially in wireless segment are indicated below. 
(i) Aggressive Push on Data Usage and Value Added Services: 
a. Aggressively push smart devices bundled with 3G Data Plans as well as 
wireless broadband with 3G and EvDO data cards. 
b. Offering innovative new services in mobile such as m -financial services, 
m-health services and rural VAS etc 
(ii) Ensuring competitive products for all customer segments.  
(iii) Increasing number of Franchisees / Retailers and providing thrust on sale. 
a. Availability of products in organized retail stores, malls, neighborhood 
markets etc. 
b. Implementing agreement with Post department to increase rural reach 
(iv) Sustained operational focus on service delivery and customer care: 
a. Payment of bills, Top up, Recharging are available on-line. 
b. Set up of outsourced SLA based call centres 
c. Special camp to interact with customers willing to port out for their 
retention by sorting out their problems 
d. Drive test carried out periodically to optimize the network. 

 
 
61 
 
MTNL 
 
Delhi and Mumbai are the most competitive telecom licence service areas. In Delhi, 
there are 15 mobile operators (GSM+CDMA) and 4 basic operators whereas in 
Mumbai, there are 14 mobile operators (GSM+CDMA) and 4 basic operators. The 
subscriber base for the MTNL‘s various services for the past 5 years is as under:  
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Total Wire -line 
Connections                     
(including WLL 
fixed 
connections) 
38,07,081 36,94,970 36,23,110 35,81,148 35,65,896 
Total Wireless 
Connections 
including WLL 
mobile 
34,02,767 43,60,748 49,67,660 53,61,827 57,24,231 
Broadband 
Subscribers 
5,70,591 6,95,500 8,15,830 9,42,317 10,40,191 
Total  77,80,439 87,51,218 94,06,600 98,85,292 1,03,30,318 
 
It is submitted that despite facing fierce competition , a growth of over 5% has been 
maintained in the overall subscriber base.  
Some of the reasons for declining market share of MTNL vis -a-vis private players are 
as under: 
1. MTNL is operating telecom services only in two cities of Delhi and Mumbai 
and does not  have a PAN India presence therefore it becomes difficult for 
MTNL to match the various service / tariff  packages as can be done by a Pan 
India Operator. 
2. MTNL is confined to Delhi and Mumbai and is not able to operate in Tier-II and 
Tire-III cities where maximum growth is taking place.  This restriction on 
service area also impacts MTNL in another way.  While it‘s competitors having 
Pan India presence can offer discount on calls to their network elsewhere in 
the country, MTNL cannot offer similar discounts  being restricted to Delhi and 
Mumbai service areas.   
3. Being a Public Sector Company, MTNL has to follow the Govt. guidelines on 
the procurement for new equipment and expansion / up gradation of existing 
equipment. This results in multiplicity of vendor for the same kind of equipment 
leading to inter operability/integrations issues thus resulting in delay in 
commencing. Further, since technology is changing very fast in the telecom 
sector and new applications / services are being developed very frequently, it 

 
 
62 
 
is not possible for MTNL to induct the new developments due to absence of 
price reference in the tender.  
 
It is submitted that even though there is continuous growth in MTNL‘s wireless 
subscriber base in absolute terms, there is decline in market share  due to increase in 
competition & number of service provider in Delhi & Mumbai. With entry of new 
players, market share of existing operators get shared and market share of some of 
our competitors has also declined.  MTNL gained market share in mobile from  
incumbent operators when it entered market.  
Despite being a late entrant in the GSM segment, MTNL mobile subscriber base has 
grown to over 5.6 Million as on March 2012. It is further submitted that MTNL is 
making its best efforts to sustain the growth in  its GSM Services despite facing fierce 
competition in its service areas where the tele-density is already well over 150%. 
With regard to reduction in Wired line percentage share, it is submitted that there is a 
general decline in the demand for the fixed lines telephone as there is a tendency to 
shift to mobile services because of its sheer convenience with regards to affordability 
and availability. This is worldwide trend that when liberalization takes place and 
monopoly is removed in telecom sector there  is a churn in fixed line subscribers of 
incumbent operator.  
MTNL has been continuously making its best efforts to arrest the surrender of land 
line connections. Steps have been taken to arrest & reverse the negative Growth in 
Landline Telephone Services.  With the following concerted efforts, the negative 
growth has been brought under 0.5% and the positive growth is expected to be 
achieved in next 2 years:-    
 Rollout of FTTH (Fibre to the Home)  Services. 
 Migration of TDM switching network to NGN / IP net work progressively 
during 12th five year plan period. With the proposed migration, a host of 
value added services will be made available to landline subscriber also.    
MTNL is giving major thrust on the expansion of capacity for GSM and Broadband to 
cater the further demand. Following actions are being taken to generate fresh 
demands by providing quality services, customer care & satisfaction, introduction of 
new services / schemes and innovative marketing strategies.  
(i) Expansion / augmentation of exist ing 3G network to (High Speed Packet 
Access (HSPA+):  At present MTNL‘s 3G network is HSDPA (High Speed Data 
Packet Access) with download speeds up to 3.6 Mbps and uploads speed upto 384 
Kbps. After upgradation download speed upto 21.1 Mbps and upload speed  upto 
5.76 Mbps will be supported by the network.  
(ii) Deployment of new technology state of art exchanges and Next 
Generation Networks (NGN)/ IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) :  MTNL has 
planned to replace its TDM (Time Division Multiplexing) Fixed line switches with NGN 
/ IMS switch in phased manner during 12th Five year plan. Introduction of NGN / IMS 
based services will not only help MTNL in saving Opex, space but also enable MTNL 
to offer all data / video centric services which are currently enjoyed by Mo bile 

 
 
63 
 
subscribers to the fixed line subscribers also ultimately leading to convergence of 
fixed and mobile services. 
(iii) To bring optical fiber near / to subscriber’s premises by introducing 
FTTC (Fibre to the Curve) and reaching homes thereafter with FTT H (Fibre to 
the Home) on PON (Passive Optical Network) technology: MTNL is adding optical 
fibre in its access network and is deploying FTTH based on GPON (Gigabit Passive 
Optical Network). This will enable MTNL to provide access to this latest technology to 
its‘ esteemed customers with very high bandwidth. 
(iv) Expansion of broadband network to provide bandwidth on demand by 
deployment of ADSL (Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line) / VDSL (Very High Data 
Rate Digital Subscriber Line) , MLDN (Managed Leased Da ta Network) / PON etc. 
Introduction of more broadband services such as video on demand, video conference 
for public.   
(v) Expansion of high capacity IP -MPLS (IP Multiprotocol Label Switching) based 
backbone network to migrate to NGN (Next Generation Netwo rk) for establishing 
unified network for speech and data. Introduction of VOIP in the backbone and 
access network. 
As far as marketing strategies is concerned,  MTNL has always been a pioneer in 
bringing new technologies and provides a bouquet of telecom se rvices. To facilitate 
marketing of its services, MTNL has branded its services. MTNL has put into gear the 
network of marketing channels. Apart from its own Customer Service Centers, 
MTNL‘s Business Associates & Distributors for postpaid & pre -paid service s have 
been established. They are backed by 24 hrs customer care. All forms of media, 
print, electronic, outdoor, internet, Direct Mailing, exhibitions, events, public relations 
etc. are being explored to have an integrated communications setup to address 
different segments of customers. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.19) 
 
The Committee note that with the Increasing public concern against the harmful 
effects of Electromagnetic Force (EMF) radiation from mobile towers on human 
health, the Telecom En forcement Resource & Monitoring (TERM) cells were 
entrusted with the work of cross checking the  compliance of (EMF) radiation norms 
as prescribed by the Government   in the year 2010.   The Committee note that the 
specific procedures for the same along with testing fee have since been formulated 
by the Department.  The Department, while deposing before the Committee, informed 
that Guidelines are in place as per the norms prescribed by International Commission 
on Non -lonizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) and accordingly directions in this 
regard were issued to mobile operators by inserting a clause in the Access Service 
Licenses through an amendment dated 4 November, 2008.   According to the said 
clause, a licensee shall conduct audit and provide self certifica tes annually as per 
procedure prescribed by Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC) / or any other 
agency authorized by Licensor from time to time, for conforming to limits/levels for 
antennae (Base Station Emissions) for general public exposure as pres cribed by 
ICNIRP.  In this regard, DoT has directed all Cellular Mobile Telephone Service 

 
 
64 
 
(CMTS) Unified Service (UAS) licensees for compliance. Further, the Committee note 
that all new BTS sites should start radiating, only after the self certificate has been 
submitted to relevant TERM Cells. 
         The Committee have learnt that regarding the submission of self certificates by 
the Telecom Service Providers with regard to their BTS, operators were directed to 
submit self certificates against all BTSs by 31 March, 2011.   However, self 
certification for compliance of radiation norms regarding 18123 BTSs are yet to be 
submitted by the various Telecom Service Providers to their respective Cells.   The 
Committee would like that the Department should submit a li st of those service 
providers to them who are yet to submit the requisite self certificates.   They also 
recommend that all the Telecom Service Providers should be directed to 
expeditiously submit the self certification against all the remaining BTSs.   The 
Committee also note that while there is a provision in the license agreement stating 
that if the self certificates are not submitted by a Telecom Service Provider, it should 
be treated as non compliance and the penalty prescribed will be imposed.   However, 
the modalities of imposition of penalty for non submission of self certificates has not 
been finalized.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should take 
earnest steps to finalize the modalities for imposition of penalty at the earliest.  
       The Committee have further been informed that as on 30 September, 2011, 
TERM Cells had carried out the testing of radiation levels for 7120 BTSs out of the 
total of 6,63,000 BTSs for which the telecom service providers had submitted the 
self-certification to their respective TERM Cells.   Although it was found that the 
radiation levels of all the tested BTSs were in compliance with ICNIP prescribed 
levels, the Committee are disturbed to note that only 1.07 per cent out of the total self 
certified BTSs submitted by the various Telecom Servicer Providers were tested by 
the respective TERM Cells of DoT.  The Committee feel that such a minuscule 
percentage for checking compliance of radiation norms by TERM Cells, may 
perhaps, fail to give the real picture.  As the Department had also cited shortage of 
staff as one of the constraints faced by TERM Cells.   The Committee, therefore, infer 
that these cells may not be willing to take additional load of work due to non -
availability of adequate staff.   They strongly  recommend augmentation of staff in 
TERM Cells so as to take initiative to test more BTS by the TERM Cells.   Only then a 
stringent check can be made on the Telecom Service Providers for compliance of the 
norms, especially when several organisations, resear ch bodies, stakeholders and 
individuals all over the world have strong views on the harmful effects of 
Electromagnetic Force radiation emanating from mobile towers and other equipment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Self-certificates are to be submitted by the Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) once in 
two years for their BTSs (Base Transceiver Stations). The previous cycle has ended 
on 31.03.2011 and the current cycle will end on 31.03.2013. At the end of previous 
cycle self certificates were pending against 18123  BTSs. The TSP wise breakup of 
pendency as on 31.03.2011 is as below: 
 

 
 
65 
 
Sl. No. Name of TSP 
(Generalised) 
Number of self 
certificate pending as on 
31-03-2011 
1 AIRCEL/DISHNET 1052 
2 Airtel/BHL 1168 
3 BSNL 11745 
4 Etisalat/Allianz 0 
5 IDEA/ABTL 639 
6 Loop 5 
7 MTNL 0 
8 QTL/HFCL 0 
9 Reliance 162 
10 SPICE TELECOM 0 
11 SSTL (MTS) 551 
12 STEL 0 
13 TTSL/TTML 733 
14 Uninor 612 
15 Videocon 847 
16 Vodafone 609 
  Grand Total 18123 
 
As the current cycle will end on 31.03.2013 the TSPs have to submi t the self -
certificates against their BTSs by this date, thus the pendency will be finalized after 
31.03.13, however, monitoring of self-certificate submission is being done on monthly 
basis and as per the latest data, TSPs have submitted 722759 self -certificates 
against 732944 BTSs till 31.07.2012. Total 31033 BTSs have been tested so far and 
none of the BTS has been found exceeding the radiation limits so far.  
DoT is in the process of formulating detailed guidelines / instructions in case of EMR 
violations including the non -submission of self -certificates in time and also for non -
provision of signage by Telecom Service Providers.   
For strengthening of TERM Cells, a detailed analysis of works entrusted to TERM 
Cells including EMR testing and the staff req uired for each of the work has been 
carried out and the proposal is under consideration.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
66 
 
CHAPTER – V 
RECOMMENDATION/ OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7.3) 
 
The growth of teledensity indicates the level of telecom penetration in a country. The 
Committee observe that the teledensity in India which was 18.22 per cent at the end of 
March, 2007 has increased to 76.86 per cent as on December, 2011. The Committee are 
glad to note that States / Telecom Circles like Himachal Pradesh (118.64 per cent), Punjab 
(112.70 per cent), Kerala (107.24 per cent), Tamil Nadu (105.96 per cent), Karnataka (94.3 
per cent), Gujarat (87.67 per cent), Haryana (85.80 per cent) and Andhra Pradesh (79.65 per 
cent) have registered a higher teledensity than the National average of 76.86 per cent. 
However, States / Telecom Circles like Assam, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, 
North Eastern States, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal  have much lower 
teledensity when compared to the National average. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department should immediately assess the performance of both the Public and 
Private Sectors with a view to identify the bottlenecks in these ar eas and find out effective 
ways and means to incentivize Telecom Service Providers so as to give requisite impetus to 
improve the network expansion in these States / Telecom Circles. Only then, the targets 
spelt out in the thrust areas for the telecom grow th would be achieved and the benefits of 
various telecom reforms and measures would reach uniformly throughout the country. With 
the advent of Universal Access Service License (UASL) regime, the Committee hope that the 
Department should at least now take p rudent steps to mobilize Private Telecom Service 
Providers in these areas too, else the teledensity in the underperforming States / Telecom 
Circles will continue to remain dismal as ever. The Committee recommend that the 
Department should ensure inclusion of a provision in the license agreement with the 
Liscensees to have their offices in the areas they serve so as to receive the complaints of the 
public about any deficiency in service and see that any such complaints are redressed 
expeditiously, especially by the private service providers. The Committee also recommend 
that it should be mandatory for the private service providers to attend the Telecom Advisory 
Committee meetings to ensure better responsibility and accountability from them as their role 
is increasing day by day in the telecom sector.  
 
The Committee, while noting the drive for a special audit of certain private service 
providers which are alleged to have failed to disclose their actual earnings to the 
Department, recommend that such audit shou ld be carried out regularly to ascertain the 
exact income earned by the various service providers which would help the Government in 
fixing accountability for their wrong disclosure of income. Meanwhile, the Committee would 
like to be apprised of the outcome of the said special audit.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 The requisite ATNs will be forwarded in due course. 
 
 
New Delhi;  
22 April, 2013  
Vaisakha 2,1935 (Saka)  
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
Chairman,  
Committee on Estimates  

 
 
67 
 
Annexure-I 
COMPARATIVE GROWTH OF WI RELINE  VERSES WIRELESS 
CONNECTIVITY IN INDIA AND COUNTRIES LIKE  U.S.A., U.K., 
AUSTRALIA, CANADA AND CHINA* 
Prior to introduction of wireless telephone services in India in the year 1995, it 
was basic wireline (also called landline / fixed telephone) tele phone service 
which requires a pair of physical wire from telephone exchange upto the 
premises of the subscriber. Hence, it necessitates extensive laying of 
underground copper cable network which is time consuming and therefore 
expansion of wireline networ k also takes a lot of time. As a result, there was 
huge gap between demand and supply of the telephone connections. There 
was a time, when one had to wait for many years  to get a telephone 
connection. On the other hand, the roll -out of wireless network is  faster as it 
doesn‘t involve individual cable laying for each of the subscriber. With its 
portability, convenience and ‗ always connected ‘‘ features wireless telephone 
proved very useful and became very popular and preference of masses. With 
the introduction of wireless telephones in 1995, the growth of telephones was 
accelerated and was phenomenal. The growth has been driven by the rapid 
adoption of wireless services in the country, the competitive landscape that 
has been promoted in the sector and the var ious policy initiatives undertaken 
by the Government over the last few years. With this, India became one of the 
fastest growing network in the world and it‘s now second largest telephone 
network (also second largest wireless network) in the world only after China. 
In the following section, an attempt has been made to compare growth of 
wireline vs wireless telephones in India vis -a-vis some of the other countries 
during the period from year 2000 to 2010. All figures mentioned are at the end 
of December. 
INDIA 
Wireline- During the period 2000 to 2010, the  number of wireline subscribers 
continued to increase upto the end of 2005 and started declining thereafter.  
The wireline subscribers which were 32.44 million at the end of 2000, 
increased to 50.18 million b y the end of 2005. Thereafter, as a result of 
continuous decrease, the number declined to 35.09 million by the end of year 
2010. 
 
* Study undertaken by Economic Research Unit (ERU), Department of 
Telecommunication, Ministry of Communications & Information Technology. 

 
 
68 
 
 
Source: International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 
 
Wireless- The mobile telephone service was introduced in the country in mid -
nineties and it is continuously increasing since then. The increase was sharper 
after the year 2005. The number of wireless telephones which were 3.58 
million at the end of 2000, increased to 90.14 million by the end of 2005. A 
total of 662.05 milion wireless telephones were added during the period 2005 -
2010, compared to the net additions of 86.56 million during the  previous five 
years (i.e. 2000-2005), taking the total number of wireless telephones in India 
to 752.19 million by the end of 2010. By surpassing United States during the 
year 2008, India‘s wireless network became second largest in the world only 
after Ch ina. As is clearly visible from the following chart, it is growing at a 
faster pace and the gap between the size of the China and India‘s wireless 
network is reducing:  
Wireless subscribers in million 
 

 
 
69 
 
AUSTRALIA  
 
Wireline- In Australia, t he number of wi reline subscribers continued to 
increase upto the end of 2003 and started declining thereafter.  The wireline 
subscribers which were 10.46 million at the end of 2003, declined to 8.66 
million by the end of year 2010 (Annexure). 
 
Wireless- From the year 200 0, the number of wireless subscribers continued 
to increase year after year. They grew rapidly between the year 2003 and 
2007. Thereafter, the growth started slowing down. The number of wireless 
subscribers grew from 8.56 million at the end of 2000 to 14.35 million in 2003, 
21.26 million in 2007 and 22.50 million by the end of year 2010. 
 
The following chart shows the increase / decrease in the number of wireless 
and wireline telephones over the years in Australia: 
 
Subscribers in million (wireline vs wireless) 
 

 
 
70 
 
Source: ITU. 
CANADA 
Wireline- The number of wireline subscribers increased during the calender 
year 2001 and thereafter started declining. The decline was sharp during the 
calender year 2005 when the number of wireline subscribers decreased  from 
20.56 million to 18.15 million. The number of wireline subscribers further 
declined to 17.02 million by the end of 2010 (Annexure). 
 
Wireless- The number of wireless subscribers increased year after year. They 
grew rapidly till the year 2009. Next year, the g rowth slowed down. The 
number of wireless subscribers grew from 8.73 million at the end of 2000 to 
10.65 million in 2001, 23.81 million in 2009 and 24.04 million by the end of 
year 2010. 
The following chart shows the increase / decrease in the number of wi reless 
and wireline telephones over the years in Canada: 
Subscribers in million (wireline vs wireless) 
 
 
 

 
 
71 
 
Source: ITU. 
 CHINA 
 
Wireline- The number of wireline subscribers increased from 144.83 million at 
the end of year 2000 to 367.79 million by the end of year 2006 and thereafter 
started declining . The number of wireline subscribers which were 367.79 
million at the end of 2006 declined to 294.38 million by the end of 2010 
(Annexure). 
 
Wireless- The number of wireless subscribers have been continuously 
increasing year after year. It is the largest wireless network in the world . The 
number of wireless subscribers which were 85.26 million at the end of 2000 
increased to 859 million by the end of 2010. 
The following chart shows the increase / decrease in the number of wireless 
and wireline telephones over the years in China: 
Subscribers in million (wireline vs wireless) 
 
Source: ITU. 

 
 
72 
 
UNITED KINGDOM 
 
Wireline- The number of wireline subscribers are gradually decreasing in UK. 
The number of wireline subscribers  which were 35.23 million at the end of 
2000 decreased to 33.39 million by the end of 2010. 
 
Wireless- The number of wireless subscribers have been continuously 
increasing year after year.  The number of wireless subscribers which were 
43.45 million at the end of 2000 increased to 81.12 million by the end of 2010. 
 
The following chart shows the increase / decrease in the number of wireless 
and wireline telephones over the years in UK: 
 
Subscribers in million (wireline vs wireless) 
 
Source: ITU. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
Wireline- The number of wireline subscribers is continuously decreasing in 
USA except during the year 2008 when the number increased marginally. The 
number of wireline subscribers which were 192.51 million at the end of 2000 
decreased to 151.17 million by the end of 2010. 

 
 
73 
 
Wireless- The number of wireless subscribers has been continuously 
increasing year after year. The number of wireless subscribers which were 
109.48 million at the end of 2000 increased to 278.90 million by the end of 
2010. A study by the Government of United States of America (USA) finds that 
a significant slice of American households now only use mobile phones and 
have abandoned landlines completely. Preliminary results from the July –
December 2011 ‗National Health Interview Survey‘ in the USA indicate that the 
number of American homes with only wireless telephones continues to grow. 
More than 3 of every 10 American homes (34%) had only wireless telephones 
during the second half of 2011 —an increase of close to 2.4 percentage points 
since the first half of 2011. In addition, nearly one of every six American 
homes (16%) received all or almost all calls on wireless telephones despite 
also having a landline telephone. 
The following chart shows the increase / decrease in the number of wireless 
and wireline telephones over the years in USA: 
Subscribers in million (wireline vs wireless) 
 
Source: ITU. 
 

 
 
74 
 
BANGLADESH 
Wireline- The number of wireline  subscribers in Bangladesh continued to 
increase till the end of year 2009 and next year, it declined.  The number of 
wireline subscribers increased from 0.49 million at the end of 2000 to 1.52 
million by the end of 2009 and declined to 0.90 million by the  end of the year 
2010.    
Wireless- The number of wireless subscribers has been continuously 
increasing since 2000.  The number of wireless subscribers which were 0.28 
million at the end of 2000 increased to 68.65 million by the end of 2010.  
The following chart shows the increase / decrease in the number of wireless 
and wireline telephones over the years in Bangladesh: 
Subscribers in million (wireline vs wireless) 
 
Source: ITU. 

 
 
75 
 
 
NEPAL 
Wireline- The number of wireline subscribers in Nepal are continuously  
increasing. The number of wireline subscribers increased from 0.27 million at 
the end of 2000 to 0.84 million by the end of the year 2010.    
Wireless- The number of wireless subscribers has also been continuously 
increasing since 2000.  The number of wir eless subscribers which were 0.01 
million at the end of 2000 increased to 9.20 million by the end of 2010.  
The following chart shows the increase / decrease in the number of wireless 
and wireline telephones over the years in Nepal: 
Subscribers in million (wireline vs wireless) 
 Source: ITU.

 
 
76 
 
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 
Wireline- The number of wireline subscribers in developed countries has been 
continuously decreasing except during the year 2009 when the number 
increased. The number of wireline subscribers decline d from 570 million at the 
end of 2005 to 544 million by the end of 2008, increased to 555 million at the 
end of 2009 and then declined to 539 million by the end of the year 2011.    
Wireless- The number of wireless subscribers has been continuously 
increasing.  The number of wireless subscribers which were 992 million at the 
end of 2005 increased to 1514 million by the end of 2011.  
The following chart shows the increase / decrease in the number of wireless 
and wireline telephones over the years in developed countries: 
Subscribers in million (wireline vs wireless) 
 
Source: ITU.

 
 
77 
 
 
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
Wireline- The number of wireline subscribers in developing countries 
continued to increase till the end of 2007 and thereafter started declining. The 
number of wireline subscribers increased from 673 million at the end of 2005 
to 708 million by the end of 2007 and then declined to 665 million by the end 
of the year 2011.     
Wireless- The number of wireless subscribers has been continuously 
increasing.  The numbe r of wireless subscribers which were 1215 million at 
the end of 2005 increased to 4457 million by the end of 2011.  
The following chart shows the increase / decrease in the number of wireless 
and wireline telephones over the years in developing countries: 
Subscribers in million (wireline vs wireless) 
 
Source: ITU.

 
 
78 
 
 
WORLD 
 
Wireline- The number of wireline subscribers in the world as a whole, based 
on the information from 222 countries for whom the data is available on the 
web-site of ITU, continued to incre ase till the end of 2006 and thereafter it 
started declining. The number of wireline subscribers have been continuously 
declining after the year 2006. The number of wireline telephone subscribers in 
the world declined from 1261.07 million at the end of 200 6 to 1188.36 million 
by the end of 2010. 
Wireless- The number of wireless subscribers in the world have continuously 
increased and as can be seen from the following chart, the increase was sharp 
after 2005. The number of wireless subscribers in the world w hich were 
2206.80 million at the end of 2005 have increased to 5370.47 million by the 
end of 2010. 
Subscribers in million (wireline vs wireless) 
 
Source: ITU. 
Internet / Broadband- As can be seen from the following chart, the number of 
internet subscriber s and its penetration in the world are continuously 
increasing. The number of individuals using internet increased from 495 million 
in 2001 to 2265 million by the end of 2011. Similarly, the number of internet 
users per 100 inhabitants increased from 8 in 2001 to 33 by the end of 2011. 
 

 
 
79 
 
 
Source: ITU. 
CONCLUSION 
It is evident from the above that the number of wireline telephone subscribers 
in the world as a whole have been declining. While in the world as a whole, the 
decline started after December 2006, th e same happened in different 
countries at different points of time.  In India, the decline started after 
December 2005.  In countries like USA, UK, Canada and Australia, the decline 
started much earlier.  In the case of China, the decline started after Dec ember 
2006.  In the case of Bangladesh, the number of wireline telephone 
subscribers continued to increase till December 2009.  It is still increasing in 
Nepal.  In general, the decline in wireline telephone subscribers started earlier 
in the case of devel oped countries compared to developing countries. Against 
this, the number of wireless telephone subscribers has been continuously 
increasing in the world as a whole as well as in individual countries included in 
this study.  
It is also observed that even t hough wireline subscribers are declining in the 
world and in the countries like India, U.S.A., U.K., Australia, Canada and 
China, the number of internet subscribers are continuously increasing. 

 
 
80 
 
 
ANNEXURE -II 
 
GUIDELINES FOR ISSUE OF CLEARANCE FOR INSTALLA TION OF MOBILE 
TOWERS 
 
[Single Window Clearance can be provided to telecom service provider / 
infrastructure provider after following points are verified by the local body / State 
Government. This will ensure issuance of faster clearances] 
 
1.  Copy of Access Service License / IP Registration Certificate from 
Department of Telecommunications. 
 
2.  Copy of SACFA clearance for the said location issued by WPC Wing of 
Department of Telecom. 
 
3.  Other clearance at State / Local authority level: 
 
I) Copy of clearance from Pollution Control Board for DG Sets. 
i) Copy of clearance from Fire Safety Department, if applicable. 
ii) Copy of clearance from State Environment & Forest Dept. where 
necessary. 
iv)      Copy of NOC from Building Owner. 
iii) Nominal one time Administrative Fe e as may be decided by the Local body to 
recover its costs on the issue of permission for installation of Tower. 
vi) Electricity connection may be provided to BTS site on priority. 
 
4. BTS Tower Details: 
 
i)  Data Sheet 
a.  Name of Service/Infrastructure Provider 
b.  Location 
c.  Tower Reference: 
i) Height, ii) Weight iii) Ground/Roof Top, iv) Number of 
antennas planned on tower. 
 
ii)  Copy of structural stability certificate for ground based BTS. 
OR 
In case of roof top BTS towers, structural stability certificate for the 
building based on written approvals of authorized Chartered Structural 
Engineer (local bodies), Central Building Research Institute (CBRI), 
Roorkee or reputed Engineering College like IIT, NIIT etc. 
 
iii)  Avoid Base Station Antennas in narrow lanes (≤ 5 mt.) 
iv)  In respect of roof top towers with multiple antennas, the roof top 
usage desirable to be totally restricted. 

 
 
81 
 
 
 
v)  In case of both ground based towers & roof top towers, there shall be 
no nearby buildings right in front of the antenna with height 
comparable to the lowest antenna on tower at a distance threshold as 
specified below: 
 
S.No Number of Multiple 
antennas 
Building/Structure 
distance from the 
antenna (safe distance) 
(in mtrs) 
1 2 35 
2 4 45 
3 6 55 
4 8 65 
5 10 70 
6 12 75 
 
5.  Formation of State and District Telecom Committees. 
 
Keeping public interest in view, there is a need of regular interactions 
between TERM Cell of DOT and State / District administration. Hence it is 
proposed to Set-up State and District Telecom Committees for review of all 
Telecom Infrastructure related issues at State/ District Level. 
 
Note: All radiation related technical details are being dealt by TERM cell of 
DOT. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
82 
 
ANNEXURE -III 
No: 800- 15/2010-VAS 
Government of India 
Ministry of Communication & IT 
Department of Telecom 
Access Services Cell 
Sanchar Bhawan, Ashoka road New Delhi 
 
Date:  8th April, 2010 
To 
All CMTS/ UAS Licensees 
 
Sub: Instructions to Service Providers on implementation of radiation norms 
on EMF exposure by Base Transceiver Stations (BTSs) 
This is with reference to conditions of the License Agreement amendment 
dated 4th November 2008, regarding implementation of ICNIRP guidelines regarding 
the emission by Base Transceiver Stations (BTSs) as below: 
 
―Licensee  shall conduct  audit and provide self certificates annually as per 
procedure prescribed by Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC)/or any other 
agency authorized by Licensor from time to time  for confirming to limits/levels for 
antennae (Base Station Emissions) for general public exposure as prescribed  by 
International Commission on Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection ( ICNIRP) from time 
to time. The present limits/levels are reproduced as detailed below: 
 
Frequency 
Range 
E-Field Strength        
( Volt/Meter 
(V/m)) 
H-Field Strength 
(Amp/Meter 
(A/m)) 
Power Density 
(Watt/Sq.Meter 
(W/Sq.m)) 
400MHz 
to 
2000MHz 
1.375f ½ 0.0037f ½ f/200 
2GHz to 
300GHz 
61 0.16 10 
 (f = frequency in MHz) 
Note: The compliance in the form of Self Certificate shall commence six months after 
the date of issue of prescribed test procedure by TEC or any other agency authorized 
by Licensor.‖ 

 
 
83 
 
   
2. TEC has since issued the test procedure No. TEC/TP/EMF/001/01.SEP -2009 
which has been intimated to the Licensees vide letter dated 09.11.2009.  
3. In view of the above, following instructions are issued for meeting the ICNIRP 
guidelines: 
i. All existing BTSs should be ICNIRP guidelines compliant by 08.05.2010 as the 
TEC test procedure has been circulated on 09.11.2009. Therefore, all BTSs 
should be self certif ied as meeting the radiation norm. Self certification should 
be submitted to respective Telecom Enforcement Resource & Monitoring 
(TERM) Cells of DOT by 15.05.2010.  
ii. All new BTS sites should start radiating only after self certificate has been 
submitted to relevant TERM Cells.  
iii. The TERM Cell will test up to 10% of new BTS sites randomly at its discretion.  
Additionally, the BTS sites against which there are public complaints, shall 
also be tested by TERM Cell. The testing shall be done as per procedures 
prescribed by Telecom Engineering Center (TEC) from time to time.   
iv. The cost of test for audit of EMF exposure from BTS shall be borne by the 
Mobile Service Operator, which shall be Rs. 10, 000 (Rs. Ten Thousands only) 
for one site/per Service Provider.  
v. Tools and equipments for testing would be provided by the concerned Mobile 
Service Provider to the TERM cell.  
vi. If a site fails to meet the EMR criterion, a penalty of Rs. 5 lakh shall be levied 
per BTS per service provider. Service providers must meet the crit erion within 
one month of the report of TERM cell in such cases, after which the site will be 
shut down. 
vii. The BTS site details would be hosted on Telecom Engineering Center (TEC) 
website on submission of self test and registration with TERM cell, giving the  
test result and mentioning that the BTS site is self certified by the service 
Providers. Nature of compliance will be mentioned against each BTS i.e. self 
certified, TERM certified and not certified. After the BTS site has been tested 
by TERM cell, status of the BTS site will be changed to be ―TERM certified‖. 
viii. The service providers also have the option of getting all the BTS sites tested 
from TERM cell by paying the requisite fee. TERM cell will test such sites at 
their discretion depending upon the availa bility of resources with them. If they 
are not able to test such sites either the test fee shall not be accepted or will 
be refunded within a month‘s time, if a commitment to test the site within next 
6 months is not given. 
 
4. The Mobile Service Providers are advised to adopt following ten best practices 
in regard to guidelines for public exposure of Electromagnetic Fields for Base 
Transceiver Stations: 
i. Include ICNIRP compliance as recommended by the TEC in their planning 
exercise for radio base station. 

 
 
84 
 
ii. Assess all radio base stations for international (ICNIRP) compliance as 
recommended by the TEC for public exposure. 
iii. Produce a programme for this compliance as recommended by the TEC for 
already existing sites also. 
iv. Provide a database of information, which i s available to the public on radio 
base stations. 
v. Respond to complaints and enquiries about radio base stations, within ten 
working days. 
vi. Financially support the Government‘s independent scientific research 
programme on mobile communications health issues. 
 
vii. Develop clear standards and procedures on the issue after consultation with 
local communities and other stakeholders. 
viii. Participate in pre -rollout and pre -application consultation with local planning 
authorities. 
ix. Publish clear, transparent and accountable criteria and cross -industry 
agreement on site sharing, which should be updated and published regularly. 
x. Establish professional development workshops on technological developments 
within telecommunications for public and other stake holders. 
 
                                                                                                                                        
Sd-  
(Vinod Kumar) 
Director (AS-II) 
Copy to: 
 
1 Wireless Advisor, WPC Wing,  DoT, New Delhi 
2. Sr. DDG, TEC, DoT, New Delhi 
3. Sr. DDG (WPF), DoT, New Delhi 
4. DDG (Security-TERM))/ DDG (Security)/ DDG (LF), DoT, New Delhi 
5. DDG (C&A) for posting on DOT website. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
85 
 
                                                                                                  
      MINUTES OF EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 13th March, 2013 from 1600 hrs. to      
1815 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
     
    Shri Francisco Sardinha - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
(2) Shri Khagen Das 
(3) Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
(4) Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
(5) Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
(6) Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
(7) Shri Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
(8) Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
(9) Shri S. Semmalai 
(10) Shri Ganesh Singh 
(11) Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
(12) Smt. Annu Tandon 
 
        
        SECRETARIAT 
  
        (1) Shri A. Louis Martin            -       Joint Secretary  
        (2) Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director 
 (3) Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar -       Deputy Secretary 
     
  

 
 
86 
 
2. At the outse t, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the 
sitting of the Committee. 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fifteenth Report of 
the Committ ee on Estimates on the subject ‗Role and Functioning of Telecom 
Service Providers in Mobile Telephony‘ pertaining to the Department of 
Telecommunications (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology). The 
Committee adopted the draft report withou t any modification and authorized the 
Chairman to finalize the same in light of any consequential changes, if any, arising 
out of the factual verification by the Department of Telecommunications (Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology) and present the same to Lok Sabha. 
4. ***   ***   ***   *** 
5. ***   ***   ***   ***  
  
6. ***   ***   ***   ***  
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
87 
 
 
Appendix II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 21 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 7.2, 7.4, 7.7, 7.8, 7.9, 7.10, 7.12, 7.13, 7.14, 
7.16, 7.17, 7.18, 7.20, 7.21 and 7.22 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
15 
 
 
 
 
71.43% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‘s reply  
Para No. 7.15 
  
Percentage of total recommendations 
1 
 
 
 
4.76% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
Government‘s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
Para Nos. 7.5, 7.6, 7.11 & 7.19 
 
  
Percentage of total recommendations 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19.05% 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final 
replies of Government is still awaited. 
 
Para No. 7.3 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
1 
 
 
 
 
4.76% 
 
 
 