      FOURTH REPORT
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
(Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in
Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Culture -
‘Maintenance of Monuments  by Archaeological Survey of India’)
Presented to Lok Sabha on  27th April, 2010
Lok Sabha Secretariat
New Delhi
    April, 2010/ Vaisakha, 1932(S)

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE(2009-2010)…    (iii)
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………    (v)
CHAPTER I   Report……………………………………………..               1
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by Government……………….           27
CHAPTER III   Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Government’s replies………………………..           46
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee……………..           52
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which final replies of Government are still
awaited…………………………………………….            67
APPENDICES
I.   Minutes of Sitting of the Estimates Committee
held on 30.03.2010…………………………………         78
II.   Analysis of the action taken by Government on
the recommendations/observations contained
in the Sixteenth Report of Estimates Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)…………………………...   80

          COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
      (2009-2010)
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman
 MEMBERS
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal
3 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4 Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
5 Shri Bhakta Charan Das
6 Shri Milind Deora
7 Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9 Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
10 Shri P. Karunakaran
11 Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
12 Shri Chandrakant Khaire
13 Shri M. Krishnaswamy
14 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam
15 Smt. Ranee Narah
16 Shri Prabodh Panda
17 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
18 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha
19 Shri C. Rajendran
20 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
21 Shri K. Jaya Surya Prakash Reddy
22 Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
23 Shri S. Semmalai
24 Shri Madan Lal Sharma
25 Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
26 Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
27 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
28 Shri Lalji Tandon
29 Shri Manish Tewari
30 Shri K.C. Venugopal
    SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar  - Under Secretary
4. Shri Amit Ankit  - Executive Assistant

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Report on action taken by
Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of Estimates
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Culture – ‘Maintenance of
monuments by Archaeological Survey of India.’
2.  The Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on
5th March, 2008. The Government furnished their replies indicating action taken on the
recommendations contained in that Report on 1 st December, 2008 and 12 th January,
2009.  The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Estimates Committee
(2009-2010) at their sitting held on 30th March, 2010.
3. The Report has been divided into the following Chapters:-
I.  Report;
II.  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
Government;
III.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Governments replies;
IV.  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee; and
V.  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of
Government are still awaited.
4.  An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in
the Sixteenth Report of Estimates Committee (14th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix II. It
would be observed therefrom that out of 28 observations/recommendations made in the
Report, 11 recommendations i.e. 39.29%  have been accepted by Government and the
Committee do not desire to pursue  3 recommendations  i.e. 10.71% in view of
Government’s reply. Replies of Government in respect of 8 recommendations i.e.
28.57% have not been accepted by the Committee and final replies in respect of  6
recommendations i.e. 21.43% are still awaited.
New Delhi;                FRANCISCO SARDINHA
April 23rd, 2010                        Chairman,
Vaisakha 3, 1932 (Saka)                Committee on Estimates

    CHAPTER - I
REPORT
1.1  This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by
Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Culture – ‘Maintenance of
Monuments by Archaeological Survey of India’.
1.2  The Committee’s Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was
presented to Lok Sabha on 5 th March, 2008. It contained 28 observations/
recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all these observations/
recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Culture.
1.3  Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the
Report have broadly been categorized as under:-
(i)  Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the
Government
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 17, 21, 24, 26, 27, 28
(Total 11, Chapter II)
(ii)  Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of Government’s reply
Sl. No. 6, 13, 14
 (Total 3, Chapter III)
(iii)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which Government’s
replies have not been accepted by the Committee
Sl. Nos. 2, 8, 15, 16, 18, 20, 23, 25  (Total 8, Chapter IV)
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of
Government are still awaited.
Sl. Nos. 4, 10, 11, 12, 19, 22     (Total 6, Chapter V)
1.4 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the
recommendations for which only interim reply has been given by the
Government should be furnished to them expeditiously.

1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on
some of the recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies
have not been accepted by the Committee.

Regular Reporting System
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para. No. 2)
1.6 On realizing the need to establish a close liaison between State
Archaeology Departments and ASI, the Committee had recommended as
follows:-
“The Committee note that there is no institutional mechanism for
State Archaeology Departments to keep the ASI apprised about the
activities of State Archaeology Departments except periodical
meetings with Secretaries of State Culture Departments. No regular
reporting system is maintained. DG, ASI during oral evidence
informed the Committee that there is an informal relation between
State Archaeology Departments and the ASI. But the Committee is of
the view that there should be a formal arrangement between ASI and
State Archaeology Departments. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Ministry of Culture should devise an institutional
mechanism to be followed by ASI and State Archaeology
Departments so that ASI can get the information regarding the
activities of State Archaeology Departments on regular basis. It is
essential that regular reporting system should also be followed so
that ASI is apprised of the activities of State Archaeology
Departments.”
1.7 The Ministry of Culture in their action taken reply stated as follows :-
“Archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by or
under law made by Parliament to be of national Importance’ is a
subject listed as Concurrent under the Seventh Schedule List III(Entry
no. 40) of the Constitution of India. The ASI maintains and preserves
centrally protected monuments in accordance with a central law viz.
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(AM&ASR) Act, 1958 while the States have their own protection lists
as per their respective legislations.

With regard to excavation and explorations, the AM&ASR Act,
1958 provides that ‘No State Government shall undertake or
authorize any person to undertake any excavation without the
previous approval of the Central Government’. Co-ordination between
the State Government and Central Government does become
necessary as the ASI is the only agency to control excavation and
exploration activities in the entire country.
 In accordance with the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act 1972,
certain types of antiquities are required to be registered for while
Registering Officers have been appointed in various States of India.
Apart from those working within the ASI, some of the Registering
Officers are presently working under the State Archaeology
Departments. ASI provides annual funding for meeting the salaries of
these Registering Officers, who also report directly to ASI about their
progress of work and send copies of the Registration Certificates for
maintenance in the Data Bank of the ASI. Further, the movement of
antiquities from one place to another can be done with the written
permission of the Director General, ASI.
These existing mechanisms provide avenues to ASI for getting
information regarding the activities of State Archaeology
Departments. However, the interaction is limited as the Ministry of
Culture/ASI do not have any centrally sponsored or central sector
schemes for assistance to State Archaeology Departments. Hence,
the State Government’s accountability to the Central Government is
difficult to enforce. While a closer coordination between ASI and the
State Archaeology Departments is required, working out its
mechanism and modalities will need consultation with the Department
of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice.”
1.8 Observing that there was no formal arrangement between ASI
and State Archaeology Departments to keep ASI apprised of the
activities of State Archaeology Departments, the Committee in their
Report had recommended that the Ministry of Culture should devise
an institutional mechanism so that ASI could get the information

regarding the activities of State Archaeology Departments on regular
basis.
 The Committee note that the Ministry in their action taken reply
have also admitted that under the existing mechanism State
Government’s accountability to Central Government is difficult to
enforce and there is a need for closer coordination between ASI and
State Archaeology Departments. However it was distressing to note
that despite realizing the need for the same, the Ministry have
expressed their unwillingness by stating “working out its mechanism
and modalities will need consultation with the Department of Legal
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice”.  The Committee express
surprise as to why the Ministry of Culture have not initiated any
expeditious action in this matter so far, when reports of untraceable
monuments as well as illegal constructions/encroachments are
prevalent. This indicates that the Ministry is not serious towards the
importance of the Committee’s recommendations. The Committee
deprecate this tendency of the Ministry.
 The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their earlier
recommendation, strongly urge the Ministry of Culture to give due
importance to this matter and evolve a suitable mechanism in
consultation with Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and
Justice for establishing formal and regular mechanism for interaction
between ASI and State Archaeology Departments. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this
regard.

Higher revenue generation
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para. No. 8)
1.9 Taking note of the fact that economic potential of
monuments/heritage structures has not been realised either by ASI or by
the Ministry of Culture, the Committee had recommended as follows:-
“The Committee are perturbed to note that ASI could generate
only Rs.43.59, Rs.52.89 and Rs.58.07 crore as revenue during the
years 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively. It is too meager in
comparison to the number of monuments. It seems ASI as well as
Ministry of Culture are not making efforts to increase their revenue.
The Committee are of the view that economic potential of this sector
has not been realized either by ASI or by the Ministry of Culture. If
monuments have something different in the manner of presentation of
its history as well as its indoor activities, it will not only attract
domestic tourists but will definitely attract international tourists. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Culture as well as
ASI should take concrete steps for increasing their revenue by
publicizing more effectively through electronic media or by organizing
more cultural programmes, light and sound programme, puppet
shows, screening documentaries, etc. at these sites with a lead taken
by Ministry of Tourism and State Tourism Departments. In this way,
two purposes will be served, revenue generation will be more and our
invaluable culture will also get a boost.”
1.10 The Ministry of Culture in their action taken reply stated as follows:-
“Regarding higher revenue generation as well as to give a boost
to our invaluable heritage, all the ASI field offices have been directed
to take concrete steps for increasing their revenue by publicizing
more effectively through electronic media or by  organizing cultural
programmes,  Sound   and   Light  programmes,  puppet    shows,

 screening documentaries, etc. at centrally protected monuments in
consultation with the Ministry of Tourism and State Tourism
Departments.”
1.11 In order to achieve higher revenue generation as well as to
provide a boost to our invaluable heritage, the Committee in their
Report had recommended that Ministry of Culture as well as ASI
should take concrete steps to increase their revenue in consultation
with the Ministry of Tourism and State Tourism Departments.
 The Committee are however constrained to note that instead of
taking any concrete action/step, Ministry of Culture have merely
directed all the ASI field offices to take concrete steps in this regard.
The Committee are of the view that instead of just directing the field
offices, the Ministry should formulate a workable action plan, take
necessary steps to implement the plan and then make a concerted
effort through all field offices to actually reap the economic potential
of monuments/heritage structures.  Moreover, since the Committee
were informed that ASI has formulated a proposal for creation of
‘Non-Lapsable fund’ for National Monuments of ASI by earmarking
part of the income generated by sale of entry tickets for a separate
fund for conservation & preservation as well as for development of
tourist amenities in those monuments, it is even more imperative to
augment the revenue generation, so that monuments and heritage
structures could be made financially sustainable.
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation
and urge the Ministry to take appropriate action in this regard.  The

Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

A provision to be incorporated in AM & ASR, Act, 1958
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para. No. 15)
1.12 Noting that no provision exists in Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958, for consulting State
Governments and other local bodies before declaring a monument existing
in that State as centrally protected, the Committee had recommended as
follows :-
“The Committee note that according to Section 4 of Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remain Act, 1958,
whenever an ancient monument or archaeological site and remain is
found worthy of central protection keeping in view its historical,
archaeological and artistic importance, two months notice is issued
through an official gazette notification expressing its intention to
declare the monuments, archaeological site to be of national
importance. Any private individual, State Governments, voluntary
organizations having any objection, can file it. After disposing of all
the objections, ASI declare the particular monument/archaeological
site as a monument/site of national importance. The Committee note
that in all this process, there is no role of State Government where
the particular archaeological/monument site exists. Though DG, ASI
during oral evidence admitted that ASI generally consult State
Government before declaration of monument/site as a monument/site
of national importance. But there is no such provision in the Act.
Moreover DG, ASI himself agreed with the view of the Committee that
it is better to consult the State Governments before a decision is
taken to declare a monument as centrally protected. Cooperation of
the State Governments should also be sought in acquisition of land
for declaring a monument/archaeological site to be of national
importance. Local bodies such as municipalities etc. may also be
involved in the process. In view of this, the Committee recommend
that a provision should be included in the Act accordingly and State
Governments should invariably be consulted before taking a decision
to declare a monument as centrally protected.”

1.13  The Ministry of Culture in their action taken reply stated as follows :-
“All the field offices of the ASI have been directed to ensure that
before initiating any action to declare a monument/site as of national
importance, the State Department of Archaeology, District
Administration of the respective State as well as the local Municipality
of the area should also be consulted and their comments obtained
thereon. “
1.14 The Committee appreciate that Ministry of Culture have directed
all the field offices of ASI to consult the State Department of
Archaeology, District administration as well as local municipality of
the area before initiating any action to declare a monument/site as of
national importance. They however regret to note that no action has
been taken on their recommendation regarding making a provision in
the Act for invariably consulting State Government before taking a
decision to declare a monument centrally protected. Even the
‘Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2010, which has been passed by the
Parliament recently, is silent in this regard. While reiterating their
earlier recommendation the Committee strongly recommend that the
Ministry should take steps with due promptitude to incorporate a
provision in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remain Act, 1958 accordingly, to make it a statutory obligation on the
part of the ASI.

Use of latest technologies in exploration & excavation work
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para. No. 16)
1.15 On realizing the need to employ modern and latest technologies in
the field of exploration and excavation, the Committee had recommended
as follows:-
“The Committee appreciate that ASI has done a lot in the field of
excavation and exploration. But there are still many sites which need
to be explored. Exploration and excavation are very important to fill
up the gap in the cultural sequence of Indian Archaeology, throwing
more light on lesser-known cultures and protecting an area which is
threatened by submergence owing to construction of dams, being
destroyed or damaged due to absolutely necessary developmental
works, natural calamities, etc. So the onus lies with the ASI and
Ministry to take concrete steps in this direction. The Committee
recommend that since it is a computer era, ASI should employ
modern technologies such as GIS (Geographical Information
System), GPR (Ground Penetrating Radar System) etc. for accurate
documentation of site features and their quick analysis.
The Ministry should also review the methods or systems
adopted by other countries for exploration and excavation work for
bringing ASI’s existing methodology for excavation and exploration at
par with international standards.”
1.16 The Ministry of Culture in their action taken reply stated as follows:-
“The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) tries to employ the
latest techniques in exploration, excavation and documentation
wherever possible.  Since some of the sophisticated
equipments such as the Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) are

not with ASI, the department makes concrete efforts in the
areas of scientific collaboration with institutions like Indian
Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur in this direction.  IIT,
Kanpur has also recently set up a Center for Archaeological
Sciences and Technology (CAST) which will be equipped with
all the latest technologies that can be employed in archaeology.
Under this collaborative initiative, ASI and IIT, Kanpur have
recently employed latest techniques like GPS, Total Station
Survey, GPR Survey in the areas of site documentation and
surface survey.”
1.17 The Committee appreciate that in collaboration of Indian
Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur, ASI have recently employed
latest techniques like Global Positioning System (GPS), Total Station
Survey, GPR (Ground Penetrating Radar System) Survey in the areas
of site documentation and surface survey.  The Committee, however,
note with regret that the reply furnished by the Ministry is silent on
their specific recommendation that the Ministry should review the
methods or systems adopted by other countries for exploration and
excavation work for bringing ASI’s existing methodology at par with
international standards.
The Committee are of the view that only through the usage of
‘State-of-the-art’ technologies in the exploration & excavation work,
cultural sequence of Indian Archaeology can be completed and lesser
known areas/cultures with rich heritage could come to the forefront.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation
and urge the Ministry to undertake a comprehensive study of
methods or systems adopted by different countries, who are
scientifically advanced, for exploration & excavation work, so that a

qualitative improvement in ASI’s existing methodology for exploration
& excavation could be brought up.

Pending Excavation Reports
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para. No. 18)
1.18 On noting the pendency of so many excavation reports with ASI  for a
long period, the Committee had recommended as follows:-
“The Committee are astonished to note that there are so many
excavation reports pending for the last ten to fifteen years and even
PMO has taken note of the lacuna. DG, ASI during oral evidence
stated that the main problem for not submitting these reports is
transfer or retirement of concerned officials. The Committee views
this seriously and recommend that the official concerned with the
excavation report should not be transferred during the period of
preparing the report and a time frame for submitting the excavation
reports should be fixed. On non-submission of report in the
prescribed time, strict action should be taken against all concerned.
The Committee also strongly recommend that the Ministry should
take expeditious steps to get all pending reports completed and no
fresh licence for excavation be considered in favour of the defaulter in
the absence of previous excavation report. For completion of such
reports services of retired officials can also be obtained. The
Committee also desire that the steps taken in this regard and status
of pending reports may be communicated to the Committee within 6
months after the presentation of the Report.
1.19 The Ministry of Culture in their action taken reply stated as follows :-
“Out of the 56 pending reports with ASI, 23 excavation reports viz., (i)
Udaigiri, (ii)Gudlyam, (iii) Hamri, (iv) Hathab, (v) Satdhara, (vi)
Kanganhalli, (vii) Bekal Fort, (viii) Lachhura, (ix) Besnagar, (x) Lal
Kot, (xi) Bhita, (xii) Mamallapuram, (xiii) Birchabilli Tila, (xiv) Ojiyana,
(xv) Boxanagar, (xvi) Shyamsundar Tila, (xvii) Chandore, (xviii)
Tamluk, (xix) Golbai Sasan, (xx) Thakurani Tila, (xxi) Khajuraho, (xxii)
Dholavira (Part Report), (xxiii) Sravasti (Part Report) have been
received. The report on Ayodhya is sub-judice.

 The ASI has also effected necessary changes in the format for
inviting future proposals for exploration and excavation, to incorporate
specific clauses to prevent pendency in excavation reports in the
future. All necessary facilities have been extended to both the in
service and retired officers of ASI to complete the pending excavation
reports. Further, the Universities, State Governments and other
Research Institutions have been specifically instructed to clear their
pendency in excavation reports.”
1.20 The Committee are distressed to note that out of 56 pending
excavation reports only 23 have been received. Even after the lapse of
nine months of the presentation of the report, 33 excavation reports
are still pending.
 The Committee also note that the Universities, State
Governments and other Research Institutions have been instructed
by Ministry to clear their pendency in excavation reports. The
Committee are of the view that instead of just giving instructions to
the Universities, State Governments and other Research Institutes, a
time frame should be fixed for completing these excavation reports.
Moreover, the Ministry are also silent on the view expressed by the
Committee that no fresh licence for excavation be considered in
favour of the defaulters.
 The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation
strongly urge that the Ministry should fix a time period for all the
concerned Universities, State Governments, Research Institutes, to
complete the pending excavation reports and licence for excavation
should not  be considered in favour of  the  defaulters. Status of  the

remaining excavation reports may also be intimated to the Committee
within six months of presentation of this report.

Strengthening of ASI’s Watch & Ward Staff
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para. No. 20)
1.21 Taking note of the expenditure incurred by ASI on different security
agencies, the Committee had recommended as follows:-
“The Committee note that due to present phenomenon of terrorism it
has become very necessary to provide stringent security to our
national heritage. ASI is having a tremendous shortfall of monument
attendants. An expert group on archaeology constituted in 1984 by
the Government of India under the Chairmanship of Shri R.N. Mirdha,
MP recommended that ASI should have atleast 9000 monument
attendants to provide security to all important monuments in the
country. But ASI has 4000 monument attendants. In order to cope
with this shortfall, ASI which has engaged State Police, CISF, private
security guards and temporary staff, is incurring a huge financial
burden on this account. CISF alone is incurring Rs.9.25 crore
expenditure per year on ASI. The Committee is not averse to
engaging other security agencies for security of monuments but is of
the opinion and recommend that instead of investing so much money
on other agencies, ASI should strengthen its own watch & ward staff.
It should give more stress on appointing its own monument
attendants. Their watch & ward staff should be given training
periodically in order to bring them at par with other national level
security guards. They should be laced with new gadgets and
scanners, CCTV should be installed at the sites of national
importance and surprise checks should be conducted in order to
ensure the promptness of security staff deputed there.
1.22 The Ministry of Culture in their action taken reply stated as follows :-
“Regarding strengthening of ASI’s watch & ward staff and giving them
training in order to bring them at par with other national level security
guards, all the field offices of the ASI have been directed to furnish
detailed proposals regarding implementation of this recommendations
of the Estimates Committee.”

1.23 In their earlier report Committee had noted that ASI was short of
5000 monument attendants and to cope with the shortfall, ASI was
engaging police, para military forces, private security guards,
temporary staff and in turn spending funds to the tune of crores of
rupees. To avoid huge expenditure on this account, the Committee
had recommended for strengthening of ASI’s watch & ward staff,
appointing its own monument attendants and providing periodical
training to them in order to bring them at par with other national level
security guards.
From the action taken reply the Committee note that the Ministry
of Culture have directed all the field offices of ASI to furnish detailed
proposals regarding implementation of this recommendation. It is
highly regrettable that even after a lapse of nine months, detailed
proposals have not been furnished by the field offices of ASI and
Ministry have thus not taken any concrete action in this regard.
The Committee take a serious note of the inaction on the part of
the Ministry and desire that the Ministry of Culture should remind all
the field offices of ASI to furnish their detailed proposals urgently.
While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee desire
that the Ministry should take expeditious steps to augment and
strengthen the watch & ward staff of the ASI. The Committee would
like to emphasize that in this endeavour, ex-servicemen can also play
a pivotal role, who are already trained and would require only
additional orientation for the specific job. The Committee stress that
necessary co-ordination may be there with the Ministry of Defence/
DG Resettlement in this regard.

The Committee also reiterate that watch & ward staff should be
equipped with latest security gadgets and a training programme at
par with other national level security agencies should be chalked out
and implemented without further delay.  Scanners and CCTVs should
also be installed at the sites of national importance and surprise
checks should be conducted to ensure the promptness of deputed
security staff. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.

Illegal construction/Encroachment
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para. No. 23)
1.24 Expressing concern over the illegal construction and encroachment
taking place nearby the areas of monuments, the Committee had
recommended as follows:-
“The Committee take serious note of illegal
construction/encroachment taking place near most of the historical
monuments. Such encroachments/illegal constructions lend a bad
view to the monuments and it also affects tourism potentiality of the
monuments. Encroachment should be removed from the vicinity of
heritage sites as it creates an adverse image in the mind of visitors.
ASI should deal with this problem firmly. The Committee also note
that in Delhi, a Committee was constituted and periodical evictions
are carried out in Delhi. The Committee appreciate the action taken
by ASI and Delhi Government and recommend that such type of
Committees should be constituted in other States also for getting the
encroachment in nearby areas of monuments evicted. The
Committee are of the view that ASI should be vigilant so that
encroachment does not take place. Once there is encroachment, it
becomes very difficult to remove it. ASI is involved in legal actions for
eviction, which is a very lengthy process. Therefore, the Committee
suggest that Ministry should take stringent steps in this regard such
as fencing of all the monuments, tightening the security, stringent
punishment to guilty, fixing the responsibility of concerned authority to
take care, so that no new case of illegal construction/encroachment
occurs in near future. The Committee also note that under the
provisions of the Ancient Monuments Act, no construction is allowed
in the first 100 metres from the protected limits of a monument and
they recommend that construction should not be allowed in the first
200 metres from the protected limit of a monument instead of 100
metres. Effective provisions should be incorporated in the Ancient
Monuments Act to safeguard the monuments from encroachment.
The provisions should include stringent punishment and eviction by
law enforcing agencies in case of encroachment. The Committee also
suggest that a Notice Board should be placed near the monuments

giving a warning to people that illegal construction and encroachment
is not permitted nearby monuments and the guilty will be liable to
stringent punishment.
1.25 The Ministry of Culture in their action taken reply stated as follows :-
“As regards encroachments at centrally protected monuments, all the
field offices of the ASI have been directed to  make all possible efforts
under the provisions of AM&ASR Act 1958 and Rules 1959, to
adhere to the recommendations of the Estimates Committee. SA’s of
the Circles are being advised to be more vigilant to ensure prevention
of encroachments within the centrally protected monuments. District
Administration/Chief Secretary of the State have been addressed by
DG/Secretary (Culture) to issue directions to the
District/Revenue/Police authorities to provide police assistance to ASI
as and when they are approached.”
1.26 In view of rampant encroachment and illegal construction
prevailing near most of historical monuments, the Committee in their
Report had recommended for formation of Committee as constituted
in Delhi for carrying out periodical evictions, fencing of all the
monuments, tightening the security, fixing the responsibility, not
allowing any construction in the first 200 metres from the protected
limit of a monument and making provisions in the Ancient
monuments Act for stringent punishment and eviction by law
enforcing agencies in case of encroachment.
 The Committee note with satisfaction that in the ‘Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and
Validation) Bill, 2010, provision of stringent punishment has been
incorporated for any construction in the prohibited area and also in
the regulated area, if carried out without the prior permission of
competent authority. The Committee also appreciate that detailed

provisions for prohibited area (100 metres from protected
monument/area) as well as regulated area (200 metres from prohibited
area) have been provided in the Bill. However, the Committee are
constrained to note that in respect of other recommendations,
Ministry of Culture have merely directed all the field offices of ASI to
make all efforts under the provisions of AM&ASR Act, 1958 and Rule
1959 to adhere to the recommendations of Estimates Committee.
 The Committee note with concern that the Ministry have taken
no concrete action on their specific recommendation regarding
constitution of Committee on the pattern of Delhi for carrying out
periodical inspections.
 The Committee further note with concern that even after the
presentation of this report in which the Committee have suggested so
many measures to curtail encroachment/illegal construction near the
historical monuments, many cases of encroachment in and around
the historical monuments are taking place and the same must be in
the notice of the concerned authorities. This shows the Ministry’s
casual approach towards Committee’s recommendations.
The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and
strongly urge the Ministry to implement the same in its entirety and
apprise them of the action taken in this regard at the earliest.

Untraceable Monuments
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 25, Para. No. 25)
1.27 Noting that a large number of Centrally protected monuments in the
country were untraced, the Committee had recommended as follows:-
“The Committee are aggrieved to note that 35 centrally protected
monuments/sites in the country are untraceable. The major causes for
the disappearance of the ancient monuments and sites are rapid
urbanization, construction of multistoried residential and commercial
buildings, implementation of development projects, etc. The Committee
was informed by ASI that as on date, it may not be possible to fix
responsibility. The Committee view this as casual approach of ASI in
this regard. It is highly deplorable on the part of ASI as well as Ministry
of Culture that no expeditious steps have been taken to trace the
centrally protected monuments. Only instructions were issued to circle
offices to personally verify the status of such monuments/sites, falling
under their respective jurisdiction. No other State except Delhi has
bothered to sent a detailed report in this regard. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that Ministry should pursue vigorously with all
the concerned circle offices to give detailed report within a specified
time period and expeditious and concrete action should be initiated to
trace out the missing monuments. The Ministry should also fix the
responsibility in this regard. The Committee also recommend that the
Ministry of Culture in consultation with other authorities should devise
such a mechanism that before starting any new developmental work, it
should be ascertained that in that particular area, there are no hidden
remains.
1.28 The Ministry of Culture in their action taken reply stated as follows :-
“Regarding untraceable monuments, all the field offices of the ASI
have been directed to make all possible efforts to trace out the
missing monuments, and furnish detailed report/action initiated in this
regard immediately. A Committee under the Chairmanship of the
Jt.D.G, ASI has also been constituted to look into the matter. The
Committee has met twice to consider the information furnished by the
Circles into account. In its last meeting held on 25.09.2008, it was

observed that three monuments reported as untraceable in Jammu &
Kashmir and one monument in Karnataka have, in fact, got
submerged in the reservoirs of dams. In respect of some monuments,
which are reported to be damaged/destroyed because of
development/urbanization, the Committee has to ascertain the facts.
In regard to other untraceable monuments, the concerned Circles
have been directed to locate the relevant documents in the Circle
archives and make available the same to the Directorate General
urgently.”

1.29 The Committee regret to note that the reply furnished by the
Ministry is silent on their specific recommendation that they devise a
mechanism in consultation with other authorities to ascertain that
there are no hidden remains in a particular area before starting any
new developmental work. The Committee would like to emphasize
that unregulated developmental projects often lead to destruction of
hidden remains of historic structures/ancient monuments particularly
in those areas where there are possibilities of monumental structures
etc. buried in the earth. The Committee note that the reply furnished
by the Ministry is also silent about the recommendation of ‘fixing the
responsibility’ in case of untraceable monuments. The Committee find
it highly deplorable that the field offices of ASI as well as respective
Circles have not been made accountable for this debacle. The
Committee view this as casual approach on part of ASI & Ministry and
completely deprecate this tendency.
The Committee would like to emphasize that since, out of 35
untraceable centrally protected monuments, twelve are in the National
Capital (Delhi), the Ministry must understand the gravity of the
problem and should take expeditious steps to fix the responsibility in
this regard as well as ensure the non-occurrence of the same in
future.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation
and expect that the Ministry would take appropriate action and also
intimate about the same to the Committee within six months.

Implementation of Recommendations
1.30 The Committee would like to emphasise that they attach the
utmost importance to the implementation of the recommendations
accepted by the Government. They would, therefore, urge that the
Government should keep a close watch so as to ensure expeditious
implementation of the recommendations accepted by them. In case it
is not possible to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with
reasons for non-implementation.
1.31 The Committee desire that replies in respect of the
recommendations contained in Chapter V of the Report may be
finalized and the final replies of the Government furnished to the
Committee without any delay.

     CHAPTER II
Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the
Government
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1)
The Committee took up the subject ‘Maintenance of Monuments by
ASI’ for examination and had detailed interactions with the representatives
of Ministry of Culture and ASI. The Committee note that ASI was set up in
1861 with the objectives of conserving and preserving the monuments of
the country, taking up archeological excavations, epigraphical survey,
maintenance of sites, museums and imparting training in archeology. ASI
regulates all archaeological activities in the country as per the provisions of
the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958.
It also implements Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 1972. There are 24
Circles, 6 Excavation Branches, 2 Temple Survey Projects, 1 Building
Survey Project, 1 Pre-history Branch, 1 Science Branch, 2 Epigraphy
Branch and 1 Horticulture Branch through which ASI performs its functions.
As on date ASI is maintaining 3667 monuments. After going into activities
of ASI, the Committee are of the view that there is sufficient scope for
improvement in several spheres of functioning of ASI in regard to
maintenance of monuments and archaeological sites and remains of
national importance. These aspects have been dealt with in detail by the
Committee in the succeeding paragraphs.
   Reply of the Government
Archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by or
under law made by Parliament to be of national Importance’ is a subject
listed as Concurrent under the Seventh Schedule List III(Entry no. 40) of

the Constitution of India. The ASI maintains and preserves centrally
protected monuments in accordance with a central law viz. The Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958
while the State have their own protection lists as per their respective
legislations.
 With regard to excavation and explorations, the AMASR Act, 1958
provides that ‘No State Government shall undertake or authorize any
person to undertake any excavation without the previous approval of the
Central Government’. Co-ordination between the State Government and
Central Government does become necessary as the ASI is the only agency
to control excavation and exploration activities in the entire country.
In accordance with the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act 1972,
certain types of antiquities are required to be registered for while
Registering Officers have been appointed in various States of India. Apart
from those working within the ASI, some of the Registering Officers are
presently working under the State Archaeology Departments. ASI provides
annual funding for meeting the salaries of these Registering Officers, who
also report directly to ASI about their progress of work and send copies of
the Registration Certificates for maintenance in the Data Bank of the ASI.
Further, the movement of antiquities from one place to another can be
done with the written permission of the Director General, ASI.
These existing mechanisms provide avenues to ASI for getting
information regarding the activities of State Archaeology Departments.
However, the interaction is limited as the Ministry of Culture/ASI do not
have any centrally sponsored or central sector schemes for assistance to
State Archaeology Departments. Hence, the State Government’s
accountability to the Central Government is difficult to enforce. While a
closer coordination between ASI and the State Archaeology Departments is
required, working out its  mechanism and modalities will need consultation
with the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1.12.2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3)
ASI operates Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 1972 and Rules 1973.
This Act provides (i) compulsory registration of notified categories of
antiquities; (ii) regulating the export trade in antiquities and art treasures;
(iii) prevention of smuggling and fraudulent dealings in antiquities; (iv)
compulsory acquisition of antiquities and art treasures for preservation in
public places; and (v) certain other matters connected therewith or
incidental or ancillary thereof. The Committee note that in the present
scenario, Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 1972 is not being effectively
implemented and has certain lacunae such as there is no provision for
verification of registered antiquities, assessing the damage or loss on
account of defacement, the movement of the antiquity in the country, its
documentation, etc. The entire responsibility for investigating the theft or
prevention of theft is that of the law enforcing agency.
The Committee note that Cabinet Note and Draft Bill are being
finalized and therefore recommend that amendments should be proposed
for strengthening the Act further with a view to effectively checking the
illegal trade and smuggling of the antiquities and conferring greater powers
on the enforcing authorities and making punishment deterrent by
enhancing the limit of imprisonment on violation of the provisions of the Act.
The Committee also recommend that local panchayats, patwaris and
municipalities should also be involved in taking care of the heritage.
   Reply of the Government
 A mechanism for regulation of the movement of registered antiquities
within the country and their documentation already exist in Sections 14 and
17 of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972.  The other concerns
expressed by the Committee (proper verification of registered antiquities,
assessment of the damage/loss on account of defacement etc., and

deterrence of illegal trade and smuggling) have been addressed in the
amendments proposed to the AAT Act.  However, the proposed
amendments have now been seen to require revision to take into account
the global scenario in respect of trade in antiquities.  This exercise has
been undertaken.
 Under the cultural awareness programmes implemented by the ASI,
local authorities, general public, school/college students are involved, and
adequate publicity is given through print and other media.  Brochures and
booklets highlighting the implementation of the protection and preservation
of heritage are freely distributed on the occasions of World Heritage Day,
World Heritage Week, Museums day, Republic Day and Independence
Day.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5)
The Committee note that a project on National Mission on Monument
and Antiquities has been prepared and launched for a period of five years
i.e. 2007-2012 with the objective to prepare National Register and set up
State level data base of Built Heritage sites and antiquities; promote
awareness programme concerning the benefits of preserving built heritage
sites and antiquities; extend training facility and capacity building to the
concerned State Departments, local bodies, NGO’s, universities, etc. help
in developing synergy between institutions like ASI, State Governments,
concerned institutions and NGO’s for ensuring close interaction. The
Committee desire that Ministry of Culture should plan the project properly
and ensure strict compliance in the fixed term of five years i.e. 2007-2012.
The Committee further recommend that personnel who are to be
hired for the Mission should be professional and should have sufficient
experience in archaeology. These personnel can also be retired efficient
personnel of ASI.
Reply of the Government
The National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities has devised
detailed plans for successful implementation of its mandate within the
stipulated time frame of five years i.e. 2007-2012.
 The technical staff presently working with the National Mission on
Monuments and Antiquities are well qualified professional archaeologists
from Archaeological Survey of India having sufficient knowledge and
experience in their respective fields.  Besides, qualified archaeologists
outside the ambit of Archaeological Survey of India are also engaged to
collect and process the data that are being collected by the National

Mission on Monuments and Antiquities.  Further the National Mission also
plans to engage qualified archaeologists on contractual basis.
 Keeping in view the need for effective implementation of the mandate
of the National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities at the State level, a
State Level Implementation Committee (SLIC) is being formed in all
States/UTs with members from ASI and State Department of Archaeology
and Museums, professional archaeologists, historians etc.
Secretary(Culture) of the respective State will function as the Chairman of
the Committee.  So far SLICs have been formed in 18 States.  The
nominated professionals, both by respective State Governments and
Government of India, include retired archaeologists from Archaeological
Survey of India, retired archaeologists from concerned State departments,
archaeologists and historians from Universities, research organizations etc.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 7)
India is an active member of World Heritage from 1977. UNESCO
has declared 27 sites as World Heritage Sites in India. UNESCO provide
no direct financial support to these world heritage sites, though it helps ASI
in the form of capacity building i.e. for training. It provides a marginal
financial support only to a site which is declared as a World Heritage Site in
danger. During evidence the Committee were informed that a special
provision is made in the budget allocation of ASI for World Heritage Sites.
The Committee note that there are two world heritage sites in danger in
India namely Hampi in Karnataka and Manas in Assam and only limited
funds are available under the UNESCO for these sites. The Committee are
of the view that protection of these sites which are of exceptional interest
and universal value is the concern of the nation and therefore recommend
that sufficient budget allocation should be made in ASI budget and all
efforts should be made to invite national and international organisations for
providing financial support for the protection/conservation of World Heritage
Sites at Hampi and Manas.
Reply of the Government
The total allotment under Special Repairs(Plan) for the year 2008-
2009 for Hampi World Heritage Site is Rs.65 Lakhs and allotment and
expenditure for the last three years are as under:-

Year Budget Allotted Expenditure
2005-06 90,94,121 90,94,121
2006-07 96,53,167 96,53,167
2007-08 1,52,68,807 1,52,68,807
Land Acquisition in 2007-
08 under head Capital
Outlay
6,72,74,690
 The Hampi Foundation has entered into MoU with Karnataka State
Government for restoration of Chandramouleshwara temple, a State
protected monument at Anegondi.  The work is in progress.
 Hampi Foundation has entered into MoU with ASI and National
Culture Fund for taking up restoration of Krishna Temple, Hampi, a
centrally protected monument.  Work is yet to commence.
 ASI has entered into MoU with Janssen Pharmaceutica, Belgium in
2005 for studying bio-deterioration of monuments at Hampi and  Dariya
Daulat Bagh, Srirangapatna.  After collecting the samples, the Janssen
Pharmaceutica has supplied chemical formulation for testing.  The
Chemistry Branch, ASI, Mysore is carrying out the testing.
 The details of financial assistance received from UNESCO from
2004-05 to 2007-08 are given below:-
Sl.No. Year Amount Allotted Head of Account
1. 2004-05 12,16,770 OE(NP)
2. 2005-06 6,82,224 8443 Civil
Deposit
3. 2006-07 3,25,000 Advt. &
Pub.(Plan)
4. 2007-08 7,35,975 8443 Civil
Deposit

Manas
 UNESCO provided some funding support to Manas Wildlife
Sanctuary in the 1990s for improvement of infrastructure.  Details of funds
provided are not available in the Ministry of Environment and Forests as
UNESCO directly provided the funds to the Manas Wildlife Sanctuary/State
Government.
The budget allocation for Manas Wildlife Sanctuary in the last three
years by the Ministry of Environment & Forest under the scheme of Project
Tiger is as follows:
Sl.No. Year Release
(Rupees in
lakhs)
1. 2005-06 80.00
2. 2006-07 30.00
3. 2007-08 60.00
 As per the information available with Ministry of Environment &
Forest, no other financial support has been provided to Manas Wildlife
Sanctuary in the past except by UNESCO and Government of India as
indicated above.  However, a UNESCO funded project covering four
National Heritage Sites namely Kaziranga National Park & Manas Wildlife
Sanctuary in Assam, Keoladev National Park in Rajasthan and Nanda Devi
National Park in Uttarakhand, has been launched on 25.7.2007.  The total
budget for the project is only US $ 1.829 million out of which about US$
874080 (60% of the total budget) is earmarked for Manas and Kaziranga
National Parks in Assam in the ratio of 60 and 40 percent respectively.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9)
The Committee note that all the revenue earned by ASI is remitted to
the Consolidated Fund of India and ASI do not get any share of this
revenue. The Committee were informed that ASI has formulated a proposal
for creation of “Non-Lapsable fund for National Monuments of ASI by
earmarking part of the income generated by sale of entry tickets for a
separate fund for conservation and preservation as well as for development
of tourist amenities in those monuments. Moreover, the Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission has also agreed in principle with the proposal.
The Committee are of the view that if ASI gets some percentage from
the revenue, definitely they will make earnest efforts to increase their
revenue. Moreover, they will spend it on maintaining the monuments, which
will automatically curtail ASI’s budget. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the matter should be pursued vigorously at the highest
level with the Ministry of Finance with a request that a part of the ticketed
revenue should accrue to ASI.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Culture has been pursuing with the Ministry of
Finance for creation of a non-lapsable fund that will permit ASI to plough
back the revenue generated by the ASI through entrance fee levied on
visitors to centrally protected monuments and to use the same for the
maintenance of the monuments.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 17)
The Committee feel that there is a great need to update the old maps.
It is very distressing to note that neither ASI nor Ministry of Culture has felt
the need to update the maps which are 20 to 30 year old. As every year,
many sites are excavated and explored, it has become imperative to
update the old maps. The Committee also note that a scheme was started
to have an Atlas of 50 years in which the situation of India, at a given point
of time, was to be depicted. But it could not materialize. The Committee
recommend that for carrying out updation of maps of ASI, Ministry should
fix a time limit and earnest efforts should be made to start the scheme to
have an Atlas of 50 years and ensure its earliest completion.
Reply of the Government
The Government of India has recently launched the National Mission
for Monuments and Antiquities.  One of the aims of this Mission is to create
thematic maps of various periods and cultures.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para  No. 21)
The Committee note that museums play a pivotal role in representing
the history as small and movable antiquities recovered from ancient sites
are kept here with the remains to which they belong so that they may be
studied amid their natural surroundings. ASI is maintaining 41 site
museums and is initiating steps for upgradation/modernization of the
selected site museums in a phased manner. ASI in collaboration with the
National Museum of India has empanelled architects and designers after
inviting applications through Expression of Interest and due screening. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should provide
sufficient funds to enable ASI to upgrade/modernize the site museums as
they are an integral part of monuments. ASI should take expeditious efforts
to upgrade and modernize all site museums in collaboration
with National Museum of India in time bound manner to attract more
visitors/tourists.
The brochures/pamphlets are distributed free of cost to the visitors.
The Committee note that very few copies of brochures/pamphlets are being
distributed to visitors. The level of cultural consciousness in India has risen
tremendously and common man wants to know more about the history.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that adequate copies of literature in
the form of brochures/pamphlets and guide books should be made
available at these museums to keep the visitors apprised of the relevant
facts of antiquities, etc.

   Reply of the Government
 The Archaeological Survey of India has taken up holistic upgradation
and modernization of the museums under its control in a phased manner.
The following museums have been identified for phased upgradation and
modernization during the current fiscal year 2008-09.
Archaeological Museums at Red Fort (Mumtaj Mahal), Delhi
The conservation work of the selected colonial building No.B-1
identified for shifting the Archaeological Museum Red Fort is in progress.
Indian War Memorial Museum, Red Fort, Delhi
The conservation work of the selected colonial building No.B-2
identified for shifting the Indian War Memorial Museum, Red Fort is in
progress.
Archaeological Museum, Kamlapur Hampi
The modernization/upgradation is undertaken in the said museum
such as the ramp for physically handicapped, toilets are improved at the
level of international standard and museum shops etc.
Archaeological Museum, Nagarjunakonda (A.P)
The work pertaining improvement of lighting in the display system
and electrification work, improvement of cafeteria, construction of new
reserve collection storage for antiquities are being taken up in the
Archaeological Museum  at Nagarjunakonda.
Distribution of brochures/pamphlets to the visitors and sale of guide
books at monuments/museums is arranged on the sale counters by the
respective Circles.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 24, Para No. 24)
The Committee are perturbed to note that only 14 cases out of 44
cases of the theft of idols, statues which have been reported are solved
during last five years. The Committee note that ASI has huge shortage of
monument attendants. To cope with this shortage, ASI has deployed
private security guards, CISF and local police at centrally protected
monuments, archaeological sites and museums. To keep a check on theft
and smuggling, an Act was brought into force (Antiquities and Treasures
Act, 1972) but this Act has many lacunae and amendments are required to
be proposed in this regard to make it more stringent. A Draft Bill has been
finalized. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Culture
should take concrete steps to get the Act amended to curb the cases of
rampant theft and smuggling and provision for stringent punishment for the
culprit be included in the amending Bill.
The Committee are also of the view that as in India we have a very
powerful Panchayati Raj system, the Ministry should avail benefit of it. The
Ministry should devise such a mechanism in which Gram Pnachayat,
Patwaris, etc. could be involved to take care of heritage, in the process of
checking illicit trafficking of antiquities, etc. The Committee recommend that
Ministry of Culture should also take immediate steps to get back the idols,
statues recovered by police or security agencies in their possession.
Reply of the Government
A mechanism for regulation of the movement of registered antiquities
within the country and their documentation already exist in Sections 14 and
17 of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972.

The other concerns expressed by the Committee (proper verification
of registered antiquities, assessment of the damage/loss on account of
defacement etc., and deterrence of illegal trade and smuggling) have been
addressed in the amendments proposed to the AAT Act.  However, the
proposed amendments have now been seen to require revision to take into
account the global scenario in respect of trade in antiquities.  This exercise
has been undertaken.
 The ASI involves local authorities, general public, school/college
students by giving adequate publicity through print and other media.
Brochures and booklets highlighting the implementation of the protection
and preservation of heritage are freely distributed on the occasions of
World Heritage Day, World Heritage Week, Museums day, Republic day
and Independence day.
 As per the law the property recovered by the law enforcing agencies
remain in their custody till such time the relevant case is disposed off  by
the Court of Law, hence the delay.  However, as and when the litigations
are concluded as per the directions of the Hon’ble Court stolen properties
are taken into possession by the ASI.
    (Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

 Recommendation (Sl. No. 26, Para No. 26)
The Committee note that India’s rich culture and historic heritage is
embodied in its ancient monuments and this priceless heritage is being
preserved with limited resources. It is neither wise nor prudent to get ASI
alone to shoulder the responsibility of conservation, excavation of all the
monuments and they therefore strongly recommend that the Ministry of
Culture and ASI should make all sincere efforts to bring public and private
sectors to come forward to perform their rightful role in promoting and
preserving India’s cultural heritage. ASI should periodically bring out a
publication detailing the monuments where such projects can be taken up.
The Committee are also informed that in order to facilitate the infusion of
private and public sector funds into the field of heritage presentation,
National culture fund was established in 1996. The Committee recommend
that modalities of NCF should be discussed with FICCI, CII and other
corporate houses. Benefits of the contribution made in NCF for promotion
of public private partnership and salient features of MOU i.e. NCF will be
accountable to each donor in respect of funds donated and donors can
appoint and monitor the executive agencies etc. should invariably be
advertised. The Committee are also of the opinion that public/private
partnership should be accepted and availed without any undue benefits for
private partners..
Reply of the Government
A publication on ASI & NCF has been printed in English.  Its Hindi
version is in the Press.  To invite participation under the NCF, ASI has
listed 100 selected monuments in this publication.  However, the list of 100
monuments is not exclusive and a donor could select any monument which
is protected by the Archaeological Survey of India for funding a project

through the NCF. The publication also gives details about the NCF
Scheme.
 ASI is in consultation with the Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) right from 2006.  In 2007, ASI formally
informed FICCI about the possibility of public-private partnership and the
need for attracting more corporate bodies to partner with National Culture
Fund (NCF) in heritage conservation.  ASI has also supplied them the list of
monuments identified by ASI for public-private partnership.
 Similarly, Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) has also set up a
task force on public-private partnership in management of public utilities in
and around monuments (listed by the ASI) under the aegis of CII National
Committee on Tourism and Heritage and invited ASI to join the task force.
 Director General, ASI has also invited corporate bodies to enter into a
MoU with the Archaeological Survey of India for financing conservation of
monuments and/or for creation of visitor facilities.  Besides, DG, ASI has
also written to the Presidents of CII on 29.5.2007 and the Associated
Chamber of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM).
 No undue benefits are given to private partners.  However, any
project covered under the NCF is entitled to the following:
• 100% tax rebate under Section 80G of the Income Tax Act.
• Due acknowledgement of the contributions at the monument site
and also in the publications of the ASI.
• The donor can choose a variety of activities for financing.
• Flexibility in project management through a mutually agreed MoU.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 27&28, Para No. 27&28)
The Committee note that most of the monuments do not have basic
tourist facilities/amenities like drinking water, toilet, kiosks etc. Even they do
not have the proper approach road connecting the monument to the
nearest airport/railway station. The Committee are also constrained to note
that even after the lapse of many decades, Ministry is still planning to give
instructions to its officers to prepare plans for providing such amenities.
The Committee depricate the attitude of the Ministry/ASI and very strongly
recommend that they should make available to visitors all the basic
facilities like drinking water, toilets, kiosks approach pathways, signage’s,
ramps for disabled persons, visitor benches etc. Ministry of Culture and ASI
should approach and co-ordinate with respective State Governments,
tourism Departments and local Governments. The Ministry of Culture/ASI
should also give incentives to the private sector to construct hotels etc near
the monument in order to attract more and more tourists/visitors.
 The Committee note that follow up action on complaints/suggestions
received at the circle offices as well as headquarters of ASI and recorded in
the visitors/suggestion book is taken by ASI. The Committee recommend
that redressal system should further be strengthened and visitors
suggestions book/complaint box should be kept at all historical monuments
of national importance. One higher official should be made responsible for
attending and taking the remedial steps on the complaints/suggestions
received from the visitors of monuments under his circle/branch.

Reply of the Government (27&28)
The field offices of the ASI have been directed to make all efforts for
providing basic tourist amenities i.e. drinking water, toilets, approach
pathways, signages, ramps for disabled persons, visitor benches, etc. at
centrally protected monuments.  They have also been asked to ensure that
visitor suggestion book/complaint box are provided at all the centrally
protected monuments. All SA(s) have also been requested to either check
the visitors/complaint book personally or though their authorized
representatives at regular intervals and authenticate the entries made
therein.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

CHAPTER III
Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of Government’s reply
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6)
The Committee note that the Ministry have tentatively estimated in
the context of preparation of the Eleventh Five Year Plan proposals that the
annual allocation for conservation of all monuments should be Rs.300
crores.  The estimation was not vetted technically before its projection. The
reasons put forth in support of the estimation was that Rs.100 crore are
being spent on 1000 monuments so the estimation for 3667 monuments
was Rs.300 crore. The Committee consider this projection hypothetical and
abysmally low because the cost of maintenance of monument will definitely
vary depending on the size and condition of the monument and therefore
recommend that Ministry should ensure that the estimates of projects are
based on realistic assessment of requirement of funds and all technical
aspects should be considered before projection of estimates. A separate
fund should be allocated for excavation work.
Reply of the Government
The funds are requisitioned on the basis of requirement of
conservation, preservation, restoration and maintenance work to be taken
up as well as the capacity of the Circle offices to undertake the works. The
conservation work of the monuments is a complicated process which
cannot be assessed only by the quantum of the money spent as sometimes
a policy of least intervention in the protected structure may be more
appropriate as per international guidelines to maintain the authenticity and
integrity of the monument. The future requirements of funds are projected
on the basis of utilization of allocated funds and availability of other
resources. As the conservation work of the monuments is a continuous

process with much inherent uncertainty, it is difficult to give definite
estimates.  Separate funds are allocated for excavation works.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 13)
The Committee note that there are various institutes like National
Museum Institute, training institute in the archives, institute of archaeology.
The review Committee headed by RN Mirdha, MP have suggested that it
may grow as the seat of higher learning and research, it may be upgraded
as National Institute of Archaeology and art history with the status of a
deemed university with five major schools of Indian Archaeology, World
Archaeology, History of Art, Conservation and Heritage Management and
Archaeological Science. The Committee are also of the opinion and have
recommended that Ministry of Culture should take all sincere efforts to take
a decision to declare it National Institute of Archaeology and Art History.
As regards in-take of students, the Committee are informed that at
present 300 students have applied but after written test and interview only
15 students are taken. The Committee are of the view that number of seats
in the institute should be increased and recommend that the curriculum
should be made more attractive, job oriented so as to compete with
international standard so that bright students get themselves enrolled to
study archaeology and subsequently get an avenue to serve and in turn
ASI and State Archaeology Departments may also get trained personnel.
Reply of the Government
  The Archaeological Survey of India proposes to develop a new
campus of the Institute of Archaeology at Greater Noida, where 25 acres of
land had been acquired some years back.  The work for the preparation of
master plan for the new campus has been assigned to Educational
Consultants India Ltd. (a Govt. of India Enterprise), Noida.  The work is in
progress.  The number of seats for admission to the Post Graduate
Diploma will be increased once the required infrastructure is in place.

However for the present, upto two in-service officials sponsored by a State
Government/Museum, who qualify in the entrance test are admitted to the
Post Graduate Diploma Course in addition to fifteen students. We already
have a National Institute of Museology, Art History and Conservation,
already declared a deemed university. As such there may be no need to
set up a similar institute.
 An institutional mechanism has been introduced to review the
curriculum through a Board of Studies comprising eminent professionals –
educationists/ academicians drawn from different disciplines such as
archaeology, conservation, museology, art & iconography, architecture, etc.
In the meeting of the Board of Studies for the Department of Archaeology
held on 27.06.2008, the Papers/Courses were reviewed and updated
(Paper 1-Principles and Methods of Archaeology; Paper II Application of
Science in Archaeology; Paper III Prehistoric Archaeology; Paper IV
Protohistoric Archaeology).
 (Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 14)
Conservation and Preservation is the prime task of ASI and the policy of
conservation should primarily be aimed at ensuring structural stability of the
monuments without affecting any change in original features of
monuments. The Committee note that ASI is giving emphasis on just
renovating the monuments rather than conserving and preserving the
monuments with original characteristics and they are of the view that ASI
should not betray the nation by tampering with the monuments of national
importance. ASI should not do just cosmetic work. By this, the very purpose
of constituting ASI will be defeated. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that ASI with the collaboration of other Ministries, agencies, institutes, etc.
should devise new methods/techniques for conserving and preserving the
monuments without losing their originality. ASI should also seek advice of
experts of international agencies in this regard. The Committee find that
ASI takes a considerable amount of time to repair and renovate a
monument. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a definite time
frame should be fixed for conservation and preservation of monuments.
Reply of the Government
Every care is taken to maintain authenticity and integrity of the
monuments while undertaking repairs. As a policy, emphasis is not given
on the renovation of the monuments. The thrust of the conservation work is
to ensure the structural stability of the monuments. To achieve this,
sometimes restoration work becomes essential which is attended to after
proper documentation of the existing fabric and on the basis of known facts
and not on any conjecture. No cosmetic work is undertaken for the
monuments as in the majority of cases finishes are not applied while doing
the conservation work. Wherever necessary advice is sought from other
Governmental institutions like Central Building Research Institute, Survey

of India, Geological Survey of India, Indian Institute of Technology, National
Institute of Technology, Structural Engineering Research Centre etc. as
well as from international experts. Conservation work of monuments is a
slow and continuous process as it involves proper research,
documentation, location of appropriate skilled workers, materials etc.
Hence it is difficult to fix a definite time frame for accomplishment of the
task.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

CHAPTER IV
Recommendations/observations in respect of which
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2)
The Committee note that there is no institutional mechanism for State
Archaeology Departments to keep the ASI apprised about the activities of
State Archaeology Departments except periodical meetings with
Secretaries of State Culture Departments. No regular reporting system is
maintained. DG, ASI during oral evidence informed the Committee that
there is an informal relation between State Archaeology Departments and
the ASI. But the Committee are      of the view that there should be a formal
arrangement between ASI and State Archaeology Departments. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Culture should devise an
institutional mechanism to be followed by ASI and State Archaeology
Departments so that ASI can get the information regarding the activities of
State Archaeology Departments on regular basis. It is essential that regular
reporting system should also be followed so that ASI is apprised of the
activities of State Archaeology Departments.
Reply of the Government
Archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by or
under law made by Parliament to be of national Importance’ is a subject
listed as Concurrent under the Seventh Schedule List III(Entry no. 40) of
the Constitution of India. The ASI maintains and preserves centrally
protected monuments in accordance with a central law viz. The Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958
while the State have their own protection lists as per their respective
legislations.

 With regard to excavation and explorations, the AMASR Act, 1958
provides that ‘No State Government shall undertake or authorize any
person to undertake any excavation without the previous approval of the
Central Government’. Co-ordination between the State Government and
Central Government does become necessary as the ASI is the only agency
to control excavation and exploration activities in the entire country.
In accordance with the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act 1972,
certain types of antiquities are required to be registered for while
Registering Officers have been appointed in various States of India. Apart
from those working within the ASI, some of the Registering Officers are
presently working under the State Archaeology Departments. ASI provides
annual funding for meeting the salaries of these Registering Officers, who
also report directly to ASI about their progress of work and send copies of
the Registration Certificates for maintenance in the Data Bank of the ASI.
Further, the movement of antiquities from one place to another can be
done with the written permission of the Director General, ASI.
These existing mechanisms provide avenues to ASI for getting
information regarding the activities of State Archaeology Departments.
However, the interaction is limited as the Ministry of Culture/ASI do not
have any centrally sponsored or central sector schemes for assistance to
State Archaeology Departments. Hence, the State Government’s
accountability to the Central Government is difficult to enforce. While a
closer coordination between ASI and the State Archaeology Departments is
required, working out its  mechanism and modalities will need consultation
with the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para. No. 8)
The Committee are perturbed to note that ASI could generate only
Rs.43.59, Rs.52.89 and Rs.58.07 crore as revenue during the years 2003-
04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively. It is too meager in comparison to
the number of monuments. It seems ASI as well as Ministry of Culture are
not making efforts to increase their revenue. The Committee are of the view
that economic potential of this sector has not been realized either by ASI or
by the Ministry of Culture. If monuments have something different in the
manner of presentation of its history as well as its indoor activities, it will not
only attract domestic tourists but will definitely attract international tourists.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Culture as well as
ASI should take concrete steps for increasing their revenue by publicizing
more effectively through electronic media or by organizing more cultural
programmes, light and sound programme, puppet shows, screening
documentaries, etc. at these sites with a lead taken by Ministry of Tourism
and State Tourism Departments. In this way, two purposes will be served,
revenue generation will be more and our invaluable culture will also get a
boost.
Reply of the Government
Regarding higher revenue generation as well as to give a boost to our
invaluable heritage, all the ASI field offices have been directed to take
concrete steps for increasing their revenue by publicizing more effectively
through electronic media or by organizing cultural programmes, Sound
and Light programmes, puppet shows, screening documentaries, etc. at
centrally protected monuments in consultation with the Ministry of Tourism
and State Tourism Departments.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 15)
The Committee note that according to Section 4 of Ancient
Monuments and Archaeology Sites and Remain Act, 1958, whenever an
ancient monument or archaeological site and remain is found worthy of
central protection keeping in view its historical, archaeological and artistic
importance, two months notice is issued through an official gazette
notification expressing its intention to declare the monuments,
archaeological site to be of national importance. Any private individual,
State Governments, voluntary organizations having any objection, can file
it. After disposing of all the objections, ASI declare the particular
monument/archaeological site as a monument/site of national importance.
The Committee note that in all this process, there is no role of State
Government where the particular archaeological/monument site exists.
Though DG, ASI during oral evidence admitted that ASI generally consult
State Government before declaration of monument/site as a monument/site
of national importance. But there is no such provision in the Act. Moreover
DG, ASI himself agreed with the view of the Committee that it is better to
consult the State Governments before a decision is taken to declare a
monument as centrally protected. Cooperation of the State Governments
should also be sought in acquisition of land for declaring a
monument/archaeological site to be of national importance. Local bodies
such as municipalities etc. may also be involved in the process. In view of
this, the Committee recommend that a provision should be included in the
Act accordingly and State Governments should invariably be consulted
before taking a decision to declare a monument as centrally protected.

Reply of the Government
All the field offices of the ASI have been directed to ensure that
before initiating any action to declare a monument/site as of national
importance, the State Department of Archaeology, District Administration of
the respective State as well as the local Municipality of the area should also
be consulted and their comments obtained thereon.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 16)
The Committee appreciate that ASI has done a lot in the field of
excavation and exploration. But there are still many sites which need to be
explored. Exploration and excavation are very important to fill up the gap in
the cultural sequence of Indian Archaeology, throwing more light on lesser-
known cultures and protecting an area which is threatened by
submergence owing to construction of dams, being destroyed or damaged
due to absolutely necessary developmental works, natural calamities, etc.
So the onus lies with the ASI and Ministry to take concrete steps in this
direction. The Committee recommend that since it is a computer era, ASI
should employ modern technologies such as GIS (Geographical
Information System), GPR (Ground Penetrating Radar System) etc. for
accurate documentation of site features and their quick analysis.
The Ministry should also review the methods or systems adopted by
other countries for exploration and excavation work for bringing ASI’s
existing methodology for excavation and exploration at par with
international standards.
Reply of the Government
The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) tries to employ the latest
techniques in exploration, excavation and documentation wherever
possible.  Since some of  the sophisticated equipments such as the Ground
Penetrating Radar (GPR) are not with ASI, the department makes concrete
efforts in the areas of scientific collaboration with institutions like Indian
Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur in this direction.  IIT, Kanpur has also
recently set up a Center for Archaeological Sciences and Technology
(CAST) which will be equipped with all the latest technologies that can be
employed in archaeology.  Under this collaborative initiative, ASI and IIT,
Kanpur have recently employed latest techniques like GPS, Total Station

Survey, GPR Survey in the areas of site documentation and surface
survey.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 18)
The Committee are astonished to note that there are so many
excavation reports pending for the last ten to fifteen years and even PMO
has taken note of the lacuna. DG, ASI during oral evidence stated that the
main problem for not submitting these reports is transfer or retirement of
concerned officials. The Committee views this seriously and recommend
that the official concerned with the excavation report should not be
transferred during the period of preparing the report and a time frame for
submitting the excavation reports should be fixed. On non-submission of
report in the prescribed time, strict action should be taken against all
concerned. The Committee also strongly recommend that the Ministry
should take expeditious steps to get all pending reports completed and no
fresh licence for excavation be considered in favour of the defaulter in the
absence of previous excavation report. For completion of such reports
services of retired officials can also be obtained. The Committee also
desire that the steps taken in this regard and status of pending reports may
be communicated to the Committee within 6 months after the presentation
of the Report.
Reply of the Government
Out of the 56 pending reports with ASI, 23 excavation reports viz., (i)
Udaigiri, (ii) Gudiyam, (iii) Hamri, (iv) Hathab,(v) Satdhara, (vi) Kanganhalli,
(vii) Bekal Fort, (viii) Lachhura, (ix) Besnagar, (x) Lal Kot, (xi) Bhita, (xii)
Mamallapuram, (xiii) Birchabilli Tila, (xiv) Ojiyana, (xv) Boxanagar, (xvi)
Shyamsundar Tila, (xvii) Chandore, (xviii) Tamluk, (xix) Golbai Sasan, (xx)
Thakurani Tila, (xxi) Khajuraho, (xxii) Dholavira (Part Report), (xxiii)
Sravasti (Part Report) have been received. The report on Ayodhya is sub-
judice.

 The ASI has also effected necessary changes in the format for
inviting future proposals for exploration and excavation, to incorporate
specific clauses to prevent pendency in excavation reports in the future.  All
necessary facilities have been extended to both the in service and retired
officers of ASI to complete the pending excavation reports. Further, the
Universities, State Governments and other Research Institutions have been
specifically instructed to clear their pendency in excavation reports.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 20)
The Committee note that due to present phenomenon of terrorism it
has become very necessary to provide stringent security to our national
heritage. ASI is having a tremendous shortfall of monument attendants. An
expert group on archaeology constituted in 1984 by the Government of
India under the Chairmanship of Shri R.N. Mirdha, MP recommended that
ASI should have atleast 9000 monument attendants to provide security to
all important monuments in the country. But ASI has 4000 monument
attendants. In order to cope with this shortfall, ASI which has engaged
State Police, CISF, private security guards and temporary staff, is incurring
a huge financial burden on this account. CISF alone is incurring Rs.9.25
crore expenditure per year on ASI. The Committee is not averse to
engaging other security agencies for security of monuments but is of the
opinion and recommend that instead of investing so much money on other
agencies, ASI should strengthen its own watch and ward staff. It should
give more stress on appointing its own monument attendants. Their watch
and ward staff should be given training periodically in order to bring them at
par with other national level security guards. They should be laced with
new gadgets and scanners, CCTV should be installed at the sites of
national importance and surprise checks should be conducted in order to
ensure the promptness of security staff deputed there.

 Reply of the Government
Regarding strengthening of ASI’s watch & ward staff  and giving them
training in order to bring them at par with other national level security
guards, all the field offices of the ASI have been directed to furnish detailed
proposals regarding implementation of this recommendations of the
Estimates Committee.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 23)
The Committee take serious note of illegal
construction/encroachment taking place near most of the historical
monuments. Such encroachments/illegal constructions lend a bad view to
the monuments and it also affects tourism potentiality of the monuments.
Encroachment should be removed from the vicinity of heritage sites as it
creates an adverse image in the mind of visitors. ASI should deal with this
problem firmly. The Committee also note that in Delhi, a Committee was
constituted and periodical evictions are carried out in Delhi. The Committee
appreciate the action taken by ASI and Delhi Government and recommend
that such type of Committees should be constituted in other States also for
getting the encroachment in nearby areas of monuments evicted. The
Committee are of the view that ASI should be vigilant so that encroachment
does not take place. Once there is encroachment, it becomes very difficult
to remove it. ASI is involved in legal actions for eviction, which is a very
lengthy process. Therefore, the Committee suggest that Ministry should
take stringent steps in this regard such as fencing of all the monuments,
tightening the security, stringent punishment to guilty, fixing the
responsibility of concerned authority to take care, so that no new case of
illegal construction/encroachment occurs in near future.
The Committee also note that under the provisions of the Ancient
Monuments Act, no construction is allowed in the first 100 metres from the
protected limits of a monument and they recommend that construction
should not be allowed in the first 200 metres from the protected limit of a
monument instead of 100 metres. Effective provisions should be
incorporated in the Ancient Monuments Act to safeguard the monuments
from encroachment. The provisions should include stringent punishment

and eviction by law enforcing agencies in case of encroachment. The
Committee also suggest that a Notice Board should be placed near the
monuments giving a warning to people that illegal construction and
encroachment is not permitted nearby monuments and the guilty will be
liable to stringent punishment.
Reply of the Government
 As regards encroachments at centrally protected monuments, all
the field offices of the ASI have been directed to make all possible efforts
under the provisions of AM&ASR Act 1958 and Rules 1959, to adhere to
the recommendations of the Estimates Committee. SA’s of the Circles are
being advised to be more vigilant to ensure prevention of encroachments
within the centrally protected monuments. District Administration/Chief
Secretary of the States have been addressed by DG/Secretary(Culture) to
issue directions to the District / Revenue/Police authorities to provide police
assistance to ASI as and when they are approached.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 25, Para No. 25)
The Committee are aggrieved to note that 35 centrally protected
monuments/sites in the country are untraceable. The major causes for the
disappearance of the ancient monuments and sites are rapid urbanization,
construction of multistoried residential and commercial buildings,
implementation of development projects, etc. The Committee was informed
by ASI that as on date, it may not be possible to fix responsibility. The
Committee view this as casual approach of ASI in this regard. It is highly
deplorable on the part of ASI as well as Ministry of Culture that no
expeditious steps have been taken to trace the centrally protected
monuments. Only instructions were issued to circle offices to personally
verify the status of such monuments/sites, falling under their respective
jurisdiction. No other State except Delhi has bothered to sent a detailed
report in this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry
should pursue vigorously with all the concerned circle offices to give
detailed report within a specified time period and expeditious and concrete
action should be initiated to trace out the missing monuments. The Ministry
should also fix the responsibility in this regard.
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Culture in
consultation with other authorities should devise such a mechanism that
before starting any new developmental work, it should be ascertained that
in that particular area, there are no hidden remains.

Reply of the Government
 Regarding untraceable monuments, all the field offices of the ASI
have been directed to make all possible efforts to trace out the missing
monuments, and furnish detailed report/action initiated in this regard
immediately.  A Committee under the Chairmanship of the Jt.D.G., ASI has
also been constituted to look into the matter. The Committee has met twice
to consider the information furnished by the Circles into account.  In its last
meeting held on 25.09.2008, it was observed that three monuments
reported as untraceable in Jammu & Kashmir and one monument in
Karnataka have, in fact, have got submerged in the reservoirs of dams. In
respect of some monuments, which are reported to be damaged/destroyed
because of development/urbanization, the Committee has directed that all
such places be inspected by the respective heads of the Circles to
ascertain the facts.  In regard to other untraceable monuments, the
concerned Circles have been directed to locate the relevant documents in
the Circle archives and make available the same to the Directorate General
urgently.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

CHAPTER V
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies
of Government are still awaited.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4)
The Committee note that with such a rich cultural heritage and a large
number of built monuments all over the country, it may not be possible
for any single organization, like ASI to take care of the entire built
heritage. Many monuments which are under State List are in a bad
shape. State Governments neither have technically qualified staff nor
have financial resources. The Committee, therefore, very strongly
recommend that National Heritage Site Commission should be
constituted as early as possible with statutory powers to issue directions
to all State Governments. The Committee are also of the view that the
process of ‘listing the buildings as list ‘A’, list ‘B’ and list ‘C’ which has
been adopted in almost all the countries in the world should also be
adopted in our country. The Committee were informed that the cities like
Mumbai, Hyderabad and Chennai have already initiated the process on
these lines. The Committee also recommend that all over the country,
Government must list the heritage buildings, classify them and put
restrictions on any one tampering with these built heritage
buildings/sites.

Reply of the Government
There is no provision at present under the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 under which such listing of
buildings under A, B and C categories could be undertaken. A provision to
this effect will be proposed for incorporation in the draft National Heritage
Sites Commission Bill.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 10)
The Committee is distressed to note that the post of DG, ASI is being
occupied by an administrative officer and not by a professional
archaeologist since 1993. As per recruitment rules, if there are eligible
archaeologists, they could be posted as DG. In the absence of eligible
archaeologist, Government can post anyone from the administrative
services as DG of ASI. The Committee is not satisfied with Ministry’s view,
that this does not hamper the functioning of ASI, because ASI has so many
archaeologists, scientists, historians, engineers and architects. It is very
strange that on the one hand Ministry is of the view that ASI is a
multidisciplinary agency consisting of archaeologists, scientists, historians,
engineers, etc. and on the other hand, Ministry could not find one eligible
person amongst them to post him as DG, ASI since 1993. It is very strange
that Ministry compromises to appoint a person, who does not have any
experience in archaeology but has not sought to amend recruitment rules
to appoint a suitable professional to the post of DG. It seems the
Government is not serious about maintaining country’s valuable heritage.
No doubt, administrative officers are qualified and competent, but their
appointment is for a short period i.e. two-three years. ASI, which deals with
scientific and technical aspects needs a professional who understands the
technicalities of the archaeology. The Committee is not convinced by the
argument put forth by the representatives of the Ministry that since 1993
there have been no eligible officers available in the organization. The
Committee also find that recruitment rules of the ASI were notified in the
year 2002 and amendments could have been made accordingly before
issuing the notification.

The Committee, therefore, recommend that DG, ASI should be a
professional and not just an administrative officer, so that ASI can work
efficiently and effectively with inspired leadership. If need arises, necessary
amendment in the Recruitment Rules can be made accordingly because a
person heading ASI with some experience in archaeology is better than a
person who does not have any experience in archaeology.
Reply of the Government
 The Ministry is currently in the process of amending the recruitment
rules for heads of all attached and subordinate offices under the Ministry of
Culture (which includes ASI). This amendment will enable the institution to
adopt search-cum-selection procedures to select the head of ASI and will
enable selection of professionals to the post.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 11)
The Committee are surprised to note that the post of ADG (Arch)
remained vacant since 1991 because at that time, none of the
Archaeological Survey of India’s officer fulfilled the criteria as laid down in
the recruitment rules for the post of ADG. DG, Archaeological Survey of
India during oral evidence stated that according to Ministry of Finance’s
guidelines, if a post remains vacant for one year, it is deemed to have been
abolished. Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance abolished the post of ADG.
The Committee are of the view that Archaeological Survey of India should
have reconsidered the qualification for the post of ADG, as they were very
well aware of the guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance. The Committee
are further informed that only in 2006 the post of ADG (Arch.) has been
revived after a lot of correspondence at the highest level. The Committee is
astonished to note that the post of ADG was abolished in the absence of
having any officer fulfilling the criteria. In the present circumstances as DG,
ASI is an administrative officer, it was imperative to have the post of ADG
(Arch.). The Ministry of Finance should have preferred to reconsider the
qualification for filling up the post of ADG instead of abolishing the post. In
view of this the Committee recommend that Ministry of Finance should be
considerate if such a situation arises in future and they should reconsider
the recruitment rules instead of abolishing a technical post. The Ministry of
Culture should also take expeditious steps and apprise the Ministry of
Finance about the facts in time.

Reply of the Government
 The post of ADG(Arch.) fell vacant on 7 th October, 1991 on promotion
of its incumbent to the higher post of Director General in ASI. The matter
relating to revival of the posts of ADG was taken up with the Ministry of
Finance and that Ministry approved the proposal for revival of the post vide
ID No. F. 1190/E. Coord.I/2006 dated 1 st September, 2006 with the
prospective effect. Accordingly, the sanction for the revival of the post of
ADG was issued by ASI vide letter dated 11 th September, 2006. The post
was advertised in the Employment News dated 7-13 th July, 2007. In
response to the said advertisement, 11 applications have been received
which include applications of the officers in the feeder grade of Joint
Director in ASI. After completing all formalities, the proposal to fill up the
post has been sent to UPSC vide our letter No. F. 3-20/2006-ASI dated 16 th
September, 2008.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 12)
The Committee note that ASI is not able to keep pace with the
changing requirements due to shortage of manpower. ASI was primarily
formed for survey and conservation of monuments but now they are looking
after the maintenance of monuments also. DG, ASI during oral evidence
informed the Committee that ASI do not have any engineering unit,
conservation architects etc. and due to shortage of staff, they are unable to
take up more monuments which are of outstanding universal value and
importance. The Committee is astonished to note that on one hand ASI is
facing shortage of staff and on the other hand, 49 posts in Gr A, 87 posts in
Gr B and 93 post in Gr C are lying vacant for many years.
Moreover, ASI has not sent any proposal to the Ministry of Culture
and Ministry of Finance for increase in manpower. The Committee
therefore, stress that appropriate steps should be immediately taken to
strengthen the staff position, especially at technical levels viz. architect,
engineers etc. and all the posts which are lying vacant for many years
should be filled up expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
Sincere efforts have been made to fill the vacant posts at different
levels.  DPCs have been conducted from time to time to fill the vacant
posts falling in the promotion quota.  Screening Committee meeting for
Group ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ direct recruitment vacancies, took place in the
Ministry of Culture on 11 th August, 2008. Orders have been issued by the
Ministry to fill up 240 vacant direct recuitment posts in the ASI, in Group B,
C and D categories. Action is also underway for obtaining the approval of

the Screening Committee, headed by the Cabinet Secretary, to fill up 108
vacant posts in the Ministry in Group ‘A’ category. Of these 108 posts, 21
are in the ASI.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 19)
  The Committee note that use of relevant and appropriate technology
for the presentation and maintenance of monuments and rare artifacts is
important to achieve good and lasting results. Though ASI has a full
fledged laboratory in Dehradun and small laboratories in various places, yet
ASI take support from CSIR, SRI Chennai, IIT Kanpur, Central Building
Research Institute at Roorkee and they are unable to create full in-house
laboratories. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that ASI
should strengthen their own laboratories and all efforts should be made to
establish full in house laboratories so that research and development
activities may not hamper. The Committee also note that ASI is not having
facility of Carbon Dating Machine. ASI sends its samples for carbon dating
to Birbal Research Sahani Institute, Lucknow and Physical Research
Laboratory, Ahmedabad. Dating is not being maintained and ascertained
properly. For dating, ASI has to depend on other institutes and these
institutes are more interested in dealing with geological samples not
archaeological samples. These institutes do not give much importance to
determine the time. It is very astonishing to note that in PRL, the samples
of ASI are pending for results for more than two decades.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Culture
should provide Carbon Dating Machine to ASI as dating is very important
aspect. If date is not properly ascertained or maintained, it will be very
difficult to frame up the history in terms of culture or archaeology of sites.
Moreover, this will also cater to the requirements of the State Departments
of Archaeology and universities which are also in the state of uncertainty
about the agency to approach for time determination.

Reply of the Government
At present the ASI does not have in-house facilities for carrying out
dating of archaeological samples.  Through its recent collaboration with IIT,
Kanpur, ASI envisages that dating labs will be established under the Center
for Archaeological Sciences and Technology.  As a first step, the IIT,
Kanpur has planned to establish Thermoluminescence (TL) and Opitcally
Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) laboratories in this Center for dating the
ancient sediments.  As this Center will be a dedicated centre for
archaeology, samples from other archaeological institutions can also be
dated here.
 The Science Branch of the ASI has specialised labs to cater to
various needs and necessities of analysis related to archaeological
samples.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)

Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 22)
The Committee are informed that regular inspections of monuments
are carried out by Circle/Branch officers/officials and officers from DG’s
office. Though the ASI has upgraded three mini-circles to full fledged
circles for effective monitoring and supervisions of the monuments and
sites. But Committee are not satisfied with this arrangement and in view of
this, they recommend that instead of having circles for large number of
monuments, small circles should be formed so that effective monitoring of
monuments can be done. The Committee also suggest that middle level
supervision should also be strengthened. The Committee may be apprised
of the action taken in this regard at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The concerned field offices of the ASI have been directed to furnish
detailed comments and suggestions for ensuring more effective monitoring.
Also, a proposal for strengthening of middle level supervision and creating
smaller Sub-Circles is being formulated for consideration of the Ministry of
Culture.
(Ministry of Culture O.M. 1-6/2008 ASI Dated 1/12/2008)
New Delhi;                FRANCISCO SARDINHA
April 23rd  2010                        Chairman,
Vaisakha 3, 1932 (Saka)             Committee on Estimates

APPENDIX- I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE (2009-2010)
          The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 30th March, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1800 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman
 MEMBERS
2 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3 Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
4 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
5 Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
6 Shri P. Karunakaran
7 Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
8 Shri M. Krishnaswamy
9 Shri Prabodh Panda
10 Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
11 Shri Madan Lal Sharma
12 Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
13 Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Sigh
14 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
15 Shri Lalji Tandon
16 Shri Manish Tewari
17 Shri K.C. Venugopal
             SECRETARIAT
1 Shri U.S. Saxena Joint Secretary
2 Shri Bhupesh Kumar Director
WITNESSES
  ***   ***   ***   ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports and adopted the same with
some modifications/additions:

 (i) Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Culture – ‘Maintenance of
Monuments by Archaeological Survey of India’.
 (ii) ***   ***   ***   ***
3.  The Committee, authorized the Chairman to finalize the Draft Reports in the light of the
modifications and also to make verbal and other consequential changes, if any, arising out of
factual verification by the concerned Ministries and present the same to the House.
4.  ***   ***   ***   ***
5.  ***   ***   ***   ***
6.  ***   ***   ***   ***
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX -II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT OF
THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i)  Total number of recommendations/observations    28
(ii)  Recommendations/observation which have been   11
accepted by the Government
(Sl. Nos. 1,3,5,7,9,17,21,24,26,27,28)
Percentage               39.29%
(iii)  Recommendations/observations which the Committee  03
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply
(Sl. No. 6,13,14)
Percentage               10.71%
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of    08
which Government’s replies have not been accepted
by the Committee
(Sl. Nos. 2,8,15,16,18,20,23,25)
Percentage               28.57%
(v)  Recommendation/Observation in respect of which   06
final replies of Government are still awaited.
(Sl. Nos. 4,10,11,12,19,22)
Percentage               21.43%