 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2013-2014) 
 
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
 
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION 
PROGRAMME 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
2014)  
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI  
 
 
36 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS  
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION 

 
    THIRTY SIXTH 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND 
(NATIONAL AFFORESTATION PROGRAMME 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
….. February, 2014/Magha ……, 1935(S) 
 
 
 
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND 
FORESTS  
 
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION PROGRAMME 
 
_________________ 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 February, 2014 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
….. February, 2014/Magha ……, 1935(S) 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND 
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION PROGRAMME )  
February, 2014  
….. February, 2014/Magha ……, 1935(S)  

 
 
 
CONTENTS  
 
 Page  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013 -14)  (iii) 
INTRODUCTION  (iv) 
                                 PART - I  
               BACKGROUND ANALYSIS  
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
Introductory  
 
1 
      
 (i)  Objectives of NAP 
 
1 
 (ii)  Activities under NAP  2 
 (iii)  New Initiatives under NAP 3 
CHAPTER – II  Organi zational set up and funding  
 
(i)  Organizational Set up  
5 
 
5 
(ii)  Funding Pattern 
  8 
(iii)  Year-wise progress of NAP since its inception 
 
11 
 (iv) Physical and Financial performance during XI p lan and projections 
during Twelfth Plan 
 
12 
Chapter – III  Performance and evaluation  
 
14 
 (i)  Performance  14 
 (ii) Evaluation of NAP 17 
 (iii)  Prospects for NAP 20 
 (iv) Convergence of NAP with Green India Mission ( GIM) 23 
 (v) Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and  Planning 
Authority (CAMPA) 
 
26 
 
PART – II  
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  28-33 
  
 
 

 
 
APPENDICES   
(i) State-wise status of SFDA projects (from 1.4.20 10 to 31.12.2012) 
 
 
34 
(ii) State-wise details of FDAs and JFMCs 
 
36 
(iii) Estimated Mandays Generated during the last t hree years (in lakhs) 
 
37 
(iv) State/UT wise Forest Cover + Tree Cover Estima tes – ISFR 2011 39 
(v) State-wise details of Approved Area (in hectare s) 40 
(vi) State-wise details of Funds released 42 
(vii) Statement of funds released for preparatory a ctivities during 2011-12 
under Green India  Mission 
 
44 
 
ANNEXURES   
 Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 1 1.11.2013 and 
17.02.2014 
45-48 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14) 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
4 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
5 Shri Khagen Das 
6 Shri Pralhad Joshi 
7 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
8 Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
11 Kum. Meenakshi Natrajan 
12 Shri Prabodh Panda 
13 Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu” 
14 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
15 Shri R. Sambasiva Rao 
16 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
17 Vacant 
18 Shri S. Semmalai 
19 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
20 Shri M.I. Shanavas 
21 Shri Adhi Sankar  
22 Shri Rajiv Ranjan (Lalan) Singh 
23 Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
24 Shri Ganesh Singh 
25 Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
26 Shri Jagada Nand Singh 
27 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
28 Smt. Annu Tandon 
29 Shri Mukul Wasnik 
30 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shilpi Chatterjee - Director 
3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Deputy Secretary  
4. Ms. Savdha Kalia  - Executive Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2013-14)  having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their beha lf, present this Thirty Sixth 
Report on ‘National Afforestation Programme’ pertai ning to the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests. 
 
2. The Committee took the oral evidence of the repr esentatives of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests on 11.11.2013. 
 
3. The draft Report on the subject was considered a nd adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 17.02.2014. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e representatives of the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests, who appeared b efore them and placed their 
considered views on the subject. The Committee also  wish to thank them for 
furnishing the information required in connection with examination of the subject.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;         FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
17 February, 2014 
            CHAIRMAN, 
 Magha 28, 1935 (S)      COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES. 
  

 
 
PART – I 
 
Background Analysis  
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
Forests are a vital component to sustain the life s upport system on earth. 
They play a major role in supporting livelihood act ivities of the rural poor contributing 
to the economy of India; mitigating the threat of g lobal warming besides conserving 
the fertile soil; and vulnerable wildlife. Therefor e, conservation of forests has to be 
given prime importance. National Afforestation Prog ramme (NAP) of Ministry of 
Environment and Forests (MoEF), is one such program me which aims at increasing 
and improving the forest and tree cover through sus tainable development of forest 
resources. NAP is a 100 per cent Centrally Sponsore d Scheme implemented 
throughout the country through the institution of J oint Forest Management 
Committees (JFMC) from the year 2002 which provides  synergy between the 
institutional framework and the afforestation programme.  
The National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board (NAEB) was set up in 
August, 1992 to promote afforestation, tree plantin g, ecological restoration and eco-
development activities in the country. 
 
Objectives of NAP 
1.2 NAP is reported to be the flagship scheme of NA EB with the following 
objectives: 
• protection and conservation of natural resources t hrough active involvement 
of the people; 

 
 
• checking land degradation, deforestation and loss of biodiversity; 
• ecological restoration and environmental conservat ion and eco-development; 
• evolving village level people’s organization which  can manage the natural 
resources in and around villages in a sustainable manner; 
• fulfillment of the broader objectives of productiv ity, equity, and sustainability 
for the general good of the people;  
• improve quality of life and self-sustenance aspect  of people living in and 
around forest areas; and  
• capability endowment and skill enhancement for imp roving employability of 
the rural people. 
 
 
Activities under NAP  
1.3 The programme provides for seven different mode ls of plantations for a period 
of five years and the ancillary activities. The different models of plantations under the 
programme are as follows: 
• Aided Natural Regeneration 
• Artificial Regeneration 
• Cane Plantation 
• Bamboo Plantation 
• Silvipasture/Pasture Development 
• Mixed Plantation of trees having MFP and medicinal  value and 
• Regeneration of perennial herbs and shrubs of medi cinal value 
 
According to MoEF, the ancillary activities under N AP include soil and 
moisture conservation, entry point activities and fencing. 
 
 

 
 
1.4 With regard to the current forests cover in the  country, the Secretary, MoEF 
during the course of evidence held on 11.11.2013 deposed as under: 
“the National Forest Policy of 1988 envisages a for est-cum-tree cover of 33 
per cent, one-third of the area in the country, to be brought under forest and 
tree cover. As against that, our current forest and  tree cover is about 78.3 
million hectares, which is about 23.82 per cent, cl ose to 24 per cent of the 
geographical area under forest and tree cover, of w hich roughly about two per 
cent would be tree cover and the rest would be forest cover. So an area to the 
order of 30 million hectares needs to be added to r each the target of 33 per 
cent forest cover in the country.” 
 
 
New Initiatives under NAP 
1.5 It is observed from the Annual Report (2012-13)  of MoEF that a number of 
initiatives have been taken by the Ministry to expe dite the implementation of the 
scheme as well as to improve the qualitative aspect s of implementation. These 
include:  
• Stepping-up monitoring and evaluation of the Fores t Development Agency 
(FDA) projects by activation of State-level Coordin ation Committees for NAP, 
increased field visit by officers, and expeditious commissioning by the States 
of first independent concurrent evaluation of FDA projects  
• Increased number of training programmes for the fr ontline staff and JFM 
committee 
• Organising district -level interdepartmental linka ge workshops for promoting 
linkage of NAP with other developmental programmes for enhancing the 
sustainability of JFM 
• Initiating pilot projects for establishing forest- based microenterprises which 
will provide experiential learning for scaling-up s uch activity with a view to 
consolidate the JFM during the Eleventh Plan. 
• Comprehensive amendment in Guidelines of NAP schem e has been made to 
promote further decentralization by delegating more  responsibilities to State 
Forest Departments with respect to processing of th e FDA project proposals, 
greater organic linkage of JFMCs with Gram Panchaya ts, increased security 

 
 
of the elected members of JFMCs through longer tenu re of JFMC presidency, 
capacity building in particular of frontline staff of Forest Department and JFMC 
members especially with regard to local management and administrative 
responsibilities. 
 
 
 
1.6 Inspite of the above initiatives, the India Sta te of Forest Report 2011 of the 
MoEF has revealed that the forest cover of the coun try has decreased by 367 sq. 
kms. during 2009 to 2011 with green areas decreasin g in 14 States/UT viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizo ram, Assam, Kerala, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Trip ura and Chandigarh. Also the 
practice of shifting cultivation in the North-East States has adversely impacted the 
forest cover in the North-East region.  
 
 
 
1.7 In the light of the above, the subject ‘Nationa l Afforestation Programme’ was 
taken up by the Committee on Estimates for detailed  examination and report to Lok 
Sabha. Based on consolidated written and oral information, the Committee examined 
the subject in detail and identified certain critic al issues, as enumerated in the 
succeeding Chapters of this Report. 

 
 
Chapter – II 
 
Organisational set up and funding pattern 
 
 
Organizational Set up  
 According to MoEF, NAP is implemented by a three t ier institutional set-up, 
namely State Forest Development Agency (SFDA) at th e State level, Forest 
Development Agency (FDAs) at the District level and  Joint Forest Management 
Committees (JFMCs) at the village level. SFDA const ituted at the State/UT level, is 
registered society under the Societies Registration Act, and functions as a federation 
of Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) in the State/  UT. FDA constituted at the 
territorial/ wildlife forest division level, is reg istered society under the Societies 
Registration Act, and functions as a federation of all Joint Forest Management 
Committees (JFMCs) and Eco-Development Committee (E DCs) in that forest 
division. A JFMC/ EDC is the implementing agency at  the village level. The 
composition and functions of the JFMCs / EDCs are g overned by the JFM order 
adopted in that State/ UT. The JFMC provides for tw o women members in the 
executive body in order to ensure adequate represen tation of women and one 
member from the forest based artisan community. The  executive body of the JFMC 
includes two members representing the Panchayat of the area while the FDAs 
provide for three representatives in the General as  well as the Executive Body.  The 
Directors of Panchayati Raj and Tribal Welfare Depa rtments are members in the 
Executive body of the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA).  
As per the NAP Revised Operational Guidelines, 2009 , the focus of the 
institutional work would be towards regeneration an d management of forest 
resources while strengthening the village level capacity for the same. 

 
 
 
2.2 According to the Annual Report (2012-13) of MoE F, NAP provides support, 
both in physical and capacity building terms, to th e FDAs which in turn are the main 
organs to move forward institutionalization of JFM.  The FDA has been conceived 
and established as a federation of JFMCs at the For est Division level to undertake 
holistic development in the forestry sector with pe ople’s participation. From the year 
2010-11, SFDA has been constituted at the State lev el to smoothen the fund flow to 
the FDAs. This decentralized three-tier institution al structure (SFDA, FDA and 
JFMC) allows greater participation of the community , both in planning and 
implementation, to improve forests and livelihoods of the people living in and around 
forest areas. 
 
2.3 The details of the state-wise status of SFDA pr ojects has been given at 
Appendix–I of this Report. 
 
2.4 The State-wise details of FDA’s and JFMC’s is g iven at Appendix-II of this 
Report.  
 
2.5 Pointing out that there may be more than one FD A in a district, MoEF clarified 
that FDAs in fact correspond with a Forest & wildli fe division rather than a district. A 
district may have more than one Forest Development Agency (FDA) and vice versa 
in a few cases.  There are about 811 territorial an d wildlife Forest Divisions in the 
country in which the FDAs can be potentially consti tuted and hence, most of the 
potential FDAs have been covered under the programm e.  All the FDAs which have 
been constituted as per the guidelines along with t he Joint Forest Management 
Committees (JFMCs) in the area are considered.  Fro m the year 2010-11 after the 
constitution of the State Forest Development Agenci es, the inclusion of the FDAs in 
the yearly work programme is left to the State Forest Development Agencies. 

 
 
2.6 As per the NAP Revised Operational Guidelines, 2009, Joint Forest 
Management (JFM) is the central and integral part of the projects under the Scheme. 
An FDA draws a 5-year perspective (5-Year Plan) and  year-wise Annual Plan of 
Operation (APO) for treatment of the project areas in consultation with the 
FMC/EDC/ potential village members. The proposals f ormulated by the FDAs are 
forwarded to the SFDA which scrutinizes and approve s the proposals. A State/UT 
level summary statement of all approved FDA project  proposals is submitted to the 
National Afforestation & Eco-development Board (NAE B) which finally approves the 
SFDA's Plan for the five years (or until the end of the Plan period, whichever is less).  
 
 
2.7 It has been stated that the plantation models u nder NAP provide for funding 
for five years, the first year being the advance wo rk, the second year for the 
afforestation/creation and the last three years for  the maintenance of the plantations. 
The plantation and other activities under this prog ramme are done in accordance 
with the microplans prepared by the Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs). 
The funds are also provided for treatment of proble m lands and use of improved 
technology. These costs are based on the wage rate of 
` 75 and the funds are 
sanctioned as per the wage rate of the states on a pro-rata basis. According to 
MoEF, recently the concept of JFM plus is gaining m omentum by including the 
livelihood concerns of the communities in addition to conservation and management 
of forests. MoEF further elaborated that this conce pt also addresses the drivers of 
degradation while gainfully providing employment to the people. 
 
 

 
 
2.8 According to MoEF, some of the States have made  enabling provision for 
Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs). State l ike Maharashtra has 
recognized JFM/JFMCs under the Bombay Panchayat Act , 1959. Besides, a recent 
circular of the Maharashtra Government has recogniz ed JFMCs as one of the 
agencies for implementing MGNREGA.  
 
2.9 Enquired whether MoEF has suggested empowerment  of JFMCs by various 
State Governments on the lines done by Maharashtra, in response, MoEF stated in a 
written reply as under: 
“The Minister of Environment and Forests had advise d to the Chief Minsters 
of all States vide his letter dated 29 
th  October 2010 regarding the functioning 
of Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs) under  the overall guidance 
and supervision of the Gram Sabhas and may be recog nized as organs of the 
Gram Sabha under the relevant State Acts relating t o Panchayati raj 
institutions. Apart from Maharashtra, in a number o f states, the JFMCs are 
involved in implementing the activities by utilizin g the funds under 
MGNAREGA through Forest Department.”  
 
2.10 As per the information furnished by MoEF, the total annual man days 
generated in this programme was 28 million during 2 010-11 & 23 million during 
2011-12. However, during 2012-13, the man days gene rated were only 17.7 million 
due to the reduction in the funds. The State-wise d etails of estimated man days 
generated for the last three years is given at Appendix–III. 
 
Funding Pattern 
2.11 The Revised Operational Guidelines, 2009 provi de for release of funds to the 
SFDA in two installments. The State Forest Developm ent Agency (SFDA) submits 
the consolidated proposal to the Ministry. The guid elines provide for release of fifty 
per cent of the approved cost of Annual Plan of Ope ration (APO) as first installment 

 
 
at the start of the financial year preferably by Ap ril, without awaiting for Utilization 
Certificate and Progress Report of the previous yea r in order to match the timing of 
plantation activities. The average annual advance w ork in the last three years is 
about 85,000 hectares. The second and final installment will be released after receipt 
of Utilization Certificate showing at least 50 per cent expenditure of previous grants, 
the progress reports and audit reports.  
 
2.12 With regard to utilization status of the relea sed amount for NAP, MoEF in 
reply furnished to the Committee in November, 2013 stated as under: 
“As regards the utilization of the released amount under the National 
Afforestation Programme is concerned, release of fu nds for the Annual work 
programme approved by the Ministry during each year  is done only after 
deducting the unspent balance of the previous year.  The outstanding unspent 
amount of all the states at the end of the financial year is generally in the range of 
30 to 50 crores which is adjusted/accounted for in the releases during the next 
year. The targets as such were not prescribed for t he whole period and they vary 
in each year depending on the committed liabilities, unspent balances, etc.” 
 
 
2.13 With regard to funding pattern, MoEF stated th at NAP is a demand driven 
programme where no allocation of fund or area of af forestation is earmarked to the 
States. The State Forest Development Agency (SFDA) has to submit the Annual 
Work Programme (AWP) including the area proposed fo r afforestation in that year. 
The area for afforestation is sanctioned to the Sta te subject to the availability of 
budget under NAP, proposed demand of afforestation area, past performance, forest 
cover status etc. The AWP needs to be complete with  all the required documents as 
per the guidelines. In the year 2010-11 as well as 2011-12, SFDA Assam did not 
propose any area for carrying out plantation work a nd hence the same could not be 
sanctioned. Incomplete proposal was received from A ssam only in the last week of 
March for 2012-13 and therefore it could not be con sidered in that financial year. In 

 
 
the year 2011-12 due to non-receipt of complete pro posal and poor utilization of 
previous years funds, no release could be made to A runachal pradesh. In the year  
2012-13, the State of Arunachal Pradesh could not receive 2 nd  installment amount as 
well as sanction for new areas due to non-receipt o f required documents as per 
guidelines. In the State of Andhra Pradesh, due to the sizable amount of unspent 
balance pending with the SFDA in addition to the fa ct that the advance work and 
plantation had to be sanctioned for the monsoon in the same year as proposed by 
the SFDA, no further new area was sanctioned in 201 2-13. In the State of Goa, in 
the year 2003-04 an amount of 239.21 lakhs was sanctioned for treatment of an area 
of 1250 hectares of which Rs 64 Lakhs were released  as 1 st  installment. In spite of 
repeated persuasion, for utilizing the funds for th e sanctioned project by the Ministry, 
the state could utilize only Rs 16.79 Lakh till 201 0- 11 and unspent amount was 
refunded back to the Ministry.  Since, 2003-04, Goa  has not posed any proposal to 
the Ministry under NAP on the pretext that within t he limited potential, they are 
undertaking afforestation under other schemes. Inci dentally, Goa has registered an 
increase of 7sq.km of forest cover during 2009-2011  as per State of Forest Report 
2011.Regarding nil area being sanctioned in 8 State s, it is clarified that due to less 
budget availability and ceiling on expenditure in t he last quarter of the financial year, 
new areas could not be approved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Year-wise progress of NAP since its inception 
2.14 Year-wise progress of NAP as on 31.12.2012 is given below: 
Year  No. of New FDA  
projects 
approved 
 
No. of New 
JFMCs 
involved 
 
Project Area  
approved 
(ha.)* 
 
Release  
(Rs. in crores)  
2000-02  47  1843  71068  47.53 
2002-03 237 8197 404799 151.26 
2003-04 231 7902 282536 207.98 
2004-05 105 3404 106743 233.00 
2005-06 94 2362 54432 248.12 
2006-07 15 494 0 292.75 
2007-08 53 3979 493061 392.95 
2008-09 13 6598 173435 345.62 
2009-10 5 7756 103556 318.17 
2010-11 26 SFDA Projects  --- 57126 309.99 
2011-12 26 SFDA Projects  --- 141448 303.00 
 
2012-13 
(As on 
31.12.2012) 
 
23 SFDA Projects 
 --- --- 89.36 
* Area approved for advance soil work/preparatory plantations during the year for all ongoing 
FDA projects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.15 With regard to the physical and financial perf ormance of NAP particularly 
during the Eleventh Plan and projections for the Tw elfth Five Year Plans, MoEF has 
furnished the following details:  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Physical and Financial performance during Eleventh plan and projections 
during Twelfth Plan: 
 
 
 
2.16 During the Eleventh Plan, the allocation for t he scheme was only 1669.73 
crores though the approved outlay was 
` 2000 crores. It has been stated that the 
utilization during the plan period was about 100 per cent and a total area of 9.67 lakh 
hactares was approved for afforestation. During the  Twelfth Five Year Plan the 
approved outlay for the scheme is Rs 2500 crores. H owever, the allocation during 
the year 2012-13 and 2013-14 is only Rs 218.15 cror es and 318.15 crores 
respectively. The total utilisation during 2012-13 was only 193.36 crores due to the 
ceiling of expenditure in the last quarter and last  month of the financial year which 
was also taken up with the Department of Expenditur e. The total area approved 
during 2012-13 was about 55,500 hectares. 
 
2.17 As per the Outcome Budget (2013-14) of MoEF, f or the year 2012-13, a plan 
outlay of ` 218.15 crore was provided.  As on 31 st  January, 2013 only Rs. 91.70 
crore have been spent. When asked to explain reason s for the under utilization of 
the outlay provided for 2012-13, the MoEF has informed the Committee as under: 
Year  Approved plan 
Outlay 
Revised 
Estimates (RE)  
Amount 
released 
(crores) 
Afforestation         
in lakh ha. 
2007-08 2000 392.95  392.95  4.93  
2008-09  345.62  345.62  1.73  
2009-10  318.17  318.17  1.03  
2010-11  310  309.99  0.57  
2011-12   303  303  1.41  
Plan Total   1669.74  1669.73  9.67  

 
 
“During the year 2012-13, the Ministry had taken pr oactive steps to initially 
release the funds for the committed liabilities to synchronize with the monsoon 
as the forestry activities are very seasonal and timely operations lead to better 
survival and health of the plantations. Though the demand for the release of 
committed liabilities was about 50 % of the Budget Estimates (Rs 170 crores), 
only half of the funds were released which led to t he expenditure of Rs 91.70 
crores against the demand of Rs 170 crores. In the meantime, there was a 
budget cut of Rs 600 crores for the Minstry of Envi ronment and Forests and 
the allocation of NAP was reduced from Rs 318.15 cr ores to 218.15 crores. 
Out of this, the total expenditure was 193.37 crore s at the end of the financial 
year.  The remaining funds could not be utilized du e to the instructions of the 
Finance Ministry regarding ceiling of expenditure i n the last quarter and last 
month of the financial year.”  
 
2.18 It is observed from the information furnished by MoEF that the total area 
approved and funds released therefore  under NAP to  all 28 States since 2000-02 to 
2012-13 was 1.94 million hectares and Rs. 3044 crore respectively. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Chapter – III 
 
 
 
Performance and Evaluation  
 
 
(i) Performance  
 The main objective of the NAP is rehabilitation of  degraded forests by 
institutionalizing decentralized/participatory fore st management. Supplementing 
livelihoods improvement processes and increasing an d improving the forest and tree 
cover through sustainable development of forest res ources are other objectives of 
NAP.  
 
 
 
 
3.2 The total State/UT-wise forest and tree cover e stimate as provided by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forest and India State of Forest Report – 2011 is given 
at Appendix – IV of this Report. 
 
 
3.3 As per the information furnished by MoEF, the t otal decline in the forest areas 
during the period 2009 to 2011 is stated to 367 sq.  km. The highest decline in the 
forest areas was in the State of Andhra Pradesh whi ch showed a decline of 281 sq. 
km., followed by Manipur (190 sq. km), Arunachal Pr adesh (74 sq. km), Mizoram (66 
sq. km.), Meghalaya (46 sq. km). 
 
 
3.4 When asked to explain the decline of 367 sq. km s. in the forest cover during 
2009 to 2011 in 14 States across India, the MoEF explained as under: 
“As per the State of Forest Report 2011, the decrea se in forest and tree cover 
of 367 sq. kms. is primarily due to harvesting of s hort rotation tree crops and 

 
 
shifting cultivation in some NE States. However, th ere has been qualitative 
improvement in the forest cover during 2009-2011 wh en Moderately Dense 
Forest (MDF) has registered an increase of about 49 8 sq. kms. and Very 
Dense Forest (VDF), an increase of about 43 sq. kms.”  
 
 
 
3.5 With regard to the reasons for decrease in fore st and tree cover in various 
States/UT, the Committee have been informed as under:  
Sl. 
No. 
 
State /UT  Decline in 
forest area  (in 
sq. km) 
(2009 to 2011) 
Reasons for Decline  
1. Andhra Pradesh 281 Management interventions like  
harvesting of short rotation crops 
followed by new regeneration / 
plantations, forest clearance in 
some encroached areas. 
2. Manipur 190 Decrease in forest cover in the 
State is due to shortening of 
shifting cultivation cycle and biotic 
pressure. 
3. Nagaland 146 Decrease in forest cover in the 
State is due to shortening of 
shifting cultivation cycle and biotic 
pressure. 
4. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
74 Change in forest cover in the state 
is because of shifting cultivation 
and biotic pressure. 
5. Mizoram 66 Decrease in forest cover in the 
State is due to shortening of 
shifting cultivation cycle and biotic 
pressure. 
6. Meghalaya 46 Decrease in forest cover in the 
State is due to shortening of 
shifting cultivation cycle and biotic 
pressure. 
7. Kerala 24 Decrease in forest cover in the 
state is due to rotational felling of 
Eucalyptus, Teak, Acacia 
mangium, rubber and shade 
bearing trees in the gardens. 
8. Assam 19 Decrease in forest cover is mainly 
attributed to illicit felling, 
encroachments in insurgency 
affected areas and shifting 
cultivation practices. 

 
 
9. Tripura 8 Decrease in forest cover in the 
state is due to clearings for rubber 
plantations and shifting cultivations 
practices. 
10. Maharashtra 4 - 
11. Chhattisgarh 4 Submergence of forest areas in 
catchments of the dams.  
12. Uttar Pradesh 3 - 
13. Gujarat 1 Decrease in forest cover in the 
state is due to private felling in the 
Tree Outside Forests areas. 
14.      Chandigarh       0.22 - 
 
 
 
3.6 As per the information furnished by MoEF since the inception of NAP, an 
amount of 
` 3043 crores has been released for treating an area of 19.4 lakh hectares 
till March, 2013. 
 
3.7 The State-wise and year-wise details of the are a approved and funds 
released is given at Appendix V & VI of this Report.  
 
3.8 When asked whether the target of treating an ar ea of 19.4 lakh hectares till 
March, 2013 (since inception of NAP in 2002) was ac hieved, MoEF informed the 
Committee only about the target set during the Elev enth Plan i.e. 4.45 lakh hectares 
and the achievement made i.e.  7.46 lakh hectares. 
 
 
 
3.9 When pointed out that the reply of MoEF does no t indicate the overall 
achievement since inception of NAP, MoEF informed the Committee as under: 
“........... NAP is a demand driven scheme and the State-wise allocation of 
afforestation area is neither earmarked nor are the  afforestation targets set. 
The sanctioned area for afforestation depends on th e availability of budget, 
receipt of state proposals, committed liabilities a nd unspent amount with the 
states. Thus, targets as such are not prescribed an nually or for the plan 
period and sanctioned area may vary from year to year.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Evaluation of NAP 
 
3.10 As per MoEF, the mid-term review of the progra mme was carried out in 2008 
which brought out the success of NAP in mobilizing people in the forest protection 
and development activities. Based on the recommenda tions of the report the 
implementation was further decentralized with the f ormation of the State Forest 
Development Agency (SFDA) before which the programm e was implemented 
through a two tier system of Forest Development Agencies at the forest division level 
and Joint Forest Management Committees at the Village level. Two new components 
of Value addition and Marketing of forest produce, Training and Capacity building of 
local communities has been included for the sustain ability of the institutions. 
Accordingly, the revised operational guidelines wer e prepared and approved by the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) during  2009 and are being 
implemented from the year 2010-11.  
3.11 As per the Revised Operational Guidelines, 200 9, the SFDA commissions 
independent concurrent evaluation of each FDA twice  during the project cycle. The 
first concurrent evaluation is done during the thir d year and the second 
evaluation/final evaluation after five years.  The submission of the reports of the first 
concurrent evaluation of the scheme is due during t his current year. From 2011-12, 
the geo references of the new plantation sites are submitted by the States, which 
has been made mandatory for approval of the Annual Work Programme. 
 
 
3.12 In a subsequent note, MoEF informed the Commit tee that a mid-term review 
of NAP was taken up by the National Afforestation a nd Eco-Development Board 

 
 
(NAEB) through the Indian Council of Forestry Resea rch and Education (ICFRE), an 
autonomous body, which submitted its report in 2008.  
 
3.13 According to MoEF, the ICFRE carried out compr ehensive evaluation of the 
Scheme in all the 27 States implementing the programme covering 182 of the total of 
680 FDAs and 600 JFMCs out of total of 5935 committees implementing the Scheme 
in the sampled FDAs.  
 
3.14 The main findings of the mid-term evaluation i nclude: 
• The programme by and large has been successful in mobilizing people in the 
forest protection and development activities. 
• The FDAs have been successful in achievement of ph ysical targets related to 
afforestation activities and the ancillary activiti es like soil and moisture 
conservation work have also been implemented in a satisfactory manner.  
• The provision of entry point activities has been r eceived well by the villagers 
and the quality of construction activities has gene rally been very good and 
appreciated by the villagers. 
• The FDAs through a NAP implementation have played catalytic role in 
development of rural production systems through imp roved irrigation, SMC 
works, value addition in NTFP and enhanced biomass production. 
• There has been significant impact in direct and in direct employment 
opportunity and enhancement of rural livelihoods. 
• There has been reduction in forest dependency amon g the vulnerable groups. 
Some of the shortcomings observed in the mid-term evaluation are as follows: 
• The capacity building and training component needs  proper implementation. 

 
 
• Involvement of community in micro-planning and pro ject implementation. 
• Institutional linkages with other relevant line de partments. 
• Exit strategies after the Scheme implementation.  
 
 
 
Hill districts and tribal areas 
 
3.15 As per the India State of Forest Report, 2011,  the forest cover in the hill 
districts of the country is 281,295 sq. kms. which is 39.74 per cent of the total 
geographical area of these districts, however it ha s shown a decrease of 548 sq. 
kms. in all the hill districts. 
 
3.16 According to the India State of Forest Report 2011, total forest cover in the 
tribal districts is 411,881 sq. kms., which is 37.2 5 per cent of the geographical area 
of these districts. The Report indicates a decrease  of 679 sq. kms. in all the tribal 
districts of the country. 
 
 
North-Eastern States 
 
3.17 North-eastern region of the country comprising  eight States namely Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagala nd, Sikkim and Tripua, is 
endowed with rich forest resources. The region, whi ch constitutes only 7.98 per cent 
of the geographical area of the country, accounts f or nearly one fourth of its forest 
cover. The total forest cover in the region is 173, 219 sq. kms., which is 66.07 per 
cent of its geographical area. The India State of F orest Report 2011 shows a 
decrease of 549 sq. kms. in all the North-Eastern States of the country. 
 
 

 
 
3.18 As per the Annual Report (2012-13) of MoEF, re habilitation of shifting 
cultivation lands have been given specific focus un der NAP, and so far 35 Jhum 
projects have been sanctioned in the North-Eastern States and in Odisha. 
 
 
3.19 In the light of the above, the Committee desir ed to know the impact of 
shortening of shifting cultivation practices in Nor th-Eastern States, which adversely 
impacts the forest cover. In response, MoEF in a reply stated as under: 
“Rehabilitation / improvement of jhum lands by way of tree plantation have 
been covered under the NAP scheme with an objective  of arresting forest 
degradation through jhumming and improve the econom ic conditions of the 
locals through participatory approach, since 10 
th Five Year Plan. During 10 th  
plan a total of 25 projects were sanctioned and dur ing 11 th  plan 11 new 
projects were sanctioned. These projects were sanct ioned in addition to the 
FDA projects in the respective areas and a total of  36 Jhum projects were 
sanctioned in the States of Nagaland, Manipur, Mizo ram, Tripura and Orissa. 
Total area covered under Jhum projects is 0.05 million hectares till 2012-13. 
 
Proposals were not received for jhum projects from 3 FDAs for3 jhumprojects 
from Sadar FDA, Tripura and Teliamura Jhum FDA and Kiphire WL FDA in 
Nagaland. As on date, there are 33 projects under i mplementation through 
NAP. 
 
Specific treatment of jhumming areas have been take n up in the projects. 
Tree component raised in jhum lands is managed in a  manner to ensure 
effective tree cover of atleast 25% on a permanent basis. For this, growing of 
Horticultural and multipurpose tree species of loca l agro forestry importance 
which are normally not felled, is taken up. The model of Artificial Regeneration 
is taken up as a plantation model. The Ministry has not received any feedback 
regarding problems faced by them in implementing Jhum projects.” 
 
 
 
(iii) Prospects for NAP 
 
Extension of forest area 
 
3.20 As against the target of 33 per cent (1/3 area  of the country) as envisaged by 
the National Forest Policy 1988, the current forest  and tree cover is about 78.2 
million hectares, which is about 23.82 per cent. 
 

 
 
 
3.21 On the issue of achieving a target of having 3 3 per cent of forest and tree 
cover out of the total geographical area of the cou ntry as envisaged in the National 
Forest Policy, 1988, the Secretay, MoEF during the oral evidence held on 
11.11.2013 deposed as under:  
“.............. At present, 78.2 million hectares i s the forest and tree cover. Out of 
328 million hectares of the total geographical area  of this country, 153 million 
hectares is under regular agriculture and 65 millio n hectare is under 
habitation, roads, rivers etc. This comes to about 300 million hectares. To 
achieve 33 per cent of the target, we have to have another 30 to 32 million 
hectares of area. Now it is a big question as to ho w much area will be 
available out of these 30 million hectares which ar e mostly outside the forest 
areas.” 
 
 
3.22 On being further enquired about specific measu res/steps taken/proposed to 
be taken by the Ministry in order to achieve the ma jor objectives of increasing the 
forest cover under NAP, the Committee have been informed as under: 
“The major constraint in the achievement of increas ing forest and tree cover 
to the targeted level of 33 % is availability of no n-forest land for afforestation.  
As per the State of the Forest Report, 2011, the Fo rest & Tree Cover (FTC) of 
the country is 78.29 million ha (23.81 per cent of the geographical area of the 
country). The stabilisation  of FTC itself is comme ndable especially when the 
country has witnessed diversion of forest land with out mitigation to the tune of 
around 4.04 million ha in 30 years before the promu lgation of FC Act, 1980 
and another 1.2 million ha after that and ever incr easing biotic pressure all 
through. Therefore targets for afforestation also n eed to be realistic backed 
with appropriate funding as required for specific s ites. The target of 33% 
would require sustaining the existing cover and cre ation of FTC on additional 
10 per cent of the geographical area of the country or about 30 million ha. The 
additional land is difficult to obtain for afforest ation in view of competing land 
use for agriculture, industrial and infrastructure development, urbanization etc.  
Therefore the target can only be achieved with cros s-sectoral efforts through 
participation of multiple stakeholder and multi age ncies and by encouraging 
tree planting outside the notified forest lands at a long term basis.”  
 
 
3.23. According to MoEF, in the newly launched Gree n India Mission, one of the 
eight Missions under the National Action Plan on Cl imate Change, it is envisaged to 
increase forest & tree cover on 5 million hectare a rea and to improve quality of forest 

 
 
cover on another 5 million hectare area along with amelioration of forest based 
livelihood of local communities and also to improve  ecosystem services such as 
carbon sequestration, biodiversity & hydrological s ervices. Till date 71 landscapes 
were already been identified and 50 crore have been  released for taking up 
preparatory activities under GIM. 
 
3.24 On the issue regarding the need to establish b etter coordination with various 
Agencies and Departments for the execution of affor estation activities, MoEF stated 
as under: 
“It is pertinent to mention that large scale affore station work to increase the 
forest cover is also being carried out by other Min istries under schemes like 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(MGNREGS), Integrated Watershed Management Programm e (IWMP), 
National Bamboo Mission, Thirteenth Finance Commiss ion and under various 
State Plan and Non Plan schemes. The afforestation activities are thus 
already being undertaken by various implementing ag encies/ department in 
addition to forest department. However coordination  with such other agencies 
which are also carrying out afforestation activitie s is required to that these 
efforts are properly targeted. GIM has envisaged a convergence mechanism 
to address this issue.” 
 
 
 
3.25 The Committee while stressing on the need to i ncorporate wasteland 
afforestation under NAP, which is both financially and environmentally viable, 
desired to be apprised on the need to convert large  tracks of barren wasteland into 
forests. In response, MoEF stated as under: 
“It is reiterated that afforestation in degraded fo rest land is done through the 
National Afforestation programme and at present the re exists no formal 
linkage with Integrated Wasteland Programme of the Ministry of Rural 
Development but functional dovetailing at the field  level takes place in many 
areas.  The newly launched National Mission for Green Indi a, it  is envisaged 
that the Mission would have functional convergence at the district level with 
MoRD schemes of  Integrated Wasteland Management Pr ogram and 
MNREGA by having an inclusive Work Plan approved by  District Planning 
Committee.”  
 
 

 
 
 
3.26 As per the Outcome Budget (2013-14) of MoEF, S tate Governments and 
Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) have been advise d and encouraged to take 
up suitable project areas for planation of bamboo and medicinal plants under NAP. 
3.27 In this regard, the Committee desired to know which specific States/UTs have 
taken up such projects. In response, MoEF stated as under:  
“To provide the required thrust on plantation of bam boo and medicinal plants 
on degraded forest lands and contiguous areas in ad dition to other species of 
local and ecological importance in afforestation ac tivities, 4 plantation models 
of Bamboo and Cane plantation and medicinal plantat ions are under 
implementation in NAP.  They are Bamboo plantation (625 plants per 
hectare), Planting of canes (625 Plants per hectare ), Mixed plantation of trees 
having MFP and Medicinal Value (1100 plants per hec tare) and Regeneration 
of perennial herbs and Shrubs of Medicinal Value (2000 plants per hectare). 
This is intended to contribute towards poverty alle viation and also to 
ensure livelihood security of forest fringe dweller s besides ameliorating soil 
conditions and improving/ increasing forest cover. 
In the last 3 years, a total area of 9,615 hectares  have been taken up 
for treatment under Bamboo plantation and cane plan tation  and 15,548 
hectares has been taken up for treatment under medicinal plantation models.” 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Convergence of NAP with Green India Mission (G IM) 
 
3.28 As per the Outcome Budget (2013-14) of MoEF, t o achieve the targets for 
more intensive afforestation drive with other conse rvation, efforts would be needed, 
coupled with smooth transition of NAP with Green In dia Mission with enhanced 
allocation.  
 
3.29 As per the Annual Report (2012-13) of MoEF, th e National Mission for Green 
India is one of the eight missions under the Nation al Action Plan on Climate Change 
(NAPCC). The Mission acknowledges the influences th at the forestry sector has on 

 
 
environmental amelioration through climate mitigati on, food security, water security, 
biodiversity conservation and livelihood security of forest dependant communities. 
 
 
3.30 The Mission addresses the qualitative improvem ent of the forests along with 
increased forest cover and focuses on ecosystem ser vices with the emphasis on 
biodiversity, water, improved biomass and carbon se questration as a co-benefit. It 
addresses ecosystem approach and habitat diversity like grasslands, wetlands, 
pastures, forests in urban and periurban areas and other critical ecosystems. An 
important feature of this Mission is the thrust on landscape based approach in which 
the interventions at a scale of 5000 to 6000 hectar es is done at a time which is 
prioritized based on criteria including climate vul nerability. The forest and non-forest 
areas are simultaneously treated and the drivers of  degradation are effectively 
addressed.  
 
 
3.31 The total Mission cost is 
` 46,000 crores spread over 10 years, coinciding with 
the Twelfth and Thirteenth five year Plan periods, with the year 2011-12 being the 
preparatory year for the Green India Mission. Green  India Mission will partly be 
funded through convergence with schemes/Funds like MGNREGS, NAP, Integrated 
Forest Management Scheme; XIII Finance Commission award and schemes of other 
Ministries in the identified landscapes under the M ission. Additional funding will be 
met through National clean energy Fund, budget supp ort through the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests and gaps, if any, would be me t from external support. The 
actual implementation period of the Mission will be  spread over 10 years, coinciding 
with the Twelfth and Thirteenth Five Year Plan periods. 
 

 
 
3.32 The Statement of funds released for preparator y activities during 2011-12 
under Green India Mission is given at Appendix – VII of the Report. 
 
3.33 With regard to targets set under Green India M ission, the Secretary, MoEF 
during the evidence held on 11.11.2012 deposed as under: 
 
“......... we have this major programme of afforest ation coming under the 
Green India Mission. There the targets are far more  ambitious. We propose to 
cover five million hectares under fresh afforestati on, additional land to be 
brought under forest cover, and improvement in fore st cover in five million 
hectares. So, improving the quality of forestry in five million hectares and 
bringing additional five million hectares under for est cover is the target under 
the Green India Mission. If we compare these two, y ou will see that the Green 
India Mission is a much larger initiative to improv e the quality of forest cover 
and also increase the forest cover in the country.” 
 
 
 
 
3.34 Elaborating further, the Secretary added: 
“…………… we have a target of 10 million hectares out of which 5 million 
hectares is the improvement of quality and producti vity in the existing forest 
cover which cannot be increased.  Out of the 78.2 m illion hectares of forest 
and tree cover, 69 million hectares is the forest c over where you can look 
forward to increase the quality and productivity of  forest cover. Where the 
moderately dense forest has to be transformed into very dense forest cover, 
over forest cover has to be transformed to the mode rately dense forest cover. 
This has shown some results. Between 2009 to 2011 c ycle of interpretation of 
forest cover by the Forest Survey of India, 49 squa re kilometre of very dense 
forest cover, which is, more than 70 per cent of de nsity has increased. During 
the same period, above 450 square kilometre as per report has transformed 
from open forest to moderately dense forest cover. So, the thrust should be 
and is on qualitative improvement of the existing f orest cover and as we had 
earlier mentioned, out of the ten million hectares of our flagship Green India 
Mission, five million hectare is for improving the quality of the existing forest 
cover. The remaining five million hectares will add ress the concerns of the 
Committee that this entire five million hectares wi ll be to raise the tree cover 
outside the forest areas. Out of this five million hectares, three million 
hectares is for agro forestry and social forestry in the unproductive agricultural 
land where the agriculture production is not much. The areas can be utilised 
for agro forestry. The remaining two million hectar es is the areas included in 
the cities along the railway tracks, roads, farm la nd, burns and some 
abandoned areas due to mining, zooming cultivation areas, mangroves, 

 
 
ravine lands which are outside the forest areas are  to be addressed out of the 
total five million hectares.” 
 
 
 
 
3.35 With regard to Green India Mission to support Jhum Management, MoEF 
informed the Committee as under: 
 
“As per an estimate, the total area of 1.2 million hectares exits under jhum 
cultivation in the country. Green India Mission has  envisaged a focused 
treatment and rehabilitation in 0.6 m ha jhum affec ted area. The mission will 
support jhum management within the overall framewor k of socio culturally 
valued, fast growing species managed by the communi ty and from learning of 
existing jhum management models.” 
 
 
(v) Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority 
(CAMPA) 
 
 
3.36 As per the Annual Report (2012-13) of MoEF, Co mpensatory Afforestation 
Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) was constituted on the order 
issued by Apex Court as National Advisory Council u nder the chairmanship of the 
Union Minister of Environment & Forests. The basic aim of CAMPA is to promote 
afforestation and regeneration activities as a way of compensating for forest land 
diverted to non-forest uses. The Supreme Court also  approved the guidelines 
prepared by MoEF for utilizing CAMPA funds by an ag ency to be constituted in the 
States known as the ‘State CAMPA’.  
 
 
 
3.37 When asked whether CAMPA is working in tandem with NAEB with regard to 
afforestation for expansion of areas under forest c over in the country. MoEF stated 
as under: 
“The total area of forest land diverted during 30 y ears before the FC Act is 
reportedly about 4.037 million hectare and during 3 0 years after the 

 
 
promulgation of the Act in 1980 is reportedly about  1.112 million hectare. All 
the concerned States have constituted State CAMPAs as envisaged in the 
Guidelines for State CAMPAs. The National Afforesta tion and Eco 
development Board draws funds from the consolidated  fund of India. On the 
other hand, the Funds under the CAMPA set up are he ld outside the 
Consolidated Fund of India, and in terms of the ord ers of the Supreme Court 
of India, release of funds is done for undertaking expenditure in terms of the 
Annual Plans of operation, which in turn have to fo llow the regimen as 
entailed in the State CAMPA Guidelines. However, a part of the CAMPA Fund 
is also being utilized by the states for afforestation in degraded forest lands. In 
addition, the Green India Mission also envisages ut ilization of CAMPA Fund 
through convergence.” 
  

 
 
PART- II 
 
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee  
 
1. The Committee are dismayed to note that though t he National 
Afforestation Programme (NAP), launched in the year  2002 is aimed at 
increasing and improving the forest and tree cover through sustainable 
development of forest resources, the forest cover o f the country has 
decreased by 367 sq. Km. during the period 2009 to 2011 alone. According to 
the India State of Forest Report, 2011 green areas decreased in 14 
States/Union Territory which among others include Andhra Pradesh (decline of 
281 sq. Km.), Manipur (190 sq. Km.), Nagaland (146 sq. Km.), Arunachal 
Pradesh (74 sq. Km.), Mizoram (66 sq Km.) and Megha laya (46 sq. Km).  The 
decline is mainly attributed to harvesting of short  rotation tree crops, shifting 
cultivation in some North Eastern States and to som e extent illicit felling. The 
Committee are at a loss to understand how, having t aken up a total area of 
1.94 million ha under NAP at a cost of `` `` 3,044 crore since inception in the year 
2002, the outcome of afforestation has been negativ e. The Committee would 
await an explanation in this regard and would also like to know how much of 
1.94 million ha was for increase in forest cover, h ow much for improvement in 
existing forests and reasons for dismal performance  in increasing forest cover 
as targeted.  
 
2. As against 320 million ha of total geographic ar ea of the country, the 
National Forest Policy, 1988 envisages a forest cov er of 33 per cent (108.2 

 
 
million ha). The Committee are disappointed to learn that two and half decades 
after declaration of the policy, the current forest  and tree cover is merely 78.2 
million ha which falls short of the target by as mu ch as 30 million ha. What is 
shocking is that even after declaration of the poli cy in the year 1988, the 
country had to witness diversion of forest land to the extent of 1.2 million ha. 
This reveals abysmally poor implementation of the N ational Forest Policy by 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF). The  Committee have been 
informed that Green India Mission (GIM) covering a period of 10 years is being 
implemented during Twelfth and Thirteenth Five Year  Plan periods at a cost of 
`` `` 46,000 crores to increase forest/tree cover on 5 m illion ha and to improve 
quality of forest cover on another 5 million ha lan d. The Committee urge that 
GIM should be implemented as planned and it should be ensured that the 
targets of afforestation are achieved without fail. 
 
3. In order to reach the target of 33 per cent fore st-cum-tree cover of total 
geographical area in the country as set by the Nati onal Forest Policy 1988, 
about 30 million ha outside forest area needs to be  brought under the forest 
and tree cover. What is envisaged in Twelfth and Th irteenth Five Year Plan 
periods is addition of only 5 million ha. forest co ver.  25 million ha more needs 
to be added, if the target set by the National Fore st Policy, 1988 is to be 
achieved. Considering the competing demands for lan d, the Committee feel 
that there should be a realistic projection of addi tion to forest cover area and 
there should be a fresh look at the policy and the targets for forest cover. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of these steps.  

 
 
 
4. The major constraints in the achievement of incr easing forest and tree 
cover is availability of non-forest land for affore station due to competing land 
use for development and habitation needs. The Commi ttee are of the view that 
care should be exercised to ensure that projects re lated to industrial and 
infrastructural development, agriculture expansion or urbanization are not 
adversely affected in the endeavour to increase for est cover and there should 
be synergy between afforestation and development.  
 
5. The Committee feel that total ban on felling of trees on the pretext of 
environmental protection is neither desirable nor justified. All varieties of trees 
have life expectancy. Unless trees which have outlived their life are felled, they 
may pose danger to life and property when they fall  abruptly on their own. 
Reports of loss of lives and properties due to sudd en fall of trees are not 
uncommon not only during rainy and windy seasons bu t also in normal 
weather. In Committee’s view, trees are part of nat ional wealth and should not 
be wasted and there should be appropriate guideline s for felling of aged trees 
in and around habitations/forests with a view to pr eventing loss of life and 
property due to unregulated ban on felling of trees  and there should be 
stipulation for compensatory afforestation. The Com mittee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
6. The Committee have been informed that NAP is a d emand driven 
programme, where no allocation of fund or area of a fforestation is earmarked 

 
 
to the States. The Committee in this connection not e that the forest cover in 
hill districts declined by 548 sq. Km and in North Eastern States by 549 sq. Km 
even while rehabilitation of jhum lands had reporte dly been taken up with the 
sanction of 36 jhum projects in Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura and 
Odisha during Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plans, c overing an area of 50,000 
hectares till 2012-13. It has been stated that prop osals for 3 out of the 36 jhum 
projects viz. Sadar FDA, Tripura and Teliamura Jhum FDA and Kiphire WL FDA 
in Nagaland have not been received. The Committee f ail to understand as to 
why NAP has been made as a demand driven programme considering the need 
for urgent measures to arrest forest degradation an d increasing forest cover. 
Ideally, the MoEF should take proactive steps to en sure implementation of 
NAP instead of leaving it to the States to take the  initiative. The Committee 
would, therefore, suggest MoEF to reorient the NAP with a view to making it 
effective and result oriented.  
 
7. The Committee note that at present there is no f ormal linkage of NAP 
with the Integrated Wasteland Programme (IWP) of th e Ministry of Rural 
Development. Nevertheless, MoEF has stated that fun ctional dovetailing takes 
place in many areas at the field level while implem enting NAP. It is not clear as 
to what is the co-ordination and monitoring mechani sm at the Ministerial level 
and at State level to ensure linkage of NAP with IW P and functional 
convergence at district level with the schemes of I WP and Mahatama Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MNREGA). T he Committee desire 
that lacuna, if any, in this regard should be ident ified and addressed 
immediately under intimation to the Committee.  

 
 
 
8. Joint Forest Management Committee (JFMC) is the central and integral 
part of the projects under the NAP and is the imple menting agency at the 
village level. The Committee have been informed tha t the MoEF advised the 
Chief Ministers of all States in October 2010 that JFMCs may be recognized as 
organs of the Gram Sabha under the relevant State A cts relating to Panchayati 
Raj Institutions. Some States have reportedly made enabling provision for 
JFMCs in this regard and have involved JFMCs in imp lementing the activities 
under MGNREGA. The Committee desire that the remain ing States/UTs should 
be pursued to take necessary steps in this regard to reap the benefits available 
as a result of such steps.   
 
9. With a view to contributing to poverty alleviati on of forest fringe 
dwellers and ameliorating soil conditions besides i mproving/increasing forest 
cover, a total area of 9,615 hectares have reported ly been taken up for 
treatment under bamboo/cane plantation and 15,548 h ectares under medicinal 
plantation models in the last three years. The Comm ittee would like to know 
the results of these initiatives and the extent of area having similar soil 
conditions requiring amelioration and also the plan s to cover these areas 
under these plantations.  
 
10. Incidentally, the Committee observe that manday s generated under NAP 
has declined from 287 lakh mandays in 2010-11 to 23 7 lakh mandays in 2011-

 
 
12 and further declined to 177 lakh mandays in 2012 -13. The decline was sharp 
in Chattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Haryana,  Andhra Pradesh, 
Odisha, Assam and Mizoram. It is not clear as to wh at led to this decline. The 
Committee hope that MoEF will look into the reasons  for the sharp decline in 
the number of mandays generated under NAP and take such remedial 
measures as may be necessary to reverse the decline  under intimation to the 
Committee.  
 
 
New Delhi;      FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
17 February, 2014 
     CHAIRMAN, 
Magha 28, 1935 (S)     COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES. 
 
  

 
 
     APPENDIX – I 
(Vide Para No. 2.3) 
 
State-wise status of SFDA projects (from 1.4.2010 to 31.12.2012) 
 
S. 
No. 
State  Total Cost  Amt. 
Released 
Amount 
yet to be 
released  
Approved  
Advance 
Work* 
(Rs. in crore)    
1 Andhra Pradesh  
 
40.83 
 28.34  12.49  7794  
2 Bihar  13.43  
 
12.40  1.03  5647  
3 Chhattisgarh  73.39  64.16  
 
9.23  9547  
4 Goa  
 
0.00 
 0.00  0 0 
5 Gujarat  
 
84.70 
 66.95  17.75  12910  
6 Haryana  
 
47.12 
 40.32  6.8  4245  
7 Himachal Pradesh  
 
18.10 
 8.67  9.43  4212  
8 Jammu & Kashmir  
 
22.61 
 10.88  11.73  4857  
9 Jharkhand  
 
50.05 
 23.84  26.21  4815  
10  Karnataka  
 
40.81 
 25.85  14.96  9523  
11  Kerala  
 
32.00 
 15.21  16.79  3613  
12  Madhya Pradesh  
 
86.46 
 58.04  28.42  23219  
13  Maharashtra  
 
89.55 
 53.80  35.75  9854  
14  Odisha  
 
40.24 
 21.59  18.65  7410  
15  Punjab  
 
3.93 
 1.22  2.71  625  
16  Rajasthan  
 
22.44 
 13.05  9.39  3700  
17  Tamil Nadu  
 
16.77 
 11.99  4.78  2984  
18  Uttar Pradesh  
 
68.27 
 54.37  13.9  15775  
19  Uttarakhand  
 
26.75 
 11.09  15.66  10225  
20  West Bengal  
 
15.36 
 12.28  3.08  5175  
 Total (Other States)  
 
792.81  534.05  258.76  146130  
21  Arunachal Pradesh  
 
10.32 
 7.18  3.14  3125  
22  Assam  
 
25.84 
 15.50  10.34  0 
23  Manipur  
 
28.32 
 25.71  2.61  7849  
24  Meghalaya  
 
22.94 
 15.04  7.9  8730  

 
 
25  Mizoram  
 
32.03 
 28.87  3.16  4970  
26  Nagaland  
 
30.72 
 26.26  4.46  10000  
27  Sikkim  
 
24.87 
 23.17  1.7  5279  
28  Tripura  
 
33.77 
 26.58  7.19  12491  
 Total (NE States)  208.82  168.30  40.5  52444  
 
 G. Total  1001.63  702.35  299.26  198574  
 
 
*Approved advance work is updated till 31.04.2012 
  

 
 
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide Para No. 2.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION PROGRAMME (NAP) 
State-wise details of FDAs and JFMCs 
S. No . State  JFMC's  FDAs  
1 Andhra Pradesh  2555 47 
2 Chhattisgarh 2611 32 
3 Gujarat  2157 25 
4 Haryana  2265 19 
5 Himachal Pradesh  1556 30 
6 Jammu & Kashmir 1836 31 
7 Karnataka  1560 45 
8 Madhya Pradesh  3270 55 
9 Maharashtra  3092 48 
10 Orissa  3547 46 
11 Punjab  1192 15 
12 Rajasthan  996 33 
13 Tamil Nadu  1580 32 
14 Uttar Pradesh  2752 69 
15 Uttarakhand  1900 38 
16 Goa 26 3 
17 Jharkhand 2495 34 
18 Bihar 978 10 
19 Kerala 615 27 
20 West Bengal 1960 20 
  Total (Other States)  38943  659  
21 Arunachal Pradesh  481 23 
22 Assam 810 30 
23 Manipur  578 16 
24 Nagaland  456 19 
25 Sikkim  244 8 
26 Tripura 271 13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
27 Mizoram  528 24 
28 Meghalaya 224 8 
  Total (NE States)  3592  141 
  TOTAL  42535  800  

 
 
 
APPENDIX - III 
                                                                                                          (Vide Para No. 2.10)  
 
National Afforestation Programme  
 
Estimated Mandays Generated during the last three years (in lakhs)  
 
S.No. State  2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
1 Andhra Pradesh 8.05  10.39  3.23  
2 Bihar 4.66  5.17  5.82  
3 Chhattisgarh 28.60  14.39  9.47  
4 Gujarat 19.74  15.86  12.68  
5 Haryana 13.27  7.45  5.56  
6 Himachal Pradesh 5.00  5.48  2.7  
7 Jammu & Kashmir 8.05  6.06  5.27  
8 Jharkhand 15.75  9.17  6.45  
9 Karnataka 10.88  9.61  8.06  
10 Kerala 5.47  3.43  3.31  
11 Madhya Pradesh 25.03  19.07  12.05  
12 Maharashta 19.14  14.58  12.43  
13 Orissa 18.34  9 8.38  
14 Punjab   1.13  0.82  
15 Rajasthan 7.54  5.25  3.43  
16 Tamil Nadu 4.92  4.47  4.1  
17 Uttrakhand 8.40  6.66  6.09  
18 Utttar Pradesh 19.53  22.55  15.51  
19 West Bengal 3.89  4.87  3.16  
  Sub Total :  226.24  174.59  128.52  
20 Arunachal Pradesh 6.17    2.48  
21 Assam 8.17  4.07  2.57  
22 Manipur 7.34  8.98  7.7  
23 Meghalaya 7.40  7.74  7.89  
24 Mizoram 8.63  12.21  4.98  

 
 
25 Nagaland 7.66  10.15  10.8  
26 Sikkim 5.81  6.14  4.13  
27 Tripura 9.75  13.38  8.37  
  Sub Total :  60.93  62.67  48.92  
  Grand Total  287.17  237.26  177.44  
 
  

 
 
Appendix – IV  
(Vide Para No. 3.2) 
 
State/UT wise Forest Cover + Tree Cover Estimates – ISFR 2011 
States/UTs  Geographical 
Area 
Forest Cover + 
Tree Cover % age  
Actual Change in 
Forest Cover 
between 2009-
2011 (ISFR-2011) 
(Sq. Km) 
Andhra Pradesh 275069 19.46 -281 
Arunachal Pradesh 83743 81.15 -74 
Assam 78438 37.15 -19 
Bihar 94163 9.79 41 
Chhattisgarh 135191 44.04 -4 
Delhi 1483 19.96 0 
Goa 3702 67.67 7 
Gujarat 196022 11.46 -1 
Haryana 44212 6.79 14 
Himachal Pradesh 55673 27.49 11 
Jammu & Kashmir 222236 13.09 2 
Jharkhand 79714 32.48 83 
Karnataka 191791 21.86 4 
Kerala 38863 51.60 -24 
Madhya Pradesh 308245 27.51 0 
Maharashtra 307713 19.41 -4 
Manipur 22327 77.41 -190 
Meghalaya 22429 79.60 -46 
Mizoram 21081 91.58 -66 
Nagaland 16579 82.27 -146 
Odisha 155707 34.17 48 
Punjab 50362 6.88 100 
Rajasthan 342239 7.12 51 
Sikkim 7096 47.69 0 
Tamil Nadu 130058 21.79 74 
Tripura 10486 77.83 -8 
Uttar Pradesh 240928 9.02 -3 
Uttarakhand 53483 47.00 1 
West Bengal 88752 17.27 1 
Andaman & Nicobar 8249 81.99 62 
Chandigarh 114 23.68 -0.22 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
491 48.88 0.00 
Daman & Diu 112 13.39 0.50 
Lakshadweep 32 100.00 0.58 
Puducherry 480 16.88 0.09 
Total  3287263  23.82  -367  
 
  

 
 
Appendix - VII  
(Vide Para No. 3.32) 
 
 
Statement of funds released for preparatory activities during 2011-12 under Green 
India  Mission  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Sl. No.  State  Funds released  
(`` `` in Lakhs) 
1. Maharashtra  405.77 
2. Jharkhand 147.00 
3. Kerala 194.60 
4. Tamil Nadu 72.15 
5. Gujarat 133.80 
6. Rajasthan 275.25 
7. Himachal Pradesh 126.50 
8. Jammu & Kashmir 64.00 
9. Odisha 107.50 
10. Punjab 125.50 
11. Haryana 357.00 
12. Chhattisgarh 972.00 
13. Assam 130.00 
14. Andhra Pradesh 89.53 
15. Manipur 40.50 
16. Nagaland 141.50 
17. Tripura 350.50 
18. Karnataka 267.45 
19. Madhya Pradesh 823.50 
20. Uttar Pradesh 119.50 
21. Uttarakhand 51.00 
 
 Total  4994.55  
 

 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
MINUTES OF SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14)  
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 11 th  November, 2013 from 1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
          MEMBERS 
 
2.  Shri Khagen Das  
3.  Dr. Thokchom Meinya  
4.  Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik  
5.  Shri Prabodh Panda  
6.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu”  
7.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
8.  Shri  S. Semmalai  
9.  Shri M. I. Shanavas  
10.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav  
  
            SECRETARIAT  
 
1.  Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director  
2.  Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar – Deputy Secretary  
  
 
            WITNESSES  
 
1. Dr. V. Rajagopalan Secretary (E&F) 
2. Shri K. Jude Sekar DGF & SS 
3. Shri A. K. Srivastava ADG (FC) 
4. Shri B.M.S. Rathore Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Anoop Badhwa IGF 
6. Shri Ajay Tyagi Joint Secretary  
7. Dr. G. V. Subrahmanyam Advisor 
 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  of the Committee and the 
representatives of Ministry of Environment and Fore sts to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for examination of the subject ‘National A fforestation Programme (NAP) and 
issues related to Western and Eastern Ghats’. The C hairman also drew the attention of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests to Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions 
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentialit y of the proceedings of the sitting of the 
Committee. Expressing concern over the decrease wit nessed in the forest cover in the 
country during 2009-2011, he asked the representati ves of the Ministry to explain efforts 
made for increasing and improving the forest and tree cover.  
 
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Environme nt and Forests then gave a brief 
overview of the NAP scheme, highlighting the targets set and achievements made under the 
same. Thereafter, Members of the Committee raised q ueries on various issues for instance, 
percentage area under tree and forest cover on a St ate-wise basis, need to fix minimum 
cover of forest/trees in each State, issues related  to ecologically sensitive areas, 
environmental clearances required for infrastructur al development etc. With regard to 
Western Ghats, status of the Kasturirangan Report a nd the need to consider concerns 
raised by various States was discussed in detail. F urther, the Members of the Committee 
also emphasized upon the need to create better awareness amongst people on environment 
related issues, check the encroachment in forests a s well as deforestation and the 
importance of increasing the number of man days gen erated under NAP. The Committee 
further suggested for establishing better monitorin g mechanism for forest and reserve areas 
and judicious use of funds allocated for afforestation.  
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Environme nt and Forests responded to the 
queries raised by the Committee. In respect of the points for which the representatives could 
not readily respond, the Ministry was asked to furnish written replies at the earliest.  
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
. 
 
  

 
 
MINUTES OF TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES (2013-14)  
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 17 
th  February, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs. in Room No. 52-B (Chairman’s Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
              PRESENT 
  
          Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
               Members     
        
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the  draft Report on ‘National 
Afforestation Programme’ pertaining to the Ministry  of Environment and Forests and 
adopted the same with the insertion at Page No. 30,  Recommendation No. 5, Line 
No. 7 after “view”, “trees are part of national wealth and should not be wasted and”.  
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalize the Report on the 
basis of factual verification by the concerned Mini stry and present the same to the 
Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
    
 
2. Shri Khagen Das 
3. Shri K. Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
4. Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
6. Shri S. Semmalai 
7. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
8. Shri M. I. Shanavas 
9. Shri Ganesh Singh 
10. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
11. Shri Jagadanand Singh 
12. Smt. Annu Tandon  
13. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
              
                   SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin           -       Joint Sec retary 
2. Shri S. Chatterjee              -       Director  
3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar  -       Deputy Secretary 