1 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION) 
 
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sevente enth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30/07/2010 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
     July, 2010/Sravana, 1932(S) 
________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
EC No. ____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price Rs.____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2004 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India  Press, 
Minto Road, New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE NO. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-11)             (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations w hich have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
23 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government‟s reply 
 
43 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which G overnment‟s replies  have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
 
47 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final replies of G overnment are still 
awaited 
 
51 
  
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of Fifth Sitting of the Committee on 
Estimates held on 20.7.2010 
 
70 
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained 
in the Seventeenth Report of Committee on 
Estimates (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-11) 
 
1.  Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
    Members  
2.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3.  Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
4.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
5.  Shri Milind Deora  
6.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
7.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
8.  Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi  
9.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
11.  Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
12.  Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam  
13.  Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
14.  Smt. Ranee Narah  
15.  Shri Prabodh Panda  
16.  Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
17.  Shri Kabindra Purkayastha  
18.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
19.  Shri K. Jaya Surya Prakash Reddy  
20.  Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy  
21.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
22.  Shri S. Semmalai  
23.  Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
24.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma  
25.  Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh  
26.  Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
27.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
28.  Shri Lalji Tandon  
29.  Shri Manish Tewari  
30.  Shri K.C. Venugopal  
  
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.         Shri U.S. Saxena    -          Joint Secretary   
 2.        Smt. Anita B. Panda           -          Addl. Director  
 3. Shri Janmesh Singh    - Committee Officer 
 
 
(iii) 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2010 -11) having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Sixth Report on 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
„University Grants Commission‟ pertaining to Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Higher Education).  
 
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 13 th March, 2008. 
The Government furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 23 rd February, 2009. The draft report 
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 20th July, 2010.  
 
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the  Seventeenth Report of Committee on Estimates (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix II.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;  
 27th July, 2010              
 Sravana 5,1932(S) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 

6 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER  1 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1. This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Fourte enth Lok 
Sabha) on the subject „University Grants Commission‟*  pertaining to the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education).  
 
1.2 The Seventeenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 13 th March, 2008. It contained 38 observations/recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes on all these observations/recommenda tions were received from the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education)  on 23 rd February, 
2009.  
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the Report 
have broadly been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
    Sl. Nos. 1,3,5,6,7,8,9,16,17,20,21,23,25,26,27,30&38    
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s reply: 
 Sl. Nos. 4, 14, 15,35                         (Chapter-III)  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government‟s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos. 12, 13, 22                                 ( Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
Sl. Nos.    2, 10,11,18,19,24,28,29,31,32,33,34,36 & 37 
   ( Chapter V) 
___________________ 
* Hereafter referred as „UGC‟ 

2 
 
 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of  the 
recommendations for which only interim reply has been given by the 
Government should be furnished to them expeditiously. They would also like to 
point out at the inordinate and avoidable delay by the Ministry in furnishing 
replies to their Seventeenth  Report on UGC, which, though was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 13 th March, 2008 yet the Ministry furnished Action Taken Replies 
after nearly 11 months, i.e. on 23 rd February, 2009. In the meantime, various 
issues raised in the report became redundant. The Com mittee also observe 
that many of the Action Taken Replies were interim in nature and could be 
classified only in category (iv) above. Overall, the Committee are deeply 
anguished about the casual attitude of the Ministry and urge them to ensure 
that the replies are furnished within the prescribed time limit in future. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
Role of UGC in Developing State Universities/colleges 
Recommendation [Para No. 2] 
 
1.6 The Committee had recommended as below:  
 The Committee regret to note that  majority of universities lack high standards 
even after the existence of UGC for fifty years. It is disheartening to note that only  
30% of the universities and 10% of the colleges are of high quality. Rest of the 
universities and colleges are of mediocre standards which churn out large number of 
graduates and post graduates every year who also possess mediocre academic 
standards. This  kind of poor quality higher education will not serve to achieve the 
country‟s goal of becoming a strong knowledge power. The Committee view the 
situation as a failure on the part of UGC to fulfill its responsibilities to maintain 
standards in university e ducation. The reasons cited by the Ministry for the situation 
are that more than 90 percent of the universities and colleges funded by UGC are 
under the administrative control of the concerned state Governments. The 
administrative structure of universities  and colleges varies from state to state. UGC 
only provides development grants to State Universities while providing maintenance 
grants is the sole responsibility of the state Governments. The inadequacy of 
maintenance grants is one of the factors which le ads to deterioration in standards. 
National Accreditation and Assessment Council (NAAC) based on its assessment 
has indicated some weaknesses in our universities and colleges. They are : narrow 
programme options, lack of master plan, absence of research cu lture, lack of modern 
teaching methods and curriculum upgrade, ICT facilities, infrastructure, library 
resources and faculty development programmes. The Committee, while noting the 
resource crunch as the major reason for poor standards, are of the firm vie w that 
bureaucratization has also contributed to this state of affairs. Greater regard for the 
autonomy of universities, enabling improved administration by universities, better 
servicing and coordination by UGC, optimum utilization of the available resour ces by 
the universities, and dedication of the faculty are equally important to effectively 
overcome most of the above mentioned weaknesses in our university system and to 
boost the standards of higher education in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the following measures to address the issue:- 
 

4 
 
(i) The Ministry of Human Resources Development and UGC should impress upon 
the State Governments about the necessity and importance of their providing 
maintenance grants to universities as per their a ctual requirements. This should be a 
conditionality for giving any grants to State Universities; 
 
(ii) UGC should provide incentives to State Governments so that they provide 
adequate level of maintenance grants to its universities and colleges by way of 
enhanced development grants to universities and colleges to create world class 
infrastructural faculties; 
 
(iii) In case of State Governments which are in financial difficulties, the UGC should 
provide maintenance grants for a certain period to enable unive rsities and colleges to 
come to the mainstream; 
(iv) All those colleges and state universities which are of C and D grades should be 
given a special one time grant in addition to the regular development grants to bring 
them on par with A grade universities and colleges. 
 
(v) The Ministry should appoint an independent, renowned and suitable agency to 
conduct a thorough and in -depth study of UGC‟s functioning with reference to its 
functions on maintenance of standards of universities and colleges funded by it , 
including its rules and regulations, regarding incentive schemes for improving 
standards in universities. Based on the outcome of the study, which may be 
completed within two years, suitable reforms should be implemented in the 
functioning of UGC in this regard. 
 
(vi) The model amendments in the Acts of the State Universities should be framed to 
enable the State Universities to discharge their responsibilities of management and 
for faculty members to improve the standard of a state university and the Stat e 
Governments should be persuaded by the Ministry to make suitable amendments 
accordingly. 
 

5 
 
(vii) Special development grants should also be given to State Universities to set up 
well equipped laboratories, to introduce modern teaching methods, to introduce  ICT 
facilities and to strengthen library resources to meet international standards. 
 
(viii) An exclusive university centre should also be launched by UGC to take care of 
the needs of faculty development programmes. 
 
(ix) A definite time frame should be fi xed for NAAC accreditation of all the State 
universities to a minimum standard.”  
 
 
1.7 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Human Resource Development have 
stated as under:- 
 (i)  In the last State Education Ministers‟ Conference held on 23 -24 July, 2008,  
the State Governments were requested at the level of Minister of HRD to provide 
maintenance grants to the universities based on their requirements. The State 
Governments now have better financial resources and therefore should be in a 
position to provide higher level of assistance to State Universities. However, such a 
conditionality as suggested by the Hon‟ble Committee may not be desirable, as in the 
event of State Governments not assisting universities to the desired extent and the 
UGC tying its releases to the releases by the State Governments,    State Universities 
which are already facing resource crunch may be forced to resort to unreasonable 
increase in fee/commercialization of education which would impact access and would 
also be against the national policy. 
 
(ii) It is submitted that while maintenance grants should be the responsibility of the 
respective State Government, the UGC provides development grants to the eligible 
state universities under the provisions of the UGC Act, 1956, depen ding on their 
requirements and availability of resources. The UGC has also initiated many quality 
oriented schemes such as the Scheme of “Universities with Potential for Excellence” , 
“Colleges with Potential for Excellence”, Special Assistance Programme f or 
University Departments, Innovative and Emerging Programmes etc. which have 
benefited state universities in quality improvement. In the XI Plan, new schemes have 

6 
 
been proposed to provide one -time central assistance to the State Governments 
under the following schemes:- 
(a)      It is proposed to set up 374 degree colleges in the districts having Gross 
Enrolment Ratio (GER) lower than the national average as identified by the UGC. 
These 374 districts also include 88 districts having a high minority concent ration. Up 
to Rs. 2.67 crore or one -third cost is proposed as Central contribution with the 
balance to be met by the State Government and/or through Private participation.  
(b)     A new scheme has been envisaged to provide one time  assistance to 
universities and colleges which do not get any financial assistance from UGC as they 
are not qualified for being covered under Section 12 B of UGC Act. Under the 
Scheme, assistance will be provided by UGC to the State Govt. institutions provided 
that the State Gov ernments meet 50% of the development assistance required to 
make them eligible for 12 „B‟ assistance. In the case of private State funded colleges, 
it has been proposed that 25% of the total cost of development should be brought 
forward by the private trust/society and 25% by the State Govt., with the balance 50% 
being given by UGC.  
(c)  Another new scheme has been envisaged to incentivise the State Governments 
to enable them to set up new educational institutions.  Under the Scheme, the Central 
Government (M/o HRD) will contribute 1/3 rd of the cost for setting up new 
educational institutions by the States, while the balance amount (i.e. 2/3rd share) as 
well as the recurring expenditure would be borne by the States. 
 
 
(iii) As submitted above, a Scheme for  providing one time central assistance has 
been proposed in the XI Plan to bring State Universities and Colleges lacking in 
minimum requirements of infrastructural facilities etc for being eligible for receiving 
development grants from the UGC.   
 
(iv) The UGC is already implementing a scheme of providing Special Development 
Grants to Universities and Colleges located in Backward/Rural/Remote/Border areas.  
The UGC also has a proposal to provide additional grants to universities and colleges 
to enable them to come up from Grade „C‟ to „B‟ and from  „B‟ to „A‟, as per 
accreditation of the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC). 
 

7 
 
(v) the Government of India has already constituted a UGC/AICTE Review 
Committee, under the Chairmanship of  Prof. Yas h Pal, former Chairman, UGC to 
review the functioning of the UGC and the  All India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE) vide Order No. 4 -4/2008-U.I(A) dated 28.2.2008.  The Committee has since 
been renamed as  „Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rej uvenation of Higher 
Education‟. The Committee is required to furnish its report within one year from the 
date of constitution of the Committee. 
 
(vi) UGC had prepared a draft Model Act in 2003 , on which reactions were sought 
from all stakeholders. The sam e was withdrawn due to opposition from State 
Governments, Teachers‟ Associations,  and various academic quarters. 
 
(vii) It is submitted that while UGC has been providing plan grants to Universities and 
Colleges which include assistance for procurement of laboratory equipments, the 
Universities and Colleges are also provided financial assistance under different 
schemes for upgradation of infrastructure and teaching facilities. These grants have 
been substantially increased in the XI Plan.  
 
(viii) The UGC h as established 57 Academic Staff Colleges in different universities 
which conduct Refresher Courses and Orientation Programmes for the teachers. The 
Ministry has also asked the UGC to organize Summer/Winter Schools to train 
teachers so as to improve their knowledge content in their respective domain 
subjects. During the XI Plan, it has been proposed to establish a new Inter University 
Centre namely, Research Institute for Policy and Evaluation (RIPE). The UGC has 
been asked to examine the possibility of inc luding the capacity building needs of 
faculty as a part of the mandate of the proposed Inter University Centre.  
 
(ix)  While the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee is important from the point 
of ensuring quality, the same can be acted upon only if ac creditation by NAAC is 
made mandatory as against the present provision of voluntary accreditation. A 
legislative proposal for giving statutory status to NAAC and making accreditation 
mandatory is under consideration.  
  

8 
 
 The UGC has also proposed to make a ccreditation compulsory. It is in the 
process of framing regulations in this regard. 
 
 
1.8 Under the UGC Act, 1956, the mandate of the UGC is to promote and 
coordinate university education and to determine and maintain standard of 
teaching, examination and  research in universities. In this context, the 
Committee had expressed serious concern over the prevailing low/mediocre 
standards of the majority of the Universities/colleges in the country and termed 
it as a failure on the part of UGC. They had also observed that concerted efforts 
by UGC in providing incentives and special development grants to State 
Universities to set up facilities, better maintenance of State Universities, a 
review of functioning of UGC, compulsory NAAC accreditation etc. were some 
of the initiatives required for bringing the desired improvement in the field of 
higher education in India. 
 From the replies furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that the 
Government is aware of the ground situation and certain steps have indeed 
been taken/proposed to be taken to improve the fund allocation to the State 
Universities, a major chunk of which has to come from the State Governments. 
The UGC has also reportedly initiated many quality-oriented schemes to benefit 
the State universities/colleges. It has also been proposed to set up 374 Degree 
Colleges  in the districts having Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) lower than the 
national average. The Committee also note from the reply that the Government 
had constituted a UGC Review Committee under Prof.  Yashpal, Former 
Chairman, UGC in the year 2008, and its report was expected to be ready within 
a year. 

9 
 
 While it is a matter of satisfaction that a number of schemes have been 
initiated by the UGC and the Government to improve the scenario of higher 
education in the country, the Committee would have appreciated had the reply 
been corroborated with facts about the actual performance of at least those 
schemes and programmes, which are operational for quite some time. The 
Committee would like to know whether the proposed 374 Degree Colleges have 
actually been set up. Besides, as per the reply, certain new schemes had been 
proposed in the XI Plan to provide one time Central assistance to the State 
Governments. The XI Plan began in the year 2007 and by the time the reply 
were furnished to the Committee in the month of February, 2009, 2 years had 
already passed. The Committee therefore desire to be apprised about the latest 
status of these schemes. As the Yashpal Committee had already submitted its 
report in June,  2009, they further wish to be apprised of its specific 
recommendations regarding renovation and rejuvenation of higher education 
in the country and the improvements required in UGC and also the action 
proposed to be taken on the same by the Government. 
 One unfortunate fact which has come to the notice of the Committee 
through the reply is that a draft model Act for State universities that was 
proposed by the UGC in the year 2003 was withdrawn due to opposition from 
State Governments, teachers associations  and various academic quarters. The 
Committee would like to know the grounds on which objections were raised. 
Also they would like to be informed as to whether any further action on the 
model Act is being envisaged by the UGC . As regards an Exclusive Unive rsity 
Centre to be launched by the UGC to take care of the needs of faculty 
development programmes, it was reportedly proposed to establish a new Inter 

10 
 
University Centre namely Research Institute for Policy and Evaluation during 
the XI Plan. The Committee would like to know current status of the proposal. 
Further, they would also like to be apprised of the current status of the framing 
of regulations by the UGC on the matter concerning compulsory accreditation 
of universities and colleges. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
Financial Grants to State Universities/Colleges 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
1.9 The Committee recommended as below:- 
 The Committee regret to note that even those state universities/colleges which 
are eligible under 12 (B) of the UGC Act are not given  grants by UGC. The reasons 
put forth by the Ministry for this sorry-state-of-affairs was scarcity of resources. Out of 
6,500 colleges which are eligible under 12 (B) of the UGC Act, only 5,661 colleges 
are receiving development assistance from UGC. The Co mmittee further learnt from 
Calcutta University which is a State University that only 10% of the UGC‟s annual 
budget is presently spent as development grants on State Universities. In Calcutta 
University‟s budget, the share of UGC grants does not exceed ev en 5%. In this 
regard it had suggested that UGC‟s financial support to state universities is extremely 
inadequate to meet the present challenges in the realm of higher education and the 
UGC should consider the possibility of providing both development and maintenance 
grants to state universities. The Committee recommend that a comprehensive review 
should be conducted on the financial needs of all the state universities and they 
should be given enhanced level of funding by UGC according to their size, as wel l as 
present and future needs. Importance should be accorded to performance of 
individual universities. The universities which perform better should be rewarded with 
more funds. 
 
1.10 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 
 It is submitted that the maintenance requirement of State Universities are to be 
met by State Governments. The UGC has incorporated an allocation during XI Plan 
for Rs.7000 crore to support 150 uncovered State Universities and 6000 uncovered 
colleges. In addition, an amount of Rs.3000 crore have been provided in the XI Plan 
for assistance to 160 State Universities already covered under Section 12B of the 
UGC Act, 1956 and 5500 colleges which are recognized by the UGC for assistance. 
Further, State Governments are also being incentivized to set up 374 degree colleges 
in districts having GER lower than the national average, by providing one time 
assistance and increasing their share gradually. Increased grants are also being 

12 
 
given towards development expenditure of State Universities, for setting up of Girls‟ 
hostels and for upgradation of technical institutions. 
 
 
1.11 On the matter concerning financial needs of the State Universities and 
enhance funding by UGC, the stand taken by the Ministry that the maintenanc e 
requirement of State Universities should be met by the State Governments, is 
well taken. However, in their original recommendation, the Committee had 
expressed concern over the non -receipt of UGC grants by those State 
Universities/Colleges, which are eli gible Under Section 12 B of the UGC Act. 
The Committee had referred to 6500 such colleges, out of which only 5661 
colleges had received development assistance from UGC. The reply of the 
Government is silent on this aspect. The reply merely refers to the pr oposal to 
incorporate Rs. 7000 crores to support hitherto uncovered 150 S tate 
Universities and 6000 colleges during the XI Plan, and the provision of Rs. 3000 
crores for assistance to 160 State Universities already covered under Section 
12 B of the UGC Act  and 5500 colleges, which are recognized by the UGC for 
assistance. While the Committee appreciate it as an effort in the right direction, 
they expect that the projected allocation for providing financial support to 
various State Universities/colleges has actually been made available to the 
UGC and that the individual performance/potential of each institution has been 
taken into consideration for deciding on the matter. As the XI Plan is in its 
fourth year of operation, the Committee hope that some of the f und allocation 
has been since utilized. They therefore would like the Government to furnish 
details of funds allocated and utilized to State Universities/colleges under XI 
Plan so far. The Committee also hope that appropriate mechanism is in place in 
the UGC to ensure that the funds made available to these institutions are being 
utilized prudently and efficiently. They would like the Ministry to inform them 
about the same too.   
                                 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
 
Non achievement of Financial Targets 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
1.12 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
 The Committee note that financial targets fixed for several schemes were not 
achieved by UGC during the Tenth Five Year Plan. A financial target of Rs. 789 crore 
was fixed for development grants to central universities but only Rs. 720.88 crore was 
actually disbursed, out of a target of Rs. 465 crore, only Rs. 129 crore was given to 
colleges as development grants, a target of Rs. 20 crore was fixed for providing 
development grants to  universities in backward areas but only Rs. 12.30 crore was 
actually disbursed. For Inter University Centres only Rs. 13.45 crore were spent 
against a target of Rs. 125 crore. For Special Assistance Programme, a target of Rs. 
205 crore was fixed but only Rs. 134 crore was spent. With such slow pace of 
spending of plan allocation by UGC, the development of higher education and raising 
its standards to that of international level will remain a distant dream. The Committee 
is not satisfied with the excuses pu t forth by the Government i.e. the failure on the 
part of universities and colleges to submit the documents required for obtaining the 
approval of building proposals in time and delay by the State Universities in creation 
of teaching and non -teaching posts  sanctioned by UGC. The Committee feel that 
such an unfortunate situation arises only when the implementing agencies fail to 
service grants in a spirit of dedication to development. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry and UGC should final ise the estimates of physical and 
financial targets of various schemes only after duly examining the requirements and 
the feasibility of achieving the same. Once targets have been fixed, UGC should take 
proactive steps to achieve the same. Any lacunae on t he part of UGC in this regard 
will lead to unnecessary locking of several crores of rupees and at the same time 
intended benefits not reaching the beneficiaries viz. universities, colleges, faculty and 
ultimately the students and higher education as a whole. 
 
1.13 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 While the Ministry endorses the concern expressed by the Hon‟ble Committee 
that physical and financial targets under the various schemes should be estimated 
only after examining the requirement and the feasibility of achieving such targets, it is 

14 
 
submitted that the financial target of X Plan for UGC was Rs. 9853.10 crore (Budget 
Estimate) for all the schemes and UGC had fully utilized the budgetary provision. The 
annual expenditure  during the 2004 -05, 2005 -06 and 2006 -07 were Rs.  1943.56 
crore, Rs. 2198.56 crore and Rs. 2786.74 crore, respectively for all the UGC 
schemes of X Plan. 
 It is humbly submitted that reasons put forward by the Government were 
based on feedback received fr om UGC. It is also humbly submitted that funding of 
universities is done by UGC in terms of the provisions of the UGC Act which does not 
provide for any role of the Central Government in deciding the allocations to be made 
to the Universities or to the sch emes of UGC. UGC has been advised from time to 
time to ensure that expenditure is incurred timely and evenly throughout the year in 
order to prevent „lumping‟ in any quarter. UGC has also been advised to streamline 
its procedure for releases so that proces sing delays are avoided and universities get 
sufficient time to ensure progress and utilization of funds. 
 It is further submitted that the requirement of funds of each 
university/institution is finalized by the UGC, based on advice of a Committee of 
Experts which visit such institutions, in consultation with stake holders and after 
taking all relevant facts into account. 
 
1.14 Commenting on the non -achievement of financial targets fixed for 
several schemes by the UGC during the X Five Year Plan in respect of 
development grants to Central Universities, Universities in backward areas, 
Inter University Centres and grants under Special Assistance Programmes, the 
Committee had expressed dissatisfaction over the failure of the implementing 
agencies to service gra nts in a spirit of dedication to development. They had 
emphasized that the Ministry and the UGC should have finalized the estimates 
of physical and financial targets of various schemes only after examining the 
requirements and the feasibility of achieving the same. 
 In their reply the Government have now submitted that the financial 
target in the X Five Year Plan was achieved by the UGC and that the reasons 
advanced by them for slow pace of spending of Plan allocation by UGC, were 
based only on the feedback received from UGC. 

15 
 
 From the reply, the Committee feel that once the funding targets have 
been fixed and fund allocated by the Ministry of HRD, the UGC takes over and 
thereafter, the onus lies entirely on the UGC to disburse the grants to 
universities and  colleges. Although the Ministry of HRD have reportedly 
advised the UGC from time to time to ensure that the expenditure is incurred 
timely and evenly throughout the year in order to prevent ‘lumping’ in any 
quarter, they seem to have hardly any role once the matter is left in the hands 
of UGC. The Committee are aware that the UGC is a Statutory body with a 44 
year experience for practically all matters concerning higher education in India 
and that maximum autonomy is granted to them to utilize allocated funds in the 
best possible manner. However, autonomy should not lead to arbitrariness and 
thus, the Committee expect UGC to pay heed to the directions issued by the 
Ministry under Article 20 of the UGC Act. Besides, by virtue of the fact that UGC 
has suffici ent infrastructure and powers in hand, the Committee recommend 
that they should finalize the estimates of physical and financial targets of 
various schemes under the 5 Year Plans only after examining in depth the 
requirements and the feasibility of achievi ng the targets in an optimal manner 
for the sake of bringing maximum efficiency as well as the desired 
improvement in the present scenario of higher education in the country.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
 
Career Oriented Programmes  
 Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
1.15 The Committee recommended as below:- 
 The Committee note that a scheme called Career Oriented Programme is 
being implemented by UGC to impart vocational training to undergraduates. These 
courses run parallel to the conventional BA, B.Com and B.Sc degr ees. This scheme 
is being implemented since 1995 -96 but only 43 universities and 3383 colleges have 
been covered so far. In this regard, the Ministry stated that keeping in view the 
availability of funds, UGC would extend the scheme to cover more universit ies and 
colleges and also would introduce more vocational courses to suit the requirements 
of the  country in the wake of globaliz ation and liberalization of economy. In 
Committee‟s view this programme is very important as a large number of students, 
after completing their graduation, are unable to opt for vertical mobility in higher 
education either due to average performance or due to financial constraints. This 
programme would ensure providing gainful employment after graduation and thus 
would reduce educated unemployment. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
steps should be taken by the Ministry of Human Resources Development and UGC to 
extend this programme to all the colleges and universities in the country within a 
definite time frame. Non -availability of funds should not be a problem for the 
expansion of this programme and hence, the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development should hold talks with the Ministry of Finance, the Planning 
Commission and leaders of industry for the allocation of required f unds and the 
expansion of the programme with industry links throughout the country.  
 
  
1.16 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Human Resource Development have 
stated as under:- 
 It is submitted that according to the guidelines framed by the UGC for 
„Introduction of Career Oriented Courses in Universities and Colleges during XI Plan 
(2007-2012)‟, all colleges and universities recognized by the UGC under Section 2 (f) 
and Section 12 B of the UGC Act, 1956 are eligible for implementing the Scheme of  
Career Oriented Courses. 
 

17 
 
1.17 The Committee are not satisfied with the one -line reply of the Ministry 
that merely reproduces the guideline about all recognized colleges & 
universities being eligible for career -oriented courses during XI Plan. In their 
original recommendation, the Committee had referred to the schemes which, 
though in existence since 1995 -96, could only be implemented in 43 
Universities and 3383 colleges due to lack of funds. Besides, the Ministry had 
assured the Committee at that time tha t the vocational training programme 
would be extended to cover more universities and colleges depending on 
available funds. As the Ministry has chosen to remain silent on the matter, the 
Committee infer that in all probability the programme was not extende d to 
uncovered Universities/colleges, owing to reasons unknown to them. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to submit appropriate replies to their 
recommendations. Further, they would like to know about the 
Universities/colleges where the career -oriented programme is currently in 
operation as per the guidelines of XI Plan. The Committee hope that the 
programme is in sync with the current needs of the industry. They would also 
urge the Ministry and the UGC to strive for such standards in vocational 
training so as to encourage private players to hire students trained under this 
programme. The Human Resource Departments of various industrial quarters 
also need to be informed and sensitized about the availability of trained 
students so that those could a vail of the opportunities offered by the industry. 
The Committee trust that the Ministry and UGC are capable of doing so.  They 
would like the UGC to suggest State Universities to play a proactive role in the 
matter too. The Committee wish  that the Ministr y may submit a brief note to 
them on the said matter.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCE CORPORATION  
Recommendation (Para No. 34) 
 
1.18 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 The Committee note that there is a need for providing financial assistance  by 
way of soft loans to the meritorious students to pursue higher education as such 
students are unable to access it due to market/commercial rate of interest being 
charged by banks,  the insistence on collateral and early commencement of 
repayment, etc. Under the Education Loan Scheme of the Indian Banks‟ Association, 
a need based finance of Rs. 7.5 lakh is provided for studies in India and Rs. 15 lakh 
for studies abroad subject to repaying capacity of the parents/students with margin. 
Under the aforesaid  scheme there is no need for any collateral security upto Rs. 4 
lakh. Unfortunately, there are instances of insistence on mortgages or property by 
banks for educational loan in violation of the above guideline. To address all the 
issues relating to educati onal loan to students, CABE Committee on Financing of 
Higher and Technical Education in its Report has made a valid recommendation that 
a body like Higher Education Finance Corporation (HEFC) may be set up with 
contributions from the Government and corpora te sector, to coordinate the student 
loan schemes being operated by several banks and to provide its own scholarships 
and soft loans to students. The Committee are unhappy to learn that this proposal 
has been kept in abeyance by the Government in view of t he proposed “Scheme of 
subsidy on students Loan for Professional Education.” Under this Scheme, the 
entire interest, especially of those whose parental income is less than Rs. 2.5 lakh 
per annum, for the moratorium period on the loan provided by the banks shall be 
borne by the Government. The Committee urge the Government to also consider the 
feasibility of  bearing interest on loan during the moratorium period of parents whose 
annual income is less than Rs. 5 lakh as the middle class families are also equa lly 
burdened by the higher cost of professional education of their children. The 
Committee, while appreciating the proposed scheme of subsidy and recommending a 
wider scope for its operation, is of the firm view that it is necessary that an 
independent bod y may be set up to coordinate, to ameliorate the grievances of 
students in getting loans from banks and to provide scholarships and soft loans on its 
own. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the government should set 

19 
 
up the Higher Education F inance Corporation immediately as earlier  recommended  
by CABE Committee. The Committee also recommend that the government should 
immediately launch the proposed subsidy scheme with the modification suggested by 
the Estimates Committee regarding education al loan and implementation of this 
scheme may also be coordinated by the proposed HEFC. 
 
 
1.19   In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as under:- 
  
 While there is a proposal to provide interest subsidy to the students on the 
loans taken by  them under the Educational Loan Scheme of the Indian Banks‟ 
Association for pursuing professional education in India, no decision has been taken 
so far. Under the proposed scheme, the students belonging to economically weaker 
sections are proposed to be c overed, for which the parental income ceiling has been 
proposed at Rs. 4.5 lakh per annum. The Scheme is proposed to be implemented 
and monitored through Canara Bank, who are the Bankers of this Ministry.  In view of 
this, the proposal for setting up of Hig her Education Finance Corporation (HEFC) has 
been kept in abeyance. 
 
1.20 Although the Action Taken reply of the Government States that the 
proposal for setting up of HEFC has been kept in abeyance, the Committee 
learn that now the proposal is being fast t racked by the Planning Commission. 
Further, the Ministry is reportedly mulling over a tax -saving bank deposit 
scheme to raise funds for cheap loans to educational institutions and students. 
The Committee feel that while such steps would go a long way in ma king 
higher education more inclusive and accessible, they feel that the Government 
should workout the modalities fast. They are of the view that providing loans 
and scholarships to the meritorious but needy students, would definitely 
incentivize them to perform better.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
 
 
Corruption in MCI, AICTE 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
 
1.21 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
 The Committee note that a number of Professional Councils such as All India 
Council of Technical Education, Medical Council of I ndia etc. are responsible for 
recognition of courses, promotion of professional institutions and to provide grants to 
undergraduate programmes etc. UGC is the apex body for coordination of standards 
of teaching, research and examination in universities bes ides giving grants to them. 
The Commission carries out these functions in coordination and consultation with 
other statutory bodies wherever and whenever required. There is a proposal with the 
Government to establish a National Commission on Higher Educati on which will 
coordinate the working of various regulatory bodies. However, National Knowledge 
Commission (NKC) in its Report has suggested that there is a multiplicity of 
regulatory agencies where mandates are both confusing and overlapping. The 
system is  over-regulated and  undergoverned. NKC has suggested that an 
Independent Regulatory Authority of Higher Education (IRAHE) should be 
established. This authority will perform the regulatory functions of AICTE, MCI and 
BCI so that their role would be limited  to that of professional associations. The role of 
UGC will be limited to disbursing grants to universities. On this suggestion of NKC, 
the Committee obtained the comments of universities of Calcutta, Jadavpur, Delhi, 
Hyderabad and Jawaharlal Nehru Univers ity. None of them support the idea of 
establishment of IRAHE. University of Hyderabad even stated that the entire proposal 
of the National Knowledge Commission overlooks the fact that there is an interplay 
between regulatory and funding roles presently exe rcised by UGC. The Committee, 
in this regard, recommend that the Government first set up the National Commission 
on Higher Education to coordinate the activities of various regulatory bodies in Higher 
Education such as UGC, AICTE and MCI etc. and simultane ously hold wider 
consultations on the recommendations of NKC including that of IRAHE, setting up of 
1500 universities by 2015 etc. and take concrete and appropriate steps in the matter. 
 
 

21 
 
 
 
1.22 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as under:- 
 
 Recommendations of the National Knowledge Commission regarding setting 
up of a Independent Regulatory Authority on Higher Education (IRAHE), setting up of 
1500 universities, etc.,  have not found acceptance by the wider academic community 
including   teachers‟ organizations. A proposal for setting up of a National 
Commission for Higher Education has been under consideration of this Ministry, but 
no consensus has  been reached on the need for setting up such a Commission. It 
has been decided to place the matter before the Central Advisory Board of Education 
(CABE) for its consideration at its next meeting. 
 Government of India have constituted a UGC/AICTE Review Committee, since 
renamed as „Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher 
Education‟, under the Chairmanship of  Prof. Yash Pal, former Chairman, UGC to 
review the functioning of the UGC and the  All India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE) vide Order No. 4 -4/2008-U.I(A) dated 28.2.2008. The Committee is required 
to furnish its report within one year from the date of constitution of the Committee 
 
1.23 The Committee express regret at the charges of corruption leveled 
against certain officials of MCI, AICTE etc. some of which have already been 
proven, leading to arrest of the g uilty. These incidents have not only brought 
discredit to these statutory bodies, but have also brought to the fore issues of 
the rot that has crept in the governance of certain regul atory bodies in the field 
of higher education. The Committee would like t o emphasize that those found 
guilty of malpractices must be made accountable for the same. They feel that 
the need to take effective steps for ensuring transparency and accountability in 
the activities of these statutory bodies has become urgent now. They learn that 
the Government is already contemplating upon an ordinance to supersede MCI. 
The Committee desire the Ministry to furnish their specific Action Taken reply 
on this issue in due course. 
 

22 
 
1.24 The Committee further would like to emphasi ze that they attach greatest 
importance to implementation of the recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  They would, therefore, urge that the Government should keep a 
close watch so as to ensure expeditious implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by them.  A report on status of action taken on the 
recommendations categorized as accepted by the Government in Chapter -II of 
this Report should be furnished to the Committee within three months 
alongwith the action taken replies to recommendations in chapter -I an d the 
final replies to recommendations included in chapter-V of this report.  In case it 
is not possible to implement the recommendations in letter  
 and spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
 University Grants Commission (UGC) was established in November, 1956 as 
a statutory body of the Government of India by th e University Grants Commission 
Act, 1956. The Act mandated UGC to take all such steps for the promotion and 
coordination of university education and for the determination and maintenance of 
standards of teaching, examination and research in universities. T he commission 
also provides financial support in the form of grants to universities and colleges for 
their development. In the present day world, knowledge economy has brought into 
focus the strong linkages between higher education, knowledge and wealth cr eation. 
As such, higher education occupies a special place in a knowledge society which in 
turn creates a strong economy. Unfortunately our university standards are not upto 
the level of internationally renowned universities and our universities do not fig ure in 
the lists of globally popular ratings. In this context, functioning of UGC which is the 
national level nodal organization engaged in promotion of higher education, is very 
significant. Hence, the Committee selected this subject for examination. Afte r the 
examination of various activities of UGC, the Committee feel that by its own 
admission regarding very poor facilities and standards in colleges and universities, 
there is immense scope for improvement in various areas of its functioning. These 
aspects are dealt with in greater details by the Committee in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry agrees with the valuable observations of the Hon’ble Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note the inadequate level of quality and 
quantity of research in universities funded by UGC. It is disheartening to note that 
only about 5000 PhDs are produced in a year in this country whereas in China they 
produce more than 35000 PhDs in a year and in USA the figure is about 25000 
PhDs. On the patents side also we are far below the other countries. In 2005, we had 
about 648 patents, China had 2,452 patents, USA had 45,111 patents and Japan had 
25,145 patents. At present the country‟s share in number of research papers in the 
world is about 2.5 percent while the USA publishes 32 percent of the research papers 
in the world. The Committee note that UGC  implements certain programmes for the 
development of research initiatives in universities such as Faculty Improvement 
Programme, Major and Minor Research Projects, Research Awards, Junior Research 
Fellowships etc. But these programmes have not delivered t he desired results and 
these research initiatives in the universities are still below the international standards. 
The Committee note that recommendations of the MM Sharma Committee have been 
accepted by the Government. The Committee were informed that onl y Rs. 205 crore 
instead of Rs. 600 crore has been earmarked for the current financial year to take 
care of the recommendations of the said Committee. The Committee are unable to 
understand how, in the absence of infrastructural and human resource facilitie s, UGC 
will be able to improve scientific research at various levels. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Government should definitely earmark Rs. 600 crore for 
improving scientific research in universities from the next financial year on wards. 
They should also take into consideration the cost overrun due to administrative 
delays in implementation of the recommendations and the allocation for the purpose 
should be increased accordingly. The Committee should be informed about the 
implementation status of the recommendations of M.M. Sharma Committee on the 
subject. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry endorses the strong recommendations of the Hon’ Committee in 
regard to the budgetary allocations for the development of research initiatives in 
universities.  

25 
 
      It is submitted that the allocation for implementation of recommendations of 
the MM Sharma Task Force as also for the Fellowship Programmes emanating from 
the recommendations of the MM Sharma Task Force, have been substantially 
increased in the XI Plan to Rs. 3500 crore. of which Rs. 1200 crore is for 
implementing the recommendation of the MM Sharma Task force and the outlay of 
Rs. 2300 crore is for Fellowship Programmes. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note with concern that there are 223 vacancies out of the 
sanctioned strength of 806 posts in the Secretariat of UGC at present i.e. about 28% 
of the posts are vacant in UGC. There are 20 vacancies in Group „A‟ posts out of the 
sanctioned strength of 92 Group „A‟ posts. As the higher education is poised for large 
scale expansion in near future and present organizational set up of UGC with its 
present weaknesses and short comings may not be able to handle the work load of 
the future. As per Ninth Report of the Expenditure Reforms Commission 2001, UGC 
had to reduce its number of schemes and thus it was required to abolish 264 posts. 
In 2003, UGC had to abolish 55 posts as 146 posts were lying vacant for more than 
one year. In view of the depleting staff support, UGC requested for revival of 65 
vacant posts in 2004. However, as per the Expenditure Reforms Commission Report, 
UGC is entitled to fill up only 36 addi tional posts and that too only if the Ministry of 
Finance gives approval for revival of posts which are lying vacant for more than one 
year. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance generally insist for recommendations of 
Staff Inspection Unit. Even though UGC has requested the Government for 
inspection by Staff Inspection Unit, inspection has so far not been carried out. The 
Committee take a serious view of such lapses on the part of the Government. The 
Committee, recommend that immediate steps should be ta ken by the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development and the Ministry of Finance to carry out a 
comprehensive inspection regarding staff strength of UGC. The Committee also note 
that UGC has requested the Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad to 

26 
 
conduct a study of the functioning of UGC and to suggest necessary modifications 
and changes in its structure. In this regard, the Committee recommend that a 
comprehensive study should be conducted on the present organizational/ 
administrative structure of U GC particularly on its suitability to the present and future 
requirements of higher education and thereafter, prompt steps should be taken to re -
structure the organizational set up of UGC accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance had called for some basic 
data from the UGC for the study for the staff requirement of UGC. The UGC has been 
reminded to furnish the required information to the Staff Inspection Unit. The UGC 
has also been advised to expedite the st udy entrusted to the Administrative Staff 
College of India. The UGC has also initiated a proposal for e -governance in order to 
provide inter -connectivity between UGC, its Regional O ffices, Autonomous Inter 
University Centres, Universities, Colleges and oth er institutions of Higher Education. 
It is expected that the said project, as and when operationalised would result in 
smaller manpower need in the result in smaller manpower need in the UGC. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that there are six regional offices of UGC at Hyderabad, 
Pune, Bhopal, Kolkata, Guwahati and Bangalore. The Northern Regional College 
Bureau of UGC Head  Office works as Northern Regional Office. These regional 
offices were set up so that they improve the delivery system, working improves and 
the grants are released on time. The regional offices primarily deal with the college 
sector because there are abou t six thousand colleges that are supported by UGC for 
various purposes like development grants, travel grants and other grants. During the 
Eleventh Plan it is proposed to open two more regional offices. At present, there are 
only two regional offices at Ne w Delhi and Bhopal for entire northern region, two 
regional offices at Bangalore and Hyderabad for southern region, one for entire 

27 
 
Eastern region at Kolkata, one at Guwahati for North-Eastern region and one regional 
office at Pune for entire Western region . The Committee are of the firm view that the 
present number of regional offices is not sufficient to handle the work load particularly 
in view of the multifarious functions of UGC and growing number of colleges. 
Regional offices may play a vital role to m onitor the performance of universities and 
colleges under their purview including the utilization of funds for intended purposes.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that UGC should open offices in every state 
to coordinate the functions of UGC at state l evel and develop a sophisticated web -
based computerized system to discharge functions of the Regional Centres. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As submitted above (para 5),  the e-governance project of the UGC is intended 
to network colleges, universities, regional offices of UGC, inter-university centres and 
the headquarter of UGC.  In so far as opening of offices in every State is concerned, 
it is submitted that an effective e -governance system could obviate the need for 
physical presence of UGC in every State.  Together with the e -governance system 
and the effective functioning of the regional offices, the UGC shall be in a better 
position to regulate the quality and standard of education. UGC has also been 
advised to delegate more powers to its regional offices  in order to obviate the need 
for the colleges and universities to approach the headquarters in large number of 
schemes. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 The Committee note that there are six inter -university centres of UGC for 
providing common facilities to university and collegiate system.  These centres 
comprise, National Accreditation and Assessment Council which accredits 
universities and colleges, the Centre for Educational Communication which generates 
software for use in higher education, INFLIBNET which networks university and 
college libraries and provide them facilities to access to e -journals etc. Only three 

28 
 
centres are meant for sci entific research viz. Accelerator Centre, the second one is 
for availing facilities from Deptt. of Atomic Energy and the third one is for astronomy. 
The Committee feel that many areas of new and frontier technologies such as 
nanotechnology, electronics, bi o-technology, etc. are not covered by existing inter -
university centres. Inter -university centres can play a very vital role in scientific 
research initiatives of universities in various fields of science and technology such as 
physical sciences, chemical science, bio -science and mathematical science by 
offering them common facilities in research work, equipment and technologies. This 
may also reduce the cost of research of individual universities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that existing inter-university centres should be strengthened by 
UGC to offer common facilities in various fields of scientific research. These centres 
may facilitate scholars by offering board and lodging and arrangements for face -to-
face interactions among scholars from all di sciplines, providing internet access to all 
international academic journals, arranging seminars and conferences on specialized 
subjects, documenting and disseminating the results of such interactions. These 
centres may also pool facilities of various unive rsities together for common research 
in various disciplines of science and technology. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry accepts the valued recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee 
regarding the need for strengthening the Inter University Centres (IUC s). The XI Plan 
outlay for IUCs has been enhanced.  A new IUC for Policy and Evaluation has also 
been proposed in the XI Plan. It is submitted that the broad objectives and the need 
for IUCs  are determined by the requirment of investment, which should be of a scale 
larger than that any one university can afford to make, and therefore can be shared 
as a common facility among scholars associated with a number of universities. At 
present, no such proposal for large investments in the field of nano -technology, 
electronics, bio -technology etc have been projected by Universities. Investments 
required in nano -technology and bio -technology have been projected by individual 
universities, namely, the University of Mumbai, University of Calcutta and the 
University of Madras for establishing centres of excellence in these technology. On 
the basis of the recommendations of the UGC, Central Government has also 
declared Chennai Mathematical Institute as an institution Deemed to be University to 

29 
 
enable them to work further in promoting areas of mathematical studies. The said 
institution deemed to be university collaborates with other institutions. UGC has been 
advised to explore the feasibility of extending common facilities in other areas as 
recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee, subject to availability of resources. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 The Committee regret to note that GDP spending on higher education sector is 
very low and the sector has been relatively neglected in the past decades. As stated 
by the Prime Minister recently, it was the investment made in this sector in the 50s 
and 60s which has given us a strong knowledge base in many fields and aft er that 
the sector has been sidelined for decades as a non -priority sector as far as resource 
allocation is concerned. Only 0.37 or 0.4 percent of GDP is currently spent on higher 
education, whereas in developed countries about 1.5 percent of GDP is spent on 
higher education. The Committee take a very serious view of such low spending on 
higher education which may affect the country‟s competitive potential. Unfortunately, 
till now, we have been able to spend only about 3.5 percent of GDP on education. As 
a result, allocation to higher education has also suffered. It is high time that the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development takes serious and detailed discussions 
with Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission to take immediate and 
concrete steps to en sure that Government allocate at least 2% of GDP for higher 
education i.e. at least 25% of total allocation for the education sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry is grateful to the Hon‟ble Committee for taking a serious view over 
the low expendi ture on higher education over the years. It is submitted that even 
though present level of expenditure on higher education is also modest in relation to 
the need for spending at least 2% of GDP on higher education, the XI Plan allocation 
of Rs.84,943 crore  for Higher Education is roughly nine times of the expenditure 
during the X Plan by the Central Government. The share of allocation on higher 
education as a percentage of total allocation for the Plan has increased from 1.7% in 

30 
 
the X Plan to 6.1% during the XI Plan. It is further submitted that allocation by Central 
Government alone shall not help in realizing the goal of spending 6% of GDP on 
education and there has to be commensurate increase in allocation by State 
Governments. States have been requested repeatedly, including at the last State 
Ministers‟ Conference held in July 2008, to increase their outlay in the XI Plan. 
Several schemes for incentivizing State Governments to allocate state resources 
have also been included in XI Plan by UGC. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 The Committee regret to note that the Union Government‟s share in total GDP 
spending on higher education is merely 0.17  percent.  Private educational institutions 
spend almost 50 percent of the country‟s total requirement of higher education. 
Remaining 50 percent of the funding for higher education in the country is met by the 
State Governments and the Union Government in the ratio of 80:20. This shows that 
a very small amount is being allocated by the Union Government for the development 
of higher education in the country. So, there is an urgent need to increase centre‟s 
budgetary allocations for higher education. Higher E ducation being critical to the 
country‟s economy, both the Union and State Governments should act in tandem with 
each other and ensure that standard and quantum of higher education are up to the 
international level and according to the specific needs of th e country. In this regard, 
the Committee also note that the responsibility of raising GDP spending on education 
to six percent, and in turn to two percent on higher education, rests both with the 
Union Government and State Governments. It is unfortunate th at, many a time when 
the Union Government increases its budgetary allocation for education, the State 
Governments tend to decrease their share. Education sector as a whole does not 
gain in such a situation. This is the reason why the higher education which  is 
receiving a relatively less allocation suffers the most. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend  the following: 
 

31 
 
(i) to convene a meeting of State Education Ministers to discuss and arrive at a 
definite fund allocation formula for education sector 
(ii) Planning Commission should prevail over the states at the time of approval of their 
five year plans and annual plans to allocate a definite proportion of their resources for 
higher education 
(iii) the Union Government should share the burden of those states which are at the 
bottom of the rankings based on incidence of poverty and which may find it difficult to 
increase their share of funds for higher education commensurate with Union 
Government‟s increase. The Union Government may even offer incentives to the  
State Governments which come forward to increase their allocation on higher 
education. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) It is submitted that conferences of State Education Ministers dealing with 
Higher and Technical Education are conducted regularly. Last such meeting was held 
on July 23 -24, 2008, wherein allocation of resources were discussed. States were 
exhorted to provide more funds for higher education, considering that the position of 
state revenues is better than ever before. 
(ii) Recommendation of Hon‟ ble Committee has been communicated to the 
Planning Commission for appropriate action. 
(iii) Schemes for incentivizing State Governments have been included by UGC in 
the XI Plan. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that Indian Higher Education Institutions 
are very poorly ranked in two globally recognized ranking systems. Apart from IITs, 
Delhi University (254t h), University of Calcutta, University of Pune are the only 
universities which find their names in Times Higher Education Supplement Rankings.  
None of other higher education institution find its place from 1st to 253 rd rankings. 
Even IITs are lagging far behind in the rankings. In 2006, in Times‟ rankings IITs were 

32 
 
ranked 57th, IIMs were ranked 68th and JNU was at 183rd but in 2007 rankings IIMs 
and JNU could not find any place in the rankings. The Committee note that the 
organization which administers the Times rankings has changed its system of ranking 
last year and subsequently IIMs and JNU could not find a place in the ranking and 
IITs had low ranking. The other global ranking system is administered by Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University.  Only IIS, Bangalore  (305th rank) and IIT, Kharagpur (402nd 
rank) are the Indian higher educational institutions which find a place in this ranking. 
The Committee in this regard were informed that Planning Commission is envisaging 
setting up of 14 new central universities wit h world -class infrastructure so as to 
achieve world standards.  The Committee recommend that a mission mode be 
adopted to cut through bureaucratic red tape to ensure that these universities are set 
up within the Eleventh Plan Period. The Committee also rec ommend that needs of 
our existing institutions of excellence like Delhi, Kolkatta, Mumbai, Madurai, Aligarh, 
Banaras and Pune universities, JNU IITs, IIMs, IISs etc. should be studied and high 
levels of assistance should be provided to them to make them wo rld class institutions 
and to improve their rankings in the globally recognized ranking systems. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 There are no globally recognized norms for determining the rank of a 
university.  Some of our institutions such as University of Cal cutta, Delhi University, 
Jawahar Lal Nehru University, IITs, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, are known 
to be of global standards. It was earlier decided to allocate an amount of Rs.100 
crore each to the three universities, namely, the University of  Calcutta, the University 
of Mumbai and University of Madras for setting up of centres on nano -technology. 
Additional special grants have also been given to Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore. It has also since been decided to provide additional grants  of Rs. 100 
crore to each of the University of Delhi, Mysore University and  Punjab University. 
 During the XI Plan, it has been proposed to establish 14 National Universities 
aiming at world class standards.  A concept paper in this regard is being finali zed. 
 The UGC is implementing a scheme for providing grants to Universities with 
potential for excellence with increased assistance during the XI Plan. 
 

33 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 The Committee note that UGC notifies regulations on different subjects under 
the relevant provisions of the UGC Act to maintain standards of teaching, research 
and examination in higher education in the country. These regulations are reviewed, 
modified, updated at regular intervals and new regulations are notified as and when 
required. The Commission has prescribed various norms and standards for bringing 
qualitative changes in higher education.  These norms perta in to establishment and 
maintenance of institutions, minimum standards for instruction and grants of degrees, 
minimum qualification for appointment of teachers, minimum workload for teachers, 
minimum teaching days and establishment and maintenance of standard of education 
in private universities etc. In Committee‟s view these regulations and norms of UGC 
have not yielded the desired result as our universities are way behind foreign 
universities in quality and standards. The Committee, therefore, recommend t hat 
standards and norms prescribed by parallel bodies in other countries, whose 
universities excel in standards, should be studied by UGC and appropriate steps 
should be taken by UGC to bridge the gap in standards of Indian universities and 
those of world -class universities. The Committee further appreciate that mere 
prescription of standards, norms and regulations will not yield the desired results. The 
Members of UGC should demonstrate leadership abilities to inspire confidence and 
elicit cooperation of d istinguished faculty members in universities towards these 
efforts. The Inter -university centres should be geared up to activate working with 
universities towards a common cause. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The UGC had organised a Conference on setting up of  National Universities 
aiming for world class standard in  August, 2008 in New Delhi.  The Conference was 
attended by select Vice Chancellors of Central, State and Self financed Deemed 
Universities, Noted academicians, Educational policy Planners and Senio r Officers of 
the Government of India.  

34 
 
 The conference was intended to enable the UGC to finalise the concept paper 
for the National Universities aiming for world class standard and also to understand 
global best practices.  
 One of the important ingredie nts of high quality institutions is the quality of 
teaching faculty. Our inability to attract highly talented and meritorious young persons 
in teaching profession is a matter of serious concern. Based on the recommendations 
of a Pay Review Committee consti tuted by UGC, this Ministry has announced a 
package comprising revised pay scales and emoluments as well as certain quality 
oriented prescriptions for ensuring that bright young candidates are attracted and 
also retained in the teaching profession.  
  A le gislative proposal for making accreditation by the National Assessment 
and Accreditation Council mandatory, is also under consideration. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 The Committee note that UGC is implementing a scheme called Universities 
with Potential for Excellence (UPE) and Colleges with Potential of Excellence. Under 
this scheme, a grant of Rs. 30 crore is given to the identified univ ersity during the 
Plan Period and the grant to colleges ranges from Rs. 35 lakh to Rs. 1 crore per 
college on the basis of the category to which it belongs. The scheme is under 
implementation since IX Plan. During Ninth Plan only five universities were sel ected 
and during Tenth Plan four more universities were selected. As such, only nine 
universities have been benefited under the scheme. Apart from this, 12 centres in 
specialized areas have also been identified in different universities under the scheme 
called Centre with Potential for Excellence. 97 colleges were also selected by UGC 
during Tenth Plan under this scheme. Considering the number of universities and 
colleges in the country, the number of universities and colleges benefited, so far, are 
very miniscule in number even though the scheme is under implementation since last 
ten years. Only two reasons may be adduced in this regard, either the standard of 
vast majority of universities in the country is very poor or the criteria stipulated by 
UGC for se lection under the scheme are of very high standards. The Committee, 

35 
 
therefore, recommend that the scheme should be revamped so as to benefit more 
universities and colleges during the XI Plan. Quantum of assistance given to selected 
universities and college s should be reviewed and the amount of assistance should 
accordingly be raised for further development of universities and colleges which have 
potential for excellence. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The UGC has revised it guidelines for providing grants to Uni versities and 
Colleges under the schemes of (i) Universities with Potential for Excellence and (ii) 
Colleges with Potential for Excellence, with increased quantum of assistance.  
 Under the revised guidelines, the ceiling limit for allocation of funds duri ng the 
XI Plan Period (i.e for a period of five years) to Universities and colleges has been 
increased as under:- 
 Potential for Excellence (colleges) 
 Rs.1.00 crore to  Rs.1.50 crore 
 Potential for Excellence (universities) 
 Rs. 50 crore. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 The Committee note that UGC designed model curriculum on 32 subjects and 
circulated the same for adoption by universities i n the country. UGC proposed model 
curriculum with the help of experts at national level. Model curriculum is not 
compulsory. Universities have been given autonomy to adopt the model curriculum 
based on their own democratic systems they follow. Most of the universities have 
done this exercise. Some of the universities have informed UGC that they maintain a 
standard higher than this syllabus. National Knowledge Commission (NKC) has 
stated in its report that the syllabi of course in universities, which remain unchanged 
for decades, need to be upgraded constantly and revised frequently.  NKC has 
suggested that the universities be required to revise or restructure curricula at least 
once in three years and this provision must be subjected to outside peer review 

36 
 
before implementation. The Committee, however, would like to reiterate the well 
known principle that in the context of higher education it is the autonomy of faculty 
members rather than standardization that is the vital element in quality education. 
Therefore, instead of a routinised drill in division of syllabi, it would be more 
appropriate to hold a series of seminars and conferences every year where scholars 
gather to appreciate the advances in their fields of study and are in addition facilitated 
by UGC to devote one session to curriculum development. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The UGC has been advised to hold seminars and conferences as 
recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 The Committee are constrained to note the imbalances in development of 
higher education among various social groups. Out of the total enrolments in degree 
courses and above, only 3.6% were  that of STs and 11.3% of SCs in the year 2002 -
03. The Committee note that Government propose to set up a National Tribal 
University at Amarkantak which is situated in the Madhya Pradesh – Chattisgrah 
border. In this regard, the Committee recommend that co ncrete steps should be 
initiated for the setting up of the National Tribal University within a year. Similar Tribal 
universities or the campuses of the National Tribal University should be opened in 
other parts of the country where the concentration of tri bals is more.  The Committee 
also note that UGC propose to provide additional grant to universities and colleges 
which are either having relatively larger strength of SCs, STs, OBCs and minorities or 
located in minority concentrated districts. At the same time, UGC also constituted a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Prof. Chaddha which will come up with a 
diversity index. Based on the index, the universities and colleges having widespread 
representation of various social groups will be eligible for highe r entitlement to UGC 
grants. The Committee are happy that atleast now UGC propose to address the issue 

37 
 
of inequalities among various social groups in getting higher education. In this regard, 
they recommend that additional grants should be provided from 20 08-09 onwards 
and quantum of additional grants should be more so as to really serve any useful 
purpose for the development of the particular university or college. However, the 
Committee are of the view that diversity of student body in any university or c ollege 
will enable the students to respect the value of equality. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that based on the diversity index which will be recommended by Prof. 
Chaddha Committee, university and colleges should be provided enhanced level of 
UGC grants for catering to widespread representation of various social groups. The 
Committee also recommend that special classes to learn better English be started in 
all universities to enable students from less privileged sections to cope with their 
basic difficulty in relating to higher education in any field. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The legislation for Indira Gandhi National Tribal University passed by both the 
Houses of Parliament as also assented by the Hon‟ble President has since come into 
effect from 8th July, 2008. The first Vice -Chancellor, Registrar and Finance Officer 
have since then been appointed. The Executive Council and the Academic Council of 
the University are being notified.  The State Government has already been 
approached  to hand -over th e land identified for the university at Amarkantak.  
Necessary budgetary allocation has been made in the XI Plan.  The power to 
establish Campuses/ Regional Centres of the university in the tribal concentrated 
areas vest in the university itself. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 The Committee take a serious view of large number of vacancies in faculty 
positions in Central Universities as well.  As on 31st March, 2007, out of the total 
sanctioned strength of 9054 faculty positions, 2271 were vacant in 18 central 
universities i.e. about 25.08% of the total faculty vacancies remained vacant. On the 

38 
 
one hand the Ministry of Human Resource Developmen t tries hard to impress upon 
the State Governments to fill up faculty positions vacant in their universities on the 
other hand large number of vacancies exist in central universities which are under its 
direct purview. In this regard, the Ministry taken th e plea that it plays only a limited 
role of providing visitor nominees to the selection committees of central universities 
as all of them are governed by individual Acts of Parliament. Ministry just keeps on 
reminding the central universities through UGC t o fill up vacancies. The Committee 
are not satisfied with the steps taken by the Government and UGC to fill up faculty 
positions in central universities. The problem needs to be addressed with reference to 
redtapism at the offices of Registrars in universi ties and the need for incentives to 
attract meritorious faculty to join these universities. The Committee recommend that 
UGC should direct all the central universities to fill up vacancies forthwith. The 
Committee also recommend that ad -hoc appointment of faculty members upto fifty 
percent of the existing vacancies be resorted to immediately, if any university finds 
after reviewing the facts, department-wise, that sufficiently meritorious candidates are 
not available for the posts to be appointed on a permanent basis. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that around 20% teaching posts were lying vacant as on 31-10-
2007 whereas the vacant positions earlier in March, 2007 were approximately 25%. 
    To tide over the faculty shortage, the age of superannuation of teachers in centrally 
funded higher education institutions under this Ministry was raised  from 62 years to 
65 years.  Based on the recommendations of a Pay Review Committee constituted by 
UGC, this Ministry has announced a package comprising revi sed pay scales and 
emoluments as well as certain quality oriented prescriptions for ensuring that bright 
young candidates are attracted and also retained in teaching profession.  Recently, 
the UGC has  started a new scheme of Professor of Eminence so as to encourage 
and reward top -level faculty.  Research grant, particularly for science based 
education, is being strengthened. These measures are expected to have a positive 
impact on the vacancy position in Central Universities. 
 

39 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 The Committee note that faculty of universities are increasingly opting to take 
up permanent/short-term assignments in foreign universitie s and institutions. Such a 
trend is gradually ending the presence of high quality faculty members in the 
universities. Even a central university like Delhi University expressed the same 
opinion that its faculty members join foreign universities because of the better 
facilities, pay and prospects offered there. As of now, the UGC guidelines permit only 
a visiting faculty, an adjunct faculty or a casual faculty to take up these assignments 
on contract basis.  These are aimed at providing permission to bright teachers to gain 
exposure and experience abroad and on a reciprocal basis to permit some scholars 
to teach temporarily at Indian universities. However, these are still reviewed within an 
insular framework of discouraging brain drain rather than in a more c ontemporary 
perspective of recognizing the power of brain gain. The Committee recommend that 
the Ministry of Human Resource Development and UGC should explore the 
possibility of permitting highly meritorious faculty members of our universities to take 
up joint appointment in a foreign university to spend half the year there and half here 
as well as allow foreign scholars to teach in our universities. This may also pave the 
way for further development of our faculty when they have an opportunity to deal with  
a different set of curriculum and teaching methods in foreign universities. Such 
appointees may be required to put in a specified number of man hours in the Indian 
universities.  UGC should workout a scheme and incorporate suitable provision in its 
regulation in this regard to operationalise this recommendation at an early date. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 UGC is  implementing a scheme of Visiting Professor/Visiting Fellow under 
which distinguished teachers/scholars are appointed up to a period of two years.  
 The Government has since taken a decision to improve/revise the pay and 
service conditions of teachers in order to attract and retain talented persons in 

40 
 
teaching profession. The UGC has been advised to work out a scheme as per 
decision taken by Government. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 The Committee note that UGC in consultation with the Government of India 
has constituted a Pay Review  Committee on 8th August, 2007 to review and make 
recommendations regarding pay scales of university and college teachers, librarians, 
physical education, personal and other academic staff in universities and colleges. 
The Committee has been given one year ‟s time to finalise its recommendations. Pay 
scales of university teachers should be enhanced and pegged at a level higher than 
class „A‟ Civil Services since the qualifications required for appointment at universities 
is much higher than the simple gradua tion required for Civil Services.  It is high time 
the country recognizes this basic change required in pay structure. Along with higher 
pay package, they should also be offered proper medical facilities, housing facilities 
on campus etc. Career advancemen t should be built in by providing greater freedom 
to interact with faculties abroad. The Committee recommend that UGC should refer 
the above aspects to the Pay Review Committee and ensures attractive benefits to 
the faculty. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As su bmitted in reply to Para 26 above, the Government has since taken a 
decision to improve/revise the pay and service conditions of teachers in order to 
attract and retain talented persons in the teaching profession. It is submitted that the 
revised pay scale s and other emoluments of teachers at entry level and their 
promotional avenues upto  professors‟ level have been pegged at a level higher than 
Group „A‟ services.  A copy of the Ministry‟s letter dated 31.12.2008 is enclosed 
(Annexure-I). 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 

41 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 The Committee note that under Junior Research Fellowships (JRFs) Scheme 
students/research scholars who qualify National Elig ibility Tests (NET) conducted by 
UGC are awarded fellowships to pursue research leading to M.Phil/Ph.D degrees in 
various disciplines. At present Junior Research Fellows are getting Rs. 12,000 per 
month and 30% of Rs. 12,000/ - as H.R.A. The Committee are c onstrained to note 
that only three per cent of those who are registered for Ph.D get this assistance and 
rest of them get Rs. 5000 as they are not NET qualified. As a result, approximately 70 
per cent of them dropout before completing their Ph.D. In 2005, only 300 candidates, 
were selected for Junior Research Fellowship of UGC. The Committee are not 
convinced with the reasons put forth by UGC for large scale drop -out that the 
financial assistance given to the Ph.D students is very low and there is bleak fut ure 
for the students in terms of job in universities. The Committee view the situation 
seriously and recommend that the amount of scholarship to JRFs should be 
increased to Rs. 18,000/ - plus 30% for HRA so as to attract many prospective Ph.D 
candidates. Mo reover, same amount of scholarship should be offered to Non -NET 
candidates who had outstanding scores in their university examination and come 
forward or Ph.D. and a strong computerized system should be created for payment of 
scholarships in time. The Comm ittee also urge the Ministry to take immediate steps 
to attract more Ph.D candidates, particularly in science and technology fields by 
offering special incentives to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The  UGC has  revised the fellowship amount (JRF/SRF/RA) w hich is in 
consonance with amount of fellowship under the Department of Science and 
Technology/Council of Scientific & Industrial Research. 
 In order to attract more Ph.D. students in the teaching profession, higher 
incentives in the form of advance increm ents and  promotional avenue have been 
provided for under the revised pay structure announced by the Government for 
teachers in universities and colleges  who acquire  Ph.D. degree from a university 
complying with UGC regulations in regard to the process o f registration, course work, 
and evaluation process. 

42 
 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 38) 
 The Committee are constrained to note that there are a  large number of 
colleges, close to 7000 or 8000 which are given affiliation in a year by universities, do 
not meet some of the conditions set by UGC to receive grants. However, UGC has 
stated that any college which gets permanent affiliation from a univer sity becomes 
entitled for a grant. The Committee are of the firm view in this regard that universities 
should grant affiliation to any college only after a thorough examination of the 
standards of the college. The Committee, therefore recommend that UGC sh ould 
impose a minimum standard for affiliation of any college by universities through its 
regulations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The affiliation of colleges by universities regulations 2008 are being 
considered/finalized by UGC. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 The Committee note that the Commission consists of the Chairperson, Vice -
Chairperson and ten other members which include Secretary (Education) and 
Secretary (Expenditure). The Secretary, Higher Education, informed the Committee 
that the availability of these t wo officers from the Government in the Commission 
facilitates coordination with the Commission and leads to its smooth and better 
understanding between the Commission and the Government. However, the 
information provided by the Ministry shows that the Secr etary (Expenditure) attended 
none of the meetings of the Commission during the period of three years from 2005 
to 2007. The secretary (Higher Education) did not attend the meetings on five 
occasions. This is very unfortunate and symptomatic of bureaucratic indifference. The 
Secretarys‟ membership in the Commission is by virtue of their position as Secretary 
in the Departments of Higher Education and Expenditure. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the prior permission of Cabinet Secretary be invariably  obtained 
after adducing detailed reasons in writing by the Departmental Secretaries 
concerned, to excuse themselves from any meeting of the Commission. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 According to the provisions of Section 5 (3) (a) of the UGC Act, 1956, two 
members shall be chosen from amongst the officers of the Central Government, to 
represent the Government in the Commission. It is submitted that every effort shall be 
made to ensure that Secretary (Higher Education) attends the meetings of the 
Commission, b arring on those occasions, where in view of other equally important 
work, Secretary is unable to attend Commission‟s meetings. On such occasions, 
Joint Secretary in charge of Higher Education is invited as a Special Invitee to 
represent Secretary. In so fa r as the other representative of the Central Government 

44 
 
is concerned, Additional Secretary (Expenditure) has since been nominated as 
Member,  representative of the Central Government in terms of Section 5 (3) (a) of 
the UGC Act, 1956. It is submitted that it may not always be possible to seek prior 
permission of the Cabinet Secretary for absence of the Secretary from the meeting of 
the Commission. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 The Committee note that UGC proposes to depute its Committees to each 
university to evaluate its performance during the X Plan and assess the financial 
requirements for XI Plan Period. In this regard, UGC also proposes  to request the 
State Governments to depute their nominee in those Committees to take on -the-spot-
decisions about the state‟s share in various developmental projects. The Committee 
are skeptical of success of this proposal as it would be very difficult to take on-the-
spot decisions by the state representatives without consulting the State Government 
concerned. Moreover, this approach may not yield result in every scheme as UGC 
would have to be very considerate towards some state universities due to their 
financial constraint. The Committee, therefore, recommend that while making on -the-
spot assessment of the performance of state universities, UGC should 
simultaneously embark on high level discussion with State Governments on 
allocation of development funds t o state universities including matching grants by 
State Governments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that Chairpersons of UGC, have from time to time, interacted 
with State Governments at the highest levels in regard to higher education demands 
of each States. The present Chairperson has already visited the States of Karnataka, 
Kerala, West Bengal, Orissa, etc. and has interacted at the highest levels in those 
States. 
 

45 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 The Committee note that plan allocations for UGC were raised from Rs. 383 
crore in 1997-98 to Rs. 2374 crore for 2007 -08. This is an increase of more than six 
times. However, alongwith increase in fund allocation, the number of universities has 
also grown several folds. At present there are 386 universities and 20,676 colleges. 
Higher Education, owing to its importance in the present world of knowledge 
economies, is poised for further expa nsion in future.  UGC has also demanded more 
funds to cater to the increased requirements owing to the proposed expansion of 
higher education sector in the XI Plan period. UGC has projected its financial 
requirements for XI Plan as Rs. 56,326 crore. But th e share of UGC in the recently 
approved XI Plan outlay of Rs. 84,943 crore for higher education is only Rs. 45,471 
crore which is less than the UGC‟s demand by Rs. 10.855 crore. As Prime Minister 
stated in his address at the meeting of Planning Commission recently, the Union 
Government propose to set up 16 new central universities in those States which do 
not have a university and 14 new central universities in other states which would 
eventually aim to attain world -class standards. Moreover, the universiti es already in 
existence have to be strengthened as most of them are of mediocre standards. In 
view of the above, the Committee are of the view that plan allocations made for UGC 
for Eleventh Plan may not be adequate to meet the multifarious necessities of the 
universities at this crucial juncture of development and higher plan allocation is 
required and they, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Human Resources 
Development, University Grants Commission and Planning Commission sit together 
to examine th readbare the requirements of UGC for the Eleventh Plan and increase 
the plan allocation to UGC accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that the allocation of funds for the UGC is made as a part of the 
overall allocation for Higher Education Sector as finally approved by the National 
Development Council. 
 

46 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
 The Committee note that another important aspect of CABE Committee Report 
is scholarship to meritorious students. The Prime Minister has also recently proposed 
extensive scholarships for the development of higher education. In this regard it is 
pertinent to note that in top foreign universities stud ent fees are either funded by 
scholarships or borne by sponsors from industry etc. The Committee are also of the 
view that scholarships and sponsorships will be of great help to ensure that no 
student is denied higher education especially professional educ ation because of his 
or her financial constraints. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development and UGC should take immediate steps for the 
creation and operation of various enabling and attractive scholarships and 
sponsorships for meritorious students to pursue higher and professional education 
irrespective of their economic backgrounds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The UGC is awarding a number of scholarships/fellowships such as Post 
Graduate Indira Gandhi Scholarship Scheme for Single Girl Child , Post Graduate 
Merit Scholarship Scheme For University Rank Holders I n General & Honours 
Courses at Undergraduate Level. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 The Committee regret to note that even those state universities/colleges which 
are eligible under 12 (B) of the UGC Act are not given grants by UGC. The reasons 
put forth by the Ministry for this sorry-state-of-affairs was scarcity of resources. Out of 
6,500 colleges which are eligible under 12 (B) of the UGC Act, only 5,661 colleges 
are receiving development assistance from UGC. The Committee further learnt from 
Calcutta Univers ity which is a State University that only 10% of the UGC‟s annual 
budget is presently spent as development grants on State Universities. In Calcutta 
University‟s budget, the share of UGC grants does not exceed even 5%. In this 
regard it had suggested that UGC‟s financial support to state universities is extremely 
inadequate to meet the present challenges in the realm of higher education and the 
UGC should consider the possibility of providing both development and maintenance 
grants to state universities. The Committee recommend that a comprehensive review 
should be conducted on the financial needs of all the state universities and they 
should be given enhanced level of funding by UGC according to their size, as well as 
present and future needs. Importance sh ould be accorded to performance of 
individual universities. The universities which perform better should be rewarded with 
more funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that the maintenance requirement of State Universities are to be 
met by State Go vernments. The UGC has incorporated an allocation during XI Plan 
for Rs.7000 crore to support 150 uncovered State Universities and 6000 uncovered 
colleges. In addition, an amount of Rs.3000 crore have been provided in the XI Plan 
for assistance to 160 Stat e Universities already covered under Section 12B of the 
UGC Act, 1956 and 5500 colleges which are recognized by the UGC for assistance. 
Further, State Governments are also being incentivized to set up 374 degree colleges 

48 
 
in districts having GER lower than the national average, by providing one time 
assistance and increasing their share gradually. Increased grants are also being 
given towards development expenditure of State Universities, for setting up of Girls‟ 
hostels and for upgradation of technical institutions. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 The Committee note that financial targets fixed for several schemes were not 
achieved by UGC during the Tenth Five Year Plan. A financial target of Rs. 789 crore 
was fixed for development grants to central universities but only Rs. 720.88 crore was 
actually disbursed, out of a target of Rs. 465 crore, only Rs. 129 crore was given to 
colleges as devel opment grants, a target of Rs. 20 crore was fixed for providing 
development grants to universities in backward areas but only Rs. 12.30 crore was 
actually disbursed. For Inter University Centres only Rs. 13.45 crore were spent 
against a target of Rs. 125 c rore. For Special Assistance Programme, a target of Rs. 
205 crore was fixed but only Rs. 134 crore was spent. With such slow pace of 
spending of plan allocation by UGC, the development of higher education and raising 
its standards to that of international level will remain a distant dream. The Committee 
is not satisfied with the excuses put forth by the Government i.e. the failure on the 
part of universities and colleges to submit the documents required for obtaining the 
approval of building proposals in ti me and delay by the State Universities in creation 
of teaching and non -teaching posts sanctioned by UGC. The Committee feel that 
such an unfortunate situation arises only when the implementing agencies fail to 
service grants in a spirit of dedication to de velopment. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry and UGC should finalise the estimates of physical and 
financial targets of various schemes only after duly examining the requirements and 
the feasibility of achieving the same. Once targets h ave been fixed, UGC should take 
proactive steps to achieve the same. Any lacunae on the part of UGC in this regard 
will lead to unnecessary locking of several crores of rupees and at the same time 

49 
 
intended benefits not reaching the beneficiaries viz. unive rsities, colleges, faculty and 
ultimately the students and higher education as a whole. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 While the Ministry endorses the concern expressed by the Hon‟ble Committee 
that physical and financial targets under the various schemes shou ld be estimated 
only after examining the requirement and the feasibility of achieving such targets, it is 
submitted that the financial target of X Plan for UGC was Rs. 9853.10 crore (Budget 
Estimate) for all the schemes and UGC had fully utilized the budge tary provision. The 
annual expenditure during the 2004 -05, 2005 -06 and 2006 -07 were Rs.  1943.56 
crore, Rs. 2198.56 crore and Rs. 2786.74 crore, respectively for all the UGC 
schemes of X Plan. 
 It is humbly submitted that reasons put forward by the Governm ent were 
based on feedback received from UGC. It is also humbly submitted that funding of 
universities is done by UGC in terms of the provisions of the UGC Act which does not 
provide for any role of the Central Government in deciding the allocations to be made 
to the Universities or to the schemes of UGC. UGC has been advised from time to 
time to ensure that expenditure is incurred timely and evenly throughout the year in 
order to prevent „lumping‟ in any quarter. UGC has also been advised to streamline 
its procedure for releases so that processing delays are avoided and universities get 
sufficient time to ensure progress and utilization of funds. 
 It is further submitted that the requirement of funds of each 
university/institution is finalized by the UGC, b ased on advice of a Committee of 
Experts which visit such institutions, in consultation with stake holders and after 
taking all relevant facts into account. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 The Committee note that a scheme called Career Oriented programme is 
being implemented by UGC to impart vocational training to undergraduates. These 

50 
 
courses run parallel to the conventional BA, B.Com and B. Sc degrees. This scheme 
is being implemented since 1995 -96 but only 43 universities and 3383 colleges have 
been covered so far. In this regard, the Ministry stated that keeping in view the 
availability of funds, UGC would extend the scheme to cover more un iversities and 
colleges and also would introduce more vocational courses to suit the requirements 
of the country in the wake of globalisation and liberalization of economy. In 
Committee‟s view this programme is very important as a large number of students,  
after completing their graduation, are unable to opt for vertical mobility in higher 
education either due to average performance or due to financial constraints. This 
programme would ensure providing gainful employment after graduation and thus 
would reduce educated unemployment. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
steps should be taken by the Ministry of Human Resources Development and UGC to 
extend this programme to all the colleges and universities in the country within a 
definite time frame. Non -availability of funds should not be a problem for the 
expansion of this programme and hence, the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development should hold talks with the Ministry of Finance, the Planning 
Commission and leaders of industry for the allocation of req uired funds and the 
expansion of the programme with industry links throughout the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that according to the guidelines framed by the UGC for 
„Introduction of Career Oriented Courses in Universities and College s during XI Plan 
(2007-2012)‟, all colleges and universities recognized by the UGC under Section 2 (f) 
and Section 12 B of the UGC Act, 1956 are eligible for implementing the Scheme of 
Career Oriented Courses. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
 
 
 
 

51 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 The Committee regret to note that majorit y of universities lack high standards 
even after the existence of UGC for fifty years. It is disheartening to note that only 
30% of the universities and 10% of the colleges are of high quality. Rest of the 
universities and colleges are of mediocre standard s which churn out large number of 
graduates and post graduates every year who also possess mediocre academic 
standards. This kind of poor quality higher education will not serve to achieve the 
country‟s goal of becoming a strong knowledge power. The Commit tee view the 
situation as a failure on the part of UGC to fulfill its responsibilities to maintain 
standards in university education. The reasons cited by the Ministry for the situation 
are that more than 90 percent of the universities and colleges funded by UGC are 
under the administrative control of the concerned state Governments. The 
administrative structure of universities and colleges varies from state to state. UGC 
only provides development grants to State Universities while providing maintenance 
grants is the sole responsibility of the state Governments. The inadequacy of 
maintenance grants is one of the factors which leads to deterioration in standards. 
National Accreditation and Assessment Council based on its assessment has 
indicated some weakness es in our universities and colleges. They are : narrow 
programme options, lack of master plan, absence of research culture, lack of modern 
teaching methods and curriculum upgrade, ICT facilities, infrastructure, library 
resources and faculty development pr ogrammes. The Committee, while noting the 
resource crunch as the major reason for poor standards, are of the firm view that 
bureaucratization has also contributed to this state of affairs. Greater regard for the 
autonomy of universities, enabling improved administration by universities, better 
servicing and coordination by UGC, optimum utilization of the available resources by 
the universities, and dedication of the faculty are equally important to effectively 
overcome most of the above mentioned weaknesses  in our university system and to 

52 
 
boost the standards of higher education in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the following measures to address the issue:- 
(i) The Ministry of Human Resources Development and UGC should impress upon 
the State  Governments about the necessity and importance of their providing 
maintenance grants to universities as per their actual requirements. This should be a 
conditionality for giving any grants to State Universities; 
ii) UGC should provide incentives to State Governments so that they provide 
adequate level of maintenance grants to its universities and colleges by way of 
enhanced development grants to universities and colleges to create world class 
infrastructural faculties; 
(iii) In case of State Governments wh ich are in financial difficulties, the UGC should 
provide maintenance grants for a certain period to enable universities and colleges to 
come to the mainstream; 
(iv) All those colleges and state universities which are of C and D grades should be 
given a special one time grant in addition to the regular development grants to bring 
them on par with A grade universities and colleges. 
(v) The Ministry should appoint an independent, renowned and suitable agency to 
conduct a thorough and in -depth study of UGC‟s f unctioning with reference to its 
functions on maintenance of standards of universities and colleges funded by it, 
including its rules and regulations, regarding incentive schemes for improving 
standards in universities. Based on the outcome of the study, w hich may be 
completed within two years, suitable reforms should be implemented in the 
functioning of UGC in this regard. 
(vi) The model amendments in the Acts of the State Universities should be framed to 
enable the State Universities to discharge their re sponsibilities of management and 
for faculty members to improve the standard of a state university and the State 
Governments should be persuaded by the Ministry to make suitable amendments 
accordingly. 
(vii) Special development grants should also be given to State Universities to set up 
well equipped laboratories, to introduce modern teaching methods, to introduce ICT 
facilities and to strengthen library resources to meet international standards. 
 

53 
 
(viii) An exclusive university centre should also be launche d by UGC to take care of 
the needs of faculty development programmes. 
(ix) A definite time frame should be fixed for NAAC accreditation of all the State 
universities to a minimum standard. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i)  In the last State Education Ministers‟ Conference held on 23 -24 July, 2008,  the 
State Governments were requested at the level of Minister of HRD to provide 
maintenance grants  to the universities based on their requirements. The State 
Governments now have better financial resources and therefore should be in a 
position to provide higher level of assistance to State Universities. However, such a 
conditionality as suggested by the Hon‟ble Committee may not be desirable, as in the 
event of State Governments not assisting universities to the desired extent and the 
UGC tying its releases to the releases by the State Governments,    State Universities 
which are already facing resource  crunch may be forced to resort to unreasonable 
increase in fee/commercialization of education which would impact access and would 
also be against the national policy. 
(ii) It is submitted that while maintenance grants should be the responsibility of the 
respective State Government, the UGC provides development grants to the eligible 
state universities under the provisions of the UGC Act, 1956, depending on their 
requirements and availability of resources. The UGC has also initiated many quality 
oriented schemes such as the Scheme of “Universities with Potential for Excellence” , 
“Colleges with Potential for Excellence”, Special Assistance Programme for 
University Departments, Innovative and Emerging Programmes etc. which have 
benefited state universities in quality improvement. In the XI Plan, new schemes have 
been proposed to provide one -time central assistance to the State Governments 
under the following schemes:- 
(a)      It is proposed to set up 374 degree colleges in the districts having Gross 
Enrolment Ratio (GER) lower than the national average as identified by the UGC. 
These 374 districts also include 88 districts having a high minority concentration. Up 

54 
 
to Rs. 2.67 crore or one -third cost is proposed as Central contribution with the 
balance to be met by the State Government and/or through Private participation.  
(b)     A new scheme has been envisaged to provide one time  assistance to 
universities and colleges which do not get any financial assistance from UGC as they 
are not qualified for being cove red under Section 12 B of UGC Act. Under the 
Scheme, assistance will be provided by UGC to the State Govt. institutions provided 
that the State Governments meet 50% of the development assistance required to 
make them eligible for 12 „B‟ assistance. In the case of private State funded colleges, 
it has been proposed that 25% of the total cost of development should be brought 
forward by the private trust/society and 25% by the State Govt., with the balance 50% 
being given by UGC.  
(c)  Another new scheme has b een envisaged to incentivise the State Governments 
to enable them to set up new educational institutions.  Under the Scheme, the Central 
Government (M/o HRD) will contribute 1/3 rd of the cost for setting up new 
educational institutions by the States, whil e the balance amount (i.e. 2/3rd share) as 
well as the recurring expenditure would be borne by the States. 
(iii) As submitted above, a Scheme for providing one time central assistance has 
been proposed in the XI Plan to bring State Universities and College s lacking in 
minimum requirements of infrastructural facilities etc for being eligible for receiving 
development grants from the UGC.   
(iv) The UGC is already implementing a scheme of providing Special Development 
Grants to Universities and Colleges located in Backward/Rural/Remote/Border areas.  
The UGC also has a proposal to provide additional grants to universities and colleges 
to enable them to come up from Grade „C‟ to „B‟ and from  „B‟ to „A‟, as per 
accreditation of the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC). 
(v) the Government of India has already constituted a UGC/AICTE Review 
Committee, under the Chairmanship of  Prof. Yash Pal, former Chairman, UGC to 
review the functioning of the UGC and the  All India Council for Technical Educati on 
(AICTE) vide Order No. 4 -4/2008-U.I(A) dated 28.2.2008.  The Committee has since 
been renamed as  „Committee to Advise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher 
Education‟. The Committee is required to furnish its report within one year from the 
date of constitution of the Committee. 

55 
 
(vi) UGC had prepared a draft Model Act in 2003 , on which reactions were sought 
from all stakeholders. The same was withdrawn due to opposition from State 
Governments, Teachers‟ Associations,  and various academic quarters. 
(vii) It is submitted that while UGC has been providing plan grants to Universities and 
Colleges which include assistance for procurement of laboratory equipments, the 
Universities and Colleges are also provided financial assistance under different 
schemes for upgradation of infrastructure and teaching facilities. These grants have 
been substantially increased in the XI Plan.  
(viii) The UGC has established 57 Academic Staff Colleges in different universities 
which conduct Refresher Courses and Orientation Programmes for the teachers. The 
Ministry has also asked the UGC to organize Summer/Winter Schools to train 
teachers so as to improve their knowledge content in their respective domain 
subjects. During the XI Plan, it has been proposed to establish a new I nter University 
Centre namely, Research Institute for Policy and Evaluation (RIPE). The UGC has 
been asked to examine the possibility of including the capacity building needs of 
faculty as a part of the mandate of the proposed Inter University Centre.  
(ix)  While the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee is important from the point 
of ensuring quality, the same can be acted upon only if accreditation by NAAC is 
made mandatory as against the present provision of voluntary accreditation. A 
legislative prop osal for giving statutory status to NAAC and making accreditation 
mandatory is under consideration.  
 The UGC has also proposed to make accreditation compulsory. It is in the 
process of framing regulations in this regard. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 The Committee note that the Government has levied a Basic Education Cess 
of two percent since 2004 -05. It is exclusively meant for funding pr ogrammes 
pertaining to basic education like Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and Mid Day Meals 
scheme. One percent cess is being separately levied from this year for secondary 
and higher education. With the help of this cess the Government was able to increase 

56 
 
substantially its outlay for secondary and higher education this year (2007 -08). In this 
regard, the Committee are of the view that secondary education and higher education 
should also be separated for cess purpose. If one percent cess is separately levied 
for s econdary education and higher education, it would pave the way for separate 
and higher mobilization of resources for higher education and at the same time it will 
also facilitate development of secondary education. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that separate cess should be levied for secondary and higher education 
sectors to enable the Government to meet the large scale investment needed for the 
expansion of higher education. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Finance has been requested to cons ider levying cess for 
„Secondary Education‟ and „Higher Education‟ separately. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 The Committee note that the University Grants Commission provides financial 
assistance to eligible universities/colleges which are included under section 2(f) and 
declared fit to receive central assistance under section 12 (B) of UGC Act, 1956. 
Central Universities are eligible to re ceive both the development and maintenance 
grants whereas state universities are eligible only for development grants as their 
maintenance expenses are taken care of by the State Governments. In this regard, 
the Committee are concerned to note that even ce ntral universities which have been 
set up by the Central Acts and find a mention in the Union List (item no. 63) of 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India are not receiving adequate funds from 
UGC. The Committee held discussions with three central u niversities, viz. Hyderabad 
University, Delhi University and Jawaharlal Nehru University. All of them have stated 
that the present level of grants being provided by UGC is not just grossly inadequate 
but it is completely out of tune with the realities at t he ground level as well as global 
developments in the area of higher education. The Committee take a serious view of 
such apathy on the part of the Government which leads to undermining of the 

57 
 
importance of higher education, and they, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should take immediate steps to conduct in -depth study of the fund 
requirements of each central university and increase budgetary allocation (both plan 
and non -plan) accordingly to make them world class universities and to serve as 
models for State universities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The XI Plan visiting teams constituted by UGC have been asked to assess the 
requirement of funds of each of the Central Universities. It is submitted that the 
requirement of funds for strengthening the Central Universities at par with world class 
universities is limited by the allocation for the scheme as approved by the National 
Development Council for the XI Plan. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 The Committee note that National Accreditation and Assessment Council 
(NAAC) assess the quality of educational institutions and grants accreditation 
accordingly. NAAC, after making assessment of a u niversity/college, comes out with 
grading like A, B, C and D. Accreditation is not mandatory in our country. Universities 
and colleges can choose to apply for NAAC or NBA (National Board of Accreditation) 
accreditation which accredits courses in technical education institutions. Only 128 
universities and 2780 colleges have come forward for accreditation upto 2007 
eventhough the entire expenditure on accreditation is met by UGC. In this regard, the 
Committee note that universities like Jawaharlal Nehru Unive rsity feel themselves 
above such accreditation necessity because of their already proven records. The 
Committee is of the view that for improving quality of higher educational institutions, it 
is necessary that all the institutions, irrespective of their p ast records, should be 
accredited by a designated accreditation agency and they, therefore, recommend that 
all the central and state universities should get themselves accredited by a 
designated accreditation agency for being eligible to receive grants fro m UGC. 
Development grants to state universities should also be based on their accreditation 

58 
 
status. In regard to state universities and colleges which are of „C‟ and „D‟ grade, the 
Committee note that UGC propose to implement a specific scheme of providing  
special grant in addition to the regular development grant. This special grant will be 
given on a matching contribution by the State Government. The Committee feel that 
this scheme should be implemented in letter and spirit so as to improve the standards 
of state universities and colleges which are of „C‟ and „D‟ grade. In this regard the 
Committee recommend that a definite time frame should be fixed for the 
implementation of the scheme viz. 3 years and UGC should initiate steps accordingly. 
The Committee further recommend that UGC should give recognition only to such 
educational institutions and deemed universities which obtain „A‟ grade accreditation 
from the designated accreditation agency. It  should also be made compulsory for all 
the existing deemed universities to obtain „A‟ grade accreditation within a definite time 
period. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As submitted in reply to the Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation at Sl. No.17 
above, a  legislative proposal for making accreditation by the National Asse ssment 
and Accreditation Council mandatory, is under consideration. Prescription of a 
definite time period to obtain „A „status by a university is possible only if accreditation 
is  mandatory. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 The Committee note that National Accreditation and Assessment Council is a 
registered society under the Societies Registration Act, Karnataka. It is one of the 
inter-university centres of UGC and functioning as an autonomous body under UGC. 
As such, NAAC does not have any statutory basis. In Committee‟s view NAAC should 
function independently without any influence of any super agency over it. Moreover, 
statutory status can  bring more credibility to NAAC accreditation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take immediate steps to introduce a 

59 
 
Bill in Parliament to accord statutory status to NAAC. In this regard, the Committee 
further recommend that enti re functioning of NAAC including its new methodology of 
assessment and accreditation process should be reviewed and the standard of 
methodology of the proposed statutory body should be equivalent to that of the 
similar bodies in developed countries or that of international organizations engaged in 
assessment and accreditation process. Moreover, the proposed statutory body 
should be independent of UGC in every respect. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry thanks the Hon‟ble Committee for their valuable s uggestions.  A 
legislative proposal to accord statutory status to NAAC is already under 
consideration, under which it is proposed to have  status independent of UGC. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 The Committee take a serious view of large scale faculty vacancies in 
universities. Perusal of information provided by the Ministry regarding vacancies of 
teachers in 69 state universities as on 01 .05.2007 shows that average percentage of 
vacancies in all the 69 universities was 36%. In some universities, more than 50% of 
the faculty positions were vacant. Reasons put forward by the Ministry for this sorry -
state-affairs is the ban imposed by state G overnments on recruitment of teachers in 
the higher education system. The Committee are constrained to note that many 
states resort to appointment of short term contract teachers. In this regard, the 
Committee are of the view that appointment of regular pr ofessional teachers is 
necessary for the development of higher education in the country. Large scale faculty 
vacancies and subsequent resorting to contract teachers has compromised the 
quality of education in many universities. The Ministry of Human Resour ce 
Development has taken up the matter with states and in the conference of State 
Education Ministers. The Committee hold UGC responsible for this situation. UGC‟s 
assistance to State Universities for filling up of vacancies is only for a specific plan 

60 
 
period. To be eligible to receive assistance in the next plan period, state universities 
have to maintain the posts and many of them are unable to do so hence, they 
become ineligible to receive assistance from UGC. The plan allocation made for this 
purpose al so remains unutilized. The Committee, therefore, recommend that UGC 
should take this matter as of national importance and treat state universities on par 
with central universities in regard to sanctioning of faculty positions. The faculty 
positions should be permanent and not lapse with plan periods. The Ministry may 
prepare a detailed note on operationalising such a recommendation, including 
considerations such as involvement of UGC in selection process for appointment to 
be made by State universities unde r such a dispensation, and submit it for 
consideration at the next meeting of Central Advisory Board on Education for its 
decision. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee shall be placed before the 
CABE for a decision in its forthcoming meeting. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 The Committee feel that quality of teaching is as important as the facilities 
offered to faculty. Quality of teaching in many universities and colleges is not up to 
the mark and this is one of the reasons for poor standard of universities and colleges. 
As such, college teachers should be made accountable for imparting quality 
education to s tudents. In Committee‟s view teachers‟ classroom performance and 
their effective laboratory demonstration are essential for proper understanding of the 
subject matter by students.  Any lacunae in this regard may lead to the poor quality of 
college education. Students‟ anonymous evaluation of teachers and peer evaluation 
are important inputs for ensuring quality of teaching by teachers. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that UGC should come up with formal guidelines in regard to 
anonymous student evaluatio n and peer evaluation of teachers. UGC should also 
reward best teachers so as to encourage other teachers to excel in teaching. 

61 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that the UGC Pay Review Committee has also recommended 
Peer Review and Students‟ evalu ation. The UGC has been asked to work out 
suitable regulations in this regard.  In view of the  anxiety of teachers‟ organizations  
and their concern about objectivity in such forms of evaluation, weightage of students 
and peer evaluation has to fixed carefully. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29)  
 The Committee note that 57 academic staff colleges were opened during the 
Tenth Plan for conducting  specially designed orientation  programmes of 4 weeks 
duration for newly appointed teachers and refresher courses of 3 weeks duration for 
in-service teachers. UGC has also identified 31 universities and specialized 
institutions as UGC - Refresher Courses c entres. In Committee‟s view, orientation 
course should inculcate moral and ethical responsibilities in young teachers and 
should teach them the practical nuances of preparing for classes, classroom teaching 
skills and use of different pedagogues to teach. Refresher courses should ensure that 
inservice teachers are acquainted well with the latest advances in their subjects. The 
Committee note that 55 academic staff colleges are going to be revamped, summer 
schools are intended to be started to upgrade the kn owledge of teachers and there 
will be a World Bank project under which some mentor institutions will upgrade the 
colleges of education in their attached units. World Bank will provide Rs. 7000 crore 
for the project. The Committee recommend that revamping of academic staff colleges 
should be completed within a year and teachers from both the central and state 
universities should be trained there. The Committee recommend that such efforts 
should be guided more by the relevance of teaching and research interes t in India 
rather than by mere elegance in conducting classes or preparing learning materials. 
The Committee also desire that information should be furnished to the Committee 
annually on the implementation of World Bank project, the pattern and amount spen t 

62 
 
each year and the qualitative achievements as a result of the implementation of the 
World Bank project. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Administrative Staff Colleges have been asked by UGC to revise their 
curriculum so that the participants can get  advanc ed and up -to-date  knowledge in 
their respective fields. As regards information to be furnished annually to the Hon‟ble 
Committee in regard to  implementation of the World Bank Project (TEQIP), the 
recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee shall be complied with by the Technical 
Bureau of the Ministry regularly. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 The Committee note that Information and Library Net work (INFLIBNET) is one 
of the inter -university centres of UGC engaged in modernization of libraries and in 
establishing a national network of libraries and information centres in universities. 
INFLIBNET is providing Rs. 6.5 lakh to each university library  to purchase computers 
and hardware for the computerization of libraries. Upto February, 2007 142 
universities were given assistance under this scheme. A major communication 
network of universities called UGC -INFONET was set up by INFLIBNET. Broad band 
connectivity is provided to universities and under this scheme, 149 universities were 
networked upto May 31, 2007. Under the E -journals Scheme for universities, 
approximately 4450 e -journals are available. The Committee note that academic 
community in the cou ntry can effectively use INFONET infrastructure for accessing 
international scholarly e -journals, databases, internet and intranet services.  Further 
augmentation of this network will strengthen research initiatives of faculty and 
students in universities.  But networking through INFONET and assistance to 
purchase computers has not been granted to half of the universities in the country so 
far.  Moreover, faculty members have not been provided with computers and net 
facilities at their residences. The Committee recommend that all the universities in the 
country should be networked during the Eleventh Plan Period and the scheme of 

63 
 
providing assistance to universities to purchase computers etc. should be 
discontinued and replaced by the requirement that compute r and net facilities be 
provided at the residence of every faculty member. The Committee see no reason 
why this cannot be done when the same is being provided to members of the Civil 
Services. All the college libraries in the country should also be compute rized and 
networked through INFONET. A time frame should also be fixed by the Government 
in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been conveyed by UGC to 
INFLIBNET, Ahmedabad for taking necessary action at its end a nd to submit an 
Action Plan and the estimated cost to be incurred in this regard. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 INFLIBNET is an Inter -university Centre of UGC engaged in networking of 
university libraries and providing allied services to the universities. However, out of 42 
sanctioned posts, 21 posts including the post of director are vacant. Moreover, the 
centre is functioning from a resi dential flat in the Gujarat University campus.  The 
Committee are of the view that staff strength of INFLIBNET especially of scientists 
and other allied staff should be reviewed according to the increase in the network of 
INFONET and e -journals etc. and st aff strength should be augmented suitably and 
vacant posts should be filled up. The Committee also note that land has been allotted 
free-of-cost by the Government of Gujarat for the construction of a permanent 
building for the centre. The Committee desire that expeditious steps should be taken 
by the Ministry of Human Resource Development and UGC for the construction of 
permanent building for INFLIBNET. 
 
 
 

64 
 
Reply of the Government 
 With regard to the review of the staff strength of INFLIBNET, it is submitted  
that the UGC has already constituted a Committee to review X Plan progress and 
assess  the XI Plan requirements  of the Centre. Further, the centre has already been 
requested to project their Plan/proposals/ requirements before XI Plan visiting 
Committee of the UGC. 
 Regarding construction of building,  UGC has considered and approved the 
request of Centre in its meeting held on 10.9.2008. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
 The Committee note that UGC has constituted a Committee in August, 2007 to 
formulate its regulations with regard to admission and fee for self -financing, private 
professional institutions, including deemed to be universities  and for self -financing 
and aided courses in aided universities and colleges. In Committee‟s view regulations 
on admission and fee structure in self financing private professional colleges and 
deemed universities should be immediately formulated by UGC as these colleges 
and universities often indulge in collection of huge fees at the time of admission. After 
the due formulation of regulations, UGC should ensure that the regulations are 
implemented by these institutions in letter and spirit. UGC should also have an 
effective monitoring mechanism over these institutions.  If any university/college is 
found to be violating UGC regulations, stringent action should be taken against them. 
UGC regulations should also address the above views of the Committee. The 
Committee also note that the fee paid for different courses of study in Govt. funded 
universities is very low. University representatives who appeared before the 
Committee have suggested that the fee system needs to be reformed. The Prime 
Minister had also r ecently advocated that we should take a serious look at the 
proposal for fee increases to reasonable levels in a graduated manner accompanied 
by a scheme of extensive scholarships and loans which would ensure that no student 
is denied education because of financial constraints. In this regard, the Government 

65 
 
should take into account CABE Committee‟s observation in its report that revenue 
generation through student fees beyond 20 percent may seriously affect access to 
higher education. Fees, for this purpose , include tuition fee, examination fees and all 
other types of fees paid by the students.  The Committee weighed the considerations 
of efficiency on the one hand and access for poorer sections on the other and regard 
the recommendation of the CABE Committe e 2005 as a very balanced view. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that revision of fees to raise it to 20% should be 
done forthwith. This should be coupled with grant of scholarships to students from 
weaker sections. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recomme ndations of the Committee which was constituted by UGC to 
frame regulations for admission and fee structure in universities and other institutions, 
including private self -financed Deemed Universities and Colleges, are under  
consideration of the UGC. The G overnment have already accepted the 
recommendations of the CABE Committee in preference to the recommendations of 
the National Knowledge Commission which prescribed student fee to be at least 20% 
of revenues. However, decision in regard to increase of fee in accordance with CABE 
Committee recommendation is within the competence of Universities. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 34) 
 The Committee no te that there is a need for providing financial assistance by 
way of soft loans to the meritorious students to pursue higher education as such 
students are unable to access it due to market/commercial rate of interest being 
charged by banks, the insistence  on collateral and early commencement of 
repayment, etc. Under the Education Loan Scheme of the Indian Banks‟ Association, 
a need based finance of Rs. 7.5 lakh is provided for studies in India and Rs. 15 lakh 
for studies abroad subject to repaying capacity  of the parents/students with margin. 
Under the aforesaid scheme there is no need for any collateral security upto Rs. 4 
lakh. Unfortunately, there are instances of insistence on mortgages or property by 

66 
 
banks for educational loan in violation of the above  guideline. To address all the 
issues relating to educational loan to students, CABE Committee on Financing of 
Higher and Technical Education in its Report has made a valid recommendation that 
a body like Higher Education Finance Corporation (HEFC) may be set up with 
contributions from the Government and corporate sector, to coordinate the student 
loan schemes being operated by several banks and to provide its own scholarships 
and soft loans to students. The Committee are unhappy to learn that this proposal  
has been kept in abeyance by the Government in view of the proposed “Scheme of 
subsidy on students Loan for Professional Education.” Under this Scheme, the entire 
interest, especially of those whose parental income is less than Rs. 2.5 lakh per 
annum, for the moratorium period on the loan provided by the banks shall be borne 
by the Government. The Committee urge the Government to also consider the 
feasibility of bearing interest on loan during the moratorium period of parents whose 
annual income is less th an Rs. 5 lakh as the middle class families are also equally 
burdened by the higher cost of professional education of their children. The 
Committee, while appreciating the proposed scheme of subsidy and recommending a 
wider scope for its operation, is of th e firm view that it is necessary that an 
independent body may be set up to coordinate, to ameliorate the grievances of 
students in getting loans from banks and to provide scholarships and soft loans on its 
own. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the government should set 
up the Higher Education Finance Corporation immediately as earlier recommended 
by CABE Committee. The Committee also recommend that the government should 
immediately launch the proposed subsidy scheme with the modification su ggested by 
the Estimates Committee regarding educational loan and implementation of this 
scheme may also be coordinated by the proposed HEFC. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 While there is a proposal to provide interest subsidy to the students on the 
loans taken  by them under the Educational Loan Scheme of the Indian Banks‟ 
Association for pursuing professional education in India, no decision has been taken 
so far. Under the proposed scheme, the students belonging to economically weaker 
sections are proposed to b e covered, for which the parental income ceiling has been 

67 
 
proposed at Rs. 4.5 lakh per annum. The Scheme is proposed to be implemented 
and monitored through Canara Bank, who are the Bankers of this Ministry. 
 In view of this, the proposal for setting up of  Higher Education Finance 
Corporation (HEFC) has been kept in abeyance. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
 The Committee note that a number of  Professional Councils such as All India 
Council of Technical Education, Medical Council of India etc. are responsible for 
recognition of courses, promotion of professional institutions and to provide grants to 
undergraduate programmes etc. UGC is the apex  body for coordination of standards 
of teaching, research and examination in universities besides giving grants to them. 
The Commission carries out these functions in coordination and consultation with 
other statutory bodies wherever and whenever required.  There is a proposal with the 
Government to establish a National Commission on Higher Education which will 
coordinate the working of various regulatory bodies. However, National Knowledge 
Commission (NKC) in its Report has suggested that there is a multipl icity of 
regulatory agencies where mandates are both confusing and overlapping. The 
system is over -regulated and  undergoverned. NKC has suggested that an 
Independent Regulatory Authority of Higher Education (IRAHE) should be 
established. This authority wi ll perform the regulatory functions of AICTE, MCI and 
BCI so that their role would be limited to that of professional associations. The role of 
UGC will be limited to disbursing grants to universities. On this suggestion of NKC, 
the Committee obtained the comments of universities of Calcutta, Jadavpur, Delhi, 
Hyderabad and Jawaharlal Nehru University. None of them support the idea of 
establishment of IRAHE. University of Hyderabad even stated that the entire proposal 
of the National Knowledge Commission ove rlooks the fact that there is an interplay 
between regulatory and funding roles presently exercised by UGC. The Committee, 
in this regard, recommend that the Government first set up the National Commission 
on Higher Education to coordinate the activities of various regulatory bodies in Higher 
Education such as UGC, AICTE and MCI etc. and simultaneously hold wider 

68 
 
consultations on the recommendations of NKC including that of IRAHE, setting up of 
1500 universities by 2015 etc. and take concrete and appropriate steps in the matter. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendations of the National Knowledge Commission regarding setting 
up of a Independent Regulatory Authority on Higher Education (IRAHE), setting up of 
1500 universities, etc.,  have not found acceptance by the wider academic community 
including   teachers‟ organizations. A proposal for setting up of a National 
Commission for Higher Education has been under consideration of this Ministry, but 
no consensus has  been reached on the need for setting up such a Commission. It 
has been decided to place the matter before the Central Advisory Board of Education 
(CABE) for its consideration at its next meeting.   
 
 Government of India have constituted a UGC/AICTE Review Committee, since 
renamed as „Committee to Adv ise on Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher 
Education‟, under the Chairmanship of  Prof. Yash Pal, former Chairman, UGC to 
review the functioning of the UGC and the  All India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE) vide Order No. 4 -4/2008-U.I(A) dated 28.2.2008. The Committee is required 
to furnish its report within one year from the date of constitution of the Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
 
Recommendation ( Para No. 37) 
 The Committee note that the Secretariat of UGC operates through many 
Bureaux and Divisions. There are 14 divisions in the Secretariat to deal with various 
areas of functioning of UGC. The Committee are unable to understand the rationale 
behind the allocation of work to these divisions. For example, the subject of Basic 
Scientific Research in Universities is looked after by Policy and Planning Bureau 
whereas monitoring of Research Projects is assigned to the Bureau dealing with 
regional languages. The Division dealing with State Universities is also entrusted with 

69 
 
monitoring and evaluation, publication and website. Assignment of work to various 
divisions in the Secretariat presents a grim scenario of quality consciousness in UGC. 
When un -related subjects are clubbed together, the divisions of the Secretariat 
cannot be expected to show the desired results. Information and Statistics and 
library, publication and website would be a natural mix. Likewise, legal matters and 
Right to Information shou ld be given to one Bureau to deal with. There should be a 
separate division to deal with central universities, state universities and inter -
university centres.  Monitoring, evaluation and malpractices should be clubbed 
together.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a study should be conducted 
on the present organization of the Secretariat of UGC and work allocation among 
various divisions should be rationalized accordingly. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The UGC has already commissioned a study by Administrative Staff College of 
India, Hyderabad, for, among other things,  studying the structural arrangements, 
designing the organizational structure, developing the manning norms and for 
suggesting optimal manpower requirement of UGC. The UGC has been advised to 
expedite the study. 
 The Commission has also been advised to expedite furnishing of information 
to the Staff Inspection Unit of Finance Ministry so as to get the Work Study completed 
for assessing its staff requirement. 
 
[Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) O.M. 
No.F.9-17/2008-U-5, dated 20-02-2008] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
27th July, 2010              
Sravana 5, 1932(S) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 
 
 

70 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-2011) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, 20TH JULY, 2010 
   
The Committee sat from 1445 hrs. to 1745 hrs  in Room No. ‘62’ Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Additional Director 
2. Shri Janmesh Singh  - Committee Officer 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Commit tee then took up for consideration Draft Report on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendat ions contained in the Seventeenth  Report (14th Lok Sabha) of 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
                            MEMBERS 
2 Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
3 Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
4 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik  
5 Shri Prabodh Panda 
6 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
7 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
8 Shri S. Semmalai 
9 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
10 Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh 
11 Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
12 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
13 Shri Lalji Tandon 

71 
 
the Committee on the subject „University Grants Commission‟ pertaining to Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (Department of Higher Education).  The Committee adopted the draft 
action taken report without any modifications. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report and present the same 
to Parliament. 
5. *** *** *** *** *** *** 
6. *** *** *** *** *** *** 
7. *** *** *** *** *** *** 
8. *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________ 
** ** Not related with the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
APPENDIX -II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i)  Total number of recommendations/observations    38   
 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/observation which have been   17 
accepted by the Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1,3,5,6,7,8,9,16,17,20,21,23,25,26,27,30&38) 
Percentage of total recommendations          44.73% 
 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/observations which the Committee   04 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s reply 
(Sl. No. 4, 14, 15,35) 
Percentage of total recommendations          10.52% 
 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of    03 
which Government‟s replies have not been accepted 
by the Committee 
(Sl. Nos. 12, 13, 22) 
Percentage of total recommendations          7.89% 
 
 
(v)  Recommendation/Observation in respect of which   14 
final replies of Government are still awaited.  
(Sl. Nos. 2, 10,11,18,19,24,28,29,31,32,33,34,36 & 37) 
Percentage of total recommendations          36.84% 
 