12 
 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS  
(DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS) 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports on the 
subject ‘Sports – Policy, Infrastructure and Training Facilities’.  
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2011-2012) 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  


 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS) 
 
 
SPORTS – POLICY, INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRAINING  
FACILITIES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventh Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) pertaining to the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs & Sports on the subject ‘Sports – Policy, 
Infrastructure and Training Facilities’] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2011 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2011 / Pausa, 1933(S) 


 
  
 
E.C. No. 1458 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: ` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha ( Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of 
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi. 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2011-12) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iv) 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
47 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
 
63 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
67 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited 
 
86 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Details regarding projected/envisaged cost for 
Commonwealth Games to public exchequer 
 
94 
II The details of the projects undertaken for 
Commonwealth Games 
 
95 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of Eleventh Sitting of the Committee on 
Estimates held on 16th December, 2011 
 
96 
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Seventh 
Report of Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-12) 
 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
 Members 
 
2 Shri Raj Babbar  
3 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
4 Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer  
5 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty  
6 Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
7 Shri Dhruvanarayana  
8 Shri T. K. S. Elangovan  
9 Shri Ninong Ering  
10 Shri Prahlad Venkatesh Joshi  
11 Shri P. Karunakaran  
12 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru  
13 Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
14 Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
15 Shri Datta Meghe  
16 Shri Prabodh Panda  
17 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
18 Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
19 Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia  
20 Shri S. Semmalai  
21 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi  
22 Shri M. I. Shanavas  
23 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
24 Shri Ganesh Singh  
25 Shri Ijyaraj Singh  
26 Shri Jagada Nand Singh  
27 Shri Radha Mohan Singh  
28 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
29 Smt. Annu Tandon  
30 Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  1.        Shri P.K Grover    -         Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri S.C. Chaudhary  - Director  
  3.        Smt. Anita B. Panda           -         Additional Director  
  4. Smt. Juby Amar    - Deputy Secretary 
  5. Km. Neha Chauhan  - Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2011 -12) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this T welfth Report 
on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Seventh Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Sports – 
Policy, Infrastructure and Training Facilities’ pertaining to the M inistry of Youth 
Affairs & Sports (Department of Sports).  
 
2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22 nd November, 2010. 
The Government furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 30 th June, 2011.  The draft report was 
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 16 th December, 
2011.  
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following Chapters: -  
  
(i)  Report;  
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted  by the 
Government; 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply; 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee; and 
      
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
4. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix II.   
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
21st December, 2011              
Agrahayana 30 ,1933(S) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 
 
        (iv) 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the ir Seventh Report ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject „Sports – Policy, Infrastructure and Training Facilities‟  pertaining to the Ministry 
of Youth Affairs & Sports (Department of Sports). 
 
1.2 The Committee‟s Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 22 .11.2010.  It contained 16 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken 
Notes on all these observations/recommendations have been received from the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports (Department of Sports). 
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
               Sl. Nos. 2,4,5,7,13        (Total 5, Chapter – II) 
      (Para Nos. 5.2, 5.4, 5.5, 5.7, 5.13)  
(ii)  Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s reply: 
        Sl. Nos. 9       (Total 1, Chapter – III) 
        (Para No. 5.9) 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which Government‟s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  Sl. Nos. 1,6,8,10,12,16    (Total 6, Chapter – IV) 
      (Para Nos. 5.1, 5.6, 5.8, 5.10, 5.12, 5.16) 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: 
  Sl. Nos. 3,11, 14, 15     (Total 4, Chapter – V) 
       (Para Nos. 5.3, 5.11, 5.14, 5.15) 
 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the recommendations , 
for which only interim replies have been received, should be furnished by the 
Government expeditiously. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on some of 
the recommendations in respect of which Government‟s replies have not  been 
accepted by the Committee/final reply is still awaited. 

3 
 
A.   Need for enhanced budgetary allocation for sports 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.  1, Para No. 5.1) 
 
1.6 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
“In so far as the budgetary allocation in respect of sports is concerned, the 
Committee observed that prior to the year 2007-08, the total allocation (both plan 
and Non Plan) for the same had remained in the Rs.  300-400 crore bracket with 
around 90% utilization.  The Committee further observed that the funding 
received a substantial boost only in 2007 -08 onwards, when funds  were actually 
allocated to the Ministry for the preparations required to host the XIX 
Commonwealth Games in Delhi in the year 2010.  The Ministry were allocated 
Rs 3396.06 crores (RE both Plan and Non -Plan) in F.Y. 2009 -2010, apart from 
Rs. 413.90 crore t o the Organizing Committee of the Commonwealth Games, 
which already stands utilized.  The Committee were later informed that the 
revised total allocation for CWG was Rs.  11494 crore, out of which Rs.  4459.48 
crores was the Budget for development of sports infrastructure.  While the actual 
figures of the total allocation and expenditure for the Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports in the current year can only be known after the conclusion of the 
Commonwealth Games, the Committee are of the view that the incr eased 
allocation for sports this year was just a knee -jerk reaction of the Government to 
host an International sports meet.  Even then the initial estimates for CWG was 
revised from Rs.  655 crore to Rs.  11494 crore.  Though the Ministry had 
submitted reasons for such cost escalations, the Committee  are far from 
convinced.  Now they can only hope that the funds would be utilized in an 
efficient and prudent manner.  Disturbed with the constant media covera ge on 
allegations of corruption, misuse of funds, overspending on equipment, huge 
time and cost overruns in preparing various games venues etc., the Committee 
desire that such allegations, if proven true would be probed most seriously to fix 
the accountability and the proven cases would be dealt with stringently.   
 
The Committee also feel that to inculcate sports culture in the country, 
consistency in providing appropriate funds for the Ministry needs to be 
maintained to yield the desired results.  Thus, the Committee hope that adequate 

4 
 
budgetary allocation would be continued for the Ministry to sustain its efforts to 
promote sports, even after the Commonwealth Games, since investment in 
sports infrastructure, training facilities and related activities is a n essential pre -
requisite not only to produce potential medal winners in various national and 
international sports events, but also to provide a healthy alternative to the 
burgeoning youth population of the country. In this connection, the Committee 
are disheartened to know that the National Sports Development Fund (NSDF), 
which mobilizes resources to promote sports from Government and Non -
Government sources, including the Corporate sector and NRIs, had a meager 
corpus of just Rs.  63.70 crore as on 31 st December 2009, as so far only BCCI 
and SAIL have contributed to it.  The Committee feel that the concept needs an 
aggressive campaigning to convince Corporate Houses to contribute to the 
NSDF as part of their Corporate Social Responsibility, besides, the Comm ittee 
desire that the Sports Policy, 2001 needs to be modified so as to include a 
provision that all Government Departments should devote a fraction of their 
budgets to promote sports talent.  Also all tax incentives given for sports matters 
need to be re -examined to ensure that the funds spent on training of 
sportspersons etc. could be made tax free. Private establishments engaged in 
such endeavors to promote sports should also be given tax incentives.  The 
Committee desire that the Ministry of Youth Affai rs & Sports should work out the 
modalities of these proposals in coordination with ministry of Finance and inform 
the Committee about the outcome.  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the Long Terms Development Plan prepared by SAI on the matte r 
and the steps taken to implement the Plan.  At the same time, the Committee 
also feel the need to emphasis upon transparency and accountability in sports 
funding matters to develop certain level of confidence among those who wish to 
sincerely contribute for promoting a healthy sports culture in the Country.” 
 
1.7 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in their action taken reply stated as 
follows: 
“The Delhi 2010 Commonwealth Games (CWG) was successfully held from 
October 3 -14, 2010. Competitions were hel d in 17 sports in which 7572 
athletes/coaches/officials from 71 countries & territories of the Commonwealth 
participated. The Opening and the Closing Ceremonies were held at Jawaharlal 

5 
 
Nehru Stadium, the flagship stadium for the CWG and were commended 
internationally for its spectacular quality.  
 
The performance of the Indian Sportspersons at the Commonwealth 
Games was outstanding. India won more than double the medals it had won at 
the last Commonwealth Games held in Melbourne in 2006. India finished seco nd 
in the medals tally, ahead of the major sporting nations such as England, 
Canada, South Africa, etc with a total of 101 medals, the highest ever in any 
major multidisciplinary sporting event. Women sportspersons, in particular, 
performed brilliantly.  
 
  Out of the total allocation of Rs.  11687.25 crores for Commonwealth 
Games, 2010, an amount of Rs. 10078.91 crore was incurred by various 
agencies.  Allocation & expenditure for the last 2 years 2009 -10, 2010-11 for the 
Commonwealth Games were as under:-                                                                       
          (Rs. in crore) 
Sl.No. Year Allocation Expenditure 
1. 2009-10 2268.00 2246.07 
2. 2010-11 1477.43 870.27 
  
Even though the Games per se were conducted successfully, there were 
allegations regarding corruption. The Hon‟ble Prime Minister of India  constituted 
a  High Level Committee  under the Chairmanship  of Shri V.K. Shunglu to 
investigate the allegations rel ating to the Commonwealth Games, 2010.  The 
mandate given to the Committee, inter -alia, included examination of the role and 
responsibilities of the various agencies relating to the Commonwealth Games, 
2010 and also to advise for the lessons learnt for the  future including 
establishment of a mechanism for laying down timeframes and effective 
monitoring, creation of a legally sustainable framework for hosting similar 
international sporting events, appropriate  financial management and internal 
audit, media interaction and communication. The committee has since submitted 
all its report/s to the Government which are under examination. Government has 
already initiated certain action on the recommendations of the High Level 
Committee.  

6 
 
 
As regards the inculcation  of sports culture in the country, the Ministry is 
in complete agreement with the recommendation of the Estimates Committee 
that “…to inculcate sports culture in the country, consistency in providing 
appropriate funds for the Ministry needs to be maintaine d to yield the desired 
results. …… that adequate budgetary allocation would be continued for the 
Ministry to sustain its efforts to promote sports, even after the Commonwealth 
Games, since investment in sports infrastructure, training facilities and relate d 
activities is an essential pre -requisite not only to produce potential medal 
winners in various national and international sports events, but also to provide a 
healthy alternative to the burgeoning youth population of the country”. However, 
there was reduction in the budgetary allocation during 2010 -11 at the RE stage.  
Allocation of Rs. 2564 crore was made for the Department of Sports for 2010 -11 
at BE stage, which included Rs. 1477.43 crore for CWG 2010. Thus, allocation 
for the Department of Sports exc luding CWG 2010 component was Rs. 1109 
crore for 2010-11, which was reduced to Rs. 963 crore at RE stage.  
 
For the current financial year, i.e., 2011 -12, the Department of Sports has 
projected an outlay of Rs. 1436 crore for Plan Schemes of the Department . 
However, allocation made is Rs. 700 crore only, which represents a reduction of 
37% w.r.t BE allocation of 2010 -11 and 27% w.r.t. to RE allocation of 2010 -11. 
The Department has informed both Ministry of Finance and the Planning 
Commission that reduced a llocation will adversely affect implementation of the 
various schemes of the Ministry. It is expected that enhanced allocation may be 
made to the Department at RE stage.    
 
As regards, contributions to the National Sports Development Fund 
(NSDF), it is st ated that NSDF was established with the main objective of 
promoting sports in the country with the ultimate aim of creating sports culture 
and achieving excellence in sports and games at the National and International 
level.  The Fund accepts contributions  from statutory bodies, international 
organizations, private and public corporate sectors, trusts, societies and 
individuals. NSDF got contributions of about Rs. 55.40 crore from various 
organizations/entities over a period of time. The BCCI had made the m ajor 

7 
 
contribution of Rs.50 crore. The BCCI contribution has given a major boost to the 
objectives of the NSDF. It is desirable that corporate entities also make 
substantial contribution to the NSDF.  However, such contributions should be a 
voluntary exercise. Many corporate entities and major PSUs have evolved their 
own schemes for sports promotion and this may be one of the reasons for not 
coming up with contribution to the NSDF even when such contributions get 
100% tax exemption. The Ministry proposes to take up the matter with industry 
associations viz., Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
(FICCI), Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Associated Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) and others and also to move the 
concerned line Ministries dealing with Central PSUs especially in the sectors of 
power, telecom, oil & gas to adopt specific sports disciplines and assist in 
promotion and development of the  adopted sports disciplines as part of their 
corporate social responsibility. 
 
As regards, tax exemptions for the sports, it is stated that contributions to 
NSDF are exempted from income tax under Sub Section 2(iii) hg of clause (a) of 
Section 80G of Income Tax Act.  Further, NSDF, as a body, is exempted from 
payment of income tax under Section 12 A of Income Tax Act.  Sports Authority 
of India (SAI), an autonomous body under the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, 
engaged in promotion of excellence, is also exempted from payment of income 
tax under Section 12 A of Income T ax Act.  The matter for giving tax incentives 
to private establishments engaged in promotion of sports was taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance, which informed that the Income Tax Act, 1961 already 
provides tax incentives to private establishments engaged  in the promotion of 
sports. Under the Act, a non -commercial private sports establishment i.e., an 
establishment which does not charge any fee or other consideration for its 
services may get registered under Section 12 AA of the Act. As per Sections 11 
and 12 of the Act, the income of a registered private sports establishment will be 
exempted from tax upon the fulfillment of certain conditions. A commercial 
private sports establishment can also get registration under the Act for availing 
exemption if the to tal fee or other consideration received by it does not exceed 
Rs. 25 lakhs in a year. Ministry of Finance  has further informed that Section 80G 
of the Act gives incentives to a registered private establishment by providing that 

8 
 
contribution/donation to a Registered Private Sports Establishment will be 
deductible in the hands of contributors/donors for the computation of income. 
Thus, it is apparent from the above that the Income Tax Act already provides 
adequate tax incentives to private sports establishme nts which are engaged in 
the promotion of sports.  
 
Further, the cash incentives in the form of cash awards given by the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, to sportspersons for winning medals in 
international sports events, are exempted from income tax un der Sec tion 
10(17A) of Income Tax Act.“  
 
  

9 
 
1.8 The Committee observe that n otwithstanding a rather good per formance 
by the Indian athletes  and sportspersons in the Delhi Commonwealth Games 
held last year, India still has to be content with being among nations of the World 
having an average record in sports with very few Olympic medals, despite having 
the second largest population, nearly half of which is under the age of 25 years.  
Thus, the Committee are of the firm opinion that mediocrity in Ind ian Sports is 
still an issue waiting to be addressed with utter sincer ity and transparency.   To 
promote sports, availability of adequate funds is the first and foremost 
requirement.  In view of the fact that a large portion of the Government’s Sports 
budget is spent on paying the salaries of the Government officials working with 
Sports Authority of India (SAI) and the maintenance of the stadi a, the Committee 
in their earlier recommendation had emphasized upon consistency in providing 
appropriate funds for the Ministry to achieve the desired results.  However, t he 
Committee are highly concerned to note from the action taken note submitted to 
them that the Budgetary Estimates (BE) for 2011-12 for the Department of Sports 
has been substantially reduced. The Department of Sports has reportedly 
informed both the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission that the 
reduced allocation (a reduction of 37% w.r.t. BE allocation and 27% w.r.t Revised 
Estimate ( RE) allocation of 2010 -11) will adversely affect impl ementation of the 
various schemes of the Ministry.   As the Ministry has introduced a new scheme 
of assistance for the creation of Urban Sports infrastructure, the Committee fail 
to understand as to how such initiatives can be funded with reduced overall 
allocation. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to relentlessly pursue the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission so that adequate 
funds are provided to the Depart ment of Sports during the next Financial Y ear.  

10 
 
They desire to be apprised of enhanced allocation, if any, at the RE stage for the 
Department of Sports.  
 
 As regards  the Committee’s observations on probing of corruption 
charges level led against CWG office -bearers and related agencies, it has been 
stated that the report of the V.K. Shunglu Committee appointed for the purpose 
has been under examination and the Government has already initiated certain 
action on the same.  The Committee are extremely sad that the C ountry’s image 
has taken a severe beating i n the world of sports due to corruption and 
mismanagement by the CWG organisers, which may have a telling impact on our 
future bids to host international sports events.  The Committee hope that timely 
and stringent action would be taken on the proven charges and for all future 
purposes, the Government would be extremely cautious in entrusting such tasks 
only to person s with  proven professional skills and expertise, impe ccable 
integrity and zeal to make their country proud.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

11 
 
B.   Need for encouraging rural sports talent by strengthening PYKKA Scheme  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.  4, Para No. 5.4) 
 
1.9 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
“Indigenous games like Wrestling, Kabaddi, Kho -Kho etc. are extremely popular 
among rural youth.  In this context, the Committee appreciate the efforts of the 
Ministry in launching a new scheme in the year 2007-08 namely Panchayat Yuva 
Krida Aur Khel Abhiya n (PYKKA) for around 2,50,000 village and 6400 block 
Panchayat units in the country.  The Committee observe that with the transfer of 
four centrally sponsored Sports Infrastructure Development Schemes to the 
State sector w.e.f. 1.4.2005, the development of  sports infrastructure had come 
to a standstill due to paucity of funds with the States.  Hence, PYKKA was 
launched in 2007 -08 to enable the State Governments get the requisite Central 
assistance, which will help them in achieving the goal of „broadbasing of sports‟.  
Assistance of `250.77 crore for covering 22854 village Panchayats and 601 
block Panchayats have been stated to be approved under the scheme so far.  
The Committee hope that promising local sports talent available in each 
village/block would be identified and encouraged under the scheme.   
In this connection, the Committee feel that PYKKA is an ambitious 
programme in view of the sheer number of village and block Panchayats in the 
country.  At the same time, the C ommittee are of the view that the  current 
amount of  ` 22,000 per annum being given to each village panchayat as Annual 
Acquisition and Operational Grants for acquisition of sports equipment, 
accessories, repairs/maintenance and to meet operational expense is grossly 
insufficient.  The Committee feel that under the current economic scenario in the  
country, it is virtually impossible to do anything concerning sports even at the 
village level with such a meager sum and thus recommend that the same needs 
to be a realistic amount.  The Commit tee desire that the Ministry should conduct 
a study of the cost factor involved in providing even the most basic sports facility 
in a village and accordingly modify the scheme with revised amount.  The 
Committee hope that the amount would be increased from  next financial year 
onwards. 

12 
 
As regards, achievement of PYKKA so far, the Committee note from the 
Ministry‟s deposition that the scheme has received good response from State 
Governments.  The Committee, however, observe that the target of training 
master trainers during the year 2009-10 could not be achieved.  Only 254 master 
trainers could be trained as against a target of 600.  Training of Master trainers 
and kridashrees is of utmost importance for the success of PYKKA.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the State Governments should be asked 
to achieve the target in the best possible manner.  The Committee also desire 
the Government to ensure that village panchayats dominated by SC/ST or other 
backward sections of the society are adequately covered  under PYKKA .  The 
Committee further recommend that a Monitoring Committee with local 
MPs/MLAs as its members may be set up in their constituencies to monitor the 
implementation of PYKKA .  T he Committee are also of the opinion that the 
Mahatma Gandhi Natio nal Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
could be linked with the same.  As the PYKKA empowers the village/Block 
Panchayats to create basic sports facilities in their area, employment 
opportunities thus emerging could be given to the rural workforce .  The 
Committee would urge the Ministry of Sports to consult Ministry of Rural 
Development on the matter and take suitable action”.   
 
 
1.10 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in their action taken reply stated as 
follows: 
“Scheme of Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA), introduced from 
2008-09, has been received well in the States/UTs.  For the last three years and 
upto 31.3.2011 since PYKKA Scheme was launched in 2008 -09,  `572.00 crore 
had been released to States/UTs for development of spo rts infrastructure in 
village/block panchayats and for conduct of annual competitions in block, district, 
state and national level. PYKKA Scheme in respect of sports infrastructure is 
being implemented in 28 States and 3 UTs.  Efforts are being made to cov er 
under the scheme the UTs of Chandigarh, NCT of Delhi, Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
and Daman & Diu. 

13 
 
Details about number of Village/block panchayats approved and financial 
assistance released to States/UTs upto 31.3.2011 are given as under: 
(a) Number of village Panchayats approved    - 47,058 
(b) Number of block panchayats approved  -   1,417 
(c)  Total Grant-in-aid released    - `449.00 crore 
(d) Number of States participated in the PYKKA competitions increased from 
8 in the year 2008-09 to 26 in 2009-10. 
(e) Total amount released to States during 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 for 
conduct of annual sports competitions at block, district, state and national 
levels is `8.15 crore, 30 crore and `84.85 crore respectively.  
(f) Total number of participants in PYKKA c ompetitions held at all levels in 
2009-10 was 22.50 lakh including 8.75 lakh women participants as 
against 7.22 lakh participants in 2008-09. 
Regarding identification of sports talent in village/block panchayats, it is 
stated that main objective of PYKKA S cheme is mass participation of rural youth 
in sports.  However, annual competitions being held under PYKKA at various 
levels provide a huge base for identification and nurturing of sports talent by SAI 
and State Governments for nurturing them under their respective schemes.   
Recommendation of the Committee with regard to enhancement in the 
amount of annual acquisition and annual operation grants would be kept in view 
at the time of conducting the review in consultation with Planning Commission 
and Ministry of Finance for continuance of the scheme in the XII Five Year Plan.  
The training of Master Trainers was introduced in the second half of 2009-
10 after setting up of PYKKA Resource Centre in November, 2009 at LNUPE, 
Gwalior (MP), as a capacity building me asures.  Around 557 Master Trainers 
were trained which is close to the annual target of 600.  In the subsequent years, 
target of training of 600 Master Trainers annually would be achieved. 
 

14 
 
The scheme already provides 10% annual coverage of village/block 
panchayats in the normal States and 20% coverage in the case of North Eastern 
States and special category States.  This automatically takes care of the 
village/block panchayats dominated by SCs/STs and other backward sections of 
the society. 
The States/UTs have already been advised to associate Members of 
Parliaments in the district level PYKKA Executive Committee.  Most of the States 
have reported that notifications have been issued in this regard.  The remaining 
States have been reminded to expedite the same. 
The matter regarding availing of funds under Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) scheme for leveling of playfield 
land already been taken up with the Ministry of Rural Development.  Further, 
States/UTs were also advised to avail the benefit admissible under MGNREGA 
scheme for development of playfields.  Some of the States had confirmed that 
they were availing the benefit of MGNREGA scheme for leveling of playfields, 
construction of boundary wall/fencing etc”. 
  

15 
 
1.11   From the action taken reply submitted by the Ministry, the Committee 
note that the Scheme of Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA), which 
was introduced from 2008 -2009, has been received well in States/UTs and a total 
number of 47,0 58 village pachayats have been approved to receive grants under 
the scheme. Main objective of PYKKA scheme is broad basing i.e. mass 
participation of rural youth in sports.  However, the Committee feel that there is 
still scope to identify and nurture prom ising young sportspersons from the 
villages/semi-urban areas particularly from the Eastern and North-Eastern States.     
The Committee, therefore, opine that for PYKKA to succeed in its objective, there 
is a need for transparent and robust infrastructure f or the selection of rural 
sportspersons to harness their hitherto unknown talent and potential.  There are 
District Sports Officers (DSOs) in each district to conduct various sports and 
youth oriented scheme/programmes. In view of the fact that DSOs work a t the 
grassroot level, the Committee feel that the role of DSO can be expanded further.  
The Committee suggest that region -wise sports talent search programmes can 
be conducted in the East, West, North, South and Central Regions of the country 
under PYKKA by the Sports Authority of India, with active involvement of DSOs. 
This would also lessen the impact of mismanagement rampant in various Sports 
Federations, due to which many promising sportspersons fail to come to the 
fore. 
 
 The Committee further suggest that wherever possible, a database of rural 
sportspersons’ details and their performances in PYKKA games, should be 
created, so as to help Selection Committees take informed decisions. The 
Committee also suggest that the DSO should be entrusted with creat ing 

16 
 
awareness about the rural sports programmes/schemes in the villages too.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry may re -examine the PYKKA scheme in 
the light of their above suggestions.                    
  

17 
 
C. Need for a permanent corpus for National Games 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.  6, Para No. 5.6) 
 
1.12 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee note that at present there is no scheme in the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs under which assistance can be given to State Governments for 
conducting of National Games.  Therefore, in the past, assistance has been 
given for the same by the Ministry in relaxation of provisions of the Scheme of 
Assistance to National Sports Federations (NSFs).  The Planning Commission 
has also i n the past provided assistance of Rs.  40.51 crore and Rs.  67 crore to 
the Government of Assam and Government of Jharkhand respectively for 
National Games, Guwahati (2007) and National Games, Ranchi (2009) in the 
form of Additional Central Assistance (ACA),  ACA of Rs.  110 crore was 
sanctioned to the State Government of Kerala for conducting the 35 th National 
Games in May 2010.  The Committee feel that such ad hoc measures should not 
be made for permanent events like National Games.  The Committee note that 
the Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme referred to in the previous 
recommendation will cover National Games, other sports infrastructure and 
playing fields too as the National Games are organized in State Capitals.  The 
Committee are of the view that there is urgent need to support the States in 
hosting National Games.  Thus, the Committee would urge the Ministry to keep 
the fund requirements under this Head in view while preparing the estimates for 
the new Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme.  The Committee would further 
emphasize upon the need to set up a permanent corpus of funds by the Central 
Government with a specific amount to be contributed by each State as 
mandatory condition.  The corpus should be utilized by the States for regular 
hosting of Nationa l Games as well as for establishing sports infrastructure 
required by them for the same.  The Committee also feel that the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs & Sports must coordinate with the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting so as to highlight the achievement  of our sportspersons in various 
disciplines in the National Games as well as in other national and international 
sports events.” 
 

18 
 
1.13 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in their action taken reply stated as 
follows: 
“The allocation of funds for the Scheme of Assistance for the creation of Urban 
Sports Infrastructure, introduced on pilot basis from 2010 -11, is limited and it is 
not possible to fund the projects for National Games from this Scheme, as the 
requirement of funds for creation/upgradation o f sports infrastructure facilities for 
National Games is quite significant. However, from 12 th Five Year Plan, the 
Scheme is likely to be made as a regular Scheme and  then the projects for 
National Games can also be considered for assistance from the Sche me. Till 
then, proposals of the State Governments for creation/upgradation of sports 
facilities for conduct of the National Games will require to be assisted by way of 
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) by the Planning Commission.  
 
For 34 th National Game s, Jharkand, a n assistance of Rs.  67 crore was 
given to the State Government as Additional Central Assistance by the Planning 
Commission towards creation of sports facilities and conduct of games.  
 
  For 35 th National Games, Kerala, scheduled to be held i n 2012, the 
Planning Commission has sanctioned an Additional Central Assistance of Rs.  
110 crore to the State Government (50% of the Project cost).  Further, an 
amount of Rs.  20 crore has been sanctioned to SAI for modernization and 
renovation of SAI centr es in Kerala which will be used as venues during 35 th 
National Games.  
 
 For evaluation and assessment of the funds for 36 th National Games, Goa, 
the Central Team consisting of representatives from the Department of Sports, 
Sports Authority of India, Planning Commission and Indian Olympic Association 
had visited the State in October 2009 and the Team assessed that the total cos t 
towards development of sports infrastructure would be Rs. 326 crore. The 
Central team has recommended that Government of India may consider giving 
75% of the assessed cost as grant -in-aid, i.e., Rs. 244.50 crore. The Report of 
the Central Team has been f orwarded to the Planning Commission for taking 
further action in the matter.  
 

19 
 
Further, the Department of Sports has taken a serious view of the ad hoc 
approach of the Indian Olympic Association and the States in the allotment of the 
National Games and non-adherence to the original time schedule for the conduct 
of the Games. The Department of Sports had written to all State Governments 
that it would not be feasible for the Central Government to consider host states‟ 
requests for central assistance without p rior appraisal of the level of 
preparedness of the State Government to host the Games. States were advised 
to seek prior approval of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports before bidding for 
National Games to be eligible for central assistance.        
 
Although National Games are supposed to be held biennially, 34 th National 
Games, Jharkahnd, originally scheduled to be held in November 2007, were 
postponed six times and were recently held in February 2011. Instead of 
conducting the National Games already al lotted, Indian Olympic Association 
(IOA) had gone ahead allotting the future editions of the Games to one State 
after the other without ensuring or taking concrete steps for timely conduct of the 
National Games already allotted. There is a general trend am ong states to first 
bid for the National Games without making a complete assessment in terms of 
infrastructural and financial requirements and then approach the Central 
Government for assistance for creation of sports infrastructure and conduct of 
the Games.  
 
A meeting was taken by the Secretary, Department of Sports on 10.11.2010 
with the representatives of the State Governments of Jharkhand, Kerala, Goa 
and Chhattisgarh. The issues relating to allotment of the National Games, timely 
conduct of the Games,  infrastructural requirements etc were deliberated at 
length. It was decided in the meeting to take up the matter with IOA on the 
following points:  
(i) Formulation of clear guidelines for allotment of the National Games to 
the States 
(ii) No further bidding till conclusion of Goa National Games 
(iii) Work out a cycle for holding National Games biennially in a manner so 
that the National Games are held before Olympic Games on the one 

20 
 
occasion and before the Asian Games/Commonwealth Games on the 
other occasion and so on 
(iv) Making it mandatory for concerned authorities including State 
Government, State Olympic Association and IOA to hold the National 
Games as per the dates finalized at the time of bidding leaving no 
scope for postponement barring for situations beyond control  
(v) Development of a model Host City Contract  
(vi) Standardization of field of play, equipments etc.  
(vii) Exploring the possibility of splitting the Games into main National 
Games, Indoor Games and the Youth Games.  
 
As a follow up to the above meeting, a meeting with the representatives of 
IOA was held under the chairmanship of the Joint Secretary (Sports), 
Department of Sports. Representative of IOA has informed that IOA has 
guidelines for allotment of National Games  to the States and conduct of the 
National Games.  It was decided in the meeting that these guidelines need to be 
re-visited to obviate the awkward situation like the present one, where 4 States 
are waiting in queue to conduct the National Games.  It was e mphasized in the 
meeting that there should only be two States waiting at a time – one in staging 
mode and one in the preparation mode. It was also stressed in the meeting that 
the National Games should be conducted as per the schedule and that if there 
was any question mark/doubt with regard to timely conduct of the Games on 
account of lack of preparations or for some other reason, the National Games be 
shifted to Delhi where adequate sports facilities are available and where the 
conduct of the National Gam es even at a short notice will not be a problem.  It 
was acknowledged that the cycle of the Games should be such that they are 
held once before the Olympic Games and once before the Commonwealth/Asian 
Games, as it would help in selection of national teams in different disciplines for 
participation in Olympics/Commonwealth/Asian Games. 
 
It also emerged from the discussions that a quadrennial cycle (once in 
four years) could also be considered for conduct of National Games to 
synchronize with the conduct of the Asian games.  If the National Games were to 
be conducted biennially as per present practice, then the National Games should 

21 
 
be allotted in such a manner that once they are held in a State having brown -
field stadia i.e., where facilities of adequate standard for conduct of National 
Games already exist, followed by a State where green -field stadia are being 
developed. Such an arrangement will provide a lead time of 4 years for creation 
of sports facilities to States, where green -field sports facilities are required to be 
created.    
 
It also emerged from the discussions that regular Nat ional Games should 
be confined to 28 Olympic disciplines, and that Indoor Games be held 
biennially/quadrennially, as the case may be, to cover the non -Olympic 
disciplines. 
 
On the issue of play field norms, it emerged that only field of play/surface, 
lighting etc. should be of international standards, others like spectator gallery 
need not be developed of the level required for staging mega events.  
 
The Department of Sports is now in the process of constituting an 
Empowered Committee consisting of represen tatives from the Ministry, Sports 
Authority of India, Indian Olympic Association and States to deliberate on the 
various issues related to conduct of the National Games including fixation of 
guidelines for allotment of the Games to the States, periodicity of the Games, 
schedule of the Games, splitting of the Games into main National Games 
(outdoor), Indoor Games and the Youth Games, fixation of guidelines for 
allotment of the Games to the States, development of model Host City Contract, 
etc and make recommendations to the Government.”  
 
  

22 
 
1.14 Concerned with the adhoc approach in organizing permanent events like 
the National Games, the Committee , in their original report, had recommended 
that host States needed support from the Government.  They had also 
emphasized upon setting up of a permanent corpus of funds for it, which may 
have contributions from the Centre as well as States.  The Committee had 
suggested that funds for National Games  could be given  from the Urban Sports 
Infrastructure Scheme.  The Ministry , in their reply , has  stated that this can be 
considered from the 12th Five Year Plan, when the scheme is likely to be made as 
a regular scheme.  Meanwhile, the Ministry has also brought to the notice of the 
Committee certain deficiencies in organizing even the National Games by the 
Indian Olympic Association and State Governments , for instance, non-adherence 
to the original time schedule for the conduct of the Games, low -level of 
preparedness of the States for National Games, last moment dependence on the 
Central Government for assistance for creation of sports infrastructure and 
conduct of the Games.  
 
The Committee are shocked with the revelations regarding the conduct of 
National Games, particularly the fact that the 34th National Games at Jharkhand, 
originally scheduled to be held in November 2007, were postponed six times  
before being held in February 2011.   Further, instead of conducting the National 
Games already allotted, Indian O lympic Association (IOA) had gone ahead 
allotting the future editions of the Games to one State after the other.  What the 
Committee find strange is that this has happened inspite of existence of 
guidelines with IOA for allotment of National Games.  Therefore, the Committee 
concur with the Ministry that there is a need not only to revisit these guidelines  
but also  to address the apathy towards National Level Sports tournaments .  It 

23 
 
seems that the States too have not been pro-active in the matter.  They bid for the 
National Games without making a complete assessment of their resources and 
then seek central assistance at the last hour.  The Committee appreciate that the 
Ministry has come out with suggestions for better conduct of the N ational Games 
and that an Empowered Committee consisting of representatives from the 
Ministry, S ports Authority of India , I ndian Olympic Association and States  is 
being constituted to deliberate on the various issues related to th e conduct of 
National Games.  They expect that early action would be taken for the same.  The 
Committee suggest that creation of a permanent funding mechanism  for the 
National G ames should also be deliberated by the proposed Committee.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the deliberation s, as well 
as, the particular response of the Indian Olympic Association on the need to 
revise the guidelines for smooth and timely conduct of National Games.  
 
  

24 
 
D. Optimal utilization of existing sports infrastructure and the  need for 
construction of multipurpose stadia. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.  8, Para No. 5.8) 
 
1.15 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee are constrained to note that there is no optimal utilization of the 
existing stadia.  They  have been made to understand by sports experts that a 
cricket stadium can be utilized as a multi -purpose stadium for sports like football 
and Kabaddi with minor changes.  The Committee, however, fail to understand 
the logic of keeping the stadia unutilize d except for cricket matches, while other 
sports are being given a cold shoulder by the authorities.  The Committee 
therefore, recommend that instead of keeping a stadium exclusively for use of 
one sport disciplines, these should be optimally used for vari ous disciplines.  In 
fact, the Committee feel that the Ministry should adopt the policy of constructing 
multipurpose stadia in view of less availability of land.  This will not only reduce 
expenditure to be incurred for construction of stadia for each disc ipline but will 
also lead to proper utilization of such stadia.  The Committee also desire that 
schools near these stadia should also be allowed access to them for conducting 
matches & tournaments.  A proper schedule for allotment of stadia to schools 
should be prepared and followed for the same.” 
 
 
1.16 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in their action taken reply stated as 
follows: 
“Under the Come and Play Scheme of Sports Authority of India, launched in 
April, 2011, the designated areas in the Stadi a have been thrown open for both 
imparting professional training to established sportspersons and also to 
beginners with the objective to encourage participation in sports and for optimum 
utilization of the Stadia.  
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
Following sports disciplines are being taken up for coaching/training at the 
various facilities:  
Name of the Stadium Sports Discipline 
Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium  (i) Athletics 
(ii) Weightlifting 
(iii) Football 
(iv) Volleyball 
Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Ranges Shooting 
Dr. Shyama  Prasad Mukherjee Swimming Pool 
Complex  
Swimming  
Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium (i) Hockey 
(ii) Cricket 
Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium (Gymnastic)  (i) Gymnastics 
(ii) Table Tennis 
(iii) Badminton 
K.D. Jadhav Wrestling Stadium, IG Stadium Complex  (i) Wrestling 
(ii) Boxing 
(iii) Judo 
(iv) Basketball 
Cycling Velodrome, 
IG Stadium Complex 
Cycling 
I G Sports Complex (Open Area)  Archery  
 
So, it is being ensured that the sports stadia and sports facilities owned by 
the Sports Authority of India are being used optimally for various sports 
disciplines. As regards, cricket stadia, it is stated that these stadia are owned by 
the State Cricket Associations and it is for them to decide to allow usage of 
cricket stadia for other sports competitions.” 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
1.17 In view of the constraints in regard to availability of land and to encourage 
optimal utilisation of stadia , the Committee , in their earlier report , had 
recommended adopting the policy of optimum use of existing cricket stadia and 
constructing multipurpose stadia which could be opened to nearby schools  for 
their sports activities .  In their reply, t he Ministry is silent on the Committee’s 
recommendation concerning multi-purpose stadia.  E xistence of a multipurpose 
stadia increases usage of the stadium complexes and thereby enhances capacity 
utilization of the se assets.  Therefore, the Committee would reiterate the 
recommendation on the need for multipurpose stadia in the country.   The 
Committee, in this regard, further strongly recommend that there must be at least 
one multipurpose stadium in every State with one good ground and a synthetic 
track and minimum sports facilities should also be create d/made available at 
district and block levels all over the country. The Committee ar e also not 
satisfied with the evasive reply of the Ministry that it is upto the State Cricket 
Associations to decide upon the usage of cricket stadia for other sports 
competitions, since the Ministry can definitely play an advisory role on the 
matter.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry again to take up and pursue 
the matter seriously with  the State Cricket Associations and report their 
response to them.  
 
 The Committee have also been informed that the Ministry has launched a 
new scheme in April this year, namely ‘Come & Play Scheme’ for optimal 
utilization of the sports facilities in SAI stadia in Delhi.  The Committee appreciate 
the initiative and would like to be apprised of the response received on  this 
scheme. The Committee further desire that after due assessment of the response 
of this scheme, it should be implemented in S AI stadia all over the country.  The 

27 
 
Committee also observe that post CWG, the sports infrastructure, equipment etc. 
need to be utilized by the sports enthusiasts,  instead of the same lying idle.  
Apart from the fact that huge amount of public money has been spent on them, 
these world class equipment and infrastructure can be utilized effectively to train 
the country’s sports loving generation in a better way.  The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the plan of the Government to ensure optimum usage of post 
Commonwealth Games stadia and infrastructure in future.  
 
   
 
  

28 
 
E. Training for coaches 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 5.10) 
 
1.18 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
“Coaches are vital for training the sportspersons. Therefore, apart from ensuring 
adequate number of coaches to train the sportspersons, improving and 
maintaining their quality with suitable refresher courses is very i mportant.  The 
Committee feel that there is a need to open more coaching centres at the 
district/regional level first so as to make coaches available for such 
sportspersons who lack resources to get coaching in big cities & metropolises.  
Since new develop ments are taking place in the field of sports, the Committee 
opine that the Government should devise a programme for sending the coaches 
on refresher training at regular intervals.  At present there is a coach exchange 
programme with very few countries lik e Hungary, with whom India has signed 
International cooperation agreement.  The Committee feel that such efforts must 
be extended to countries having international level coaches and sportspersons 
like China, Japan, South Korea, Germany, South Africa, Russi a and Latin 
American countries too.  Also, the coach development programme run by NIS, 
Patiala should be further modernized and strengthened in consultation with 
sports scientists.” 
 
1.19 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in their action taken reply s tated as 
follows: 
“Ministry has taken a major drive for capacity building for coaches  by sending 
them for training abroad or arranging training for them by foreign experts at 
National Institutes of Sports, Patiala, so that they are equipped with latest 
methodologies and techniques in coaching of sportspersons. Ministry has 
entered into coll aborations with Cuba and Hungary for training of coaches 
abroad. During April 2010, 20 coaches of SAI were deputed for a three month 
long International Coaching Course at Budapest conducted by the Semmelweis 
University, Budapest (Hungary) . In January 2011, 56 coaches and community 
coaches have been sent to Cuba for 4 week and 6 week training programme 
under the Scheme of Talent Search & Training. While 29 high performing 

29 
 
coaches including once coordinator drawn from Sports Authority of India  and 
State Governments have been sent for 6 week training programme, 27 
community coaches including one coordinator, who have undergone Master 
Trainers Training Programme under Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan 
(PYKKA), have been sent for 4 week traini ng programme. Further, 34 coaches, 
drawn from SAI and State Governments have been sent for 3 month long 
International Coaching Course, at Semmelweis University, Budapest (Hungary) 
from March-June 2011.  
 
The Sports Authority of India and Semmelweis Univers ity, Budapest have 
signed an agreement in 2011, under which the Semmelweis University will 
design a Tailor-made coaching programme of one month duration exclusively for 
Indian coaches, under which a coaching programme for a minimum of 30 
coaches by experts of Semmelweis University  will be run either in Hungary or in 
India.  
 
Further, the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and SAI are in interactions 
with Beijing Sports University for training of our coaches.” 
 
  

30 
 
1.20 At present, the country suffers from a serious lack of world class coaches 
in various sports disciplines.  Thus, capacity building and enhancement of 
coaches is vital.  The Committee, in their original report, had underlined the need 
to open more coaching centres at the district/regional level for such 
sportspersons who lack resources to get coaching in big cities and metropolises, 
to modernize the Coach Development  Programme run by NIS, Patiala and to 
enhance efforts for regular training of coaches under foreign exchange 
programmes.  
 
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs & Sports, since they feel that adequate measures have not been taken on 
this front so far.  The Ministry  has also chosen to remain silent on the 
recommendation that more coaching centres at the District/Regional level should 
be opened so as to make coaches available for such sportspersons who lack 
resources to get coaching in big cities and metropolises.  
 
 Regarding the training of coaches abroad, the Committee feel that not 
enough is being done by the Ministry.  In the last two years, c oaches were sent 
for training to Cuba and Hungary  only.  The Committee are of the opinion that 
there are several countries specializing in particular sports discipline s such as 
Russia in Gymnastics, Germany , Spain  and Brazil in Football , Kenya in 
Marathons etc.  Training programme should be designed in such a way so that 
the coaches and sport persons can benefit from these cou ntries. The Committee 
feel that the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports can coordinate with the Ministry 
of External Affairs to explore and encourage their interactions with friendly 
countries excelling in sports. The Committee would also like to be appri sed of 

31 
 
the outcome of the interactions between the Ministry and SAI and Beijing Sports 
University for training of our coaches. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
F. Need to provide equal and greater opportunities to women in sports 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 5.12) 
 
1.21 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee note with regret that the participation of women in sports is 
abysmally low which is evident from the fact that out of total 15115 number of 
trainees in SAI centres, the number of girls was only 4261 as compared to 10854 
boys.  Besides, there are no separate women sports hostels and out of 91 sports 
hostels only 49 have residential facilities for women. Apart from the gender bias 
in our society, unavailability of some gender specific facilities is responsible for 
the same.  For example out of 1258 regular coaches, only 181 i.e. 15% are 
women coaches.  It is but a fact that girls living in rural areas will prefer to have 
women coaches.  Having noted media reports about sexual harassment of girl 
players by men coaches, the Committee are surprised  to note that there is no 
mechanism in place to deal with cases of sexual harassment of sportswomen.  It 
is only now that the Ministry has decided to write to various National Sports 
Federations to put in place a mechanism for the same.  The Committee woul d 
like to know the status of the same at the action taken stage. 
 
Though the Ministry of YA&S does not feel any need for a separate policy 
for sportswomen, the Committee are of the view that the issue needs attention in 
order to provide equal opportunities to girls in the field of sports.  Therefore, they 
suggest that a scheme for sportswomen should be formulated on the following 
lines.  Firstly, the Ministry should start with Gender Budgeting to encourage 
participation of women.  Separate funds should be e armarked to be spent on 
sportswomen under various heads & schemes as availability of funds will 
incentivize the Government to spend it for the purpose it will be allocated.  
Secondly, a well defined mechanism is needed to be put in place to prevent and 
deal with cases of sexual harassment in SAI.  All the NSFs being funded by the 
Government should also be asked to establish such a mechanism.  In case of 
failure, the concerned NSF should be de -recognized by the Government.  
Thirdly, the government should mak e all efforts to increase the number of 
women coaches. To this end, some seats should be reserved for women in 

33 
 
various training institutes.  The Committee further counsel the Ministry to 
coordinate with the Ministry of Women & Child Development to garner s upport 
on the issue and frame a scheme for discovering and nurturing sports talent 
among the women population of the country.” 
 
1.22 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in their action taken reply stated as 
follows: 
“There are social issues, which have a bearing on the number of women trainees 
and women sportspersons taking part in the sports events. Parents are generally 
not open to send girls to residential training centres. There is also hesitation on 
the part of girls and the parents as some of the c entres are far away from the 
cities. However, as far as the Ministry of the Youth Affairs and Sports and Sports 
Authority of India are concerned, all Schemes are inclusive schemes and equally 
applicable to women sportspersons. 
 
Further, a National Champion ship for exclusively women is conducted 
annually, which is now conducted under PYKKA Scheme. Under the annual 
sports competitions conducted at block, district, state and national levels under 
PYKKA Scheme, there has been a very encouraging response from wo men. 
During the sports competitions in 2008 -09, out of 7,21,519 participants, there 
were 2,49,190  women participants and during 2009 -10, out of 22,48,944 
participants, there were 8,73,842 women participants.   
 
As regards prevention of sexual harassment of women in sports, the 
Ministry has issued instructions in August 2010 to all NSFs making it clear to 
them it shall be the responsibility of NSFs and other sports bodies to prevent 
sexual harassment of women in s ports and to ensure their safety. They have 
also been directed to take appropriate measures, as per the judgment of 1997 of 
Supreme Court in the mater of Vishakha & others versus of State of Rajasthan, 
to prevent sexual harassment of women in sports sector.  
 
Further, the guidelines for prevention of sexual harassment of women in 
sports have been incorporated in the proposed National Sports Legislation”.  
 

34 
 
1.23 Women’s participation in sports is constrained by  several socio-economic 
factors, as well as certain deficienci es in the policy towards sports women.  In 
view of the unfortunate situation, the Committee , in their original report, had 
recommended Gender Budgeting  in the Sports Budget , earmarking of separate 
funds for sportswomen , reservation for wom en in training Institutes to increase 
the number o f women coaches in the country as well as putting in place a 
mechanism to curb sexual harassment in all National Sports Federations.  
 
The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, has stated that a very 
encouraging response from women  was seen during the last two years  in the 
annual competitions conducted under PYKKA  Scheme.  A National 
Championship exclusively for women is also conducted under PYKKA.   The 
Committee urge the Ministry to encourage schemes like these so that the talent 
of women athletes could be brought to the fore.  This will also create employment 
opportunities for sportswomen. 
 
 As regards the need for more women coaches, t he Ministry has not 
furnished any comment on it.  The Committee would l ike to know the specific 
gender-wise details of the students undergoing coaching courses this year in 
National Institute of Sports, Patiala and other Government Institutes, if any, since 
they are convinced that the ratio would be highly skewed which would have 
serious impact on the future line of female coaches available for the sports 
enthusiast girl children. The Committee feel that unavailability of women coaches 
might dissuade girls , particularly from rural and semi -urban areas, to pursue 
sports, for it is indeed obvious that parents of girls living in such areas will prefer 
them to be coached by women.  Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier 

35 
 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to take initiative on the same.  
Furthermore, the C ommittee observe that their recommendation on Gender 
Budgeting has not been addressed by the Ministry in their reply, and thus, would 
urge them to furnish comments on the same too.  As regards National Sports 
Federations, the Committee are aware that a Nat ional Sports Law is currently in 
the process of being enacted, which seeks to address several such issues.  They 
hope that the revised draft of the Bill would contain specific references on these 
issues including the establishment of a n anti-sexual harassment mechanism in 
National Sports Federations.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this direction.  
  

36 
 
G. Need for enactment of National Sports Law expeditiously 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 5.14) 
 
1.24 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
“Cases of mismanagement in various National Sports Federations (NFSs), who 
are responsible and accountable for the overall management, direction, control, 
regulation, promotion and development of particular sports disc iplines are 
rampant and thus a matter of great concern to the Committee.  Though it is a 
fact that these Federations are autonomous yet by virtue of the fact that they 
receive funds from the Government and function for the public, they have been 
rightly de clared by the Government as public authorities.  The Committee 
appreciate the recent initiatives taken by the Government in introducing a system 
of annual recognition of NSFs to bring transparency & fairness in their 
functioning.  The Committee feel that h ad such a step been taken by the 
Government long back, the current murky situation could have been avoided.  
The Committee are of the opinion that autonomy should not lead to arbitrariness 
and transparency and accountability in dealings including election of members 
would definitely help the NSFs in gaining respect and admiration among the 
sports community.  The Committee would further like to underline the pressing 
need to conduct regular auditing of accounts of those NSFs which are being 
funded by the Gov ernment by either the C&AG or reputed Chartered 
Accountants.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to take up the matter with 
NSFs and also conduct random checking of their accounts.  The Committee are 
also of the view that there should be no discriminatio n by the Government in 
giving funds to NSFs.  Federation promoting indigenous games and performing 
well consistently like Kabaddi, Kho -Kho, Wrestling should not face the resource -
crunch. 
The Committee are perturbed to note the absence of any grievance 
redressal mechanism in the NSFs.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
existence of such a mechanism should also be made a criterion for giving 
recognition and financial assistance by the  government to any NSF.  Since the 
matter regarding the tenure of members of NSFs is sub judice, the Committee 
would like to be apprised of the final position in this regard.  The Committee 

37 
 
would like the Ministry to advise the NSFs to include eminent spor tspersons in 
their Boards.  For NSFs involved in women sports disciplines like women hockey 
etc., the Committee would recommend establishing some quota for 
sportswomen in their Boards, as well.” 
 
1.25 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in their action taken reply stated as 
follows: 
“With a view to ensuring financial accountability and for monitoring the utilization 
of funds for the purpose for which are sanctioned, the Ministry insists upon the 
national Sports Federations to follow proper accounting pro cedures and have 
their accounts audited on regular basis which is also a prerequisite for obtaining 
and maintaining recognition with the Ministry. They have to submit timely 
utilization certificates to the Ministry with respect to all the grants received b y 
them. Any federation, not submitting the UCs in time, is not given any further 
financial grant. The accounts of the Federations receiving financial grant of more 
than Rs. 1 crore are audited by Comptroller & Auditor General.  
From January, 2010, a mandat ory annual recognition procedure for the 
NSFs has been introduced.   In order to update records of National Sports 
Federations (NSFs), the Government has undertaken an exercise to collect and 
maintain the data/documents with regard to legal, financial, man agement and 
operational status of NSFs.  NSFs have also been asked to draw the calendar of 
their activities for the year so as to enable players/States units, Association of 
Indian Universities (AIU) and School Games Federation of India to plan their 
participation and sporting activities. 
Only those NSFs, who submit the requisite documents, including financial 
statements, prescribed by the Ministry, are being granted annual recognition 
certificates.   
 Most NSFs do not have proper grievance redressal mechan ism. Ministry 
has been insisting upon the NSFs for good governance practices. Recently, 
Ministry had declared IOA and all NSFs as public authorities under Right to 
Information Act, 2005. This measure will go a long way in grievance redressal as 
the affected parties can access information under RTI Act. Further, normally the 

38 
 
grievances of the sportspersons relate to selection criteria and of conduct of 
coaching camps etc.  In this regard, the Ministry has issued detailed guidelines 
for more efficient managem ent of coaching camps, selection of coaches, 
selection of athletes, etc in September 2008.  
 
Separately the Ministry is in the process of enacting the National Sports 
Law, a preliminary draft of which has been published on the website of the 
Ministry. The proposed National Sports Development Bill contains, inter alia, 
elaborate suggestions for setting up a National Sports Ombudsman and 
Appellate Authority to provide for speedy and effective dispute resolution 
mechanism in sports through the process of arbit ration, mediation and 
conciliation. Ministry has received a number of suggestions/comments, on  the 
Preliminary Exposure draft on the proposed National Sports Legislation. The 
Ministry has constituted a Committee on 6.4.2011 under the chairmanship of 
Justice Mukul Mudgal, Retired Chief Justice of the High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana, to examine all comments and suggestions received, both from sports 
governance and legal angle, to make specific recommendations on each 
comment/suggestion with specific referenc e to sports administration, sports 
development and welfare of sports persons, to make specific comments on the 
sports arbitration mechanism etc.  
Based on the receipt of the report of the Committee, the Ministry will 
proceed further in the matter for obtai ning the approval of the Cabinet for 
introduction of the National Sports Law in Parliament.” 
  

39 
 
1.26 The Committee in their earlier  Report, while pointing out the dire need of 
grievance redressal mechanism in National Sports Federations (NSFs) had 
recommended that existence of such mechanism should also be made a criterion 
for giving recognition and financial assistance b y the Government to  National 
Sports Federations.  In this regard, the Committee acknowledge the action t aken 
by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports by declaring Indian Olympic 
Association (IOA) and all National Sports Federations as public authorities under 
the Right to Information Act, 2005 and are of the view that this measure will 
certainly go a long way in grievance redres sal as the affected parties can a ccess 
information under the RTI Act. 
 The Committee have further been informed by the Ministry that they are in 
the process of enacting the National Sports Law (NSL) which contains, inter-alia, 
elaborate provisions for setting up a National Sports Ombudsman and Appellate 
Authority to provide for speedy and effective dispute resolution mechanism in 
sports through the process of arbitration, mediation and conciliation. The 
Committee have also learnt that numerous comments and suggestions have 
been received by the Ministry on the different aspects of National Sports Law and 
these are being examined by a Committee constituted by the Ministry for this 
purpose on 6 th April, 2011. The Committee , while endorsing the response of the 
Ministry for enacting a holistic legislation covering important aspects of sports in 
the country, strongly urge the Ministry that the National Sports Law should be 
enacted and then implemented expeditiously to streamline the various activities 
in the field of sports in the country. 
 

40 
 
H. Need for streamlining the organisation of mega sports events 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 5.16) 
 
1.27 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee are extremely concerned to note the delay in overall 
arrangements for organizing the XIX Commonwealth Games, 2010 in India, 
apart from the huge cost overruns as is evident from the difference in the initial 
cost, estimates to the revised esti mates of conducting the Games.  Inability of 
the government to meet most of the deadlines in development of infrastructure 
projects and the consequent cost overruns are not only putting the nation in bad 
light but are casting staggering burden on the publi c exchequer.  The Committee 
fail to comprehend that despite the Host city contract being signed in 2003, why 
the budgetary allocation for CWG was made four years later i.e. in 2007.  As a 
result, the scheme for training of sportspersons could only be start ed in 2008.  
Also the development of critical sports infrastructure in time to conduct the 
Games suffered irreversibly.  The Committee would like to quote the example of 
the city of London, the host city for Olympic Games, 2012, where the 
infrastructure ha s been nearly complete despite the Games still a good two 
years away.  The Committee are of the view that ideally various projects which 
include development of stadia, training venues and development of city‟s 
infrastructure including residential facilitie s for sportspersons should have been 
completed at least one year before the start of the Games.  Apart from the fact 
that the infrastructure is still not complete, the constant press reports on 
slippages in various projects is extremely disheartening.  The  Committee cannot 
but deplore the lethargic manner in which the matter was handled by the Central 
Government, Organizing Committee and GNCTD, particularly when the country‟s 
honour is at stake.  They expect the government to probe all charges of 
corruption and cost escalations seriously after the Games.  Meanwhile the 
Committee also urge the Ministry to utilize their PR mechanism optimally in case 
any exaggerated reports appear in the media. As for the athletes and 
sportspersons, the Committee sincerely hop e that our sportspersons would give 
their best performance to bring laurels to the host country since such lifetime 
opportunities are too precious for each one of them. 

41 
 
 
The Committee are also concerned to note that Government is yet to 
decide about the ac tual utilization as well as maintenance of the sports 
infrastructure after the CWG.  The Committee recommend that care must be 
taken to ensure an optimum utilization of the same throughout the year.  As 
regards overall maintenance and repair, the agency in volved in construction of a 
stadium should be responsible for its maintenance for a specified period.  The 
Committee also feel that the stadia should be given to various NSFs/Sports 
Associations for regular training of their sportspersons and holding 
championships in their disciplines.  Such constant utilization of infrastructure 
would ensure their proper maintenance too, and thus in case of hosting any 
other mega sports event in future, large scale investments on the same could, 
perhaps be avoided. 
 
The Co mmittee are of the view that absence of any policy on hosting 
mega sports events is the reason for the present status of CWG projects.  The 
Committee feel that had there been proper planning, the never ending delays in 
projects could have been avoided.  Th e Committee desire that in future we 
should go for bidding for organizing Mega Sports events only after the ground 
work in this regard is done.  Financial planning involving the cost benefit analysis 
should also be done well in advance keeping in view the cost escalation factors 
over the years.  The Committee also desire that the level, at which the 
responsibility can be fixed in case of failure to achieve the target should be 
clearly defined.  A proper plan of action for training the sportspersons to excel  in 
such events should also be prepared.  The Committee desire that a policy be 
chalked out by the government on these lines for organizing any mega sports 
events.  The Government should also ensure its proper execution and 
transparency and accountability in all financial deals. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should seriously consider revising the Sports Policy 
to address all the matters raised by them.” 
 
 
 

42 
 
1.28 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in their action taken reply stated as 
follows: 
 “Through a series of meetings of the Group of Ministers (GOM) and the 
Committee of Secretaries (COS), all the proposals/projects related to the 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 were regularly considered/approved and monitored 
for timely completion of the projects. This Ministry, being the nodal Ministry for 
overseeing the work related to the Commonwealth Games and release of funds in 
this regard has also been making timely and consistent efforts to get the 
approvals of the competent authorities for the  various project related to the 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 in a time bound manner and making the funds 
available to the various concerned agencies for timely completion of all the 
projects.  
 
  Details regarding projected/envisaged cost for Commonwealth Game s, to 
public exchequer since inception, are given in Annexure-I. Progress of work, for 
Commonwealth Games, was monitored by the Group of Ministers, the Committee 
of Secretaries, Empowered Committee of Delhi Government chaired by Chief 
Secretary and Infrastructure Monitoring Committee chaired by Secretary (Sports), 
on regular basis. The project undertaken by Central Government, Government of 
NCR and other bodies, for Commonwealth Games, funded out of the exchequer, 
alongwith   budget, are given in Annexure-II.  These cost escalations were due to 
certain inescapable factors like escalation in prices of construction material; ii) 
change in scope of work; iii) increases in build up area; iv) addition of new work; 
v) statutory levies which were not taken into acc ount earlier and vi) quality 
assurances & other contingencies etc.  These projects were completed before the 
commencement of the Commonwealth Games-2010. 
 
       To improve the performance of the Indian contingent in the Commonwealth 
Games-2010 a Scheme wi th allocation of Rs.678.00 crore (2008 -09) to 2010-11) 
was implemented for providing training to the elite sportspersons in all the 
disciplines of the Commonwealth Games,2010. Systematic training in India and 
abroad under highly qualified Indian and Foreig n coaches was given to 
sportspersons for Commonwealth Games and 155 meetings of the Steering 
Committee meeting were held to finalize the proposal for participation in various 

43 
 
tournaments/Championship /training in India and abroad under the Scheme 
Preparation of Indian Team. 1140  elite athletes were identified for training and 
this no. was gradually reduced to 728 after pruning. 541 proposals related to 
participation/training of Teams abroad were processed and 3759 players (repeat 
visits included) were sent  abroad for training/competition.  With the help of the 
Scheme for Preparation of Indian Teams for Commonwealth Games, 2010, the 
performance of the Indian Sportspersons at the Commonwealth Games was 
exceptional and outstanding resulting in an unprecedented  haul of medals, which 
were more than double the medals India had won at the last Commonwealth 
Games held at Melbourne in 2006. India also finished second in the medals tally, 
ahead of the major sporting nations such as England, Canada, South Africa, etc 
with a total of 101 medals, the highest ever in any major multidisciplinary sporting 
event. Women sportspersons, in particular, performed brilliantly.  
 
On the basis of the adverse report in the Electronic Media the Hon‟ble 
Prime Minis ter of India had const ituted a High Level Committee  under the 
Chairmanship  of Shri V.K. Shunglu to investigate the matter relating to the 
Commonwealth Games, 2010.  The mandate given to the Committee, inter -alia, 
included examination of the role and responsibilities of the va rious agencies 
relating to the Commonwealth Games, 2010 and also to advise for the lessons 
learnt for the future including establishment of a mechanism for laying down 
timeframes and effective monitoring, creation of a legally sustainable framework 
for hos ting similar international sporting events, appropriate  financial 
management and internal audit, media interaction and communication. The 
committee has since submitted all its report/s to the Government which are under 
examination. Government has already initiated certain action on the 
recommendations of the High Level Committee.  
 
As regards about the actual utilization as well as maintenance of the sports 
infrastructure after the CWG 2010, it is stated that the Ministry has constituted a 
Committee compri sing eminent sportspersons and sports journalists under the 
chairpersonship of Director General, Sports Authority of India (SAI)  for examining 
various options and for giving their recommendations for the legacy planning of 
the stadia in Delhi managed by S AI namely Major Dhyan Chand National 

44 
 
Stadium, Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Swimming Pool, Dr. KSSSR Shooting 
Ranges, Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium and Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium after the 
Commonwealth Games 2010. The Committee is to give its recommendations on  
list of preferred sporting and other activities, which could be allowed stadia -wise; 
the correct balance between revenue generation objective and sports promotion 
objective, the strategies to leverage the stadia for hosting prestigious sporting 
events; the strategies for attracting commercially viable anchor -tenants who have 
a strong sports agenda like professional/commercial league etc; operation of 
players‟ academies by eminent sportspersons; alternative approved models for 
operations and maintenance of SA I stadia, including public private partnership 
and corporate social responsibility models. The Committee has submitted its 
report. Recommendations made by the Committee are being examined for 
proceeding further in the matter.  
  
Further, for utilization of the sports facilities in SAI stadia, Sports Authority 
of India has launched „Come and Play Scheme‟ in April 2011. Designated areas 
in the SAI stadia in Delhi viz., Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium, Dr. Karni Singh 
Shooting Ranges, Dr. SPM Swimming Pool Complex, Major Dhyan Chand 
Hockey Stadium, Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium (Gymnastics, Wrestling and 
Cycling Velodrome) have been thrown open for promoting community sports. The 
response has been encouraging.  Apart from this, National Coac hing Camps are 
also being run in respect of some sports disciplines like Hockey, Gymnastics, etc.  
 
            As regards the recommendations of the Committee to the effect that in 
future we should go for bidding for organizing Mega Sports events only aft er the 
ground work in this regard has been done, it is stated that the Ministry will keep 
the recommendations of the Committee in view while deciding on the proposals 
received for bidding for mega sport events.” 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
1.29 The Committee , being extremely concerned with the excessive budget 
overruns, delays in construction of the CWG venues and the negative pre-event 
publicity, had recommended that a proper plan of action, particularly financial 
planning including the cost benefit analysis should have been done well in 
advance keeping in view the cost of escalation factor over the years.  Also, the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry should get the ground work done 
first before bidding for any mega sports event in the future. 
 
The Committee  are aghast at the reply of the Ministry  that the cost 
escalations during CWG 2010 were due to ‘Certain inescapable factor s’, such an 
evasive reply is not at all acceptable to the Committee.  One of these factors cited 
by the Ministry viz. ‘statutory levies which were not taken into account earlier’ 
contradicts the ir reply, since they have accepted that there has been a lapse.   
The Committee also find the contention of the Ministry that these projects were 
completed before the commencement of the CWG, 2010 as misleading.  It is a 
known fact that work at Shivaji Stadium , which was being undertaken to prepare 
it as one of the training venues for the Games , is still not complete.  Besides, 
many venues were completed just before the CWG event was to start.  However, 
the Committee would now await the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations of the V.K. Shunglu Committee Report, which has already 
probed the charges of delays and irregularities in the conduct of CWG Games. 
They would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government on all its 
recommendations. 
 
Lack of any plan for subsequent utilization of sports infrastructure created 
during CWG, 2010 also highlights the manner in which the Games were 

46 
 
conducted.  It was only after the Games that  a Committee was constituted by the 
Ministry to look into this aspect, which shows a lack of vision and foresight in the 
Ministry.  A plan in this regard should have been ready eve n before the Games 
were completed.  The Committee cannot but deplore this attitude and desire to be 
apprised of the specific line of action, alongwith timelines, based on the report of 
the said expert Committee, to utilize CWG infrastructure.  The Committee would 
also like to know as to how the sports and  other equipment , furniture and the 
paraphernalia used for the Games and its Opening and Closing Ceremonies, 
have been utilized.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 5.2) 
 
The Committee observe that one of the reasons for lack of sports culture in India 
is over emphasis on academics resulting in sports taking a back seat in school 
education.  Though, the New Education Policy, 1986, N ational Curriculum Framework 
2005 and the National Sports Policy, 2001 have recognized the need for integration of 
sports and physical education with educational curriculum, the required thrust in its 
implementation is yet to be seen.  The Ministry of Yout h Affairs & Sports have 
reportedly made some efforts in this regard through meetings and written 
communications with the Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD), yet a 
decisive change has not come so far.  The Committee feel that though Indians do hav e 
enthusiasm for sports, yet the lack of an effective policy so far has worked against it.  
The Government must acknowledge the fact that since training for sports invariably 
starts at a young age, sports are required to be included at the primary level ed ucation 
to bring up a sports -loving generation at par with those in other countries in Asia, 
Europe and the Americas. The Committee also feel concerned about issues such as 
lack of uniformity in allocating a period in schools for physical education/sports,  dearth 
of required infrastructure like playgrounds in the schools as well as shortage of physical 
education teachers.  
 
Therefore, the Committee are of the view that to develop sports culture among 
school children certain norms in favour of promoting spor ts should be adopted by the 
Ministry of HRD in the field of education.  For instance, availability of a playground 
should be there in all schools.  Secondly, if should be the responsibility of schools and 
colleges to integrate sports with academics.  At least one indoor and one outdoor sports 
activity should be made compulsory for school children of all ages.  Achievements in 
sports and games in national and international events by students should be rewarded 
with grace marks in their overall assessment.  T hese steps would provide the 
necessary boost to sports and games among the youth population, would create 

48 
 
demand for PT instructors in schools and colleges and thus, training in physical 
education & sports will become lucrative for employment purposes also .  The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports should explore the 
feasibility of more coordination between the departments handling sports and education 
so that the physical education segment of the curriculum could benefit from t he 
expertise of the sports department.  The Committee also desire that the Ministry of 
HRD may be apprised of their suggestions to ensure necessary action on the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Sports, education and health are closely inter-linked with each other.  Sports and 
physical education form an integral part of a school curriculum to promote all round 
development of children.  The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development have been continuously emphasizing the  significance 
of sports, games, physical and health education for the overall development of children.   
 
National Policy on Education, 1986 has made the following recommendations on 
sports and physical education: 
 
“Sports and physical education are an int egral part of the learning process and will 
be included in the evaluation of performance.  A nation -wide infrastructure for 
physical education, sports and games will be built into the education edifice.  The 
infrastructure will consist of playfields, equip ments, coaches and teachers of 
Physical Education as part of the School Improvement Programme. Available open 
spaces in urban areas will be reserved for play grounds.  ….. Appropriate 
encouragement will be given to those talented in sports and games.  Due stress will 
given traditional games.” 
 
National Curriculum Framework 2005 provides for the following: 
 
 Special emphasize on physical education for all round development of the child.  
 Physical education to be a compulsory subject from primary to secondary stage.  
 Physical education to be given equal status with other subjects. 

49 
 
 Minimum essential physical space and equipment should be available in every 
school. 
 Physical education should b e integrated into all pre -service teacher education 
courses.  
 
 The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009, which 
has been enacted as consequential legislation to the insertion of Article 21 -A in the 
Constitution of India, makin g elementary education a Fundamental Right, provides 
inter-alia for:- 
  
(i) A play ground for each school; 
(ii) Part time Instructor for physical education in upper primary school.  
(iii) Supply of play material, games and sports equipment, as required to 
schools.   
 
 Sarva Shiksha Abhiyam (SSA) recognizes the importance of sports and 
emphasizes the vital role of games and sports for the all round development of children.  
Consequent to enactment of RTE Act, 2009, SSA have sanctioned 1.31 lakh posts of 
part time Instructo rs in 2010 -11, with a view to promote games and sports in schools. 
For supply of play material, games and sports equipment in schools, the norms of SSA 
have been amended to facilitate the inclusion Annual School Grant for games and play 
material and sports equipment.  
 
For strengthening sports infrastructure, the Central Board of Secondary 
Education (CBSE), before granting affiliation to schools, ensures that they have, inter 
alia, the following facilities in the schools: 
i) Adequate ground to create outdoor facilities for a 200 meter track; 
ii) Adequate land for kabaddi and Kho-Kho; and 
iii) Facilities for playing volleyball. 
 
In addition, CBSE has introduced the Physical Education Cards (PEC) as a 
useful tool for teachers. After the successful implementation of the PEC; the Board is at 
the final stage of developing the Secondary Physical Education Cards (SPEC) in 
association with the British Council. This is expected to be implemented soon.  

50 
 
 
CBSE has in November 2010 issued instructions to all its affiliated schools  to 
have one Physical Education and Sports period per day for classes I -X and two periods 
per week compulsorily for classes XI & XII. According to the CBSE Affiliation Bye Laws, 
it is mandatory for all schools to have at least one qualified Physical Educat ion Teacher 
on roll as a prerequisite for affiliation with the Board. 
 
As regards including the performance of students in sports in the evaluation 
process of students, CBSE has already drafted a scheme for upgrading the grades for 
students who excel in Co-Scholastic Areas (including sports).  
 
The National Curriculum Framework for School Education has recognized Health 
& Physical Education as an important area in the curriculum in an integrated manner.  
NCF 2005 made Health & Physical Education a compulsor y subject up to secondary 
stage and optional at higher secondary stage. 
 
As a follow up of NCF 2005, NCERT has developed the syllabus on Health & 
Physical Education for class I -XII, which has bee approved by the National Monitoring 
Committee.  NCF 2005 has  included number of indoor and outdoor sports activities in 
all classes and care has been taken to provide opportunities to children and schools to 
choose activities according to available facilities. 
 
The Ministry of Youth Affairs &  Sports has launched a nationwide programme 
called „Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan‟ (PYKKA), which aims at providing 
basic sports infrastructure and organized sports competitions at the grassroots level.  A 
90% of the PYKKA centres approved are loca ted in primary/secondary schools.  It is 
hoped that convergence of the components of PYKKA with provisions made under SSA 
will go a long way in holistic development of children. 
 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development have, in a joint D.O. letter dated 7 th January 2011, requested State 
Governments/UT Administrations  to ensure that adequate time and space is made 
available in the daily school time table at primary, upper primary, secondary and higher 

51 
 
secondary level for children to participate in games and sports activities and making all 
efforts to fill up the vacancies of physical education teachers in the schools.   
 
The Department of Sports organized an international Workshop on „School & 
Community Sports‟ New D elhi on March 31, 2011,  in which, delegates from Youth 
Sports Trust of United Kingdom, Chairman of CBSE, representatives from Navodya 
Vidyalaya, Sports Authority of India (SAI), Nehru Yuva Kendra, Laxmibai National 
University for Sports and Physical Educa tion (LNUPE), NCERT, UNICEF and others 
participated.   
 
As a follow-up to the deliberations in the workshop held on 31.3.2011, a National 
Workshop is being organized during June 20 -22, 2011 at Shimla (Himachal Pradesh)  
with the Chairpersons of all 41 School Education Boards and the Education Secretaries 
of States/UTs for promotion of Physical Education & Sports in School system.  The 
main focus of the workshop will be on strategies for integration of physical education 
and sports with school curriculum and  strategies adopted by Youth Sport Trust of UK.  
The  Workshop will provide a platform to learn from the experiences of different states 
on the subject as some of the States have introduced Sports & Physical Education in 
Higher Secondary level and give weightage to performance in Sports. 
 
Planning Commission has in Mid Term Appraisal of 11 th Five Year Plan 
recommended that “a radical beginning should be made by introducing Sports and 
Physical Education as a subject at the elementary level. On the lines of „ Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan‟ (SSA), a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS), „Sarva Krida Abhiyan‟ should 
be contemplated in the next Plan, synergizing it with Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel 
Abhiyan (PYKKA). Preparatory activities for this programme should be started 
forthwith”.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 5.4) 
 
Indigenous games like Wrestling, Kabaddi, Kho -Kho etc. are extremely popular 
among rural youth.  In this context, the Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry 
in launching a new scheme in the year 2007-08 namely Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel 
Abhiyan (PYKKA) for around 2,50,000 village and 6400 block Panchayat units in the 

52 
 
country.  The Committee observe that with the transfer of four centrally sponsored 
Sports Infrastructure Development Schemes to the State sector w.e.f. 1.4.2005, the 
development of  sports infrastructure had come to a standstill due to paucity of funds 
with the States.  Hence, PYKKA was launched in 2007 -08 to enable the State 
Governments get the requisite Central assistance, which will help them in achieving the 
goal of „broadbasing of sports‟.  Assistance of `250.77 crore for covering 22854 village 
Panchayats and 601 block Panchayats have been stated to be approved under the 
scheme so far.  The Committee hope that promising local sports talent available in each 
village/block would be identified and encouraged under the scheme.   
 
In this connection, the Committee feel that PYKKA is an ambitious programme in 
view of the sheer number of village and block Panchayats in the country.  At the same 
time, the committee are of the view that th e current amount of `22,000 per annum 
being given to each village panchayat as Annual Acquisition and Operational Grants for 
acquisition of sports equipment, accessories, repairs/maintenance and to meet 
operational expense is grossly insufficient.  The Com mittee feel that under the current 
economic scenario in the  country, it is virtually impossible to do anything concerning 
sports even at the village level with such a meager sum and thus recommend that the 
same needs to be realistic amount.  The Committee  desire that the Ministry should 
conduct a study of the cost factor involved in providing even the most basic sports 
facility in a village and accordingly modify the scheme with revised amount.  The 
Committee hope that the amount would be increased from next financial year onwards. 
 
As regards, achievement of PYKKA so far, the Committee note from the 
Ministry‟s deposition that the scheme has received good response from State 
Governments.  The Committee, however, observe that the target of training master 
trainers during the year 2009-10 could not be achieved.  Only 254 master trainers could 
be trained as against a target of 600.  Training of Master trainers and kridashrees is of 
utmost importance for the success of PYKKA.  The Committee, therefore, recommend  
that the State Governments should be asked to achieve the target in the best possible 
manner.  The Committee also desire the Government to ensure that village panchayats 
dominated by SC/ST or other backward sections of the society are adequately covered 
under PYKKA.  The Committee further recommend that a Monitoring Committee with 
local MPs/MLAs as its members may be set up in their constituencies to monitor the 

53 
 
implementation of PYKKA .  The Committee are also of the opinion that the Mahatma 
Gandhi Nationa l Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) could be linked 
with the same.  As the PYKKA empowers the village/Block Panchayats to create basic 
sports facilities in their area, employment opportunities thus emerging could be given to 
the rural workforce.  The Committee would urge the Ministry of Sports to consult 
Ministry of Rural Development on the matter and take suitable action.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Scheme of Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA), introduced from 
2008-09, has been receive d well in the States/UTs.  For the last three years and upto 
31.3.2011 since PYKKA Scheme was launched in 2008 -09,  `572.00 crore had been 
released to States/UTs for development of sports infrastructure in village/block 
panchayats and for conduct of annual competitions in block, district, state and national 
level. PYKKA Scheme in respect of sports infrastructure is being implemented in 28 
States and 3 UTs.  Efforts are being made to cover under the scheme the UTs of 
Chandigarh, NCT of Delhi, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu. 
 
Details about number of Village/block panchayats approved and financial 
assistance released to States/UTs upto 31.3.2011 are given as under: 
 
(a) Number of village Panchayats approved    - 47,058 
(b) Number of block panchayats approved  -   1,417 
(c)  Total Grant-in-aid released    - `449.00 crore 
(d) Number of States participated in the PYKKA competitions increased from 
8 in the year 2008-09 to 26 in 2009-10. 
(e) Total amount released to States during 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 for 
conduct of annual sports competitions at block, district, state and national 
levels is `8.15 crore, 30 crore and `84.85 crore respectively.  
(f) Total number of participants in PYKKA  competitions held at all levels in 
2009-10 was 22.50 lakh including 8.75 lakh women participants as 
against 7.22 lakh participants in 2008-09. 
 

54 
 
 Regarding identification of sports talent in village/block panchayats, it is stated 
that main objective of PYK KA Scheme is mass participation of rural youth in sports.  
However, annual competitions being held under PYKKA at various levels provide a 
huge base for identification and nurturing of sports talent by SAI and State 
Governments for nurturing them under their respective schemes.   
 
Recommendation of the Committee with regard to enhancement  in the amount 
of annual acquisition and annual operation grants would be kept in view at the time of 
conducting the review in consultation with Planning Commission and Ministry of 
Finance for continuance of the scheme in the XII Five Year Plan.  
 
The trainin g of Master Trainers was introduced in the second half of 2009 -10 
after setting up of PYKKA Resource Centre in November, 2009 at LNUPE, Gwalior 
(MP), as a capacity building measures.  Around 557 Master Trainers were trained 
which is close to the annual target of 600.  In the subsequent years, target of training of 
600 Master Trainers annually would be achieved. 
 
The scheme already provides 10% annual coverage of village/block panchayats 
in the normal States and 20% coverage in the case of North Eastern Stat es and special 
category States.  This automatically takes care of the village/block panchayats 
dominated by SCs/STs and other backward sections of the society. 
 
The States/UTs have already been advised to associate Members of 
Parliaments in the district le vel PYKKA Executive Committee.  Most of the States have 
reported that notifications have been issued in this regard.  The remaining States have 
been reminded to expedite the same. 
 
The matter regarding availing of funds under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) scheme for leveling of playfield land already 
been taken up with the Ministry of Rural Development.  Further, States/UTs were also 
advised to avail the benefit admissible under MGNREGA scheme for development of 
playfields.  Some of the States had confirmed that they were availing the benefit of 
MGNREGA scheme for leveling of playfields, construction of boundary wall/fencing etc. 
 

55 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.5) 
 
From the deposition of the Ministry made before them , the Committee  note that 
in order to promote sports infrastructure in urban areas, a new Urban Sports 
Infrastructure Scheme has already been proposed and an allocation of `5 crore has 
been made for the same in the current year.  The Committee are aware that our country 
has 5161 cities/towns/urban agglomerations and the broadbasing of sports could result 
only after covering these urban areas too.  They hope that the scheme would receive 
favourable response and be operationalised soon.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the status of the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government has approved introduction of a central scheme titled „Scheme 
of Assistance for the creation of Urban Sports Infrastructure‟ on pilot basis in 2010 -11 
with a view to addressing the entire „sports eco -system‟ holistically i.e., players‟ training 
and development, coaching and infrastructure. The Scheme envisages development of 
playfields by the State Governments through Playfield Associations, coach 
development programme through Central and State Governments, setting up of players 
academies where SAI centres will provide the nucleus of a hub and spoke model for 
such academies catering to premier sports in each State. The Scheme will focus on 
promoting and supporting a mechanism at national and state level to encourage, assist 
and preserve communi ty playfields, incentivizing utilization of infrastructure already 
available in the State at all levels by filling up critical gaps, creating ne need -based 
infrastructure and creating capacity building among coaches, including community 
coaches.  
 
Salient features of the Scheme are as under:  
 
(i)  annual assistance @ `50 lakh to each state and `25 lakh to each Union 
Territory for a period of 2 years that sets up and operates a state -level 
playing field association.  The association must be modelled on the lines 
of the National Playing Fields Association of India (NPFAI).  The annual 
assistance is to be utilised to further the objectives of the association, 

56 
 
including meeting establishment and administrative expenses, 
maintaining a comprehensive database of r egistered playing fields, 
providing legal assistance to endangered playing fields, conducting 
seminars/ workshops, and providing assistance to support pilot projects at 
the state level.   
 
(ii)  At the national level, NPFAI will receive an annual grant @ ` 2.5 crore per 
annum for carrying out similar activities, including supporting pilot projects 
for States to emulate them.    All projects assisted by NPFAI have to get 
themselves registered with NPFAI and enter into an Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with  it as a community playing facility as per a 
model MoU.  
 
(iii)  the development of sports training infrastructure on partnership mode with 
State Governments/ local bodies/ colleges/ universities/ sports control 
boards on the one hand, and SAI on the other .  Under the scheme, the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS) will provide assistance 
through SAI, or directly, for the creation of need -based sporting 
infrastructure in States/ UTs, which will function as SAI extension centres, 
but the entire responsibility of maintenance of the infrastructure will that of 
the State Government/ UT/ beneficiary entity.  
  
(iv)  With a view to maintaining focus on mother sports and popular sports, 
especially those in which the country has good medal prospects, the 
following types of sports infrastructure will get preference over others: 
 
(a) Synthetic playing surface (for hockey, football and athletics) 
(b) Multipurpose indoor hall 
 
(iv)  CPWD, State PWD , or any Central or State PSU will be engaged for 
construction of the projects.  The CPWD/ State PWD schedule of rates 
will be adopted for preparing the estimates.  The grant as per approved 
estimates will be released to SAI directly for taking up the proj ect on 
partnership mode as stated in para 3.2 above. 

57 
 
 
(v) State Governments, Local Civic bodies, schools, colleges and universities 
under Central/ State Governments, Sports Control Boards will be eligible 
to receive assistance for creation of sports infrastructure.  
 
(vi) The applicants will be required to furnish information about ownership of 
land, present performance of the entity in sports promotion, discipline -
wise infrastructure owned, managed and operated by it, impact of 
proposed sports infrastructu re / additionality in terms of growth in 
participation, retention of existing participation level, identification and 
development of new talent, a business plan for establishing sustainability 
of the project, including meeting of operations and maintenance  cost, 
details of existing partnerships, if any, management structure for sports 
development and operations of the existing and proposed facilities, 
delivery capability, broad plan, estimate and time schedule for execution, 
budgetary support from State Gov ernment, if any, free public access to 
informal play spaces, affordable pay and play schemes for other facilities, 
availability of coaching facilities, cross subsidizing model through PPP,  
linkages with local clubs, sports clubs and leagues, sports associ ations, 
business partnerships to enhance viability etc.  
 
(vii)  No State shall get more than one project in a year.  States that have 
properly utilized facilities created under the erstwhile sports infrastructure 
schemes will get preference. The grant for creation of sports infrastructure 
will be released to SAI.   
 
(viii)  States/ UTs will be assisted to depute 20/ 10 coaches per year to undergo 
1 month refresher course in National Institute of Sports, Patiala.  The 
maximum admissible assistance per coach  shall be Rs 50, 000 towards 
training, training material and boarding and lodging.  The travel expenses 
and other allowances will be the responsibility of the State/ UT 
Government.  The State Governments/ UTs will obtain bond from the 
nominated coaches not  to leave service before 2 years of receiving the 
training. 

58 
 
During 2010 -11, funds to the tune of `12.50 crore have been released for the 
following projects under the Scheme of Assistance for the creation of Urban Sports 
Infrastructure: 
` in crore 
S. 
No.  
Name of the Project State Amount 
released  
Amount to 
be released 
in 2011-12 
1. Laying of hockey synthetic field in 
Indira Stadium,Una 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
3.50 1.50  
2. Laying of Hockey Astro Turf with 
normal lighting at the Boys Hockey 
Academy at Kawnpuri   
Mizoram  4.00 1.00 
3. Construction of Multi-Purpose Hall 
at Taran Taran  
Punjab 2.00 1.98 
4. Renovation/modification and 
modernization of Indoor Sports 
Complex (Khudiram Anushilan) 
Eden Garden, Kolkata 
West 
Bengal 
3.00 3.00 
 
 
During 2011 -12, following proposals are being appraised for grant under the 
Scheme of Assistance for the creation of Urban Sports Infrastructure:  
` in crore 
S. 
No.  
Name of the Project State Amount 
approved   
1. Synthetic Hockey Field with normal lighting 
at Government High School, Jashpur 
Chhatisgarh 5.00 
2. Synthetic Hockey Field at Ranital Sports 
Complex, Jabalpur 
Madhya Pradesh 4.96 
3. Synthetic Track at Indira Gandhi Stadium, 
Kohima 
Nagaland 5.00 
4. Synthetic Football Ground at Football 
Academy, Baripada, Distt. Mayurbhanj 
Orissa 4.50 
 
 

59 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 5.7) 
 
At present, in the field of several sports like Athletics and Hockey, synthetic 
surfaces like Astroturfs  are being used the world over.  The Committee are, however, 
dismayed to learn that there is no uniformity in development of synthetic surfaces in the 
country.  At present there are only 5 synthetic Athletic tracks in the country while 14 are 
proposed to be laid.  Besides there are just 12 Synthetic Hockey surfaces in the country 
and 12 more are proposed to be laid.  Several states like Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, 
Bihar and Goa do not have any synthetic surface.  The Committee had felt that the 
presence of such surfaces was not uniform in the country to which the Ministry took the 
stand that apart from availability of talent in a particular area & facilities made available 
by State, existence of Sports Authority of India (SAI) centre is also a factor, which i s 
taken into consideration while choosing location for laying of synthetic surfaces.  Since 
SAI does not have centres in all the States, this has led to a situation where some 
States have more than one surface whereas some have none.  The Committee are not  
convinced by this argument and feel that there is no dearth of sports talent in the 
country and existence of a proper infrastructure can lead to discovery and development 
of hidden talent and popularity of a particular sport.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that there should be some uniformity in development of sports 
infrastructure across the States.  To begin with, at least one Athletic track must be 
made available in every State. The Committee would like to be apprised of the timelines 
for laying the proposed synthetic surfaces in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Scheme of Assistance for the creation of Urban Sports Infrastructure, introduced 
from 2011, provides for grants to the State Governments, Local Civic bodies, schools, 
colleges and universities under Central/ State Governments, Sports Control Boards, for 
synthetic playing surfaces (for hockey, football and athletics). With a view to 
maintaining focus on mother sports and popular sports, especially those in which the 
country has good med al prospects, it has been provided in the Scheme that the 
following types of sports infrastructure will get preference over others while deciding the 
grants: 
 

60 
 
(a) Synthetic playing surface (for hockey, football and athletics) 
(b) Multipurpose indoor hall 
 
Thus, the States, which do not have synthetic surfaces, can apply for grants from 
the Scheme of Assistance for the creation of Urban Sports Infrastructure.  
 
Once adequate funds become available under the Scheme, it will be ensured 
that  funds for one synt hetic surface (for hockey/football) and one synthetic athletic 
track in each State and Union Territory are sanctioned.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 5.13) 
 
The Committee are shocked to note the apathy of the government towards the 
sportspersons wi th disability which is evident from the fact that during two years i.e. 
2007-08 and 2008 -09, Budgetary allocation for a scheme for promotion of sports 
among disabled had lapsed due to its non formulation.  The Committee are pained to 
note that no special f acilities in terms of training and infrastructure are provided to the 
disabled.  There are no proper coaching centres for them and there is dearth of 
specialized coaches to train them.  Besides, SAI centres and stadia are hardly disabled 
friendly.  To add to this, there is no provision of giving cash awards for meritorious 
paralympic sportspersons, though there achievement are taken into consideration in the 
overall medal tally.   
 
The Committee are very disturbed at the plight of these sportspersons.  Though 
the paralympic sports were given recognition by the Government almost six years back, 
yet the necessary supports has not been provided till now.  A scheme of “Sports & 
Games for Disabled‟ has been approved only now in 2009.  The indifferent attitude of 
the government towards paralympic sports became clear from the statement made by 
the Ministry before the Committee that for development of disabled -friendly sports 
infrastructures & facilities, a copy of „Guidelines on creating Sporting &Recreational 
Activities for persons with Disabilities‟ will be sent to SAI & concerned NSFs.  It seems 
that government was oblivious of the issue till this Committee raised it.  The Committee 
now would like the Ministry to play a proactive role in the matter. 
 

61 
 
The Committee, also recommend that all the centres of SAI as well as stadia 
should be made disables -friendly.  The new stadia & sports venues must be 
constructed on the approved norms of a disa bles friendly facility. The Government 
should also provide specialized coaches to them and such coaches should be regularly 
sent on Refresher training courses to learn the new developments in their field. Further, 
since their achievements are taken into consideration in overall medal tally,  meritorious 
Paralympic sportspersons (medalists in International events) should also receive cash 
awards.  The Committee would urge the Ministry to bring necessary changes in their 
rules and guidelines to include these suggestions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The funds earmarked for the Scheme of Sports and Games for Persons with 
Disabilities  were re -appropriated/surrendered during 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 as the 
Scheme could be formulated during October 2009 only, as the form ulation of the 
Scheme required extensive consultations with the concerned stakeholders such as 
Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities, State Commissioners for People with 
Disabilities, Planning Commission, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry 
of Social Justice & Empowerment, State Governments, and the National Sports 
Federations dealing with different kinds of  persons with disabilities, viz., Special 
Olympics Bharat (dealing with mentally challenged), Paralympic Committee of India 
(dealing with physically challenged) and All India Sports Council for Deaf (dealing with 
deaf).  
 
Scheme of Sports and Games for Persons with Disabilities, approved in October 
2009, aims at promotion and development of sports and games among persons with 
disabilities. The objective of the Scheme is broad -basing participative sports among the 
disabled. The Scheme has the following components:- 
(a) Grant for sports coaching and purchase of consumables & non -consumable 
sports equipment for Schools 
(b) Grant for Training of Coaches 
(c) Grant for holding District, State & National level competitions for the disabled. 
  

62 
 
 More than 100 schools/institutes have been given grants under the scheme for 
procurement of sports equipment and engagement of coaches on contract b asis. 
Further, Special Olympic Bharat has been designated as the nodal authority for conduct 
of training of community coaches and conduct of sports competitions at district, state 
and national levels. A Training Programme for training of Master Trainers is  being 
organized under which about 500 Master Trainers are being trained annually at 
Lakshmibai National University of Physical Education (LNUPE), Gwalior. These Master 
Trainers, in turn, provide training to about 50 community coaches in their respective 
districts.    
   
Further, under the Scheme of assistance to NSFs,  assistance is also provided 
to Paralympic Committee of India (PCI),  Special Olympics Bharat (SOB) and the All 
India Sports Council for Deaf (AISCD ). Under the Scheme, the Government of India 
provides assistance for conduct of National Championships and International 
Tournaments in India, participation in International tournaments abroad, organizing 
coaching camps, procurement of sports equipments, e ngagement of foreign coaches 
and disbursement of salaries of the paid Joint/Assistant Secretaries engaged by NSFs. 
However, since recently, PCI has been derecognized due to complaints of 
mismanagement, the Ministry is working out alternative ways and means  to support 
para-athletes.  
 
As regards, accessibility of the sports facilities by persons with disabilities, it is 
stated that the SAI stadia renovated for hosting the Commonwealth Games 2010 are 
disabled friendly. Further, coaching camps are organized fo r disabled sportspersons as 
per the requirements of the Para - athletes, Special Olympic Bharat and All India 
Council for Deaf.  
 
The discriminatory clause in the Scheme of „Special Awards for medal winners in 
international sports events and their coaches‟ has been done away with. Consequent to 
removal of the discriminatory clause, winners of medals in Commonwealth Games 
2010,  Asian Games 2010 and  IPC Athletics World Championships 2011 have been 
given cash awards at par with other sportspersons.  
  

63 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 5.9) 
 
As far as the efforts of the Government in the field of talent identification and 
imparting training  to sportspersons is concerned, the Committee note that the SAI is 
running six schemes for the same.  From the figures made available to them, the 
Committee observe that there has been only a marginal increase in the number of 
trainees who are being trained in SAI Promotional Schemes throughout the country that 
is, from 15010 persons in the year 2007 -08 to 15115 persons in 2009 -10.  It is a very 
grim indication of the status of sports in a country having billion plus population as well 
as the largest youth population in the world.  The contention of the Government is that 
budgetary constraints are the reasons for this state of affairs.  The Committee 
therefore, urge the Ministry to approach the authorities for budget enhancement.  
Besides, very large Governm ent establishments like Railways and the Army can be 
asked to expand their bank of talented sports persons.  The Committee are also of the 
view that all unnecessary administrative expenditure on SAI should be curtailed by the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sp orts so that funds could be provided to find and train the 
talented sportspersons. 
 
As regards foreign training of sportspersons, the Committee are appalled to note 
that the number of such persons since 2001 has never exceeded 20, though as 
preparation of sportspersons for CWG, 2567 persons have reportedly been sent abroad 
for the first time. The Committee thus, recommend that adequate foreign exposure 
should be regularly provided to deserving sportspersons, who show a consistent 
performance and fitness lev els, as those are the medal winning prospects for the 
country in various international level tournaments. For this a proper schedule should be 
prepared and followed.  Such training should be given well in advance of the start of a 
tournament as any last minute effort on this front does not produce desired results. 
 
 

64 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Expansion of scope of various schemes of SAI with regard to identification and 
nurturing of talent is dependent on availability of resources. Ministry of Youth Affairs &  
Sports can consider enhancing the number of both residential and non -residential 
trainees provided adequate funds are made available. There has been reduction in 
allocation of the funds to the Department of Sports during 2011 -12 and with the 
reduced allocation, the Ministry is finding it difficult to run even the existing schemes. 
The Ministry has written to both the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission 
for enhancement of funds for the Department of Sports.  
 
 As regards the training, both abroad and within the country, the same is provided 
under various schemes of the Ministry and Sports Authority of India. Training is 
primarily provided through National Coaching Camps and participation in international 
events. The requirements for training and participation in international events are 
worked out for various sports disciplines on the existing level of proficiency and 
potential for medal prospects. Over 300 National Coaching camps are organized 
annually where 4000 – 5000 sportspersons/athletes are trained.  
 
 Participation in international sports events for various   sports disciplines is 
determined in the Long Term Development Plan, prepared for each discipline and 
depends on the factor whether the sports discipl ine is in „priority‟ category or „general‟ 
category. Following table gives the entitlement about foreign exposures of the sports 
disciplines belonging to „priority‟ and „general‟ category:  
 
A: Priority Disciplines:  
 Level Number of Main & Mandatory 
Events (at full cost to the 
Government) 
Number of other 
events to be 
cleared at Full 
cost 
Number of 
events to be 
cleared at air 
passage cost 
only  
Senior  Main & Mandatory 
Events without any limit 
2 4 
Junior  Main & Mandatory 
Events without any limit 
2 1 

65 
 
 Level Number of Main & Mandatory 
Events (at full cost to the 
Government) 
Number of other 
events to be 
cleared at Full 
cost 
Number of 
events to be 
cleared at air 
passage cost 
only  
Sub-Junior NIL 2 1 
 
 
B: General Category Disciplines:  
 Level Number of Main & 
Mandatory 
Events (at full cost to 
the Government) 
Number of 
other events to 
be cleared at 
Full cost 
Number of events to 
be cleared at air 
passage cost only  
Senior Main & Mandatory 
Events without any limit 
NIL 2 
Junior  NIL 2 NIL 
Sub-Junior NIL 2 1 
 
 Apart from training provided under National Coaching Camps and foreign 
exposure in the form of participation in international sports events abroad, customized 
training, both within the country and abroad, is also provided to sportspersons under 
the Scheme of Talent Search & Training and Scheme of National Sports Development 
Fund.  Under the Scheme of Talent Search & Training, 50 meritorious sportspersons 
belonging to disciplines of athletics, boxing, judo, weightlifting and wrestling have been 
sent for 8 we eks advance training in Cuba in April 2011.Under NSDF, assistance is 
provided to the elite athletes who are medal prospects in major international sports 
events.  
 
 Further, for improving the performance of the Indian contingent in the 
Commonwealth Games-2010, a Scheme with allocation of `678.00 crores (2008-09) to 
2010-11) was implemented for providing training to the elite sportspersons in all the 
disciplines of the Commonwealth Games, 2010. Systematic training in India and abroad 
under highly qualified I ndian and Foreign coaches was given to sportspersons for 
Commonwealth Games and 155 meetings of the Steering Committee meeting were 
held to finalize the proposal for participation in various tournaments/Championship 
/training in India and abroad under the Scheme Preparation of Indian Team. 1140  elite 
athletes were identified for training and this number was gradually reduced to 728 after 

66 
 
pruning. 541 proposals related to participation/training of Teams abroad were 
processed and 3759 players (repeat visits included) were sent abroad for 
training/competition. 
 
 For the sports disciplines of the Asian Games, 2010, which were not covered 
under CWG 2010, the norms for training, diet etc, as provided for in the Scheme of 
Preparation of Teams and Athletes for CWG 2010, were adopted for Asian Games 
2010.  
 
 Post CWG 2010 and Asian Games, 2010, the norms of the Scheme of 
Preparation of Teams and Athletes for CWG 2010, under which core probables were 
sent for foreign training abroad, are being retained for preparation  of our athletes for 
London Olympics 2012 and beyond.  Rather, some norms are being enhanced further.   
  

67 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 5.1) 
 
In so far as the budgetary allocation in respect of sports is concerned, the 
Committee observed that prior to the year 2007 -08, the total allocation (both plan and 
Non Plan) for the same had remained in the `300-400 crore bracket with around 90% 
utilization.  The Committee further observed that the funding received a substantial 
boost only in 2007 -08 onwards, when funds were actually allocated to the Ministry for 
the preparations required to host the XIX Commo nwealth Games in Delhi in the year 
2010.  The Ministry were allocated `3396.06 crores (RE both Plan and Non -Plan) in 
F.Y. 2009 -2010, apart from `413.90 crore to the Organizing Committee of the 
Commonwealth Games, which already stands utilized.  The Committ ee were later 
informed that the revised total allocation for CWG was `11494 crore, out of which 
`4459.48 crores was the Budget for development of sports infrastructure.  While the 
actual figures of the total allocation and expenditure for the Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports in the current year can only be known after the conclusion of the Commonwealth 
Games, the Committee are of the view that the increased allocation for sports this year 
was just a knee -jerk reaction of the Government to host an Intern ational sports meet.  
Even then the initial estimates for CWG was revised from `655 crore to `11494 crore.  
Though the Ministry had submitted reasons for such cost escalations, the Committee  
are far from convinced.  Now they can only hope that the funds w ould be utilized in an 
efficient and prudent manner.  Disturbed with the constant media coverage on 
allegations of corruption, misuse of funds, overspending on equipment, huge time and 
cost overruns in preparing various games venues etc., the Committee des ire that such 
allegations, if proven true would be probed most seriously to fix the accountability and 
the proven cases would be dealt with stringently.   
 
The Committee also feel that to inculcate sports culture in the country, 
consistency in providing ap propriate funds for the Ministry needs to be maintained to 
yield the desired results.  Thus, the Committee hope that adequate budgetary allocation 

68 
 
would be continued for the Ministry to sustain its efforts to promote sports, even after 
the Commonwealth Gam es, since investment in sports infrastructure, training facilities 
and related activities is an essential pre -requisite not only to produce potential medal 
winners in various national and international sports events, but also to provide a healthy 
alternative to the burgeoning youth population of the country. In this connection, the 
Committee are disheartened to know that the National Sports Development Fund 
(NSDF), which mobilizes resources to promote sports from Government and Non -
Government sources, including the Corporate sector and NRIs, had a meager corpus of 
just `63.70 crore as on 31 st December 2009, as so far only BCCI and SAIL have 
contributed to it.  The Committee feel that the concept needs an aggressive 
campaigning to convince Corporate Houses to  contribute to the NSDF as part of their 
Corporate Social Responsibility, besides, the Committee desire that the Sports Policy, 
2001 needs to be modified so as to include a provision that all Government 
Departments should devote a fraction of their budgets to promote sports talent.  Also all 
tax incentives given for sports matters need to be re -examined to ensure that the funds 
spent on training of sportspersons etc. could be made tax free. Private establishments 
engaged in such endeavors to promote sports should also be given tax incentives.  The 
Committee desire that the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports should work out the 
modalities of these proposals in coordination with ministry of Finance and inform the 
Committee about the outcome.  The Committee wou ld also like to be apprised of the 
Long Terms Development Plan prepared by SAI on the matter and the steps taken to 
implement the Plan.  At the same time, the Committee also feel the need to emphasis 
upon transparency and accountability in sports funding m atters to develop certain level 
of confidence among those who wish to sincerely contribute for promoting a healthy 
sports culture in the Country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Delhi 2010 Commonwealth Games (CWG ) was successfully held from 
October 3 -14, 2010. Competitions were held in 17 sports in which 7572 
athletes/coaches/officials from 71 countries & territories of the Commonwealth 
participated. The Opening and the Closing Ceremonies were held at Jawaharlal N ehru 
Stadium, the flagship stadium for the CWG and were commended internationally for its 
spectacular quality.  

69 
 
 
 The performance of the Indian Sportspersons at the Commonwealth Games was 
outstanding. India won more than double the medals it had won at the  last 
Commonwealth Games held in Melbourne in 2006. India finished second in the medals 
tally, ahead of the major sporting nations such as England, Canada, South Africa, etc 
with a total of 101 medals, the highest ever in any major multidisciplinary sporti ng 
event. Women sportspersons, in particular, performed brilliantly.  
 
 Out of the total allocation of `11687.25 crores for Commonwealth Games, 2010, 
an amount of `10078.91 crore was incurred by various agencies.  Allocation & 
expenditure for the last 2 ye ars 2009-10, 2010-11 for the Commonwealth Games were 
as under:- 
                                                     (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Year Allocation Expenditure 
1. 2009-10 2268.00 2246.07 
2. 2010-11 1477.43 870.27 
  
 Even though the Games per se were conducted successfully, there were 
allegations regarding corruption. The Hon‟ble Prime Minister of India  constituted a  
High Level Committee  under the Chairmanship  of Shri V.K. Shunglu to investigate the 
allegations rel ating to the Commonwealth Games, 2010.  The mandate given to the 
Committee, inter -alia, included examination of the role and responsibilities of the 
various agencies relating to the Commonwealth Games, 2010 and also to advise for the 
lessons learnt for the  future including establishment of a mechanism for laying down 
timeframes and effective monitoring, creation of a legally sustainable framework for 
hosting similar international sporting events, appropriate  financial management and 
internal audit, media i nteraction and communication. The committee has since 
submitted all its report/s to the Government which are under examination. Government 
has already initiated certain action on the recommendations of the High Level 
Committee.  
 
As regards the inculcation of sports culture in the country, the Ministry is in 
complete agreement with the recommendation of the Estimates Committee that “…to 
inculcate sports culture in the country, consistency in providing appropriate funds for 

70 
 
the Mini stry needs to be maintained to yield the desired results. …… that adequate 
budgetary allocation would be continued for the Ministry to sustain its efforts to promote 
sports, even after the Commonwealth Games, since investment in sports infrastructure, 
training facilities and related activities is an essential pre -requisite not only to produce 
potential medal winners in various national and international sports events, but also to 
provide a healthy alternative to the burgeoning youth population of the countr y”. 
However, there was reduction in the budgetary allocation during 2010 -11 at the RE 
stage.  Allocation of `2564 crore was made for the Department of Sports for 2010 -11 at 
BE stage, which included `1477.43 crore for CWG  2010. Thus, allocation for the 
Department of Sports excluding CWG 2010 component was `1109 crore for 2010 -11, 
which was reduced to `963 crore at RE stage.  
 
For the current financial year, i.e., 2011 -12, the Department of Sports has 
projected an outlay of  `1436 crore for Plan Schemes of the Department. However, 
allocation made is `700 crore only, which represents a reduction of 37% w.r.t BE 
allocation of 2010 -11 and 27% w.r.t. to RE allocation of 2010 -11. The Department has 
informed both Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission that reduced allocation 
will adversely affect implementation of the various schemes of the Ministry. It is 
expected that enhanced allocation may be made to the Department at RE stage.    
 
As regards, contributions to the Natio nal Sports Development Fund (NSDF), it is 
stated that NSDF was established with the main objective of promoting sports in the 
country with the ultimate aim of creating sports culture and achieving excellence in 
sports and games at the National and Internat ional level.  The Fund accepts 
contributions from statutory bodies, international organizations, private and public 
corporate sectors, trusts, societies and individuals. NSDF got contributions of about 
`55.40 crore from various organizations/entities over a period of time. The BCCI had 
made the major contribution of `50 crore. The BCCI contribution has given a major 
boost to the objectives of the NSDF. It is desirable that corporate entities also make 
substantial contribution to the NSDF.  However, such con tributions should be a 
voluntary exercise. Many corporate entities and major PSUs have evolved their own 
schemes for sports promotion and this may be one of the reasons for not coming up 
with contribution to the NSDF even when such contributions get 100% t ax exemption. 
The Ministry proposes to take up the matter with industry associations viz., Federation 

71 
 
of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII), Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCH AM) 
and others and also to move the concerned line Ministries dealing with Central PSUs 
especially in the sectors of power, telecom, oil & gas to adopt specific sports disciplines 
and assist in promotion and development of the  adopted sports disciplines a s part of 
their corporate social responsibility. 
 
As regards, tax exemptions for the sports, it is stated that contributions to NSDF 
are exempted from income tax under Sub Section 2(iii) hg of clause (a) of Section 80G 
of Income Tax Act.  Further, NSDF, as  a body, is exempted from payment of income 
tax under Section 12 A of Income Tax Act.  Sports Authority of India (SAI), an 
autonomous body under the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, engaged in promotion of 
excellence, is also exempted from payment of in come tax under Section 12 A of 
Income Tax Act.  The matter for giving tax incentives to private establishments engaged 
in promotion of sports was taken up with the Ministry of Finance, which informed that 
the Income Tax Act, 1961 already provides tax incen tives to private establishments 
engaged in the promotion of sports. Under the Act, a non -commercial private sports 
establishment i.e., an establishment which does not charge any fee or other 
consideration for its services may get registered under Section 1 2 AA of the Act. As per 
Sections 11 and 12 of the Act, the income of a registered private sports establishment 
will be exempted from tax upon the fulfillment of certain conditions. A commercial 
private sports establishment can also get registration under t he Act for availing 
exemption if the total fee or other consideration received by it does not exceed `25 
lakhs in a year. Ministry of Finance  has further informed that Section 80G of the Act 
gives incentives to a registered private establishment by provid ing that 
contribution/donation to a Registered Private Sports Establishment will be deductible in 
the hands of contributors/donors for the computation of income. Thus, it is apparent 
from the above that the Income Tax Act already provides adequate tax ince ntives to 
private sports establishments which are engaged in the promotion of sports.  
 
 Further, the cash incentives in the form of cash awards given by the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs & Sports, to sportspersons for winning medals in international sports 
events, are exempted from income tax under Section 10(17A) of Income Tax Act.   
 

72 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 5.6) 
 
The Committee note that at present there is no scheme in the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs under which assistance can be given to State Gov ernments for conducting of 
National Games.  Therefore, in the past, assistance has been given for the same by the 
Ministry in relaxation of provisions of the Scheme of Assistance to National Sports 
Federations (NSFs).  The Planning Commission has also in t he past provided 
assistance of `40.51 crore and `67 crore to the Government of Assam and Government 
of Jharkhand respectively for National Games, Guwahati (2007) and National Games, 
Ranchi (2009) in the form of Additional Central Assistance (ACA), ACA of `110 crore 
was sanctioned to the State Government of Kerala for conducting the 35 th National 
Games in May 2010.  The Committee feel that such ad hoc measures should not be 
made for permanent events like National Games.  The Committee note that the Urban 
Sports Infrastructure Scheme referred to in the previous recommendation will cover 
National Games, other sports infrastructure and playing fields too as the National 
Games are organized in State Capitals.  The Committee are of the view that there is 
urgent ne ed to support the States in hosting National Games.  Thus, the Committee 
would urge the Ministry to keep the fund requirements under this Head in view while 
preparing the estimates for the new Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme.  The 
Committee would furthe r emphasize upon the need to set up a permanent corpus of 
funds by the Central Government with a specific amount to be contributed by each 
State as mandatory condition.  The corpus should be utilized by the States for regular 
hosting of National Games as w ell as for establishing sports infrastructure required by 
them for the same.  The Committee also feel that the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports 
must coordinate with the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting so as to highlight the 
achievement of our spor tspersons in various disciplines in the National Games as well 
as in other national and international sports events. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The allocation of funds for the Scheme of Assistance for the creation of Urban 
Sports Infrastructure, introduced on pilot basis from 2010 -11, is limited and it is not 
possible to fund the projects for National Games from this Scheme, as the requirement 
of funds for creation/upgradation of sports infrastructure facilities for National Games is 

73 
 
quite significant. However, from 12th Five Year Plan, the Scheme is likely to be made as 
a regular Scheme and  then the projects for National Games can also be considered for 
assistance from the Scheme. Till then, proposals of the State Governments for 
creation/upgradation of sports facilities for conduct of the National Games will require to 
be assisted by way of Additional Central Assistance (ACA) by the Planning 
Commission.  
 
 For 34th National Games, Jharkand, a n assistance of `67 crore was given to the 
State Government as Add itional Central Assistance by the Planning Commission 
towards creation of sports facilities and conduct of games.  
 
  
For 35 th National Games, Kerala, scheduled to be held in 2012, the Planning 
Commission has sanctioned an Additional Central Assistance of `110 crore to the State 
Government (50% of the Project cost).  Further, an amount of `20 crore has been 
sanctioned to SAI for modernization and renovation of SAI centres in Kerala which will 
be used as venues during 35th National Games.  
 
For evaluation an d assessment of the funds for 36 th National Games, Goa, the 
Central Team consisting of representatives from the Department of Sports, Sports 
Authority of India, Planning Commission and Indian Olympic Association had visited the 
State in October 2009 and th e Team assessed that the total cost towards development 
of sports infrastructure would be `326 crore. The Central team has recommended that 
Government of India may consider giving 75% of the assessed cost as grant -in-aid, i.e., 
`244.50 crore. The Report of  the Central Team has been forwarded to the Planning 
Commission for taking further action in the matter.  
 
Further, the Department of Sports has taken a serious view of the ad hoc 
approach of the Indian Olympic Association and the States in the allotment o f the 
National Games and non-adherence to the original time schedule for the conduct of the 
Games. The Department of Sports had written to all State Governments that it would 
not be feasible for the Central Government to consider host states‟ requests for central 
assistance without prior appraisal of the level of preparedness of the State Government 

74 
 
to host the Games. States were advised to seek prior approval of the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs & Sports before bidding for National Games to be eligible for central assistance.        
 
Although National Games are supposed to be held biennially, 34 th National 
Games, Jharkahnd, originally scheduled to be held in November 2007, were postponed 
six times and were recently held in February 2011. Instead of conducting t he National 
Games already allotted, Indian Olympic Association (IOA) had gone ahead allotting the 
future editions of the Games to one State after the other without ensuring or taking 
concrete steps for timely conduct of the National Games already allotted.  There is a 
general trend among states to first bid for the National Games without making a 
complete assessment in terms of infrastructural and financial requirements and then 
approach the Central Government for assistance for creation of sports infrastruc ture 
and conduct of the Games.  
 
A meeting was taken by the Secretary, Department of Sports on 10.11.2010 with 
the representatives of the State Governments of Jharkhand, Kerala, Goa and 
Chhattisgarh. The issues relating to allotment of the National Games, timely conduct of 
the Games, infrastructural requirements etc were deliberated at length. It was decided 
in the meeting to take up the matter with IOA on the following points:  
(viii) Formulation of clear guidelines for allotment of the National Games to the 
States 
(ix) No further bidding till conclusion of Goa National Games 
(x) Work out a cycle for holding National Games biennially in a manner so 
that the National Games are held before Olympic Games on the one 
occasion and before the Asian Games/Commonwealth Games on the  
other occasion and so on 
(xi) Making it mandatory for concerned authorities including State 
Government, State Olympic Association and IOA to hold the National 
Games as per the dates finalized at the time of bidding leaving no scope 
for postponement barring for situations beyond control  
(xii) Development of a model Host City Contract  
(xiii) Standardization of field of play, equipments etc.  
(xiv) Exploring the possibility of splitting the Games into main National Games, 
Indoor Games and the Youth Games.  

75 
 
 
As a follow up to the a bove meeting, a meeting with the representatives of IOA 
was held under the chairmanship of the Joint Secretary (Sports), Department of Sports. 
Representative of IOA has informed that IOA has guidelines for allotment of National 
Games to the States and cond uct of the National Games.  It was decided in the 
meeting that these guidelines need to be re-visited to obviate the awkward situation like 
the present one, where 4 States are waiting in queue to conduct the National Games.  It 
was emphasized in the meeting that there should only be two States waiting at a time – 
one in staging mode and one in the preparation mode. It was also stressed in the 
meeting that the National Games should be conducted as per the schedule and that if 
there was any question mark/doub t with regard to timely conduct of the Games on 
account of lack of preparations or for some other reason, the National Games be 
shifted to Delhi where adequate sports facilities are available and where the conduct of 
the National Games even at a short noti ce will not be a problem.  It was acknowledged 
that the cycle of the Games should be such that they are held once before the Olympic 
Games and once before the Commonwealth/Asian Games, as it would help in selection 
of national teams in different discipline s for participation in Olympics/  
Commonwealth/Asian Games. 
  
It also emerged from the discussions that a quadrennial cycle (once in four 
years) could also be considered for conduct of National Games to synchronize with the 
conduct of the Asian games.  If t he National Games were to be conducted biennially as 
per present practice, then the National Games should be allotted in such a manner that 
once they are held in a State having brown -field stadia i.e., where facilities of adequate 
standard for conduct of National Games already exist, followed by a State where green-
field stadia are being developed. Such an arrangement will provide a lead time of 4 
years for creation of sports facilities to States, where green -field sports facilities are 
required to be created.    
 
 It also emerged from the discussions that regular National Games should be 
confined to 28 Olympic disciplines, and that Indoor Games be held biennially/ 
quadrennially, as the case may be, to cover the non-Olympic disciplines. 
 

76 
 
 On the issue of play field norms, it emerged that only field of play/surface, 
lighting etc. should be of international standards, others like spectator gallery need not 
be developed of the level required for staging mega events.  
 
 The Department of Sports is now in the p rocess of constituting an Empowered 
Committee consisting of representatives from the Ministry, Sports Authority of India, 
Indian Olympic Association and States to deliberate on the various issues related to 
conduct of the National Games including fixation of guidelines for allotment of the 
Games to the States, periodicity of the Games, schedule of the Games, splitting of the 
Games into main National Games (outdoor), Indoor Games and the Youth Games, 
fixation of guidelines for allotment of the Games to the S tates, development of model 
Host City Contract, etc and make recommendations to the Government.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 5.8) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that there is no optimal utilization of the 
existing stadia.  They have been made to understand by sports experts that a cricket 
stadium can be utilized as a multi -purpose stadium for sports like football and Kabaddi 
with minor changes.  The Committee, however, fail to understand the logic of keeping 
the stadia unutilized except fo r cricket matches, while other sports are being given a 
cold shoulder by the authorities.  The Committee therefore, recommend that instead of 
keeping a stadium exclusively for use of one sport disciplines, these should be 
optimally used for various discipl ines.  In fact, the Committee feel that the Ministry 
should adopt the policy of constructing multipurpose stadia in view of less availability of 
land.  This will not only reduce expenditure to be incurred for construction of stadia for 
each discipline but will also lead to proper utilization of such stadia.  The Committee 
also desire that schools near these stadia should also be allowed access to them for 
conducting matches & tournaments.  A proper schedule for allotment of stadia to 
schools should be prepared and followed for the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under the Come and Play Scheme of Sports Authority of India, launched in April, 
2011, the designated areas in the Stadia have been thrown open for both imparting 

77 
 
professional training to established sportspersons and also to beginners with the 
objective to encourage participation in sports and for optimum utilization of the Stadia.  
 
Following sports disciplines are being taken up for coaching/training at the 
various facilities:  
Name of the Stadium Sports Discipline 
Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium  (i) Athletics 
(ii) Weightlifting 
(iii) Football 
(iv) Volleyball 
Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Ranges Shooting 
Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Swimming Pool Complex  Swimming  
Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium (i) Hockey 
(ii) Cricket 
Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium (Gymnastic)  (i) Gymnastics 
(ii) Table Tennis 
(iii) Badminton 
K.D. Jadhav Wrestling Stadium, IG Stadium Complex  (i) Wrestling 
(ii) Boxing 
(iii) Judo 
(iv) Basketball 
Cycling Velodrome, IG Stadium Complex Cycling 
I G Sports Complex (Open Area)  Archery  
 
So, it is being ensured that the sports stadia and sports facilities owned by the 
Sports Authority of India are being used optimally for various sports disciplines. As 
regards, cricket stadia, it is state d that these stadia are owned by the State Cricket 
Associations and it is for them to decide to allow usage of cricket stadia for other sports 
competitions. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 5.10) 
 
Coaches are vital for training the sportspersons. Therefore, apart from ensuring 
adequate number of coaches to train the sportspersons, improving and maintaining 

78 
 
their quality with suitable refresher courses is very important.  The Committee feel that 
there is a need to open more coaching centres at the district/regional level first so as to 
make coaches available for such sportspersons who lack resources to get coaching in 
big cities & metropolises.  Since new developments are taking place in the field of 
sports, the Committee opine that the Government should devise a programme for 
sending the coaches on refresher training at regular intervals.  At present there is a 
coach exchange programme with very few countries like Hungary, with whom India has 
signed International cooperation agreement.  The Committee feel that such efforts must 
be extended to countries having international level coaches and sportspersons like 
China, Japan, South Korea, Germany, South Africa, Russia and Latin American 
countries too.  Al so, the coach development programme run by NIS, Patiala should be 
further modernized and strengthened in consultation with sports scientists. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has taken a major drive for capacity building for coaches  by sending 
them for t raining abroad or arranging training for them by foreign experts at National 
Institutes of Sports, Patiala, so that they are equipped with latest methodologies and 
techniques in coaching of sportspersons. Ministry has entered into collaborations with 
Cuba and Hungary for training of coaches abroad. During April 2010, 20 coaches of 
SAI were deputed for a three month long International Coaching Course at Budapest 
conducted by the Semmelweis University, Budapest (Hungary) . In January 2011, 56 
coaches and commu nity coaches have been sent to Cuba for 4 week and 6 week 
training programme under the Scheme of Talent Search & Training. While 29 high 
performing coaches including once coordinator drawn from Sports Authority of India 
and State Governments have been sent  for 6 week training programme, 27 community 
coaches including one coordinator, who have undergone Master Trainers Training 
Programme under Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA), have been sent 
for 4 week training programme. Further, 34 coaches, dr awn from SAI and State 
Governments have been sent for 3 month long International Coaching Course, at 
Semmelweis University, Budapest (Hungary) from Mach-June 2011.  
 
The Sports Authority of India and Semmelweis University, Budapest have signed 
an agreement  in 2011, under which the Semmelweis University will design a Tailor -

79 
 
made coaching programme of one month duration exclusively for Indian coaches, 
under which a coaching programme for a minimum of 30 coaches by experts of 
Semmelweis University  will be run either in Hungary or in India.  
 
Further, the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and SAI are in interactions with 
Beijing Sports University for training of our coaches.   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 5.12) 
 
The Committee note with regret that the participation of women in sports is 
abysmally low which is evident from the fact that out of total 15115 number of trainees 
in SAI centres, the number of girls was only 4261 as compared to 10854 boys.  
Besides, there are no separate women sports hostels and out of 91 sports hostels only 
49 have residential facilities for women. Apart from the gender bias in our society, 
unavailability of some gender specific facilities is responsible for the same.  For 
example out of 1258 regular coaches, only 181 i.e. 15% are women coaches.  It is but a 
fact that girls living in rural areas will prefer to have women coaches.  Having noted 
media reports about sexual harassment of girl players by men coaches, the Committee 
are surprised to note that there is no mechanism in place to deal with cases of sexual 
harassment of sportswomen.  It is only now that the Ministry has decided to write to 
various National Sports Federations to put in place a mechanism for the same.  The 
Committee would like to know the status of the same at the action taken stage. 
 
Though the Ministry of YA&S does not feel any need for a separate policy for 
sportswomen, the Committee are of the view that the issue needs attention in order to 
provide equal opportunities to girls in the field of sports.  Therefore, they suggest that a 
scheme for sportswomen should be formulated on the following lines.  Firstly, the 
Ministry should start with Gender Budgeting to encourage participation of women.  
Separate funds should be earmarked to be spent on sportswomen under various heads 
& schemes as availability of funds will incentivize the Government to spend it for the 
purpose it will be allocated.  Secondly, a well defined mechanism is needed to be put in 
place to prevent and dea l with cases of sexual harassment in SAI.  All the NSFs being 
funded by the Government should also be asked to establish such a mechanism.  In 
case of failure, the concerned NSF should be de -recognized by the Government.  

80 
 
Thirdly, the government should mak e all efforts to increase the number of women 
coaches. To this end, some seats should be reserved for women in various training 
institutes.  The Committee further counsel the Ministry to coordinate with the Ministry of 
Women & Child Development to garner s upport on the issue and frame a scheme for 
discovering and nurturing sports talent among the women population of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There are social issues, which have a bearing on the number of women trainees 
and women sportspersons ta king part in the sports events. Parents are generally not 
open to send girls to residential training centres. There is also hesitation on the part of 
girls and the parents as some of the centres are far away from the cities. However, as 
far as the Ministry  of the Youth Affairs and Sports and Sports Authority of India are 
concerned, all Schemes are inclusive schemes and equally applicable to women 
sportspersons. 
 
Further, a National Championship for exclusively women is conducted annually, 
which is now conducted under PYKKA Scheme. Under the annual sports competitions 
conducted at block, district, state and national levels under PYKKA Scheme, there has 
been a very encouraging response from women. During the sports competitions in 
2008-09, out of 7,21,519 participants, there were 2,49,190  women participants and 
during 2009-10, out of 22,48,944 participants, there were 8,73,842 women participants.   
 
As regards prevention of sexual harassment of women in sports, the Ministry has 
issued instructions in August 2010 to all NSFs making it clear to them it shall be the 
responsibility of NSFs and other sports bodies to prevent sexual harassment of women 
in sports and to ens ure their safety. They have also been directed to take appropriate 
measures, as per the judgment of 1997 of Supreme Court in the mater of Vishakha & 
others versus of State of Rajasthan, to prevent sexual harassment of women in sports 
sector.  
 
Further, the guidelines for prevention of sexual harassment of women in sports 
have been incorporated in the proposed National Sports Legislation.  
 

81 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 5.16) 
 
The Committee are extremely concerned to note the delay in overall 
arrangements for organizing the XIX Commonwealth Games, 2010 in India, apart from 
the huge cost overruns as is evident from the difference in the initial cost, estimates to 
the revised estimates of conducting the Games.  Inability of the government to meet 
most of the deadlines in development of infrastructure projects and the consequent cost 
overruns are not only putting the nation in bad light but are casting staggering burden 
on the public exchequer.  The Committee fail to comprehend that despite the Host city 
contract being signed in 2003, why the budgetary allocation for CWG was made four 
years later i.e. in 2007.  As a result, the scheme for training of sportspersons could only 
be started in 2008.  Also the development of critical sports infrastructure in time  to 
conduct the Games suffered irreversibly.  The Committee would like to quote the 
example of the city of London, the host city for Olympic Games, 2012, where the 
infrastructure has been nearly complete despite the Games still a good two years away.  
The Committee are of the view that ideally various projects which include development 
of stadia, training venues and development of city‟s infrastructure including residential 
facilities for sportspersons should have been completed at least one year before the  
start of the Games.  Apart from the fact that the infrastructure is still not complete, the 
constant press reports on slippages in various projects is extremely disheartening.  The 
Committee cannot but deplore the lethargic manner in which the matter was handled by 
the Central Government, Organizing Committee and GNCTD, particularly when the 
country‟s honour is at stake.  They expect the government to probe all charges of 
corruption and cost escalations seriously after the Games.  Meanwhile the Committee 
also urge the Ministry to utilize their PR mechanism optimally in case any exaggerated 
reports appear in the media. As for the athletes and sportspersons, the Committee 
sincerely hope that our sportspersons would give their best performance to bring laurels 
to the host country since such lifetime opportunities are too precious for each one of 
them. 
 
The Committee are also concerned to note that Government is yet to decide 
about the actual utilization as well as maintenance of the sports infrastructure after the 
CWG.  The Committee recommend that care must be taken to ensure an optimum 
utilization of the same throughout the year.  As regards overall maintenance and repair, 

82 
 
the agency involved in construction of a stadium should be responsible for its 
maintenance for a specified period.  The Committee also feel that the stadia should be 
given to various NSFs/Sports Associations for regular training of their sportspersons 
and holding championships in their disciplines.  Such constant utilization of 
infrastructure would ensure their proper maintenance too, and thus in case of hosting 
any other mega sports event in future, large scale investments on the same could, 
perhaps be avoided. 
 
The Committee are of the view that absence of any policy on hosting mega 
sports events is the reason for the present status of CWG projects.  The Committee feel 
that had there been proper planning, the never ending delays in projects could have 
been avoided.  The Committee desire that in future we should go for bidding for 
organizing M ega Sports events only after the ground work in this regard is done.  
Financial planning involving the cost benefit analysis should also be done well in 
advance keeping in view the cost escalation factors over the years.  The Committee 
also desire that the  level, at which the responsibility can be fixed in case of failure to 
achieve the target should be clearly defined.  A proper plan of action for training the 
sportspersons to excel in such events should also be prepared.  The Committee desire 
that a policy be chalked out by the government on these lines for organizing any mega 
sports events.  The Government should also ensure its proper execution and 
transparency and accountability in all financial deals. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the Ministr y should seriously consider revising the Sports Policy to 
address all the matters raised by them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Through a series of meetings of the Group of Ministers (GOM) and the 
Committee of Secretaries (COS), all the proposals/projects rel ated to the 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 were regularly considered/approved and monitored for 
timely completion of the projects. This Ministry, being the nodal Ministry for overseeing 
the work related to the Commonwealth Games and release of funds in this rega rd has 
also been making timely and consistent efforts to get the approvals of the competent 
authorities for the various project related to the Commonwealth Games, 2010 in a time 

83 
 
bound manner and making the funds available to the various concerned agencies for 
timely completion of all the projects.  
 
 Details regarding projected/envisaged cost for Commonwealth Games, to public 
exchequer since inception, are given in Annexure-I. Progress of work, for 
Commonwealth Games, was monitored by the Group of Ministers , the Committee of 
Secretaries, Empowered Committee of Delhi Government chaired by Chief Secretary 
and Infrastructure Monitoring Committee chaired by Secretary (Sports), on regular 
basis. The project undertaken by Central Government, Government of NCR and other 
bodies, for Commonwealth Games, funded out of the exchequer, alongwith   budget, 
are given in Annexure-II  These cost escalations were due to certain inescapable 
factors like escalation in prices of construction material; ii) change in scope of work;  iii) 
increases in build up area; iv) addition of new work; v) statutory levies which were not 
taken into account earlier and vi) quality assurances & other contingencies etc.  These 
projects were completed before the commencement of the Commonwealth Games -
2010. 
 
To improve the performance of the Indian contingent in the Commonwealth 
Games-2010 a Scheme with allocation of `678.00 crore (2008 -09) to 2010 -11) was 
implemented for providing training to the elite sportspersons in all the disciplines of the 
Commonwealth Games,  2010. Systematic training in India and abroad under highly 
qualified Indian and Foreign coaches was given to sportspersons for Commonwealth 
Games and 155 meetings of the Steering Committee meeting were held to finalize the 
proposal for participation in various tournaments/Championship /training in India and 
abroad under the Scheme Preparation of Indian Team. 1140  elite athletes were 
identified for training and this no. was gradually reduced to 728 after pruning. 541 
proposals related to  participation/training of Teams abroad were processed and 3759 
players (repeat visits included) were sent abroad for training/competition.  With the help 
of the Scheme for Preparation of Indian Teams for Commonwealth Games, 2010, the 
performance of the In dian Sportspersons at the Commonwealth Games was 
exceptional and outstanding resulting in an unprecedented haul of medals, which were 
more than double the medals India had won at the last Commonwealth Games held at 
Melbourne in 2006. India also finished se cond in the medals tally, ahead of the major 
sporting nations such as England, Canada, South Africa, etc with a total of 101 medals, 

84 
 
the highest ever in any major multidisciplinary sporting event. Women sportspersons, in 
particular, performed brilliantly.  
 
 On the basis of the adverse report in the Electronic Media the Hon‟ble Prime 
Minister of India had constituted a  High Level Committee  under the Chairmanship  of 
Shri V.K. Shunglu to investigate the matter relating to the Commonwealth Games, 
2010.  The mandate given to the Committee, inter-alia, included examination of the role 
and responsibilities of the various agencies relating to the Commonwealth Games, 
2010 and also to advise for the lessons learnt for the future including establishment of a 
mechanism for laying down timeframes and effective monitoring, creation of a legally 
sustainable framework for hosting similar international sporting events, appropriate  
financial management and internal audit, media interaction and communication. The 
committee has since submitted all its report/s to the Government which are under 
examination. Government has already initiated certain action on the recommendations 
of the High Level Committee.  
 
As regards about the actual utilization as well as maintenance of the  sports 
infrastructure after the CWG 2010, it is stated that the Ministry has constituted a 
Committee comprising eminent sportspersons and sports journalists under the 
chairpersonship of Director General, Sports Authority of India (SAI)  for examining 
various options and for giving their recommendations for the legacy planning of the 
stadia in Delhi managed by SAI namely Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium, Shyama 
Prasad Mukherjee Swimming Pool, Dr. KSSSR Shooting Ranges, Jawahar Lal Nehru 
Stadium and Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium after the Commonwealth Games 2010. The 
Committee is to give its recommendations on  list of preferred sporting and other 
activities, which could be allowed stadia -wise; the correct balance between revenue 
generation objective and spo rts promotion objective, the strategies to leverage the 
stadia for hosting prestigious sporting events; the strategies for attracting commercially 
viable anchor -tenants who have a strong sports agenda like professional/commercial 
league etc; operation of p layers‟ academies by eminent sportspersons; alternative 
approved models for operations and maintenance of SAI stadia, including public private 
partnership and corporate social responsibility models. The Committee has submitted 
its report. Recommendations m ade by the Committee are being examined for 
proceeding further in the matter.  

85 
 
  
Further, for utilization of the sports facilities in SAI stadia, Sports Authority of 
India has launched „Come and Play Scheme‟ in April 2011. Designated areas in the SAI 
stadia in Delhi viz., Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium, Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Ranges, Dr. 
SPM Swimming Pool Complex, Major Dhyan Chand Hockey Stadium, Indira Gandhi 
Indoor Stadium (Gymnastics, Wrestling and Cycling Velodrome) have been thrown 
open for promoting com munity sports. The response has been encouraging.  Apart 
from this, National Coaching Camps are also being run in respect of some sports 
disciplines like Hockey, Gymnastics, etc.  
 
As regards the recommendations of the Committee to the effect that in futur e we 
should go for bidding for organizing Mega Sports events only after the ground work in 
this regard has been done, it is stated that the Ministry will keep the recommendations 
of the Committee in view while deciding on the proposals received for bidding  for mega 
sport events. 
 
  

86 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 5.3) 
 
The Committee observe that excelling in sports is no longer a matter of stamina 
and endurance alone.  Sports at national and international level has become a 
specialized endeavor comprising physiological, bio -mechanical, nutritional & 
physiological elements.  It has been rightly said that in today‟s world, an international 
sports star is not just born or found, but is created through a well researched and 
discipline-specific scientific process, backed by appropriate incentives.  The specialists 
in these dis ciplines in India are, however, a counted few.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly feel that sports should be developed as a science and its physiology, 
pharmacology, biomechanics, nutrition and medicine, etc. need to be a part of higher 
education.  These disciplines should be popularized and be made available in 
maximum number of Institutes.  The Committee desire that Ministry of Youth Affairs & 
Sports should continue to take up the matter with the Ministry as well as the Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfar e of HRD and other relevant bodies/institutes and urge them to 
take concrete steps in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Sports Sciences are an integral part of the training of sportspersons. The Sports 
Authority of India (SAI) centres at the Nation al Institute of Sports (NIS), Patiala, Kolkata 
and  Bangalore have well established sports science facilities, which are manned by 
experts. The scientific support to national campers is an essential part of the system of 
preparation of national athletes fo r participation in international competitions. Sports 
science facilities have been strengthened at Bangalore, Bhopal, Lucknow, 
Gandhinagar, Thiruvanthapuram, Kolkata, Aurangabad, Imphal and Sonepat centres of 
SAI, as part of preparation of sportspersons for Commonwealth Games, 2010.  
 
Application of scientific techniques is aimed at the following objectives: 

87 
 
(i) to enhance potential of Indian sportspersons 
(ii) to improve health & fitness assessment of athletes 
(iii) to provide physiotherapy and rehabilitation to injured sportspersons.  
(iv) to enhance optimum work output in the field.   
(v) designing of weight control programme for weight category sports.   
 
Following are the departments of the Sports Medicine and Sports Science which 
intend to apply medical knowledge to sports with the aim of preserving the health of the 
athletes whilst improving his or her performance: 
(i) Department of Sports Anthropometry 
(ii)Department of Bio-chemistry  
(iii) Department of Exercise Physiology 
(iv)   Department of Sports Psychology 
(v) Department of Sports Biomechanics 
(vi) Department of Sports Nutrition 
(vii) Department of General Theory & Methods of Training  
 
Further, the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports has constituted an Expert Group in 
February 2011 under the chairpersonship of Secretary (Sports) and comprising of 
experts from sports medicine, sports injuries, nutrition, dope testing laboratories, 
distinguished sportspersons and sports administr ators to give suggestions for 
strengthening various aspects of sports science including sports nutrition. Terms of 
reference of the Expert Group are as follows:  
(i) To be the Centre of excellence for education and research in sports 
sciences in the national endeavour to improve sporting performances; 
(ii) To be a comprehensive centre for evaluation, prevention and 
treatment for sportspersons; 
(iii) to provide a centre of faculty exchange, collaboration and research 
among various sports universities of the world; and  
(iv) to promote research and application of sports sciences to enhance 
performance in sports.  
 
The Ministry will take further action in the matter on submission of the report by 
the Expert Group.  

88 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 5.11) 
 
One of the objectives of National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) is to take up 
research & development studies for providing support to excellence in sports.  The 
Committee note with concern that no R&D studies have been undertaken so far despite 
the fact that NSDF was instituti onalized around 12 years back.  The stand taken by the 
Department of Sports before the Committee was that if any viable project is received for 
funding R&D in sports, it would be given serious consideration, which is not convincing 
enough.  Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry of YA&S to become proactive 
and take the required initiative in conducting a study on providing scientific support to 
sportspersons instead of waiting for any viable project to come up.  In this regard, the 
Ministry can engage research institutions with proven track record or experience in the 
field of sports science.  Such research studies can be funded by the Ministry from 
NSDF.  The objective of the study should be to see how to integrate the development in 
the field of biomechanics, nutrition, physiology, pharmacology, sports medicine etc. with 
sports.  The Committee further recommend that since new developments occur in the 
field of sports, engagement in R&D studies should be a continuous process for which 
adequate funding must be ensured.  The Committee desire that the Ministry may 
identify, in consultation with experts, specific areas where R&D is critically required.  
They would like to be apprised of the action plan of the Ministry on the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
One of the objectives of NSDF is to identify problems and take up research and 
development studies for providing support to excellence in sports.  However, NSDF has 
not received any proposal for R&D studies in the field of sports. Ministry of Youth Affairs 
& Sports will explore the possibility of conducting such studies by engaging reputed 
research institutions in the field of sports sciences. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 5.14) 
 
Cases of mismanagement in various National Sports Federations (NFSs ), who 
are responsible and accountable for the overall management, direction, control, 
regulation, promotion and development of particular sports disciplines are rampant and 

89 
 
thus a matter of great concern to the Committee.  Though it is a fact that these 
Federations are autonomous yet by virtue of the fact that they receive funds from the 
Government and function for the public, they have been rightly declared by the 
Government as public authorities.  The Committee appreciate the recent initiatives 
taken by the Government in introducing a system of annual recognition of NSFs to bring 
transparency & fairness in their functioning.  The Committee feel that had such a step 
been taken by the Government long back, the current murky situation could have been 
avoided.  The Committee are of the opinion that autonomy should not lead to 
arbitrariness and transparency and accountability in dealings including election of 
members would definitely help the NSFs in gaining respect and admiration among the 
sports community.  T he Committee would further like to underline the pressing need to 
conduct regular auditing of accounts of those NSFs which are being funded by the 
Government by either the C&AG or reputed Chartered Accountants.  The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to take  up the matter with NSFs and also conduct random 
checking of their accounts.  The Committee are also of the view that there should be no 
discrimination by the Government in giving funds to NSFs.  Federation promoting 
indigenous games and performing well co nsistently like Kabaddi, Kho -Kho, Wrestling 
should not face the resource-crunch. 
 
The Committee are perturbed to note the absence of any grievance redressal 
mechanism in the NSFs.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that existence of such 
a mechanism shou ld also be made a criterion for giving recognition and financial 
assistance by the government to any NSF.  Since the matter regarding the tenure of 
members of NSFs is sub judice, the Committee would like to be apprised of the final 
position in this regard.   The Committee would like the Ministry to advise the NSFs to 
include eminent sportspersons in their Boards.  For NSFs involved in women sports 
disciplines like women hockey etc., the Committee would recommend establishing 
some quota for sportswomen in their Boards, as well. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With a view to ensuring financial accountability and for monitoring the utilization 
of funds for the purpose for which are sanctioned, the Ministry insists upon the national 
Sports Federations to follow proper accounting procedures and have their accounts 

90 
 
audited on regular basis which is also a prerequisite for obtaining and maintaining 
recognition with the Ministry. They have to submit timely utilization certificates to the 
Ministry with respect to all the gra nts received by them. Any federation, not submitting 
the UCs in time, is not given any further financial grant. The accounts of the 
Federations receiving financial grant of more than `1 crore are audited by Comptroller 
& Auditor General.  
 
From January, 20 10, a mandatory annual recognition procedure for the NSFs 
has been introduced.   In order to update records of National Sports Federations 
(NSFs), the Government has undertaken an exercise to collect and maintain the 
data/documents with regard to legal, fi nancial, management and operational status of 
NSFs.  NSFs have also been asked to draw the calendar of their activities for the year 
so as to enable players/States units, Association of Indian Universities (AIU) and 
School Games Federation of India to plan their participation and sporting activities. 
  
Only those NSFs, who submit the requisite documents, including financial 
statements, prescribed by the Ministry, are being granted annual recognition 
certificates.   
 
  Most NSFs do not have proper grievance redressal mechanism. Ministry has 
been insisting upon the NSFs for good governance practices. Recently, Ministry had 
declared IOA and all NSFs as public authorities under Right to Information Act, 2005. 
This measure will go a long way in grievance redressa l as the affected parties can 
access information under RTI Act. Further, normally the grievances of the 
sportspersons relate to selection criteria and of conduct of coaching camps etc.  In this 
regard, the Ministry has issued detailed guidelines for more e fficient management of 
coaching camps, selection of coaches, selection of athletes, etc in September 2008.  
 
Separately the Ministry is in the process of enacting the National Sports Law, a 
preliminary draft of which has been published on the website of th e Ministry. The 
proposed National Sports Development Bill contains, inter alia, elaborate suggestions 
for setting up a National Sports Ombudsman and Appellate Authority to provide for 
speedy and effective dispute resolution mechanism in sports through the process of 
arbitration, mediation and conciliation. Ministry has received a number of 

91 
 
suggestions/comments, on  the Preliminary Exposure draft on the proposed National 
Sports Legislation. The Ministry has constituted a Committee on 6.4.2011 under the 
chairmanship of Justice Mukul Mudgal, Retired Chief Justice of the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana, to examine all comments and suggestions received, both from 
sports governance and legal angle, to make specific recommendations on each 
comment/suggestion with s pecific reference to sports administration, sports 
development and welfare of sports persons, to make specific comments on the sports 
arbitration mechanism etc.  
 
Based on the receipt of the report of the Committee, the Ministry will proceed 
further in the  matter for obtaining the approval of the Cabinet for introduction of the 
National Sports Law in Parliament.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 5.15) 
 
National Sports Policy, 2001, envisages that it would be reviewed periodically in 
order to incorporate changes/modifications which may be necessitated by technological 
and other advancements in the field of sports.  Reviewing of existing schemes of 
Ministry and introduction of new schemes is a way of implementing the existing policy 
and does not imply a review of the National Sports Policy as has been interpreted by 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports.  The Committee observe that an attempt was 
made to review this policy and a draft comprehensive National Sports Policy, 2007 was 
prepared.  However, due to opposition from IOA & NSFs the draft was not approved.  
The Committee are of the view that the existing Sports Policy has not been successful 
in generat ing enough enthusiasm about sports in the country so far and thus needs 
certain modifications, particularly in post CWG scenario, for instance, committing to 
establish at least one centre of excellence in sports in every State as per international 
standards and recommending a better convergence and coordination among 
departments handling education and sports etc.  Besides sports quota in education and 
employment should be made more effective.  The Committee further are of the view 
that vested interests have really harmed the country‟s sports scene and thus there is an 
urgent need for establishment of an independent sports arbitration and mediation 
mechanism, as was proposed in draft policy, 2007.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the existin g policy be revised and a Sports Regulatory Body be 

92 
 
established for resolution of disputes arising within or between NSFs or between an 
individual NSF and the players.  Cases of doping and sexual harassment of 
sportspersons should also be brought within it s jurisdiction.  As the government is 
examining the possibility of a new sports law, the Committee would like the Ministry to 
apprise them of the issues the law is likely to address as well as the status of the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With the obj ective of formulating a suitable legal framework for national sports 
development including good governance among sports bodies, the Ministry proposes to 
enact national sports legislation. For this purpose, the Ministry has prepared an 
exposure draft paper on the proposed national sports legislation with a view to invite the 
comments and suggestions and placed the same in the public domain since 22.2.2011, 
on the website of the Ministry. The Draft Legislation has the following broad principles: 
 
(i) Some of the core principles enunciated in the „Basic Universal Principles 
of Good Governance‟ proposed by the International Olympic Committee 
(IOC) and endorsed by the XIII Olympic Congress, which include fair and 
transparent election process; age and tenure limit in respect of office 
bearers; and participation of athletes in decision making process. 
(ii) Best practices in sport governance identified from the legal framework of 
sports obtaining in other countries. 
(iii) Anti-doping regulations compliant with WADA code to be given  legislative 
backing. As a signatory to the UNESCO convention, India has shown 
highest commitment to movement against doping. It is a member of the 
World Anti Doping Agency (WADA) and has constituted its own National 
Anti Doping Agency (NADA) on the lines of WADA.  
(iv) Measures to prevent sexual harassment of women following the 
guidelines enunciated by the Supreme Court in the Vishakha judgement. 
(v) Foolproof guidelines for detection and prevention of age fraud in sports. 
(vi) Effective and speedy resolution of sport -related disputes, including 
redressal of athletes‟ grievances, through conciliation and mediation 
process by appointing a National Sports Ombudsman.  
 

93 
 
A large number of responses have been received in response to the Preliminary 
Exposure draft on the proposed National Sports Legislation. The Ministry has 
constituted a Committee on 6.4.2011 under the chairmanship of Justice Mukul Mudgal, 
Retired Chief Jus tice of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, to examine all 
comments and suggestions received, both from sports governance and legal angle, to 
make specific recommendations on each comment/suggestion with specific reference 
to sports administration, sport s development and welfare of sports persons, to make 
specific comments on the sports arbitration mechanism  etc.  
 
Based on the receipt of the report of the Committee, the Ministry will proceed 
further in the matter for obtaining the approval of the Cabine t for introduction of the 
National Sports Law in Parliament.  
 
As regards establishment of at least one centre of excellence in sports in every 
State as per international standards and recommending a better convergence and 
coordination among departments handling education and sports etc, it is stated that the 
primary responsibility of for promotion and development of sports in the country 
including establishment of centres of excellence is that of States, as „sports‟ is a State 
subject. However, for supplem enting the efforts of the States, the Ministry provides 
assistance under its various schemes. For the purpose of creation of sports 
infrastructure facilities of international standards, which may serve as centres of 
excellence, the States can apply for assistance under the recently approved Scheme of 
Assistance for the creation of Urban Sports Infrastructure.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
21st December, 2011              
Agrahayana 30 ,1933(S) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 
 
  

94 
 
Annexure - I 
 
Details regarding projected/envisaged cost for Commonwealth Games  
to public exchequer 
(` in crores) 
Sl. 
No. 
Estimates Presented Estimated 
Amount 
 
1. Estimate presented before Cabinet on 10,09,2003 based 
on their assessment of IOA 
618 
 
 
2. Estimate projected by IOA in Bid Document in November 
2003 ($ 407.65 million) 
1835 
 
 
3. Estimate presented before Cabinet on 09.04.2007 3566 
 
4. Estimate presented before GOM on 06.08.2007 4352 
 
5. Estimate presented before CCEA on 27.3.2008 6504 
 
6. Estimate presented before Cabinet on 03.10.2008 7862 
 
7. Estimate presented before Cabinet on 04.12.2008 7907 
 
8. Estimate presented before Cabinet on 08.05.2009 9599 
 
9. Final Allocation 11687.25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

95 
 
Annexure - II 
 
The details of the projects undertaken for Commonwealth Games 
 
       (`in crore) 
S.No. Name of Stadium Construction 
Agency 
Initial 
Cost 
Revised 
Cost 
Date of 
completion 
1. Jawaharlal Nehru 
Stadium 
SAI/CPWD 465 961 01.08.2010 
2. Major Dhyan Chand 
National Stadium  
SAI/CPWD 113 262 14.01.2010 
3. Indira Gandhi 
Stadium Complex 
SAI/CPWD 271 669 29.06.2010 
4. Dr. SPM Swimming 
Pool Complex 
SAI/CPWD 145 377 18.07.2010 
5. Dr. Karni singh 
Shooting Rangers 
SAI/CPWD 16 149 31.01.2010 
6. Rugby Main  
Ground  and other 
training venues 
DU 222.27 306.41 11.07.2010 
7. Training Venues and 
JMI 
JMI 33.41 42.57 04.08.2010 
8. R.K.Khanna Tennis 
Stadium 
AITA 30±15% 65.65 11.07.2010 
9. Big Bore Shooting 
Kadarpur 
CRPF/CPWD 15 28.50 10.05.2010 
10. DPS Lawn Bowls CPWD 1.73 1.73 30.04.2010 
11. Delhi Development 
Authority(DDA)--- 
i)Sirifort Sports 
Complex 
ii) Yamuna Sports 
Complex 
iii) Game Village etc. 
DDA 325.00 
±25% 
827.86 31.08.2010 
12. Govt of  National  
Capital  Territory of 
Delhi 
i) Thyagraj Sports 
Complex 
ii) Ludlow Castle Hall  
iii) Chattrasal stadium 
 
GNCTD 416.76 416.76  
 
i) 02.04.2010 
ii)29.01.2010 
iii)09.04.2010 
 
In most of the cases, initially, the targeted dates of completion of the project 
were December, 2009/January, 2010. 
  

96 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
MINUTES OF ELEVENTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-2012) 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 16 th December, 2011 from 1400 hrs. to 1510 
hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das - Convener 
2.  Shri R. Dhruvanarayana  
3.  Shri Ninong Ering  
4.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
5.  Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
6.  Shri S. Semmalai  
7.  Shri M. I. Shanavas 
8.  Shri Ganesh Singh 
9.  Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
10.  Shri Jagadanand Singh 
11.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
12.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
      1.    Shri P. K. Grover  - Additional Secretary 
      2.    Shri S. C. Chaudhary - Director 
      3.    Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Director 
 4.    Smt. Juby Amar  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Convener welcomed the Members to sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration  following Draft Report s for 
consideration and adoption 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
their Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Sports - Policy, Infrastructure and 
Training Facilities‟ pertaining to Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (Department 
of Sports).   

97 
 
(ii) *    *   *   *   *    *   * 
 
4. The Committee adopted the draft Report s at (i)  above with some  modifications 
suggested by the Members of the Committee as per Annexure. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Convener to finalize the Report s in the light 
of modifications suggested as well as other consequential changes arising out of the 
factual verification, if any, by the concerned Ministr ies and present the same to the 
Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned.  
  

98 
 
Annexure  
 
Modification carried out in the Draft Action Taken Report on the Action Taken  
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  
Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 
 ‘Sports - Policy, Infrastructure and Training Facilities’ pertaining to  
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (Department of Sports) 
 
 
1. After Page No. 10:   Para Nos. 1.9, 1.10 and 1 .11 may be added which read as 
under:- 
B.   Need for encouraging rural sports talent by strengthening PYKKA Scheme  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.  4, Para No. 5.4) 
1.9 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
“Indigenous games like Wrestling, Kabaddi, Kho -Kho etc. are extremely popular 
among rural youth.  In this context, the Committee appreciate the efforts of the 
Ministry in launching a new scheme in the year 2007-08 namely Panchayat Yuva 
Krida Aur Khel Abhiya n (PYKKA) for around 2,50,000 village and 6400 block 
Panchayat units in the country.  The Committee observe that with the transfer of 
four centrally sponsored Sports Infrastructure Development Schemes to the 
State sector w.e.f. 1.4.2005, the development of  sports infrastructure had come 
to a standstill due to paucity of funds with the States.  Hence, PYKKA was 
launched in 2007 -08 to enable the State Governments get the requisite Central 
assistance, which will help them in achieving the goal of „broadbasing of sports‟.  
Assistance of `250.77 crore for covering 22854 village Panchayats and 601 
block Panchayats have been stated to be approved under the scheme so far.  
The Committee hope that promising local sports talent available in each 
village/block would be identified and encouraged under the scheme.   
In this connection, the Committee feel that PYKKA is an ambitious 
programme in view of the sheer number of village and block Panchayats in the 
country.  At the same time, the C ommittee are of the view that the current 
amount of  ` 22,000 per annum being given to each village panchayat as Annual 

99 
 
Acquisition and Operational Grants for acquisition of sports equipment, 
accessories, repairs/maintenance and to meet operational expense  is grossly 
insufficient.  The Committee feel that under the current economic scenario in the  
country, it is virtually impossible to do anything concerning sports even at the 
village level with such a meager sum and thus recommend that the same needs 
to be a realistic amount.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should conduct 
a study of the cost factor involved in providing even the most basic sports facility 
in a village and accordingly modify the scheme with revised amount.  The 
Committee hope that t he amount would be increased from next financial year 
onwards. 
As regards, achievement of PYKKA so far, the Committee note from the 
Ministry‟s deposition that the scheme has received good response from State 
Governments.  The Committee, however, observe th at the target of training 
master trainers during the year 2009-10 could not be achieved.  Only 254 master 
trainers could be trained as against a target of 600.  Training of Master trainers 
and kridashrees is of utmost importance for the success of PYKKA.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the State Governments should be asked 
to achieve the target in the best possible manner.  The Committee also desire 
the Government to ensure that village panchayats dominated by SC/ST or other 
backward sections of t he society are adequately covered under PYKKA .  The 
Committee further recommend that a Monitoring Committee with local 
MPs/MLAs as its members may be set up in their constituencies to monitor the 
implementation of PYKKA .  T he Committee are also of the opin ion that the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
could be linked with the same.  As the PYKKA empowers the village/Block 
Panchayats to create basic sports facilities in their area, employment 
opportunities thus emerging coul d be given to the rural workforce.  The 
Committee would urge the Ministry of Sports to consult Ministry of Rural 
Development on the matter and take suitable action”.   
 
 

100 
 
1.10 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports in their action taken reply stated as 
follows: 
“Scheme of Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA), introduced from 
2008-09, has been received well in the States/UTs.  For the last three years and 
upto 31.3.2011 since PYKKA Scheme was launched in 2008 -09,  `572.00 crore 
had been released to States/UTs for development of sports infrastructure in 
village/block panchayats and for conduct of annual competitions in block, district, 
state and national level. PYKKA Scheme in respect of sports infrastructure is 
being implemented in 28 States and 3 UT s.  Efforts are being made to cover 
under the scheme the UTs of Chandigarh, NCT of Delhi, Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
and Daman & Diu. 
Details about number of Village/block panchayats approved and financial 
assistance released to States/UTs upto 31.3.2011 are given as under: 
(a) Number of village Panchayats approved    - 47,058 
(b) Number of block panchayats approved  -   1,417 
(c)  Total Grant-in-aid released    - `449.00 crore 
(d) Number of States participated in the PYKKA competitions increased from 
8 in the year 2008-09 to 26 in 2009-10. 
(e) Total amount released to States during 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 for 
conduct of annual sports competitions at block, district, state and national 
levels is `8.15 crore, 30 crore and `84.85 crore respectively.  
(f) Total number of participants in PYKKA competitions held at all levels in 
2009-10 was 22.50 lakh including 8.75 lakh women participants as 
against 7.22 lakh participants in 2008-09. 
Regarding identification of sports talent in village/block panchayats, it is 
stated that main objective of PYKKA Scheme is mass participation of rural youth 
in sports.  However, annual competitions being held under PYKKA at various 
levels provide a huge base for identification and nurturing of sports talent by SAI 
and State Governments for nurturing them under their respective schemes.   

101 
 
Recommendation of the Committee with regard to enhancement in the 
amount of annual acquisition and annual operation grants would be kept in view 
at the time of conducting the review in consultation with Planning Commission 
and Ministry of Finance for continuance of the scheme in the XII Five Year Plan.  
The training of Master Trainers was introduced in the second half of 2009-
10 after setting up of PYKKA Resource Centre in November, 2009 at LNUPE, 
Gwalior (MP), as a capacity building measures.  Around 557 Master Trainers 
were trained which is close to the annual target of 600.  In the subsequent years, 
target of training of 600 Master Trainers annually would be achieved. 
The scheme already provides 10% annual coverage of village/block 
panchayats in the normal States and 20% coverage in the case of North Eastern 
States and special category States.  This automatically takes care of the 
village/block panchayats dominated by SCs/STs and other backward sections of 
the society. 
The States/UTs have already been advised to associate Members of 
Parliaments in the district level PYKKA Executive Committee.  Most of the States 
have reported that notifications have been issued in this regard.  The remaining 
States have been reminded to expedite the same. 
The matter regarding availing of funds under Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) scheme for leveling of playfield 
land already been taken up with the Ministry of Rural Development.  Further, 
States/UTs were also advised to avail the benefit admissible under MGNREGA 
scheme for development of playfields.  So me of the States had confirmed that 
they were availing the benefit of MGNREGA scheme for leveling of playfields, 
construction of boundary wall/fencing etc”. 
1.11  From the action taken reply submitted by the Ministry, the Committee note 
that the Scheme of Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) , which was 
introduced from 2008 -2009, has been received well in States/UTs and a total 
number of 47,058 village pachayats have been approved to receive grants under 
the scheme.    Main objective of PYKKA scheme  is broad basing i.e. mass 

102 
 
participation of rural youth in sports.  However, the Committee feel that there is 
still scope to identify and nurture promising young sportspersons from the 
villages/semi-urban areas particularly from the Eastern and North-Eastern States.     
The Committee, therefore, opine that for PYKKA to succeed in its objective, there 
is a need for transparent and robust infrastructure for the selection of rural 
sportspersons to harness the ir hitherto unknown talent and potential.  There are 
District Spo rts Officers (DSOs) in each district to conduct various sports and 
youth oriented scheme/programme s. In view of the fact that DSOs work at the 
grassroot level, the Committee feel that the role of DSO ca n be expanded further.  
The Committee suggest that region -wise sports talent search programmes can 
be conducted in the East, West, North, South and Central Regions of the country 
under PYKKA by the Sports Authority of India, with active involvement of DSOs . 
This would also lessen the impact of mismanagement rampant in various Sports 
Federations, due to which many promising sportspersons fail to come to the 
fore. 
 The Committee further suggest that wherever possible, a database of rura l 
sportspersons’ detail s and  their performances in PYKKA games , should be 
created, so as to help Selection Committees take informed decision s. The 
Committee also suggest that the DSO should be entrusted with creating 
awareness about the rural sports programmes/schemes in the vil lages too.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry may re -examine the PYKKA scheme in 
the light of their above suggestions.   
 
 
 

103 
 
APPENDIX – II 
 
(vide introduction to Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i)  Total number of recommendations/observations    16  
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been  
 accepted by the Government: 
(Sl. Nos. 2,4,5,7,13 – Total 5) 
 
Percentage              31.25% 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s reply: 
(Sl. No. 9 – Total 1) 
 
Percentage              6.25% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
Government‟s replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(Sl. Nos. 1,6,8,10,12,16 – Total 6) 
 
Percentage              37.50% 
      
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
final replies of Government are still awaited: 
(Sl. Nos. 3,11, 14, 15 – Total 4) 
 
Percentage              25.00% 
 
 