 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
NATIONAL FILM ARCHIVE OF INDIA (NFAI) 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
_______ ______________________________________ 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
      
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
NATIONAL FILM ARCHIVE OF INDIA (NFAI) 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2013-2014) 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
______________________________________ 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 30 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING  
NATIONAL FILM ARCHIVE OF INDIA (NFAI)  
______________________________________  

 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
MINISTRY OF 
NATIONAL FILM ARCHIVE OF INDIA (NFAI) 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, 
                       Presented to Lok Sabha on 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
    19 December, 2013/ 
________________________________________________________ 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
NATIONAL FILM ARCHIVE OF INDIA (NFAI) 
_______ 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 04 January, 2014 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  05 February, 2014 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/ 28 Agrahayana, 1935(S) 
________________________________________________________ 
INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING  
NATIONAL FILM ARCHIVE OF INDIA (NFAI)  
Lok Sabha on 04 January, 2014  
05 February, 2014  
Agrahayana, 1935(S)  
________________________________________________________  

 
 
CONTENTS  
PART-I 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 Page No.  
CHAPTER  I INTRODUCTORY                                                                       1-4 
   
CHAPTER  II  ACQUISITION  5-9 
 (i)  Acquisition of Archival Films and Film Materia l 5-7 
 (ii)  Film Collection 7-9 
   
CHAPTER  III  PRESERVATION  10-14 
 (i)       Digitization and Restoration 10-11 
 (ii)      Storage Facillity - Film Vaults 11-12 
 (iii)      Infrastructure for Preservation 12-14 
   
CHAPTER IV  RESEARCH, DOC UMENTATION AND DISSEMINATION OF 
FILM CULTURE 
15-21 
 (i)       Research and Documentation 15-16 
 (ii)      Dissemination of Film Culture 16-17 
 (iii)     National Film Heritage Mission (NFHM) 17- 21 
   
CHAPTER  V PROBLEMS FACED BY NFAI  22-26 
 (i)     Limited Funding and Need for a Nation Film Preservation  
and Restoration Policy 
22 
 (ii)      Shortage of Manpower  22-23 
 (iii)     Inadequate Equipment and Facility 23-25 
 (iv)     Lack of Interest and Awareness 25 
  
 
 
 
PART - II   
 OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE  26 -29  
 
 APPENDIX   
Appendix - I Staff Strength of NFAI, Pune 30 
   
ANNEXURE 
 
              I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 01.08.2013 31-33 
  II  Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 18.12.2013 34-35 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14) 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
4 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
5 Shri Khagen Das 
6 Shri Pralhad Joshi 
7 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
8 Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
11 Kum. Meenakshi Natrajan 
12 Shri Prabodh Panda 
13 Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu ” 
14 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
15 Shri R. Sambasiva Rao 
16 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
17 VACANT 
18 Shri S. Semmalai 
19 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
20 Shri M.I. Shanavas 
21 Shri Adhi Sankar  
22 Shri Rajiv Ranjan (Lalan) Singh 
23 Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
24 Shri Ganesh Singh 
25 Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
26 Shri Jagada Nand Singh 
27 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
28 Smt. Annu Tandon 
29 Shri Mukul Wasnik 
30 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.        Shri A. Louis Martin    -         Joint Secretary   
 2.        Smt. Anita B. Panda            -        Director  
 3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar   - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri L. Shantikumar Singh   - Committee Assista nt    
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2013-14 ) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, pr esent this Thirtieth Report on 'National Film 
Archive of India (NFAI)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting on 1 August, 2013. 
3. The Report on the subject was considered and ado pted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 18 December, 2013. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, who appeared before them and placed their considered views on 
the subject. The Committee also wish to thank them for furnishing the information required in 
connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
19 December, 2013              
Agrahayana 28,1935(Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
PART - I 
Background Analysis 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY  
 
Background 
 
 Today, the Indian Film Industry has a distinction of being one of the oldest and 
the most prolific, producing the highest number of films in the world, numbering almost a 
thousand per year. These films are a significant re cord of our culture and heritage and 
its evolution over time, across generations. Preser ving film as an art and historical 
document has been recognized all over the world as an important effort to rescue 
decaying film stock so as to assure that a film wil l continue to exist as close as to its 
original form. As per the Ministry of Information a nd Broadcasting (MoIB), the task of 
preserving cinema in all its varied expressions and  forms is best entrusted to a national 
organization having adequate resources, a permanent  set-up and the confidence of the 
film industry.  
 
1.2 The National Film Archive of India (NFAI), esta blished in 1964, is the outcome of 
the Government’s realization that films are as valu able as books and other historical 
documents and to ensure that the country’s film her itage is preserved for posterity. It is 
the only media unit of the MoIB which is engaged in  the task of preserving the rich 
cinematographic heritage of the nation. 
 
  
The Existing Scenario  
1.3 India has been a film producing country for alm ost 100 years. In the year 1913, 
Dada Saheb Phalke made the first Indian feature fil m, Raja Harishchandra . However, 
according to the MoIB, no substantial efforts to co nserve our filmic heritage have been 
made in consonance with the volume of production. I t is evident from the fact that out of 
the 1000 films produced in the country during the S ilent Era, less than 20 films are 
available now. Similarly, many valuable films of th e Sound Era, including Alam Ara 
(1931) , the first talkie made in India, have been lost fore ver. Countless number of 

 
 
valuable items like screenplays, posters, stills, c ostumes, properties and vintage 
equipment have also been damaged or completely lost during the past decades. 
 
1.4 The Committee were informed in a presentation m ade to the them on 1 
st August, 
2013 that NFAI houses 9000 movies and availability and condition of the rest of 34000 
movies is unknown.  
 
1.5 Realizing that significant damage has been done to a vast number of Classic 
films, due to negligence and faulty technique of st oring them, the Government felt the 
need to preserve the films of both the silent and s ound era for posterity and for their 
significance as moving image history.  
 
1.6 According to the MoIB, NFAI has collected aroun d 9000 films, 2 lakh 
posters/stills/photographs, 37,785 scripts and othe r items like song books. Besides, it 
has initiated digitization and restoration under th e Plan Scheme “Acquisition and 
exhibition of archival films”. During the year 2012 -13, it had acquired 36 films, 455 
Books, 1134 scripts, 1549 stills, 1047 wall-posters, 92 song booklets, 34 pamphlets and 
481 DVDs and also released DVDs of three silent fil ms with music.  Though NFAI 
regularly collects such materials for preservation,  the vast majority still remains 
untouched in private collections, which has not bee n surveyed, catalogued, conserved, 
preserved, digitized and commercially exploited. Mo reover, hardly any studies or 
research has been conducted based on these collections. 
 
 
Organizational Set-up  
1.7 With its headquarters at Pune, NFAI has three regio nal offices located at 
Bengaluru, Kolkata and Thiruvananthapuram. These re gional offices are primarily 
engaged in the task of diffusing film culture in th e respective areas through film 
societies, educational institutions and cultural or ganizations. The functioning of these 
regional offices is administered by a Director with  the help of Deputy Director-cum- 
Curator who heads the technical and administrative wings at the headquarters. 
Presently, the staff strength of NFAI inclusive of its three Regional offices is 49 (26 
posts under the Administrative Wing and 23 under the Technical Wing).  
 

 
 
Objectives of NFAI  
1.8 According to the MoIB, NFAI was mainly establis hed to attain the following goals 
and objectives:  
 (i) to trace, acquire and preserve for the use of posterity the heritage of 
national cinema and a representative collection of world cinema. 
 (ii) to classify and document data related to film  and undertake and 
encourage research on cinema.  
 (iii) to act as a centre for the dissemination of film culture in the country, and 
to promote Indian cinema abroad.  
 
Functions of NFAI 
 
1.9 As per the MoIB, NFAI is mandated to carry out the following functions:  
       (i)  Acquisition and preservation of Indian and International film classics, 
books, journals and other ancillary material relating to Cinema.  
 (ii) Classification and documentation of the mater ial acquired.  
 (iii)  Publication of books/pamphlets/monographs/f ilmographies/programme 
notes on cinema.  
 (iv)    Conducting periodical courses, seminars, l ectures on Film Appreciation/ 
teacher training workshops for the spread of film c ulture among university 
students and general public.  
 (v)  Building up an oral history of Indian Cinema by interviewing eminent film 
personalities and others concerned with the development of Cinema in the 
country and recoding their interviews on audio and videotapes.  
 (vi)  Servicing film training institutions in the country with a regular supply of 
film classics and ancillary material required for their academic use.   
 (vii)  Instituting fellowships/ study grants for e ncouraging film scholarship.  
 (viii)  Circulation of film classics to film socie ties/film clubs/educational 
institutions for non-commercial study, screenings t hrough the Archive 
Distribution Library at Pune and the respective Regional Offices.  
 (ix) Extending facilities to filmmakers, research scholars and students of 
Cinema for preview/study of rare films in the Archi ve collection within the 
premises.  
       (x)  Providing guidance and advisory service  to individuals and organizations 
interested in film research and film study activities.  

 
 
 (xi) Preserving the heritage of national cinema fo r the sake of posterity and 
extending service to filmmakers, distributors, etc.  for repair of old 
negatives or video copying and preparing compilation films, using extracts, 
clips from archival material for academic use.  
 
1.10 According to the MoIB, despite being the sole organization to undertake the task 
of film acquisition, preservation, restoration and digitization, NFAI has been plagued 
with certain issues regarding organizational, admin istrative and financial matters like 
shortage of manpower, shortage of funds, lack of eq uipment and infrastructure for 
proper storing and preserving films.  
1.11 As regards a policy on the matter, according t o the MoIB, NFAI has got only Film 
Acquisition Policy made on 9 
th  January, 1981 but there is no policy on preservati on and 
restoration of films. Besides, the rate of restorat ion and digitization of films is not 
proportionate to the number of films acquired by NF AI for archival purposes. As per the 
MoIB, due to shortage of funding, there is constrai nt in carrying out the restoration and 
digitization work of the acquired films in time. Th is has led to deterioration in the 
condition of a number of films and has almost led to the point of destruction forever.  
1.12   According to MoIB, there is no legal compuls ion on the part of the filmmakers or 
the whole film fraternity to contribute and preserv e their films for posterity. The lack of 
awareness of the significance of film preservation and lack of interest among the film 
fraternity is one of the important factors leading to loss of many a classic, of both the 
silent and sound era, especially those films made before 1955, forever.  
1.13 In the light of the above, the subject 'Nation al Film Archive of India (NFAI)' was 
taken up by the Committee on Estimates for detailed  examination and report to Lok 
Sabha. Based on consolidated written and oral infor mation, the Committee examined 
the subject in detail and identified certain critic al issues, as enumerated in the 
succeeding Chapters of this Report. 

 
 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION 
  
 
 According to the MoIB, NFAI has been entrusted wit h the primary task of 
acquiring and preserving the heritage of India Cine ma. The Archive has also got a 
secondary objective of acting as a centre of diffus ion of a healthy film culture in the 
country and to promote research on various aspects of cinema. It is not only the largest 
repository of India cinema but is also considered t o be the best resource centre for 
cinema in India attracting researchers and scholars from within the country and abroad. 
 
(i)  Acquisition of Archival Films and Film Materia l    
2.2 The details of physical performance for the sch eme of Acquisition of Archival 
Films and Film Material in 11 
th  plan period are as under: 
Number of films acquired during the 11 th  Five Year Plan  
                                                                                   (in Numbers)                                                                                                                     
Year  Target  Fresh  
films  
Duplicate  
prints  
 
Films Received  
as Free Deposits  
Total  
 
 
      
2007-08  250  48  88  237  373  
2008-09  250  66  52  365  483  
2009-10  300  22  36  447  505  
2010 -11  300  15  22  86  123  
2011-12  100  84  20  387  491  
Total  1200  235  218  1522  1975  
 
 
2.3 From the above data, it can be seen that during  the 11 th  Plan period (2007-12), 
as against the target of acquiring 1200 films, only  453 were acquired, though 1522 films 
were received as free deposits.  
 
2.4 In the digitization of films, the achievement f ell short of targets during the 11 
th  
Plan period as indicated in the Table below: 
 
 

 
 
Year Number of films Digitized  Number of films Restored  
 Target  Achievement  Target  Achievement  
2007-08  nil nil nil nil 
2008-09  80 nil nil nil 
2009-10  150 148 50 48 
2010-11  300 245 100 152 
2011-12  100 173 50 129 
Total  630  566  200  329  
            2012-13 -Nil-                 -Nil-                   -Nil-                  -Nil- 
 
2.5 As for the reasons for showing nil for both dig itization and restoration targets for 
the year 2007-08 and 2008-09, the MoIB has stated t hat in first two years digitization 
and restoration work could not be taken up due to d elay in receipt of Delegation of 
Financial Powers in this regard to Director, NFAI, Pune. Delegation of Powers was 
received on 17 
th  November, 2008. Subsequently, the Government forma lities were 
completed to award the work of digitization and restoration of films.  
 
2.6 When asked to explain further the reasons for N FAI not being able to complete 
work targeted during the 11 
th  Plan period, the Committee have been informed as under: 
 "The acquisition of films and ancillary material i s a continuing ongoing process 
 which is done subject to availability of funds. It  is mentioned that film are made 
 every year and related ancillary material are also  constantly being created. Thus, 
 the left over material of the previous years or ev en previous decades including 
 fresh films and ancillary material needs to be acq uired in the coming years if not 
 already done. NFAI is always on the lookout of acq uisition of unique, rare and 
 classic films and related ancillary material to en rich its archival collection which 
 an ongoing process at the archive." 
 
 
2.7  The Table below shows the Year-wise 11 
th  Plan Budget Allocation and Actual 
Expenditure during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12: 
                                                                                           
                                                                                             
(` (` (` (`  in lakh)                                                                     
Name of Plan 
Scheme  
Year  S.B.G. * R.E.  Final  
Grant  
Actual  
Expenditure  
 
Acquisition and 
Exhibition of 
Archival films.  
 
 
 
 2007-08 
 
101.00  
 
101.00  
 
90.00  
 
89.92  
 2008-09 
 
300.00 
 300.00  177.10  176.23  
 2009-10 
 
400.00 
 700.00  700.00  699.88  
 2010-11 
 
500.00 
 890.00  999.00  998.64  

 
 
 2011-12 
 
2000.00 
 2000.00  1907.00  1906.52  
 
                               Total  
 
3301.00  
 
3991.00  
 
3873.10  
 
3871.19  
       * Special Budget Grants 
  
2.8 As per the MoIB, the total SBG allocation was ` 3301.00 lakh and NFAI received 
Final Grant allocation to the extent of ` 3873.10 lakh during the 11 
th  Plan period. 
According to the MoIB, as far as financial performa nce of the 11 th  Plan period is 
concerned, the shortfall in the actual expenditure is marginal.  
 
2.9 Details of physical performance of the Scheme d uring the current 12 th  Plan 
period (2012-13, 2013-14 upto 30.06.2013) are as under: 
                                                                                                              (in Numbers)  
Year            Target  
 
 
 
Achieve- 
ments 
 
Achieve- 
ments 
 
 
Films 
Received 
as Free 
Deposits  
Total  
 
 
Fresh 
films 
Duplicate 
prints 
 
 Fresh  Internegative      
2012-13 50 15 32 04 156 192  
   2013-14 
(upto  
30.6.2013) 
 
50 15 18 04 17 39  
          Internagative-Nil.  
 
 
(ii) Film Collection 
 
2.10 As per the MoIB, one of the main functions of NFAI is collection/acquisition of 
films of both national and international. With annu al production of films in India 
amounting to almost 1000 feature films and equally large number of short films, news 
reels and documentaries, the NFAI is compelled to be selective in its acquisition.  
2.11 On being enquired about the criteria/norms ado pted by NFAI for selecting films 
for archiving, the MoIB has stated as under: 
 “… the main criteria for acquisition policy framed  by NFAI’s Advisory Committee 
vide Secretary, I&B letter No. 135/Secy/I&B/81 date d 9 
th  January 1981 is as 
below: 

 
 
 i.  Nitrate period films  
Archive should acquire all available Indian Films o f the pre-1955 period. This 
is in view of the fact that a large number of films  made in this country before 
1955 being on highly inflammable nitrate base, have  already been destroyed 
and are no longer available. As such the Advisory C ommittee felt that there is 
no point in making a selection from a very few left over films of this period. 
 
ii.  Post-1955 period films  
 As regards post-1955 period, the said Committee re commended the following 
criteria to be kept in view for archival acquisition of films: 
• Films which are awarded prizes and Certificates of  Merit in the State 
Awards for Films in India and in the International Film Festivals. 
• All National Award winning films under various cat egories including 
technical award and other citations. 
• Films shown in International Film Festivals and In dian Panorama 
section of International Film Festivals held in India. 
• All films financed by National Film Development Corporation (NFDC). 
• Films depicting National Freedom Struggle. 
• Selected children films produced by the Children's Film Society of India 
(CFSI) as well as various State Governments and private agencies. 
• Selected student films made by Film and Television  Institute of India 
(FTII) and other centers.  
• Films which may be considered as landmarks in the development of 
cinematic arts and sciences. 
• Selected record films of historical importance and  national 
development in the spheres of art, culture, technology etc.  
• Any films whose loss might be regretted in the fut ure, for any reasons 
whatsoever.  
Also, under the Indian Cinematograph Act, 1952 cens ored portions of all films 
exhibited in India are deposited with the Archive b y the Central Board of Film 
Certification (CBFC).”  
 
2.12 On being asked the reasons for not being able to save some of the pioneering 
films of both silent and sound eras such as Alam Ara  (1931) , the MoIB has stated that 
film producers make films only for mass consumption  and not for any historical record 
and it has been a major factor for the very poor re presentation of early Indian Cinema in 

 
 
the Archive Collection. Elaborating further, the MoIB has informed that by the time NFAI 
started collecting films in an organized way (after  inception of the Archive in 1964), it 
was found that nearly 62-70 percent of the films pr oduced in the country were no longer 
available, their negatives having crumbled, distort ed and turned into powder, one 
significant example being the case of Alam Ara , the first Indian talkie, which is still not 
traceable.  
2.13 On the same issue, the Committee have also bee n apprised that the idea to have 
a repository of important films produced in the cou ntry was mooted way back in 1954 
when the State Awards (now known as National Awards ) were instituted. The proposal 
then was limited to keeping record of award winning  films only. But, later on, in keeping 
with the international practice, all significant fi lms were preserved and brought into the 
ambit of the Archive. However, there is ambivalence  regarding the historical importance 
of films meant for public entertainment. In fact, t his is the common doubt being faced by 
film archivists all over the world.  
2.14 During the course of oral evidence, the Commit tee were informed that as on 
December, 2012, approximately 13000 prints of India n as well as foreign films have 
been collected by NFAI.  
 
2.15 Among the NFAI's film collection are treasures  of Dadasaheb Phalke and 
Baburao Painter, as well as the silent films of Him anshu Rai and Franz Osten. A 
number of films of the film companies and studios o f the 1930 and 1940 such as 
Prabhat Film Company, New Theatres, Bombay Talkies,  Shri Bharat Laxmi Pictures, 
Minerva Movietone, Wadia Movietone, Gemini Vijaya V ahini and others are a part of 
NFAI collection. Excellent prints of major works of  the authors of new Indian Cinema 
such as Satyajit Ray, Mrinal Sen, Ritwik Ghatak, Adoor Gopalkrishnan, Shyam Benegal, 
Mani Kaul, G. Aravindam, Kumar Shahani and others h ave also been preserved by 
NFAI.  
  

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
PRESERVATION  
 
                                                
 
 NFAI is a full-time member of International Federa tion of Film Archives (FIAF) 
since 1969. It received international aid through UNESCO because of FIAF membership 
by way of specialized equipment and technical exper tise. The aid provided is as given 
below: 
(i) NFAI got Film Conditioning Apparatus (FICA) (Sw edish make) in 1984 as 
a UNESCO donation in recognition of the role played  by NFAI in 
safeguarding India’s moving image heritage. Couple of viewing machines 
of German and Russian make was also received as gif t from UNESCO in 
1980’s. 
 (ii) NFAI could organize the first Asian Seminar o n developing film Archives in 
February 1984 in Pune with UNESCO’s assistance invo lving a large 
number of film archives in Asia and other FIAF representatives.  
 (iii) NFAI is also receiving quite a lot of print material like quarterly journal of 
film preservation directly from FIAF headquarters at Brussels (Belgium). In 
addition to this, international member archives are  sending their 
publication/information brochures on complimentary basis. This is very 
useful for the preservation section.  
 
3.2 The Committee have also been informed that bein g a member of FIAF, a number 
of senior officers of NFAI attended various trainin g programmes on film archiving, 
archival practices and restoration of films in vari ous film archives. For instance, in 2012 
during June-July, Film Preservation Officer attende d the FIAF summer school on 
Restoration of Films in Italy. The MoIB has also ap prised the Committee that NFAI has 
also received technical knowhow on preservation/res toration/storage during the last 5 
years from FIAF and these have been suitably implemented.  
 
 (i) Digitization and Restoration 
 
3.3 Digitization is the process of converting the f ilm format into a digital format for 
easy access and duplication and to save film reel f rom total decay. During the course of 
oral evidence, the MoIB informed the Committee that  it is not possible to correct the 

 
 
existing damages on the film reel using the process  of digitization. Digital restoration is 
an extension of digitization process wherein the di gitized film content which has 
scratches and other image damages are corrected by using special software. The core 
idea is to restore the film to its original level, without scratches and image damage. 
 
3.4 In this regard, the Committee have also been in formed that all types of films are 
composed of chemicals, which, if not stored in idea l conditions, are subjected to decay. 
A further toll is taken by poor storage leading to the decomposition due to mold and 
fungi, and poor handling resulting in dirt, scratch es, tears and other physical damage. 
When further enquired about the reasons for the fas t deteriorating condition of the films 
collected by NFAI, the MoIB informed the Committee as under: 
 (i)  In most of the cases, conditions of the films  were not good at the time of 
their entry into NFAI 
 
 (ii)  Vaults with controlled temperature and humid ity were installed and made 
operational only in the year 1991 
 
 (iii)  Excessive use of the film material for scre ening over the years, and 
 
 (iv)  Lack of manpower with the technical knowledg e in film preservation and 
archiving. 
 
3.5 As far as resolving the above mentioned problem s, the MoIB has informed the 
Committee that the practical solution to counter fi lm deterioration is to convert and 
archive information stored on film and magnetic med ia to digital formats as this has 
revolutionized restoration of films by enabling to significantly repair damage and deliver 
versions, that are visually appealing and close to their state of initial release. 
 
3.6 NFAI has also digitized ancillary material like  posters, photographs, song 
booklets, etc. and those are being preserved throug h preservation. The original 
material, however, needs further treatment like de- acidification and cleaning and 
support of banana fibre paper to increase its shelf life.  
 
(ii) Storage Facility - Film Vaults 
 
3.7 NFAI follows the preservation methods laid down  by FIAF. Presently, the film 
storage vaults with NFAI have a capacity to store a bout 3,00,000 reels in a controlled 

 
 
environment. As on date, 1,50,000 reels are kept in  the vaults and same number of 
more reels can be accommodated. The Committee were informed that the Black and 
White films are stored in three vaults with tempera ture of about 15 oC and relative 
humidity of 50 percent and Colour films are kept in the 16 specialized vaults constructed 
at Phase-II about 3 km away from Pune headquarters of NFAI maintaining condition of 
2 oC temperature and 25 percent of relative humidity. The Committee have also been 
informed that these vaults are also nearly full with films. 
 
(iii) Infrastructure for Preservation 
 
3.8  NFAI has been performing the important task of pres erving the film heritage of 
the country since its inception in 1964. As per the  MoIB, over the years, the number of 
archival material has increased and thus, the respo nsibility of the NFAI has also 
increased manifold. Therefore, constant upgradation  of the existing infrastructure of 
NFAI is required, so that it is fully equipped to t ake on not only the future requirement 
but also adapt itself to latest technology available in the field. 
 
 
3.9 According to the MoIB, the Scheme envisages the  following two major 
activities/components under the scheme:  
(a) Upgradation of infrastructure of NFAI 
 
(b)  Development of Jayakar Bungalow, a heritage buildin g within  the 
NFAI complex into a digital library.  
           
                  
       (a)      Upgradation of infrastructure of NFAI  
          
3.10 According to the information furnished by the MoIB, the NFAI's Phase-I building, 
which also houses the Phase-I vaults, needs upgrada tion. The scheme envisages 
number of works like replacement of air-conditionin g system for the old vaults, 
auditorium and replacement of diesel generator, fir e fighting system, etc. at Phase-I 
building. All the three vaults of Phase-I have a to tal area of 657 sq.m (approx. 7100 
sq.ft.). These vaults are already in use and films are already kept in these vaults. Air-
conditioning system and plant have now become 20 ye ars old and for maintenance 
purposes, spare parts are not available. Moreover, the electricity consumption by these 
outdated air conditioners is also very high. The re quired temperature and relative 

 
 
humidity are not maintainable due to old and outdat ed air-conditioning system. After 
upgradation/renovation of these vaults, they can be  utilized to its full capacity. This 
space will partly be available for the films, which  will be digitized under the new plan 
scheme "National Film Heritage Mission". As such, i t is necessary to keep the vaults in 
use for better management for the preservation of f ilms as well as future acquisition 
purpose .  
 
3.11 As per the MoIB, taking into consideration the  importance of the NFAI, the 
Government of India allocated ` 10 crore in the 10 
th  Plan towards construction of 
Phase-II building with a state-of-the-art facility for preservation of colour films. It was 
commissioned in January, 2008 and films of NFAI, Na tional Film Development 
Corporation (NFDC), Films Division, Children's Film  Society of India (CFSI), Film and 
Television Institute of India (FTII) have been stor ed in these specialized colour film 
vaults. The new vaults (16 nos.) that were commissioned in Phase-II building are almost 
full with the films. All the films pertaining to Fi lms Division, NFDC, CFSI and FTII are 
also kept in these 16 new vaults.  
 
3.12 The MoIB has further informed the Committee th at the sound system in the 
existing NFAI theatres at Phase-I is poor and non-effective and has become irreparable. 
Due to non-availability of Dolby system, producers/ filmmakers cannot organize their 
special screenings at the existing NFAI theatre whi ch is 20 years old and needs to be 
replaced with Dolby sound system. Moreover, the pro jection system also needs to be 
upgraded with the latest projection system. Securit y fencing is required to be 
constructed around the Phase-II building and the ex isting security fencing at slum 
dweller side is to be strengthened. Cement concrete  internal roads are required to be 
constructed at   Phase-II premises.  
 
        (b) Development of Jayakar Bungalow, a heri tage building within 
 
the NFAI complex into a digital library 
  
3.13 As per the MoIB, Jayakar Bungalow is required to be preserved as this building is 
historically important and holds the interest of film researchers and film buffs/cinegoers.  
 

 
 
3.14 While preserving the building, it is proposed to utilize this building by setting up 
digital screening/video library and would involve p reservation of the building and setting 
up of computer server, computer terminals, LAN, sto rage and other hardware/software 
required for setting up a digital library. 
 
3.15 For the plan scheme, an amount of ` 19 crore has been allocated. According to 
the MoIB, Budget allocation for the scheme "Upgrada tion of Infrastructure of NFAI 
including Jayakar Bungalow and setting up of Digital Library will be as under: 
 
Sl.  
No. 
 
Name of  Scheme  
Approved  
Outlay  
(2012-17)  
2012 -13  2013 -14  2014 -15  2015 -16  2016 -17  
 
1 
 
Upgradation of  
infrastructure  
of NFAI including 
Jayakar Bungalow 
and setting up of 
digital library.  
 
 
 
 
 
   19.00 
 
 
 
 
 
     ---- 
 
 
 
 
 
    3.00 
 
 
 
 
 
     8.00 
 
 
 
 
 
     8.00 
 
 
 
 
 
    ----- 
 
 
2.16 The work is scheduled to be completed on 31.03 .2016. Latest status of the 
scheme as provided to the Committee on 16.06.2013 w as that Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) of the scheme has been approved. 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RESEARCH, DOCUMENTATION AND DISSEMINATION OF FILM CULTURE 
 
Research and Documentation  
 
 NFAI is well-equipped to promote research on India n Cinema by awarding 
research fellowships, monographs and audio visual p rojects. In an effort to encourage 
research on Cinema, NFAI invites applications for r esearch fellowships, monographs 
and audio-visual history projects . NFAI encourages and promotes research and 
academic activities on every aspect of cinema espec ially in the area of Indian film 
history. Monographs on eminent Indian filmmakers, r esearch fellowships on themes 
related to Indian Cinema, oral history recordings o f senior artists and technicians are 
being assigned to interested individuals/researchers from time to time.  
4.2 According to the MoIB, 9 monographs have been p ublished so far out of 23 
completed monographs and research projects. Besides , NFAI has acquired a large 
number of foreign films through purchase or exchang e from other activities for study 
purposes. 
4.3 It is observed from the information furnished b y the MoIB that during the last 10 
years (2003-13), the number of research fellowships  awarded was 7 and there was 
publication of 2 monographs and 10 other titles, as  well as 14 recording projects (oral 
history and audio-visual history).  
 
4.4 As per the MoIB, NFAI has reportedly proposed f or award of research fellowship, 
monographs, audio-visual project in the 12 
th  Plan period which has commenced from 
01.04.2012. However, delegation of financial powers  to Director, NFAI with enhanced 
rates is awaited. The details of fellowship grants given during 2008-09 to 2012-13 are 
given below: 
Year  ` (in lakh)  
2008-09 1.46 
2009 -10  --  
2010 -11  0.13  
2011 -12  --  

 
 
2012 -13  --  
                                                                                                           
4.5 The MoIB has informed that films are also loane d to the FTII for its academic 
programme. Distribution libraries at Pune provide f ilms to various organizations. Its 
distribution library has about 30 active members th roughout the country. For more than 
two decades, the NFAI has also been conducting an a nnual Film Appreciation course of 
four weeks duration in collaboration with FTII. The  major topics taught include the 
basics of the film medium, cinema as an art, film h istory, film theory and the relationship 
of cinema to other arts. 
 
4.6 When asked about the reasons for lack of signif icant number of research works 
on India cinema, the MoIB has stated as under: 
“The subject of “film studies” in India is not give n much importance in Indian 
Universities. Only handful of universities like the  Jadavpur University, Jawaharlal 
Nehru University, Jamia Milia Islamia University of fer research work on cinema 
with low grants. This is one of the reasons which c ontributes to insignificant 
research work on Indian Cinema.”  
 
Dissemination of Film Culture  
 
4.7 According to the MoIB, NFAI has three theatres and festivals/programmes are 
organized throughout the year. NFAI is making its presence felt through lending films for 
various film festivals within and outside the country.  
 
4.8 For instance, in order to commemorate Centenary  of India Cinema in the year 
2013, NFAI participated in various events some of which inter-alia  include: 
 (i) First Centenary Film Festival at state capital s was held at Puducherry by 
 DFF, NFAI in collaborated with the Government of P uducherry. 
 (ii) NFAI released a DVD of three silent films on 31.08.2012 with specially 
 composed music of the two surviving reels of Raja Harishchandra , DG 
 Phalke's masterpiece Kalia Mardan , and a comedy Jamai Babu  by 
 Kalipada Das which is the only Bengali Silent film .  
 (iii)  A special programme "Towards Centenary of I ndia Cinema" organized by 
NFAI, FTII and Ashay Film Club showcasing the films  and biopics on the 

 
 
eminent Phalke Award winning personalities whas hel d on every 2 nd  and 
4th  Monday of the month for eight months duration. 
 (iv) NFAI presented a special package of 13 landma rk films as a part of 
 Cinema Centenary package at the International Film  Festival of India held 
 at Panaji from 20 th  to 30th  November, 2013. 
 (v)  NFAI and Pune Film Foundation organized Pune International Film 
Festival during January, 2013 
 (vi) Three films Light of Asia , Amrit Manthan  and Mahal  were sent to 
 Toronto International Film Festival, held in Canad a in October, 2012. 
 
4.9 On enquiring about the use of the Social Media platform of the internet for 
uploading and sharing of films for their widespread  reach, especially classics and 
regional films, the Secretary, MoIB during the cour se of the evidence held on 
01.08.2013 deposed as under: 
“We already have a YouTube facility, and the hits a re growing day by day. At the 
moment, it is about 40,000 hits, which have already  taken place, there is also a 
social media cell, which has been created in the Mi nistry. This is the first attempt 
of the Ministry of I&B to create a cell in which Tw itter, Blogs, Facebook, 
WhatsApp issues are addressed on a day to day basis , and a 24x7 cell that is 
operative in the Ministry. We are trying to popular ize this, and I think that your 
suggestions are very valuable to use this facility to put classics also on it.”  
 
4.10 It has also been stated that downloads from th e websites will also be a source of 
revenue of the MoIB. 
National Film Heritage Mission (NFHM)                                                                                        
                                                                                                                             
 
4.11 According to the MoIB, NFHM is a 'project to r estore and archive films for 
preservation and dissemination of Indian film cultu ral heritage'. All existing plan 
schemes of various film units of the MoIB towards d igitization and restoration of films 
will be merged under this scheme. On the need to co me up with a comprehensive 
scheme like NFHM, the MoIB has stated that there is  a complete absence of film 
preservation culture in India. A film is seen as a one-time commercial product and its 
preservation is completely ignored.  
 

 
 
4.12 NFAI is stated to be still following tradition al preservation methods unsuitable to 
tackle the problem at hand. Its storage facilities need modern technical inputs and 
process which blend with existing sound practices. To save the films, preventive 
conservation and restoration of NFAI's existing col lection on urgent basis is an 
immediate necessity. There is an urgent need to con serve and preserve the films and 
filmic material since these are likely to be lost f orever within a period of 10 to 15 years 
due to hot and humid weather conditions of our coun try and the present techniques of 
preservation. There is also lack of awareness and t echnical knowledge among the 
custodians of these materials as to how to conserve , preserve, disseminate and 
commercially exploited them. This calls for taking up of conservation and related 
activities on a Mission mode. The isolated efforts of individuals and organizations in 
collection, conservation, preservation, commercial exploitation, studies and research will 
be brought under one umbrella by this Mission.  
 
4.13 The above intervention would generate synergie s and result in greater output 
and help in achieving economies of scale. The compr ehensive strategy of NFHM 
evolves from the three processes - Preventive Conse rvation, Digitization and 
Restoration and accordingly, it has been proposed t o start a new plan scheme called 
‘National Film Heritage Mission’ for preservation/d igitalization/restoration and archiving 
of film heritage lying with various Government agen cies and private bodies in the 
country with an outlay of ` 597 crore. 
 
4.14 The Secretary, MoIB during the course of the e vidence further elaborated as 
under: 
 “This whole project in the Mission mode has come u p because we felt in the 
 Ministry that there is an extreme need for the Gov ernment to intervene and save 
 the legacy because the private guys are there to c onserve and restore the films. 
 They have the technical knowhow but the private gu ys are not there to say that 
 we will contribute also in restoring the films mea ning thereby they will not 
 contribute the funds. So, we will have to contribu te the funds. There are various 
 labs which have the kind of facility, both technic al and otherwise, to preserve and 
 restore the films.”   
 

 
 
4.15 Further, the representative of the MoIB stated  that another reason for going in as 
Mission mode is that the Ministry “wants to up the ante in terms of funding so that the 
Ministry can substantially go in for preserving and restoring the films”. 
 
4.16 According to the MoIB, NFAI would be the nodal  agency for implementing this 
Plan Scheme. Other Media Units associated with this  Plan Scheme would be Films 
Division, NFDC and CFSI.  
 
4.17 On being asked as to in what capacity these Go vernment media units are going 
to the associated with the Plan scheme and how are they going to be synergized with 
NFAI in implementing NFHM, the MoIB in a written reply stated as under: 
 "To ensure that the Indian film heritage is passed  on to future generations for 
 educational, academic, research purposes, urgent a ction towards centralized 
 cataloguing assimilation, preservation and restora tion  is the need of the hour. 
 The Ministry has envisioned a major initiative, th e National Film Heritage Mission 
 (NFHM), with an objective to identify/trace accumu late, centralize the film 
 content. It will also provide comprehensive platfo rm and solution for the 
 cataloguing, digitization, digital restoration, pr eservation, dissemination and 
 monetization of film content. The mission is criti cal for the benefit of society at 
 large and aims to create an archival and preservat ion policy through strategic 
 direction and leadership, partnership and collabor ation between the film sector 
 departments under the Ministry of I&B like NFAI, F ilms Division, NFDC, CFSI, 
 FTII, DFF, State Government Institutions and other  private libraries. EFC for the 
 scheme is being revisited keeping in mind all the above factors."  
 
4.18 The Committee have been informed that ‘in-prin ciple’ approval of Planning 
Commission for the Mission was sought in December, 2009.  The Planning Commission 
has conveyed support to the proposal and has advise d that a Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) may be formulated keeping in view their obser vations along with physical and 
financial parameters and phasing of expenditure bef ore ‘in-principle’ approval could be 
accorded.  The said DPR has been prepared and a rev ised EFC memo is being 
submitted for appraisal and approval by respective competent authority. The Mission is 
yet to be launched. However, during the course of t he evidence, the Secretary, MoIB 
deposed as under: 
"... The Planning Commission, in principle, has app roved this project for ` 597 
 crore split into two Five Year Plans, based on whi ch we will have to bring a 
 proposal in the EFC, go to the Cabinet, get their approval and then launch the 
 project." 

 
 
4.19 As per the MoIB, the scope of NFHM after its i mplementation is enumerated as 
follows: 
 
           (i) To undertake film assessment of the film collection and ascertain left over 
life of the film. 
           (ii) Preventive conversation of film ree ls. 
 
           (iii) 2K picture & sound restoration of landmark films of Indian Cinema. 
 
           (iv) Digitization of films where good qu ality negatives already available that do 
not require restoration. 
 
           (v) Acquisition of digitized material wh ere original digitized material is already 
available. 
 
           (vi) Construction of archival and preser vation facilities for preservation of 
material restored under NFHM in dust free, low humi dity, and low 
temperature conditions. 
 
           (vii) Training workshops and courses in the field of preservation and archiving 
in coordination with international agencies who are experts in this field. 
 
 
4.20 According to the MoIB, the greatest benefit of  the Mission will be to enable the 
preservation of the invaluable filmic heritage of t he country which is an integral part of 
our socio-cultural heritage. 8000 films will be dig itized and 2000 films will be digitally 
restored under the proposed plan scheme. However, t here will also be financial benefit 
due to preservation of the film materials. The cata logue of films can be commercially 
exploited world-wide. Publications based on the collections, sales of footages, exhibition 
of costumes, posters, etc. can also fetch revenue f or the custodial organizations 
/individuals. Downloads from the websites will also  be a source of revenue. It is 
expected that the Mission will be the first major s tep towards preservation of our socio-
cultural heritage enshrined in the form of films wh en the country is celebrating the 
Centenary of India Cinema in 2013. 
 
4.21 On a query made by the Committee inviting atte ntion to a press report which 
reported that digitization and restoration work in NFAI has come to a standstill after the 
NFHM was set up, the MoIB in a written has stated as under:  

 
 
 "It is a fact that digitization and restoration wo rk in NFAI has come to standstill 
 after the NFHM was set up by the Ministry of I&B. Reason being the component 
 of “Digitization/restoration of films” which was i ncluded in 11 th  Five year plan was 
 discontinued in 12 th  Five Year Plan. The EFC memo for the scheme under NFHM 
 has already been circulated to the concerned Minis tries such as Department of 
 Expenditure, Planning Commission and Department of  Economic Affairs.  
 Presentation of the proposed scheme has been made before Hon’ble Minister for 
 Information and Broadcasting in May, 2013 and sche me has been reviewed by 
 Hon’ble Minister since the presentation. Due to so me changes required to be 
 made in the scheme, the same is being revised." 
 
4.22 In this Connection, Secretary, MoIB during the  course of the evidence deposed 
as under: 
 “…we want to appoint a Committee of Experts who is  actually performing these 
 jobs on the field. We will take people from the in dustry, from the business houses 
 and those people should be able to design the RFI.  Based on which we will 
 proceed accordingly.”  
 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
PROBLEMS FACED BY NFAI  
 
 
 According to the MoIB, NFAI is facing certain issu es regarding organizational, 
administrative and financial matters which need to be resolved quickly. The Committee 
have been informed that besides the shortage of man power and funds, there are issues 
of lack of technical knowhow and lack of proper inf rastructure for storing and preserving 
the films in NFAI.  
5.2 Some of the major issues being faced by NFAI in  carrying out its mandated task 
of archiving of films are discussed in the subsequent paras.  
(i) Limitation of Funding and Need for a National F ilm Preservation and 
 Restoration Policy 
5.3 According to the MoIB, NFAI has got only film a cquisition policy made on 9 
th  
January, 1981 but there is no policy on preservation and restoration of films which leads 
to want of sufficient funds for restoration and dig itization after having acquired a large 
number of films. The rate of restoration and digiti zation of films is not proportionate to 
the number of films acquired by NFAI for archival. Shortage of funds is a major 
constraint, due to which condition of a number of f ilms got worsened almost to the point 
of destruction forever. According to the MoIB, as a  result of shortage of funds, less than 
20 percent of the national production is preserved at NFAI. 
 
(ii) Shortage of Manpower  
 
5.4 According to the MoIB, NFAI had a total number of 64 staff. However, seven 
posts were abolished due to 10 percent economy driv e by the Government of India in 
1994. And remaining posts were abolished under the Annual Direct Recruitment Plan 
scheme in course of a decade. The posts of Director  and Deputy Director-cum-Curator 
are lying vacant for the last five years. 
5.5 As per the MoIB, out of the 49 sanctioned staff  strength (26 posts under the 
Administrative Wing and 23 under the technical wing ), only 31 staff are in place at 

 
 
present. These posts have been lying vacant since 7 -8 years. As far as Group ‘A’ posts 
are concerned, it has been stated that the MoIB is initiating the action to fill up the 
same. Elaborating on the issue, the Committee have also been informed that in 2012 
the post of Deputy Director-cum-Curator was advertised and after due selection process 
of UPSC, a candidate was interviewed and selected, but the candidate did not join. For 
the post of Director, NFAI had advertised it in 2010 and till date, it has not been filled up. 
As regards filling up of posts under Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ is concerned, the Committee have 
been informed that the MoIB has given the NOC to NF AI in June 2013, to approach 
Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for filling up the se posts. The details of the staff 
strength and vacant position in NFAI, Pune is given in Appendix - I of this Report. 
5.6 With regard to having staff with technical know ledge in film preservation and 
archiving in NFAI, the MoIB has stated that present ly, NFAI has only one Film 
Preservation Officer (FPO) who has knowledge in fil m preservation and archiving, 
however, this is not adequate. The Committee have a lso been informed that keeping in 
mind the requirement of additional manpower with re quisite technical knowledge in film 
preservation, archiving including digitization and restoration, the NFAI has proposed the 
plan scheme, namely National Film Heritage Mission (NFHM).   
5.7 When asked about non-achievement of the target of acquisition of films during 
the 11 th  Plan period, the Committee have been informed that  it is due to shortage of 
manpower that the target of acquisition of films co uld not be achieved during the 11 th  
Five Year Plan. 
 
(iii) Inadequate Equipment and Facility  
 
5.8 One of the major constraints faced by NFAI is l ack of adequate equipment and 
gadgets for proper restoration, digitization, stora ge and screening of films. The 
followings initiatives would reportedly be taken up  for upgradation/replacement of 
equipment and supporting infrastructure:  
 (i) Replacement of air conditioning system, which is 20 years old. 
 
 (ii) Renovation of auditorium and replacement of f ire fighting systems. 
 
 (iii) Replacement of diesel generator. 

 
 
                                                                                                                                
 (iv) Replacement of existing sound system with Dol by Digital sound system in 
the Main Theatre at NFAI Headquarters. 
 (v) Procurement of two 35 MM projectors at Preview  Theatre at Phase-II 
 building. 
 
5.9 On being asked as to why the sanction for upgra dation of infrastructure received 
EFC as late as 14 
th  June, 2013, the MoIB has stated that the air condi tioning system at 
vault at Phase-I were installed and commissioned in  the year 1990, since then the 
maintenance and upkeep of this system is being carr ied on by the Civil Construction 
Wing (Electrical) [CCW (Electrical)], All India Rad io. The Air-Conditioning and Humidity 
Control system has a total technical life of 15 yea rs. The CCW (Electrical) has been 
maintaining the system based on the availability of  the spare parts in the market. The 
scheme for construction of 16 new temperature-contr olled air conditioned vaults was 
approved under 10th  Five Year Plan (2002-2007) for which Standing Finance Committee 
(SFC) approval was received in the year 2004. Howev er, the upgradation/replacement 
of air conditioning system could only be included in 12 th  Five Year Plan because:  
           (i)  There was no need to upgrade/replac e the air conditioning system till 
2005  as the system was fully operational. For next  three years i.e. 2008 
CCW  (Electrical) could manage with the available s pare parts. In the 
meantime the new vaults at Phase-II were ready in M arch 2008, and the 
films at Phase-I vaults were shifted to those newly  constructed vaults to 
avoid any deterioration. 
           (ii)  The CCW (Electrical), in 2008 had suggested replacing the existing Air-
Conditioning  and Humidity Control system at Phase- I. Since the 
components for replacement as suggested by CCW (Ele ctrical) had a 
small monetary value, it was not viable to make the  same a part of total 
plan scheme under 11 th  Five Year Plan. The scheme was then revised 
after including associated civil works and was incl uded under 12 th  Five 
Year Plan as a full-fledged new plan scheme.  
5.10 Elaborating on the issue, the MoIB has informe d the Committee that NFAI has 
since received EFC sanction for “Upgradation of Infrastructure of NFAI and setting up of 

 
 
Digital Library in Jayakar Bungalow.” It was also c onfirmed that there was no damage 
caused to the archival material. 
 
(iv) Lack of Interest and Awareness  
 
5.11 As per the MoIB, there is no legal compulsion on the part of the filmmakers or the 
whole film fraternity to contribute and preserve th eir films for posterity. The Committee 
have been informed that the main reason for the tot al neglect of the historical 
importance of films is primarily due to the fact th at cinema had always had a low priority 
in the overall developmental needs of the country a nd unfortunately, such thinking 
continues to persist even today among certain circl es which is partly responsible for the 
low acquisitions of the Archive.  
 
 
  
   

 
 
PART - II  
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee  
    
    
 The National Film Archive of India (NFAI) was esta blished in the year 
1964 with the objective to trace, acquire and prese rve the heritage of 
national cinema. The Committee’s examination of NFA I reveals that it has 
miserably failed in achieving this objective. Admit tedly, no substantial 
efforts to conserve our filmic heritage have been m ade in consonance with 
the volume of production. Consequently, less than 2 0 films out of the 1000 
produced in the country during the Silent Era are a vailable now. Even 
valuable films of the Sound Era, including Alam Ara (1931) , the first talkie 
made in India, have reportedly been lost forever. C ountless number of 
valuable items like screenplays, posters, stills, c ostumes, properties and 
vintage equipment have also been damaged or complet ely lost during the 
past decades. NFAI houses only 9000 movies whereas availability and 
condition of the rest of 34,000 movies is unknown. A vast majority of filmic 
material still remains untouched in private collect ions. All these indicate 
that something is seriously wrong in the functionin g of NFAI. The 
Committee desire that the Government institute a co mprehensive review of 
NFAI with a view to revamping the organization and ensuring that NFAI 
achieves the objectives for which it was established.  
 
2.  It is the duty of the Government to ensure that  the Indian Film 
Heritage is passed on to future generations. The Co mmittee have been 
informed that there is no legal compulsion on the p art of the filmmakers or 
the whole film fraternity to contribute and preserv e their films for posterity. 
With the result, countless number of films and film ic material appear to 
have been lost. This points to the need for modific ation in the existing film 
acquisition policy and incorporation of an appropri ate legislative provision 

 
 
to ensure that the filmmakers/private collectors pa rt with a copy of films to 
NFAI for preservation. It has been stated that thou gh there is a film 
acquisition policy made in 1981, there is no policy  on preservation and 
restoration of films. The Committee desire a comprehensive National Policy 
be formulated incorporating the existing film acqui sition policy as may be 
modified and also covering other areas viz. restora tion, digitization and 
preservation of films and filmic material.  
 
3.  The Government have envisioned a National Film Heritage Mission 
(NFHM) with an outlay of `` `` 597 crore and with the goal of synergising the 
isolated efforts of individuals and organizations in collection, conservation, 
preservation, commercial exploitation, studies and research under one 
umbrella. The Committee are disappointed to note th at digitization and 
restoration work in NFAI has come to a standstill d uring the last two years 
pending implementation of NFHM. The Committee note that unless NFHM is 
launched immediately, the films and filmic material s collected by NFAI may 
be lost forever, due to hot and humid weather condition of our country. The 
Committee, therefore, emphasize that NFHM must be l aunched without any 
further delay and the Committee be informed of its implementation during 
the current year. 
 
4.  The Committee note that NFAI is facing infrastr uctural constraints. 
There is an urgent need to construct additional vau lts, as the existing 16 
specialised vaults in NFAI for storing colour films  are nearly full with film 
reels. Another area which need immediate interventi on is replacement of 
air conditioning system of the film vaults which do es not maintain the 
required temperature and relative humidity and cons umes excess 
electricity due to its over utilization of around 2 0 years. There is also a 
need to upgrade the sound system of NFAI main theat re with the Dolby 
Digital sound system; procurement of two 35 mm proj ectors; and 
replacement of fire fighting systems. Upgradation/r eplacement of air-
conditioning system in NFAI is stated to have been included under 12 
th  Five 

 
 
Year Plan as a full-fledged Plan Scheme. The Commit tee urge that 
immediate measures should also be taken to construc t specialised vaults 
in a phased manner and to procure projectors and so und system needed 
for NFAI to enable it to function effectively. 
 
5.  NFAI is headless during the last five years. Th e posts of Director and 
Deputy Director-cum-Curator are lying vacant since 2008. With the result, 
the performance of NFAI has left much to be desired . NFAI is also 
constrained by shortage of manpower, both in its ad ministrative and 
technical wings. There are 18 posts which are vacan t against the total 
strength of 49 in NFAI. Consequently, work of resto ration and digitization 
of films in NFAI is stated to have been adversely a ffected. The Committee 
desire that the authority that may undertake compre hensive review 
recommended by the Committee should also make thoro ugh assessment 
of additional manpower required at different levels  in NFAI. The Committee 
also wish that, in the meantime, immediate steps be taken to fill up the post 
of Director and all other vacant posts in NFAI. The  Committee hope that 
with the appointment of Director and recruitment of  additional staff, NFAI 
will be in a position to discharge its functions effectively. 
 
6.  The Committee find that promotion of ‘film stud ies’ is a neglected 
area in the scheme of things in NFAI. Only seven research fellowships have 
been given during the last ten years. During the ye ars 2009-10, 2011-12 and 
2012-13 no research fellowship was granted to any o ne. The Committee 
have been informed that only a very few universitie s offer research work in 
cinema. The Committee feel that it is for NFAI to f ind ways and means to 
encourage ‘film studies’ and ensure that adequate r esearch work is 
undertaken. The Committee would like to be apprised  of NFAI’s plans and 
proposals in this regard. Incidentally, the Committ ee would like to know 
why the issue of delegation of enhanced financial p ower to Director, has 
not been sorted out which is reportedly holding up launching of research 
fellowships during the Twelfth Five Year Plan. 

 
 
 
7.  The Secretary, Information and Broadcasting was  receptive to the 
idea of uploading regional classics in the social m edia of the internet as it 
would ensure wider reach besides fetching revenue f rom downloads. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the MoIB shoul d explore the 
possibility to optimize the use of social media pla tforms of the Internet like 
YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, etc. as a way of popula rizing and 
disseminating Indian Cinema all over the world. The y would like to be 
apprised of the efforts made in this direction. 
  
....... 
 
 
  

 
 
 Appendix - I 
 
 
Sl . 
No. 
 
Name of the posts, pay band  and 
Grade Pay   
 
 
 
Group/  
Class 
Sanctioned  
Strength 
 
 
 
Staff in  
position 
 
 
 
Vacant  
Posts 
Vacant  
since  
when  
 
1 Director ( ` 37400-67000) 8700                                A 1 --  1 1.4.2008  
2 Dy.Director-cum-Curator ( ` 15600-39100) 
6600     
A 1 --  1 1.2.2008  
3 Regional Officer ( ` 15600-39100) 6600                  A 2 --  2 11.3.02/  
1.7.12 
4 Administrative Officer ( ` 9300-34800) 
4600 
B 1 1 --        ---  
5 Film Preservation Officer ( ` 9300-34800) 
4600  
B 1 1 --        ---  
6 Library & Information Asstt ( ` 9300-
34800) -4200 
C 3 2 1 1.8.2011  
7 Stenographer Gr.II ( ` 9300-34800) 4200 C 1 1 --       ---  
8 Accountant ( ` 9300-34800) 4200 C 1 1 --       ---  
9 Jr. Hindi Translator ( ` 9300-34800) 4200 B(NG) 1 --  1 1.11.2009  
10 Film Library Assistant ( ` 9300-34800) 
4200 
C 1 --  1 1.12.2012  
11 Projectionist ( ` 9300-34800) 4200 C 1 1 --       ---  
12 UDC-3 ( ` 5200-20200) 2400 C 3 2 1 1.9.2012  
13 Computer Operator ( ` 5200-20200) 2400 C 1 1 --       ---  
14 Jr. Librarian ( ` 5200-20200) 1900 C 1 --  1 1.2.2013  
15 LDC ( ` 5200-20200) 1900 C 5 3 2 1.2.11/  
1.2.13 
16 Driver ( ` 5200-20200) 1900 C 1 1 --        ---  
17 Asstt. Projectionist ( ` 5200-20200) 1900 C 1 1 --        ---  
18 Sr. Film Checker ( ` 5200-20200) 1900 C 1 1 --        ---  
19 Film Checker ( ` 5200-20200) 1800 D 11     11  --        ---  
20 Daftary ( `  5200-20200) 1800 D 1 --  1   1.5.2013  
21 Chowkidar ( ` 5200-20200) 1800 D 3 2 1   1.7.2010  
22 Peon-Cum-Packer ( ` 5200-20200) 1800 D 4 --  4    1.7.2010  
23 Peon ( ` 5200-20200) 1800 D 1 1 --       ---  
24 Mali ( ` 5200-20200) 1800 D 1 1 --       ---  
25 Sweeper-cum-farash ( ` 5200-20200) 
1800  
D 1 --  1   1.8.2009  
                                               Total   49  31  18   
 
  

 
 
Annexure -I 
MINUTES OF EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-2014) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 1 st  August, 2013 from 1100 hrs. to 
1220 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
          PRESENT 
  
          Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
        Members 
 
2 Shri K. Bappi Raju Kanumuru 
3 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
4 Shri Prabodh Panda 
5 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
6 Shri S. Semmalai 
7 Shri M.I. Shanavas 
8 Shri Adhi Shankar 
9 Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
10 Shri Jagadanand Singh 
11 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
 
       SECRETARIAT 
       1.   Shri A. Louis Martin        -      Join t Secretary  
       2.   Smt. Anita B. Panda        -      Direc tor 
       3.   Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar        -       Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
         WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
1. Shri Bimal Julka Secretary (I&B) 
2. Shri Raghvendra Singh Joint Secretary (Films) 
3. Shri B. Brahma Economic Advisor 
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL FILM ARCHIVE OF INDIA (NFAI) 
               
4.         Shri Prashant Pathrabe                            Director, NFAI 
 
            
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  and the representatives of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to the  sitting of the Committee in 
connection with the examination of the subject ‘Nat ional Film Archive of India’ and drew 
the attention of the latter to Direction 55(1) of ‘ Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee.  
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Informati on and Broadcasting then made a 
power-point presentation on NFAI highlighting its p resent organizational, administrative 
and financial problems, its activities and faciliti es such as film collection, film vaults, film 
festivals, research and documentation, etc, shortag e of manpower and need for 
modernization, financial and physical performance d uring the Eleventh Plan, plan 
schemes for the Twelfth Plan, future digitization a nd restoration of films by taking up 
projects such as ‘National Film Heritage Mission (N FHM)’ and inviting of global 
expression of interest for the same. 
4. Thereafter, the Committee discussed various issu es regarding the performance 
of NFAI with regard to preserving, digitizing and r estoring of films in India and its 
challenges which inter-alia  included shortage of manpower and technical expert ise, lack 
of proper lab facility, coordination with private i ndividuals or organisations in preserving 
films, acquisition policy and norms, acquisition of  more regional films, preservation and 

 
 
restoration work thereafter, review meetings of NFA I, possibility of adopting climate 
control walls like the one in USA, budgeting on Nat ional and International Film Festivals 
both by Centre and States, earning capacity from th e various film festivals organised at 
National and International levels, etc. 
5. The representatives of the Ministry responded to  various queries raised by the 
Committee. The representatives were asked to furnis h written replies to the points for 
which they could not readily respond.  
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt.  
The Committee then adjourned .       
  

 
 
Annexure-II  
MINUTES OF TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES         
(2013-2014)  
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18 th  December, 2013 from 1045 hrs. 
to .... hrs. in Room No. 52-B, (Chairman’s Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
          Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2 Shri Khagen Das  
3  Shri K. Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
4 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
5 Shri Prabodh Panda 
6 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
7 Shri S. Seemmalai 
8 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
9 Smt Annu Tandon 
10 Shri Mukul Wasnik 
11 Shri Omprakash Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
       1. Shri M. Louis Martin              -        Joint Secretary 
       2. Smt. Anita B. Panda    -   Director 
       3. Shri Srinavasulu Gunda        -         Additional Director 
       4. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar    -   Deputy Secre tary 
       5. Shri U.C. Bharadwa              j-        Deputy Secretary 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the 
Committee. Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
(i) Report on ‘National Film Archive of India (NFAI )’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting; 
(ii) *** *** *** *** *** ***;*** *** *** *** *** ** *  
(iii) *** *** *** *** *** ***;*** *** *** *** *** * **  
(iv) *** *** *** *** *** ***;*** *** *** *** *** ** * 
3. The Committee adopted the abovementioned Reports  without any modification. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalise the above reports after 
factual verification by the Ministries concerned and present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
. 
 