14 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION OF CIVIL 
AVIATION 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2011-2012) 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
„Development and Regulation of Civil Aviation‟ 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2012 / Vaisakha, 1934 (S) 


EC No._________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: ` ________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General 
Manager, Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi – 110002. 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 Page No. 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
(iii) 
 INTRODUCTION  (iv)  
CHAPTER – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 1-6 
CHAPTER –II GENERAL BUDGETARY SUPPORT 
 
7-14 
CHAPTER -III POLICY FRAMEWORK  15-32 
 
 (a)  Open Skies Policy 15-17 
 (b) PPP/ FDI Policy 17-21 
 (c)  Role of the Central & State Governments  22 
 (d) Domestic Air Transport Policy 23-25 
 (e)  Regulation of Mergers & Acquisitions 25-26 
 (f)        Cartelization and Regulation of Airfares 27-29 
 (g)       Taxes and other levies  30-32 
 
CHAPTER -IV REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 33-72 
 
 (a)  Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA)  33-53 
 (i)  Safety 35-43 
 (ii) Airport Licensing  43-47 
 (iii) Licences to Pilots & Engineers 47-49 
 (iv) Civil Aviation Authority 49-53 
   
 (b)       Bureau of Civil Aviation Safety (BCAS) 53-60 
 (c)       Airport Authority of India 61-63 
 (d)  Airport Economic Regulatory Authority of India  
           (AERA) 
63-72 
 
CHAPTER – V NATIONAL CARRIERS  
 
(a)  AIR INDIA LIMITED 
73-115 
 
73-110 
 (i)  Administrative, legacy & other issues  73-88 
 (ii)  Market Position  88-93 
 (iii)  Financial Health 
                                                                                       
93-110 
 (b) PAWAN HANS HELICOPTER LIMITED 
 
110-115 
CHAPTER-VI          DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORTS 
 
116-132 
 (a)  Upgradation Of Old Airports (Brownfield Airports) 117-123 
 (b) Greenfield Airports 124-125 
 (c)  Air traffic Management System 125-132 
   
CHAPTER-VII HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  133-136 
   

 OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 137-186 
  
APPENDICES 
 
(I) Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 01.07.2010  
(II) Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 12.10.2010  
(III) Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 20.12.2010  
(IV) Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 08.11.2011  
(V) Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 10.04.2012  
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-12) 
 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
 Members 
 
2 Shri Raj Babbar  
3 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
4 Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer  
5 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty  
6 Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
7 Shri Dhruvanarayana  
8 Shri T. K. S. Elangovan  
9 Shri Ninong Ering  
10 Shri Prahlad Venkatesh Joshi  
11 Shri P. Karunakaran  
12 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru  
13 Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
14 Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
15 Shri Datta Meghe  
16 Shri Prabodh Panda  
17 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
18 Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
19 Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia  
20 Shri S. Semmalai  
21 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi  
22 Shri M. I. Shanavas  
23 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
24 Shri Ganesh Singh  
25 Shri Ijyaraj Singh  
26 Shri Jagada Nand Singh  
27 Shri Radha Mohan Singh  
28 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
29 Smt. Annu Tandon  
30 Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  1.        Shri P.K Grover    -         Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri S.C. Chaudhary  - Director  
3.        Smt. Anita B. Panda           -         Additional Director  
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2011 -2012) having been authorized 
by the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fourteenth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Development and Regulation of Civil Aviation‟ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
 
2. The subject was selected for detailed examination by the Committee  on 
Estimates (2010 -2011), taking into account the urgent need to overhaul the entire 
structure of the Indian Civil Aviation sector so as to bring radical changes/improvement 
in its overall financial and infrastructural health and make it more profitable a nd 
competitive sector in the entire arena of civil aviation of the world. 
 
3. The Committee held five sittings on the subject. The Committee have been 
briefed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 1 st July, 2010 on the subject.  The Committee 
took the oral evidence of the Ministry on 12 th October, 2010, 20 th December, 2010 and                 
8th November, 2011 respectively.   
 
4. The Report was considered & adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
10th April, 2012. 
 
5. The Committee would like to e xpress their deep appreciation of the valuable 
work done by the Committee on Estimates (2010 -2011) in connection with the 
examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee wish to express their gratitude towards the representatives of the 
Ministry of Civil Avi ation, who appeared before them and placed their views on the 
subject. The Committee also wish to thank them for furnishing the information required 
in connection with examination of the subject during the briefing and oral evidences. 
 
7. The Committee wou ld also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of the 
Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
24th April, 2012              
Vaisakha 04, 1934 (Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES. 
 

CHAPTER – I 
 
 
   INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
1.1 The aviation sector has come into prominence in the last two decades as an 
engine of growth and fast connectivity to all corners of the country  with lot of impetus 
provided by the Government of India.  Airports have facilitated the growth of exports and 
imports in the country tremendously and the aviation sector may provide the only mode 
of connectivity to remote areas otherwise inaccessible by other modes of transport  in 
the near future. Despite rapid advances in infrastructure in the a viation sector, India still 
fares poorly when compared with developed countr ies of the W orld. It has so far been 
unable to emerge as a  cargo and courier hub to other countries  in the Asiatic region 
despite its geographical advantage.  Besides, air travel still remains confined  to a small 
percentage of the domestic population. The share of India in total world aviation traffic  
continues to remain miniscule. An efficient aviation sector is critical to the success of the 
tourism industry. A vibrant and thriving civil aviation sector is essential to our economy 
as well as security. Besides, a  strong airlines system backed with a well -planned 
network of airports would be valuable in any national emergency  to provide timely 
evacuation and relief measures to the needy. 
 
1.2 It was in t his backdrop that the Committee decided to select and examine in 
detail the subject „Development & Regulation of Civil Aviation‟.  
 
 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 
 
1.3 Civil aviation in India was born on 18th of February, 1911, when  a French pilot 
Henri Piquet fle w the first commercial plane in India between Allahabad and Naini , 
carrying mails covering a distance o f about 10  km in as many minutes.  The scheduled 
air services in India, in the real sense, began on October 15, 1932. It was on this day 
that J.R.D. Tata, the father of civil aviation in India and founder of Air India, took-off from 
Drigh Road Airport, Karachi, in a tiny, light single -engined de Havilland Puss Moth 

aircraft on his flight to Mumbai (then known as Bombay) via Ahmedabad. At Mumbai, 
Neville Vin tcent, a former RAF pilot who had come to India from Britain three years 
earlier on a brain-storming tour (during which he had surveyed a number of possible air 
routes) took over from J.R.D.Tata and flew the Puss Moth to Chennai (then Madras) via 
Bellary. At the time of independence, i.e, in 1947, the number of air transport 
companies, which were operating within and beyond the frontiers of the country, 
carrying both air cargo and passengers, was nine. It was reduced to eight, with Orient 
Airways shifting to Pakistan. These airlines were: Tata Airlines, Indian National Airways, 
Air service of India, Deccan Airways, Ambica Airways, Bharat Airways and Mistry 
Airways.  
 
1.4 In early 1948, a joint sector company, Air India International Ltd., was established 
by the Government of India and Air India (earlier Tata Airline) with a capital of ` 2 crore 
and a fleet of three Lockheed constellation aircrafts. Its first flight took off on June 8, 
1948 on the Mumbai (Bombay) -London air route. At the time of its nationalization in 
1953, it was operating four weekly services between Mumbai -London and two weekly 
services between Mumbai and Nairobi. The joint ve nture was headed by J.R.D. Tata 
who ran it until its nationalization in 1953. 
 
1.5 After World War-II the Airlines op erating in the country went on an expansion 
spree, but the  soaring prices of aviation fuel, mounting salary bills and 
disproportionately large fleets took a heavy toll of the airlines  operating at that time. The 
financial health of companies declined despi te liberal Government patronage, 
particularly from 1949, and an upward trend in air cargo and passenger traffic. The 
trend, however, was not in keeping with the expectations of these airlines which had 
gone on an expansion spree during the post -World War-II period, acquiring aircraft a nd 
spares. 
 
1.6 The Government set up the Air Traffic Enquiry Committee in 1950 to look into the 
problems of the airline industry and eventually all airlines operating in the country were 
merged into either Indian Airlines or Air India by virtue of the Air Corporations Act, 1953. 

The Government of India held a monopoly on the airlines Industry for the next forty 
years. The Directorate General of Civil Aviation controlled every aspect of flying 
including granting flying licenses, pilots, certifying aircrafts for flight and issuing all rules 
and procedures governing Indian airports and airspace. Finally, the Airports Authority of 
India was entrusted with the responsibility of managing all national and international 
airports and ad ministering every aspect of air transport operation through the Air traffic 
Control. 
 
1.7 It was in the Nineties that “Open Sky Policy“ was mooted and the Air Corporation 
Act, 1953 was abolished to end the monopoly of the public sector and private airlines  
were reintroduced.  The Indian Government introduced the O pen Sky Policy fo r 
domestic players in 1991 and P artial Open Sky Policy for international players only in 
November 2004. Increasing liberalization and deregulation led to an increase in the 
number of players. The industry as on date comprises of three  types of players - full 
cost carriers, low cost carriers (LCC) and many start -up airlines and chopper services 
that are making/planning an entry. 
 
 
PRESENT SCENARIO 
1.8 As per the Ministry‟s Annual Repo rt (2010-11), the year 2011 was significant in 
the Indian Aviation Industry since it entered into the 100th year of its operation . The 
Indian Aviation sector is in the midst of a frenzied growth and consolidation phase.  The 
apex body responsible for development and regulation of Civil Aviation is the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation along with its associate organizations overseeing various verticals of the 
industry. The Ministry has the following Organizations under its administrative control: 
Attached Offices / Organisations 
a) Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
b) Bureau of Civil Aviation Authority (BCAS) 
c) Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) 
d) Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
  
 

Autonomous Body 
e) Indira Gandhi Rashtriya UranAkademi (IGRUA) 
 
Public Sector Undertakings 
f) Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
g) Air India Limited (AIL) 
h) Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited (PHHL) 
 
1.9 In addition to primary functions of framing of policies for the Aviation sector, the 
Ministry provides guidance to the se Organizations in the implementation of policy 
guidelines, monitors and evaluates and also provides their interface with Parliament.  
 
 
1.10 The Ministry informed the Committee in June 2010 about the phenomenal growth 
in all the aspects of the aviation sector over the last few years as follows.  
 
“In a very short time , India has become the 9th biggest aviation market in 
the world. India ranks 4th after USA, China and Japan in terms of 
domestic passenger volume. Aviation Sector has more than doubled in the 
last five years in terms of passengers, commercial fleet and international 
flights. Operational airports have been increased from 50 to 82 in last five 
years. The highly competitive Indian airline industry has encouraged many 
first time flyers and rail travellers to take the  skies cutting down their travel 
time and freely access in economic activity. New airlines, budget travellers 
and the robust ec onomy have  complemented each other and fueled 
growth over the years.  The sector has the potential to preserve 3 million 
jobs dire ctly by 2020, which would be further supplemented in direct 
growth in the tourism and related industries.”  
 
1.11 The Committee were informed that t he number of scheduled operators beca me 
16 in 2009 -10 in comparison of 05 scheduled operator s in 2000-01 and total number of 
aircraft in the fleet of  Scheduled Airlines have risen to 422 from 113.  Besides, a new 
category of Scheduled Airlines i.e. Scheduled Air Transport (Regional) services has 
been introduced to enhance connectivity to smaller cities and withi n a region. The  
number of Non-scheduled operators beca me 117 in 2009 -10 in comparison of 36 Non -

scheduled operator in 2000 -01 and t otal number of aircrafts in the fleet of Non -
Scheduled Airlines have risen to 331 from 106.   The total number of passengers carried 
by domestic airlines in 2010 , were 50.2 million as against 16.75 million  back in the year 
2000 with 20% average annual growth between 2003-04 and 2008-09.  
 
1.12 At present 82 stations across the C ountry are connected by Air as a gainst 50 
stations in the year 200 0 and Four  Indian Carriers operating 990 flights to 35 
destinations in 25 countries are also connected with the country . There are 11 
operational airports served by the Scheduled airlines in the North -East region (NER) of 
viz. Dibrugarh, Guwahati, North Lakhimpur, Imphal, Dimapur, Agartala, Shillong, Jorhat, 
Silchar, Tezpur & Lengpui.  
 
1.13 In the last five years the number of flights per week being operated by Scheduled 
Airline to/from NER have been increased by 230% and become 286 from 87. In addition, 
Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd (PHHL) is providing helicopter services under the aegis of 
the State Governments of Arunachal Prades h, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Sikkim and 
Tripura. North East Shuttle is also providing Non-Scheduled Operations in NER. 
 
1.14 The Ministry of Civil Aviation  informed the Committee in February, 2012 that their 
organization, AAI has undertaken a program me for modernization of two metro airports 
(Chennai and Kolkata) and 62 non -metro airports during the Eleventh Five Year Plan 
period.   
1.15 A background note from the Ministry in this regard further stated as under:- 
“Development of new airports and opening of the skies for private sector 
participation has led to massive growth in air transport and enhanced 
connectivity to all p arts of the country. The country has developed many 
international airports like Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Bangalore, Chennai, 
Cochin, Goa, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Kolkatta, Mumbai, New Delhi, 
Trivandrum etc and do mestic airports in most of the S tate Capitals. 
Passengers carried by domestic airlines during Jan -Feb 2011 were 95 .11 
lakh as against 79.51 lakh  during the corresponding period of previous 
year thereby registering a growth of + 19.6% . The country is very well 

connected with all the capitals of the world an d the international 
connectivity has grown in leaps and bounds over the course of 100 years 
of aviation in the country. Apart from airlines , Helicopter services in the 
Hilly regions of the country , specially the North -East have also developed 
over the year s and augmented the overall growth of air services in the 
country. The Air-ambulance services, though in its nascent stage, are also 
active in all the metro s as well as some capital cities of the country. The 
movement of cargo  by air for  domestic consumpti on as well as  imports 
and exports has also become a major stream of revenue for airlines  and 
freight operators over the years.” 
  

CHAPTER - II 
 
 
GENERAL BUDGETARY SUPPORT  
 
 
2.1 On being enquired by t he Committee about the General Budgetary Support for 
the year 2010 -11 and 2011 -2012 and its utilization in the current financial year , t he 
Ministry in a written reply furnished as under: 
 
“(i)  Budgetary Allocation for non-plan expenditure during 2010-11 and 2011 -
12 (net of recoveries):- 
                                                         (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Scheme BE 
2010-11 
BE 
2011-12 
A. Non-Plan 
1. (i) Ministry of Civil Aviation – Sectt. 
(ii) Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
(iii) Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
(iv) Commission of Railway Safety 
13.75 
41.60 
9.84 
6.79 
16.55 
52.59 
11.13 
7.59 
2. Payment of share of FTT to AAI 0.01 0.01 
3. Subsidy for operation of Haj Charters 800.00 600.00 
4. Grants-in-aid to IGRUA 5.00 0.00 
5. Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of 
India 
8.00 6.00 
6. Grants-in-aid to State Govt.(Flying Subsidy) 0.05 0.05 
 Total – Non Plan (Gross) 885.04 693.92 
 Recoveries (-) 0.04 0.04 
 
 Total - Non Plan (Net) 885.00 693.88 
 
 
(ii) The allocation for Non -Plan expenditure during 2011 -12 includes  
establishment related ex penditure of the Ministry (Sectt.), Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security, Commission of 
Railway Safety, Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India etc. as 
well as payment of subsidy to National Aviation Company of I ndia 
Ltd.(now Air India Limited) for operation of Haj Charter flights. 
 
 
 
 
 

(iii) The approved Annual Plan Outlay in respect of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
for 2010 -11 is ` 9588.30 crore with a budgetary support component of      
` 2000.00 crore.  Organisation-wise details of the approved outlay as well 
as financing pattern thereof are as under: 
 
                                                                     (` in crore) 
Annual Plan 2010-11 (BE) 
S. 
No. 
Name of Organization Budgetary 
Support 
Internal &  
Extra 
Budgetary 
Resources 
Total 
1. Ministry of Civil Aviation (Sectt.) 8.85 - 8.85 
2. National Aviation Company of 
India Limited (now Air India) 
1200.00 4434.80 5634.80 
3. Airports Authority of India 600.50 3009.50 3610.00 
4. Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited 40.00 109.00 149.00 
5. Hotel Corporation of India Ltd. - 15.00 15.00 
6. Air India Charters Limited - 20.00 20.00 
7. Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran 
Akademi 
5.60 - 5.60 
8. Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation 
86.00 - 86.00 
9. Aero Club of India 14.40 - 14.40 
10. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 44.65 - 44.65 
 Total 2000.00 7588.30 9588.30 
 
 
(iv) The approved Annual Plan Outlay in respect of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
for 2011-12 is ` 9071.56 crore with a budgetary support component of ` 
1700.00 crore.  Organisation -wise details of the approved outlay as well 
as financing pattern thereof are as under:- 
 
                                                              (` in crore) 
Annual Plan 2011-12 (BE) 
S. 
No
. 
Name of Organization Budgetary 
Support 
Internal & 
Extra 
Budgetary 
Resources 
Total 
1. Ministry of Civil Aviation (Sectt.) 9.50 - 9.50 
2. National Aviation Company of 
India Limited (now Air India Ltd.) 
1200.00 4549.36 5749.36 
3. Airports Authority of India 280.15 2494.00 2774.15 
4. Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. 3.00 293.20 296.20 
5. Hotel Corporation of India Ltd. - 15.00 15.00 
6. Air India Charters Ltd. - 20.00 20.00 
7. Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran 5.00 - 5.00 

Akademi 
8. Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation 
60.00 - 60.00 
9. Aero Club of India 6.00 - 6.00 
10. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 136.35 - 136.35 
 
 Total 1700.00 7371.56 9071.56 
“ 
 
 
 
2.2 In reference to the utilization of the budgetary allocations for the year 2011 -2012,  
the Ministry has furnished Scheme-wise details of plan  outlay for itse lf as well as the 
associate organizations  as under:- 
 
     (i)  MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION (SECTT.) 
 
                                                                   (` in crore) 
Serial 
No. 
Schemes Approved 
Outlay 
2011-12 
1. Enhancing c ompetitiveness of Indian carriers in 
international operations & aviation studies. 
3.10 
2. Application of IT tools and capacity building in the 
aviation sector. 
2.40 
3. Publicity and Consumer Awareness. 2.00 
4. Conferences & Seminars related to Aviation Sector. 2.00 
 
Total 9.50 
 
 
 
(ii)      NATIONAL AVIATION COMPANY OF INDIA LIMITED  
                          (NOW AIR INDIA LIMITED) 
 
                      (` in crore) 
S.No. Schemes Approved 
Outlay 
2011-12 
A 
(i) 
(ii) 
(a) 
(b) 
Aircraft Schemes 
Existing A-320 project 
New Aircraft Project 
Advance payment to aircraft manufacturers 
Delivery payments to aircraft manufacturers 
 
0.50 
 
424.44 
2981.37 

(c) 
 
(d) 
 
Supporting infrastructure for the new aircraft and 
payment for spare engines/workshop etc. 
Interest to be capitalized on paymen ts to aircraft 
manufacturers 
 
434.86 
 
208.19 
B 
(i) 
 
 
 
(ii) 
Other capital expenditure 
Other supporting facilities such as building projects, 
corporate computerization, booking offices, vehicles, 
GSE workshop equipment, plan & machiner y and 
misc. assets etc. 
 
Equity 
 
500.00 
 
 
 
1200.00* 
Total 5749.36 
* Budgetary support  
 
 
      (iii) AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
 
       (` in crore) 
S.No. Discipline Approved 
Outlay 
2011-12 
1. Non-Metro Airports 
Aerodrome Works including Tech. 
 
913.15 
2. 
a. 
b. 
Metro Airports 
Kolkata 
Chennai 
 
715.00 
505.00 
3. Aeronautical Communication Services 461.00 
4. Information Technology 25.00 
5. Ground Safety Services 55.00 
6. Equity contribution in JV companies 100.00 
Total 2774.15 
 
 
Budgetary support of ` 280.15 crore would be provided to Airports Authority of 
India during 2011-12 in connection with certain specific schemes as per details below:- 
 
 
    (` in crore) 
S.No. Allocation for Budgetary 
Support 
1. Investment in NE Region 20.00 
2. Other crucial areas  6.00 
  Budgetary 
support in the 

form of grants -
in-aid 
3. Construction of Greenfield airport at Pakyong 72.00 
4. Construction of Greenfield airport at Itanagar 1.00 
5. Construction of Greenfield airport at Cheitu 0.48 
6. GPS Aided Geo Augmented N avigation 
(GAGAN) system over Indian airspace 
105.00 
7. Construction of new terminal building at Leh 0.50 
8. Construction of new airport at Ajmer 0.50 
9. Upgradation of Agatti airport(Phase-II) 0.50 
10. Construction of new terminal building 
including new apron at Port Blair 
1.00 
11. Construction of new terminal building at 
Tirupati airport. 
15.00 
12. Construction of new terminal building 
including car park at Puducherry airport 
4.00 
13. Construction of culvert across the extended 
runway at Puducherry airport 
8.00 
14. Development of Jalgoan airport 5.00 
15. Expansion and modification of terminal 
building at Jammu 
2.07 
16. Development of Gondia airport (Phase-II)  38.00 
17. Construction of terminal building of modular 
design, apron, car park, contro l tower, taxi 
track etc. at Jharsuguda. 
0.05 
18. Development of Deoghar airport 0.05 
19. Procurement of electronic security 
equipments 
1.00 
Total 280.15 
 
 
 
(iv) PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED 
 
    (` in crore) 
S.No. Schemes Approved 
Outlay 
2011-12 
1. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Acquisition of new fleet 
Twin Light Helicopters 
Medium Helicopters 
Heavy Helicopters 
 
40.00 
128.09 
96.97 
2. Import of capital equipment 
Various workshop equipments 
 
6.60 
3. 
a. 
Building and other projects 
Maintenance Centre/ Joint Venture with HAL 
 
5.00 

b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
Creation of heliport at Rohini, New Delhi 
Acquisition of basic helicopter simulator 
Juhu Residential Complex 
IT Plan 
Other civil/ electrical works etc. 
7.00 
3.00* 
0.92 
2.50 
6.12 
Total 296.20 
*Budgetary Support 
 
 
(v) HOTEL CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
      (` in crore) 
S.No. Schemes Approved 
Outlay 
2011-12 
1. Renovation of Centaur Hotel, Delhi Airport 7.00 
2. Renovation of Chefair Flight Catering, Delhi 5.00 
3. Renovation of Centaur Lake View Hotel , 
Srinagar 
1.00 
4. Renovation of Chefair Flight Catering, Mumbai 2.00 
Total 15.00 
 
The entire expenditure will be borne out of the internal and extra 
budgetary resources of the company. 
 
 
 
(vi) AIR INDIA CHARTERS LIMITED 
(` in crore) 
S.No. Schemes Approved 
Outlay 
2011-12 
1. Other capital expenditure 20.00 
 Total 20.00 
 
The entire expenditure will be borne out of the internal and extra 
budgetary resources of the company. 
 
 
(vii) INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN AKADEMI 
(` in crore) 
S.No. Schemes Approved 
Outlay 
2011-12 
1. Training aids and equipments. 0.75 
2. Construction of swimming pool. 1.50 
3. Construction of auditorium. 1.50 

4. Furniture and fixtures. 0.25 
5. Plant & Machinery/Tools & equipment. 0.25 
6. Information Technology. 0.25 
7. Acquisition of vehicles. 0.50 
Total 5.00 
 
The entire outlay is to be funded by the Government in the form of 
grants-in-aid. 
 
 
(viii) DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
    (` in crore) 
  
 
 
 
 
The entire outlay is to be funded by the Government in the form of 
budgetary support. 
 
 
(ix) BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY 
 
                                                            (` in crore) 
S.No. Schemes Approved 
Outlay 
2011-12 
1. Purchase of BDDS equipment/ PIC System 8.00 
2. Information Technology 5.00 
3. Setting up of Civil Aviation Security Training 10.00 
S.No. Schemes Approved 
Outlay 
2011-12 
A. Capital  
1. Machinery & equipment 1.00 
2. Machinery & equipment (IT) 20.00 
3. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Civil Works 
DGCA Bhavan 
Regional offices 
Creation of Training Academy 
Establishment of Helicopter Academy 
 
 
30.00 
 
B. Revenue  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Modernization 
Foreign training for DGCA officers 
Development projects and consultancy/studies 
Publicity 
Contribution to COSCAP project 
9.00 
Total 60.00 

Academy 
4. 
 
a. 
 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 
Restructuring of Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security and construction of Hqrs. building 
Construction of office accommodation at 
regional offices 
Construction of BCAS(HQ) building 
Salary and allowances 
Domestic travel expenses 
Office expenses 
Foreign travel expenses 
Other administrative expenses 
Professional services 
Rent, Rates & Taxes 
Training & capacity building 
 
 
9.00 
 
12.00 
3.00 
0.50 
2.75 
0.50 
3.20 
2.00 
0.20 
2.00 
5. 
a. 
 
 
b. 
 
Contribution for  Co -operative Aviation 
Security Programme – Asia Pacific (CASP-AP) 
programme of ICAO 
Conference & Summits 
 
0.20 
 
 
2.00 
6. Advance Imaging Technology (Body Scanner) 5.00 
7. Radiological Detection Equipments 71.00 
Total 136.35 
 
The entire outlay is to be funded by the Government in the form of budgetary 
support. 
 
 
 
(x) AERO CLUB OF INDIA 
      (` in crore) 
 
S.No. Schemes Approved 
Outlay 
2011-12 
1. Flying training and aerosports development 6.00 
Total 6.00 
 
The entire outlay is to be funded by the Government in the form of grants-in-aid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – III 
 
POLICY FRAMEWORK 
 
 
3.1 In order to provide best services at affordable prices and to curb the practice of 
oligopoly to the disadvantage of the customers, the Ministry of Civil Aviation, at the apex 
along with its subordinate organizations has the mandate to implement a level pl aying 
field for all stakeholders and facilitate the growth of the sector. The Ministry has the task 
to prescribe and enforce minimum standards of services for all agencies and to maintain 
a competitive civil aviation environment which ensures safety and security of consumers 
of the services as per international standards. The  objectives of the Civil Aviation 
Ministry are to provide effective regulation of air transport in the country along with safe, 
efficient, reliable and widespread quality air transport services at affordable prices.  
 As per the Annual Report (2010 -11) of the Ministry, following policies are 
followed to regulate the Civil Aviation sector:- 
 
(a) OPEN SKIES POLICY 
3.2 A long standing demand of various stakeholders in the Indian aviation in dustry in 
order to augment passenger traffic and its positive impact on Travel & Tourism industry 
has been that India  should move towards an „Open Skies Policy ‟. The “Open skies 
policy” s trictly speaking means unrestricted access by any carrier into the so vereign 
territory of a country without any written agreement specifying capacity, ports of call or 
schedule of services.  In other words an Open Skies policy would allow the foreign 
airline of any country or ownership to land at any port on any number of o ccasions and 
with unlimited seat capacity.  There would be no restriction on the type of aircraft use, 
no demand for certification, no regularity of service and no need to specify at which 
airports they would land. Such a policy is most common with countri es that have no 
national carriers of their own and have only one or two airports. Looking at the global 
aviation sector it has  been found that n o sovereign country of any eminence practices 

Open Skies  policy, least of all the European Union, UK, USA , Japan, Australia or 
countries in South East Asia. 
 
3.3 Even today , International travel is not yet liberalized  and it is still regulated by 
bilateral agreements whereby two nations sign an agreement to allow civil aviation 
between their  territories. The Bilateral agreements signed between two countries 
continue to restrict aspects such as the  number of possible flights, the number and the 
identity of the carriers and the airports that  can be served.  Presently almost all the  
Members of the International Civil Avi ation Organization (ICAO) follow the system of 
negotiated bilateral treaties determining the aviation relations between two sovereign 
contracting parties. The bilateral regulatory model is being followed to enforce 
sovereignty, discipline and regularity of air service. 
 
3.4 During 01st April 2010 to 31st December, 2010, the Ministry of Civil Aviation had 
bilateral air talks with Brazil, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Zimbabwe, Malaysia, Indonesia 
and Iraq to review the existing bilateral arrangements.  In addition, Indian delegation 
participated in the 3rd ICAO International Civil Aviation Conference (ICAN) held in 
Montego Bay (Jamaica) from 28th June to 2nd July, 2010, where talks were held with 
the representatives of 23 countries.  The formal talks were held with t he representatives 
of Bahrain, Burkina Faso, Canada, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Fiji, Hong Kong, 
Nigeria, Singapore, Spain, UAE, Uganda, USA, Trinidad & Tobago and informal talks 
were held with the representatives of Barbados, Jamaica,  Namibia, Oman, Rw anda, 
Surinam and Switzerland. 
 
3.5 Noting that India has bilateral relations with many countries but have air 
connectivity   with very few of those, the Committee desired to know the reasons thereof 
and also the measures being taken to start operations in  these sectors. The Ministry in 
a written submission replied: 
“At present India has Bilateral Air Services Agreement with 108 countries. 
Out of these, 53 countries are connected through physical operations of 
Indian and/or foreign carriers or by way of cod e share arrangements 
between Indian and foreign carriers.  Presently, we do not have air 

connectivity with 55 such countries, with which we have bilateral Air 
Services Agreement. The primary reason for it is that actual air service 
operation by a designated  airline of any country is guided by its 
commercial judgment, based on market demand, flow of traffic, viability of 
operations and fleet availability etc. Government does not interfere in such 
commercial matters of the airlines.”   
 
 
 
(b) PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP/ FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT POLICY  
(AIRPORTS) 
 
3.6 The Constitution of India refers to civil aviation as a subject in the Central List. 
Resultantly, the subject falls within the legislative competence of Parliament. The Aircraft 
Rules, 1937 permit  airports other than Government airports to be owned by citizens of 
India or companies or corporations registered and having their principal place of 
business in India. Thus the legislative framework for privatization of airports already 
exists. In fact, s ome airports are already owned by State Governments, private 
companies and even individuals.  
 
3.7 In view of the worldwide thrust towards corporatization and privatization of 
airports, what is needed is a strategy that permits utmost latitude in the patte rns of 
ownership and management of airports in the country. Thus, airports may be owned by 
the Central Government, PSUs, State Governments, Urban local bodies, private 
companies and individuals, as also by joint ventures involving one or more of the above. 
Similarly, it would be best to keep all the options open in respect of the management of 
airports or parts of airports. These could be on Build -Own-Transfer (BOT), Build -Own-
Lease-Transfer (BOLT), Build -Own-Operate (BOO), Lease -Develop-Operate (LDO), 
Joint venture, Management Contract or Wrap -around Addition basis. In each individual 
case, the exact pattern could be negotiated, depending on the circumstances.  
 
3.8 In the case of high -cost projects involving international hubs, Government may 
seek international or bilateral cooperation with countries having the requisite expertise 
and financial strength. The actual implementation of the projects would be entrusted to 

consortia interested in turnkey execution on a joint venture basis. Foreign equity 
participation in such ventures may be permitted upto 74% with automatic approvals, and 
upto 100% with special permission. Such participation could also be by foreign airport 
authorities. It may be clarified that the normal procedures of licensing of airports by th e 
DGCA would continue to apply in accordance with the laid down regulations.  
     
 
3.9 For both the purposes of bridging the yawning gap in resources as also to bring 
in greater efficiency in management of airports, the participation of private parties 
(including foreign ones) is a must. An Airport Restructuring Committee in the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation looks into existing airports, in respect of which private sector involvement 
for development and upgradation of infrastructure is desired. It  also prepa res a shelf of 
projects in respect of Greenfield airports. The pre -feasibility reports are made available 
to private investors.  
 
3.10 The A irport Authority of India ( AAI) creates  separate profit centers for all 
individual airports and hives them off as subsidiary companies on a case to case basis, 
for the purpose of entering into commercial arrangements or joint ventures with private 
parties. Where airport operators desire private participation in their existing airports, all 
patterns of ownership and mana gement would be open to them as elucidated in the 
preceding section. No Government approval would, however, be required.  
 
3.11 In case of Greenfield projects, the Central Government, the AAI, a State 
Government private company or a group of individuals ca n act as the promoter. The 
promoter will be required to prepare a pre -feasibility study and submit the formal 
proposal to the concerned State Government. The State Government will add its 
comments to the proposal in respect of acquisition of land, supply o f water and power, 
construction of access roads, etc. and forward the propos al to the Central Government. 
The Central Government will set up an independent statutory body called the Airport 
Approval Commission, having adequate technical and financial exper tise to examine 
such proposals quickly and submit its recommendations on three aspects:  

 
 Whether there is need for a Greenfield airport at the suggested 
place, taking into account the existing airports in the vicinity and 
projected increase in traffic;  
 Which is the best site, which is technically feasible and 
economically viable;  
 In case there is need for a Greenfield airport and it is found to be 
prima facie, feasible and viable, whether it should be executed in 
the public or private sector or be taken up as a joint venture.  
 
 
3.12 On the receipt of the report of the Airport Approval Commission, the matter will 
be examined by the Central Government at the appropriate level for a decision. A 
decision once taken will normally not be subject to modification at a later stage.  
 
3.13 Once the Central Government has cleared the project, the promoter, if it is a 
Government body, will follow the prescribed procedure for floating global tenders in 
order to select the best party capable of executing the project as  also to obtain the best 
possible terms. The tendering procedure will be transparent. The selected party would 
then prepare a detailed feasibility report, which would be sent to the Central 
Government for final acceptance. Approvals once accorded would not  normally be 
revoked. Fiscal incentives would be provided to those involved in infrastructure projects, 
as maybe decided by Government for time -to-time. Currently, the following incentives 
are available: 
  
 Hundred per cent deduction in profits for purposes  of Income Tax for the 
first five years.  
 Thirty per cent deduction in profits for the same purpose for the next five 
years.  
 Full deduction to run for continuous ten out of twenty fiscal years of the 
assesses choice.  
 Forty per cent of the profit from inf rastructure is also deductible for 
financial institutions providing long-term finance for infrastructure projects.  
 
 

3.14 Such incentives should be made available not only to new companies investing 
in airport infrastructure but also to AAI and the existi ng agencies investing in up 
gradation of existing airport infrastructure. AAI may provide air traffic control services in 
private airports on terms and conditions mutually agreed upon. Alternatively, it may 
provide ATC staff on deputation and give advice o n the specifications of the equipment 
to be compulsorily installed for communication, navigation and surveillance.  
      
 
3.15 The Ministry of Civil Aviation in a written submission with regard to private and 
foreign investment in the civil aviation Sector submitted the following: 
 
Existing Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Norms in Civil Aviation Sector 
 
i) Airports:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector/ Activity FDI Cap/ 
Equity 
Entry 
route 
Other Conditions 
 
1. 
 
Greenfield 
Projects 
 
100% 
 
Automatic 
Subject to Sectoral 
regulations notified by 
Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
2. Existing Projects 100% FIPB 
beyond 
74%  
Subject to Sectoral 
regulations notified by 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 
ii) Air Transport Services:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector/ Activity FDI 
Cap/ 
Equity 
Entry 
route 
 
Other Conditions 
1. Domestic Scheduled 
passenger Airlines 
49%, 
100 % 
by NRI 
Automatic 
route 
Subject to no direct or 
indirect participation by 
any foreign airlines 
and sectoral 
regulations. 
2. Non-scheduled Airlines 
(a) Passenger/ 
Chartered 
(b) Cargo 
 
74%, 
100 % 
by NRI 
 
Automatic 
route 
 Subject to sectoral 
regulations notified by 
Ministry of Civil 
Aviation No direct or 
indirect participation by 

any foreign airlines in 
Non-scheduled and 
chartered airlines. 
Foreign airlines are 
allowed to participate 
in the equity of 
companies operating 
Cargo airlines. 
 
iii) Ground Handling Services and Other activities:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector/ Activity FDI 
Cap/ 
Equity 
Entry 
route 
 
Other Conditions 
1.  Ground  handling 
Services 
74%, 
100 % 
by NRI 
Automatic 
route 
Subject to Sectoral 
regulations notified b y 
Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and security 
clearance. 
2. Maintenance and      
Repair Organisation 
 
100% Automatic 
route 
Subject to Sectoral 
regulations notified by 
Ministry of Civil 
Aviation 
3. Flying Training 
Institutes/ 
Technical Training 
Institutions  
100% Automatic 
route 
Subject to Sectoral 
regulations notified by 
Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and approval 
of DGCA 
4. Helicopter Services/ 
Seaplane Services 
100% Automatic 
route 
Subject to Sectoral 
regulations notified by 
Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and appr oval 
of DGCA. Foreign 
airlines are allowed to 
participate in the equity 
of companies 
operating Helicopter 
and Seaplane Services 
 
Subsequently the Finance Minister, in his Budget Speech for the Financial Year 
2012-13, made the following announcement: 
“A proposal to allow foreign airlines to participate up to 49 percent in the equity of 
an air transport undertaking engaged in operation of scheduled and non -
scheduled air transport services is under active consideration of the 
Government”. 

 
(C) POLICY DEFINING  THE ROLE OF THE CENTRAL AND STATE 
GOVERNMENTS  
 
 
3.16 The Ministry‟s website informs as under:- 
The role and functions of the Central Government as contained in the various 
statutes and the preceding sections extend to the following matters:  
 
 Investment in airport infrastructure  
 Clearance of Greenfield airport projects  
 Airspace management, safety and security of airports  
 Bilateral air services agreements, including those involving international 
cooperation for modernization and up gradation of airports  
 Licensing of airports and ATC personnel  
 Environmental aspects and removal of obstructions around airports  
 Approval of aeronautical charges  
 
 
3.17 The Ministry of Civil Aviation will try to facilitate the speedy clearance of projects 
from different Ministries. The State Governments will deal with the following aspects:  
 
 Acquisition of private land and allotment of Government land  
 Supply of water and power, and provision of sanitation and sewage 
services  
 Provision of surface access through multi-modal linkages  
 Prevention of environmental pollution  
 Maintenance of law and order  
 Protection of airports from encroachments and vandalism.  
 
3.18 In case Government land is allotted by a State Government for an airport owned 
by a private party, it may be mad e available at the same rate as is charged from other 
industrial ventures in the State. Government will ensure that legislative and 
administrative mechanisms for speedy acquisition of land are devised. The Ministry of 
Civil Aviation will liaise with the St ate Governments in order to ensure provision of all 
these essential services and basic facilities. The State Civil Aviation Secretaries will act 
as coordinating officers for single -point liaison with all the State -level departments and 
authorities.  

 
(d) DOMESTIC AIR TRANSPORT POLICY 
 
3.19 On 28th May 1953 - with the enactment of the Air Corporations Act, 1953 - 
Government of India nationalized the airline industry. In accordance with this Act, two 
air corporations, viz. Indian Airlines Corporation and Air India International, were 
established and the assets of all the then existing air companies were transferred to the 
two new Corporations. The operation of scheduled air transport services was made a 
monopoly of these two Corporations and the Act prohibited  any other person or their 
associates from operating any scheduled air transport services from/ to / or across 
India. However, on March 1, 1994 the Air Corporation Act, 1953 was repealed thereby 
ending the monopoly of the Corporations on scheduled air tran sport services. While the 
domestic air transport services were liberalized and private operators were permitted to 
provide scheduled air transport services, the Government has laid down a policy 
framework to ensure safety and security of operations as well  as the orderly growth of 
air transport services keeping in view the infrastructure constraints at a number of 
airports.  
 
 
 3.20 CATEGORIES OF AIR TRANSPORT SERVICES 
  
i) Scheduled Air Transport Service:  
Scheduled Air Transport Service means an air transpor t service 
undertaken between two or more places and operated according to a 
published time table or with flights so regular or frequent that they 
constitute a recognizably systematic series, each flight being open to use 
by members of the public.  
 
ii) Non-Scheduled Services:  
Non-Scheduled Operation means an air transport service other than 
scheduled air transport service and that may be on charter basis and/or 
non-scheduled basis. The operator is not permitted to publish time 
schedule and issue tickets to passengers. 

 
 
iii) Air Cargo Services:  
An air cargo service means air transportation of cargo and mail. 
Passengers are not permitted to be on these operations. It may be on 
scheduled or non -scheduled basis. These operations are to destinations 
within India. For operations outside India, the operator has to take specific 
permission of DGCA demonstrating his capacity for conducting such 
operations. 
 
 
3.21 FOREIGN EQUITY PARTICIPATION IN AIR TRANSPORT SERVICES  
 
 Foreign equity up to 49% and NRI investment up to 100% is permissible in 
the domestic air transport services through the automatic route;  
 Equity from foreign airlines is not allowed, directly or indirectly, in the 
domestic air transport services.  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector/ 
Activity 
FDI 
Cap/ 
Equity 
Entry 
route 
 
Other Conditions 
1. Domestic 
Scheduled 
passenger 
Airlines 
49%, 
100 % 
by NRI 
Automatic 
route 
Subject to no direct or 
indirect participation by any 
foreign airlines and 
sectoral regulations. 
 
2. Non-
scheduled 
Airlines 
Passenger/ 
Chartered 
Cargo 
74%, 
100 % 
by NRI 
Automatic 
route 
 Subject to sectoral 
regulations notified by 
Ministry of Civil Aviation No 
direct or indirect 
participation by any foreign 
airlines in Non -scheduled 
and chartered airlines. 
Foreign airlines are 
allowed to participate in the 
equity of compan ies 
operating Cargo airlines. 
 
 
 

3.22 The M inistry of Civil Aviation on their website has laid down the following 
procedure for starting scheduled/non-scheduled air transport services in the country: 
 
“An Aircraft Acquisition Committee (AAC) considers pro posals for grant of 
permission to operate scheduled/non -scheduled air transport services. The 
present composition of the Committee is:  
 
o Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation - Convenor  
o Financial Advisor, Ministry of Civil Aviation - Member  
o Chairman, Airports Authority India - Member  
o Director General of Civil Aviation - Member  
o Commissioner of Civil Aviation Security, Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security - Member  
 
The three-stage clearance procedure laid down for starting Air Transport 
Services is as under:  
 
(1)  Issue of NOC for Scheduled/ Non -Scheduled services - The 
competence and viability of the company to operate safe and 
reliable air transport service is considered at this stage.  
 
(2)  Import permission for aircraft - The details of specific types of 
aircraft, their airworthiness, seating capacity, mode of acquisition 
and arrangements of security programme, training facilities for crew 
and engineers, Operations Manual, maintenance facilities, etc. are 
looked into by the Committee.  
 
(3)  Issue of permit for Scheduled/Non -Scheduled air services - Permit 
is issued by DGCA after completion of all requirements laid down in 
the regulations/guidelines.”  
 
 
 
(e) REGULATION OF MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS 
 
3.23 The aviation sector , after a very dynamic gro wth for the last two decades, 
witnessed the first round of consolidation in the aviation market    in 2007 with the 
acquisition of Air Deccan , a Low cost carrier by Kingfisher. It was followed by the 
merger of the two national entities Air India and Indian Airlines into one company , Air 
India and Jet airways , a private sector Airline , acquiring Sahara Airlines. The Indian 

Aviation industry is poised for a second round of consolidation as per industry experts 
and media reports on the health of low cost carrie rs requiring significant capital and 
cash flow. The second round of consolidation is expected to be strategic in nature to 
leverage strengths rather than pursuing scale designed to restore profitability. The 
aviation sector is growing at a  fast pace and t he demand for skilled personnel such as 
pilots, crew, engineers has outstripped supply leading to sharp escalation in wages and 
operating costs of Airlines. 
 
3.24 On being enquired by the  Committee about the policy framework and regulatory 
mechanism for Mergers and Acquisitions in the Aviation Sector, the Ministry in a written 
reply had furnished the following information: 
 
“As per Ci vil Aviation Requirements (CAR) , prior permission of 
DGCA/Ministry of Civil Aviation shall be required for takeover of the 
company by another company. While granting the permission of merger, it 
is ensured that the merged entity will     comply with the  requirement of 
concerned CAR for becoming an airline operator.” 
 
3.25 Considering the overall financial health of the sector, th e Government is aware of 
the possibility of consolidation in the airline industry.  Accordingly, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation has formulated a policy to be followed regarding use of airport infrastructure in 
case of merger/take-over of airlines and sale/transfer of aircraft in May 2006.  The policy 
is as under: 
“The airlines that takes over the aircraft pursuant to merger/take over or 
sale / transfer of the aircraft may be allowed to use of airport 
infrastructure like parking bays, landing slots etc., which i s allotted by 
Airport Operator without any payment,  Use of such rights may be 
allowed with the following conditions: 
 
(i) Only the user rights over such infrastructure that are given to an 
airline on non -payment basis e.g. parking bays, landing slots etc. 
may be allowed to be used   by the airline that takes over the 
aircraft.  
 
(ii) User rights cannot be transferred by one airline to the  other airlines 
in any event.” 
 

(F) CARTELIZATION AND REGULATION OF AIRFARES 
 
3.26 The famous Scottish economist Adam Smith in his  famous book “ Wealth of 
Nations” in 1776 had said “People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for 
merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public or 
in some contrivance to raise prices”. The Oxford Dictionary defines `Cartel‟ as “An 
informal association of manufacturers or suppliers to maintain prices at a high level, and 
control production, marketing arrangements”. 
 
3.27 With the opening up of the Indian Aviation Sector for private players, the fear of 
cartelization by private entities for furthering profits  proved true in 2010 during the peak 
holiday season in November. 
 
3.28 When the Committee asked the Ministry about the exorbitant fares charged by 
the private Airlines, the Ministry in a written reply stated: 
“The airfares on domestic sector were on higher side in the week starting 
from 15th November 2010 probably due to high demand because of mid 
week holiday and extended weekend. 
 
Airfares are not being regulated by the Government.  Domestic airlines are 
free to charge air fares as per the market forces. 
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has been given powers 
under rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 to direct airlines to establish 
tariff having regard to all factors, publish the tariff on its w ebsite or two 
daily newspapers, maintain all records relating to tariff and produce on 
demand by DGCA for inspection, Director General may issue directors to 
the airlines in case airlines establish predatory or excessive tariff or 
engage in oligopolistic practice. 
 
In view of the recent reports of excessive tariff being charged by airlines 
on different routes, Director General has issued direction to airlines to 
furnish established tariff route -wise and fare category -wise on monthly 
basis and also to notify  noticeable changes to DGCA within 24 hours of 
affecting such a change.  The intention behind the above directions is to 
keep the passengers informed of pricing pattern of airlines.  Further, 
DGCA has issued directions to the airlines to furnish details of  route-wise 
tariff established by them across the network in various fare categories.  A 

Tariff Analysis Unit has been set up in DGCA to monitor tariff on regular 
basis. “  
 
 
 
3.29 Further when the Committee posed the question again to the Ministry  during 
evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation stated as under: 
“I would like to inform that a Civil Aviation Economic Advisory Council has 
been set up in the Ministry and met last week in wake of recent increase in 
air fares and this Committee will a ddress economic issues of air transport 
with special focus on air fares.  Further a working group has been set up 
under DGCA to formulate measures to enhance transparency and 
strengthening of monitoring mechanism and also to formulate international 
best pr actices in disclosure of air fares for the protection of consumers.  
Several consumer friendly regulations have been developed and are being 
implemented.” 
 
 
 
3.30 The C ommittee, while taking a larger view of the situation asked the Ministry 
about its policy to prevent Cartelization for the benefit of the consumers, the Ministry in 
a written note stated: 
 
“The issue of cartelization falls within the purview of Competition 
Commission of India who ensures that markets work well for consumers‟ 
through effective competition and level playing fields.  
 
However it is the Gov ernment‟s endeavor to ensure effective competition 
and level playing fields. The monopoly in air transport services had 
accordingly been removed and all the applicants comply with certain 
guidelines (CAR) has been allowed to operate aircrafts in the country so 
that more options can be made available to the consumers. 
 
With regard to cartelization in airfare s, it is to be mentioned that Airfares 
applicable for domestic passengers are determined by  market forces and 
therefore are not fixed by Government. The framework for regulation of 
domestic Airfares in the Country is governed by Rule 135 of the Air Craft 
Rules 1937 which lays down broad principles including for maintaining 
transparency of tariff publication by the Airlines. In view of sudden surge in 
airfares for flights on various metro routes from 15th Nov., 2010 onwards 
compared to those prevalent a week before, without any increase in cost 

of operation, all the schedule airlines were directed  to charge tariff at a 
reasonable level.” 
 
 
3.31 With a view to maintaining transparency in tariff publication, Directorate General 
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has taken following steps: 
 
- Scheduled domestic airlines have been directed to display established 
tariff route-wise and fare category-wise in their respective websites on 
monthly basis and also to notify any significant and noticeable 
changes to DGCA within 24 hrs of effecting such a change.  
 
- A Tariff Analysis Unit has been set up in DGCA to monito r tariff on 
regular basis. 
 
 
A Working Group on Regulatory Framework to protect consumer interest 
including disclosure of tariffs and conditions of service by domestic airlines was set up 
on 20.12.2010 under the Chairmanship of DGCA. The Terms of Reference  for the 
Working Group are as under: 
 
(i) The Group shall examine the existing system of passenger fare structuring 
by all the scheduled domestic airlines and the manner in which the 
passenger fares are disclosed to public in the context of the reported 
difficulties of consumers in making an informed choice. 
 
(ii) The Group shall identify areas where disclosure of tariffs and conditions of 
service by scheduled domestic airlines require further improvement in 
promoting transparency with a view to protect interest of consumers. 
 
(iii) The Group shall, based on its finding,  recommend measures to enhance 
transparency in the disclosure of tariffs and conditions of service relating 
to scheduled domestic airlines. 
 
(iv) The Group shall also recommend improvements i n the system of 
monitoring by DGCA so as to ensure transparency and disclosure of 
passenger air fares and conditions of service by scheduled domestic 
airlines. 
 
(v) The Group shall study International best practices in disclosure and  
transparency of prices by airlines. 
 
(vi) The Group shall recommend measures that may be required to be taken 
to raise consumer awareness towards passenger rights. 

(g) TAXES AND OTHER LEVIES  
 
3.31 The Committee enquired during evidence about the deteriorating financial health  
of the national carrier, the then CMD, Air India stated as under: 
 
“I pay `1,200 crore sales tax a year.  Out of my ` 8,000 crore, ` 1,200 
crore goes to sales tax because I pay from 23 percent to 29 percent.  But 
if it is made into a declared good, then i t comes to four percent.  So, my 
tax burden will come down from ` 1,200 crore to something like ` 400 
crore and I wil l get a saving of ` 800 crore . We have made the 
representation from everybody to the Government of India.  But the 
problem is that the Stat e Governments would not agree to this.  The 
Finance Minister has said that they are more interested to get the General 
Sales Tax (GST) first, which is there and all over the world it is there.  That 
is what they want to do first.”   
 
 
 
3.32 Further more , the then CMD, Air India during evidence in his presentation 
furnished the following in relation to having a conducive fiscal regime:  
 
 “Regulation / withdrawal of service tax applied on air fares which have  
been introduced for Economy class International pa ssengers & for all 
classes of domestic passengers for travel effective 01July, 2010 and 
service tax on charter flights as such taxes serve to discourage air travel 
and increase air travel costs on corporate and individual travelers.   
  
 Service Tax of 10.3 % on labour charges, acts as a disincentive for third 
party business. 
 VAT of 12.5% on material for Indian customers. 
 Octroi (Mumbai) of 5.5% on engines and 0.1% on aircraft spares. 
 
 Classification of Aviation as „Infrastructure Sector‟-Airline Industry is highly 
capital intensive, requiring large funds for renewal and expansion of fleet 
and related facilities. The combined debt of the aviation ind ustry in India is 
in excess of ` 60,000 crore. Request classification as „Infrastructure 
Sector‟ to have access to ECB borrowings for financing working capital 
requirements. 
 Relaxations by RBI for classification of asset as NPA to provide flexibility 
to banks to refinance the loans at a lower cost or to convert into a term 
loan. 
 Rationalization of Taxes on ATF.  

o High ATF Price is due to high taxes - Excise Duty (10%) & State 
Sales Tax (avg 25 %). 
o Need to abolish/reduce Excise Duty and categorise ATF as 
„Declared Goods‟ under Central Sales Tax Act to limit State Sales 
Tax on ATF to 4%. 
 
 Airlines had to resort to large  borrowings in foreign currency, therefore 
need exemption from Withholding tax on interest payments on External 
Commercial Borrowings (ECBs) under Income Tax Act 1961, as well as 
Reverse Service charges under Section 66A of the Service Tax 
provisions. 
   
 Similarly, Airlines had to acquire aircraft and engines on lease. Currently, 
lease rental payments for aircraft / engines are subject to levy of 
Withholding Tax under Income Tax Act.  
• Levy of Withholding Tax on leased aircraft / engines makes them 
highly ex pensive adversely impacting operating costs and 
competitiveness of Indian carriers vis-avis foreign carriers. 
• Lease rentals on aircraft / engines were exempt from withholding 
tax under Section 10(15A) of Income Tax Act but the exemption 
withdrawn for lease on/after 1st April 2007.  
• Need to exempt payment of interest on ECBs and lease rental on 
leased aircraft / engines from withholding tax. 
 
 High Airport Charges and Levy of Royalty: 
• Airports in India levy various charges for airport services and also 
require sharing of revenue from service providers at airports in the 
form of royalty at high rates, possibly amongst the highest 
compared to other airports worldwide. 
• Need rationalization of charges and royalty payment on competitive 
basis. 
• Miscellaneous service charges (fire hydrant, airport driving permit, 
etc.) inflated. 
• Levy of user fee, UDF and other airport charges at prohibitively 
high rates unrelated to cost. 
 
 Reverse Service Charges: 
– The service tax department has issued show cause notices and 
proceedings against NACIL for demand on service tax on agency fees, 
commitment fees and other type of expenses incurred abroad on loans 
raised from international banks and financial institutions. Details of 
services rendered to NACIL from various agencies are also r equired to 
be furnished. 
– NACIL has offices located in India as well as outside India. The offices 
located outside India are different premises and separate 
establishments as defined in section 66A of the Service Tax statute. 

The offices located in India, a re all registered under the single 
centralized registration at Mumbai for the erstwhile Air India and under 
regional registration for the erstwhile Indian Airlines.    
– The offices outside India are locally registered in the country of their 
location and ar e subject to local taxes of that country. These offices 
receive the services in their own capacity and settle their accounts with 
the vendors locally. Such services are received abroad  from the 
vendors located abroad and having their domicile in the forei gn 
country. The privity of contract in such case is between the Vendors 
and the foreign branches.  
– The services rendered abroad and consumed abroad should not be 
taxable under the provisions of service tax law”. 
 
 
In this connection, following announcement  were made by the Finance Minister 
in his speech, while presenting the General Budget (2012-13): 
“The airline industry is fa cing financial crisis. The high operating cost of the 
sector is largely attributable to the cost of Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF).  To  
reduce the cost of ATF, Government has permitted direct import of ATF by Indian 
Carriers, as actual users. 
To address the immediate financing concerns of the Civil Aviation sector, I 
propose to permit ECB for working capital requirements of the airline in dustry for 
a period of one year, subject to a total ceiling of US Dollar 1 billion”. 

CHAPTER- IV 
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 
 
 
(a) DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION (DGCA) 
4.1 The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is the principal regulatory body 
in the field of Civil Aviation.  It is not only responsible for regulation of air transport 
services to / from / within India, formulation and enforcement of civil air regulations, air 
safety and airwor thiness standards, but also co -ordinates all regulator y functions with 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). It is responsible for implementation and 
monitoring of applicable standards in all the 18 annexure s of ICAO except annexure 17 
that deals with aviation security. The DGCA has its Headquarte rs in New Delhi. This 
organization is headed by the Director General of Civil Aviation, who is assisted by Joint 
Directors General and Deputy Directors General.  The Director General has the 
following Directorates under him: - 
 
i. Directorate of Regulations & Information. 
ii. Directorate of Air Transport. 
iii. Directorate of Airworthiness. 
iv. Directorate of Air Safety. 
v. Directorate of Training & Licensing. 
vi. Directorate of Aerodrome Standards. 
vii. Directorate of Flying Training. 
viii. Directorate of Flight Inspection. 
ix. Directorate of Administration. 
x. Aircraft Engineering Division 
xi. Air Space & Air Navigation Services 
xii. Training Academy. 
xiii. Information Technology Division 
 
 

4.2 The main function of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is to 
regulate all civil aviation matters.  Some of the salient functions are as under:- 
 
(1) Registration of civil aircraft. 
 (2) Formulation of standards of airworthiness for civil aircraft registered in India and 
grant of certificates of airworthiness to such aircraft. 
(3) Licensing of pilots, aircraf t maintenance engineers and flight engineers, and 
 conducting examinations and checks for that purpose. 
(4) Licensing of air traffic controllers. 
(5) Certification of aerodromes and CNS/ATM facilities. 
(6) Maintaining of check on the proficiency of light c rew, and also of other 
operational personnel such as flight dispatchers and cabin crew. 
(7) Granting of Air Operator‟s Certificates to Indian carriers and regulation of air 
 transport services operating to/from/within/over India by Indian and foreign 
 operators, including clearance of scheduled and non -scheduled flights of such 
 operators. 
(8) Conducting investigation into accidents/incidents and taking accident prevention 
measures including formulation of implementation of Safety Aviation  
Management Programmes. 
(9) Carrying out amendments to the Aircraft Act, t he Aircraft Rules and the Civil 
Aviation Requirements for complying with the amendments to ICAO Annexures, 
and initiating proposals for amendment to any other Act or for passing a new Act 
in order to give effect to an international Convention or amendment to an existing 
Convention. 
(10) Coordination of ICAO matters with all agencies and sending replies to State 
Letters, and taking all necessary action arising out of the Universal Safety 
Oversight Audit Programme (USOAP) of ICAO. 
(11) Supervision of the institutes/clubs/schools engaged in flying training including 
simulator training, AME training or any other training related with aviation, with a 
view to ensuring a high quality of training. 

(12) Granting approval to aircraft maintenance, repair and manufacturing 
organizations and their continued oversight. 
(13) To act as a nodal agency for implementing Annexure 9 provisions in India and for 
 coordinating matters relating to facilitation at Indian airport s including holding 
 meetings of the National Facilitation Committee. 
(14) Rendering advice to the Government on matters relating to air transport including 
 bilateral air services agreements, on ICAO  matters and generally on all technical 
 matters relatin g to civil aviation, and to Act as an overall regulatory and 
 developmental body for civil aviation in the country. 
(15) Coordination at national level for flexi -use of air space by civil and military air 
traffic agencies and interaction with ICAO for prov ision of more air routes for civil 
use through Indian air space. 
(16) Keeping a check on aircraft noise and engine emissions in accordance with 
ICAO Annex ure 16 and collaborating with the environmental authorities in this 
matter, if required. 
(17) Promoting indigenous design and manufacture of aircraft and aircraft 
components by acting as a catalytic agent. 
(18) Approving training programmes of operators for carriage of dangerous goods, 
 issuing authorizations for carriage of dangerous goods, etc. 
  
  
(i) SAFETY 
 
4.3 When the Committee, during briefing by the Ministry desired to know about the 
measures taken to enhance the safety of passengers, the Secretary stated as under: 
“As far as regulation is concerned, this is again an important aspect given 
the fact that the aviation sector is truly global. We have to ensure that the 
best international practice mandated by the International Civil Aviation 
Authority and other international organizations are implemented on a fast -
time basis. For this, we have now stren gthened the DGCA considerably – 
over 600 posts have been sanctioned. One of the aspects of surveillance 
is the human resource augmentation. This is being done. A lot of 
technology has been introduced into the DGCA. A lot of reorganization 

has gone on there. All this, we are sure will make the regulator much more 
effective.” 
 
 
 
The Secretary stated further: 
“On the safety issues that have been raised, there are three aspects. One 
is the regulatory issues and the regulatory aspects, which the DGCA is 
looking after including the human resource augmentation, the kind of 
surveillance and safety issues, where the DGCA is working closely with 
the Airport authorities. The other aspect is the technology, equipment 
including the radar satellite systems and the ground management 
including the runway. This is also being given top priority by the Airport 
Authority in terms of what they are doing.  
 
……Sir, we have also set up Civil A viation Safety Advisory Council 
consisting of all the stakeholders from the Air port operators to the pilots.  
One meeting has already taken place where both the Minister and myself 
were present. A lot of suggestions had come for improvement in all these 
systems.  
 
 
 
4.4 During evidence in October, 2010, the Secretary elaborated further as under: 
“The sector is now poised for a very steady growth of about 21 percent 
and it is projected that the demand by 2015 would be whooping 180 
million as compared to 75 million today in terms of passengers.  This puts 
tremendous amount of pressure on the ground infrastructure as well as air 
infrastructure also in terms of regulatory issues, the air navigation issues 
and most important the manpower and the skill development that is 
required to me et and sustain this growth.  The emphasis has been on 
safety, security, comfort and affordability keeping the passenger in mind.  
Towards this end, we have been working very closely to strengthen the 
DGCA, the main regulator.  We are now having plan to set up Civil 
Aviation Authority as an umbrella organisation for the DGCA  and the 
International Civil Aviation Authority has come up with a report on how we 
could set up this Civil Aviation Authority which would have a Board of 
Management with Chairman and Members.  This would give it the needed 
financial and administrative aut onomy and flexibility so that they work 
independently of the Ministry to meet the challenges in terms of regulatory 
surveillance and oversight issues. 
 

A large number of steps have been taken in terms of safety and oversight 
by the DGCA and United States F ederal Aviation Authority which has 
done an audit check has also complimented the work of the DGCA in this.  
They have also evolved a strategy to keep all the stakeholders in the loop 
and have set up Civil Aviation Regulation Group as well as Civil Safety 
Council in terms of operations, airworthiness, air navigation and 
aerodromes.  So, these are some of the regulatory issues that we have 
addressed in the last four to five months.   We have also strengthened the 
number of staff in the DGCA so that the safety  and surveillance functions 
can be improved.  In fact, from 144 technical officers in March 2009, this 
has been increased to 432 by September this year so that the oversight 
and surveillance are given the importance that they deserve.” 
 
 
 
4.5  In view of the tragic aircraft accident at Mangalore Airport, the Committee asked 
the DGCA/the Ministry about further steps taken to prevent such accidents in future, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The Director General Civil Aviation as a part of th e re-assurance drive for 
the critical aerodromes had ordered inspection of critical airports to review 
thoroughly the system and facilities at these aerodromes.11 Airports were 
identified as Critical Airport from flight oper ations point of view i.e. Leh, 
Kullu, Simla, Port Blair, Agartala, Lengpui, Calicut, Man galore, Jammu, 
Patna and Latur. Inspection of seven airports has been carried  out by 
team of officials from Flight Operations and Aerodrome standards 
directorate, DGCA. 
 
Some of the following steps ha ve been initiated to enhance the safety of the 
aircraft operations at the aerodromes: 
 
 Provision of Runway End Safety Area 
 Ensure proper marking on runway 
 Proper maintenance of Basic strip and ensuring  Frangibility criteria 
 Periodic calibration of Nav aids 
 Maintenance of runway surface within appropriate Friction level 
 Removal of Obstructions and proper marking and lighting of 
permissible obstacles 
 Safety risk assessment in respect of non-compliances. 
 
DGCA has carried out Safety Audit of Air India Express  in the first 
week of July 2010.  However, the report/findings of the DGCA are still 
awaited. A detailed review of Air India Express operations is being 

conducted by our internal Quality Management Services.  The review has 
commenced and will cover all asp ects of the Organisation and 
Management, flight operations and training, flight safety, ground handling, 
cargo handling, flight dispatch, maintenance, engineering and security.  
 
 
The review will also include documentation and implementation of 
policies an d procedures.  On completion of the review, necessary 
corrective action, where required, will be taken. An IOSA audit is also 
planned for next year.” 
 
 
 
 
 
4.6 During their briefing on the subject, t he C ommittee observed that m any air 
accidents occur during  landings and tak eoffs due to human errors  and asked the 
Ministry whether any equipment/systems have been developed to assist the Pilots on 
the same. The Ministry in a written note furnished the following: 
 
“Accidents happen during Take Off and Landings as  that is when it is 
close to ground. 
 
 There are several different type of automated system to assist pilots. 
 DGCA with Flight Safety Foundation developed ALAR India Tool Kit 
(Approach & Landing Accident Risk Reduction). 
 Automated landing system is useable by equipped aircraft at several 
airports in India.  
  The equipments /systems to assist pilot in landing and for future air 
navigation system like GPS, GAGAN, ILS, MLS, RADAR etc.  
 
 
To assist Pilots during landings, the aircraft and the airports need to be  
equipped with advanced systems. The Pilots also have to be appropriately 
qualified to carry out such landings. The entire NACIL A (B747 -400, B777 
& A310) and AICL (B737 -800) fleet is equipped with CAT III Instrument 
Landing System which has built -in redun dancies. NACIL has adequate 
number of qualified Pilots to carry out such landings.”  
 
 
 
 

4.7 After the Mangalore Accident the Ministry had constituted a Civil Aviation Safety 
Advisory Council (CASAC) under the DGCA. The Committee asked the Ministry about 
the suggestions and recommendations from CASAC. The Ministry , in a  written note 
furnished to the Committee, stated as under: 
“The following suggestions/recommendations have come from Civil 
Aviation Safety Advisory Council (CASAC):- 
 
(i) Need for more inspectors  to cope up with the requirement of 
increasing traffic.  
 
(ii) The need for enhanced training and competency levels for its 
inspectors.  
 
(iii) The need for an interface between the regulator and the industry 
and public at large.  
 
(iv) DGCA should set up a public relatio ns office to ward off 
irresponsible reporting by the press on some occasions.   
 
(v) The need for a strong interface between ATC and safety offices of 
the airlines.    
 
(vi) Need to have thrust on helicopter operations was felt and it was 
suggested that steps shoul d be initiated to support and strengthen 
institutions like Aeronautical Society of India, Rotary Wing Society 
of India, whose expertise could be used. 
 
(vii) Setting up a CAA in India and an independent accident 
investigation Board. 
 
(viii) To improve treatment of aircraft and fill up gaps in this area, ground 
staff should be trained for better ground handling of the aircraft.  
 
(ix) The gaps in implementation of SMS should be addressed, for 
which a systemic changes need to be brought about including a 
mechanism for allowing  deviations, which will encourage the 
industry not to adopt shortcuts. 
 
(x) The need for the pilots to be more communicative in cockpit and 
more departments are required to be included in CRM was 
emphasized. The need for a partnership between the regulator and  
the airlines was also emphasized. 
 

(xi) The need for regular interaction with stakeholders and make 
progress through a collaborative decision making process was 
stressed. 
 
(xii) Considering the challenges that have to be faced in merging 
growth with safety, it was s uggested that there was a need to 
evolve a concept of learning from accidents. The need for 
modification of legislation relating to areas around airports was 
emphasized. It was suggested that formation of working groups in 
order to translate recommendations into reality was needed. 
 
(xiii) The need for better coordination between ATC, airport operators 
and the airlines was emphasised.  Since there is no process in 
place for monitoring the NOC  given by AAI for use of areas around 
the airport and expressed that a s ystem of continuous monitoring 
should be evolved to ensure that once a NOC has been obtained, 
there are no violations. It stressed the need for reducing bird 
strikes by using legislative provisions against slaughter houses. It 
was also stated that better c oordination with all regulatory 
authorities is needed in case of accidents and incidents. 
 
(xiv) It was also recommended that a quality assurance policy and the 
policy on safety management systems is publicly displayed and 
softer aspects of safety culture must b e developed. He also 
expressed the need for information exchange on a real-time basis. 
 
(xv) It was also stressed that human factors issues should be given 
importance by all stakeholders.   
 
(xvi) The need for health check of pilots and said oversight on medical 
standards checks for pilots is required to be strengthened. The 
industry response to safety initiatives was critical, and the industry 
has to ensure that a robust safety system is in place.  Concerns 
over under -reporting of incidents / accidents in the past wa s also 
expressed.   
 
(xvii) It was recommended to create a working group to bring in a 
highest safety performance.  
 
(xviii) Concerns about the improvements required in ATM, which has so 
far remained a bottleneck was also expressed. It was also viewed 
that there should be pre-determined procedures and a well laid out 
plan to deal with emergencies and accidents such as passenger 
handling. 
 

(xix) Reforms are needed for ATCOs, while ATCOs should be licensed, 
the possibility of their moving over to Gulf or other countries should 
be looked into and addressed very fast. Since the airlines are 
experimenting with new routes, the need to plan the feeder routes 
was also felt. 
 
(xx) The importance of high standards of training of captains was 
highlighted.  SMS implementation should be implement ed on 
priority. Voluntary reporting needs to be encouraged and it should 
be non -punitive. FOQA programming should be closely overseen 
by CEOs. 
 
(xxi) The need to tackle the obstructions around Mumbai airport was 
emphasized.  It was felt that there is no mechanis m to monitor the 
construction once an NOC had been given to constructors. He said 
institutionalized mechanism is needed for action against those who 
violate the norms.  The need for enforcing bird strike prevention 
measures was emphasized and it was recommended that the rules 
should be strictly implemented for slaying of animals around airport 
as per law. 
 
(xxii) It was suggested that Rules are to be framed to facilitate growth 
and safety of helicopters.  Regarding addressing the low level 
tracking of aircraft whi ch was a difficult problem in the absence of 
radar coverage, it was suggested that repeater stations may be 
installed for communication to ensure uninterrupted 
communication. The search and rescue was a weak area, and 
agencies should be assigned specific r oles and their work 
coordinated. 
 
(xxiii) The need for handling the aircraft with care on  the ground was felt 
for which training of staff and CRM is required.  Since the new 
ground handling service providers   did not know the good 
practices of ground handling, and stringent ground and ramp safety 
norms are needed , i t was also observed that oversight over 
dangerous goods needs to be stepped up as there are cases of 
such goods being carried without identification.  Since the cost 
implications of bird strike damage i s very high, this problem should 
be addressed on priority. 
 
(xxiv) The revision of certain AICs which are very old and need 
amendment e.g., push back operations at Mumbai was highlighted. 
 
(xxv) It was suggested that analysis of critical airports should include 
number of flights operating, bird hits at the airport etc. All airlines 
should have SOPs for airports incorporating safety aspects.   

 
(xxvi) Considering the fact that the biggest challenge faced by the 
maintenance organizations is the inadequate quality of the 
manpower coming from training institutes, the need to improve the 
quality of training and the need for practical maintenance training of 
high standard was emphasized. 
 
(xxvii) It was suggested that an agreement can be made with FAA on 
sharing of safety critical informatio n as FAA had made such 
agreements with some countries as this type of agreement will 
benefit operators”.  
 
 
 
 
4.8 The Committee desired to know the steps taken to avoid accidents during landing 
and taking of the planes  while referring to e veryday media rep orts  that a crash was 
averted at the last minute. The Ministry in a written note stated as under: 
 
“Standard Safety Guidelines are adhered to permit smooth landing and take 
off from the runways.  Due to technical faults / snags or any other compelling 
reasons, the aeroplane is unable to take off even after take -off clearance is 
issued, the other aeroplane which is approaching to land on the same 
runway is required to discontinue its approach and go -around, for another 
approach.  Such situations are as per the international norms being followed 
all over the world.  Media Reports distort this and publish as „crash averted at 
last minute‟ which is not correct.  Airports Authority of India (AAI) has taken 
the following measures to avoid accident during l anding and take off of 
aircraft: 
 
 Safety Management System which is a proactive measure for removing 
system deficiencies has been implemented. 
 
 Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Coordination Procedure are 
reviewed at regular intervals and amended if requir ed to rectify deficiencies 
as a proactive/resultant measure. 
 
 Upgradation of ATC Automation system at Delhi and Mumbai has been 
completed. 
 
 New ATC Automation system has been installed at Chennai, Nagpur, 
Ahmedabad, Varanasi, Mangalore, Trivandrum and Guwa hati. The same will 
be installed at 38 airports all over the country. 
 

 To augment the surveillance of Surface Movement Radar (ASMGCS) has 
been installed at six major airports (Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, 
Hyderabad and Bengaluru). 
 
At Delhi airport dur ing good visibility conditions, landing strips are visible 
from the control tower. Radar inputs are also available to the Tower 
controller as a substitute to visual sighting/reference. 
 
 
 
  
4.9 When t he Committee further asked the Ministry to explain the D GCA‟s policy 
concerning engagement of foreign pilots in Domestic carriers and the procedure to 
verify their credentials  as several foreign pilots are currently flying planes in India , the 
Ministry in a written reply furnished the following: 
 
 “Foreign Pilo ts are engaged by Domestic Airlines as per their 
requirements. The norms followed by NACIL for hiring expatriate Pilots 
are in accordance with CAR, Issue 1 of October 08, 1999 (Section 7 – 
Flight Crew Standards, Series „G‟, Part II) issued by the DGCA and 
amended from time to time. 
 
 Credentials of foreign pilots are verified in accordance with the provision 
stipulated in Civil Aviation Requirements Section 7 Series G, Part II” 
 
 
 
 
(ii) AIRPORT LICENSING  
 
4.10 The Committee took a serious view of the media reports that a majority of Airport 
Authority of India -owned Airports are not having DGCA licenses  and enquired from the 
Ministry as to how many airports ha d valid DGCA licenses as on date  and how many 
had applied for fresh issue/renewal of licenses.  The Ministry in a written reply furnished 
as under: 
 
“There are 14 Airports, used for scheduled flight operations which have valid 
license issued by DGCA, which are:   
1. Calicut 
2. Jaipur 
 

3. Mangalore 
4. Delhi 
5. Bangalore (BIAL) 
6. Jindal Vijayanagar                . 
7. Jamshedpur 
8. Coimbatore 
9. Bhopal 
10. Cochin 
11. Mumbai 
12. Hyderabad (HIAL) 
13. Aizawl 
14. Puttaparthy” 
 
 
 
 
4.11 15 Airports , which have applied for is sue/renewal of licenses are as per 
details listed below: 
 
S. 
No 
Name of Airport Date of receipts   
Of application 
Status 
1. Agartala Airport 19.08.2009 To be inspected by 
DGCA 
2. Bhubaneswar 01.05.2009 Under process in DGCA 
3. Dibrugarh 05.02.2009 To be inspected  by 
DGCA 
4. Imphal 12.06.2009 Under process in DGCA 
5. Indore 22.04.2009 Under Process in DGCA 
6. Khajuraho 20.05.2009 Under process in DGCA 
7. Madurai 08.10.2009 To be inspected by 
DGCA 
8. Mysore 26.10.2009 Application received 
9. Patna 10.06.2009 Under process in DGCA 
10. Ranchi 20.04.2009 Under Process in DGCA 
11. Trichy 06.05.2009 Under process in DGCA 
12. Udaipur 26.05.2009 Under process in DGCA 
13. Vadodra 16.07.2009 Under process in DGCA 
14. Nanded 07.01.2010 Under process in DGCA 
15 Latur 07.01.2010 Under process in DGCA 
 
 

As on 6th July 2010, applications in respect of following 25 airports 
were to be received from AAI for issue of license: 
 
1. Agatti   14. Aurangabad    
2. Belgaum  15.  Bhavnagar 
3. Dehradun  16. Dharamshala 
4. Dimapur  17. Hubli 
5. Jabalpur  18. Juhu 
6. Kandla  19. Lilabari 
7. Kullu   20 Pantnagar 
8. Ludhiana  21. Raipur 
9. Porbandar  22. Rajkot  
10. Rajamundry  23. Shimla 
11. Shillong (Barapani) 24.  Tirupati 
12. Surat   25. Vijayawada”. 
13. Tuticorin 
 
 
 
 
4.12 The Committee fu rther asked the Ministry about the validity of a DGCA license 
and penalties to be imposed on the Airport functioning without a DGCA license.  The 
Committee also sought reasons for delay/laxity on the part of the AAI or the Ministry on 
the licensing issue. The Ministry in a written reply furnished, the following information: 
 
“The aerodrome license is granted for period  not exceeding 24 month s.   
Schedule VI of the Aircraft Rules 1937, contains provision of imposing 
penalty of using aerodrome in violation of Rule 78 of the Aircraft Rules, 
which requires licensing of the aerodrome.” 
  
“The airports were earlier managed by  the Central Govt. i.e. DGCA and 
were handed over to National Airports Authority in 1986 and subsequently 
to Airports Authority of India.  These airports were constructed by the 
Central Govt. as per the requirement of the flights operating at that time.  
Hence in respect of current standards there are many non -compliances.  
These non-compliances are due to various reasons like land constraints, 
civil works to make the airport compliant with DGCA CAR.  The 
Aerodrome Licensing also involves voluminous documen tation, 
coordination with various internal & external agencies and 

inspection/validation by the regulatory authority, therefore, it is a time 
consuming process.  
 
Even though ICAO had laid down the Standards and recommended 
Practice, it was felt that there  is a requirement for introducing a system for 
regulating this activity.   With this aim ICAO had introduced a standard for 
certification of aerodromes used for International air Transport Services in 
year 2003.   Accordingly regulation for licensing were revised by the 
Government and notified in year 2004. 
 
There was delay in initiation of licensing procedure by AAI and the 
application was submitted by AAI in year 2006.   Even though applications 
were submitted but there was condition from AAI that they sh ould be 
exempted from payment of   fees which was taken up by them with the   
Government.   The licenses were issued from 2007 onwards even though  
the matter of payment of license fees was pending  with the Government. 
 
Since, the licensing process was  a  new concept for existing operators 
including AAI  there was lack of  understanding in the organization 
regarding the process even though it was laid down by DGCA in the Civil 
Aviation Requirements. Besides above there was lack of organizational 
structure and regional infrastructure set up in DGCA as well as with the 
aerodrome operators/ AAI for handling the licensing issues.   Manpower 
constraints are being addressed at DGCA by taking the manpower on 
secondment basis from Aerodrome Operators/ AAI as well a s inducting 
the retired persons and experts from aviation industry on short term 
basis.” 
 
 
 
 
4.13 The Committee during evidence asked the Ministry/DGCA to explain a DGCA 
License.  A representative of the Ministry of civil aviation stated as under: 
 
“DGCA license in relation to an airport is a license which is a certification 
that the airport meets all the requirements for regular scheduled airline 
operation.” 
 

4.14 When the Committee further asked when this was notifie d, the Ministry stated as 
under: 
“In 20 06, International Civil Aviation Organization, ICAO made it 
mandatory in 2003 and promulgated these standards.  DGCA adopted this 
and issued regulations for licensing in 2006.” 
 
   
 
 
4.15 On being enquired f urther as to how many airports are yet to have th is 
certification, how many are functioning without it and what is the fee, the Ministry replied 
as under: 
 
“43 airports are yet to get the license.  DGCA has already drawn up a plan 
that by 31st December 2010 all the remaining 43 airports will be licensed.   
15 of them have been given license. The fee depends upon the capacity 
of the airport.  It is ` 15 Lakh for the new airport and ` 7.5 lakh for 
renewal.” 
   
 
 
(iii) LICENSES TO PILOTS AND ENGINEERS 
 
4.16 Central Examination Organisation  (CEO) under DGCA conducts written 
examination for issue of licenses to Pilots and Engineers. In general, Pilot examination 
are conducted every month whereas the engineers examination is conducted three 
times a year in the months of February, June and October. 
DGCA issues the  following flight crew licenses under the provisions of Rule 38  and 
Schedule II of the Aircraft Rules, 1937:- 
 Pilot  
 Flight Instructor or Assistant Flight Instructor 
 Flight Navigator  
 Flight Engineer  
 Flight Radio Telephone Operator  

Section 7 - Flight Crew Standards, Training and Licensing of the Civil Aviation 
Requirements gives the syllabus for the examination and procedure for issue/ extension 
for flight crew licenses. 
 
AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE ENGINEERS  
Licenses to engineers for maintenance of aircraft / engines/ components are issued by 
DGCA under the provision of Rule 61 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937.  
The procedure for issue of licenses has been given in Section 2 - Airworthiness (Series 
'L') of the Civil Aviation Requirements.  
DGCA also issues civil licenses (pilots and engineers) to Defense personnel - The 
licenses are issued in accordance with the Procedure given in Civil Aviation 
Requirements  Section 1 - General Series 'A' Part I. 
 
 
TRAINING SCHOOLS   
 
DGCA requires approval of the training schools before they can undertake training of 
personnel for issue of pilot/ engineer licenses. 
Flying Training School - Civil Aviation Requirements Section 7 Series 'D' Part I  gives 
the procedure and the minimum requirements relating to infrastructure, procedures and 
manpower for grant of approval for undertaking flying training activities for pilots for 
issue of licenses. 
AME Training School - Civil Aviation Requirements Section 2 Series 'E' Part VIII gives 
the procedure and the minimum requirements relating to infrastructure, procedures and 
manpower for grant of approval for undertaking training activities for engineers for issue 
of licenses. 
 
 
4.17 In view of the media reports about fake pilots flying planes of private airlines and 
involvement of DGCA officials in the same, the Committee asked the Ministry about the 

action initiated by the m and the new measures requir ed to prevent such malpractices.  
The Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“DGCA has taken stern action on the matter of fake pilot licences. All licences 
issued by DGCA are being scrutinized thoro ughly. The matter has been handed 
over to the Delhi Police for investigation.  Some persons including DGCA‟s 
officers have been detained by Delhi Police in this case. 
 
Vide order dated 29/3/2011, an Expert Committee has been set up to re -examine 
the entire  system of examination/licencing and suggest improvements in the 
same. The Expert Committee will have following Terms of Reference:- 
 
i. To examine the current system of examination of pilots, engineers 
etc., and make recommendations to make examination syste m 
secure, credible and efficient and in line with modern and best 
practices; 
 
ii. To examine introduction of electronic technology, online 
examination and make recommendations; 
 
iii. To examine the current system of licensing, procedure and 
processes and make recommendations for improvement;  
 
iv. To examine and make recommendations for introduction of 
effective system of cross-verification of documents of licensing filed 
by candidates; 
 
v. Any other task assigned by the Ministry. 
 
 
The expert Committee is to submit report within 5 weeks of its constitution.  
The Committee has met twice so far.” 
 
 
 
 
(iv) CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY 
  
4.18 The Ministry had under taken a  study for the formation of an umbrella 
organisation, the Civil Aviation Authority replacing the DGCA. The Comm ittee asked the 
Ministry about the findings of the study. The Ministry in a written submission stated as 
under: 
 

“DGCA, with the approval of MCA had commissioned Technical Cooperation 
Bureau of ICAO to conduct a study on establishment of a Civil Aviation A uthority 
in October 2009.  ICAO submitted the final report to DGCA on 8 th April 2010, 
which was examined in DGCA.  The comments of DGCA on the report were 
received on 14 th July 2010. Subsequently, a C ommittee was constituted in the 
Ministry on 7 th October 2010 to review the ICAO report.  The Committee is 
headed by Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and comprises DG (or his 
representative), Chairman (AAI), Representatives of IATA and CAPA and Sh. 
H.S. Khola, former DGCA as members.   
 
The Committee is mandated to suggest modalities of implementing the ICAO 
recommendations for restructuring the existing DGCA into an autonomous 
aviation safety regulatory organisation in line with international standards and 
practices and to meet the future demands of a viation industry in the light of rapid 
growth in air transport operations and changes taking place in the aviation 
industry;  requirements of the aviation stake holders; safety and service 
requirements of the travelling public and other related aspects.  
 
The ICAO report has 34 recommendations. DGCA is in agreement with all the 
recommendations except two.   
 
One of them pertains to levy of ` 12 on all departing passengers to cover 
the revenue gap (Recommendations No.20).  DGCA is of the view that 
this amount does not seem to be adequate and may need to be revised, 
based on more accurate estimates.   
 
The other one relates to raising fees charged by DGCA by 20% 
(Recommendations No.19).  DGCA states that there may be need to 
enhance the fees beyond 20% based on inflation levels and requirements 
of CAA for efficient discharge of safety oversight. 
 
Salient features of the recommendations:- 
 
(1) A Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) be set up, which would have 
administrative and financial autonomy and which would take over the functions of 
DGCA. 
(2) CAA to comprise between 8 and 10 members, including Chairman. 
(3) At least 5 of the members of CAA should be full-time members, in addition 
to the Chairman.   
(4) The Chairman should be full -time and have powers of general 
superintendence and direction in the conduct of the affairs of the Authority.   

(5) The title of DGCA may be used as is the international practice. 
(6) Chairman be chosen from among persons who have special knowledge 
and experience in civil aviation safety,  administration and financial matters. 
Majority of members should have special knowledge and experience in civil 
aviation safety matters. 
(7) Between 2 and 4 part-time members should be appointed.   
(8) At least 2 part -time members may be from the Ministry  and upto 2 from 
other stakeholders.   
(9) Part-time members should not include officers, employees or Board 
members of air transport operators or large service providers. 
(10) Term of office of full-time members be 5 years and of part-time members 3 
years. 
(11) Members of CAA (including Chairman) be selected by a Selection 
Committee and appointed by the Central Government.  Composition of Selection 
Committee be decided by the Central Government along the lines of established 
practice. 
(12) CAA be entrusted  with main functions, duties and powers presently 
carried out by DGCA by the relevant legislation and the CAA be adequately 
equipped to be able to discharge them.  Consequent amendments to the Aircraft 
Act, 1934 and Aircraft Rules, 1937 should be provided for in the draft CAA of 
India Bill. 
(13) CAA be entrusted with following additional functions recommended by the 
Kaw Committee:- 
 Carrying out economic analysis of traffic data and preparation of 
reports on the overall aviation scenario and make projections  for 
international and domestic traffic, as well as projections for aircraft 
demand in the country to enable airlines to draw up their expansion 
plans. 
 Functions relating to economic regulation of air transport, monitoring of 
user charges levied by airport  operators and standards of service 
being provided by them and looking into complaints and grievances of 
all stakeholders including air passengers. 

(14) Include in draft Bill a comprehensive and broad mandate to provide safety 
oversight in the functions of DGCA. 
(15) Add in draft Bill a comprehensive mandate to draw up a State Safety 
Programme and provide for its implementation. 
(16) CAA be entrusted with aircraft accident prevention, including investigation 
of minor aircraft incidents, but not with respons ibility for aircraft accident 
investigation. This should be separate from the safety regulator to be decided by 
the Central Government. 
(17) CAA should have the necessary powers to properly follow -up on 
passenger complaints, make appropriate inquiries, obt ain data and information 
from air transport operators and service providers and measure service quality 
(18) CAA to work on not-for-profit principles. 
(19) CAA be allowed to retain revenues it generates. 
(20) All fixed and moveable assets presently with DG CA, including staff 
quarters but excluding Central Government general pool accommodation, be 
transferred to CAA free of cost, of 99yr lease on payment of `1 per annum. 
(21) Capital expenditure of CAA to be financed by Central Government. 
(22) Exemption from payment of income tax, wealth tax, service tax and gains 
tax. 
(23) Raise fees by 20% 
(24)Gap in revenue and expenses of CAA be covered by levy of ` 12 on all 
departing passengers, to be collected be airline operators and remitted to CAA. 
(25) Periodic review of levies and fees to prevent undue deficit or surplus. 
(26) Efforts be made to set fees on a more rational basis.  DGCA should 
commence maintaining proper records of revenue collected under different types 
of fees and charges.  A system of costing of  service may be introduced.  Present 
system be examined to cover the cost of providing such service to the extent 
possible. 
(27) Conditions be put in place to ensure that CAA follows the principles of 
good governance. 
(28) CAA to ensure that conflict of interest situations are avoided. 

(29) Additional manpower sanctioned should be considered sufficient for 
meeting requirements upto 2012. Recruitment for these posts should be 
completed expeditiously. 
(30) Manpower requirement should be periodically reviewed every 3-4 years. 
(31) Setting up of Indian Aviation Academy fully endorsed.  Training 
programmes should commence as early as possible. 
(32) Training needs of future CAA personnel be reviewed every 3 to 4 years. 
(33) DGCA officers may be given 1 year to exer cise their option to continue on 
deputation and be governed by Government scales of pay, allowances and other 
benefits, or to be absorbed in the CAA and be governed by its regulations. 
(34) The standard procedure for complaints and appeals specified in Rul e 3B 
of the Aircraft Rules may be applied to CAA also, wherein appeals against 
decisions of an officer should be first addressed to and decided by the next 
higher level officer and then, if redress is not obtained, further appeal can be 
lodged in the High Court. 
(35) Central Government to provide for amendment of Aircraft Rules to provide 
for delegation of powers to CAA, to take effect on the date of its establishment. 
(36) Provision for other relevant issues, like Central Government directions to 
the Autho rity, protection of actions taken in good faith, exemption from certain 
taxes and other related matters be kept as proposed in the draft Bill (Chapter 
VII). 
(37) A comprehensive review of the Aircraft Act and the Aircraft Rules be 
undertaken once the CAA is established, to modernize the provisions and ensure 
good functioning of CAA. 
(38) CAA should develop a distinctive logo to be used for all official documents, 
correspondence and communications and on the common seal of the Authority”. 
 
 
(b) BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY (BCAS) 
4.19 The Annual Report (2010-11) of the Ministry provides the following information:- 
The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) is an attached office of the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation. The Bureau is responsible for laying down the standards for pre-

embarkation security and anti -sabotage measures in respect of civil flights and 
ensuring their compliance through regular Inspections and security Audits. The 
aim of BCAS is to safeguard civil aviation operations against acts of unl awful 
interference. BCAS is headed by an IPS Officer of the rank of Director General of 
Police, designated as Commissioner of Security (Civil Aviation), who is the 
designated “Appropriate Authority” to ensure development, maintenance, 
updation and implemen tation of National Civil Aviation Security Programme for 
India and fulfill all international obligations in this context.  The Bureau is the 
single regulatory authority for discharging all relevant national and international 
obligations in respect of traini ng the personnel in Aviation Security 
responsibilities, testing and certification of screeners etc. The core 
responsibilities of Bureau include, inter-alia, the Planning and Coordination of all 
Aviation Security related activities, Operational Emergencies and Crisis 
Management. It has four Regional Offices at Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai and 
Chennai, each under a Deputy Commissioner of Security (Civil Aviation), 
regulating, monitoring and conducting regular Security Inspections and Audits of 
the airports in Northern, Eastern, Western and Southern region, respectively. 
 
4.20 This Bureau has four Bomb Detection and Disposal Squads (BDDS) positioned 
at International Airports of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai with latest equipment.  
These squads have rendered safe  some of the sophisticated Improvised Explosive 
Devices (IEDs) and assisted local police in investigations.  Bureau has set broad targets 
for: 
 
(i) Modernization 
   (a)  Adopting IT and electronics equipment and Systems; 
      (b)  Redesigning and updation of BCAS website. 
 
(iii) R&D Database development 
For EDP on Security audits, incident  investigations and feedback, reports, 
technology adopted / identified/ available for security related equipment 
and systems etc. 
 
(iv) Initiatives to improve Airport Security 

by recommending various Security Procedures, Technology up -gradation 
and modernization of Security related equipment and Schemes. 
 
(v)  Maintenance & Operation of Bomb Detection & Disposal and Dog Squads 
For tackling Bomb threats and anti -sabotage requirements at th e four 
Metro International Airports and potentially sensitive airports. 
 
 
MODERNISATION  
 
4.21 BCAS has formulated an IT Plan for modernization  and automation of Office 
Procedures. Computerization work is in progress in the BCAS. All the staff members 
have been trained for basic operation.  All  documentation both in Hindi and English is 
being done on computer; leading to the development and administration of Database 
and Electronic Data Processing.  
 
RF link from NIC Headquarters to Bureau is being utiliz ed to enable quick and 
easy access to Internet and NICNET. E -mail facility has been extended to Senior 
Officers. Internet connectivity has been provided to enable access to international 
databases and various Websites of Aviation Security Organizations. 
 
All officers of the BCAS have been provided with an official e -mail ID which is 
being utilized by them for all forms of correspondences.  It has resulted in greater 
savings in terms of time and efforts.   BCAS web -site has been made user friendly for 
traveling passengers by including relevant information for them. 
 
Apart from the above, BCAS is installing Video Conferencing System for better 
interaction between the Hqrs and its regional offices.  
 
  
 
STRUCTURING/STRENGTHENING OF BCAS 
 
70 additional posts in various grades have been created. It has also been decided to set 
up four new Regional Offices at Amritsar, Guwahati, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad.  
Steps are being taken to fill up the posts and operationalising the new Regional Offices. 
 

TRAINING  
 
(a) In-line Baggage System has been operationalised at Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad 
and Cochin Airports. Certification of screeners deployed at these airports is being 
conducted as per requirement projected by the concerned airport operators. 
Installation of the Inline Baggage System at Ahmadabad, Chennai, Calicut, and 
Srinagar is in progress. At these airports in -line screening system will be 
operated by Air India as per MOU between AAI and Air India.  Certification test 
for Air India is being conducted for left out persons. 
(b) In accordance with guidelines contained in National Civil Aviation Security 
Training Programme ( NCASTP), BCAS conducted Aviation Security ( AVSEC) 
Training at its Hqrs. and various locations approved by the BCAS for the security 
and other personne l of government/private agencies functioning at the airports. 
These training courses included the courses planned in annual calendar and 
additional courses to meet escalating demand. 
(c) The NCASTP in vogue was approved by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in  the year 
2004 and revised in the year 2006.  Now it is again being reviewed in the light of 
latest trends and requirements of AVSEC. 
 
 
CONTINGENCY PLAN  
(i) The Bureau has a contingency Plan to deal with emergencies arising out of 
hijacking and other ac ts of unlawful interference to Civil Aviation operations. 
Among other things, it provides for the establishment of Aerodrome Committee at 
each airport.   Crisis Management Procedures are activated immediately on the 
occurrence of any emergency, like security  threats to the Civil Aviation, 
Terrorism, hijacking, unlawful seizure of aircraft etc. Keeping in view  the 
operational requirements, in the changing AVSEC scenario, the Contingency 
Plan has been suitably modified and issued to all concerned. 
(ii) AVSEC Ma nual on handling Aircraft Hijack Situation has been finalized and  
issued to all concerned.  

(iii) In order to test the efficacy of Contingency Plan and Operational preparedness of 
the concerned agencies, Mock exercise s are being conducted regularly at the  
airports. 
 
R&D DATABASE FOR AVSEC: 
All officers of BCAS are maintaining details of Inspection Reports, follow -up 
action, feedback reports, Security Audit Reports, detailed documentation of Incident 
Investigations etc on the server through networked desk s tation.  In due course of time, 
Bureau proposes to accumulate reliable database for Electronic Data Processing (EDP) 
and R&D purpose.   
 
INITIATIVES TAKEN TO IMPROVE SECURITY AT AIRPORTS  
 
(i)  After the attack on Colombo Airport on 24.7.2001, a team from India headed by 
Commissioner of Security(CA) visited the Colombo Airport in order to study the 
methodology adopted by Sri Lankan Terrorists. After detailed study of the 
incident, „Quick Reaction Teams' have been positioned in all the metropolitan 
airports, major airports of Jammu & Kashmir and all airports manned by CISF to 
pre-empt any similar move at Indian Airports by Terrorists.  
(ii)  In the aftermath of 11th September 2001 incident in USA, steps were taken to 
increase the number of flights in which Sky Marshals are deployed. Sky Marshals 
are now being deployed on all routes on random basis, including the private 
airlines. 
(iii)  It has been decided to induct CISF in all airports in the country to bring in 
cohesion and uniformity in procedures and pract ices in regard to security at 
Airports. At 58 Airports in the country, CISF has already taken over the security 
duties. For the remaining airports, it will be done in a phased manner.  
(iv) A comprehensive schedule for the inspection Surp rise checks, Dummy  checks 
and Security audits for ensuring compliance of all AVSEC Orders,  Acts & 
Instructions  at all airports has been made to detect weakness in the security 

system implementation and the same are being taken up for remedial action with 
concerned agencies.  
(v)     To ensure security Standards, the Security Programmes of all above categories 
are scrutinized and vetted by this Bureau.  So far this year 32 Security 
Programmes have been cleared. 
 
 
NEW AIRPORT ENTRY CARD SYSTEM  
 
To ensure Secured access contr ol to the Airport Premises, the Bureau 
scrutinizes and approves the applications for issue of Airport Permits (AEPs) through 
the AEP committees and issues airport entry permits to officials of various Government 
and Non Government organizations who are dir ectly connected with the Civil Aviation 
Operations. 
Bureau has renewed all the AEPs whose extended validity expired on 31 -10-
2010.   
Bureau is in the process of introducing automated Smart Card system and 
Biometrics based Access control and Data base management system for all airports.   
 
AUTOMATION OF AIRPORT ENTRY PASS 
The Bureau is also in the process of installing a new user friendly automated 
system of issuing AEPs. It will enable online submission, process and status checking 
of applications and will reduce dependence on paper and also reduce processing time.  
Further, it will improve efficiency and bring about more transparency. 
 
4.22 When, the Committee pointed out that a number of cases of thefts are  reported 
from various airports and what mechanism/action being contemplated taken by BCAS to 
check it, the Ministry in a written note replied: 
 
“Manual & CCTV surveillance is kept over the activities of 
workers/loaders/staff working at the airports to check the cases of thefts. 

Airport Entry pass/tempora ry AEPs are issued after due verification of 
character and antecedents of the applicant by the police. Re -verification 
is done at the time of renewal”. 
 
 
 
4.23 In the light of various new Greenfield airports being deve loped under the PPP 
model, the C ommittee wanted to know as to how will the safety and security be 
reconciled with the Operations of the new airport under a private player.  The Ministry in 
a written reply furnished as under: 
“Civil Aviation Security measures are in place to take care of airpor ts 
operations. Moreover, the Aviation Security (AVSEC) functions, except In-
line hold baggage screening, are carried out by Aircraft Operators and 
CISF/State Police. 
 
All the rules and regulations pertaining to civil aviation operations are 
issued by  
Govt. of India for implementation on ground by all entities connected with 
civil aviation operations. This is equally applicable to the Airport Operators 
i.e. private/Greenfield/brownfield airports operators. Limited security 
functions mentioned above are allo cated to them which are to be carried 
out as per the National Civil Aviation Security Programmes, Contingency 
Plan to deal with hijacking/bomb threat and airport security programme. 
Moreover, the security measures are verified during periodical security 
audit and security inspections by BCAS officers.” 
 
 
 
4.24 The Committee while acknowledging the need for trained man-power for effective 
functioning of BCAS and other organizations of the Ministry of Civil Aviation , had asked 
whether the Ministry was facing man power shortage .  T he Ministry in a written reply 
furnished the following: 
“In the case of the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security owing to the acute 
shortage of manpower faced by the Bureau, approval for 
restructuring/strengthening BCAS was approved by t he Govt. as a result 
of which a total of 70 posts in various grades have been created.” 
 
   
 

 
4.25 When the Committee asked the Ministry about the Anti -Hijacking policy of the 
Government post-Kandahar and the role of BCAS in this regard, the Ministry in a written 
note stated as follows:- 
     
“The Role of Bureau of Civil Aviation security is as under:-  
 
(i) In order to ensure the effective application of preventive security 
measures the level of threat is continually reviewed taking into 
account the domestic, regional and international situations. 
 
(ii) Contingency planning to promote coordinate and timely counter 
action to the level of threat 
 
(iii) Preparation of national contingency plan outlining the 
responsibilities and lines of command and communication from the 
highest level to the on site command and control. 
 
 
(iv) Laying down security measures and procedures commensurate 
with the threat assessment which may fluctuate due to various 
changing factors. 
 
(v) Carry out periodic security audit/inspections and security tests to 
find out the degree of compliance of laid down Civil Aviation 
Security norms and enforce remedial measures in case of any 
lapse in security. 
 
(vi) Imparting training to CISF/ASG and Airlines Security staff as per 
International standard. 
An apex body i.e. Cabine t Committee on Security has been instituted for 
Crisis Management and to take major policy and strategic decisions.”  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 

(c)  AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (AAI) 
 
4.26 The Airports Authority of India (AAI), formed on 1st April 1995 by an Act of 
Parliament, is the mainstay of the civil aviation operations in the country. AAI manages 
115 airports including 23 Civil Enclaves.  In addition, AAI also provides CNS -ATM 
Services at 11 other airports. These airports are Bangalore, Hyderabad, Cochin, 
Vidyanagar, Puttapurthy, Lengpui, Diu, Latur, Nanded, Mundra and Jamshedpur 
airports. About 2.8 million nautical square mile area of national air -space (covering Bay 
of Bengal and Arabian Sea) has been assigned to AAI for provision of Air Traffic 
Services. The main functions of the Airports Authority of India (AAI) are as under:- 
 
(i) Control and management of the Indian air space (excluding special user air  
space) extending beyond the territorial limits of the country as accepted by ICAO 
(International Civil Aviation Organization). 
 
(ii) Provision of Communication, Navigational and Surveillance Aids. 
 
(iii) Expansion and strengthening of operational areas viz. Runways, Aprons,  
Taxiways, etc. and provision of ground based landing and movement control aids 
for aircrafts & vehicular traffic in operational area. 
 
(iv) Design, development, operation and maintenance of passenger terminals. 
 
(v) Development and management of cargo terminals at international and domestic  
 airports. 
 
(vi) Provision of passenger facilities and information systems in the passenger  
 terminals. 
 
4.27 While the Government is separately developing a policy framework for the entire 
civil aviation sector, a policy relates to use and development of airport infrastructure  
already exists. The Policy on Airport Infrastructure should always be read along with the 
National Policy on Civil Aviation. 
 
 
 

The objectives of the policy are: 
(1) To provide a boost to international trade and tourism and enhance the 
country's image in the comity of nations; 
 
(2) To provide airport capacity ahead of demand, in order to handle an increasing 
volume of air traffic and to garner the maximum share of traffic in the region; 
 
(3) To enhance airport facilities to make the airport user friendly and achieve 
higher level of customer satisfaction; 
 
(4) To ensure total safety and security of aircraft operations by the introduction 
of state-of-art air traffic, security and related services; 
 
(5) To provide multi-modal linkages; 
 
(6) To provide a market orientation to the present structure, bridge the resource 
gap and encourage greater efficiency and enterprise in the operation of airports, 
through the introduction of private capital and management skills; 
 
(7) To foster the development of a strong airport infrastructure, maintaining a 
balance between the need fo r economic viability and the objective of equitable 
regional dispersal of infrastructural facilities; 
 
(8) In the achievement of the above objective, to lay special emphasis on the 
development of infrastructure for remote and inaccessible areas, especially  the 
North East, the hilly and island regions; and 
 
(9) To encourage transparency and clarity in the decision -making processes of 
Government and its public sector units. Policy  has necessarily to change in 
response to a rapidly transforming global scenario , although the process of 
transformation has to be progressive, orderly and safeguarded. Looking at what 

has been achieved in other countries, there is a wide gap which needs to be 
bridged first. 
   
 
4.28 The details of aircraft movement, passengers handle d and cargo for the period 
April 2010 to September 2010 and April 2009 to March 2010 and for the year April 2010 
to March 2011 are given below:- 
Traffic category (April to 
March)2009-10 
April to September 
2010-11 (Actual) 
(April to March) 
2010-11 
Aircraft Movements (in thousands) 
International 282.20 145.01 296.31 
Domestic 1048.69 533.87 1122.10 
Total 1330.89 678.88 1418.41 
Passengers (in lakh)    
International 343.68 181.08 374.60 
Domestic 893.87 496.01 1001.20 
Total 1237.55 677.09 1375.80 
Freight (in thousand 
tonnes) 
   
International 1270.71 750.12 1397.78 
Domestic 690.90 422.37 794.54 
Total 1961.61 1172.49 2192.32 
 
 
 
 The major task of AAI i.e. development of airports has been included in Chapter 
VI of this report. 
(d)   AIRPORT ECONOMIC REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA (AERA) 
4.29 For economic  regulation of the civil aviation sector, AERA has been set up.  
According to the Annual Report (2010 -11) of the Ministry, t he Parliament of India, 
enacted “The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of Ind ia Act, 2008”, inter-alia, to 
establish a statutory authority called the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority to 
regulate tariff for the aeronautical services, determine other airport charges for services 
rendered at major airports and to monitor the per formance standards of such airports. 
The provisions of the said Act came in to force w.e.f. 1 st January, 2009 (All provisions 

except Chapter III and VI) and 1 st September, 2009 (provisions of Chapter III and VI). 
AERA has its headquarters in New Delhi.The Statutory functions of the AERA in respect 
of major airports are specified in section 13 of the Act, as under: 
 
(1)   to determine the tariff for aeronautical service taking in to consideration- 
i. the capital expenditure incurred and timely investment in 
improvement of airport facilities; 
ii. the service provided, its quality and other relevant factors; 
iii. the cost for improving efficiency; 
iv. economic and viable operation of major airports; 
v. the concession offered by the Central Government in any 
agreement or memorandum of understanding or otherwise; 
vi. any other factor which may be relevant for the purpose of the Act. 
 
(2)  to determine the amount of the development fees including User Development 
Fee (UDF); 
 
(3) to determine the amount of the passengers service fee levied under rule  88  of 
the Aircraft Rule, 1937 made under the Aircraft Act, 1934; 
 
 
(4) to monitor the set performance standards relating to quality, continuity and 
reliability of service as may be specified by the Central Government or any 
authority authorized by it in this behalf; 
 
(5) to call for any such information as may be necessary to determine the tariff for 
aeronautical services; 
 
 
(6) Perform such other functions relating of tariff, as may be entrusted to it by the 
Central government or as may be necessary to carry out the  provisions of the 
Act. 
 
4.30 The Authority consists of a chairperson and two Members appointed by the 
Central Government.  In terms of the provision Section 2(i) of the AERA Act, 2008 
following airports have been notified by Government of India as major airports:- 
1. Mumbai 
2. Delhi 
3. Chennai 
4. Bangalore 
5. Kolkata  
6. Hyderabad  
7. Cochin  

8. Ahmedabad 
9. Goa 
10. Trivandrum 
11. Pune 
12. Calicut  
13. Guwahati 
 
 
4.31 In p ursuant to its establishment, AERA has set in motion a n open and 
transparent process, involving extensive stakeholder consultatio n, to establish its 
regulatory philosophy and approach as well as to evolve detailed procedures and 
systems for determination of tariff and monitoring of performance standards. AERA 
proposes to adopt interest of passengers and cargo facility users as the b asis anchor in 
discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers and proposes to regulate 
aeronautical tariff and other charges for major airports on „single till‟ basis thereby using 
100% of the non-aeronautical revenue (including costs thereof) as a subsidy while fixing 
aeronautical tariff and passenger charges. 
 
4.32 A Consultation Paper laying down the proposed approach of the Authority on 
various issues relating to regulation of Airports and Air Navigation Services (ANS) 
services was issued on 26.0 2.2010. AERA has classified its regulatory ambit in three 
broad categories and proposes to adopt following approach to economic regulation 
thereof: 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Aeronautical Services Proposed approach 
1. Services provided by the airport 
operators 
Price Cap reg ulation on „single till‟ 
basis. 
2. Air navigation Services Cost plus fair rate of return based 
regulation. 
3. Services provided by cargo 
facility operators, ground 
handling service providers and 
fuel farm form operators/fuel 
access providers. 
(a) If serv ice is not „material‟; or it 
is „material‟ but provided on 
competitive basis – light touch 
regulation. 
(b) If service is „material‟ but not 
provided on competitive basis – 
Price Cap regulation.  

 
4.33 After extensive stakeholder consultation , AERA has finalized and laid down its 
approach in respect of (2) & (3) above. Detailed guidelines in this respect have been 
issued for stakeholder consultation. 
 
4.34 In the meantime, AERA has tested its proposed systems and procedures, 
applying draft poli cy and approach, in the cases relating to determination of user 
development fee (UDF) at the international airports at Ahmedabad, 
Thiruvananthapuram and Hyderabad.  
 
 
4.35 The Committee raised queries about the criterion for levying User Development 
Fee for some of the airports being developed under the PPP route . The Committee also 
enquired about the fee for Domestic and International travel and the total amount 
collected so far since its application at various airports.  The Ministry in a written 
submission stated as under: 
 
 “Rule 89 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 prescribes: 
 
User Development Fee – The licensee may  
 
(a) Levy and collect at a major airport the User Development Fee at such rate 
as may be determined under clause (b) of sub -section (1) of section 13 of 
the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008; 
(b) levy and collect at any other airport the User Development Fees at such 
rate as the Central Government may specify.  
 
However, no methodology has been prescribed in the Aircraft Ru les for 
determining the UDF.  
 
The Concession Agreements for Bangalore International Airport Ltd. and 
Hyderabad International Airport Ltd. provide for levy of UDF “from embarking 
domestic and international passengers, for the provision of passenger ameniti es, 
services and facilities” and for the UDF to be “used for the development, 
management, operation and expansion of the facilities at the Airport” and to meet 
the revenue gap, if any.  
 

Draft guidelines for determination of UDF issued by the Ministry of C ivil 
Aviation in the past for discussions had noted that levy of UDF was to be 
considered only in cases and years where the Target Revenue of a major airport 
was projected to fall short of the Admissible Expenditure.  Hon‟ble High Court of 
Kerala, in its j udgment in the case of Commissioners of Central Excise Vs. 
Cochin International Airport Ltd. , has noted that the purpose of UDF “is to 
augment revenue”.  Thus, UDF may be taken as a revenue enhancing measure 
to ensure economic viability of the airport operations.  
 
Above indicates that broad intended coverage of UDF is analogous to 
other aeronautical charges.  However, while the other aeronautical charges are 
levied on the airlines, UDF is recovered directly from the passengers.  
 
Keeping in view the above,  it is submitted that the rate of UDF, its 
incidence on domestic and international passengers and the tenure of levy are 
decided on case to case basis having regard to, inter alia, the capital 
expenditure, traffic projection, required rate of return, etc. to the airport operator. 
 
Further, it is submitted that the information regarding total amount 
collected at the airports up to June, 2010 are as under: 
 
Bengaluru International Airport, Devenahalli - ` 315.085 Crore;  
 
Rajiv Gandhi International Airport, Shamshabad -  ` 301.59 crore and  
 
Sanganer International Airport, Jaipur  –   ` 11.43 crore. 
 
 
In addition to the above it is submitted as follows:-  
 
.(i) The levy of User Development Fee is independent of whether the airport is 
developed through PPP rout e or not.  The UDF is levied at the airport to 
bridge the revenue gap of the airport.  The UDF is charged at those 
airports where projected surplus during the life span of new assets are not 
sufficient to achieve the reasonable/regulated rate of return on the 
investments made at the airport. 
 
(ii) Depending upon the local socio economic factors and paying capacity of 
the passengers, UDF is quantified between Domestic and International 
passengers. 
 
(iii) The total UDF amounting to ` 13,08,79,160/- has been collect ed at   
Jaipur, Amritsar, Udaipur, Trichy & Vizag airports since its inception till 
30th June, 2010. 
 

(iv)   The UDF is levied at the airport to bridge the revenue gap for achieving 
the reasonable rate of return on the investments made and it is utilized 
for me eting expenditure on Operation & Maintenance of the airport as 
well as for new capital assets and is accordingly treated as part of 
revenue of respective airport.  
 
Amount collected at Jaipur Airport for the period 01.01.2010 to 31.03.2010 
is ` 5.52 Crore.  
 
 
The period of levy for UDF in respect of AAI airports is indicated at table 
„A‟.  
 
(A) –  AAI AIRPORTS  
     [AMT. IN `]  
S.No Airport UDF Amt. Effective 
date/ 
Proposed 
Date 
Period of 
Levy 
    Dom. Intl.    
1 Jaipur 150 1000 01.01.10 15 years 
2 Amritsar 150 910 15.06.10 10 years 
3 Udaipur 150 Nil 15.06.10 13 years & 8 
months 
4 Trichy 150 360 15.06.10 10 years 
5 Vizag 150 Nil 15.06.10 15 years & 3 
months 
6 Ahmedabad 110 415 01.09.10* 10 years 
7 Trivandrum Nil 755 01.09.10* 10 years 
8 Mangalore 150 825 01.09.10* 10 years 
                 * Proposed date for levy of UDF 
 
 
 
 
(B)  -  PRIVATE  AIRPORTS  
        [AMT. IN `] 
S.NO AIRPORT UDF EFFECTIVE DATE 
  DOM. INTL.  
1 Bangalore 260 1070 Dom – 16.01.2009      
Intl.  -  24.05.2008 

2 Hyderabad 375 1000 Dom – 22.08.2008  Intl. 
-  23.04.2008 
 
(C)   PRIVATE  AIRPORTS  WHERE ADVANCE DEVELOPMENT  FEE  IS 
CHARGED       
 
      
    [AMT. IN `]  
S.NO AIRPORT DOM. INTL. EFFECTIVE DATE 
1 Delhi 200 1300 01.03.2009 
2 Mumbai 100 600 01.04.2009 
 
However, the a mount of levy is subject to periodic review by the 
Regulatory Authority (AERA).  
   
 
  
4.36 When, the Committee asked the ministry about the  role of AERA in regulation of 
standard of services at Airports and the orders passed in this direction, the Ministry in a 
written submission inter alia stated as under: 
“…AERA has proposed to adopt interest of passengers and cargo facility 
users as the basic anchor in discharge of its functions and exercise of its 
powers and accordingly, proposed to regulate aeronautic al tariff and other 
charges for major airports.  The Philosophy and approach for regulatory 
frameworks is under consideration of AERA in consultation with 
Government.” 
 
 
4.37 The Authority has since its establishment issued 10 Orders and 3 Directions 
under the provisions of the AERA Act, 2008. The details of the Orders passed by the 
Authority, in brief are as under:  
 
S.No Order/ Direction No. Brief details of the Order 
1 No.01/2009-10 dated 
06.11.2009  - In the matter 
of levy of Development Fee 
(DF)  at the IGI Airport, New 
Delhi, by Delhi International 
Airport Pvt Ltd. 
The Authority extended the time line 
for submission of relevant information 
in terms of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation‟s letter dated 09.02.2009 
(vide which the ad hoc levy of DF was 
approved). 
 

2 No.01/2010-11 dated 
05.05.2010 - In the matter of 
proposal of Airports 
Authority of India (AAI) to 
levy User Development Fee 
(UDF) at Trivandrum 
International Airport. 
The Authority after due consultation 
with the stakeholders approved the 
rate of  UDF to be levied at the 
Trivandrum International Airport as ` 
755/- per embarking international 
passenger (exclusive of any statutory 
levies), on ad -hoc basis, with effect 
from the date of commissioning the 
new international terminal building. 
This ad -hoc determination would be 
reviewed at the stage of tariff 
determination for the first cycle and 
thereafter at such intervals as the 
Authority may determine, from time to 
time.  
 
3 No.02/2010-11 dated 
18.05.2010 - In the matter of 
proposal of AAI to levy UDF  
at Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel 
International Airport. 
The Authority after due consultation 
with the stakeholders approved the 
rate of UDF to be levied at the Airport 
as ` 110/- per embarking domestic 
passenger and           ` 415/- per 
embarking internationa l passenger 
(exclusive of any statutory levies), on 
ad-hoc basis, with effect from the date 
of commissioning the new 
international terminal building. This 
ad-hoc determination would be 
reviewed at the stage of tariff 
determination for the first cycle and 
thereafter at such intervals as the 
Authority may determine, from time to 
time. 
 
4 No.03/2010-11 dated 
21.05.2010 In the matter of 
10% increase in 
Aeronautical charges 
requested by Delhi 
International Airport Pvt Ltd 
(DIAL) and Mumbai 
International Airport Pvt Ltd. 
(MIAL), w.e.f 03.05.2009.  
 
The Authority after due consultation 
with the stakeholders rejected the 
requests made by DIAL and MIAL for 
a 10% increase in aeronautical 
charges w.e.f 03.05.2009.  
5 No.04/2010-11 dated 
30.06.2010 – In the matter 
of Economic Regulation of 
The Authority after due consultation 
with the stakeholders laid down the 
approach and framework for 

Air navigation Services - 
Regulatory Philosophy and 
Approach.  
 
economic regulation of Air Navigation 
Services. 
6 No.05/2010-11 dated  
02.08.2010 - In the matter of 
Regulatory Philosophy and 
Approach in Economic 
Regulation of the services 
provided for Cargo Facility, 
Ground Handling and 
Supply of Fuel to the aircraft 
at the major airports.  
 
The Authority after due consultation 
with the stakeholders laid down the 
approach and framework for 
economic regulation of the services 
provided for the cargo facility, ground 
handling and supply of fuel to the 
aircraft by the independent service 
providers.   
7 Direction No.01/2010 -11 
dated 13.09.201 0 in the 
matter of suo -moto revision 
of fuel throughput charges 
by the Airport Opertaors 
w.e.f 01.04.2010. 
The Authority noted that these are 
charges of aeronautical nature and 
have been levied without approval of 
the Authority as required under the 
Act.  Hence, Authority issued 
Directions to MIAL, DIAL, CIAL and 
AAI to stop charging fuel throughput 
fees at rates suo -moto revised by 
them, at the respective major airports, 
with effect from 01.04.2010 until their 
request for approval for such revision 
is decided by the Authority. 
 
8 Direction No.02/2010 -11 
dated 15.09.2010 in the 
matter of suo moto levy of 
Infrastructure charge by 
M/s.Delhi Aviation Fuel 
Facility Pvt Ltd (DAFFPL). 
The Aut hority noted that these are 
charges of aeronautical nature and 
have bee n levied without approval of 
the Authority as required under the 
Act.  Hence, Authority issued 
Directions to M/s. DAFFPL to stop 
charging the fuel facility infrastructure 
charges, suo -moto implemented by 
them at IGI Airport, New Delhi, with 
effect from 28. 07.2010 until their 
request for approval of the charges is 
decided by the Authority. 
 
9 Direction No.03/2010 -11 
dated 06.10.2010 in the 
matter of levy of Terminal, 
Storage and Processing 
(TSP) charges, Unitization 
and De -unitization charges 
The Aut hority noted that these are 
charges of aeronautical nature and 
have been levied w ithout approval of 
the Authority as required under the 
Act.  Hence, Authority issued 
Directions to DCSC to stop charging 

by M/s Delhi C argo Service 
Centre Pvt. Ltd (DCSC) and 
levy of X -Ray screening 
charges by DIAL  at its 
newly created Common 
User Domestic Cargo 
Terminal at IGI, Airport, 
New Delhi.  
 
the TSP charges, Unitization and De -
unitization charges and M/s.DIAL to 
stop charging the X -Ray screening 
(certification) charges, suo -moto 
implemented by them, with effect from 
01.05.2010, in respect of domestic 
cargo at the IGI Airport, New Delhi. 
10 No.06/2010-11 dated 
26.10.2010 -In the matter of 
revision of UDF  at Rajiv 
Gandhi International Airport, 
Hyderabad 
The Authority after du e stakeholder 
consultation determined the revised 
rate of UDF leviable at the RGI 
Airport, Hyderabad as ` 430/- per 
embarking domestic passenger and ` 
1700/- per embarking International 
passenger purely on adhoc basis 
w.e.f 01.11.2010.  This adhoc 
determination would be reviewed at 
the stage of tariff determination for the 
1st cycle and thereafter at such 
intervals as the Authority may 
determine, from time to time. 
 
11 No.07/2010-11 dated 
04.11.2010 - In the matter of 
suo-moto revision of Fuel 
Throughput C harges by 
Airport Operators 
The Authority after due stakeholder 
consultation approved the fuel 
throughput charges at the 10 major 
airports with effect from 01.04.2010, 
purely on an ad-hoc basis.  
 
12 No.08/2010-11 dated 
11.11.2010– In the matter of 
Economic Regulation of Air 
navigation Services - 
Regulatory Philosophy and 
Approach. 
The Authority, with the representation 
of the Ministry of Defence, decided 
that the approach laid down in Order 
No.04/2010-11 dated 30.06.2010 for 
economic regulation of air navi gation 
services be adopted for the Civil 
Enclaves at Pune and Goa as well. 
 
13 No.09/2010-11 dated 
11.11.2010 - In the matter of 
Regulatory Philosophy and 
Approach in Economic 
Regulation of the services 
provided for Cargo Facility, 
Ground Handling and 
Supply of Fuel to the aircraft 
at the Civil Enclaves. 
The Authority, with the representation 
of the Ministry of Defence, decided 
that the approach laid down in Order 
No.05/2010-11 dated 02.08.2010 for 
economic regulation of the services 
provided for Cargo Fac ility, Ground 
Handling and Supply of Fuel to the 
aircraft at the Civil Enclaves Civil of 
Pune and Goa as well. 

 CHAPTER – V 
 
NATIONAL CARRIER – AIR INDIA & PAWAN HANS HELICOPTER LTD.  
 
(a) AIR INDIA LIMITED 
(i) Administrative legacy & other issues 
5.1    The National Aviation Company of India limited (NACIL) was incorporated 
under the Companies Act 1956 on 30 March 2007 .  The Ministry of Civil Aviation, vide 
its letter No.AV.18013/01/2006 -AI dated 15 September 2008 advised that the 
Government of India had decided that the name “National Aviation Company of India 
Limited” be changed to “Air India Limited”. Accordingly, effective from 24 November 
2010 the name has been changed from “National Aviation Company of India Limited” to 
“Air India Limited”. 
The integration of the erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines businesses envisaged the 
creation of a unified network, common processes and a common IT system. Till date, 
progress has been made on the following integration initiatives: 
(a) Progressive integration of network/schedules, 
(b) Progressive cross-utilization of aircraft fleet, 
(c) Leveraging scale for joint procurement (fuel, insurance etc.), and 
(d) Initiation of PSS project (with the implementation of the system in 
March 2011, there will be a single code for the airline). 
 
5.2 To facilitate completion of pending manpower integration activities, HR 
Transformation and Integration work plans have been approved by the Sub -Committee 
of the Board on HR and work on the same has been initiated.   Implementation of PSS 
project and other key IT projects in the areas of Revenue Management, Hub Control, 
Flight Planning, Crew Management, MRO IT and ERP will benchmark the processes 
and systems of the Company with best -in-class Airlines and accelerate the process of 
integration. 
 

 
 
5.3 The Committee, during evidence asked the Ministry/ Air India about Air India‟s 
aircraft to personnel ratio and how it compared with other air lines of the world,  the then 
CMD, Air India Ltd stated as under: 
“The ratio in Air India Ltd. is about 226 personne l to an aircraft whereas the 
private airlines in India are working at around 100 to 110.  So, we have about 
32,000 employees.  Plus, we have another 10,000 contract workers and 2,000 
casual workers.  So, it works out to be 44,000 employees who are with us.” 
   
 
He further added: 
“Today a low cost carrier like RAN Air, which is the best one in the world, 
has only about 40 -45 personnel per aircraft and balance they outsource 
completely.  They only have core employees with them whereas in Air 
India there is a legacy issue which has to be understood that wherever Air 
India had started the services, many a time it used to do even airport 
operators‟ work, for example, handling the terminal, handling the baggage, 
handling x-ray machine and handling everything else also.   
 
…. We have loaders in three categories.  There are loaders of daily wages 
to whom we pay ` 150 under NACIL by Indian Airlines, ` 180 by Air India 
and then we have contract workers on our job and then we have fully paid 
employees also.  So, in the case of loaders, we have got six grades of 
promotion for a loader in NACIL known as Loader Assistant, Loader -I, 
Loader-II, Senior Loader and a Chief Loader.  The loader at the maximum 
level earns about ` 35,000 per month. 
 
The senior -most loader earns arou nd ` 35,000 per month all put 
together whereas a contract loader gets around about ` 6,000-7,000 and 
the casual loader gets around about ` 4,000.  If I increase and make 
payment to everybody completely, then I will have to be paying.  So, th ere 
are lots of legacy issues.” 
 
 
5.4 The Committee asked the Ministry to explain as to why the losses were higher 
after the merger of Air India and Indian Airlines .  T he then CMD Air India stated as 
under: 
“… I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the year  2008 was 
the highest yield, which was available in the country as every airline was 
in a position of trying to make profits.  Two things happened in 2008.  Our 

fuel costs about 40 percent of our total expenditure.  I spent about ` 8,000 
crore for fuel alo ne and 40 percent is my expenditure.  The fuel price in 
those days was around $ 65 per barrel and it went up to $ 145 per barrel.  
The competition was tough and no carrier was able to increase its tariff 
and rates at all.  As a result, Air India and Indian Airlines, both put together 
had an operating loss of about ` 7,700 crore.  Kingfisher had a loss of 
about ` 4,000 and odd crore and Jet Airways also had a similar loss.  
These losses were on two accounts.  One was on account of excessive 
fuel prices and w e can give this information for the entire industry to you.  
We are making representation as Chairman of the Indian Airlines 
Association.  We have been making representations to the Ministry of 
Finance and the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 
 
5.5 When the Committee further asked if the Airlines made profits when the oil prices 
were low, the then CMD Air India stated: 
“Yes, Sir.  We were making profits, but the profits were not very high.  In the 
airlines business one will never get returns more than 4 -5 percent .  But the 
losses are something around ` 5,000 crore.”   
 
 
 
5.6 On being asked  about the problems being faced by Air India , the then CMD, Air 
India, inter alia  stated as under: 
 
“…We are supposed to be full service carriers.  On per -aircraft basis, 
Kingfisher and Jet Airways have only about 150 employees whereas mine 
goes to around 226 employees and if I take the contract labour etc into 
account, then the total employees with me is around 40,000 which works 
to about 300 odd employees per aircraft.” 
  
 
 
5.7 In this context, he further added: 
“I have shortage in terms of pilots, cabin crew and engineers who are 
necessary for the aircraft to run but my employee are large in number in 
terms of ground handling, ground transport, back office issues etc.  I pay ` 
3,600 crore as salaries annually to all these 40,000 people but together 
whereas my competitor namely Jet Airways pay ` 1,800 crore.  I have a     

` 1,800 crore burden on me.  I cannot retrench them and  cannot send 
them home...” 
 
 
5.8 The Committee asked th e CMD, Air India about the justification for employing 
contract labour , as excess employees exist in the organization, the then CMD 
elaborated as under: 
“Today, if I have got a loader, he is of my age, that is, he is 50 years old, 
and my competitor is using a 25 year old Loader. 
 
He has to physically pick up the baggage.  The productivity of my Loader 
is low.  I have got six cadres in Loader, namely Loader I, Loader II, Loader 
III Senior Loader, Chief Loader and Loader Team Loader.  We had no 
recruitment for them for the last 15-20 years.  Hence, all the Loaders have 
come into the top category and they are taking the same salary.  All of 
them will be taking ` 50,000 or so whereas I can get them at ` 12,000 in 
the market.” 
 
 
 
5.9 The Committee asked whether t he loaders get ` 50,000 without overtime or with 
overtime, and if they have excess staff why overtime is being paid .  To this , the then 
CMD, Air India clarified: 
It is with OT.   The OT has been identified as a Union agreement that since we 
could not increa se their salaries, we give the increase in salary in the name of 
OT, which is permanent.” 
 
 
5.10 The Committee asked the Ministry about the reasons for the integration of Air 
India and Indian Airlines, still being in complete.  The then CMD Air India stated  as 
under: 
“Air India is separate and Indian Airlines is separate.  Air India salaries are 
different; designations are the same, but the salaries are different.  Air 
India promotional rules are separate, their timing are separate.  Air India 
works for five days; Indian Airlines works for six days a week ... These are 
all part of the agreements with the Unions.  You change that to 28 hours 
or 48 hours or something like that. we have requested the Government to 
please give us the permission to renegotiate the agreements on hand.” 
 

5.11 On being pointed out by the Committee that due to lack of proper integration 
between Air India and Indian Airlines both the Airlines were suffering post merger, the 
then CMD, Air India stated as under: 
“That is precisely what I am trying to explain.  The legacies and challenges 
before us are these :  I have two cultures to merge into one culture.  I 
would like to submit very clearly, with all the information which I have on 
hand, if the merger had not happened one of the Airlines w ould have died.  
There are no two opinions about it. 
  
The point is whatever projection was given at the time of the 
Budget was correct.  But two things happened.  One, the fuel prices went 
off like a rocket and the shareholders could not come out with his  money 
into this.  It allowed the Company to do what it wanted to do.  What did the 
Company do? It borrowed money to meet the expenses.  Now, it cannot 
even return the money.  I cannot return ` 18,000 crore.  Now, what has 
happened at other places, I want to just submit on those particular issues.  
When we did this merger and all that, if you remember, all of you have 
been travelling quite often and all that, you remember Pan Am aircraft of 
America and Trans World Airlines.  These were two companies and the y 
died.  Now, in their place is Delta, American Airlines and Continental and 
now Jet Blue and others are coming.  Worldwide over, whichever Airline 
had a very strong domestic presence, it has survived and those which are 
only international they have all died. 
  
Lufthansa, last year had suffered US 1.2 billion dollars loss for the 
first time, but they have a very strong presence in Europe.  British 
Airways, earlier it was BOAC, and there was a British Eastern Airways, 
they had to merge together, Japan Airlin es also, they had a domestic 
airlines and an international airlines; both of them had to merge.  Three 
times they have given a package support to Japan Airlines.  This time 
also, they have given them the same package again.  They have given 
them about US 1.5 billion dollars infusion immediately.” 
 
 
5.12 When t he Committee desired to be specifically apprised of the time lines for the 
completion of merger, t he ministry in a  written note submitted in February, 2012 as 
under: 
 
“The merger has been completed in many identified areas and the major 
milestones are being achieved albeit slowly due to the precarious 
financial position of the company. The major milestone of a Single AOP 
has been achieved and issued by DGCA. The cut over to the new PSS 

system has also b een completed and the Company has migrated to a 
Unicode system.  
 
At the time of merger 226 critical activities had been identified and 
targeted for completion. Out of these 161 of the identified areas have 
since been completed. 58 items are in progress and 7 not  initiated. 
 
Performance 
dependency 
Total Completed In-
progress 
Not 
initiated 
Operational 
Integration 123 97 21 5 
Contingent on 
management 
decisions 
38 30 6 2 
Contingent on IT 
readiness 35 24 11 0 
Contingent on 
HR Integration 
decisions 
30 10 20 0 
Total 226 161 58 7 
% Completed  71% 26% 3% 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation is constantly monitoring the process of merger . A 
meeting in this regard was held on 18 th October, 2011 under the 
Chairmanship of the Secy., MCA.”  
 
 
                                                            
 
5.13 When the Committee asked as to how  Air India Ltd can be revived with so many 
issues, the then CMD, Air India, inter alia, stated as under: 
 
“…I only want to submit that if some good support is given to us, then it is 
possible.  I, as the Chairman of the Company, just cannot generate         
` 10,000 crore in a year.  It is not possible.  What I can promise and I can 
commit here, you can take me to task on that one, as if our expenditure is 
` 12,000 crore, and we earn ` 12,000 crore and show the operating profit 
as such and such, I can do that, but I cannot do anything with 
depreciation.  The last problem which came on hand, which was not all 

envisaged anywhere, my position today is such that we have ordered for 
27 Boeing 787 aircraft. 
 
We have made the presentation that it has got delayed.  It should have 
come to us in 2008.  If this 787 aircrafts had come, as per the projections, 
you have to ask for the grand plan of mergers and all that.  In the Cabinet 
note when it had gone, we had asked that with the 787 coming in, we will 
have four per cent of Internal Rate of Return (IRR).  But this aircraft is 
crucial and that aircraft never came.  As a result, what has happened is 
that we used to have 21 flights to Malaysia from De lhi.  We were 
dominant; we had 60 per cent market share in Malaysia.  Today, I do not 
have one flight to Malaysia because of my competitor is using A -330 
which is wide body aircraft required for Kuala Lumpur, so Malaysia has a 
wide body going into Kuala Lu mpur; Thai Airways has got wide body 
coming from Delhi to Bangkok; Singapore has got a wide body from Delhi 
to Singapore; Emirates has a wide body from Delhi to Dubai.  What am I 
offering?  I am offering A -320, 25 year old aircraft, sometimes with all 
sorts of penalties on it.  I can carry only 60 or 70 or 80 passengers.  
When you ask for the booking it is booked, but when you get into the 
aircraft it is half empty because of penalties.  Why am I being asked to 
run with penalties?” 
 
 
5.14 On being enquired further the Committee on penalties being imposed on Air 
India, the then CMD stated as under: 
“What happens is we have the aircrafts like A -319 and they require a 
higher weight exemption.  If we do not get the higher weight exemption, 
then the DGCA and ever ybody would not allow you to fly the aircraft 
accordingly they would reduce your weight.  So, the pilot has to calculate 
the total weight he can take.  So there is a load restriction.  Therefore, if I 
am flying from Delhi to Kuala Lumpur in A -319, I can ca rry on 70 
passengers when I am supposed to carry 140 passengers.  But that is not 
the right aircraft.  The right aircraft has still not come to me.  I have lost  
6000 crore in the last three years from the markets that are dominant.  
Who is going to pay me ?  So, what we have done is that we have written 
very clearly on the tag of Boeing.  We took to the laws and we have said 
very clearly that we are not going to agree to any damages on delays and 
all that based upon the contract.  We have given 1.1 billion dollar notice to 
the Boeing people.” 
 
 
 

5.15 When the Committee enquired as to why the right aircrafts could not be brought 
to service the market , instead of waiting for the 2 7 aircraft from Boeing, the CMD , Air 
India stated as under: 
“Being a Government o rganisation, hundreds of questions are being 
asked.  Even to ask that I want ten airbuses A -330 to run this show, the 
Government will do a full scrutiny on this issue.  In the last one and a half 
years, we have been doing the scrutiny and finally now the B oard has now 
agreed and asked us to go for some lease of aircrafts.  So, we will be 
taking some three or four A -330 but we are saying that the bill of that 
should be paid by the Boeing because it has not delivered us on time.  We 
are trying to work out som e arrangements to ensure that this particular 
thing happens.  But if you recall from Madras to Delhi in earlier days we 
used to have A -300 airbus, w ide body.  That is no more there.  But if I 
have to run it, I require the airbus body.  We have just mention ed about 
the turbo aircraft.  Now we have taken turbo aircrafts mostly for meeting 
the DONER requirements in the North -East.  Beyond that, we have not 
taken any aircrafts much.  But today the most profit making routes are all 
in the tier two cities, all in  the turbo aircrafts, from Kolkata to Jamshedpur, 
Kolkata to Bhubaneswar, Kolkata to Bagdogra, Kolkata to Ranchi or to 
any other small airport like Raigarh or Raipur.  These ATRs will make lot 
of money.  When we prepared this, the first question that was a sked to us 
was that you have got this burden o f ` 24,000 crore on you head, you are 
unable to service your load, you have got ` 7,000 crore loss on hand, why 
do you want more aircrafts?  Now this is the dilemma that I would like to 
present before you.” 
 
 
 
5.16 On further probing to explain the Plans to sustain the National Carrier among the 
stiff competition by several other Airlines, t he Ministry , in a written reply , furnished 
detailed information as under:   
 
(i) SUSTENANCE AMONG COMPETITION: 
 
For the sustenance of NACIL, the “Turnaround Plan 2010 -2014” has been 
formulated & put into action. The highlights of the turn around plan are as 
under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Turnaround Plan 2010-2014 
 
 
(a) Corporate Vision and Mission 
 
 Turnaround plan document envisages a corporate vision – to be the 
leader in Indian aviation and India‟s ambassador to the world; 
 Corporate mission is to deliver the highest quality of service around the 
world and be the epitome of Indian hospitality; 
 Be India‟s flag carrier and provide seamless travel within India and the 
world. 
 
(b) Financial Restructuring 
 
 Restructuring  working capital loans through mix of bonds guaranteed by 
Government with longer tenor and  bullet payment; 
 Equity infusion by government to strengthen the balance sheet; 
 Unlocking value, optimisation and rationalisation of assets to reduce costs; 
 Appointed SBI caps as advisor for financial restructuring. 
 
 
(c) Operational Restructuring Goals 
 
 Goals to be achieved by 2015 -  25m domestic and 15m international 
passengers; 
 On time punctuality 93 per cent; 
 75% load factor with target pax revenue of ` 35000 crore. 
 Target non pax revenue of  ` 6500 crore. 
 Covering the market with different business models  viz., local feeder 
services, LCC, high quality mainline operation and cargo; 
 Providing non-stop/one stop connectivity; 
 Moving to a hub carrier (Delhi and Mumbai hubs supported with smaller 
hubs within and outside India); 
 Develop a strong feeder network. 
 
(d) Business Process and Organisation 
 
 Introduce best practices to support joining of alliance 
 Strong its backbone to support business processes  
 MRO and ground handling to be shifted to subsidiary companies 
 Catering ,hospitality and independent training center to be separate 
business units 
 New governance structure, comprising an already expande d board 
with independent directors and executive committee focusing 
sharply on operational turn-around. 

 
(e) Air India Express 
 
 Domestic and international low cost carrier with own brand 
 Capture low cost market in India and compete with incoming LCC 
 Handling of seasonal capacity for Haj flights, ad hoc charters etc 
 
 
(ii) ON TIME PERFORMANCE 
 
Air India is making all out efforts to improve its “on -time performance” as 
also its aircraft utilization to increase its revenue generation.  
 
 
(iii) CATERING SERVICES 
 
It is al ways NACIL‟s endeavour to rectif y the shortcomings and upgrade 
the services to our esteemed passengers . A well thought and balanced menus 
formulated with regional delicacies/ sp ecialties and ethnic cuisine. The menus 
are infused with seasonal flavours to d erive the universally desirable menu.  All 
the meal uplifts are catered from the reputed flight kitchens.   
 
NACIL‟s quality of service offered to the passengers are a t par with all other 
airlines and r andom checks are carried out on meal upl ift by our qual ified 
Officials‟ Airport Managers and Supervisors.   
 
 
(iv) AUGMENTATION OF FLEET: 
 
NACIL - the merged entity - has inducted 80 aircraft out of the total combined 
order of 111 new aircraft.  The details of the type -wise new aircraft inducted and 
the schedule of  delivery of the balance aircraft  are mentioned below . With this 
induction of new aircraft, phase out of old owned aircraft and the scheduled 
phase out of all the leased aircraft is concurrently being implemented.  The fleet 
of NACIL, as on 01 July 2010, is mentioned below: 
 
 
 
 

 
New Air Craft Inducted and Schedule of Balance Aircraft 
 
Aircraft Induction pattern for NACIL (A), NACIL (I) & AIE – 2010 till 2014 
(Updated based on Revised Assumptions/Actual Deliveries – As on 1st June 
2010) 
 
 Aircraft 
ordered  
Inducted 
till date 
      
   2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Total 
B777 – 200 
LR 
8 8 - - - - - 0 
B777 – 300 
LR 
15 11 2 2 - - - 4 
B787 – 8  27 0 - 7 8 5 7 27 
A319 19 19 - - - - - 0 
A320 04 04 - - - - - 0 
A321 20 20 - - - - - 0 
B737-800 
(AIE) 
18 18 - - - - - 0 
 
Total 111 80 2 9 - 5 - 31 
 
 
 
 
 
Current Fleet as on 01 July 2010 
 
Aircraft Type  Owned Leased Total 
Operational Fleet     
Wide Body     
B777-200 LR NACIL (A) 8 0 8 
B777-300 ER NACIL (A) 11 0 11 
B747-400 NACIL (A) 5* 0 5 
A310-300 NACIL (A) 4** 0 4 
A330-200 NACIL (I) 0 2 2 
Wide Body Total  28 2 30 
     
Narrow Body     
B737-800 (AIX) NACIL (A) 17 4 21 
A320 NACIL (I) 23*** 5 28 
A319 NACIL (I) 19 5 24 
A321 NACIL (I) 20 0 20 
CRJ-700 NACIL (I) 0 4 4 
ATR 42 NACIL (I) 0 7 7 
Narrow Body Total  79 25 104 
Total Operational Fleet  107 27 134 

Freighters     
A310-300% NACIL (A) 3**** 0 3 
B737-200 NACIL (I) 6 0 6 
Freighters Total  9 0 9 
     
Non-Operational Aircraft     
A-320^* NACIL (I) 10 0 10 
A-320# NACIL (I) 0 6 6 
B737-800 (AIX)# NACIL (A) 0 1 1 
B777-200 ER# NACIL (A) 0 3 3 
B747-300 Combi^ NACIL (A) 1 0 1 
B747-400 $ NACIL (A) 1 0 1 
B737 -200^ NACIL (I) 5 0 5 
DO-228^ NACIL (I) 2 0 2 
Non-Operational Total  19 10 29 
NACIL Total  135 37 172 
 
  Note:- 
  * includes 3 under sale & lease back. 
** All under sale & lease back. 
*** Includes 8 under sale & lease back and 11 more are under proposal for sale. 
**** Includes 2 under sale & lease back. 
# Under return process to lessor. 
^* 6 Aircraft are out of service and rest of the 4 aircraft are assumed to be out of 
service. 
^ Aircraft out of service, pending disposal.  
$ Regn No. ESM damaged and grounded. 
%  Additional 1 A310 Freighters is leased out. 
 
 
(v) MARKETING & SALES INITIATIVES: 
 
NACIL is also taking initiative to improve its marketing and sa les activities as per 
market dynamics as listed below: 
 
1) Focused calling on Corporate / MNCs 
2) Special Partnership Schemes for loyal Travel Agents. 
3) Tapping the Source Markets for feeder traffic into Metro cities from 
where we have International flights.  
4) GOI, MEA policy have been introduced to ensure maximum GOI high 
yield traffic on Air India.  
5) Special fares / policy for the large group business on domestic and 
International sectors.  
6) Close inventory control, to maximise revenues per flight. 
7) Focus on servicing of high yield customers.  Direct Product mailers to 
them. 
8) Special schemes for Travel Portals - the biggest source of market of 
date.  

9) Super Saver coupons in Economy and Executive Class for bulk 
purchase. 
10) Constant price adju stment on International and Domestic sectors 
based on competitors. 
 
 
 
(vi) PRICING OF TICKETS & FLEXIBLE FARES: 
 
Fares offered by Air India are  competitive and market driven and  are based on 
market considerations such as fares offered by competitors, seasonal ity, extent 
of competition and product features like frequency, timings, direct / indirect 
operations etc.  
 
Presently, due to system constraints, NACIL is able to offer 9 to 10 levels of 
fares on a particular sector in contrast to fares offered in as many  as 20 to 23 
fare levels by the competition on a given sector. Limited fare levels  has 
restricted  the fare spread  to a  smaller range as  out of 10 fare levels two are 
for normal economy  and executive class sector  fare  while two have been 
assigned fo r advance purchase bookings. Of the remaining six RBDs two are 
non-refundable and 4 are refundable fare levels. 
 
The availability of a particular fare on the sector may vary from flight to flight and 
sector to sector as it is dependant on the demand and su pply and consequent   
availability of seats in a particular fare level at the time of issuance of the ticket. 
Generally fares are high  closer to departure as the lower fare levels  gets sold 
out much in advance and may not be available nearer to departure. 
 
Besides the market driven fares, NACIL offers special fare discounts to various 
market segments, which include Armed forces personnel, senior citizens, 
students etc. 
 
To attract the leisure  market  special fares like Discover India, India Wonder fare 
and Youth fare are available for overseas travelers ,while  for domestic  
passengers,  special group fares and LTC fares  (for Government  employees)  
are offered. 
 
With the migration to the new PSS system, NACIL with 26 fare levels would have 
better market  penetration. Wider fare range would enable Air India to compete 
more effectively with the other carriers, both full service and LCC s . 
 
The new RBD structure is also in line with the STAR Alliance requirements. As a 
member of STAR Alliance, NACIL would h ave a larger reach and priority status 
for booking on member Airlines and vice versa. 
 

The shifting of hub to Delhi will see Air India realigning their Domestic and 
International arrival and departures, to ensure traffic movement from source 
markets. 
 
 
Filing of competitive fares in the GDS from source markets and strengthening of 
Sales Teams at the source market is on the anvil. 
 
Fares on all sectors and all classes are very closely monitored and adjusted, we 
follow a dynamic fare policy, keeping in mind inventory utilization and competitors 
offer. 
 
To cater to the vast incentive and MICE market, the tour operators are constantly 
being tapped and competitive fares given to ensure travel on NACIL. 
 
Charter – An effort is being made to strengthen charter oper ations and 
competitive rates.  
 
 
(vii) ROUTE ADDITIONS: 
As regards route network, the following steps were taken in the recent past 
(Summer 2010) 
New links introduced  
 
 By NACIL 
o Chennai-Coimbatore (reintroduced)  
o Delhi-Seoul (reintroduced) 
 
 
 By Alliance Air 
o Delhi-Kozhikode / Coimbatore (non-stop)  
o Delhi- Mangalore 
o Delhi-Dehradun       
o Delhi-Amritsar (domestic flight) 
o Delhi-Ludhiana 
 
NACIL continuously monitors market situation as well as carries out 
studies with the objective of introducing new services, subject to availability of 
resources and commercial viability of operations. 
 
 
 
 

5.17 The Committee asked the Ministry if the Indian Airlines had withdrawn operations 
from a number of profitable routes resulting in profits for private carriers and loss for 
National Carrier. The Ministry in a written note replied as under: 
“NACIL (Air India) has not withdrawn services from any of the routes that have 
been profitable to the airline. Moreover, no routes were withdrawn with an 
objective to benefit the private airlines.” 
 
 
 
5.18 Referring to the fact that the Committee on Public Undertakings and Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture had made recommen dations with regard 
to demerger, the Committee sought the Ministry's view .  The Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under:  
“The Committee observed that the merger of the erstwhile Indian Airlines 
Limited and Air India Limited was an ill -conceived and erroneous decision 
neither arrived at by the two Airlines on their own accord nor mutually 
considered by them to be in the best interest. “ 
 
This Ministry is of the view that the merger of the two airlines will 
specifically provide the following benefits:-  
 
(i) Provide an integrated international/domestic footprint, which will 
significantly enhance customer propositi on and allow easy entry 
into one of the three global airline alliances; 
 
(ii) Enable optimal utilization of existing resources through 
improvement in load factors and yields on commonly serviced 
routes as well as deploy „freed up‟ aircraft capacity on alternate  
routes; 
 
(iii) Provide an opportunity to fully leverage strong assets, capabilities 
and infrastructure; 
 
(iv) Parking bays and landing slots in „infrastructure constrained‟ 
environment; 
 
(v) Potential to launch high growth & profitability businesses {Ground 
Handling services (GHS); Maintenance, Repair & Overhaul (MRO) 
etc}. 
 
(vi) Potentially enable merged entity to command better valuation; 
 

(vii) Operate a combined fleet strength, which will be largest in India 
and comparable to other airlines in Asian Region (Emirates, 
Singapore, Malaysia). 
 
(x) Besides the above, a merged airline would be in a better position to 
serve and promote the a irport hubs now being developed at the 
metro cities, pursuant to the airport restructuring and modernization 
programme approved by the Government, by providing seamless 
connectivity over domestic and international networks. 
 
In view of the advantages of me rging the two airlines, there is no 
proposal to demerge them. 
 
 
 
 
ii) MARKET POSITION 
 
5.19 Perturbed with the downward trend in the overall market position of Air India, t he 
Committee asked the M inistry about steps being taken by to improve its image as a  
viable option for travelling.  The Ministry, in a written reply, stated as follows: 
 
“Following are the steps taken by Air India for the winter schedule of 2010 to improve 
its schedule and provide enhanced connectivity to passengers: 
 
1. Delhi hub 
 
M/s.SH&E were contracted to develop the network of the combined entity on a 
“clean sheet” basis.  This involved a complete re -look at the present operations 
of erstwhile Air India, erstwhile Indian Airlines & Air India Express and 
development of an integrated network for the merged entity. 
SH&E analysis indicated viable opportunities for Air India in establishing hubs at 
Delhi and Mumbai.  Their analysis showed that creating Delhi as a hub 
immediately would give maximum synergies to Air India and simultaneously 
minimize cost of operation. 
Accordingly, Air India's international Operations shifted to Terminal -3 effective 
28.7.2010 and the domestic operations from 31.10.2010. 
 
Keeping in view that for the first time in Delhi an integrated terminal was being 
made available, Air India decided to make Delhi as its International Hub and had 
planned hub-and-spoke flights to/from Delhi. 
 
(ix)  Provide maximum flexibility to achieve financial and capital 
restructuring through revaluation of assets and cleaning up of 
financial books. 

Operation at T -3 would provide for a flawless integration of international and 
domestic operations so as to provide passengers with a seamles s, integrated 
experience when they choose Air India over its competitors.   
Air India has partnered with DIAL to provide an unmatched choice of destinations 
and schedules out of its Delhi hub. Also part of the plan is to introduce non -stop 
services from De lhi to Toronto and Chicago in addition to the existing non -stop 
services to New York.  
 
 The Hyderabad -Mumbai-Frankfurt-Chicago services restructured to 
operate as Hyderabad -Delhi-Chicago, thus offering Delhi -Chicago non -
stop 
 The Ahmedabad -Frankfurt-Newark services restructured to operate as 
Ahmedabad-Mumbai-Newark, thus introducing non -stop service between 
Mumbai and Newark 
 The 4 weekly services on Amritsar -London-Toronto and 3 weekly Delhi -
London-Toronto services restructured to operate as daily on each of  the 
Amritsar-Delhi-Toronto and Amritsar -Delhi-London routes, thus offering 
Delhi-Toronto non-stop. 
 Services on Bangalore-Male route have been increased from 5/wk to daily 
(done from 1.10.2010) 
 Services on Chennai -Goa-Kuwait route increased from 3/wk to 4 /wk & 
that on Chennai -Hyderabad-Ahmedabad-Kuwait increased from 2/wk to 
3/wk   
 Delhi-Goa non-stop daily (new flight) for the peak season 
 Once weekly service on Gaya -Yangon route reintroduced to cater to 
winter traffic  
 The launch of new services to Newark,  Tokyo, Seoul, Singapore and 
Osaka has been widely advertised. 
 The receipt of Reader's Digest and Brand Equity `Most Trusted Brands 
2010' awards by Air India has also been widely advertised. 
 
 
2. Other steps 
 
 The Mumbai -New York and Delhi -New York B777 -200LR services 
restructured to operate as Mumbai-Delhi-New York with B777-300ER 
 The Hyderabad -Mumbai-Frankfurt-Chicago services restructured to operate 
as Hyderabad-Delhi-Chicago, thus offering Delhi-Chicago non-stop 
 The Ahmedabad -Frankfurt-Newark services restr uctured to operate as 
Ahmedabad-Mumbai-Newark, thus introducing non -stop service between 
Mumbai and Newark 

 The 4 weekly services on Amritsar -London-Toronto and 3 weekly Delhi -
London-Toronto services restructured to operate as daily on each of the 
Amritsar-Delhi-Toronto and Amritsar -Delhi-London routes, thus offering 
Delhi-Toronto non-stop. 
 Services on Bangalore -Male route have been increased from 5/wk to daily 
(done from 1.10.2010) 
 Services on Chennai -Goa-Kuwait route increased from 3/wk to 4 /wk & that 
on Chennai-Hyderabad-Ahmedabad-Kuwait increased from 2/wk to 3/wk   
 Delhi-Goa non-stop daily (new flight) for the peak season 
 Once weekly service on Gaya -Yangon route reintroduced to cater to winter 
traffic  
 The launch of new services to Newark, Tokyo, Seoul,  Singapore and Osaka 
has been widely advertised. 
 The receipt of Reader's Digest and Brand Equity Most Trusted Brands 2010' 
awards by Air India has also been widely advertised. 
 
The above schedule improvements are being advertised through Print, TV Tickers,  
Web portals and Hoardings.Meetings are held every second month with apex Travel 
agents forums - TAAI/TAFI, as also various Corporates where presentations are made 
on the Air India product, network,  new aircraft and cuisine, etc Mailers are sent to all 
Agents regularly conveying information on changes/improvements, etc.  Hoardings are 
placed in Mumbai and other cities to highlight Air India‟s USPs. 
 
 
 
5.20 The Ministry in a written reply sent later added that AI would develop Mumbai as 
AI‟s second primary Indian hub, as and when infrastructure is ready at Mumbai airport. 
 
 
 
 
5.21 The Committee asked the Ministry about the "on time" punctuality percentage of 
Air India with respect to all other airlines operating in the country . The Ministry in a 
written note furnished as under: 
“A comparative chart indicating overall On Time performance of various 
scheduled domestic airlines during October, 2010 is attached as below:- 
 

 
ON-TIME PERFORMANCE (OTP) OF SCHEDULED 
DOMESTIC AIRLINES.
6.6
21.3 12.6 21.6
10.2
22.5
5.1
92.8 92.5 88.9 85.7 80 79.4
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
JetLite
Jet Airways
Indi Go
Kingfisher Spicejet NACIL(1)
Go Air
On-Time Performance (%)
Percentage of Total OTP  
 
 
 
5.22 The Committee asked the Ministry about the share of Air India in domestic 
corporate travel market as well as whether it has  entered into any agreements with 
Corporate, to enhance its revenue and market share , the Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under: 
“Corporate travel is an important segment. Air India has entered into 
more than 250 Corporate agreements in the Western Region with strong 
benefits/features to deliver a competitive edge to our Sales effort.” 
 
 
 
 
5.23 When the Committee desired to know as to whether the National carrier had 
conducted any survey to find ways to impr ove their on -board facilities to passe ngers, 
the Ministry in a written reply furnished as follows: 
“Suggestion cards are given out on board for the passengers for their 
feedback which are then forwarded to the concerned Departments for 
investigation/corrective action, if any. 
 
NACIL is also in the process of establishing a Customary Advisory forum 
covering all regions/stations for passenger feedback mechanism where 
customer involvement will also be sought.   This Customer Advisory 
Forum would also act as a think tank for generating ideas for 
improvement of our product & services and in the volume of business. 

However, NACIL always attaches utmost importance to passe nger 
comfort and well -being. NACIL‟s quality of service offered to the 
passengers is at par with all other airlines.” 
  
 
 
5.24 The Committee desired to know the plan of AI for maximum utilization of 
resources.  They also desired as to w hether AI has conducted any study on routes on 
which  an aircraft can make double trips, as has been done by priva te operators. The 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“Air India routinely monitors the market development and as carries out 
market studies with an objective to introduce new routes / increase 
number of services on existing routes / make modific ations to existing 
schedules / adjust seats offered on a route with equipment change so as 
to match seats offered with the demand for seats / etc. AI subscribes to 
the market intelligence services offered by IATA which provides data 
relating to the estimat ed number of passengers travelling on various air 
routes. In respect of new routes AI also obtains data with regard to traffic 
potential from the local Sales and Marketing units who compile this 
information based on discussions held with local commercial h ouses, 
trade, tourism and travel bodies. As in the past, AI would endeavor to play 
a major role in the development of aviation market and to grab maximum 
share of the growth in market. 
 
The number of services per day that is offered by AI is based on 
the estimated size of the market, feedback received from AI‟s Sales and 
Marketing teams and other reliable sources of data / feedback, cost -
benefit analysis and feasibility in terms of resources.  AI operates multiple 
flights per day on the metro sectors betwee n Delhi / Mumbai and Kolkata / 
Bangalore / Hyderabad / Chennai. Additionally, AI currently operates more 
than one flight per day on many other routes..  
 
It would be AI‟s endeavour to introduce double daily services on 
other potential sectors based on resource availability.  
 
As a part of the proposed turnaround plan, the additional aircraft 
capacity would be inducted in a phased manner till financial year 2020. Air 
India has identified routes for deployment of the additional aircraft capacity 
till 2015 that include  
 
 Some of the existing high density routes on both domestic and 
international markets for deployment of more number of frequencies / 
higher seating capacity aircraft  

 New routes that AI does not serve currently due to various reasons 
 New routes that would generate feeder traffic to other strategic services 
on AI‟s network 
 
The utilisation of aircraft is usually maximised by deploying the 
aircraft on quick round trips which is generally the strategy of low cost 
carriers who operate on point -to-point services.  However, for a network 
carrier like AI, which provides services on a wider network covering many 
destinations, the aircraft utilisation and network development has to be 
balanced.  Air India has developed Delhi airport as its hub – wherein the 
schedule offers “banks” of domestic arrivals and international departures – 
which provides connections from various domestic flights to every 
international departure.  Such a network offers wider connections for intra -
domestic and domestic -international flights – thereby offering connectivity 
to the passenger.”  
 
 
 
 
5.25 The Ministry in a written note further informed the Committee that the traffic  
demand is projected to increase to  419.81 million passengers by end of  the year 2021 -
22, i.e. during next 10 years and the augmentation of capacities  to handle the projected 
demand have been firmed up for the first five years(XII Plan period) and  the Plan  are 
under preparation for the next five years  which  will be firmed  during formulation of XIII 
Five Year Plan  as per policy.  Air India is expected to grow its capacity in the next 2 -3 
years, by inducting the B787 aircraft.  The first aircraft is expected to be delivered in 
early 2012.  Air India & its subsidiaries currently operate regular services to 64 Indian 
cities and 33 international cities providing 126 international city pairs and 153 domestic 
city-pairs with more than 500 daily departures. 
 
 
 
iii) FINANCIAL HEALTH 
 
5.26 The then CMD, Air India, in their presentation to the Committee during evidence 
presented the following data about their financial position for Financial Year 2009-10: 
 
 
 

Financial and Operational Highlights – FY 09 vs FY 10                          (Rs. in crore) 
 FY 09  FY 10  Difference  Increase (+) / 
Decrease (-)  
Operating 
Revenue 
 (` Crore)  
13225  12694  531  -4% 
Operating Cost  
(` Crore)  18897  16340  2557  -14% 
Operating Loss  
(` Crore)  
(5672)  (3646)  2026  -36%  
Passenger load 
factors  
59.5%  64.6%  5.1% 8.6%  
Yield (` / 
RPKM)  
3.57  3.12  0.45  -13%  
ASKM 
(Millions)  
43591  44726  1135 2.6%  
RPKMs 
(Millions)  
25950  28913  2963 11.4%  
 
5.27 Further data furnished to the Committee in February, 2012 is as under :- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Particulars F.Y. ending March 2011  March 2012 
Operating Revenue  
Revenue from 
JV/subsidiaries  
Non-operating Revenue  
 
13,137 
     429 
398 
13,347 
     463 
     399 
Total Income  13.964 14,209 
 
• Cost reduction initiatives lead to savings of ` 1087 crore, fall in ATF prices lead 
to a further reduction of ` 1470 crore.  
• Operating loss reduced with marginal increase in capacity. 
• Increased aircraft utilization led to unchanged capacity though old fleet was 
withdrawn. 

• Number of routes not covering cash costs decreased from 183 flights to 131 
flights, a reduction of 28%. 
• Decrease in revenue due to fall in yield and reduced ground handling revenue. 
  
Current Situation 
• Critical Issues. 
– Air India Cash Strapped.  
 Need to borrow to pay for day to day requirements (Current liabilities ~ ` 2,000 
crore). 
 Working Capital Borrowings increasing presently around ` 18,500 Cr  
– Negative Net Worth. 
• Solution 
o Decrease Interest Costs.  
o Improve  Financial Leverage  - Debt/Equity Ratio. 
o Immediate need for Equity Infusion to the extent of ` 5000 Cr.  
o Positive balance sheet position to achieve healthy returns for the 
shareholders. 
o Unlock value by optimization and rationalization of assets to reduce costs. 
 
   
 
5.28 When t he C ommittee sought the Ministry ‟s take to improve  financial health of 
National carrier.  The Secretary stated as under: 
 
“The other issue that has been  flagged is our national carrier, the Air 
India. As you know, it has been going through very difficult financial 
times. There is a Group of Ministers headed by the hon. Finance Minister, 
which has been meeting very regularly on this and we are all working 
towards improving the financial situation and the operational situation. In 
this connection, I am happy to inform you that just two weeks ago, we 
have appointed a Chief Operating Officer who will look after the entire 
operations of this national carrier so  that very many of these issues on 
maintenance and other relating things are given tremendous amount of 
importance and priority. 
 
We are also looking at financial restructuring of the loans and 
other things. The Air India is going through very difficult ti mes but there 
has been a tremendous focus from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the Air 

India issues both at my level and at the level of the CMD. We are 
confident that in the next two to three months, with the full cooperation of 
the employees and the un ions, we would move forward. We have taken 
your point. We would like to work closely with the unions and others 
because this is something that requires all stakeholders to come 
onboard.” 
 
 
5.29 The Committee asked the CMD, Air India to explain the issues a nd reasons for 
the dwindling state of affairs of Air India, the CMD stated as under: 
“Today, I have got a legacy on hand.  I had made a presentation to the 
Prime Minister last year.  In fact, the Government was very helpful for 
bringing it to the notice of  the Prime Minister and the Cabinet.  We said 
one thing very clearly that on the operating side I will make sure that we 
will not have a loss but I cannot do anything with ` 18,000 crore debt on 
my hand.  If you remove my ` 1,800 crore of extra staff salar y, if you 
remove my ` 2,000 crore of interest on hand and if you remove ` 1,500 
crore of depreciation then I am better than Jet Airways as on today.  But 
who is going to pay ` 1,800 crore?  Who will give me ` 2,000 crore?” 
 
 
 
5.30 The CMD, Air India further stated as under: 
“I am operating 111 aircrafts now. But still, I have got 24 A -320 old 
aircrafts on hand.  I have got 4 A -320 old aircraft s on hand, which are 29 
years old.  If I have to dispose them off, the total production of mine will 
come down.  It means that I will have to start closing down routes.  On one 
hand, I am asked not to close down the routes and maintain them.  With 
146 aircraft, the production we were giving in terms of number of flights, 
number of seats and number of kilometers, we cont inue to maintain that 
with 111 aircrafts.  In the background, you would not know how come we 
are still running a Patna Flight when I have removed 33 aircraft s on hand.  
We have tried to increase the productivity to whatever possible level.  We 
changed the network and put these people on hand.  
 
…One thing is very clear, Sir, My Director (Finance) said that there was ` 
24,000 crore debt and ` 18,000 crore debt, and the Company does 
something to clear the debt or some body else has to give it.  If the 
Government is willing to take over the entire thing, I am happy to run with 
only 90 aircraft.  I do not want even 111 aircraft.  But if you are going to tell 
that „no, the Government is not going to help you at all, and that they will 
only give your ` 800 crore, ` 200 crore or ` 100 crore‟, then I have no 
other option but to lease aircraft and run.  I have to make more business 

to have more profit to return the money.  With lesser number of aircraft 
and lesser number of businesses, I cannot do it. 
  
….Sir, Kingfis her had gone and raised ` 4,000 crore outside in the 
international market.  I am not allowed to raise it.  How do I run?  I am 
submitting again, you can put anybody in this Company, that is, you bring 
Kingfisher CEO to Air India, or you bring the CEO of Je t Airways or 
anybody.  He will only give you four percent or five percent.  Today my 
revenue are ` 12,000 crore.  If you want to turnaround and make profit on 
this Company and service this debt which is there on hand, you require a 
revenue of ` 35,000 crore.  So, the question which came up last year wa s 
this.  Will the P arliament, the Government, allow me to buy another 400 
aircraft?  You are going to say very clearly that I cannot service these 111 
aircraft, and I want to buy 400 aircraft!  But if I do not  go to ` 35,000 crore 
turnover, I cannot give you ` 8,000 crore or ` 9,000 crore profit.  That is 
the profit which is going to support this.  If you are going to ask me to do ` 
10,000 crore turnover and get ` 10,000 crore profit, I do not know from 
where we can do this.”   
 
 
 
5.31 The Committee asked the  then CMD, Air India as to how it intended to reduce 
the operating lo sses by ` 2026 crore that is 36% as shown in the presentation for the 
Financial year 2010-2011, the CMD stated as under: 
“Sir, first we ha d gone in for fuel efficiency. Both Air India and Indian 
Airlines do not have modern IT systems at all. So, we had to start placing 
orders for modern IT systems. We had engaged IATA consultants to look 
at fuel efficiency gains. We get about ` 300 crore savings out of that. Then 
we also closed down a number of offline offices in international sites. We 
withdrew a lot of offices from international sites and brought them into the 
domestic area. Where two officers were running, we closed down one and 
put everybody into that office. The process is still going on. What we are 
trying to do is that we are outsourcing the ground handling and such 
operations which we were doing ourselves, in order to bring in competition 
and reduce price. At the same time we were also  lucky. A reduction of ` 
1000 crore was coming because of reduction in the fuel price. From 145 
dollars it came down to around 80 to 85 dollars. This year we are 
expecting that it will be touching around 100 dollars. So, that is the level at 
which we will have to operate. 
  
Basically the issue is of increasing the productivity. If you are able to 
increase the productivity, you are able to get more result. If an aircraft is 
doing three flights per day, the same aircraft can do six flights a day. So, if 
I do six flights more, the next three flights I will be able to operate at a 

much lesser cost. That is because anyway I am paying for the pilot, 
anyway I am paying for the aircraft, and anyway I am paying for the cabin 
crew and engineers and everything else. So , it is better to improve my 
productivity. With 146 aircraft we were giving a level of service. We 
reduced it to 111 and gave the same service. Therefore, what happens is 
the cost on the 35 aircraft, maintenance and other costs, will go down. 
This sort of work we have been doing continuously. 
  
We have suggested from the management side also that airline business 
should be done by the airline people. The ground handling should be done 
separately. Maintenance, repair and engine workshop should be done 
separately. Training should be done separately. We have submitted to the 
Government that we be allowed to create subsidiaries for doing the engine 
workshop, etc. 
  
In airline business the passengers will go up and down but the aircraft will 
remain there. So, in the entire country we have got about 400 aircraft. And 
we expect another 1000 aircraft to come in the next four to five years into 
the civil aviation business. The engineering company which is going to 
service the aircraft does not service the aircraft bas ed upon the number of 
passengers in the aircraft. The aircraft will always be there. So, the 
engineering company can make a good amount of money. The catering 
people can make a good amount of money. The ground handling people 
can make a good amount of mone y. But if they all are brought under the 
airline business and paid airline salaries, perks, etc., none of them will be 
able to make profit. For example, Singapore Airlines have made a 
separate subsidiary known as Singapore Airlines Terminal Services. The 
MRO is separate. And they take business from everybody. So, in my own 
company with the number of engineers we have we can service 400 
aircraft. But I only have 111 aircraft. So, there is a possibility to generate 
business to the extent of about 300 more air craft, if we can do that one. 
That is why in the next year‟s budget, for the turn -around plan we are 
asking for a revenue of about ` 3000 crore. 
  
I will mention cargo also. We used to have separate freighters and all that. 
We have stopped the entire thing  because we were incurring losses. 
Some private company came up and said that they would take our aircraft 
on lease and run the cargo business. They tried it and they have closed it. 
So, if you want to do cargo business, you have to have new aircraft. 
Customer does not want an old aircraft. The moment he sees a 25 year 
old aircraft, he does not trust that his cargo and goods will anytime reach 
the destination. Even if they initially do it, later on they will  have a 
problem. So, what we did is we removed th e entire freighters service. We 
will losing about ` 20 lakh per flight. We closed it and said we should 
dispose it off, lease it off, or auction it off, but we should save the losses. 

The people from those flights were shifted to other aircraft so that the  
shortages on the other aircraft are made good. 
  
Coming to 747, we were running them on a large number of routes. When 
I run a 747 on a route annually, I lose about ` 115 crore. So, we stopped 
that. We said that we would dispose it off and reduce the loss es on that 
count. We were trying to do it.”  
 
 
 
 
5.32 The Committee asked the M inistry to provide figures of the debt of Air India Ltd  
and its business plan to become a debt free company . The Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under: 
  
 
“The breakup of aircraft and working capital loan as on December 01, 2010 is as   
follows: 
           In crore 
  Aircraft Loan        21,350 
  Working Capital Loan      19,500 
  Total         40,850 
 
Additionally Rs. 1004 crore working capital loan is taken for Aircraft P re Delivery 
Payments. M/s. SBI Caps has  been appointed as Consultants for the financial 
restructuring. 
 
The various aspects of restructuring have been addressed in the letter dated Sept. 
13, 2010 written by State Bank of India on behalf of the  working capital lenders to 
RBI. The letter seeks dispensation from RBI to help in the turnaround plan of NACIL”. 
 
 
 
5.33 When a sked about the per day loss for Air India and the percentage of salary 
component as expenditure in the cost structure , the Ministry in a writ ten reply stated as 
under: 
“The Operating loss of Air India for 2009/10 is ` 3472.05 crore and per day loss is ` 
9.51 crore.  The percentage of salary component as expenditure in the cost 
structure is given below: 
 ` in crore 
Pay allowance (Salary + PLI) for 2009/10 2319.96 
Crew Allowance for 2009/10 826.90 
Total pay allowance 3146.86 

Total expenditure  for 2009/2010 19035.83 
Percentage of Pay allowance/total 
expenses 
16.53% 
                      “ 
 
 
 
5.34 The Committee then sought information on the equity infusion into Air India and 
Indian Airlines since its nationalization and w hat has been the return on investment or 
dividend paid separately by Air India and Indian Airlines as well as after the merger. The 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“The amounts infused by the Government of India as Equity Share Capital in 
erstwhile Air India and erstwhile Indian Airlines up to 2006/07 is as under: 
 
Erstwhile Air India                -    ` 153.84 crore 
Erstwhile Indian Airlines       -    ` 432.14 crore 
Post-merger the equity of NACIL was fixed at ` 145 crore 
 
In March 2010 an amount of ` 800 crore has been infused in the merged entity. 
An additional amount of ` 12000 crore has been infused in the merged entity 
taking the total equity to ` 2145 crore. 
 
During the period 1953 to 2006/07, erstwhile Indian Airlines had declared only 
once during 1964-65 @ 5% and an amount of ` 0.55 crore was paid to the Govt. 
of India on this account. No dividend has been paid after merger.” 
 
 
 
5.35 The Committee later again asked the Ministry to update the figures on equity 
infusion over the last three years and the ministry in a written note stated as under: 
 
“The Government has infused Rs 3200 crores in Air India in the last three years 
since merger as under 
  
2009-10   `   800 crores 
 2010-11   ` 1200 crores 
 2011-12   ` 1200 crores 
 

As per the recommended Turnaround P lan accepted by the Group of Officers 
and GOM the total equity infusion over the next 10 years is in the range of Rs. 30,231 
crores.   
 
 
 
5.36  Enquired about the cumulative loss of Air  India as on 30 th September 2010, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, during evidence, stated as under: 
“Sir, as on 31st March, 2010, the cumulative loss is approx.  ` 5,500 crore 
and the projection of NACIL is that i t is likely to exceed ` 13,000 at the 
close of the year 2010-11” 
 
 
5.37 The C ommittee further asked the Ministry as to how it funds the gap between 
operating loss and cumulative loss of Air India Ltd. The CMD, Air India stated as under: 
“So far it was coming as irregular short term credit from the banks.  That is 
where we raised about ` 18,000 crore and on that we are paying about ` 
2000 crore interest every year.” 
   
 
 
5.38 A representative of the Ministry further explained as follows: 
 
“There has been a g ap of `. 350-400 crore every month.  This has been 
going on.  It is still there.  There have been improvements but this gap has 
been covered by taking from the working capital limit which has been 
progressively going up.  On an operation scale, you have se en their 
Annual Report, it does not require ` 19,500 crore as the working capital.  
The dues as exist now are ` 19,500 crore.  Out of ` 20,000 crore working 
capital limit of ` 19,500 crore has been fully drawn.  There is ` 21,000 
crore due on aircraft purc hase.  Al together, the dues are about ` 40,000 
crore.  It is increasing because, roughly I am saying, the expenditure is 
about ` 1500 crore a month and the income is only about  `. 1100 crore.  
There is ` 400 crore gap which is made up by taking from the wo rking 
capital limit.  I know it is a difficult situation.  For the first time ` 800 crore 
has been advanced as an equity in March, as the hon. Member has 
pointed out.  That also straightaway went into paying for the essential 
fuels and other things.  Now, ` 1200 crore is also going in the same way.  
As you said, debt equity ratio truly does not make any commercial sense 
because whatever equity is coming is going for defraying other 
commitments.  That is the situation.” 
 
 

5.39 The Committee asked the Ministry as to how it is planning to resolve the situation 
and handle a debt of ` 40,000/- crore of Air India, the Secretary stated as under: 
    
“Sir, in brief several meetings were held at the level of Prime Minister and 
the GoMs.  It has been directed that all  efforts must be made to revive Air 
India by evolving a turn around plan.  They have now prepared the turn 
around plan which aims at capturing 40 per cent of the market share and 
then there are attendant commitments and obligations that they will have 
to f ulfil.  Based on the turn around plan there is a business plan that is 
being developed.  There is also an issue of financial restructuring of the 
working capital of about ` 19,500 crore on which they are paying ` 2000 
crore interest.  All these three parts of the strategy to revive the NACIL are 
under detailed examination.  I may inform the hon. Committee that one 
consortium of the bank was formed because the working capital had really 
swollen to a big extent.  A consortium of the bank which had extended th e 
working capital was formed.  They then came up with financial 
restructuring proposal which had certain components.  It has gone to the 
RBI.  The RBI is seeking certain support from the Government in terms of 
guarantee and comfort letter.  Those are being  processed at the 
Government level.  The plan that this consortium has evolved for financial 
restructuring is also being subjected to further evaluation by financial and 
management consortium M/s Delight which report we are expecting to 
receive this month.   In the meantime, Sir, we are also approaching the 
CCA for infusion of additional ` 1200 crore equity, including the 
operationalisation of their subsidiary business units.  Since the matter is 
now being considered by the Cabinet, may be subsequently a ver y 
detailed presentation can be made when we have all the components 
together.” 
 
 
 
5.40 When a sked whether RBI was asking for a sovereign Guarantee from the 
Government of India to give the go ahead for restructuring of the working capital by the 
Consortium, the Secretary stated as under: 
 
“Yes, Sir. The RBI is asking for these items.  One is the Government 
guarantee and the Letter of Comfort to give green signal to the consortium 
of banks to proceed with the financial restructuring plan they have for the 
conversion of the working capital loan of ` 19500 crore into some kind of 
financial options like short term loan, long term loan, some kind of bonds, 
etc.  Those are the options which are under examination.” 
 
 
   

5.41 The then CMD, Air India, further added: 
 
“.........this is precisely the Secretary had mentioned that we have gone to 
the banks.  The banks will have to take a hair -cut of about ` 600 crore a 
year.  They are not willing to take a hair -cut of ` 600 crore a year unless 
they are ensured that the Gov ernment is going to give us a equity support 
which is being asked for in the turnaround plan or the financial 
restructuring plan and secondly they want a guarantee which would allow 
them a short term loan to be converted into long term loan.  I am paying 
on an average 10.50 per cent rate of return if it is made a long term loan, 
then it would come to 8 per cent and I would be saying four percent.”   
 
 
 
5.42 Enquired about the reasons for negative growth of Air India during 2009 -10, the 
CMD Air India explained as under: 
“Yes, there was a negative growth and that one year was drastic.  My 
average yield per kilometre was around ` 3.50 paisa in the year 2008 -09, 
in 2009-10, it came down to just ` 2.90 and this year currently with all the 
growth we have not reach ed the revenue requirement of 2008 -09 at all.  
So not only for me but it is for all the airlines put together.” 
 
   
 
 
5.43 During final evidence held on 08.11.2011 the Secretary, Ministry of Civil A viation 
explained the current state of affairs in Air India, as under: 
 
“The National Carrier at present suffers from the liquidity stress which has 
arisen on account of previous two -three years cumulative repercussions 
starting from global economic recession, increase in aviation turbine fuel, 
increased competit ive pressures including the heavy debt burden on 
account of aircraft purchases and including the working capital from banks 
on account of continued operating losses. All of these have contributed to 
the liquidity of Air India and it is under a stress condi tion.  Just to illustrate 
my point, I would like to apprise the Committee that the Air India has a 
debt burden on account of aircraft acquisition to the tune of about ` 22,000 
crore which is guaranteed by the Government of India and the borrowings 
have been made from domestic banks as well as foreign banks.  The Air 
India has been suffering operating losses due to mismatch between its 
operating cost and operating revenue. This has been financed by the 
working capital raised from various banks.  There are a total of 18 banks 
and there is a consortium of banks also.  This amount is ` 22,000 crore 

approximately.  Besides, on account of liquidity crisis, Air India also has 
huge over dues payable to various oil companies, various vendors 
including various airports. This total amount comes to about ` 5,500 crore 
as on today.   On a daily basis, Air India suffe rs a loss of about Rs. 21 
crore and that translates into ` 600 crore per month.  The cumulative loss 
of Air India as on 31st March, 2010 is to the tune of approximately ` 20,000 
crore which is financed by the working capital to the tune of ` 2200 crore. 
So, that is the present state of affairs of Air India.” 
 
 
5.44 Further elaborating on the turnaround plan he stated: 
“Keeping all these facts in mind, viz, the financial stress and operational 
problems of Air India, the Air India had prepared one turnaround plan, a 
financial restructuring plan, which was submitted to the Ministry in the 
month of June, 2011.  This turnaround plan and financial restructuring 
plan was subjected to the review of the Group of Ministers chaired by the 
Finance Minister. The Group of Ministers then appointed a Group of 
Officers (GoO).  The Group of Officers was required to give its report 
within six weeks. The report of the Group of Offic ers has been received 
and has been considered by the Group of Ministers on 28 th October. The 
Group of Ministers has decided to seek the regulatory forbearance from 
the Reserve Bank of India. I have met the Reserve Bank of India on        
1st November and t he consortium of bankers has submitted an 
application to the RBI and we hope that in about a week‟s time, the RBI 
would be able to give its clearance.  After that clearance, the banks 
proposal for restructuring of their ` 22,000 crore loans would be cleare d.  
So, speaking very briefly, the turnaround plan envisaged three important 
government‟s support.  Number one, when the aircraft were purchased by 
the Air India, its equity base was ` 145 crore only. In past two years, the 
Government of India has infused more than ` 3,000 crore as equity into 
Air India, but the turnaround plan which has been presented before the 
Government of India envisaged that the Government of India needs to 
infuse more equity so that the equity to debt ratio is as per the industry 
practice and according to that plan, the Government of India will be 
required to infuse    ` 6,750 crore as affront equity to Air India.  That is 
number one.   
 
Number two, on account of its financial and operational problems, 
the company would remain in cash  losses for next few years. So, it is also 
proposed that the Government of India will cover that cash losses for next 
few years. 
 
Finally, the third component of the turnaround plan is that the 
company is not in a position to repay the aircraft debt.  Ther efore, it is 
proposed that the Government of India would also bear the burden of the 
aircraft acquisition.  So, this is on the turnaround plan of the Air India 

which will spread over a period of ten years. There is a plan prepared by a 
banker of consortium . This plan has also been vetted by the independent 
consultants and is now presently before the Reserve Bank of India as well 
as the Group of Ministers”. 
 
 
 
5.45 With regards to th e financial restructuring , the S ecretary, further submitted as 
under: 
 “On t he financial restructuring side, as I mentioned, there is a working 
capital debt of about ` 22,000 crore.  So, these `. 22,000 crore are 
proposed to be restructured. About ` 11,000 crore will be converted into 
long-term loan. That is where it will bring ce rtain savings in terms of 
interest as well as certain moratorium period to Air India; and remaining ` 
7,000 crore, the banks will pick up shares in Air India.  The Government is 
committing that after 16 years, the Government can have the option of buy 
back and some ` 3,000 crore will be converted into some cash credit limit.  
So, this is under consideration of the RBI because there are certain 
relaxations required from the RBI because the RBI is equally concerned 
about the health of banks. But the RBI has a ssured us that they would 
give sympathetic consideration to the proposal and that is where we are 
as on today.” 
 
5.46 The Minis try in its presentation to the C ommittee on 8  November, 2011 
presented the following facts regarding the liquidity position, outs tanding, key 
performance indicators, financial performance and the modified growth scenario for the 
turnaround plan of  Air India: 
 
“(A) Air India‟s Current Liquidity Position 
 
• Outstanding unsecured short term working capital loans ~ ` 21545 crore  
• Annual interest burden on working capital ~ ` 2600 crore (12-14%) 
• Annual Interest on Aircraft Loans( Loan Balance ~` 22,000 crore) ~ ` 1000 
crore  
• Loans repaid till date on new aircraft acquisition -  (USD 796 million) ` 3600 
crore  
• Overdue payments to oil companies, other vendors, etc. ~ ` 5451 crore  
 After meeting fuel payments, salaries, aircraft loan and interest repayments, 
and credit hold vendor payments, insufficient liquidity to meet interest on 
working capital, aircraft spares and other operational costs 
 

 
(B) Outstanding as on 31st October, 2011 
 
Particulars 
 
` in Crore  
 
INR Fuel Bills to OMCs*  
 
2350  
 
Foreign Fuel and Lease Payments  
 
40 
 
Outstanding to Airport Authorities  
 
1125  
 
Aug/ Sep/Oct 2011 - Working Capital Interest 628 
PLI/ Allowances Payable in July / Aug/ Sep 2011 388 
Other Vendors 350 
TDS & Other Statutory Allowances of Salary of  August & 
September  
 
115 
Service Tax 301 
Aircraft Stores / Spares  
 
154 
Total : 5451 
  
• Excludes interest and dues after 2nd Sep 2011 in view of 2 months credit 
• In the last two months payments released for Salary up to Sep11 & PLI (` 316 
cr),   Interest to Banks (`703 cr), Aircraft Principal Loan repayments (` 267 
cr),Spares Vendors (` 80 cr), Tax dues (` 42 cr) Other Vendors (` 243 cr)  
 
 
(C) Key Performance Indicators: Sep 11 vs. Sep 10 
 
 Passenger 
Revenue 
 (` Cr)  
 
Capacity 
ASK 
(million) 
Passengers 
(million) 
PLF (%) Yield/ RPK 
(`) 
International services        
Sep-10 538 3062 0.465 61.3 2.87 
Sep-11 582 2961 0.489 65.6 2.99 
Change % 8.1% -3.3% -3.3%  
 
4.3 pts 4.4% 
Domestic services      
Sep-10 287 862 0.576 67.6 4.93 
Sep-11 299 869 0.589 70.7 4.87 
Change % 4.1% 0.8% 2.3% 3.1 pts -1.3% 

Network      
Sep-10 826 3924 1.041 62.7 3.36 
Sep-11 881 3830 1.078 66.8 3.44 
Change % 6.7% -2.4% 3.6% 4.1 pts 2.6% 
      
 Passenger Revenue has gone up by 7% even after reduction in capacity by 
2.4% 
 PLF has gone up  by 4.1 pts 
 Yield has increased by 2.6% 
 
 
(D) Financial Performance: April – September, 2011  
` Crore  
 
2010-11 
(Prov.) 
Apr/Sept 10   Apr/Sept 11  
       ( Prov). 
Variance 
Operating Revenue 13918 6493 6796 4.67% 
Operating Cost 17875 8563 9058 5.78% 
Operating Loss (3957) (2070) (2262) 9.28% 
Total Revenue 14166 6702 6804 1.52% 
Total Cost 21160 21160 10904 7.41% 
Net Loss before Tax (6994) (3450) (4100) 18.84% 
Net Loss before 
Depreciation,  Interest & 
Tax 
(1963) (995) (1370) 37.69% 
Depreciation 
 
1746 866 885 2.19% 
Interest 3285 1589 1845 16.11% 
 Increasing fuel cost ( ` 767 crore) & higher interest  burden (` 256 crore) offset 
revenue enhancement and cost reduction initiatives.  
(E) Modified Growth Scenario – Increased PLF Scenario – Support from GoI  
PLF of 73% by 2015 and 75% by 2020 
Particular (Figures in ` Cr) 
Equity Support Total 
Upfront  Equity Infusion by GoI in order to provide immediate relief* 6,750 
Infusion of Equity to fund Cash Deficits till FY2021 4,552 
Equity Infusion through funding of principal and interest repayments in 
respect of the Guaranteed Aircraft Loans (both present and future)  upto 
FY2021 (incl. ` 1,786 Cr in FY 2012) 
18,929 
Total Equity Support 30,231 
Buy back Guarantee for CRPS (FY2027 – FY2032) 7,408 
*Includes ` 1,200 Cr provided in the Union Budget  

Y-o-Y Equity Infusion Required from GoI  
(Figures in ` Cr) 
Equity 
Support 
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Total NPV 
Upfront 6,750 - - - - - - - - - 6,750 6,750 
For 
Cash 
Deficit1 
- 1,539 1,055 921 858 156 24 - - - 4,552 3,811 
GoI 
Guarant
eed 
Loans1 
1,786 1,787 1,802 1,817 1,833 2,157 1,861 1,896 2,611 1,378 18,92
9 
13,62
1 
Total 
Support 
8,536 3,326 2,857 2,738 2,691 2,313 1,884 1,896 2,611 1,378 30,23
1 
24,18
3 
CRPS           7,408 1,863 
1 The NPV of net GoI‟s obligation after FY 2021 would be ` 1,560 Cr  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.47 The Committee asked further as to whether by increase of 46%  PLR, AI will 
be in a positi on to revive itself and make up its loss, keeping in view that AI has to pay 
interest on the loan and other factors having impact on  its revenue generation.  The 
Committee also pointed out as to whether by issue of equity and wa iver of loan by 
banks as proposed in their restructuring, AI will able to meet its loss.  The Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under: 
 
“The increase in load factors is one of the several measures contemplated 
in the Turn Around Plan of the company.  M/s SBI Caps who are the 
advisors to the preparation of the Financial Restructuring Plan have 
considered  the various alternatives like increase in Operating Revenues 
from Passengers and Cargo, Monetisation of Assets, Equity infusion,  
restructuring of loans, moratorium on interest, etc while preparing the plan.  
 
M/s SBI Caps prepared eight possible scenarios of Turnaround Plan to the 
airline, keeping in view  the assumptions of growth, PLF and fleet size.  Of 
eight options, a scenario of Moderated Growth Scenario Option VII was 
recommended by the Group of Officers/Group of Ministers. 
 
Moderated Growth Scenario option VII has following features:- 
 
 
 PLF of 73% by 2015 and 75% by 2020 

 FRP – Loan restructuring as proposed by M/s SBI Caps with                                                  
buy back guarantee for Cumulative Redeemable Preference Shares. 
 Equity Infusion as per Moderated Growth Scenario (VII) 
 Support of cash deficit & aircraft loan servicing as per MGS (VII) 
 Hiving off of MRO/GH as separate business entities with equity sup port as 
part of Air India overall equity support 
 Monetization of assets. 
 Aircraft induction plan up to 2014-15 and review thereafter. 
 No new induction without proper route profitability study. 
 Review of HR Policy across AI including subsidiaries 
 Rightsizing of staff with an appropriate VRS package. 
 Customer oriented services  
 
The GoO also recommended the following milestones : 
 
a) Improvement of OTP  to 90% from 71.7% within 2 years. 
b) PLF reaching 73% by 2015 and moving on to 75% by 2020. 
c) Yield to be benchmarked 5% less than the market leader 
d) Fleet utilization also to be benchmarked 3% less than the market leader. 
 
After taking into account all above recommendations/ suggestions given by M/s 
SBI Caps, Air India would be able to achieve positive EBITDA in FY 201 3 and 
would start generating cash profits from FY 2018.  The Tangible Networth of Air 
India would turn positive in FY 2020.”  
    
 
5.48 On being inquired by th e Committee about the steps taken towards cost cutting 
measures including measures taken o n reduction of cost in manpower, t he Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under: 
 
 “Steps taken towards cost cutting measures are as under: 
 
 Implementation of Fuel Efficiency Gap Analysis (FEGA) with the help of 
IATA   resulting in substantial saving on consumption of Fuel 
 Complete route rationalization of erstwhile AI & IA routes and elimination 
of route network involving parallel operations; 
 Rationalization of certain loss making routes; 
 Phasing out of old fleet and consequential reduction in maintenance cost; 
 Return of leased aircraft; 
 Freezing of employment in non-operational areas; 
 Redeployment of staff to curb in-fructuous  expenditure; 
 Grounding of ageing fleet including B747-400 which would be used 
mainly for operating VVIP flights; 
 Relocation of EDs/IBOs from abroad to India; 

 Closure of overseas offline offices at certain locations; 
 Introduction of PSS(Passenger Service System) to have single code 
along-with SAP ERP based solutions throughout the organization; 
 Dismantling of the Frankfurt hub and establishment of the Delhi hub 
resulting in substantial saving due to restructuring of routes; 
 Establishment of Integrated Operations Control Centre; 
 Plans to Operationalise Subsidiary Companies such as AIATSL & AIESL 
and   transfer manpower and equipment to these subsidiary companies to 
hive off the Ground Handling and MRO activities; 
 Induction of independent Directors on Board of AI and        formation of 
Board Committees to monitor closely the financial and operating 
performance of the Company; 
 Implementation of a Financial Restructuring Plan”. 
 
 
 
 
5.49 When t he Committee pointed out that in the restructuring plan, there is only 
mention about restructuring towards financial side  and no steps are taken to restructure 
the organization as a whole and thus desired to be apprised  of the steps being  taken 
to reduce operational expenditure and restructuring of the Department , the Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under: 
 
“In order to bring down the staff size, the Company had introduced an open 
ended Voluntary Sche me for availing “Leave Without Pay” in the month of 
June 2009 which provides for grant of leave to an extent of two years at a 
time (extendable up to five years) to the employees desire  to proceed on 
such leave.  More than 300 employees are availing this scheme at present.” 
 
 
 
 
 
(II) PAWAN HANS HELICOPTER LIMITED 
 
5.50 Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. (PHHL), the national helicopter company of India 
was incorporated in 1985. Presently the shareholding of the Government of India in 
PHHL is 51% and Oil and Natural Gas Corporation is 49%. PHHL was incorporated with 
the primary objective of providing helicopter support services to the oil sector for its off -
shore exploration operations, services in remote and hilly areas and charter ser vices for 
promotion of tourism. 

 
5.51 PHHL has emerged as one of Asia‟s largest helicopter operators having a well -
balanced operational fleet.   The Company‟s operational fleet profile as on 31.12.2010 is 
as follows: - 
 
Helicopter type Passenger Seats No. of helicopters 
Dauphin SA365N 11 18 
Dauphin AS365N-3 11 10 
Bell-407 6 4 
AS350B3 6 3 
Bell 206L4 6 3 
MI-172 26 2 
Total  40 
 
PHHL provides a variety of services making it the most trusted brand in the 
Indian Aviation Industry. PHHL has also deployed 2 Bell helicopters for regular 
passenger flights to Mata Vaishno Devi Shrine. During the pilgrimage season (May -
June and Sept. -Oct.) the company also operates regular passenger flights to 
Shri Kedarnath Dham from Augustmuni and Phata in Uttarakhand. Recently PHHL has 
taken O & M contracts for Dhruv helicopters of MHA and ONGC.Some of these services 
offered by PHHL are: 
 Off Shore Operations. 
 Inter Island Transportation. 
 Connecting Inaccessible Areas. 
 Pipeline surveillance. 
 Casualty and Rescue work. 
 Charter Services. 
 VIP Transportation. 
 Film Shooting and Aerial Photography. 
 Flower Dropping . 
 Customised services. 
 Offshore – Crew change and production tasks. 
 Corporate and special charters. 
 Pipeline inspections. 
 Aerial surveillance. 
 Hotline washing of insulators. 

 Operation and Maintenance of helicopters – Dauphin series, Bell and 
Dhruv. 
 Passenger services under the aegis of different state govts. in the 
North East and Lakshadweep & A&N Administrations. 
 Heli pilgrimages – Mata Vaishno Devi srhine, Shri Kedarnath & Shri 
Badrinath Dhams. 
 
Helicopter Service in the North Eastern Region 
Pawan Hans operates flights from 39 destinations covering 64 sectors by 148 weekly 
flights under the aegis of the State Governments of Meghalaya, Tripura, Sikkim and 
Arunachal Pradesh. 
 
Helicopter Industry Overview – Global 
Total Helicopters – 32,747 (World) 
Average Fleet Size – 15 
Commercial Usage Pattern – Emergency Medical Services (30%), Oil & Gas Industry 
(27%) and Personnel Transport (15%) others (28%) 
 
Helicopter Industry Overview – India 
Helicopter Market Size: 268 Civil Helicopters. 
PHHL 36 nos; PSU‟s/State Govts. 30 nos. and remaining with Private agencies.  
 
Operators having five or more helicopters. 
 
 PHHL 36 
 Global Vectra 26 
 Deccan Aviation 12 
 United Helicharters 7 
 Mesco 6 
PHHL retains majority market share of commercial operations of helicopters 
deployed on long term basis. 
 
 
 
 

FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
 
5.52 The Committee were informed that since the financial year 1991-92 Pawan Hans 
has been continuously making profit and paying dividend to the Government and 
ONGC. The financial performance during the period from 2006 -07 to 2010 -11 (R.E.) 
was provided as under: - 
     (Rs. in crore) 
  
Particulars 
 
2006-
07 
2007-08  2008-09 
 
2009-10 2010-11 
(R.E) 
A) Total Revenue 233.79 243.41 328.82 384.04 403.50 
B) Expenditure 
i) Operating & non-
Operating expenses 
ii) Depreciation 
 
 
       Total  
 
180.38 
 
 
  25.67  
 
-------- 
206.05 
 
183.53 
 
 
  30.36  
 
--------- 
213.89 
 
254.44 
 
 
36.20 
 
 
290.64 
 
310.38 
 
 
  38.21 
_______ 
 
348.59 
 
319.10 
 
 
  48.40 
_______ 
 
367.50 
C) Profit before prior 
period/ extraordinary 
Adjustments 
 
 27.74 
 
   29.52 
  
38.18 
 
  47.50 
 
  42.93 
D) Prior Period/Extra 
-ordinary adjustment 
 
 (9.13) 
 
    0.65  
 
 9.77 
 
    7.64 
 
    9.40 
E) Profit/(Loss) after 
     Adjustments 
 
 18.61 
 
 30.17 
 
47.95 
 
  55.14 
 
  52.33 
F) Provision for 
Income Tax/ Deferred 
tax liability. 
 
   9.09 
 
  7.00 
 
22.83 
 
  19.55 
 
  41.83 
G) Net Profit after tax 
 
   9.52  23.17 25.12   35.59   10.50 
H) Dividend     9.10   11.37 
 
11.37 
 
  
Note: Net profit after tax in 2010 -11 (R.E.) is lower due to significant provision 
required to be made of ` 31.40 crore towards deferred tax liability as per the 
requirements of Accounting Standard 22 of Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
India during Financial Year 2011 -12 on account of large capital cost  of the 
acquisition of new fleet. 
 

 
 
 
 
5.53 As regards the future of helicopter operations, the strategy plan 2010-2015 of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation is as under:- 
“Helicopters have a tremendous future in India. Given the ability of 
helicopters to fl y in varied environments and also due to the fact that 
infrastructure for fixed wing aircrafts can expand only incrementally, it is 
but natural for helicopters to grow at an unprecedented pace. At present, 
India has only 210 helicopters in operation, which  is minuscule in 
comparison to the international figure of 15,750. In order to achieve this 
objective the Government shall:-  
 
(i) Create the right infrastructure for the rapid growth of helicopter 
operations. Heliports shall be set up in the four regions in t he country – 
Delhi in North, Mumbai in the West, Kolkata in the East and Chennai/  
Bangaluru in the South in the first phase.  
 
(ii) These heliports shall be developed both in the public, private and joint 
sector. The responsibility of developing heliports shall  primarily rest 
with the Airports Authority of India. However, this critical function can 
also be performed by the Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd. and also by the 
private sector.  
 
(iii) The Greenfield Airports Policy shall be suitably modified wherever 
necessary to adapt to helicopter operations‟ needs.  
 
 

(iv) States would be encouraged to develop helipads and heliports through 
subsidy schemes like the Infrastructure Development Scheme of 
Tourism Department. 
 
(v) The Government shall periodically review the need for helicop ter 
corridors and update them according to changing needs of the 
industry. Air Space Management shall be done in a way to enable 
optimal growth of helicopters along-with fixed wings.  
 
(vi) Tourism and Medical evacuation are going to be major drivers of 
helicopter growth in India in the years to come. Medical Evacuation 
would be triggered by the Government through the National Disaster 
Management Agency and NHAI.  
 
(vii) Since medical evacuation for private people still continues to be an 
expensive proposition medical  insurance companies would be 
encouraged to formulate appropriate packages to include the cost of 
such evacuation. In the case of Government Servants CGHS would act 
as a facilitating vehicle.  
 
(viii) Coordinate with line Ministries to develop helipads in major a nd 
prestigious government and private hospitals.  
 
(ix) In order to facilitate growth of helicopter operations in India a separate 
wing for helicopters shall be developed in the DGCA and AAI. The 
Regulatory regime for helicopters would be continuously upgraded to 
enable blossoming of the sector.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER - VI 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORTS 
 
 
6.1 Airports being nuclei of economic activity assume a significant role in the national 
economy. The quality of airport infrastructure, which is a vital component of the overall 
transportation network, contributes directly to a country's international competitiveness 
and the flow of foreign investment. While cargo carried by air in India weighs less than 
1% of the total cargo exported, it accounts for 35% of the total value of exports. Better 
cargo handling facilities lead to enhanced levels of importation, especially of capital 
goods and high-value items. Likewise, 97% of the country's foreign tourists arrive by air 
and tourism is the nation's second largest foreign exchange earner. 
 
6.2 AAI, the main organization dealing with construction and maintenance of airports, 
was granted Mini -Ratna Category - I PSE status in March 2009 by the Government of 
India.  AAI has been making profits consistently since its inception. Th e Authority paid a 
dividend of ` 137.40 crore for 2008 -09. The Authority incurred capital expenditure of     
` 2742.54 crore against RE of ` 2822.50 crore during 2009-10 which is 97% of RE. AAI 
has made all efforts to utilize the capital expenditure allocated during the year fully.   
 
6.3 The Committee were informed that i n spite of recessionary conditions in the civil 
aviation sector, AAI continued with its plans for expansion of airport infrastructure at 
various airports. New Terminal Buildings have been constructed / commissioned at 
Dehradun, Jaipur, Kullu, Udaipur, Gaya, Cooch Behar, Dibrugarh, Lilabari, Ahmedabad 
(New Departure Block for Domestic Terminal Building), Aurangabad, Bhuj, Gondia, 
Porbandar, Mysore, Mangalore, Trichy, Vizag, Srinagar and Triv andrum. These 
Terminals have modern passenger facilities besides comfortable lounges / user friendly 
amenities and good ambience. State -of-the-art technology has been used in these 
Terminals. 
 

6.4 New Terminal Buildings are under construction at Kolkata, C hennai, Chandigarh, 
Lucknow, Varanasi, Khajuraho, Ranchi, Bhubaneswar, Raipur Barapani (Shillong), 
Ahmedabad (New International Terminal Building, Ph -I & Ph -II), Bhopal, Goa, Indore, 
Rajamundary and Madurai airports. A Greenfield airport is under construct ion at 
Pakyong in Sikkim. Expansion and modification of Terminal Buildings at Pune and 
Coimbatore airports is also in progress. 
 
6.5 Construction of new Terminal Buildings at Leh, Port Blair, Coimbatore, 
Puducherry and Tirupati airports have been proposed.  A Greenfield airport has also 
been planned at Chiethu in Nagaland and Itanagar in Arunachal Pradesh. 
 
 
 
 
A) UPGRADATION OF OLD AIRPORTS (BROWN FIELD AIRPORTS) 
 
6.6 As informed by M inistry of Civil Aviation , t he Cabinet in its meeting, held on 
September 11, 2003, had decided to restructure Delhi and Mumbai airports through 
Joint Venture route by formation of separate companies between AAI and the selected 
Joint Venture partners.  Pursuant to these decisions, an Empowered Group of Ministers 
(EGOM) consisting o f Minister of Finance, Minister of Law and Justice, Minister of 
Disinvestments and Minister of State (Independent Charge) of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation was set up to decide upon the detailed modalities including the design 
parameters, bid evaluation criteria, etc. based on which the Joint Venture partner was to 
be selected. Through a bidding process, the EGOM selected M/s GMR Consortium and 
M/s GVK Consortium as joint venture partner for modernization of IGI Airport, New Delhi 
and CSI Airport, Mumbai re spectively and submitted the proposal for final approval of 
the Cabinet.  On the basis of EGOM decisions, the Cabinet, in its meeting held on 
01.02.2006, approved the proposals for selection of Joint Venture partners for 
modernization and development of De lhi and Mumbai airports. The Operations, 
Management and Development Agreement (OMDA) were signed between the individual 
JVs and AAI on 04.04.2006 and subsequently the JVs took over the Airports on          
3rd May, 2006 and commenced development of these A irports.  The lease of the 

Airports to the JVCs is for an initial period of 30 years, which is extendable by another 
30 years. 
 
 
6.7 The Committee on Infrastructure (CoI), in its 14 th and 15th meetings, decided that 
the development of Kolkata and Chennai a irports would be undertaken through AAI. 
Two Inter -Ministerial Groups (IMGs) were constituted for finalizing the Action Plan in 
respect of Kolkata and Chennai airports.  The following information was furnished to the 
Committee:- 
 
Kolkata: 
The main building work of this project was awarded in October, 2008 with probable date 
of completion as June, 2011. The total project cost of this project is ` 1942.51 crore. 
The period of completion of the project was originally envisaged as 30 months. 
However, taking into consideration assessed hindrance on account of rain during June -
September, 2009, the date of completion of the project was revised to August, 2011.  
 
Chennai: 
The total project cost of this project is ` 1808.25 crore and development of the airport 
was expected to be completed by June, 2011.  
 
 
Modernization of Non – Metro airports: 
6.8 The Committee on Infrastructure in its 12 th Meeting held on 8 th June, 2006 had 
approved the modernization of 35 non-metro airports.  Out of these 35 non -metro 
airports, the  cost of development work on 30 airports is less than ` 150 crore.  The 
development work on 11 such projects has already been completed and on 19 airport 
projects the work is either at planning stage or in progress.  The cost of development 
work on the rem aining 5 projects, out of 35, is more than `150 crore.  The work on 1 
such project namely Thiruvananthapuram has been completed and work is in progress 

in the remaining 4 such airports.   The Committee were informed in February, 2012 that 
the number of non-metro airports to be modernized had risen to 62. 
 
 
6.9 The 62 non-metro airports where the modernization has been envisaged are - 
Ahmedabad, Agra, Agatti, Agartala, Amritsar, Aurangabad, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, 
Chandigarh, Coimbatore, Dehradun, Dimapur, Goa, Guwahati, Imphal, Indore, Jaipur, 
Jammu, Khajuraho, Lucknow, Madurai, Mangalore, Nagpur, Patna, Port Blair, Pune, 
Raipur, Rajkot, Ranchi, Trichy, Thiruvananthapuram, Udaipur, Vadodara, Varanasi 
Vishakhapatnam, Tirupati, Bhatinda, Mysore, Bikaner, Kulu, Coo ch Behar, Kadappa, 
Shillong, Rajamundary, Jaisalmaer, Jalgaon, Porbander, Gondia and Teju.  In addition, 
AAI has also undertaken upgradation/development of the airports at Kadappa and 
Rajamundhry in Andhra Pradesh, Jaisalmer and Bikaner in Rajasthan, Jalga on in 
Maharashtra, Puducherry (UT) and Bhatinda in Punjab.  New Terminals have been 
commissioned at Madurai, Mysore, Trichy, Kulu, Rajamund ary, Cooch Behar, Shillong 
and Gondia under the authority and responsibility of AAI. 
 
 
 
6.10  The Committee raised certain issues concerning few airports and pointed out the 
congestion at Bhubaneshwar Airport  and non-completion of its terminal. The Ministry in 
a written note furnished as under: 
 
“A new Terminal Building to handle 800 passengers is  under construction 
at B hubaneswar.  The delay in the completion of this project is due to 
unseasonal rains. However, execution work of the project is being closely 
monitored by dedicated project team to ensure that bottlenecks in the 
execution of the project at site are removed and the work is expedited for 
early completion.  The New Terminal is expected to be operationalised by 
June 2012.” 
 
 
 
6.11 The Committee pointed out that the Bhatinda Airport as per schedule was to be 
completed in March 2011 , but as per the revised schedul e, its completion was shifted 

the next year. As per the monthly progress report it is further observed that the project is 
behind its schedule. The Ministry, in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“AAI is developing a new Civil Enclave at Bhatinda airport in  Punjab.  The 
scope involved construction of a new Terminal Building & apron.  Taxiway 
connecting the apron and runway falls within the IAF operational area.  
Hence, proper coordination needs to be carried out with IAF.  The progress 
of Terminal Building i s 45% and apron is 51%.  The work of apron is 
proposed to be completed by March, 2012 and  the Terminal Building and 
associated works are likely to be ready by June, 2012”. 
 
 
 
 
 
6.12 With regard to Tirupati airport, the Committee enquired whether the permi ssion 
for taking off night flight s at Tirupati would be provided from 1 st January 2012 onward, 
as the facilities  for the operation of night flight were already there, t he Ministry in a 
written note stated as under: 
 
“Tirupati airport has facilit y for night operations. However, at present no scheduled 
domestic airline is operating flights beyond 1645 hrs. It may be stated that time slots 
for operation of all flights are decided by the airlines themselves on the basis of 
commercial inputs and operational feas ibility. The flight schedules are approved 
after receipt of slot clearance from the airport operator concerned, who examines the 
feasibility to handle the flights at that time.”  
 
 
 
 
 
6.13 The Operation, Management and Development Agreement (OMDA) was sign ed 
between M/s GVK Consortium & AAI on 04.04.2006 for modernisation of Mumbai 
airport. Asked about the present status of its construction , the Ministry in a written reply 
stated as under: 
“OMDA stipulates completion of 32 Mandatory Capital Projects (MCPs) by 
M/s MIAL out of which 30 MCPs are already completed within timelines. 
The remaining two MCPs shall be completed by 31.12.2010 for which 
approval has been granted by Competent Authority.  The major completed 
MCPs include new domestic terminal (t1C), Term inal 2B modifications, 

domestic and international apron expansion, additional remote domestic 
parking bays, etc.” 
 
 
 
 
6.14 The Committee also enquired from the Ministry about the upgradation status of 
airports at Bh opal, Indore, Gaya  and Patna .  T he Chairm an, Airports Authority of 
India(AAI) stated as under: 
 
“........about Bhopal and Indore Airports, were both constrained airports.  
Their length was less.  So, the State Government has given us sufficient 
land for 12,000 feet of runway.  For both the airpor ts, we have exceeded 
the runway to 9,000 feet and we are also constructing integrated terminal 
building.  That means, it can handle the international operations, if 
required.  That is under construction.  There is some delay in completion.  
Hopefully, we will be able to complete both the buildings by September.” 
 
 
 
 
6.15 In a subsequent note, the Ministry informed that projects at Indore, Bhopal and 
Gaya had been completed. The Ministry in a written submission  later also informed the 
progress of work at some of these airports as under: 
 
“Patna Airport   
Patna Airport is customs Airport and has Runway 07/25 of dimension 1954m X 
45 m, with usable length of 1954m for take off and available landing distance of 
1820mfor Runway 25 suitable for operation of AB -320 type of aircraft in all 
weather condition with load penalty. 
 
Apron of dimension 271.8m X 81.3m is suitable for parking of 4 AB -320 and 1 
ATR type of aircraft at a time with two link taxiway.   
   
Communication and Navigation services are available. 
 
Ground light facilities are available 
Due to obstructions in approach funnel and vicinity, the operational length is 
reduced for take-off & landing for safety of aircraft operations resulting in load 
restrictions. However, due to non -removal of identified obstr uctions in the 

approach funnels by Govt of Bihar, the operational length of Runway is likely 
to reduce further for safety of aircraft, which may result into operation of only 
smaller aircraft of type ATR -72.  Runway extension is not feasible due to 
obstructions and land constraints.   
 
AAI has requested the Govt. of Bihar to provide additional land of 198 acres 
for establishing the Isolation bay, upgradation of fire services and modification 
& expansion of existing Terminal Building.  The requisitioned land  is yet to be 
made available to AAI by the Govt of Bihar.” 
 
 
 
 
 
6.16 When t he Committee pointed out that flights have been increased from Patna 
Airport but no steps are taken to provide infrastructure on this airport , the Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under: 
 
“It is true that flights have increased to Patna airport in the last few years. 
However, due to non -availability of land, AAI is not in a position to 
undertake expansion of the infrastructure at this airport, especially runway 
and terminal buil ding. In addition, DGCA have declared this airport as 
“Critical Airport” due to presence of obstructions around the vicinity of the 
airport which are posing safety concerns.  
 
AAI has done a study in September, 2009, in which AAI had 
recommended to the Sta te Government for the development of Bihta as 
Civil Enclave.  AAI also submitted a Report to the State Government for 
development of  Nalanda as a Greenfield  airport.    
 
In response to 4800 acres of land suggested by AAI for development of    
Greenfield airport at Nalanda, State Government has recently offered 
1200 acres of land which is inadequate for development.  Apart from 
above, at Patna airport, a study for assessment of the diversion of the 
railway track on Runway 07 side by taking the Railway Track Underground 
is also being done by M/s. RITES on request of AAI.   
 
 
AAI also plans to construct a new Integrated Terminal Building provided 
certain Government structure / hangars are relocated.  
 
 
 

278 acres of land is also required to be acquired, for p rovision of 300 m 
basic strip and construction of fire station / isolation bay to be handed 
over to AAI free of cost and free from encum brances by the State 
Government”.   
 
 
 
Hubli Airport 
 
6.17 As on date, 487 acres of land has been taken over by AAI at H ubli Airport.  27 
acres of land is yet to be handed over by the State Government to AAI.  Estimates for 
development works at Hubli airport are under process.  The financial feasibility of the 
airport is being examined. 
 
 
Gwalior Airport 
 
6.18 The Committee on Infrastructure had approved modernization of 35 non -metro 
airports in 2006. The airport of Gwalior, which also needs to be modernized, has been 
excluded from this list.  Asked about the reasons there of, the Chairman AAI stated as 
under: 
“About Gwalior , the building, which is presently existing is sufficient 
enough.  There were certain modification, which were needed.  We are 
taking up that.  Unfortunately, there is not much traffic also at Gwalior right 
now.  So, we are not able to do much at Gwalior.  We are doing some air-
conditioning and some relief jobs.” 
 
 
 
6.19 The Ministry in a written note later furnished as under: 
 
“The 35 Non Metro Airports for development and modernization were 
selected based on certain parameters like State Capital, Land Avai lability 
for City Side Development, Traffic and Tourist Potential etc.  Therefore,  
Gwalior airport could not be included in this list.  However, development 
works based on requirements and traffic growth for airports other than 35 
Non Metro Airports is al so taken up from time to time, the infrastructure 
up- gradation being a continuous process.” 
 
 
 
 

B) GREEN FIELD AIRPORTS 
 
6.20 On being enquired by t he Committee about the policy regarding construction of a 
Greenfield  Airport, the Ministry in a written submission stated as under: 
 
“Considering the phenomenal growth in aviation sector Government of 
India have approved a new policy for Greenfield airports in April, 2008. In 
accordance with the policy a Steering Committee under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary, Civil Aviation has been constituted to coordinate and monitor 
various clearances required for the Greenfield airport projects in a time 
bound manner. Its salient features are: 
(i) Terms and conditions of all the concerned agencies like DGCA, 
Security, Defence etc. would be prescribed up-front. 
 
(ii) DGCA can clear a proposal if it meets all the prescribed terms and 
conditions. 
(iii)  If the proposal is to set up a new airport within an aerial distance of 
150 kms from an existing airport, it would be considered by a 
Steering Committee of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on whose 
advice, the Ministry can clear it. 
(iv) In case the proposal seeks any exemption from any of the 
prescribed conditions, it would require approval of the Union 
Cabinet. 
 
(v)  All reserved activities to be perf ormed at the airport by central 
agencies like immigration, customs etc. would be on cost recovery 
basis. 
           
 
Further, no Greenfield airport will normally be allowed within an aerial 
distance of 150 kilometers of an existing airport.  However, a Gre enfield 
airport may be permitted where an existing airport is unable to meet the 
projected requirements of traffic or a new focal point of traffic emerges, 
with sufficient viability.   
 
The Government may, while permitting a Greenfield airport, decide 
whether it will be in the public or private sectors or be taken up as a joint 
venture.   
 
A Greenfield airport to be set up beyond 150 km of an existing airport, but 
seeks exemption / relaxation from any of the guidelines / rules and policies 

would be consider ed by the steering committee constituted for the 
purpose.   
 
A Greenfield airport to be set up within 150 km of an existing airport, the 
application shall be considered first by the steering committee.  The 
decision of the Central Govt. for approval of the  airport will be based on 
the recommendation of the steering committee.” 
 
 
6.21 According to a background note submitted by the Ministry, i n Bengaluru  and 
Hyderabad, there were constraints of expanding the capacity of the existing airports. To 
meet the need of growing traffic at these airports, the Government had approved setting 
up of new Greenfield airports and closure of the existing airports upon commissioning of 
the new Greenfield airports. Further, in order to improve connectivity to the North 
Eastern States, the Government later also approved the setting up of a new Greenfield 
airport at Pakyong in Sikkim. The approval for Greenfield Airports is given under the 
Greenfield Airports policy 2008.  The other Greenfield airports for which the government 
of India has accorded in principle approval are  Mopa(Goa), NaviMumbai, Sindhudurg 
(Maharshtra), Kannur(Kerala), Bijapur, Shimoga, Hassan, Gulbarga (Karnataka), Dabra 
(MadhyaPradesh), Saras(Rajasthan),Karaikal(Puducherry), Kushinagar (UttarPradesh). 
 
 
6.19 AAI is to build three Green Fi eld airports in North -east at G angtok (Pakyong), 
Kohima (Chiethu) and Itanagar. The work in progress for Gangtok airport is at a cost of 
` 309 crore with likely date of completion being January 2012.  The DPR has been 
approved for Chiethu airport by State Government at an estimated cost of ` 954 cr. The 
Itanagar airport is to build at an estimated cost of ` 989 crore. 
 
 
 
C) AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
  
6.22 The entire Airspace of India has been divided into 4 Flight Information Reg ions 
(FIRs). Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata (Guwahati as sub -FIR) and Chennai.  There are 12 
neighbouring FIRs which share common FIR boundary with Indian FIRs.  These 12 

FIRs are located in Pakistan, Oman, Yemen, Mogadishu, Seychelles, Mauritius, Male, 
Srilanka, Malaysia, Myanmar, Bangladesh and Nepal. 
 
6.23 The Airport Authority of India has drawn up a plan for the augmentation of the Air 
Traffic Management system  which was explained to the Committee in a Power Point 
presentation as under: 
 
AUGMENTATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
SHORT TERM MID TERM LONG TERM 
 
Extended VHF, Data Link, 
DATIS, PDC, AIDC 
 
 Airspace sectorisation 
 Route optimization 
 Radar network 
 Amalgamation of 11 
ACCs into 4 Europe 
centres 
 Reduced separation 
application. 
 
 Amalgamation of 4 
Enroute centres to  2 
centres 
 
 Transition 
Voice – Data 
Satellite navigation. 
 
 Harmonization with 
Global systems. 
 SWIM 
DVOR/DME, ILS, GBAS, 
SBAS (GAGAN) PBN 
 
Central ATFM  
Radar, ADS -C, ADS -B, 
ASMGCS 
Transition to ATN  
Improved ATC Procedures 
 
Transition AIS – AIM  
Integrated ATC Automation, 
Tower automation, 
Controller tools, Safety 
alerts, Arrival manager 
 
Impl. of GAGAN 
 
GBAS 
 
 
 
 
6.24 The Committee asked the Ministry about the GAGAN project and its benefits to 
Air Traffic Management.  The Ministry in a written note stated as under: 
“The GPS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation (GAGAN) system is planned 
implementation of a Satellite Based Navigation System being developed 
by Airports Authority of India (AAI) and Indian Space Research 

Organization (ISRO), to deploy and certify an operational SBAS for the 
Indian Flight Information Region, with expansion capability to neighboring 
FIRs. GAGAN system provides correction signals to the GPS signals to 
meet the accuracy, integrity, availability and continuity requirements 
required for aviation. 
 
The growth of aviation and the urgent need to reduce fuel 
consumption and emissions demands increased airspace and airport 
capacity and a focus on providing the preferred trajectory (route and 
altitude) to each airspace user. This in turn dictat es improvements in 
communications, navigation  and surveillance services, aircraft operator 
also require efficiency gains via approaches with the lowest possible 
minima and the significant safety benefits of vertical guidance. Global 
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) of which GAGAN is a part provides a 
way to satisfy all of these requirements. 
 
GAGAN also would provide tangible benefits to Non -Civil Aviation 
Sectors such as Railways, Marine Activities, Surveying, Scientific 
Research, Geodynamics, Natural Re source, Land Management and 
Agriculture.The total cost of the project is ` 774 Crore. 
 
Airports Authority of India has so far spent an amount of ` 108 
crore in phase I and in Phase II, AAI has spent a sum of ` 206 Crore.” 
 
 
 
 
6.25 Asked by the Committee about the modernization program mes initiated t o 
upgrade the Air Traffic Control ( ATC) and enhance its functioning across airports in the 
country, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“Following ATC Modernization programmes at various airports in the country are in 
progress. 
 
(i) At present, Air Traffic Service facilities at IGI Airport, New Delhi and CSI 
Airport, Mumbai are provided with state of the art technology Air Traffic 
Automation System wherein air situation display has been provided in v arious 
ATC units such as Control Tower, Approach Control Centre and area Control 
Centre by integrating radar data and flight information data. 
 
(ii) Advanced Surface Movement Guidance and Control System 
(ADMGCS) has been provided at Delhi, Bangalore & Hyde rabad Airports to 
monitor & control the movements of aircraft and vehicles on ground through 

display in Control Tower to enhance the operational efficiency during near Zero 
visibility conditions. 
 
 
(iii) ASMGCS at Kolkata, Mumbai & Chennai Airports to  under installation to 
monitor & Control the ground movements in Control Tower thereby enhancing 
the operational efficiency during poor visibility. 
 
(iv) ATC Tower Automation System at 38 airports are being installed to 
make provision of air situation display in various ATC units. 
 
 
(v) ATC Modernization at Chennai Airport is under progress to make 
provision of air situation display in various ATC facilities such as Control Tower, 
Approach Control and Area Control centre by integrating Radar data of regional 
radars, flight information data & ADS. 
 
(vi) ATS Data Link Network at 6 airports to facilitate airlines to get Met 
Information from these servers without manual intervention from ground 
personnel.  46 DATIS are under way for integration with these servers.  V olmet 
broadcast is being automated at two (2) airports.  Departure clearance by way of 
Data link is being implemented at (6) airports. 
 
 
(vii) Voice Communication & Control Systems at 30 airports are being 
installed to provide integrated communication pane l to ATC Controllers wherein 
all VHF / Telephone / Hotlines / Direct Speed Circuits can be operated from 
same console thereby increasing operational efficiency. 
 
 
(viii) Performance Based Navigation (PBN) 
 
-  Implemented at Mumbai, Delhi & Ahmadabad Airports since August,  
    2008. 
-  ATC procedures for Chennai PBN implemented since October, 2009. 
- Procedures for Hyderabad under notification. 
- Deriving following benefits 
 
a) Structured flow of traffic in Terminal Control Area (TMA) – reducing need  
 for frequent communication with ATC. 
 
b) De-conflicting of arrival and departure flow for enhanced safety and  
improved efficiency. 
 
c) 30% reduction in Radio Telephony (RT) Communication – reducing  
controller workload. 

 
(ix)  Central Flow Management System (CFMS) is being im plemented over 
Indian air space to improve Air Traffic Management.” 
 
 
 
6.26 The C ommittee asked the AAI about steps being taken to improve the 
radar coverage to regulate and control air traffic in the country .  The AAI in a written 
note stated as under: 
 
“Airports Authority of India is installing 9 Number of MSSR (Monopulse 
Secondary Surveillance Radar) I at the following airports:- 
 
1. Chennai 
2. Bellary 
3. Vishkhapatnam 
4. Bhopal 
5. Porbandar 
6. Kolkata 
7. Jharsuguda 
8. Katihar 
9. Jodhpur. 
 
To provide Radar surveillance coverage in  the entire Indian airspace.  In 
addition, eight Primary Surveillance Radar (PSR) co -located with MSSR are 
also being provided at following airports for catering overlapping Radar 
coverage and for airport approach surveillance: 
 
Mumbai   - 2 
Delhi    - 1 
Cochin   - 1 
Chennai   - 1 
Kolkata   - 1 
Amritsar   - 1 
Thiruvananthapuram - 1” 
 
 
6.27 The Committee asked the Ministry about the airports having CAT I, CAT II 
& CAT III Instrument Landing System facilities in India .  T he Ministry in a written 
submission stated as under: 
“There are 47 airports which have the facility of Instrument Landing 
System.  Details are given below:  
 

Sl. No. Airports 
1. Agartala 
2. Ahmedabad 
3 Amritsar 
4 Aurangabad 
5 Bangalore (HAL) 
6. Bangalore (BIAL)   
7. Bhavnagar 
8 Bhopal 
9. Bhubneshwar 
10. Calicut 
11. Chennai 
12. Cochin 
13. Coimbatore 
14. Delhi (IGI)* 
15. Dibrugarh 
16. Dimapur 
17. Gaya 
18. Gondia@ 
19. Guwahati 
20. Hyderabad 
(Begumpet) 
21. Hyderabad (HIAL) 
22. IGRUA 
23. Imphal 
24. Indore 
25. Jaipur 
26. Jammu 
27. Khajuraho 
28. Kolkata** 
29. Lengpui # 
30. Lucknow 
31. Madurai 
32. Mangalore 
33. Mumbai 
34. Nagpur 
35. Patna 
36. Port Blair 
37. Raipur 
38. Rajkot 
39. Ranchi 
40. Silchar 
41. Surat 
42. Trichy 
43. Trivandrum 

 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
*      At Delhi, ILS facility is CAT IIIB.                
          @    Equipment installed & side preparation (earth work) is under way.   
**    At Kolkata, ILS facility is CAT II. 
           #     Facility installed and is under calibration. 
               
 At all other airports, CAT I ILS is available” 
 
 
 
6.28 During winter  (season in Delhi) , delay is generally experienced in flight 
operations due to dense fog.   The Committee observed that though Instrument Landing 
System (ILS) ha d been installed at Delhi airport  but still long delays are there.  Asked 
about the reasons thereof and the measures taken to overcome it at Delhi and other 
such airports, the Ministry in a written submission stated as under: 
 
“IGI Airport, New Delhi has three operational runways i.e. Runway 29/11, 
28/10, 27/09, Runway 11 and Runway 28 are equipped with CAT III B 
ILS.  Runway 10 and Runway 27 are equipped with CAT I ILS.  
Installation of CAT -I ILS is underway for Runway 09.  CAT II ILS is in 
operation at Kolkata.  Runways at Amritsar, Kanpur and Lucknow are 
operating in ILS Category I and are being equipped for CAT II ILS.   
 
 
Although ILS CAT -IIIB is installed at IGI Airport sometimes the 
visibility drops below the CAT IIIB compliant aircr aft operating minima i.e. 
50 meters.  As a result the aircraft has to wait for the improvement of 
visibility. In  compliance with DGCA instructions during fog period [15 th 
December to 15 th February], airlines are required to deploy CAT -III 
trained pilots.” 
 
 
 
 
44. Udaipur 
45. Vadodara 
46. Varanasi 
47. Vizag 

6.29 When the Committee asked the Ministry about systems in place where any error 
made by the Air Traffic Controllers can be corrected, the Ministry in a written submission 
stated as under: 
  
“Following procedures/ system are in vogue to correct the er rors made by 
ATCOs in India. 
 
i) Ensuring correct read back of instructions issued to the pilots: 
 
The pilot shall read back to the controller safety related parts of ATC clearances 
and instructions which are transmitted by voice. The controller listens to  the read 
back to ascertain that the clearances / instructions have been correctly 
acknowledged by the pilot and take immediate action to correct any 
discrepancies revealed by the read back. 
 
ii) Predicted conflict alert: 
 
This is a computer generated tool in radar system which generates warning to air 
traffic controllers about the possibility of conflict between aircraft in air due to 
controller‟s or pilot‟s error. This is commonly called Short Term Conflict Alert 
(STCA) System. 
 
iii) Minimum safe Altitude Warning: 
 
This is another computer generated warning which is activated if the aircraft 
descends below a safe altitude (less than thousand feet above terrain) due to 
wrong clearance issued by the controller or wrong descent initiated by pilot. 
 
iv) Advanced Surface Movement Guidance Control System: 
 
In this system aircraft and vehicular movement on ground is presented to the 
controller on a situation display and warns the controller about possible conflict 
between aircraft or between aircraft and any vehic le. The system also warns the 
controller about runway incursion (unauthorized entry of aircraft or vehicle on the 
runway). 
 
v) Airborne Collision Avoidance System (ACAS): 
 
This system is available in aircraft. The pilot receives a warning if another 
aircraft comes in close proximity to his aircraft due to incorrect clearance 
issued by  the controller or wrong manoeuvre carried out by the pilot due to 
non compliance of ATC instructions.” 
 
 

 
CHAPTER – VII 
 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
7.1 As per the Strategy Plan 2010-15 of the M inistry of Civil Aviation, the growth of 
the aviation industry in India will not happen without the availability of qualified 
personnel across every discipline, including pilots, cabin crew, engineers, air traffic 
controllers, ground  staff and handlers, administration and management. Each one of 
these roles requires education and training. This impacts not only the airlines and 
airports, but every supplier across the value chain, as well as government regulators. 
Trained Indian personne l would also migrate to other countries where training facilities 
are yet undeveloped and this would lead to constant attrition and requirement for quick 
replacement. The Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation , a globally -known aviation research 
organisation foresees that the demand for pilots, engineers and cabin crew (operational 
staff) is likely to grow from the current nearly 32,000 to 90,000 by 2020. It can be safely 
deduced that nearly half this demand is likely to mature by 2015. This figure does not 
include airport employees, air traffic controllers, ground handlers, catering companies, 
retailers, security personnel etc. The direct and indirect impact of the aviation sector in 
India could be employment for over 2.6 million people by 2020.IATA and ICAO esti mate 
that there is a multiplier of 5.8 direct and indirect jobs for every aviation industry 
employee. In the Indian market, this number may be higher. 
 
7.2 The Strategy Plan further acknowledges that civil aviation Human Resource is 
largely globalised with training facilities mushrooming all over the globe. A large number 
of Indian students undergo training in foreign countries too and then acquire an Indian 
license. There is consequently a glut in the employment market with nearly 3500 pilots 
remaining unemployed as a result of the recent recession. 
 Accordingly, the plan proposes the following measures:  
a) The Ministry shall develop better tools to assess market demand and calibrate 
supplies accordingly. This might require annual release of seats to the Trai ning 
Institutions rather than a blanket freedom available at the moment.  

b) The Government shall also lay down stricter standards for establishing Flying 
and Engineering Schools in order to ensure that only the best remain in the field.  
c) In order to improve standards of performance, quality control measures would be 
modified, to include system of third party audits. IGRUA and NFTI would be used 
as a resource to complement the DGCA in the conduct of audits. Similarly the 
training institute of PHHL shall be use d as a central resource for the audit of 
helicopter training institutions.  
d) The Course -Curriculum for commercial pilots shall be reviewed periodically in 
order to match global standards. In the first stage the existing curriculum would 
be modified on basis of the Joint Airworthiness Regulation curriculum. Simulation 
would be made integral part of training to train the pilots in emergency situations.  
e) It would be made compulsory for all institutions involved in training to acquire ISO 
certification by the end of 2013.  
f) International norms for changeover from fixed wings licenses to rotary wings 
would be adopted to enable simpler transition from one to other.  
g) National Institute of Aviation Management and Research (NIAMAR) at Delhi 
would be developed as a major resource for training of aviation related Managers 
and Personnel.  
  
 
 
 
INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN AKADEMI (IGRUA) 
 
7.3 Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi was set up at Fursatganj, Raebareli (Uttar 
Pradesh) to bring about a quantum improvement in the  standards of flying and ground 
training of Commercial Pilots in the country.   The Academy  is equipped with most 
modern and sophisticated trainer aircraft, up -to-date audiovisual training aids and other 
facilities for effective ground training.  It employs  qualified flying and ground instructors, 
with long experience in the field of aviation and flying training.  The aim at IGRUA is not 
only to train to make a pilot but also to make him an effective systems manager in 
aeronautics.  The flying trainees of the Academy acquire the standards required for their 
transit with ease into the cockpits of the airlines. 

 
7.4 According to the Annual Report (2010 -11) of the Ministry, the process of 
infrastructure expansion of the Academy  is still continuing. Notable achie vements have 
been made to upgrade the institution to the level of present day global standards, such 
as Instillation of DA -42 Simulator, Procurement of two DA -42 Aircraft, Extension of 
Apron & re -surfacing of parallel taxi track, Up -gradation of Ground Lig ht facilities & 
provision of simple approach light, Construction of plinth Protection Wall to prevent 
intrusion through fencing, Repair of Drains, Renovation of FOC.ATC Building, 
Constructing of new NDB Shelter & Installation of new NDB, Refurbishment of t wo old 
hangars, etc. at the airport area. In the Institutional/Residential area, construction of 
three type „C‟ Residential Blocks, Renovation of existing Residential quarters, Old Boys 
Hostel, Institutional Block, digging of Bore well, Repair of Boundary Wall & Drains, etc. 
are the major expansion projects undertaken during the current year. IGRUA, the 
flagship flying training institution in the country has every hallmark of an institution of 
international standards.  
  
7.5 IGRUA has entered into a Managem ent Contract with Global Aviation Giant – 
CAE, Canada to scale up the standards at par with international Standards. CAE took 
over the management of IGRUA on 1 st Mar 2008 as per management contract signed 
between Ministry of Civil Aviation and CAE, Canada.  
 
 
7.6 The objective of the Academy is to conduct airline oriented flying training courses 
to the level of contemporary international standards. The courses offered are: 
a) Ab-Initio to CPL Course on fixed wing aircraft. 
b) Multi Engine Endorsement Course 
c) Instrument Rating Renewal 
d) Refresher Course for Certified Flying Instructors and Pilot Instructors of Flying   
      Training Institutes. 
e) Courses for Assistant Flight Instructor Rating (A) and Flight Instructor Rating  
                 A. 
f) Skill Tests for renewal of Licence for Ex-students of IGRUA on requirement  
      basis. 
g) To provide Simulator training & checks and other facilities to outside aviation  
      agencies for their Pilots Selection & Interview. 

h) WOMBAT Pilot Aptitude Test for beginners. 
i) Practical Training on aircraft to Diploma Holders in Aeronautical Engineering  
 
 
 
 
7.7 Responding to a query from t he Committee as to what action was taken by the 
Ministry in the area of development of training for pilots, ground crew and support staff 
and its regulation, the Ministry in a written submission stated as under:     
 
“The Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Academy  (IGRUA) is mandated to 
bring quantum improvement in the standards of flying and ground training 
of commercial pilots in the country.  It is equipped w ith modern and 
sophisticated trainer equipments.  Currently 203 trainee pilots are 
undergoing training for Commercial Pilot License. 
 
Airports Authority of India in joint collaboration with CAE, Canada has set 
up National Flying Training Institute at Gondi a in Maharashtra as Joint 
Venture Enterprise.  The objective of setting up this Institute is to create 
qualified and well trained pilots. 
 
There are 17 Government flying training institutes and 23 private flying 
training institutes in the country engaging in training of pilots.” 
 
 
 
 
7.8 When the Committee asked whether  Air India was suffering from shortage of 
staff especially pilots, the Ministry in a written note furnished as under: 
 
“There is no shortage of staff in Air India. The total number of 
employees as on 30.09.2011 on the rolls of the Company were 
27738 out of which 1518 are Pilots ”. 
 
                                  

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
1. The civil aviation sector in India has come a long way in the last 
100 years of its existence and growth. From a solely 
Government regulated area, it has transformed into a more open 
and liberalized sector with several prominent private players in 
the field. Currently India is considered among the largest 
aviation markets of the World. In this context,  the Committee 
note that around 140 million passengers were handled by the 
Indian Airports in the year 2010, which may increase upto 420 
million by the year 2020, thus becoming the third largest market 
in the world.   
 
Such growth prospects have posed several challenges too.  
The Committee note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation is striving 
to face these challenges as well as achieve the desired growth 
rate for the aviation sector in the coming years through various 
measures.  Infrastructure development to meet the future growth 
in air traffic has been given priority with construction projects of 
15 „Greenfield‟ airports.  Modernization of 64 metro and non -

metro airports is currently being undertaken to augment 
capacity and facilities at these airports.  Ec onomic regulation of 
the sector as well as protection of consumers‟ interests has also 
emerged as an area of crucial importance.  Further, the 
Committee also note the steps taken by the Ministry in 
liberalizing capacity enhancement/ traffic rights by allow ing 
domestic airlines to fly to international destinations and to have 
alliances with various foreign airlines to serve a bigger market.   
 
However, despite these positive signals, the Committee 
find it extremely distressing that the National Carrier, Air India is 
fast losing its dominant market position and has accumulated 
huge outstanding debts amounting to over  ` 40,850 crore, as in 
December 2010.  The Committee further learnt during the course 
of the examination that the National Carrier has a negative  net 
worth and is in deep financial trouble to the extent that it is 
unable to meet even its own expenditure and needs 
unprecedented Government support to remain afloat as an 
airline company.   
 

As regards the functioning of other aviation related bodies, 
the Committee feel that the reports of fake pilots flying aircraft, 
unpaid pilots refusing to fly and near misses of air mishaps have 
severely dented the credibility of the Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation (DGCA), the aviation regulator.  Even some of  the 
leading private airlines have started facing financial crunch.  
Overall, the Indian aviation scenario seems quite bleak.  In this 
backdrop, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need for 
finding practical solutions and deft handling of the Indian  
Aviation sector.   It is high time that the aviation regulators 
improved their functioning too. The subsequent paragraphs deal 
with various issues associated with the subject and the 
Committee‟s observations and recommendations on the same.  

2. The Committee note from the deposition of the Ministry that the 
Government of India does not follow the open skies policy, 
which allows unrestricted access by any foreign carrier into the 
sovereign territory of a country without any written agreement 
specifying cap acity, ports of call or schedule of service.  
Presently, the Government regulates international 
destination/travel through bilateral agreements, as is the 
practice followed by the European Union, UK, USA, Japan, 
Australia and countries in South Eastern Asi a.  The Committee 
do understand the demerits of allowing unrestricted access of 
any foreign carrier into the sovereign territory of our country 
particularly in the light of an increased threat of terrorist 
activities.  At the same time, they are constraine d to note that 
inspite of having bilateral agreements with 108 countries, India 
has air connectivity with just half the number, i.e. around 53 
countries.  The Ministry has attributed it to the commercial 
judgments based on market demand, viability of operations, flow 
of traffic etc.   The Committee have learnt that the Ministry had 
formal and informal bilateral talks with 27 countries in the year 
2010 on mutual aviation relations, which include countries 

witnessing heavy air travel by Indians, for instance,  Malaysia, 
HongKong, USA, Canada and Singapore.  The Ministry, in their 
deposition before the Committee, had taken the stand that the 
Government does not interfere in commercial matters of airlines 
of any country.  Still one cannot lose sight of the fact t hat air 
travel for business or leisure is gaining good momentum all over 
the world. The Committee, accordingly desire that the Ministry 
should work out the modalities of establishing air connectivity 
with the remaining 55 countries and improve connectivity  at 
least in the profitable routes.  The Committee feel that even if the 
routes/destinations cannot be serviced by the National Carrier at 
present, the same should be made available to scheduled 
carriers/foreign airlines judiciously in order to improve tou rism, 
trade and other bilateral activities with foreign countries.  In this 
connection, it is understood that recently the Government has 
decided that the „right of first refusal‟ enjoyed by the National 
Carrier so far, will cease to exist for all foreign routes or bilateral 
agreements signed between India and other countries.  As a 
result, now all domestic carriers will be allowed to use bilateral 
trade rights to fly to foreign countries.   The Committee feel that 

it is a step in the right direction and wo uld impress upon the 
Ministry to utilize the Bilateral agreements to the optimum for 
overall benefit of the aviation sector and the subsequent impact 
on other sectors like tourism and industry.  They would like to 
be apprised of the Government‟s decisions and plans during 
this fiscal with regard to establishing air connectivity with 
countries with whom formal negotiations are underway, and 
results thereof.  

 
3. Access to funds is a critical issue for the aviation industry, with 
most domestic airlines regis tering huge losses in 2011 -12.  The 
Committee note that Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) for airport 
development in Greenfield Projects and Brownfield Projects is 
100 percent through the automatic and the FIPB (Foreign 
Investment Promotion Board) routes res pectively.  However, as 
regards FDI in domestic scheduled passenger Airlines, only 
foreign financial and non -airline investors can invest upto 49 
percent in Indian Airlines, as on date.  In this connection, the 
Committee note that while presenting Union Bu dget (2012-13) in 
the Parliament on 16 th March 2012, the Finance Minister has 
announced that a proposal to allow foreign airlines to participate 
upto 49 percent in the equity of an air transport undertaking 
engaged in operation of scheduled and non -scheduled air 
transport services is under active consideration of the 
Government.  
 
The Committee do not see any valid reasons for 
maintaining a cap on the FDI in domestic scheduled passenger 
airlines sector to 49 percent by foreign investors and 100 

percent by a  Non-Resident Indian (NRI). The cap for FDI is 74 
percent in passenger/chartered flights and cargo and 100 
percent by NRIs with no direct or indirect participation by any 
foreign airlines in passenger/chartered airlines. 
 
The Committee consider that such a  cap is limiting the 
growth of aviation sector in India. The benefits of opening up the 
passenger airlines sector for investment by foreign airline 
companies are manifold.  Apart from addressing the shortage of 
funds, this would help raise the level of ser vices for the 
consumers and promote healthy competition.  The Committee 
are of the opinion that in a business environment, healthy 
competition ensures optimum level of services for consumers.  
They, therefore, would like to be apprised of the final decisio n of 
the Government on the matter concerning the ceiling on FDI as 
the same has already been under active consideration of the 
Government this fiscal.   At the same time, the Committee would 
stress that FDI cannot be the sole solution to the Indian aviatio n 
sector‟s debt problems and a holistic approach is required not 
only to attract funds towards it but also bring down the colossal 

losses being suffered by it year after year.  No doubt, the 
problem needs immediate attention and the Committee would 
like to  be apprised of the decisions taken in this regard at the 
earliest.  

 
4. The Committee observe that there was a sudden surge in 
domestic airfares by various Airlines during the winter tourist 
season in the year 2010.  Though domestic fares are determined 
by market forces and thus are not Government regulated, the 
Committee wish to emphasize the need to ensure that air -fares 
are not hiked in a sudden and unreasonable manner.  They note 
from the Ministry‟s deposition in December 2010 that a Civil 
Aviation Economic Regulatory Council has already been set up 
in May 2009 to address economic issues of air transport with 
special focus on airfares.  The Committee wish to point out that 
this is only a relatively recent development.  In fact the DGCA is 
already empow ered under Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937  
to direct Airlines to establish their tariffs according to certain 
broad principles for maintaining transparency and the     
Director-General of the DGCA is empowered to issue directives 
to the Airlines indu lging in excessive/predatory pricing.  
However, the Committee have doubts about the DGCA taking 
any cautionary step on these lines otherwise the case of 
excessive air tariffs during 2010 would not have happened.  The 

Ministry had also referred to the DGCA‟ s directive to all 
scheduled airlines to display route -wise tariffs and category -
wise fares in their respective websites.  But on visiting the 
various websites, it is found that very few scheduled Airlines are 
following the said directive.  The DGCA is und erstood to have a 
Tariff Analysis Unit functioning under its purview also to 
monitor tariff on regular basis.  While being dissatisfied with the 
current state of affairs despite several powers already available  
to the Government, the Committee recommend that the DGCA or 
the newly set up Civil Aviation Economic Regulatory Council 
should monitor this aspect with clarity and find out measures to 
ensure proper compliance of the directives issued to scheduled 
Airlines so as to prevent harassment of the consumer s.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised about the concrete 
proposals devised by the Economic Regulatory Council in the 
last one year on airfares, since a scrutiny of the 10 orders 
passed by them revealed that they related to the User 
Development Fee and fuel charges only.  As the DGCA has also 
reportedly set up a Working Group to protect consumer 
interests in 2010, the Committee would only hope that the two 

regulatory setups work in -sync so that their respective 
recommendations complement each othe r.  The Committee 
would like to know as to what perceptible difference has been 
achieved in the field of airfare regulation by the Government in 
the recent months.  

 
5. The Committee note with concern that the aviation industry is 
heavily burdened with ta xes and levies like Sales Tax on 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF), levy withholding tax on leased 
aircraft/engines, high airport charges and levy of royalty, service 
tax on agency fees, expenses incurred abroad on loans raised 
and also services rendered and consumed abroad etc.  The hefty 
Sales Tax on Aviation Turbine Fuel has been causing an adverse 
effect on the growth of the aviation sector over a period of time.  
The sales tax on ATF charged by the State Governments ranges 
from 4 percent to around 30 percent .  The tax on ATF forms 
nearly 35 -40 percent of the cost component of the airlines.  
During their deposition, the representatives of the aviation 
industry underlined the need to declare ATF under „Declared 
Goods‟ Category so that it attracts uniform sales tax of 4 percent 
across India, though it  has not yet been conceded by the Govt. 
as the Ministry of Finance is more keen on establishing a GST 
(Goods & Services Tax) regime first.  The Government is 
currently considering this proposal. The Committee desire  that 
an early decision in this regard should be taken in the interest of 

domestic airlines.  They are of the view that conducive tax 
regime is essential for the growth of the aviation sector and 
hence recommend that due consideration may be given to 
reduce sales tax on ATF and categorize it as „Declared Goods‟ 
under Central Sales Tax Act, since the proposed GST regime is 
not likely to be in place very soon and thus, the Ministry of 
Finance should not defer a decision on this matter.  The 
Committee desire that their suggestions may be conveyed to the 
Ministry of Finance.  At the same time, the Committee appreciate 
the announcement made by the Finance Minister, while 
presenting Union Budget (2012 -13), that to reduce the cost of 
ATF, Government has permitted d irect import of ATF by Indian 
carriers, as actual users. 
 
The Committee also were convinced by the Ministry‟s 
stand that classification of aviation as an “infrastructure sector” 
enables companies for external commercial borrowings (ECB) 
through the automat ic route and since aviation is a capital 
intensive business, easy access to working capital at 
competitive rates is a must for the healthy growth of the sector.  

In this connection, the Finance Minister, in his Budget Speech 
(2012-13) has proposed to permi t ECB for working capital 
requirements of the airline industry for a period of one year, 
subject to a total ceiling of US Dollar one billion.  The Committee 
hope that this would address the immediate financing concerns 
of the Civil Aviation sector and woul d like to be apprised of the 
factual position on the said proposal at the action taken stage.  
 
Another instance which the Committee are concerned to 
point out is that out of a total fleet of 174 aircraft, NACIL (now 
renamed as Air India Limited) has lease d around 37 aircraft, 
which is highly expensive, as lease rental payments for 
aircraft/engines are subject to levy of Withholding Tax under 
Income Tax Act.  The Committee were informed that such 
payments were exempt from taxation under Section 10 (15A) of 
Income Tax Act but the exemption was subsequently withdrawn 
for lease on or after April 2007, which was a great blow to the 
already sagging financial health of the national carrier and the 
aviation industry as a whole. 
 

Overall, the Committee are dismayed that the incidence of 
taxes on air fares is quite substantial thus adversely impacting 
competitiveness of Indian Carriers vis -à-vis foreign carriers.  
They urge the Ministry to take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance on priority basis and work towa rds simplification of the 
tax regime which is imperative for the growth of the aviation 
sector.  The Committee hope that the Ministry of Finance would 
take a reasonable view on the matter as not only NACIL but also 
scheduled carriers are facing acute finan cial crunch of late and 
this would not augur well for the Indian Civil Aviation industry in 
the long run.  

 
 
6. The Committee note that the mandate to regulate flight 
operations, airworthiness, and air traffic control services lies 
with the Directorate Ge neral of Civil Aviation (DGCA). However, 
the Committee find it strange that such a significant regulatory 
body is headed by an officer holding additional charge in the 
Ministry.  Since in their view, this administrative dispensation 
would not allow DGCA to  render requisite vigilance and 
regulation of civil aviation sector, the Committee desire that 
DGCA should be headed by an officer with exclusive charge.   
   
In so far as safety issues are concerned, tragic incidents in 
Mangalore and Arunachal Pradesh, re ports of aircrafts coming 
dangerously close to each other or hovering over the airports 
for a long time before landing, have led the Committee to believe 
that the DGCA needs to revisit their procedures and regulatory 
mechanism thoroughly. The Committee have been informed that 
the DGCA has now set up a Civil Aviation Safety Advisory 
Council to suggest ways to enhance the safety of the aircraft 
operations at the aerodromes, and has ordered the inspection of 

critical airports in order to review the systems and  facilities at 
these aerodromes. The Committee take serious view of the fact 
that 11 airports have been identified as critical airports from 
flight operation point of view. It simply means that these airports 
are potentially very dangerous for the fliers a s well as the crew 
and the aircraft.  The Committee strongly recommend that the 
DGCA must not lose any time in addressing all issues pertaining 
to flight operations at these 11 critical airports to avoid any more 
tragic incident in future.  They would like  to know the timelines 
fixed and the actual planning done by the Ministry to bring these 
airports in the safe category.  The Committee also emphasize 
that there is need to review and streamline all existing 
mandatory procedures related to flight operations  at all the 
airports in the country which also include controlling noise 
pollution at metro airports. The Committee suggest that surprise 
checks/inspections be carried out in flights, hangars, cargo 
areas, public areas in airports etc. at regular intervals  to keep 
the system foolproof to the maximum extent possible. 
  

 The Committee are convinced that the safety of the 
passengers can be ensured by introducing latest technology 
and equipment such as radar satellite systems to minimize 
human errors as well as  having alert, efficient, qualified and 
well-trained personnel to operate these equipment effectively. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the suggestions made by 
Civil Aviation Safety Advisory Council (CASAC) for training of 
inspectors, ground staff, pilots etc. and the need to improve the 
quality of training imparted by training institutes should be 
implemented in letter and spirit.  
 
An amount of ` 10 crore has been given as budgetary 
support during 2011 -12 for setting up of Civil Aviation Security 
Training Academy.  The Committee would like to know the 
progress made in this regard.  Further they note from the data 
furnished by the Ministry that an amount of ` 84 crore was 
allocated to the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) for 
purchase of body sc anners, radiological detection equipment 
and Bomb Detection & Disposal equipment.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the purchases made so far in this 

regard.  The Committee further feel that post -accident 
operations need to be undertaken in a spe edier manner.  As 
suggested by Civil Aviation Safety Advisory Council (CASAC), 
an Independent Accident Investigation Board should also be set 
up without further delay.  The search & rescue operations, 
another weak area, should also be strengthened with ade quate 
support from all concerned organisations/agencies and State 
Governments.  
 

 
7. The Committee are unhappy to note that several airports in the 
country are functioning without license as per the policy 
mandated by the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) 
in 2003 and adopted by the Ministry since 2007.  Since these 
licenses are a certification of fulfilling all necessary 
requirements by an airport, the very absence of it may mean a 
compromise in terms of safety and standard of services at th e 
airports which are functioning without it.  As five years have 
already elapsed, the licensing procedure should no longer be 
viewed as a new concept.  Thus, the Committee desire to know 
the reasons for allowing these airports running without license, 
which by any standards, is a substantial number, as well as the 
responsibility fixed in the matter.  They would also like to be 
apprised of the remedial measures taken, if any, to grant 
licenses to the applicant airports and the results thereof as well 
as the revenue earned by the DGCA so far by granting licenses.  
The Committee strongly urge the Ministry to complete all 
certification/ licensing for all the Airports in the country at the 
earliest and ensure that no such lapse occurs in future. 

 
8. The Committee note with alarm that some pilots who either did 
not possess a proper pilot‟s license or were unfit to fly aircraft, 
had been found to be flying planes of private airlines thus 
gravely endangering the lives of passengers.  What is further 
distressing is t hat the involvement of DGCA personnel too had 
been suspected in the matter, as certain private flying training 
institutes, in possible connivance with some DGCA officials, had 
been found to be certifying unfit candidates as pilots.  Further 
surprising is the fact that some fake pilots were also found to be 
among the kith & kin of DGCA officials, which perhaps, explains 
as to why this issue was never unearthed by DGCA. The 
Committee were informed later that apart from the investigation 
by Delhi Police, the D GCA had started scrutinizing all licenses 
issued by them, and that an Expert Committee had been set up 
in March 2011 to re-examine the entire system of examination as 
well as licensing. The report of the said Committee was 
submitted in July, 2011. The Comm ittee desire to be apprised of 
the recommendations of the Expert Committee as well as the 
arrests and prosecutions made in the case following the internal 

checking done by DGCA and the follow up action taken on the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee.  The Committee are 
further appalled by the news reports of a fake flying school 
functioning in the national capital itself.  Obviously such 
schools can not be established overnight.  Besides, it is difficult 
to accept that DGCA was completely unaware of su ch 
developments.  The laxity on the part of the regulatory body has 
shocked the Committee and they strongly recommend that the 
DGCA personnel involved in this whole episode be identified 
urgently.  The Committee are deeply anguished to note that a 
premier regulator like DGCA is plagued with nepotism which 
raises a question mark on its role. The Committee strongly feel 
that the time is ripe for its complete overhauling.  While the 
Ministry is working on restructuring of the existing DGCA into 
an autonomous a viation safety regulatory organisation named 
Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) in line with ICAO‟s 
recommendations and international standards and practices, the 
Committee recommend that vested interests must not be 
allowed to dilute its efficacy otherwise In dian aviation industry 
may continue to suffer setbacks and miss growth opportunities.  

The Committee would also like to be informed about the 
restructuring of DGCA into Civil Aviation Authority, as soon as it 
is completed.   
 

 
9. The Committee have already commented on the serious issue of 
fake pilots and flying institutes in their earlier recommendation.  
They further find that at present, there are 23 private Flying 
Training Institutes and 17 Government Flying Training Institutes 
in the country for training of pilots.  They note with concern that 
as the aviation sector is growing at an average rate of 15 
percent, lack of skilled personnel should not restrain the growth 
of the sector.  The demand for pilots, engineers and cabin crew 
is going to be three ti mes than that of the current strength by 
2020 as per certain studies.  In this regard, concerns about the 
quality of human resource in Indian aviation sector are being 
openly expressed now.  The Committee, therefore, would like to 
emphasize that it is abso lutely necessary to augment the 
training capacity for pilots, cabin crew, engineers and ground 
staff to meet the demands of the aviation industry, while keeping 
a very strict vigil on the quality  of such training.  The Committee 
are of the opinion that an y slackness on this issue can cost the 
country dear in the near future.  The Committee also recommend 
that the Ministry should assess and upgrade the existing 

infrastructure at various Government Training Institutes to stop 
the exodus of Indian citizens to  foreign training institutes.  
Besides, the Ministry must carry out periodic audits/inspections 
as well as efficiency and aptitude tests on the trainers to find out 
the degree of compliance of laid out norms for imparting proper 
training and enforce remedi al measures, in case any lapse is 
found.  
 
The Committee also recommend that DGCA should tighten 
the norms set for Government recognized private flying training 
institutes and ensure that all such institutes meet the desired 
criteria.   
 

 
10. The Committe e note that the Airports Economic Regulatory 
Authority (AERA) has been established to act as the economic 
regulator for all airports in the country to determine tariffs, other 
airport charges and development fees including the User 
Development Fee (UDF) fo r aeronautical services and also to 
monitor the performance standards of 13 major airports.  With 
regard to UDF, the Committee note that the concerned licensee 
may levy and collect the same under the rules. However no 
methodology has been prescribed in the  Aircraft Rules for 
determining the User Development Fee and is determined on 
case-to-case basis.   
 
The UDF is recovered directly from the passengers.  In this 
connection, from the information furnished to them, the 
Committee noted that two airports at Ud aipur and Vizag are not 
charging any UDF from international customers while charging it 
from domestic travellers.  The Committee fail to comprehend the 
logic behind it, particularly for Udaipur, which is a favourite 
tourist destination of high -profile inte rnational travellers 
category on whom UDF ought to be levied.  Besides, Delhi and 

Mumbai Airports are reported to be charging „advance 
development fee‟ albeit there is a huge variation in the fee being 
charged by both. The Committee would desire to be appr ised of 
the reasons for charging an „advance‟ fee from passengers.  As 
the amount of levy is subject to periodic review by AERA, the 
Committee desire that AERA should review these issues and 
issue suitable directions with a view to streamlining the system.   
The Committee may also be apprised of the same.  

 
11. The Committee are pained to note that the National Carrier has 
suffered irreparable damage due to multiple issues which    
inter-alia include incomplete merger of the erstwhile Air India 
and Indian A irlines businesses, surplus and unproductive aged 
contract staff, skyrocketing fuel prices, strong competitors, non-
availability of the required number of Boeing 787 wide -bodied 
aircraft for its international operations etc.  Consequently, the 
company has gone into a severe crisis and its performance is far 
from satisfactory.  As all the Public Sector Undertakings are 
required to sign an MoU with the Government so that their 
performance could be monitored constantly, the Committee 
would like to be apprised about the MoU, if any, signed between 
the Air India Limited and the Government as well as steps taken 
by the Government to ensure that the overall expenditure of the 
company does not accumulate into such a gigantic debt burden.   
Further, the Committee are surprised to note the imbalance in its 
staff structure as on the one hand Air India has surplus staff in 
terms of ground handling, ground transport and back office 
functions as stated by the then CMD, Air India, on the other, it 
has shortage of skilled pe rsonnel in terms of pilots, cabin crew 

and engineers.  Out of 27,738 employees, only 1518 are pilots.  
The Committee have further been informed that the aircraft to 
personnel ratio of Air India is 1:226, which is three times as 
compared to the internationa l standards. The Agreements with 
Employees Union are also understood to be affecting the 
efficiency of the National Carrier and obstructing its efforts to 
respond positively to the fast changing business environment.  
Besides, even after five years of the integration of Air India and 
Indian Airlines, their merger is still not complete due to which 
the issue of pay parity has not been resolved.  As on date, only 
71 percent of the merger is complete.  As far as integration of 
HR is concerned, out of 30 critic al activities, only 10 are 
completed and rest are in progress.  The Committee are 
convinced that lack of foresight, initiative and proper planning 
by the Government is responsible for the dismal state of affairs 
in Air India.  Before embarking upon the mer ger of the two 
separate business entities, the Government should have devised 
clear-cut ways to address the issues relating to employees of 
the two airlines and prepared a meticulous plan of action as well 
as a contingency plan on merging Airlines with two  different 

cultures by studying the merger of several Airlines the world 
over.  The Committee are aware that recently the three member 
panel headed by Justice Dharmadhikari (appointed by the 
Ministry to streamline wages), has submitted its report to the 
Government. The Committee hope that their recommendations 
would be implemented expeditiously for settling the salary issue 
of employees. The Committee feel that grievances of the 
employees need to be settled fast to make them a motivated and 
productive workforce.  The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry should look at the structure of Air India, in terms of its 
aging employees and initiate a suitable voluntary retirement 
scheme for them.  Considering the excess of manpower in the 
company, especially th e ground support staff, the Committee 
suggest that  some younger surplus employees can be given 
proper professional training to be redeployed in catering and 
hospitality subsidiaries also. Overall, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to act expeditiously on al l legacy issues and help the 
airline gain the dominant position, it had enjoyed in the past, 
among all domestic Airlines. 
 

  In so far as availability of wide -bodied aircraft for 
augmentation of fleet of Air India is concerned, the Committee 
find that out of 27 B787 aircraft, which were expected to be 
received by the year 2008, only 7 were delivered till 2011.  As the 
competitors in international routes offer better flight experience 
to the travellers with wider aircraft, Air India loses customers 
due to it s aging and narrow -bodied aircraft.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the reasons for such a long delay by 
the USA based Boeing Commercial Planes company in 
delivering the ordered aircraft to India and penalties/ 
compensation imposed on them.  Th ey would also like the 
Ministry to apprise them whether the Boeing Company, has 
actually paid the compensation to the Indian Government for the 
delay. The Committee would also like to know as to how many 
aircraft have been delivered out of the 8 expected t his year so 
far.   

 
12. The Committee are distressed to note that despite being in the 
industry for 60 years, Air India Ltd. has completely lost its 
dominant position to private airlines due to severe financial 
crisis.  It has accumulated a working capita l debt to the tune of  
` 22,000 crore, as on November 2011.  Further, the operating 
loss of Air India per day has been ` 21 crore.  Apart from these 
staggering figures, the Committee also note that Air India was at 
an unenviable 6 th position in terms of on -time performance 
among the scheduled airlines of the country in the year 2010 
which in itself is enough to trigger its decline in terms of market 
share and profitability. 
 
Furthermore, the Committee note that the debt equity ratio 
of Air India is more tha n 40:1 as compared to the industry 
standards of 5:1.  They are very disappointed that the net worth 
of Air India is negative owing to its inability to even meet its 
daily expenses as well.  The Committee have been informed that 
the yield per seat kilometer  for the Financial year 2010 has 
decreased by 13 percent as compared to 2009 and that it has 

exhausted the ` 20,000 crore working capital.  The government 
of India has been constantly infusing fresh equities amounting 
to crores of rupees into Air India, la test being ` 3200 crore 
particularly for its salary component,  yet it has not made much 
of a difference to the overall financial health of the company.  An 
estimated ` 30,231 crore equity is still required in the next 10 
years, as per the Turnaround Plan.  The Committee fail to 
understand as to how the situation was allowed to deteriorate to 
this extent despite the fact that Air India was once a show piece 
PSU and a matter of pride for the Government.  Appointing a 
new Chief Operating Officer for the Nation al Carrier could not 
help the airline a bit. The Ministry had argued that several 
airlines of other countries have also experienced decline, 
nonetheless the Committee feel that the fall of Air India has been 
really steep.  The Committee cannot help but opi ne that 
unscrupulous and vested interests have worked overtime to 
suck the life out of this public enterprise.  Failure to check its 
deterioration is nothing but utter callousness on the part of the 
Government too.  
 

 
13. The Committee are utterly disappointed that a „Turnaround Plan‟ 
prepared with much consultations initially failed to convince the 
lenders to convert 40 percent of Air India‟s total debt into equity 
and the situation came back to square one.  They are aware that 
the Government has begun con sultations all over again on a 
fresh loan restructuring plan alongwith SBI Caps, the advisor to 
Air India.  In this connection, the Committee feel that the Banks 
should not have been forced to agree to a plan which was 
detrimental to their own growth particularly in present economic 
and financial scenario world wide.  Besides, converting part of a 
loan into equity cannot rid Air India of its entire debt burden 
therefore the Committee feel that Air India should be given at 
least interest free loan to partially ease the situation. 
  
The Committee, therefore, hope that the Ministry might 
have by now come up with a viable turnaround plan which is 
agreed to by the lenders.  Besides, since the Government is 
solely responsible for the company‟s financial woes, it s hould 
not shy away from taking care of the interest liability on its loan, 

and payments for acquiring new fleet, if the company is to stay 
afloat.  Recently, a panel set up by the Group of Ministers on the 
issue has reportedly recommended the Government to  consider 
selling a part of its stake in Air India to a strategic partner too, 
apart from infusing further equity into the ailing entity.  
Monetisation of some of the key assets/properties of Air India is 
also being considered. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the final decisions taken on the issue.  The Committee also 
suggest that all routes being serviced by Air India as a matter of 
policy and having lower load factors than required, be 
subsidized by Government of India to the extent of the operating 
cost of the flight to cut down Air India‟s losses.  The Committee 
would like the Ministry to submit a detailed note to them on the 
financial restructuring exercise as well as the results achieved at 
the earliest.  As an Expert Committee has already b een 
examining various options for financial revival of Air India 
Limited, the Committee desire that their views may be conveyed 
to them.  The Committee hope that any financial restructuring 
exercise suggested by the said Committee would be strictly 
time-bound since much delay has already occurred resulting in  

an unprecedented damage to the overall image and financial 
health of Air India.  They also desired to be apprised of the 
recommendations made by the said Expert Committee in this 
regard.      
 
The Com mittee also feel that Air India should revisit its 
expenses judiciously and weed out unnecessary expenditure to 
augment its financial condition till a decision on the debt 
restructuring is reached and the plan is implemented on ground. 
Though the company w ould still run in losses for few more 
years, yet the Ministry has expressed confidence that it would 
experience positive growth from the Financial Year 2018.  The 
Committee have been apprised that using Delhi airport as a hub, 
acquiring Boeing 787 aircraft  for its capacity enhancement, 
setting up of cargo infrastructure etc. are some of the significant 
steps taken by Air India to match the growth in aviation sector.  
They desire that the Government should give maximum 
attention to ensure that Air India perf orms better in the years to 
come. 

 
14. The Committee are glad to note that Pawan Hans Helicopter Ltd. 
(PHHL) has been a profit making entity since 1991-92 and paying 
dividends to the Government of India and ONGC.  The 
Committee are, however, distressed to  note that the safety 
record of PHHL is not satisfactory. The crash of two of its Bell 
choppers in the recent past have raised questions about the 
maintenance aspect and fleet adequacy.  The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry enquire into the mishaps an d take 
corrective measures, without delay. 
 
The Committee appreciate that PHHL has been a 
frontrunner in providing connectivity to the hilly regions of the 
country, particularly for Arunachal Pradesh where helicopters 
are the sole means of transportation i n certain inhospitable 
terrains and suggest that it should augment the fleet as part of 
transport, rescue and relief infrastructure by adding more 
helicopters to its fleet since a fleet of 40 helicopters is 
inadequate for the needs of such a vast country. 
 

The Committee desire that the Government should explore 
the medical evacuation/air -ambulance segment vigorously and 
start its services at affordable prices at a national level as 
medical evacuation would be a major driver of helicopter growth 
in the count ry through the National Disaster Management 
Agency (NDMA) and National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) 
requirements. However, construction of helipads in major 
Government hospitals needs to be undertaken first, for which 
engagement with other Ministries is necessary.  The Committee 
hope that the Ministry has initiated action in the matter.  They 
would also like to know the progress of the heliports in four 
metros as on date, particularly in Delhi, for which ` 7 crore was 
allocated this fiscal.  The Commit tee further note that the 
Strategy Plan 2010 -2015 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation lays 
emphasis on increasing the fleet of helicopters and exploring 
new sectors where its services can be optimally utilized.  While 
various important aspects have been iden tified in the said plan, 
the Committee find it surprising that there is no plan to increase 
the manpower, be it flight safety inspectors or helicopter pilots.  
Acquiring more helicopters and venturing into newer areas will 

boomerang in the absence of quali fied and trained inspectors 
and pilots.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend for 
inclusion of these aspects in the said Strategy Plan of the 
Ministry. 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
15. The Committee note that Airports Authority of India (AAI), a 
consistently profit-making organisation, has initiated the 
development of Airports in the country at a large scale either on 
its own or through the PPP mode.  The Committee further note 
that 2 metro airports and 62 non -metro airports have been 
shortlisted for modernization and upgradation for which around 
` 1500 crore was given as budgetary support during 2011 -12.  
Apart from metro airports, several non -metro airports are 
experiencing a substantial rush of domestic and international 
travellers for tourism and business purposes. Therefore, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to ensure that all such projects 
are completed in a time bound manner.   They would like to be 
apprised of the progress on a case-to-case basis.   
 
Further, the Committee are constrained to note that t he 
upgradation of airport at Bhubaneswar has been delayed.  They 
feel that not only the upgradation of the said airport needs to be 
speeded up but more cities in Orissa should be considered for 
creating airport infrastructure in view of the transit of the State.  

Similarly the development of new Civil Enclave at Bhatinda 
Airport is delayed due to coordination required with the Indian 
Air Force as its taxiway and runway fall within the IAF 
operational area.  The status of Patna airport is in limbo too due 
to non-availability of land.  For Hubli airport, 27 acres of land is 
yet to be given by the State Government. Though Kota airport 
has not been included in the list of 62 non -metro airports to be 
modernized, the Committee are of the opinion that the city, 
which is third largest city in Rajasthan, needs a good aviation 
infrastructure for its growth, and thus, feel that the Ministry 
should consider including the city airport for modernization and 
diverting air traffic through it.  In so far as Gwalior airport is  
concerned, the Committee are not convinced by the reasons 
cited by the Ministry for not including the same in the list of 
airports where modernization will be taken up and desire that 
the matter may be reconsidered.  Another airport requiring AAI‟s 
attention is Nagpur, where the project of multi-modal hub airport 
has been delayed for the last three years. As regards, North -
East, the Committee are disappointed to note that the Itanagar 
airport, which was envisaged in the special package, has so far 

received a meagre sum of ` 1 crore only.  Arunachal Pradesh, 
due to its sensitive location, needs special attention.  Thus, the 
Committee recommend that the construction of Greenfield 
airport at Itanagar must be speeded up urgently.  The Committee 
strongly urge th e Ministry to look into all the above -stated 
matters and respond accordingly.  Besides the Ministry must 
expedite the upgradation progr amme of all the 64 airports to 
prevent any cost escalations and time overruns, in consultation 
with the Airport Advisory Committees at various airports.  In the 
meantime, the Committee desire to be apprised of the scheduled 
and actual date of commencement, cost estimates, progressive 
actual expenditure upto 31 March, 2012, delay, if any, along with 
reasons thereof and cost e scalation of each of the 64 projects 
taken up by AAI.  The Committee also desire that the 
responsibility may be fixed for delay and time -overruns in these 
projects.   
 
  As regards other smaller airports, the Committee feel that 
airports providing connecti vity to certain world famous shrines 
like Tirupati and Shirdi not only have great potential in terms of 

passenger load but are vital to promote religious tourism too.  
The Committee are happy that construction of terminal building 
for Shirdi airport has al ready commenced, while obtaining of 
land clearance for Tirupati Airport terminal building needs to be 
pursued further.  The commencement of night landing facility at 
Tirupati with due commercial and operational assessment s 
needs attention too.  In this con nection, the Committee 
appreciate to note that in response to the concern shown by 
them during their Study Visit in January 2012, all the requisite 
logistic and other related requirements for night landing facility 
have been put in place at Tirupati Airpor t in the recent past.  
Some of the chartered flights have already started operating.  
Regarding the scheduled flights, it has been informed that many 
of the airlines have shown their keenness to start their services 
for night landing very soon. The Committ ee desire that all 
necessary steps should be taken by the concern authorities so 
that the various airlines operate their night services at Tirupati 
Airport and the Committee be informed accordingly.  Besides, in 
view of the great demand to connect Tirupati  with Bangalore, 
which reportedly is not lucrative to the National carrier, the 

Committee would like to suggest that the matter might be 
discussed with other scheduled airlines to explore a feasible 
solution. 
 
  In so far as the metro airports are concerne d, the 
Committee note that availability of buggies at Terminal –III of the 
Delhi Airport to the needy travellers needs to be looked into, 
since many such passengers are unable to make use of the 
facility.  The Committee would urge the Ministry to take up t he 
matter with DIAL authorities and ensure compliance of 
Committee‟s suggestions.  The noise pollution levels at all metro 
airports, particularly the Mumbai Airport, need to be brought 
down to the permissible limits too.  The Committee desire that 
the matter be appropriately addressed and would like to have a 
comprehensive report on all the issues raised herein. 

 
16. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry has 
initiated a programme for upgradation of infrastructure at the 
various airports in the country for Air Traffic Management.  They 
further note that AAI has embarked upon the ambitious, ` 774 
crore GAGAN (GPS aided Geo Augmented Navigation) project 
with ISRO, which will provide correction signals to the GPS 
signals to meet the accuracy, integ rity, availability and 
continuity requirements of aviation sector.  An amount of ` 313 
crore is stated to have been spent on the project.  The 
Committee would like to know the progress and timelines for 
completion of this project.  The Committee further de sire the 
Ministry to acquire all necessary modern technologies and 
equipment and streamline the procedure for air traffic 
management.  In the light of airports being developed through 
the PPP route, the role of the ATC becomes even more critical in 
ensuring safe air traffic movement.   Moreover, the Committee 
note with concern that Instrument Landing System (ILS)  are of 
CAT - I level at most of the airports in the country and thus 
strongly urge the Ministry to upgrade the same at all the 

airports.  The Com mittee would like to point out that inspite of 
ILS CAT-III system installed at Delhi Airport, there are still long 
delays experienced during every winter season.  The Committee, 
therefore, are of the opinion that the Ministry should work hard 
to improve th eir air traffic management system.  They should 
also ensure that all airlines deploy CAT -III trained pilots, 
particularly during the fog period to ensure on time arrivals and 
departures. 

 
 
17. The Committee note that the Strategic Plan prepared by the 
Ministry for the period 2010-15 has already identified inadequate 
trained manpower as a weakness in the Indian aviation sector 
while maintaining a view that the existing training infrastructure 
may not be adequate to support the sector‟s growth from the 
current nearly 32000 personnel to 90000 personnel by the year 
2020.   The said Plan has also identified the Indira Gandhi 
Rashtriya Udan Academy (IGRUA), Rae Bareli, the National 
Flying Training Institute, Gordia and the training institute of 
Pawan Hans Helicop ters Ltd. as a combined resource to meet 
the required standards of performance of Human Resource (HR) 
in aviation.  Further, the Committee have learnt that it has been 
proposed that the National Institute of Aviation Management and 
Research (NIAMR) at Delh i would be developed as a major 
resource for training of aviation related managers and 
personnel.  The Committee are of the strong opinion that more 
Government Institutes need to be added to the 17 existing 
institutes so as to train adequate personnel as p er the 

requirements of the sector.  The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the progress made in respect of each component of 
the Strategic Plan at the action taken stage. 
 
 
From the Budgetary Outlays for the year 2011 -12, the 
Committee note that an amount of nearly Rs. 50 crore has been 
approved for HR development and establishment of training 
academies during the Year.  Out of the said Outlay, an amount of 
Rs. 30 crore is allotted  to the DGCA for creation of a helicopter 
academy as well as a training acad emy and the IGRUA has also 
received Rs. 10 crore to establish a civil aviation training 
academy.  An amount of Rs. 6 crore has also been approved for 
the Aero Club of India for the purpose of flying training.  The 
Committee would like to know the status of  utilization of the 
allotted outlay and the progress on establishing the training 
academies, as the aviation sector is facing an acute lack of 
suitably trained personnel.  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of further measures taken by the Minist ry to meet the 
ever increasing demand for aircraft and helicopter pilots, 

aeronautical engineers, cabin crew, aviation safety inspectors 
and air traffic controllers.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
24th April, 2012              
Vaisakha 04,1934 (Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES. 
 

   Appendix – I 
 
MINUTES OF FOURTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-2011) 
 
   
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 1st July, 2010 from 1515 hrs. to 1750 hrs. 
 
 
 
 
     
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.  Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Addl. Director 
3. Smt. Juby Amar  - Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION  
  
1 Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar            Secretary 
2 Shri Rohit Nandan                      Joint Secretary 
3 Shri Alok Sinha                          Joint Secretary 
4 Shri Prashant Narain Sukul          Joint Secretary 
5 Dr. Nasim Zaidi                             Director General, DGCA 
6 Shri Yashwant Bhawe   Chairman, AERA 
7 Shri. V.P. Agrawal Chairman, AAI 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
                MEMBERS 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3 Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
4 Shri P. Karunakaran  
5 Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
6 Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
7 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
8 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
9 Shri S. Semmalai  
10 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
11 Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh  
12 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
13 Shri Lalji Tandon  
14 Shri Manish Tewari  
15 Shri K.C. Venugopal  

8 Shri Arvind Jadhav CMD, NACIL 
9 Shri R.K.Tyagi CMD, PHHL 
10 Shri Sudhir Kumar    Commissioner of Railway 
Safety, CRS 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation to the sitting of Committee.  
 
 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation gave a PowerPoint 
presentation on the subject „Development & Regulation of Civil Aviation‟.  The Members 
of the Committee sought clarification on various issues relating to the subject to which 
the officials of the Ministry responded.  The Hon‟ble Chai rman requested the Secretary 
to furnish replies in writing to the questions for which answers were not readily available 
during the course of briefing. 
 
4. The Committee decided to have a PowerPoint presentation by National Aviation 
Company of India Ltd. (NACIL) in the next sitting of the Committee. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

Appendix – II 
 
MINUTES OF FIFTEENTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-2011) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12 th October, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1710 hrs. in 
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Director 
2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
                            MEMBERS 
2 Shri T.K.S  Elangovan  
3 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
4 Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
5 Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
6 Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
7 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
8 Shri Prabodh Panda 
9 Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy 
10 Shri S. Semmalai 
11 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
12 Shri Madanlal Sharma 
13 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
14 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
15 Shri Lalji Tandon 

  
 
  WITNESSES  
 
       MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION AND NATIONAL AVIATION COMPANY OF INDIA LTD. 
(NACIL) 
 
1.  Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar Secretary 
2.  Shri Rajrishi Bhattacharya AS & FA 
3.  Shri Alok Sinha Joint Secretary 
4.  Shri Prashant Narain Sukul Joint Secretary 
5.  Shri Syed Nasir Ali Director 
6.  Dr. Nasim Zaidi Director General, DGCA 
7.  Smt. Geeta Narayan Director (F&A), DGCA 
8.  Shri V.K. Verma Director, IGRUA 
9.  Shri V.P. Agrawal Chairman, AAI 
10.  Shri S.C. Chhatwal Member (F), AAI 
11.  Shri V. Somasundaram Member (ANS), AAI 
12.  Shri M.C. Kishore ED & CS, AAI 
13.  Shri Arvind Jadhav CMD, NACIL 
14.  Shri S. Chandrasekhar Director – Finance, NACIL 
15.  Shri Vijay Paul Executive Director, Northern Region, 
NACIL 
16.  Shri S. Rotkar Executive Director (S&M), MRO SBU, 
NACIL 
17.  Shri M.N. Rajgopal Executive Director – Engg. II Pax 
SBU, NACIL 
18.  Shri M.L. Sharma Chief Manager, NACIL 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the  Members and representatives of the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation and National Aviation Company of India Ltd. (NACIL) to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
3. The representatives of NACIL gave a PowerPoint presentation on the subject 
„Development & Regulation of Civi l Aviation‟. The Members of the Committee sought 
clarification on various issues relating to the subject to which the representatives of the 
Ministry and NACIL responded. The Hon‟ble Chairman requested the Secretary to furnish 

replies in writing to the que stions for which answers were not readily available during the 
course of evidence. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
Appendix – III  
 
MINUTES OF TWENTIETH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-2011) 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 20th December, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 17 35 
hrs. in Committee Room „C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
1.  Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
2.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
3.  Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
4.  Shri Prabodh Panda  
5.  Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
6.  Shri Kabindra Purkayastha  
7.  Shri K. Jaya Surya Prakash Reddy  
8.  Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy  
9.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
10.  Shri S. Semmalai  
11.  Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
12.  Shri Lalji Tandon  
13.  Shri Manish Tewari  
14.  Shri K.C. Venugopal  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Juby Amar  - Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
19.  Dr. Syed Nasim Ahmad Zaidi - Secretary  
20.  Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan - AS & FA, Ministry of Civil Aviation and 
Director General, DGCA 
21.  Shri Rohit Nandan - Joint Secretary 
22.  Shri Alok Sinha - Joint Secretary 
23.  Shri Prashant Narain Sukul - Joint Secretary 

24.  Shri A.K. Sharan - Joint Director General, DGCA 
25.  Shri Alok Shekhar - Director 
26.  Smt. Pragya Richa Srivastava - Director 
27.  Smt. Shubha Thakur - Director 
28.  Shri L. Raja Shekhar Reddy - Director 
29.  Shri Syed Nasir Ali - Director 
30.  Shri V.P. Agrawal - Chairman, Airports Authority of India 
31.  Shri Arvind Jadhav - CMD, NACIL 
32.  Shri Chandrashekhar  - Director (Finance), NACIL 
33.  Shri Vipin Kumar Sharma - SBU Head, E&C 
34.  Shri K.M. Unni - SBU Head, Air France 
35.  Shri S. Venkat - ED Finance & CS 
36.  Shri V. Srikrishnan - ED (Hqrs) 
37.  Shri Vijay Paul - Executive Director, Northern Region 
38.  Shri S. Rotkar - ED (Sales & Marketing), SBU, MRO 
39.  Shri M.N. Rajagopal - Executive Director (Engg)-II (O), Pax SBU 
40.  Shri K. Shyamsundar - GM-Commercial 
41.  Shri R.K. Tyagi - CMD, Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited 
42.  Shri V.K. Verma - Director, IGRUA 
43.  Shri R.N. Dhoke - Additional Commissioner 
44.  Shri S. Raheja - Member (Plg.), AAI 
45.  Shri S.C. Chhatwal - Member (Fin.), AAI 
46.  Shri V. Somasundaram - Member (ANS), AAI 
47.  Shri G.K. Chaukiyal - Member (Operations), AAI 
48.  Shri Ajay Kapur - DGM (Comm.), AAI 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and representatives of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, DGCA, AAI, IGRUA and NACIL to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. The representatives of AAI & DGCA  gave PowerPoint presentation s on the 
subject „Development & Regulation of Civil Aviation‟.  The Members of the Committee 
sought clarification s on various issues relating to the subject to which the 
representatives of the Ministry and NACIL responded.  The Hon‟ble Chairman 

requested the Secretary to furnish re plies in writing to the questions for which answers 
were not readily available during the course of evidence. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

Appendix – IV 
 
MINUTES OF NINTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-2012) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 08th November, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to 1725 
hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
   
Shri Franscisco  Sardinha - Chairman 
        Members 
 
 
2.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3.  Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer  
4.  Shri Dhruvanarayana  
5.  Shri Ninong Ering  
6.  Shri Prahlad Venkatesh Joshi  
7.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
8.  Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru  
9.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
10.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
11.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
12.  Shri S. Semmalai  
13.  Shri Arjun Charan Sethi  
14.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
15.  Shri Ijyaraj Singh  
16.  Shri Jagada Nand Singh  
17.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh  
18.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
19.  Smt. Annu Tandon  
20.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
      1. Shri P. K. Grover  - Additional Secretary 
      2. Shri S. C. Kaliraman  - Director 
      3.   Smt. Juby Amar  - Deputy Secretary 

 
          WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
1 Dr. Syed Nasim Ahmad Zaidi Secretary 
2 Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan Additional Secretary & FA 
3 Shri Alok Sinha Joint Secretary 
4 Shri Prashant Narain Sukul Joint Secretary 
5 Shri Nasir Ali Director 
6 Shri A.K. Sharan Joint DG, DGCA 
7 Capt. Kapil Chaudhary Secretary, AERA 
8 Shri B.B. Dash Joint Commissioner of Security, BCAS 
 9 Shri S.P. Singh Deputy Commissioner of Security, BCAS 
 10 Air Marshal (Retd) V.K. Verma Director, IGRUA 
11 Shri V.P. Agarwal Chairman, Airports Authority of India 
 12 Shri S. Raheja Member, Planning 
13 Shri V. Somasundaram Member ANS & Finance 
14 Shri G.K. Chaukiyal Member (Ops.) 
15 Shri M.C. Kishore ED (CA) & (CS) 
16 Shri Rohit Nandan CMD, Air India Ltd. 
17 Shri Vipin Kumar Sharma SBU Head MRO (E&C), Air India Ltd. 
 18 Shri K.M. Unni SBU Head MRO (Airframe) 
19 Shri Deepak Brara ED (HQRS), Air India Ltd. 
20 Shri S. Venkat ED Finance & Company Secretary,  
Air India Ltd. 
 21 Shri F. J. Vaz ED (Commercial), Air India Ltd. 
22 Shri Vijay Paul ED (North), Air India Ltd. 
23 Shri M.L. Sharma Dy. G.M. (CA), Air India Ltd. 
24 Shri R.K. Tyagi CMD, PHHL 
25 Shri Sanjeev Bahl ED, PHHL 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation to the sitting of Committee.  
 
3. The representatives of Air India Limited gave a Power Point presentation on the 
subject „Development & Regulation of Civil Aviation‟.  The Members of the Committee 

raised queries on various issues relating to the subject and the representatives of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation as well as the CMD, Air India and Chairman, AAI responded to  
the same.  Thereafter, the Chairman directed the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation to 
furnish replies, in writing to the questions for which answers were not readily available 
during the course of evidence. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

Appendix – V 
 
MINUTES OF ELEVENTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-2012) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10 th April, 2012 from 1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
in Committee Room B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Franscisco  Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
2.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
3.  Shri Dhruvanarayana 
4.  Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
5.  Shri Ninong Ering 
6.  Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
7.  Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
8.  Shri Datta Meghe 
9.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
10.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
11.  Shri S. Semmalai 
12.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
13.  Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
14.  Shri Jagadanand Singh 
15.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
16.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
   16. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
      1.    Shri P. K. Grover  - Additional Secretary 
      2.    Shri S. C. Chaudhary - Director 
      3.    Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Director 
 4.    Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.                                                                                                                  
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration  following Draft Report s for 
consideration and adoption: 
(i) „Development and Regulation of Civil Aviation‟ pertaining to the Ministry of
 Civil Aviation. 
(ii) *** *** ***  *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  ***  *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
 
4. The Committee adopted the draft Report s at (i) and *** above with some  
modifications suggested by the Members of the Committee as per Annexure. 
 
 5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the above Reports in 
the light of modifications suggested as well as other consequential changes arising out 
of the factual verifications, if any, by the co ncerned Ministries and present the same to 
the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annexure 
 
  
Modifications carried out in the Recommendations portion of the Draft Report on 
the subject „Development and Regulation of Civil Aviation‟ 
 
1. On Recommendation No. 6:    The R ecommendation may be  modified as 
under:- 
(i) After “However,” in the 3rd line (from the top) of the first paragraph, the 4th 
line may start with the following lines:- 
“… … the Committee find it strange that such a si gnificant regulatory body 
is headed by an officer holding additional charge in the Ministry. Since in 
their view, this administrative dispensation would not allow DGCA to 
render requisite vigilance and regulation to civil aviation sector, the 
Committee desire that DGCA should be headed by an officer with exclusive 
charge.” 
 
(ii) At the start of the 1st line of the second paragraph, the following phrase 
may be added:- 
“In so far as safety issues are concerned, … …” 
 
2. On Recommendation No. 11:    In the 9 th line (from the top) of the first 
paragraph, after “satisfactory.”, the following lines may be added:- 
“… …  As all the Public Sector Undertakings are required to sign an MoU 
with the Government so that their performance could be monitored 
constantly, the Committee would like to be apprised about the MoU, if any, 
signed between the Air India Limited and the Government as well as steps 
taken by the Government to ensure that the overall expenditure of the 
company does not accumulate into such a gigantic debt burden. Further, … 
…” 
 
 

3. On Recommendation No. 13:    The R ecommendation may be  modified as 
under:- 
(i) In the existing first paragraph of Recommendation No. 13, the following 
lines may be added after the last line:- 
 “… … Besides, converting part of a loa n into equity cannot rid Air India of 
its entire debt burden, therefore, the Committee feel that Air India should 
be given at least interest free loan to partially ease the situation.” 
 
 (ii) In the existing second paragraph, the following lines may be add ed after 
the last line:- 
 “… … As an Expert Committee has already been examining various options 
for financial revival of Air India Limited, the Committee desire that their 
views may be conveyed to them. The Committee hope that any financial 
restructuring exercise suggested by the Committee would be strictly time -
bound since much delay has already occurred resulting in an 
unprecedented damage to the overall image and financial health of Air 
India. They also desire to be apprised of the recommendations made by the 
said Expert Committee in this regard.” 
 
4.  On Recommendation No. 14:    After “ country,” in the 3 rd line of the second 
paragraph, the following lines may be added:- 
 “… … particularly for Arunachal Pradesh where helicopters are the sole 
means of transportation in certain inhospitable terrains and suggest that it 
should augment the fleet as part of transport, … …” 
 
5. On Recommendation No. 15:     The R ecommendation may be  modified as 
under:- 
 (i)  After “delayed.” in the 2nd line of the second paragraph, the following lines 
may be added:- 
 
 

“… … They feel that not only the upgradation of the said airport needs to 
be speeded up but more cities in Orissa should be considered for creating 
airport infrastructure in view of the transit of the State … …” 
 
 (ii)  After “Government.” in the 8 th line of the second paragraph, the following 
paragraph may be added:- 
“… … Though Kota airport has not been included in the list of 62 non -
metro airports to be modernized, the Committee are of the opinion that the 
city, w hich is third largest city in Rajasthan, needs a good aviation 
infrastructure for its growth, and thus, feel that the Ministry should 
consider including the city airport for modernization and diverting air traffic 
through it. In so far as Gwalior airport i s concerned, the Committee are not 
convinced by the reasons cited by the Ministry for not including the same 
in the list of airports where modernization will be taken up and desire that 
the matter may be reconsidered. Another airport requiring AAI‟s attent ion 
is Nagpur, where the project of multi -modal hub airport has been delayed 
for the last three years. As regards North -East, the Committee are 
disappointed to note that the Itanagar airport, which was envisaged in the 
special package, has so far received a meager sum of ` 1 crore only. 
Arunachal Pradesh, due to its sensitive location, needs special attention. 
Thus, the Committee recommend that the construction of Greenfield airport 
at Itanagar must be speeded up urgently. The Committee strongly urge the 
Ministry to look into all the above -stated matters and respond accordingly. 
Besides, the Ministry must expedite the upgradation programme of all the 
64 airports to prevent any cost escalations and time overruns, in 
consultation with the Airport Advisory Comm ittees at various airports. In 
the meantime, the Committee desire to be apprised of the scheduled and 
actual date of commencement, cost estimates, progressive actual 
expenditure upto 31 March, 2012, delay, if any, along with reasons thereof 
and cost escala tion of each of the 64 projects taken up by AAI. The 

Committee also desire that the responsibility may be fixed for delay and 
time overruns in these projects.” 
 
6.  On Recommendation No. 17:     After “personnel.” in the 16 th line of the first 
paragraph, the following lines may be added:- 
 “… … The Committee are of the strong opinion that more Government 
Institutes need to be added to the 17 existing institutes so as to train 
adequate personnel as per the requirements of the sector … …” 
 