 
 
31 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
TRIBAL WELFARE SCHEMES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2013-2014) 
THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 

 
 
THIRTY FIRST REPORT  
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
TRIBAL WELFARE SCHEMES 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendati ons contained in 
the Twenty First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of th e Committee on 
Estimates] 
Presented to Hon‘ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 04 January, 2014 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 05 February, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE NO. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14)                (ii) 
INTRODUCTION          (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report         1 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations w hich have been 
accepted by the Government 
       10  
CHAPTER III  Recommen dations/observations which the C ommittee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
       26  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/obser vations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
       27  
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
      33 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Statement showing the amount released to 
States/NGOs under the Central Sector Scheme of 
development of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups 
((PTGs) during 2007-08 to 2012-13 
     37 
II. 
State -wise Physical Achievement under CCD plan for XI 
Plan period 
   38 
III. Quick Statistics pertaining to STs    45 
IV.  List of beneficiary from 2010 -11 to 2012 -13  
as per Physical Progress Report submitted by State 
Governments 
  57  
V. Findings of the Independent Evaluation Agency   58 
VI. Findings and Recommendations of the Monitoring 
Agency in the 1 st  and 2 nd  Report  
63 

 
 
VII State -wise information regarding discipline in             
which Vocational Training is provided by Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs 
 
    68 
VIII 
List of Vocational Training Centre funded by M inistry 
of Tribal Affairs. 
     78 
 APPENDICES   
I 
 
II 
 
III 
Minutes of Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee on 
Estimates held on 23.10.2013. 
Minutes of Second Sitting of the Study Group of the 
Committee on Estimates held on 18.12.2013. 
Minutes of Twenty First Sitting of the Committee on 
Estimates held on 18.12.2013 
    80 
 
 83 
 85 
IV 
Analysis of t he action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 
Twenty First Report of Committee on Estimates 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
   87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14) 
  Shri Francisco Sardinha  - Chairman  
MEMBERS  
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
4 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
5 Shri Khagen Das 
6 Shri Pralhad Joshi 
7 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
8 Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
11 Kum. Meenakshi Natrajan 
12 Shri Prabodh Panda 
13 Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu” 
14 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
15 Shri R. Sambasiva Rao 
16 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
17 VACANT 
18 Shri S. Semmalai 
19 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
20 Shri M.I. Shanavas 
21 Shri Adhi Sankar  
22 Shri Rajiv Ranjan (Lalan) Singh 
23 Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
24 Shri Ganesh Singh 
25 Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
26 Shri Jagada Nand Singh 
27 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
28 Smt. Annu Tandon 
29 Shri Mukul Wasnik 
30 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  1. Shri A. Louis Martin   -     Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda  -     Director 
                        3.        Shri Srinivasulu Gunda           -    Additional Director 
                        4.        Shri U. C. Bharadwaj              -    Deputy Secretary   
                        5. Shri Ajitesh Singh  -    Committee Officer 

 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2013-14 ) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty First Report on action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the 
Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Tribal Welfare Schemes’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs.   
2.   The Twenty-First Report of the Committee (Fift eenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 23 April, 2013. The Ministry of Tribal Aff airs furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in the Twent y First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
21 October, 2013. As replies given by the Ministry to a number of recommendations/ 
observations were not specific, the Committee held discussion with the representatives of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 23 October, 2013. 
 Further, subsequent to this supplementary replies 
on a number of Recommendations were furnished by th e Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 21 
November, 2013. The draft report was considered and  approved on 18 December, 2013 by the 
Study Group of the Committee on Estimates, constitu ted to consider the action taken replies 
furnished by the Government. Thereafter, the Report  was adopted by the Committee on the 
same day.  
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on  the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty First Report of Committee on Estimates ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix 
III. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
19 December, 2013              
Agrahayana 28 ,1935(Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
  

 
 
                                                                 CHAPTER - I 
                                                                   REPORT 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty First  Report  (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Tribal Welfare Schemes’ pertaining to the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs.  
1. 2. The Committee’s Twenty First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 23.04.2012. It contained 19 Recommendations/ Observations. Action Taken 
Notes in respect of all the Recommendations / Observations were received from the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 21.10.2013. As replies given by the Ministry to a number of 
recommendations/ observations were not specific, the Committee held discussion with 
the representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 23.10.2013. Thereafter, Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs furnished written replies on 21.11.2013 to the specific points raised by 
the Committee.  
1.3 Replies to the Recommendations / observations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government  
             Sl. No. 2, 
3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 & 19                                                               
                               (Total 12)   
     (Chapter-II)  
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee  do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply  
          Nil 
                                 (Total Nil)        
                             (Chapter-III)                            

 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich replies of the     
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
       Sl. No. 1, 8, 12 & 13                                                          
  (Total 4)    
                                                                                                                (Chapter IV)  
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the 
Government  are  still awaited 
 Sl. No. 4, 10 &11                                                                                    
   (Total 3)  
                  (Chapter V) 
1.4   The Committee desire that response to comments contained in Chapter-1 and 
final replies to the recommendations contained in Chapter V of this Report should be 
furnished expeditiously .  
1.5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
                                                   
A.    Delay in formulation of a Comprehensive National Policy for Tribals. 
          Recommendation / Observation (Sl. no. 1)   
1.6   Pointing out that socio economic status of Scheduled tribes had not improved to 
the desired level despite existence of Constitutional provisions and Statutes for 
upliftment of tribal population, the Committee had recommended that the National 
Policy for Scheduled Tribes, being formulated by the Ministry, should be drawn up 
expeditiously and specific targets and time lines drawn for socio economic development 
of tribal population.   

 
 
1.7. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in its action taken reply dated 21.10.2013, stated 
inter-alia  that earlier attempts on policy formulation appeared inadequate to meet the 
challenges facing STs.  In the meantime several measures like the Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, the Food 
Securities Act, 2013, Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 etc. have been enacted.  Hence,   the policy 
formulation process is going on through consultation with experts.  Once, the 
consultation process is over, it would be kept in the public domain seeking further views 
/ objections before its finalizing. 
1.8. As the Ministry’s reply was silent on the Comm ittee’s recommendation for 
expeditious formulation of   National Tribal Policy and specifying targets and drawing up 
of timelines for socio economic development of tribal population, the Ministry were 
asked to furnish specific replies to the same. Accordingly, the Ministry vide  their OM 
dated 21.11.2013, provided further information as under: 
“Comments/views from the members of the Expert Grou p constituted by this 
Ministry have been received for revision of the draft National Tribal Policy.  A 
meeting to discuss the various aspects of the draft National Tribal Policy under the 
Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Minister for Tribal Affairs was held with the members 
of the Expert Group.  In the meantime the Government has constituted a High 
Level Committee (HLC) in August, 2013 to process a position paper on the present 
socio-economic, health and educations status of STs and suggest a way forward.  
The Committee has to submit its report within nine months.  The report would 
have bearing on the tribal policy.   Hence, the National Tribal Policy will be finalized 
taking into consideration the recommendations of the High Level Committee 
(HLC).’’ 
 
1.9. The Committee had recommended that a National Policy for Scheduled Tribes 
should be drawn up expeditiously and specific targets and timelines drawn for socio-
economic development of tribal population. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, initially 

 
 
informed in the action taken reply that the policy formulation is going on through 
consultation with experts. The Committee were informed in a subsequent reply that 
the Government has constituted a High Level Committee (HLC) in August, 2013, to a 
process a position paper on the present socio-economic, health and educational 
status of STs and suggest a way forward. The HLC is expected to submit its report 
within nine months. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has neither given the composition 
of the HLC nor has given the rationale for giving nine months time to process a 
position paper. It is strange that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs which has been in 
existence for the last one and half decade had not bothered to ascertain the status of 
STs and woken up to ascertain their status only after the Committee’s exhortation 
for expeditious formulation of a tribal policy. This reflects poorly on the functioning 
of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. The Committee hope that the HLC will complete the 
task within the given time. The Committee urge that there should be no further delay 
in formulation of the policy on receipt of report from HLC.  
 
B.   Measures required to improve the functioning of Ashram Schools          
                           Observation/ Recommendation (Sl.no. 8)   
1.10.   As there was no Ashram Schools in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) effected districts 
of Andhra Pradesh, the Committee had recommended the Government for considering 
the possibility of setting up of an Ashram School in  Paderu near Vishakhapatnam. With a 
view to improving the functioning of Ashram Schools, the Committee had recommended 
that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should take up with the State Governments of Gujarat, 
Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh, the question of filling up of 
the vacant teacher posts of the Ashram Schools located in these States. Further, the 
Committee had also recommended that there should be sufficient incentives to attract 
teachers to work in schools in tribal areas.   To address the shortage of teachers in 
ashram Schools, the Committee had suggested appointment of qualified teachers on ad 

 
 
hoc basis, subject to clearing the Teacher eligibility test within 5 years of joining and 
regularization thereafter. The Committee had also desired remedial measures after 
ascertaining the reasons for low enrolment of students in ashram schools in Madhya 
Pradesh, and Chhattisgarh.   
1.11. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in its action taken reply, have stated inter alia    that 
despite so many Ashram Schools having been sanctioned to the State Governments of 
Madhya Pradesh (242 Ashram Schools) and Chhattisgarh (134 Ashram Schools), the 
number of students enrolled remained comparatively low primarily because sizeable 
number of the sanctioned Ashram Schools are still remaining incomplete for various 
reasons viz. problems in acquisition of land, incomplete tendering process, inhospitable 
terrain, Left Wing Extremism and inadequate number of teachers/ teachers who can 
teach in the local language.  Further, the State Governments were being repeatedly 
requested to adhere to the time schedules for completing construction. Some State 
Governments have also issued suitable directives to ensure that adequate number of 
teachers are appointed from among the locals 
.  
1.12       The action taken reply furnished by the Ministry does not contain any specific 
response to the Committee’s recommendations regarding (i) setting up of Ashram 
School in Paderu near Vishakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh, (ii) filling up of vacancies of 
teachers, (iii) provision of incentives to teachers to work in schools in tribal areas; and 
(iv) appointment of teachers on ad hoc basis initially and regularizing them at a later 
date subject to fulfilling specified conditions. The Committee reiterate that action on 
these aspects should be taken without delay and the Committee be informed of the 
position.  
 
 
 

 
 
 C. Policy on Integration of Jarawa Tribe with the main Society 
Observation/ Recommendation (Sl.no. 11) 
1.13  According to the ‘Policy on Jarawa Tribe of Andaman Islands, 2004’, no attempts 
will be made to bring them to the mainstream society against their conscious will. The 
Committee felt that no community should be deprived of the benefits of economic 
development and desired to know whether any efforts were made to ascertain the will 
of Jarawas regarding their integration with the main society, and if so, when and with 
what results.  
1.14 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in its action taken replies, has stated that as per 
recommendation of the “Expert Committee under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, 
Tribal Affairs for preparation of policies for various PTGs of A&N Islands”, the A&N 
Administration, vide letter dated 23-7-2013 had furnished a project study report carried 
out by experts namely, Prof. VishwajitPandya and Shri Manish Chandy and Director 
(TW), A&NI and Officers of AAJVS titled ‘A Fieldwork Based Report - Jarawa Movements 
in relation to time and space’.  The Ministry has further stated that the A&N 
Administration had also informed that the second phase of the work on the Jarawa 
study would be carried out to access the freewill of the tribe.  This work is expected to 
be completed by the end of March, 2014.  After receipt of the report of the second 
phase of the work, the issue will be examined. Moreover, the A&N Administration is 
carrying out ethnographic study to understand the Jarawa issues and forwarded 
research report entitled “Kangapo” (Stitched Garment in Jarawa Language) prepared by 
Prof. Dr. Vishwajit Pandya, the Expert Member of Andaman Admi Janjati Vikas Samiti 
(AAJVS).  The Research Advisory Board of Andaman Nicobar Tribal Research & Training 
Institute in its meetings held on 23 rd & 24 th  August, 2013 carefully evaluated the report 
and recommended for its implementation by A&NI Administration.  The strategy for 

 
 
implementation of the recommendations of the report is to be addressed by A&N 
Administration. 
 
1.15  The Committee are glad to note that a project study report titled “A Fieldwork 
based Report-Jarawa Movement in relation to time and space” has been submitted in 
July, 2013 and the second phase of the work on the Jarawa study will be carried out to 
assess the freewill of the tribe (as to their integration with the main Society) as 
recommended by the Committee. The work is expected to be completed by March, 
2014. The Committee will await the outcome of the study. 
 
                     D. Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub Plan (SCA to TSP) 
                                    Observation/ Recommendation (sl. no. 12) 
1.16  The Committee, in their original report, expressing concern over the lack of data 
as to what was achieved out of the funds given under the scheme “Special Central 
Assistance to Tribal Sub Plan”, had desired that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs must 
develop a system of compiling State-wise information regarding achievements under 
this scheme. The Committee further desired to be apprised of the outcome at least for 
the last two years. 
 
1.17 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in its action taken reply, merely stated as under: 
“ As per the progress reports submitted by State Governments, the total no. of ST 
beneficiaries for which funds were released under SCA to TSP during last two years is 
18,59,504  (individuals) and 8,08,212 (families) (approximately), respectively as per the 
list enclosed at Annex- I.”  
 

 
 
1.18 The Committee had desired development of compiling State-wise information 
regarding achievements under Special Central Assistance (SCA) to Tribal Sub Plan. The 
Government’s reply merely provides the number of beneficiaries during last two years 
which received financial assistance under the scheme. What the Committee desired 
was the impact on the livelihood/living conditions of the Scheduled Tribes as a result 
of the assistance extended under the SCA to Tribal Sub Plan. The Committee would 
expect the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to evolve a system to assess the impact of its 
schemes and the Committee be informed of the outcome. 
 
                      E.  Grants under Article 275 (1) of the Constitution of  India  
                                         Observation/Recommendation (sl. no. 13) 
1.19 Taking note of the fact that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs do not have details of 
outcome of funding extended under Special Area Programmes – Grant under Article 275(1) 
of the Constitution of India, the Committee urged the Ministry to periodically collect details 
of work done under the Programme for information of the Parliament.     
1.20    The Ministry, in its action taken reply, have only provided the procedure under 
the scheme as under: 
“Under the programme, Grants are released to 26 States, having ST population 
for raising the level of Administration in Scheduled Areas and for the welfare of 
tribal people. Funds are released to States based on proposals received from the 
State Governments depending on the felt needs of ST population to bridge the 
gap in infrastructure activities in sectors like roads, bridges, education, health and 
irrigation etc. and for setting up of Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRSs).   
State Governments submit Proposals and Progress Report in prescribed format in 
which activities are mentioned for which funds have been released and used. 

 
 
Further, guidelines clearly mention indicative type of activities for which funds 
may be released.” 
1.21  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has not bothered to take action as recommended by 
the Committee to collect details of outcome/assessment of the impact of the grants given 
under Article 275(1) of the Constitution of India. The Committee take a serious exception 
to the casual manner in which their recommendation has been handled by the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs. The Committee urge the Secretary, Tribal Affairs to personally look into the 
matter and ensure that appropriate methods and systems are developed to assess the 
impact of the funds given by the Ministry under different schemes and the Committee be 
informed of the outcome. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
        The Committee observes that there are ten C entral Sector Schemes, five centrally 
sponsored Schemes and two Special Area Programmes w hich are implemented by the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for the welfare and deve lopment of Scheduled Tribes. The 
Committee find that there has been gross under-util isation of Plan Expenditure 
particularly, during the years 2008-09 and 2009-10.  The shortfall in utilisation of Plan 
allocation was as much as ` 1208 crore in 2009-10 and ` 315 crore in 2008-09. Though 
there has been marked improvement in utilisation of  funds in the subsequent years, the 
Committee cannot brush aside the Ministry’s past la pses which impacted the welfare of 
tribal people. The under-utilisation came down to `68.50 crore in 2010-11 and ` 101 
crore in 2011-12. The Committee hope that the Minis try of Tribal Affairs will learn from 
past failures and improve its performance through i nnovative measures. Non-receipt of 
utilisation certificates and shortcomings in project proposals of State Governments have 
been cited as the reasons for under utilisation of funds. The Committee feel that these 
problems can be overcome through e-Governance both at the Centre and States and 
periodical co-ordination meetings through video-con ferencing. The Committee, in this 
connection, recommend that the Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System (CPSMS) 
initiated by the Comptroller General of Accounts sh ould be fully implemented 
expeditiously which would provide online informatio n of fund deployment/utilisation 
vertically under each scheme down to the implementing agencies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
         The Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System (CPSMS) initiated by the 
Comptroller General of Accounts is already implemented in the Ministry. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
          The Committee observe that Budgetary allo cation for the Scheme ‘Vocational 
Training Centers in Tribal Areas’ has varied between ` 8 crore and ` 13.72 Crore during 
each of the last five years. However, even this all ocation was not fully utilized in any 
year. The utilisation was abysmally low in the year  2009-10 which stood at ` 2 crore as 
against the budgetary target of ` 13.72 crore. Even the success rate of students und er 
‘Coaching for STs’ scheme relating to 07 coaching centers during 2009-10 was just 27.8 
per cent i.e only 96 out of 345 students were succe ssful in competitive examinations. 
Considering the poor performance of this scheme, th e Committee would like the 
Ministry to evaluate the scheme with a view to making it effective and result-oriented. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
        While the Scheme for Vocational Training in  Tribal Areas will be subsumed in the 
Umbrella Scheme for education of Tribal children, i ts fundamental nature is set to 
change. The country has recently seen a major shift  in the way vocational education 
and training are perceived, and MHRD has formulated  a National Vocational Education 
Qualifications Framework (NVEQF). The objective is to set common principles and 
guidelines for a nationally recognized qualificatio n system covering secondary schools, 
vocational education institutes and institutes of h igher education with qualifications 
ranging from secondary to doctorate level, leading to international recognition of 
national standards.  
 Accordingly, under the proposed Umbrella Scheme on  Education of ST children, 
while the component of vocational education will be  taken care of in the Ashram 
Schools, support will be provided for work educatio n at the elementary stage, and 
vocational education at the secondary stage in all Ashram Schools 
established/sanctioned with financial support from MoTA subject to the condition that 
the NVEQF norms are adhered to.  
 The schemes implemented by NGOs were subject to co ncurrent monitoring and 
evaluation by an independent external agency. Durin g the first year, 6 projects of 

 
 
Vocational Training Centres and 8 projects of Coach ing Centres ST were covered. At 
Vocational Training Centres, 50% of the respondents  interviewed said that the project 
was a good programme to earn livelihood and the oth er half said that it bestowed a 
sense of pride among the STs. Similarly, in the sec ond year of monitoring, 5 projects of 
Vocational Training Centres and 2 projects of Coach ing Centres for STs were covered. 
It was found that better machines and equipment for  training are required. In terms of 
infrastructure it is required that the number of rooms should be increased.  
 The observations of the monitoring agency have bee n sent to the concerned 
State Governments and NGOs.  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government  
    “The scheme of Vocational Training in Tribal Ar eas is intended to be implemented 
through State Governments as well as NGOs.   The St ate-wise information regarding 
disciplines in which vocational training is provide d by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and 
number of beneficiaries in each trades is given at Annex- VII  
This is a demand-driven scheme and at present grants-in-aid is being provided to 
nine NGOs only.  The trades in which vocational tra ining is provided are selected by the 
implementing agency as per the employment potential  of the areas. Further, the 
Vocational Training Centre (VTC) is required to be recognized/affiliated under Modular 
Employable Skills (MES) from Regional Directorate o f Apprenticeship Training of the 
State/UT Government, or under Craftsmen Training Sc heme (CTS) from National 
Council of Vocational Training (NCVT) under Directo rate General of Employment & 
Training (Ministry of Labour and Employment). The A uthority who gives the 
recognition/affiliation also approves the trades of  the Vocational Training Centre.  The 
details of Vocational Training Centres (VTC) along with the name of trades in which 
Vocational Training is provided is at Annex- VIII.    
 (ii) The State Governments are required to submit physical and financial progress 
with regard to previous grants, before further gran ts under the scheme of Vocational 
Training in Tribal Areas are released to them 
The grants-in-aid is considered based on the Inspec tion Report of the District 
Collector and recommendation of the State Level Com mittee. The Utilization Certificate 
(UC) and physical progress report of earlier releas es is ensured before further release. 

 
 
Each of the VTCs are required to provide the list o f beneficiaries. The work of the 
concurrent monitoring of these projects was given t o an independent external agency. 
Where scheme specific observations are made, the fu nds are released subject to 
compliance report from the State Government.  
 
All the sanction orders are uploaded in the website of this Ministry.  
The accounts of grantee institutions are open for i nspection by 
representatives/officers from the office of Comptro ller and Auditor General of India, 
Government of India, or concerned State Government at any time.  
(iii) The Ministry has awarded the work of evaluati on of the scheme to an 
external agency, Development Research Services (P) Ltd. (DRS). It is submitted that 
efforts of Voluntary Organisations in the area of S kill Development is a very small 
component”. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.11.2013] 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 The Committee note from the deposition of the Mini stry that the Scheme of ‘Top 
Class Education for ST Students’, introduced from t he year 2007-08 with 625 
scholarships per year is stated to have never achie ved the targets in any year. The 
maximum figure reached was 425 scholarships in 2011 -12. Parents’ income ceiling of ` 
2 lakh per annum prescribed under the Scheme is sai d to be the reason for poor 
performance of the Scheme. The Committee have been informed that a proposal to 
raise the income ceiling to ` 4.5 lakh per annum is under consideration. The Com mittee 
urge that a decision on the proposal be taken witho ut delay with a view to achieving the 
objective of the scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government  
The proposal for raising parental income ceiling fr om `2 lakh to `4.5 lakh per 
annum in this scheme has already been considered by  the Cabinet in its meeting held 
on 11 th  July, 2013. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
Scheme of National Overseas Scholarships (NOS) prov ides financial assistance 
to meritorious students belonging to STs for pursui ng higher studies abroad in specified 
fields of Master level courses, Ph.D. and Post-Doct oral research programmes, in the 
field of Engineering, Technology and Science.  The Committee note that the scheme 
provides for award of 15 scholarships annually cove ring tuition fee, maintenance grant, 
travel expenses for pursuing higher studies abroad,  in specified fields of Master level 
courses and above, and four annual “Passage Grants”  to such candidates who are in 
receipt of merit scholarship without passage grant. However, the number of awardees of 
scholarship has never crossed 10 and passage grant has never been awarded to 
anyone. Admission criteria abroad, being very strin gent, are stated to be the reason for 
shortfall in grant of scholarships. 
 
        The Committee feel that given that there is  a separate scheme for coaching of ST 
students to compete in competitive examinations, ho pefully the number of ST students 
getting admission abroad for higher studies will go  up. What appears to be lacking is 
awareness about the schemes of Ministry of Tribal A ffairs among ST students. There is 
need for adequate publicity about the scholarship/c oaching schemes in all universities 
and colleges having Engineering/ Technology/ Scienc e disciplines and also through 
electronic media to reach the targeted beneficiaries. 
       
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
       The Ministry is in the process of revising t he Scheme for continuation during 12 th  
Plan Period and that some of the suggestions of NIR D viz., wide publicity among 
universities through advertisement, coaching facility for TOEFL/GRE/ GMAT, revision of 
scholarship amount etc. are being incorporated in t he Scheme guidelines. In the SFC 
meeting a number of decisions have already been tak en to make the Scheme more 
attractive so as to draw more applicants. The decisions so taken inter-alia include letters 
to be sent to all the National institutions and Cen tral Universities for having the Scheme 
details posted on their notice boards. This will be  over and above the established 
practice of advertising the Scheme in the leading d ailies, Employment News and 
hosting on the Ministry’s web-site.  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
        The Committee note that the new scheme of ‘ Pre-Matric Scholarship for ST 
Students’, for which `50 crore was allocated in 2011-12, was not implemen ted during 
the year due to delay in getting approval for the s cheme. The scheme is targeted to 
benefit 22 lakh students. The Committee would like to be apprised of the actual number 
of beneficiaries under the scheme during 2012-13. 
       The Committee are shocked to note that Pre-M atric Scholarship is provided only to 
Class IX and above Scheduled Tribes students. 
      
 
Reply of the Government 
During the year 2012-13, the actual number of benef iciaries under the scheme of 
‘Pre-Matric Scholarship for ST Students’ was 20.12 lakhs. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 

 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government  
(i) The Pre-Matric Scholarship is a newly launched scheme during 2012-13 w.e.f. 
01-07-2012.   The objective of the Scheme is to sup port ST students for education in 
Classes IX and X so that the incidence of dropout, especially in transition from the 
elementary to secondary and during secondary stage of education, is minimized and to 
improve enrolment of ST students in Classes IX and X so that they perform well and 
have a better chance of progressing to Post-Matric stages of education.   
(ii) In view of limited resources of this Ministry,  at present there is no such proposal 
under contemplation. However, the enactment of the Right to Education Act now 
provides the right to free and compulsory education  to children from the age of 6 to 14 
year including ST children. 
(iii) The proposals of the State Govt./UT Administr ations are based on            
‘Anticipated Expenditure and coverage of students’ and as such, target is fixed 
tentatively.  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.11.2013] 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
       The Committee are unhappy to note that only 15 States/UT out of 18 having 
identified Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (P TGs) have received funds under this 
scheme during the last four years. The Committee ar e perturbed to note that Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands having considerable PTGs did not receive any fund for three years 
and received just ` 1.84 crore for one year during 2010-11. Similarly,  Uttarakhand and 
West Bengal also did not receive any fund under thi s scheme during the last three 
years. It appears that it is entirely left to the S tates/UT to prepare Conservation-cum-
Development (CCD) Plan for availing proportionate flow of resources under the scheme. 
Consequently, six States have not prepared the CCD Plans for implementation during 
XII Plan. The Committee feel that the Ministry of T ribal Affairs should be pro-active and 
ensure CCD Plans are prepared by all States/UT in t ime. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the outcome of CCD plans during the XI Plan period.  
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Conservation-cum-Development (CCD) Plans are prepa red by each 
State/UT for five year plan period, aimed at planni ng the socio-economic development 
of the PTG population in a holistic manner by adopt ing habitat development approach 
and intervening in all spheres of their social and economic life so that the quality of life 
of PTGs is improved and visible impact is made. Thi s scheme gives flexibility by 
allowing every State/UT to concentrate on areas tha t they consider is relevant to their 
PTGs and their socio-economic environment.  
The CCD plans are examined by an Expert Committee u nder the 
chairpersonship of Secretary (Tribal Affairs).  
During the 12 th  Plan, all the concerned States/UT have submitted their CCD plan. 
The plans were discussed (except Manipur & Uttarakh and) by the Expert Committee. 
Plans of Six States/UT (Andaman & Nicobar, Bihar, W est Bengal, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand) were not approved by the Expert Co mmittee and were asked to 
submit the revised proposals. Andaman & Nicobar, Ut tar Pradesh and Uttarakhand 
have submitted the revised proposals. This Ministry  is making continuous efforts to 
expedite the pending CCD plans from the State Gover nments. The State Governments 
have been addressed in this regard periodically in review meetings taken up with the 
Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of States.  
The status of financial releases during the 11 th & 12 th  Plan Period is at Annex-I.  
During the XI Plan period, infrastructure like road  connectivity, housing, irrigation 
etc has been developed. Educational, medical and dr inking water facility has also been 
extended. In some states, lands have been provided to the landless PTGs. They are 
also covered under the Janashree Bima Yojana. Physi cal progress report of various 
State Governments is at Annex-II.  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
 
 

 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government  
 
“Proposal for CCD Plans were submitted by all conce rned States/UTs.  As per the 
modalities, representatives of Manipur and Uttar Pr adesh were also to be present in the 
meeting to put up their proposals and discuss.  How ever, as there were no 
representatives of these two States, their proposal s could not be discussed in the 
meeting. 
 Subsequently, Joint Secretary, MoTA, had a meeting  with Addl. Chief Secretary, 
Manipur, and thereafter Government of Manipur had s ubmitted their revised CCD plan. 
The plan was examined and Chairperson of the Expert  Committee approved the plan. 
Accordingly, ` 1.00 crore was released to the Government of Manip ur during the year 
2012-13.    
 The CCD Plan of Uttarakhand had been discussed by the Expert Committee and 
a sum of ` 4.00 crore was released to State Government of Uttarakhand for undertaking 
priority activities/work proposed in the CCD Plan f or Development of Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Groups for the year 2012-13.  
In fact, the CCD Plan of Uttar Pradesh had not been  discussed, and 
inadvertently, instead of “Uttar Pradesh”, “Uttarak hand” was mentioned in the Action 
Taken Report. The proposal received from Government of Uttar Pradesh was examined 
and the State was asked to submit a revised proposa l based on base line survey. The 
revised proposal has been received on 30.10.2013 and is being examined.”  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.11.2013] 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
           The Committee observe that under the Grants-in-aid to Tribal Research Institutes 
(TRIs), at present there are 18 Tribal Research Ins titutes located in 18 States/UT. It is 
observed from the data contained in the Ministry’s Annual Report that four TRIs 
including the one in Andaman & Nicobar Islands have  not received any Grants-in-aid 
from the Centre for the past five years. Himachal P radesh and Maharashtra did not 
receive fund under the scheme for four out of five years. Given this state of affairs, one 
more TRI is reportedly being set up in Uttarakhand.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have 
also now identified TRIs of Odisha, Maharashtra, Ma dhya Pradesh and Assam as 

 
 
“Nodal TRIs” with a mandate to provide policy input s, among other things. The 
Committee feel that it is high time that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs review the causes for 
as many as six TRIs not receiving funds from the ce ntre and how these TRIs are run in 
the absence of Central funds. The Committee would a wait the outcome of the review 
and the action taken thereon.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has reviewed the scheme to ensure effe ctiveness and smooth 
functioning of the TRIs. As per the proposed scheme , Grant-in-Aid to TRIs will be a 
Central Sector Scheme.  Other features of the revised scheme include:- 
 
(i) TRIs would work in collaboration with Nodal TRI s, the Centres of Excellence 
and Universities/ institutions in place of working in isolation. 
(ii) Training programmes undertaken by the TRIs wou ld be linked with Grants 
under Article 275(1).   
(iii) Capacity building and skill up gradation of G ram Sabha, Gram Panchayats in 
collaboration with State Level Training Institutes and linkage with programme 
undertaken by the Ministry of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj.  
(iv) TRIs would undertake research work according t o their core competency. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 
          To assess the impact of the programmes co nducted by the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs, third party monitoring and independent eva luation has been initiated by the 
Ministry. The Committee have been informed that the  work of third party monitoring and 
integrated evaluation of the schemes of the Ministr y of Tribal Affairs run through NGO 
Projects have been outsourced for a three year peri od from 2010-11 to 2012-13. It has 

 
 
been stated that the preliminary report of the thir d party monitoring and evaluation 
would be ready by March 2013 and final report by Ma rch 2014. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the findings of the preliminary report and action taken thereon. 
  
Reply of the Government 
Evaluation  – An evaluation report has been received for the purp ose the 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) memo of the sch emes. The observations have 
been included in the Expenditure Finance Committee Memo for the XII Plan period and 
the scheme guidelines. A brief of the preliminary e valuation report is at Annex-V. State 
Governments are addressed in this regard.   
Monitoring - The schemes implemented by NGOs are su bject to concurrent 
monitoring by an independent external agency. The main objectives are: 
1. Monitoring of Physical and financial performance   
2. Ascertaining of the compliance of guidelines by stakeholders 
3. Ascertaining value, utilization, and effectivene ss of services rendered and 
assets created if any, under the scheme(s) 
4. Understanding the sustainability of services ren dered and assets created and 
its implication on success of activities chosen under the schemes. 
 
The methodology, coverage, sampling, scoring and re commendations etc. are at 
Annex-VI . The first and second monitoring reports have been  received. The final 
monitoring report is awaited.  
The independent agency in their report has raised actionable points. Some of the 
actionable points are generic where as some are sch eme specific. The issues have 
been communicated to the State Governments/NGOs for  sending compliance report. 
Releases to funds to these NGOs are being considere d (in case of scheme specific 
actionable points) only on receipt of satisfactory compliance report from the concerned 
State Government.  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
            In Committee’s view, monitoring of Trib al Welfare Programmes left much to be 
desired. At the instance of the Committee, the Mini stry of Tribal Affairs took up with the 
Ministry of Rural Development, which is stated to h ave agreed that all the programmes 
of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs shall be reviewed  by District level Vigilance and 
Monitoring Committees (V &MCs). The Committee, howe ver, regret to note that action 
to put in place a co-ordination mechanism to effect uate monitoring by V & MCs is yet to 
be taken. Hence, V&MCs have not undertaken any revi ew of programmes of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs so far. The Committee ur ge the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to take 
necessary action in this regard and ensure that rev iews of the Ministry’s programmes is 
undertaken by V&MCs without any further delay. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
Vigilance and Monitoring Committee (VMCs) of Minist ry of Rural Development 
monitor the programmes of Ministry of Drinking Wate r & Sanitation, Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Tribal Affairs and Raji v Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran 
Yojana (RGGVY) of Ministry of Power in addition to the programmes of Ministry of Rural 
Development. 
 To ensure proper monitoring of programmes of other Ministries by VMCs the 
Ministry of Rural Development has taken the followi ng measures recently for 
consideration improvement on this front:- 
 
(a) All States and UTs have been requested to advic e the Member Secretary of all 
district level VMCs in their State/UT to forward re commendations of the VMCs 
relating to other Ministries directly to those Ministries for follow up action; 
(b) All State Governments have been requested to in struct Member Secretary of the 
district level VMCs to, inter-alia, upload proceedi ngs of the meetings on the 
website of the State Government; 
(c) The district level Vigilance & Monitoring Commi ttees (VMCs) may take up issues 
with the State Government and if the State Governme nt so desires, may refer 

 
 
such issues directly to the Union Ministry concerned, in case State Govt. requires 
intervention of the Union Government. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 17)  
            The Committee note that the Ministry of  Tribal Affairs, being the nodal Ministry 
for the welfare of Scheduled Tribes, has an obligat ion to institute an effective co-
ordination mechanism to ensure programmes of health , sanitation and drinking water, 
women empowerment, etc., in relation to tribal popu lation are implemented by the 
concerned Central Ministries effectively. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
details co-ordination mechanism, system of follow-u p and system of resolution of 
problems evolved by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coordination Committee has been constituted on 25/2 7.04.2011 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (TA) and is meeting regul arly to monitor the planning and 
progress of the schemes/programmes being implemente d by the line Ministries for the 
overall development of Scheduled Tribes and also to identify the critical gap and work to 
bridge the gap. State-wise reviews are being done b y conducting workshops and 
national priorities are being listed out in the Pla nning Commission’s guidelines.  Last 
meeting of Coordination Committee was held on 01.08.2013.  Hon’ble Minister for Tribal 
Affairs has also reviewed the progress in the meeti ng of Coordination Committee held 
on 11.03.2013. 
 
In order to have a focused strategy with regard to STs through Tribal Sub Plan 
(TSP) guidelines issued in respect of State Governm ents and Central Ministries are 
being revised by Inter-Ministerial Group in the Pla nning Commission and revised 
guideline are likely to be finalized shortly.  The revision of guidelines provide for 

 
 
institutional mechanism required for effective coor dination and implementation of TSP 
and other interventions.  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government  
 
The Planning Commission of India appraises and appr oves State plan outlays 
annually including that of Tribal Sub Plan.  Planni ng Commission has constituted an 
Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) to prepared guide lines for effective implementation of 
the SCSP and TSP Ministry of Tribal Affairs has sub mitted its recommendations.   This 
Committee has held 4 meetings and revision of guide lines is under consideration of the 
Planning Commission.  No time limit has been intima ted by Planning Commission for 
revision of said guidelines. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.11.2013] 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
The Committee are distressed to learn that 12.69 la kh titles with an average of 
about 3.5 acres of land per head have been distribu ted till 31st August 2012 under the 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwell ers (Recognition of Forest Rights) 
Act, 2006. Incidence of rejection of claims as on t he aforesaid date was also high and 
stood at around 15 lakh. 
          The Committee appreciate that in order to  ensure effective implementation of the 
Forest Rights Act, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs i ssued comprehensive guidelines and 
amended the rules last year. The Committee would li ke to know as to what extent, the 
revision of rules and guidelines have helped expedi tious disposal of claims and 
benefitted the intended beneficiaries. 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
        The comprehensive guidelines issued by the Ministry on 12.7.2012 and the Forest 
Rights Amendment Rules, 2012, notified on 6.9.2012 require the State/ UT 
Governments to take several actions, like, (i) reco nstitution of Forest Rights Committee 
(FRCs) with atleast two-third members belonging to STs to address the problem of 
FRCs being dominated by non-tribal people; (ii) reduction in the quorum of Gram Sabha 
meetings from two-third to a more realistic one-half of all members to avoid adjournment 
of Gram Sabha meetings for want of quorum; (iii) id entification of hamlets or habitation, 
unrecorded or unsurveyed settlements etc. formally not part of any revenue or forest 
villages and their inclusion as villages for recogn ition and vesting of rights in such 
hamlets/ habitations; (iv) modification of the tran sit permit regime in relation to 
transportation of minor forest produce and issue of  transit permits by a committee 
constituted by the Gram Sabha for empowerment of Gr am Sabhas; (v) facilitating filing 
of claims and vesting of habitats rights of the Pri mitive Vulnerable Tribal Groups 
(PVTGs) by District Level Committees; (vi) ensuring  quarterly meetings of the State 
Level Monitoring Committees (SLMCs) to monitor the process of recognition and 
vesting of rights and to take stock of the field le vel problems; (vii) provision of post 
claims support and handholding to forest rights holders for their upliftment etc. 
 
            In order to explain and discuss the ame nded Rules and orient the key 
Departments responsible for the implementation of t he Act, the Ministry also organized 
five regional workshops, nation-wide, during the pe riod September-November, 2012, 
followed by a National review-cum-orientation meeti ng with all States on Forest Rights 
Act, 2006 on 3 rd December, 2012 at New Delhi, wherein the final Acti on Plans presented 
by the States for implementation of the Act were di scussed and the State Governments 
were directed to make special efforts to create awa reness about community rights so 
that more claims are finalized and recognized.   
 
         The Ministry is also organizing theme-base d consultations across the country on 
various issues which impeded the implementation of the Forest Rights Act, 2006.  A 
consultation on the theme “Issues in implementation  of Community Rights with a focus 

 
 
on Management and Governance of Community Forest Rights (CFR)” was recently held 
on 23 rd and 24 th  September, 2013 at Bhubaneswar.  Prior to this, a consultation was also 
organized at Ranchi to review implementation of the  Forest Rights Act, 2006 in LWE 
affected areas.  The Ministry is also proposing to hold two more consultations – one at 
Gangtok (Sikkim) with focus on “Implementation of F orest Rights Act in North-East” and 
the second at Gandhinagar (Gujarat) with focus on “ Habitats Rights to Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Groups” during the period October-December, 2013. 
 
           As per the information collected from th e State/ UT Governments till 
30 th  September, 2013, a total number of 35,39,793 claim s have been filed and a total 
number of 14,06,971 titles have been distributed un der the Act.  Further, 18,299 tittles 
were ready for distribution.  A total number of 30,  78,483 claims have been disposed of 
(86.96%). 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 
The Committee have been informed that a Central Sec tor Scheme of Minimum Support 
Price (MSP) for Minor Forest Produce (MFP) covering  13 items like Tendu, Honey, 
Wax, is being worked out. The proposed scheme would  enable tribals and other forest 
dwellers to sell their MFPs with assured return. Th e Committee hope that the scheme 
will be finalised and implemented expeditiously for  the benefit of the intended 
beneficiaries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government has approved a Centrally Sponsored S cheme of “Mechanism 
for marketing of Minor Forest Produce (MFP) through  Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
and Development of Value Chain for MFP”.  To start with, the scheme covers eight 
States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha,  Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, 

 
 
Jharkhand, Rajasthan, and Gujarat for 12 MFP namely , (i) Tendu, (ii) Bamboo, (iii) 
Mahuwa Seed, (iv) Sal Leaf, (v) Sal Seed, (vi) Lac,  (vii) Chironjee, (viii) Wild Honey, (ix) 
Myrobalan, (x) Tamarind, (xi) Gums (Gum Karaya) and  (xii) Karanj, which are not 
nationalized by the State Government concerned.  Th e scheme seeks to establish a 
system to ensure fair monetary returns for the MFP collected by the STs and other 
forest swelling communities by fixing Minimum Suppo rt Price.  It also supports primary 
value-addition of MFP, provide for supply chain inf rastructure like cold storage, 
warehouses etc. and emphasizes on scientific harvesting of MFP. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government  
(i)  Procurement and marketing operation of Minor F orest Produce (MFP), according 
to the scheme, will be undertaken by the agencies d esignated by the state government 
concerned.  Collectors of MFP are free to sell the produce to the designated states 
agencies or in the open market. 
(ii)   The scheme has been launched in the current financial year.  Any proposal to 
include or exclude MFP into the existing list would  be made after mid-term assessment 
and evaluation of the scheme. 
 (iii) There is no programme/scheme in Ministry of Tribal Affairs to provide 
compensation to STs who lost their land consequent to the declaration of area as 
National park/Sanctuaries.  The wildlife conservati on and ‘The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 
1972’ are allocated subjects of Ministry of Environment and Forests.   
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.11.2013] 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLY 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
         The Committee note with concern that thoug h the Scheduled Tribes account for 
8.2% of the total population of the country and the re are Constitutional provisions and 
Statutes for upliftment of tribal population, the C ommittee feel that their socio-economic 
status has not improved to the desired level. In or der to address the multifarious issues 
concerning Scheduled Tribes, there is a need for Na tional Policy for the Scheduled 
Tribes. Lately, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has realised this need and is in the process 
of formulating a National policy. The Committee des ire that the National Policy for 
Scheduled Tribes should be drawn up expeditiously a nd specific targets and time lines 
drawn for socio-economic development of tribal population. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Formation of National Tribal Policy is a complex pr ocess.  It needs to cater to 
diversities amongst STs; their uniqueness.  The pol icy prescriptions while helping 
enhance socio-economic   status of STs should help in maintaining their socio-cultural 
identities and ways of life. 
 Earlier attempts on policy formulation appeared in adequate to meet the 
challenges facing STs.  In the meantime several mea sures like the Scheduled Tribes 
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, the 
Food Securities Act, 2013, Right to Fair compensati on Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2 013 etc. have been enacted.  Hence 
the policy formulation process is going on through consultation with experts.  Once, the 

 
 
consultation process is over, it would be kept in t he public domain seeking further views 
/ objections before its finalizing. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
                   Subsequent reply of the Government dated  
Comments/views from the members of the Expert Group  constituted by this 
Ministry have been received for revision of the draft National Tribal Policy.  A meeting to 
discuss the various aspects of the draft National Tribal Policy under the chairmanship of 
the Hon’ble Minister for Tribal Affairs was held wi th the members of the Expert Group.  
In the meantime the Government has constituted a Hi gh Level Committee (HLC) in 
August, 2013 to process a position paper on the pre sent socio-economic, health and 
educations status of STs and suggest a way forward.   The Committee has to submit its 
report within nine month.  The report would have be aring on the tribal policy.   Hence, 
the National Tribal Policy will be finalized taking  into consideration the 
recommendations of the High Level Committee (HLC).’’ 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.11.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
                                     (Please see Paragraph No. 1.9 of Chapter – I) 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
         Ashram Schools were established by the Min istry of Tribal Affairs in Tribal Sub-
Plan (TSP) Area to promote and extend educational f acilities to Scheduled Tribe 
students including particularly Vulnerable Tribal G roups (PTGs).  The Committee note 
that 579 Ashram Schools in TSP Areas were sanctione d since 2002-03. These schools 
provide education with residential facilities to ST s & particularly Vulnerable Tribal 

 
 
Groups (PTGs). Among of five States having Left Win g Extremist (LWE) Districts viz. 
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Mahar ashtra and Odisha, there is not 
even a single Ashram School in Andhra Pradesh. Amon g the remaining four LWE 
States, there are 80 Ashram Schools. The Committee desire that necessary action 
should be taken to establish Ashram Schools in the LWE Districts of Andhra Pradesh, 
possibility of setting up a school in Paderu near V isakhapatnam may also be 
considered.  
Further, the committee have been informed about vac ancies of teachers in 
Ashram Schools in Gujarat, Uttarakhand, Madhya Prad esh, Karnataka and Uttar 
Pradesh. Though the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have  regularly taken up the matter with 
concerned State Governments, the Committee feel tha t the matter should be vigorously 
pursued with State Governments to ensure proper edu cation to ST students. There 
should be sufficient incentives to attract teachers  to schools in tribal areas. In order to 
address the problem of shortage of teachers in Ashr am school, the Committee suggest 
that Government should consider appointing qualifie d teachers on ad hoc basis subject 
to clearing the Teacher Eligibility Test within 5 y ears after joining the service. Thereafter 
their service may be considered for regularization. 
The Committee also desire that reasons for low enro lment of students in Ashram 
Schools - in Madhya Pradesh where there are only 16 ,320 students in 136 schools, and 
Chandigarh where there are only 2265 students in 51  schools - be ascertained for 
taking remedial measures under intimation to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
As per records available in the Ministry a total nu mber of 862 Ashram Schools 
have so far been sanctioned by MoTA since 2002-03. The number of Ashram Schools 
sanctioned by the Ministry in LWE States was also indicated. This clearly showed that in 
the State of Madhya Pradesh 242 Ashram Schools have  so far been sanctioned and in 
Chhattisgarh 134 Ashram Schools have been sanctioned with a capacity of 6695 seats. 
Despite so many Ashram Schools having been sanction ed to the State 
Governments of Madhya Pradesh (242 Ashram Schools) and Chhattisgarh (134 
Ashram Schools), the number of students enrolled re mains comparatively low primarily 

 
 
because a sizeable number of the sanctioned Ashram Schools are still incomplete for 
various reasons ranging from problems in acquisitio n of land, tendering process not yet 
complete, inhospitable terrain, problems of Left Wi ng Extremism, as also not fully 
functional owing to inadequate number of teachers/ teachers who can teach in the local 
language.   
 The State Governments are repeatedly requested to adhere to the time 
schedules for completing construction. Some State G overnments have also issued 
suitable directives to ensure that adequate number of teachers are appointed from 
among the locals.  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
Subsequent reply of the Government  
The Ministry holds periodical review meetings with State/UTs to discuss and sort out 
all outstanding issues pertaining to this Ministry including the problems hampering 
completion of construction of the sanctioned Ashram  Schools. The Planning Commission 
also holds periodical meeting with States affected by Left wing Extremism where problems 
faced by these States and ways and means of resolvi ng them are discussed.  The Ministry 
also impresses upon the States concerned through le tters etc as well as during visits of 
senior officers to the State to sort out these prob lems and complete construction of the 
sanctioned Ashram Schools. No further grants are re leased by the Ministry unless the 
concerned State/UT Administration furnish Utilization Certificate for previous grants released.  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.11.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
                                     (Please see  Paragraph No. 1.12 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
The Committee observe that the objective of the ‘Sp ecial Central Assistance to 
Tribal Sub Plan’ scheme is to boost the demand base d income generational 
programmes with special focus on specific income ge neration activities like, skill 
training, storage, small-scale trading inputs, etc.  and connectivity to markets, service 
delivery centres, etc. The Committee are glad to no te that the amount released under 
the scheme, which stood around ` 497 crore in each year during the three year perio d 
from 2008-09 to 2010-11, has doubled to ` 962 crore in 2011-12 and targeted to reach ` 
1200 crore in 2012-13.  
 
Reply of the Government 
As per the progress reports submitted by State Gove rnments, the total no. of ST 
beneficiaries for which funds were released under S CA to TSP during last two years is 
18,59,504  (individuals) and 8,08,212 (families) (approximately ), respectively as per the 
list enclosed at Annex-IV.  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
Subsequent reply of the Government  
“This Ministry releases funds to the user agencies that fulfill codal formalities and 
schemes guidelines, the, like utilization of funds released earlier; completion of activities for 
the funds released etc. The Ministry through regula r meetings with Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of State Govts./UTs has imp ressed upon usage of funds allocated to 
them and to provide utilization certificate.  In ad dition, subsequent fund releases have been 
linked to providing utilization of earlier funds re leased.  This has resulted in reduction of 
unspent balance to ` 830.02 crores as on 31.03.2013.”  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
                              (Please see  Paragraph No.1.18 of Chapter – I) 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.13) 
         The Committee are also happy to note that the annual release of funds for Special 
Area Programmes – Grant under Article 275(i) of the  Constitution of India has been 
almost tripled in the year 2010-11 from about ` 340 crore in 2008-09 and 2009-10 to ` 
1000 crore in 2010-11. The amount released under th is programme in 2011-12 was ` 
1085 crore with a target of ` 1317 crore in 2012-13. The Committee find that in this case 
too, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs do not have det ails of outcome of funding given to 
States and Union Territories. The Committee urge th e Ministry of Tribal Affairs to 
periodically collect details of work done under thi s Programme for information of 
Parliament. 
Reply of the Government 
Grants under Article 275(1) of the Constitution: Un der the programme, Grants 
are released to 26 States, having ST population for  raising the level of Administration in 
Scheduled Areas and for the welfare of tribal peopl e. Funds are released to States 
based on proposals received from the States Governm ents depending on the felt needs 
of ST population to bridge the gap in infrastructur e activities in sectors like roads, 
bridges, education, health and irrigation etc. and for setting up of Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools (EMRSs).   
State Governments submit Proposals and Progress Rep ort in prescribed format 
in which activities are mentioned for which funds have been released and used. Further, 
guidelines clearly mention indicative type of activities for which funds may be released.  
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
Subsequent reply of the Government  
 “The Ministry of Finance carries out budgetary exe rcise which involves utilization of 
funds under various schemes/programmes and as per p revalent fiscal policies including 
apportionment of funds at Revised Estimate stage.  These funds are released subject full 
filing codal formalities by the user agencies like utilization certificate, progress report, and 
certificate of funds transferred etc.  
 
Further , efforts of the Ministry are to release the funds to  the user agencies based on 
its availability in respect of proposal received th at are complete in all respect i.e. with regard 

 
 
to codal formalities and scheme guidelines that inc lude utilization certificate, physical 
progress report etc.  It may not be out of place to  mention that the funds allocated by this 
Ministry are additive or gap filling and would norm ally supplement the efforts of State 
Governments and other central Ministries for welfare of the Scheduled Tribes.” 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.11.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
                                  (Please see  Paragraph No.1.21 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
 The Scheme “Strengthening Education among ST Girls  in Low Literacy Districts”  
was introduced in the year 1993-94 and was revised in 2008-09 for ST girls in low 
literacy pockets. The primary objective of the Sche me was promotion of education 
among tribal girls in the identified low literacy d istricts of the country. The scheme also 
aimed to improve the socio-economic status of the p oor and illiterate tribal population 
through the education of women. The programme is im plemented as a Central Sector 
Scheme and the Ministry of Tribal Affairs provides 100% funding as a gender specific 
scheme. The educational complexes were established in rural areas of identified 
districts and have classes I to V with a provision for upgradation up to class XII, 
provided there is sufficient accommodation for clas srooms, hostel, kitchen, gardening 
and for sports facilities. The educational complexe s impart not only formal education to 
tribal girls but also train the students in agricul ture, animal husbandry, other vocations 
and crafts to make them economically strong. 
 
While examining the impact of the scheme, the commi ttee note that budgetary 
allocation for Strengthening of Education among ST girls has steadily been reduced 
from ` 60 crore in 2008-09 to ` 40 crore in 2012-13. What is more distressing is t hat 
utilisation of fund, under the scheme has been way below ` 40 crore during each of the 
last three years. However, the committee find that the Scheme has not received 
sufficient focus considering that the tribal female  literacy rate is below 35 per cent (as 
per 2001 Census). The Committee desire to know the latest information regarding 
female literacy rate among tribals.  
 

 
 
Further, the Committee emphasise that serious effor ts should be made to rejuvenate 
the scheme with enhanced funding and positive realisation of the objective and urge the 
Ministry to revise the scheme expeditiously under intimation to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The latest information on female literacy rate amon g tribals is awaited from the   
Registrar General of India. RGI has intimated that district-wise female literacy rate 
among ST as per 2011 Census is in the process of finalization.   
Due to the focused approach of this Ministry under the scheme of “Strengthening 
education among ST girls in low literacy Districts” , about 50% of the total allocation of 
2013-14 has been expended up to the month of Septem ber, 2013 benefitting 6869 
beneficiaries in 34 projects.  
Revision of the schemes shall be completed by the e nd of the Financial Year 
2013-14. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
           The Committee note with concern that no Human Development Index (HDI) has 
been constructed so far in respect of Scheduled Tri bes to evaluate the socio-economic 
development of the Scheduled Tribes population. It is only after the matter has been 
taken up by the Committee that the Ministry of Trib al Affairs has proposed to build a 
new composite HDI like Social Index and has approac hed the National Sample Survey 
Organisation, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to conduct a Survey 
exclusively focusing on tribals. The Committee desi re to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The matter has been taken with the Ministry of Stat istics & Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI) to conduct a baseline survey  on Situation Assessment Study 
and Collection of data on the STs in the country. MoSPI has informed that if it is decided 

 
 
to devote one round for the subject, it would happe n only after June, 2015.However 
living conditions of the STs as revealed in the Cen sus 2011 has been worked out and a 
comparative picture vis' a vis general population has been given in the Annex-III 
 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
         Giving due attention to primitive tribes o f Andaman & Nicobar Islands, the 
Committee desired to know the various welfare measu res/initiatives taken by the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs to facilitate slow and s mooth transition of primitive tribes 
particularly Jarawas . 
        The Committee were informed that as per the  ‘Policy on Jarawa Tribe of Andaman 
Islands, 2004’ maximum autonomy is being given to t he Jarawas with minimum and 
regulated interventions by A&N Administration there  is no interventions in cultural life of 
the Jarawas and they are left to develop according to their own genius and at their own 
pace. No attempts to bring them to the mainstream s ociety against their conscious will 
at this stage of their social development will be m ade. The Committee feel that no 
community should be deprived of the benefits of eco nomic development. The 
Committee would like to know whether any efforts we re made to ascertain the will of 
Jarawas regarding their integration with the main s ociety, and if so, when and with what 
result. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per recommendation of the meeting of the “Expert  Committee under the 
Chairpersonship of Secretary, Tribal Affairs for pr eparation of policies for various PTGs 
of A&N Islands” held on 2-2-2012, the A&N Administr ation, vide letter dated 23-7-2013 
had furnished a project study report carried out by  experts namely, Prof. Vishwajit 
Pandya and Shri Manish Chandy and Director (TW), A& NI and Officers of AAJVS titled 
‘A Fieldwork Based Report - Jarawa Movements in rel ation to time and space’.  The 

 
 
A&N Administration has also informed that the secon d phase of the work on the Jarawa 
study will be carried out to access the freewill of  the tribe.  This work is expected 
completion by the end of March, 2014.  After receip t of the report of the second phase 
of the work, the issue will be examined.   
          The A&N Administration, vide letter dated  12-9-2013 has informed that the 
Administration is carrying out ethnographic study t o understand the Jarawa issues and 
forwarded research report entitled “Kangapo” (Stitc hed Garment in Jarawa Language) 
prepared by Prof. Dr. Vishwajit Pandya, the Expert Member of AAJVS.  The Research 
Advisory Board of Andaman Nicobar Tribal Research &  Training Institute in its meeting 
held on 23 
rd & 24 th  August, 2013 carefully evaluated the report and re commended for its 
implementation by A&NI Administration. The strategy  for implementation of the 
recommendations of the report is to be addressed by A&N Administration. 
[ref: Ministry of Tribal Affairs, OM no. F.No. 16015/04/2013-PC&V dated 
21.10.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
                                     (Please see  Paragraph No. 1.15 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
19 December, 2013              
Agrahayana 28 ,1935(Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
 
  

 
 
Annexure-I 
STATEMENT SHOWING THE AMOUNT RELEASED TO STATES/NGOs UNDER THE CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF PARTICULARLY 
VULNERABLE TRIBAL GROUPS (EARLIER KNOWN AS SCHEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMITIVE TRIBAL GROUPS PTGs) (PTGs) DURING 2007-08 
TO 2012-13 
                (Rs. in Lakh) 
S.No. Name of the 
State/UT 
Name of Implementing 
Agency States/NGOs 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
 2010-11  2011-12 2012-13  2013-14 (as on 
30-09-2013) 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 1) Govt. of Andhra Pradesh 860.000 985.000 0.000 22 92.400 2292.400 2000.000 3000.000 
2 
Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands 
1) Andaman Adim Janjati 
Vikas Samiti, A & N Islands 149.000 0.000 0.000 184 .000 0.000 0.000 75.000 
3 Bihar 1) Govt. of Bihar 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.0 00   
4 Chattisgarh 
1) Govt.of Chattisgarh 700.000 615.330 0.000 2244.7 90 1655.390 2000.000 1400.000 
2) VISHWAS, Narayanpur, 
Distt. Bastar 1.951 0.000 10.696 7.486 0.000 6.864 8.560 
3) Ramakrishna Mission 
Ashram, Naryanpur, Distt. 
Bastar 
0.000 0.000 6.893 5.330 4.380 4.830   
5 Gujarat 1) Govt. of Gujarat 500.000 1943.220 0.000 0.000 20 35.200 700.000 1000.000 
6 Jharkhand 
1) Govt.of Jharkhand 0.000 1068.000 0.000 0.000 200 0.000 630.540   
2) Bharat Sewa Ashram 
Sangha, Sonari, 
Jamshedpur 
174.261 165.885 168.595 155.856 363.566 0.000 229.9 37 
3) Bharat Sevahsram 
Sangha, Pakur, WB 25.645 28.265 53.436 31.893 38.481 0.000 35.289 

 
 
4) Bharat Sevashram 
Sangh, Barajuri, Via-
Ghatsila, Jharkhand 
39.460 37.829 50.000 30.932 62.006 8.367   
5) Bharat Sevashram 
Sangha, Deogarh, 
Jharkhand 
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 6.770 7.070   
7 Kerala 1) Govt. of Kerala 0.000 960.000 10.000 0.000 1210. 000 0.000   
8 Karnataka 
1) Govt. of Karnataka 200.000 3227.000 0.000 6000.0 00 1225.608 659.460   
2) Swami Vivekanada Youth 
Movement, Hanchipura 
Road, Saragur, Tal. - H.D. 
Kote, Distt. - Mysore - 571 
121, Karnataka 
0.000 19.275 20.474 0.000 0.000 47.912   
9 Madhya 
Pradesh 
1) Govt. of Madhya Pradesh 1000.000 3754.900 5067.8 00 5428.200 6546.320 4350.000 4500.000 
2) Bonded Liberation Fund, 
New Delhi (H.Qrs.) 12.661 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000   
3) Sewa Bharathi, Bhopal 31.921 0.000 0.000 0.000 0 .000 0.000   
10 Maharashtra  
1) Govt. of Maharashtra 497.000 2007.980 556.125 34 59.835 0.000 0.000   
2) Maharogi Sewa Samiti, 
Warora (Lok Biradari 
Prakalp), Hemalkasa, PO-
Bhamragad, Distt-
Gadchiroli, Pin - 442710, 
M.S. 
49.776 0.000 28.194 27.772 0.000 28.300   
11 Manipur 1) Govt. of Manipur 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1 00.000   
12 Odisha 1) Govt. of Orissa 1000.000 1243.000 1228.700 1226. 680 1224.728 3260.000 2000.000 
13 Rajasthan 1) Govt. of Rajasthan 0.000 1120.490 0.000 1280.280  2677.000 1500.000   
14 Tamil Nadu 1) Govt. of Tamil Nadu 0.000 673.000 0.000 476.000 1075.940 1400.000 2000.000 

 
 
2) Nilgiris Adiwasi Welfare 
Association, Kotagiri, 
Nilgiris 
59.217 52.870 61.663 77.581 85.107 46.658   
15 Tripura 1) Govt. of Tripura 185.000 403.000 461.800 315.700  627.400 700.000 950.000 
16 Uttar 
Pradesh 
1) Govt of Uttar Pradesh 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000   
17 Uttrakhand 1) Govt. of Uttrakhand  0.000 0.000 100.140 0.000 0 .000 400.000   
18 West Bengal  1) Govt. of West Bengal 300.000 901.740 537.235 0.0 00 0.000 0.000   
    GRAND TOTAL 5785.892  19206.784  8361.751  23244.735 23130.296  17850.000 15198.786 
 
 
  

 
 
Annexure- II  
State-wise Physical Achievement under CCD plan for XI Plan period  
ODISHA 
S.No 
Name of 
PTG 
XI Plan  
Activities/ Achievements 
1 Bonda Connectivity, Drinking -
Water, Housing, irrigation 
and land development, 
projection of tradition, 
Education, Health 
State Government land distributed to 
2966 Hose Holds including 595 landless 
households. All 18562 families have been 
covered under Janshree Bima Yojana. 
1021 new Firepoof  have been 
constructed and provided to house holds. 
All weather connectivity with main roads 
have been extended to 221 villages. 
Drinking water problem of 116 villages 
have been solved.180 irrigation projects 
created. 71 villages electrified and 102 
villages given solar lights in 96 villages.17 
educational complexes established for 17 
micro projects. 
2 
Chuktia  
Bhunjia 
3 Didayi 
4 
Dongria  
Kondh 
5 Hill Kharia 
6 Mankirdia 
7 Birhor 
8 Juang 
9 KutiaKondh 
10 LanjiaSaora 
11 Lodha 
12 PauriBhujia 
13  Saora  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
A &N  ISLANS  
S.No Activity Taget Achievement 
1 Construction of 20 bed ward for 
Onges 
Rs. 108.00 lakhs  Rs. 108.00 lakhs  
2 Construction of Guest House at 
Onges settlement Dugong Creek 
Rs. 102.15 lakhs Rs. 105.15 lakhs 
3 Construction of eco -friendly huts at 
Jarawa Tribal Area 
Rs. 0.97 lakhs Rs. 0.97 lakhs 
4 Internal electrical work for Great 
Andamanese Houses 
Rs.5.60 lakhs  Rs.5.60 lakhs  
5 Interal electrical work for Onges 
houses 
Rs. 5.98 lakhs Amount released to forest 
department i.e. PWD and 
Forest Department.  The 
amount has been utilized for 
the purpose for it was 
released. 
6 Repair of Staff quarter s at 
Kadamatala 
Rs. 3.55 lakhs  -do - 
7 Repair of Jarawa ward at Kadamtala Rs. 3.28 lakhs Rs. 3.28 lakhs 
8 Internal Electrical work of AAJVS 
Office building 
Rs. 1.41 lakhs  Rs. 1.41 lakhs  
9 Renovation of AAJVS Office building Rs. 5.65 lakhs  Rs. 5.65 lakhs 
10  Construction of Jarawa ward at 
Baratang 
Rs. 13.03 lakhs  Amount released to forest 
department i.e. PWD and 
Forest Department.  The 
amount has been utilized for 
the purpose for it was 
released. 
11  Implementation activities for the 
primitive tribes including supply of 
iron tools, implements, 
hospitalization etc. 
Rs. 86.93 lakhs  Rs.86.93 lakhs  

 
 
Chattisgarh:  
Physical achievement 2007-08 to 2011-12 as under:- 
 
i.  Rate of success in agriculture and Horticulture sector is 89.76%. 
ii.  Rate of success in activities related with irrigation, fertilizer and pesticides is 79.22% 
Rate of success in activities of Aawas nirman, solar lamp distribution, health camps and self 
employment is almost 100 
 
TRIPURA: 
PHYSICAL ACHIEVEMENT (2007-08 TO 2011-2012) 
SL. No. Activity Target Achivement 
I II III IV 
2007-2008 
1 Education Awareness 107 hamlets 107 hamlets 
2 
Agriculture (Horti & Fish 
cultivation, Const. of check dam 
irrigation & land Dev. Etc. 76 hamlets 34 hamlets 
3 
Vocational training (tailoring 
carpentry) etc. 54 hamlets (500 ben..) 54 hamlets (40 0 ben..) 
4 
Model Village covering 131 
families etc. 1 Village 1 Village 
5 Other economic activities 57 families 47 families  
6 Piggery & Goatery Farming 12 hamlets 6 hamlets 
7 Reang Toursim etc.  10 hamlets  1 hamlets  
8 Health care awareness 24 hamlets 24 hamlets 
9 
Infrastructure dev. (Hojagiri dance 
academy etc.) 1 No 1 No 
10 J.B.Y. Scheme. 5000 family 5000 family 

 
 
        
2008-2009 
1 Renewal of JBY Scheme  5000 families  5000 families  
2 Education Awareness  122 hamlets  110 hamlets  
3 
Rubber cultivation including nusery 
raising 132 families 132 families 
4 Other Economic activities 59 hamlets 59 hamlets 
5 
Infrastructure Development 
(Housing) 125 families 120 families 
6 Health care awareness 25 hamlets 25 hamlets 
7 Reang Tourism etc. 9 hamlets 9 hamlets 
    
 
2009-2010 
1 Renewal of JBY Scheme 1000 families 1000 families  
2 Health care awareness 25  hamlets 25  hamlets 
3 
Infrastructure Development 
(Housing) 125 families 125 families 
4 Rubber cultivation  180 families 180 families 
5 Other Economic activities  59  hamlets  59  hamlets  
6 Education coaching of PTG students 107  hamlets 1 07  hamlets 
7 Piggery & Goatery 90 families 90 families 
8 Skill-up-gradation 500 PTG beneficiaries 500 PTG beneficiaries 
9 
Resident accommodation for PTG 
students 2 No. 2 No. 
10 Hori plantation & check dam etc. 10  hamlets 10  hamlets 

 
 
11 
Reang Tourism & Conservation of 
culture & haritage 9  hamlets 9  hamlets 
    
2010-2011 
1 
Infrastructure Development  
(Housing) 125 families 100 families  
2 
Construction of residential 
accommodation of PTG students 1 No. 1 No. 
3 Education awareness/ coaching 107 hamlets 107 ham lets 
4 Rubber cultivation 180 hamlets 180 hamlets 
5 Other Economic activities 59 hamlets 59 hamlets 
6 Piggery & Goatery Farming  90 hamlets  80 hamlets  
7 Skill-up-gradation 518 PTGs 518 PTGs 
8 Agri. Horti etc. 260 families 220 families 
9 Conservation of reang culture etc. 9 hamlets 4 ha mlets 
10  Health care awareness  25 hamlets  25 hamlets  
    
RAJASTHAN:  
Physical Achievement:  
S.No.  Activity Target Achievement 
1 Establishment of Nutritional 
Rehabilitation Centres  
16 12 
2 Land purchase scheme  4600  43  
3 Additional amount for Iniramma 
Houses  
36750  6419  
4 Janshree bime Yojana 27162 54830 

 
 
5 Establishment of PTG Culture 
Centres  
6 12 
6 Provision of community Health 
Workers in all PTG Habitations  
2802 0- 
7 Positioning of Livelihood 
Assistants @ 1 for every 10 
habitations 
 
281  0  
 
Madhya Pradesh:
 
 Physical Targets/Achievement 2007-08 to 2011-12  
 
S.N.  Activity  Target 
(beneficiaries)  
Achievement  
1.  Education 103705 88149 
2.  Health 7617 6474 
3.  Drinking Water 2173 1847 
4.  Agriculture and 
irrigation 
19408 16497 
5.  Housing 3760 3196 
6.  Livelihood 6108 5192 
 
TAMIL NADU : 
Physical Achievement (2007-08 to 2011-12)              (as per plan) 
S.N 
o. 
Activity Target  Achiev 
ement 
I II III IV 
1 Housing 836 836 
2 Sheep units  1926  963  
3 Milch Animals  1236  100  
4 Drinking Water Facilities 219 110 
5 Street light 3 2 

 
 
6  Poultry 70   
7 Growing of colour fish 2  
8 Fishing net 100  
9  Brick making unit  12   
10 Embroidery chumkey works 200  
11 Power sprayer 10  
12 Sewing machines 30  
13  Embroidery training  11   
14  Community Halls  5  
15 Infrastructure  facilities 282  
16 Mini power pump 1 1 
 
GUJARAT: 
 
Physical targets/achievements 
   
Activities 
Group formation 
XI Plan (Achievements) 
Target  
(benefciaries) Achievement 
Group formation 7748 3999 
Bamboo Craft 2613 6765 
Eco tourism 929 84 
Dairy  3653  5339  
Wadi & Fisheries 2206 12612 
Skill training 8209 5607 
Trading activities 2348 1459 

 
 
Others 0 2982 
Total 27706 38847 
 
  

 
 
Annexure-IV 
 
List of beneficiary from 2010-11 to 2012-13  
as per Physical Progress Report submitted by State Governments 
S.No.  Year  2010 -11  2011 -12  2012 -13  
State  Individual  Family  Individual  Family  Individual  Family  
1 Andhra Pradesh  N/A 168650  N/A 129616  N/A 29044  
2 Assam  24711  N/A 10900  N/A N/A 
3 Bihar  N/A N/A N/A 
4 Chhatisgarh  47873    38635  N/A N/A 
5 Goa  N/A N/A N/A 
6 Gujarat  N/A 76437  272621  N/A N/A 218594  
7 Himachal Pradesh  105072  N/A 81478  12987  N/A 
8 J & K  N/A 10371  N/A N/A 2162  
9 Jharkhand  N/A 15537  N/A 8080  N/A 
10  Karnataka  N/A 10371  N/A 12308  N/A 2162  
11  kerala  4073  N/A 3750  N/A 976  N/A 
12  Madhya Pradesh  N/A N/A 61119  79427    
13  Maharashtra  N/A 30189  N/A N/A 
14  Manipur  N/A 10233  N/A 1242  N/A 
15  Odisha  77922  N/A 165020  N/A N/A 
16  Rajasthan  233048  N/A 430939  N/A N/A 
17  Sikkim  6090  N/A 159000  N/A N/A 
18  Tamilnadu  N/A N/A N/A 
19  Tripura  N/A 4355  N/A  4755  N/A 
20  Uttarakhand  N/A N/A N/A 

 
 
21  Uttar Pradesh  N/A N/A N/A 
22  West Bengal  84559    33410  N/A N/A 
  TOTAL 583348 326143 1195753 230107 80403 251962 
  G.Total Individual 1859504   G.Total Family 808212   
 
 
  

 
 
Annexure-V 
Findings of the independent Evaluation Agency  
The Ministry had got evaluation of the schemes cond ucted by an independent 
agency namely, M/s Development Research Services (D RS) Limited, in the States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka and Madhya Pra desh. The study has revealed that 
the scheme is useful as it is flexible and covers s ectors such as housing, infrastructure 
development, education, health, land distribution, land development, agriculture 
development, cattle development, social security an d insurance, etc. which are important 
for their development. The main findings, with rega rd to utility and sustainability of the 
schemes are summarized as under: 
The main findings of the independent evaluation agency are as under: 
Scheme: Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups(PTGs): 
(a)  The study observed that the respondent from the sta te of Karnataka being unable to 
reach the project intervention at the time of emerg ency, preferred to visit Government 
hospitals. However, a significant proportion (51%) of beneficiaries from Jharkhand 
preferred to visit project locations in such situat ions. Overall (both states taken 
together), about 36% respondents (highest) preferred to visit government hospitals for 
health related emergency. This shows health related  projects need to be strengthened 
to meet the emergency needs of the PTGs. 
(b)  The study reveals reduction in instances of severe diseases since project intervention 
in the two states (as reported by respondents: 88% respondents in Karnataka and 80% 
in Jharkhand). Likewise, instances of common diseas es have also come down since 
project intervention 85% respondents in Karnataka a nd 80% in Jharkhand responded 
this way. 
(c)  An important impact of the project intervention was  access to immunization facilities 
by the PTGs. However, large variation was observed in both states in this regard. 84% 
respondents from Jharkhand and 50% from Karnataka c onfirmed benefits of various 
types of immunizations through project intervention. 
(d)  The monthly spending on health related issues by th e PTGs has also come down due 
to project intervention in health sector. Overall, majority of about 54% felt that their 
monthly spending on health had been reduced since p roject intervention (59% in 
Jharkhand and 50% in Karnataka). Overall, majority of the respondents (78-83%) 
confirmed getting free medicines for treatment through projects intervention. 
(e)  Around 90% respondents from Jharkhand felt that the education level of their children 
had registered an increase after project interventi on. Similarly more than 86% 
respondents from Karnataka also felt the same way. 
(f)  Rise in enrollment in schools.  Around 96% responde nts from Karnataka and 88% 
those from Jharkhand informed rise in enrollment of PTGs in schools. 
(g)  Decrease in drop-out rates from schools has been an  important impact of the project 
intervention, as reported by majority of respondents (80-96%) in both states.  

 
 
(h)  Around 96% respondents from Karnataka and 88% from Jharkhand reported rise in 
the number of teachers in schools after project interventions. 
(i)  About 80% respondents from Karnataka and 50% from J harkhand indicated 
increasing inclination towards higher education among children in tribal areas had the 
similar opinion. Overall proportion of such respond ents was at the level of around 
65%. 
(j)  Impact of occupation on employment for economic sel f-reliance: Overall preference 
for economic self-reliance over manual labour indic ated by majority of the 
respondents (84%) in both states followed by self-employment (65%).  
(k)  Impact on employment: Rise in monthly house-hold (H H) income. The results of the 
survey indicate that half of the respondents from J harkhand agreed that their HH 
income had increased after getting benefitted throu gh this scheme. However, in 
contrast, around 94% of the respondents from Karnat aka reported that the project 
interventions had no significant impact on their monthly HH income. 
(l)  A large section of people from Jharkhand (42%) was ready to relocate anywhere for 
getting skill based employment. Interestingly most of the people preferred economic 
freedom. 
(m)  Status of migration after project intervention: The  project intervention has a positive 
impact on migration status in both states. Around 7 0% respondents migration had 
reduced due to project interventions. 
(n)  Decrease the dependency on forest.  Due to project intervention, the dependency on 
forest had come down. The results of the survey ind icate that around 77% 
respondents from Karnataka and 50% for Jharkhand op ined that their dependency on 
forest had reduced. 
(o)  Rise in household food security: HH food security d id not register any increase. Only 
47% respondents from Jharkhand and only 6% of those  from Karnataka reported rise 
in their food security because of project interventions. 
(p)  Perception of other communities towards PTGs: Inter estingly, the project 
interventions in different sectors for PTGs have ch anged the mind set of other 
communities towards PTGs. Overall, 77% (Karnataka-9 6%; Jharkhand-58%) 
respondents confirmed positive change in perception  of other communities towards 
PTGs. 
(q)  Overall significant proportions of respondent PTGs reported positive change in their 
life because of MoTA project interventions, in term s of food habits (30%), healthcare 
behavior (54%) and cleanliness and hygiene (47%). K arnataka registered highest 
change (32%) in health care behavior and least (7%)  in terms of ‘talking style 
language’. However, in Jharkhand highest change was  reported in cleanliness and 
hygiene (26%). 
(r)  Perception of present life compared to earlier:  Mo st of the respondent PTGs 
informed that the project interventions had improve d their perception and attitude 
towards life. More than 87% of the respondents repo rted that their present life was 
‘better’ as compared to the earlier one. More than two third of the respondents from 
Karnataka and about half of those from Jharkhand rated their life ‘better’ as compared 
to earlier life. 
(s)  Usefulness of the scheme:  

 
 
(i)  The scheme enables states to address structural ine quality prevalent in PTG 
communities in comparison to those in the mainstream society. 
(ii)  The scheme is very useful as it is flexible and cov ers wide range of activities 
like housing, infrastructure development, education , health, land distribution, 
land development, agriculture development, cattle d evelopment, social 
security and insurance, etc. 
(iii)The scheme promotes creation of enabling condi tions for all-round 
development of PTGs that would remove their isolati on and also build 
capacity to deal with major institutions and other stakeholders to improve their 
life style in general and social and economic conditions in particular. 
Scheme: Grants-in-aid to voluntary organizations wo rking for the welfare of 
Scheduled Tribes : 
 
(i)  The projects under this scheme are very useful for STs particularly because 
of their socio-economic conditions and characteristic spread in remote areas. 
(ii)  Mobile dispensary is an effective initiative to mee t the medical and health 
needs of the tribals in remote areas.  
(iii)  Most of the ST population is not aware of the provi sions and benefits of 
various projects being implemented under this schem e. Its full potential can 
be achieved through increased awareness among triba l communities and 
ensuring their participation. 
(iv)  The scheme is useful for social, health, educationa l and economic 
development of STs. 
(v)  The scheme is of critical importance in mainstreaming the STs. 
 
Scheme: Strengthening education among Scheduled Tri be girls in low 
literacy districts 
 
(i)  The scheme is very useful and acceptable to the community. 
(ii)  There are no local schools offering similar educati on facilities in the low 
literacy districts. 
(iii)  This scheme gives an important opportunity to the t ribal girls in these areas 
to obtain education, free of cost. 
 
Scheme: Vocational training centres in Tribal areas 
      It creates an opportunity for direct income g eneration by the beneficiaries, 
after they undergo vocational training. 
 
Scheme: Coaching for STs 
The scheme provides an opportunity to ST students f or getting free 
coaching for various competitive exams. It is benef icial for young educated 
ST people aspiring to participate in competitive examinations. 
 

 
 
In order to make the schemes more effective, the ev aluation study has 
made several recommendations. The main ones have be en broadly categorized as 
follows: 
 
Recommendations under PTG scheme: 
(i)  Need close and periodic monitoring at all levels to  improve adequate fund 
allocation as well as utilization. 
(ii)  The scheme is sustainable but needs effective invol vement of state 
agencies. 
(iii)  The state governments should be advised to improve the quality of their 
CCD plans for respective PTGs to ensure creation of livelihood supporting 
quality infrastructure that has direct relevance an d should be in 
convergence with the other infrastructure schemes o f the central and state 
governments. The utilization of the available funds  under the scheme 
should be closely monitored at regular intervals at  village, block, district 
and state levels. 
(iv)  Adequate funds should be timely released to ensure proper 
implementation of the scheme. The irregular fund fl ow under the scheme, 
as observed during the 11th plan period in the stud y areas, may be 
detrimental and impede the progress of scheme there by slowing down the 
intended benefits to the targeted PTGs in concerned areas. 
(v)  The progress of socio-economic conditions and livel ihood opportunities 
provided to the PTGs should be regularly reviewed t o assess the impact 
and outcome of implementation of the scheme. 
 
   
Scheme specific recommendation under GIA scheme: 
 
a)  With reference to the appropriateness of the implem ented schemes, the study has 
observed that some of the schemes such as coaching classes for tribal students and 
vocational training need to be reframed. The presen t practice of conducting 
coaching classes appears to be highly unfocussed as  the current methods used for 
coaching is highly impractical, with very low rate of success.  
b)  Similarly, vocational training to tribal beneficiar ies also appears to be incomplete 
if the aptitude of the targeted individuals and bac k-end support in terms of 
infrastructure is not there. There appears to be a strong inclination among the 
tribal youth to seek more remunerative employment t hrough appropriate 
vocational training. Location specific training mod ules may be identified to suit 
the tribal needs to be incorporated into the existing vocational training programs. 
c)  Need to strengthen interventions in education sector at the middle and high school 
levels have emerged as one of the critical issues. Provision of a more efficient 
infrastructure along with support facilities is imp erative to attract and retain more 
tribal children in the education system. Increase i n the number of seats for girl 
children along with better hostel facilities should be the initiating step. 
d)  The study respondents had also reflected strongly o n the need to employ local 
qualified youth as teachers in the tribal schools. This would definitely improve the 

 
 
accountability of the teachers towards their respon sibilities. Special coaching may 
be provided to tribal boys and girls after their gr aduation to prepare them as basic 
school teachers and post them to their respective villages as school teachers. 
 
Recommendation under GIA scheme for  Implementation and monitoring: 
 
a)  The role, responsibilities and involvement of State Tr ibal Departments in 
implementation of the schemes need to be strengthened.  
b)  At present, the active participation of state tribal welfare departments is mostly limited 
to identification of suitable NGOs/VOs, and forwarding the proposals of the NGOs/VOs 
for consideration and selection by the MoTA. Beyond this activity, the state departments 
feel that their involvement in actual implementation of the schemes is just marginal. 
c)  A decentralized process for release of funds through the state departments to the NGOs 
would not only create a suitable environment for smoother implementation, it will also 
ensure the accountability of the NGOs to the state. 
d)  Critical issues like fund flows and monitoring of vital progress indicators is close to being 
relegated to the status of a minor activity. Systematic monitoring framework need to be 
designed and used at all levels. 
e)  Accountability is another major factor that needs to be examined. As of now, it appears 
that NGOs have a literal monopoly over implementatio n and the actual target 
community has hardly any say in activity selection, be neficiary selection, 
implementation timeframes, etc. 
f)  In the above context, it may be worthwhile to involve the Panchayati Raj Institutions and 
the CBOs in implementing the schemes right from the planning stage. 
g)  Involvement of PRIs and CBOs will positively fulfill a social audit function and prompt 
correction of routine anomalies involve in implementation by and NGO/VO. 
h)  As mentioned earlier, the state government agencies do not have a sufficient control 
over the implementing NGOs/VOs. Empowering the PRIs and CBOs to regularly monitor 
the implementation activities would help reduce the load and onus on the state 
departments in regular monitoring. 
i)  The role of the implementing agents (NGOs/VOs) needs to be re-examined for their 
capabilities in implementing the schemes, as in some cases, their capabilities have been 
the limiting factor. 
 

 
 
Annexure-VI 
Findings and Recommendations of the Monitoring Agency in the 1 st  and 2 nd  Report  
Operational Methodology  
To ensure that all three components of the project – Service delivery on ground, Conformation 
to MoTA specifications, and fulfillment of Tribal needs, were covered, four types of stakeholders (Project 
Head at Project location, Beneficiaries of these projects, Key Opinion Leaders, Personnel at the NGO 
Head Office ) per project were interviewed.  
 
Project Selection/ Sampling Design/Coverage/Scoring  
It was proposed to cover 523 projects in 206 districts in 3 year period. Though 200 projects were 
targeted and visited in the 1 
st year, a total of 185 projects were finally completed across 25 states. 
Similarly, 167 projects were covered in 21 states in the 2 nd  year of monitoring. A composite score was 
obtained by giving   weightage  to project location, view of beneficiaries and key opinion leaders and a 
performance score-card was prepared for each project covered . Ranking was done based on the scores. 
Qualitative Findings and Success Stories 
Awareness & Opinion about projects among tribals: 
Though awareness was observed to be less in few cases, overall people were found to be well 
aware about of the schemes and the benefits which these projects are bringing to the STs. For 10+ 
Bedded Hospital project, almost 91% were aware about the scheme and said that the STs are benefitting 
from the project. In case of Computer Training Centre, respondents said that the facility was free of cost 
and that this project will make ST children self-reliant.  
Only a small percentage (12%) of respondents of the hostel project, said that it was a properly 
implemented project, 34.7% knew that this is a free facility for the ST students and 32% said that ST 
students will definitely benefit from this project.  At Vocational Training Centre, 50% of the respondents 
interviewed said that the project was a good programme to earn livelihood and the other half said that 
it bestowed a sense of pride among the STs. 
In case of Mobile dispensaries, the respondents felt that these projects are a facility for tribal / 
poor people, and that disadvantaged tribals are benefitted. In case of Residential, primary schools and 
ST Girls’ Education Hostel, the respondents said that the Govt. is doing good work and the ST Children 
are receiving free education. 

 
 
 Level of involvement of the local community 
The Key Opinion Leaders (KOLs) who were interviewed, when asked about their involvement in 
different projects, a large percentage said that they support the cause and always help in increasing 
awareness about the projects, some said that whenever they feel the need, they recommend people to 
avail benefit from the project. In case of Computer Training Centres, it was found that the Panchayat 
Head and parents support the project. For Hostel project, the KOLs provide suggestions, arrange for 
meetings, organize festivals / cultural programmes and extend help by other means. 
In some cases, communities were not able to extend any help – either due to their poor financial 
condition, or lack of awareness / knowledge. Overall, there is support for all the projects and people do 
get involved to raise awareness so that more and more STs are able to benefit from these projects. 
Level of involvement of Panchayat in project operations and monitoring 
Responses indicate that in few of the cases, some of the members of the Panchayat in their own 
capacity were supporting and facilitating the projects.  
 
 Implementation / Overlapping of similar projects b y other Ministries & Demand for 
additional similar services in that area 
79% of the total respondents interviewed said that Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the only Ministry 
which has implemented  projects like 10+ Bedded Hospitals, Computer Training Centres, Agricultural 
Training Centres, Balwadis, Hostel and Schools for STs (both residential and non-residential), Library, 
Mobile Dispensary, Mobile Library cum Audio Visual Units, Typing and Shorthand Training and 
Vocational Training Centers. The rest 21% said that some local private institutions also run such 
programs as for example–projects like Residential School, Mobile Dispensary, Hostel, and 10+ bedded 
hospitals. 
Almost all beneficiaries and KOL’s interviewed said that there is an enormous requirement for 
such projects. The awareness has increased about the wel fare programs and projects being 
implemented by the Government and therefore large number of STs desire to avail the benefit. 
Particularly, there is a need of more 10+ bedded hospitals, Hostel, Residential, Middle and Primary 
schools for Girls, along with Computer and Vocational training schools. 
Problems faced by NGOs in running the project 
As per the responses received by the NGOs, major problems faced by them in running the projects 
are: 
1.  Lack of funds (resulting in low resources and less salaries for staff)  
2.  Untimely release of funds by the ministry,  
3.  Lack of support from the government in terms of administration  

 
 
4.  Improper supply of electricity and drinking water  
5.  Absence of a proper grievance redressal mechanism  
6.  Finding quality staff and  
7.  Slow processing by the government machinery etc.  
Suggestions for improvement 
Almost all NGO Officials and Project Heads interviewed suggested for timely release of grants, 
increase in amount with respect to different provisions of grant and the resources to include computers 
and printers. One important demand was to increase the awareness about the schemes and to 
implement more welfare projects so that more and more people could avail the benefits. Among 
beneficiaries, a large number said that the resources provided to them should be better. There should 
be more doctors, nurses, trained teachers and other staff in the projects. Some beneficiaries said that 
the facilities provided should be of higher quality and in larger quantity. Lastly, some of the beneficiaries 
said that there should be more inspections and career guidance must be provided to the beneficiaries. 
 Success Stories 
Success stories of few projects included a student of a middle school (run by Rajasthan Bal 
Kalyan Samiti, Rajasthan)  who later became judge in a city; the Computer Training Centre and the 
Vocational Training Centre run by Pathahri Vocational Institute, in Assam , has helped in upliftment of 
the tribal people and has been a major motivating factor for tribal communities to step out of their 
homes and take up training. After few trainees got good jobs, many educated youth took up training at 
this centre for better employment opportunities, resulting in the improvement of their socio economic 
status. 
The Mobile Dispensaries have made possible the treatment and the medical help to reach less 
accessible areas. The unit, run by  Bharat Sevashram Sangha, in Dumka district of Jharkhand has 
changed the behaviour of the people by making them come out of superstitions and start believing in 
medical treatment.  The Mobile Dispensary in East Godavari district, Andhra Pradesh run by Ram 
Krishna Mission,  has helped significantly in reducing Diabetic cases, Hypertension and Eye related 
diseases. The effectiveness of the dispensary is such that people come here for treatment and have 
stopped going to Govt. Hospitals. The dispensary is now serving more areas than before. 
The Residential School run by Seva Bharati in Meghalaya has helped the residents of the 
Brokona village and its surrounding, as earlier not a single person was even 10 th  pass. But now many 
have completed their schooling (10 th ) and most of them have been recruited in Army. Now along with 
Hezong language, large numbers of people understand and speak Hindi, Engilsh, Assamese and Garo.The 
students of the Primary School at Rayagada district of Orissa (run by SNEH ), participated in UNDP 
cultural programme in 2006 and has achieved 3 rd  position at Block level science exhibition recently.  
These successful examples indicate that the tribal population are benefitting from the projects / 
schemes that are run by the Ministry and there is continuous building up of belief among the tribals that 
such projects are for their benefit and upliftment.  

 
 
Recommendations in the 1 st  and  2 nd  Monitoring Report 
The findings of the study suggest that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should continue to implement 
such programmes and projects either directly or through NGOs. The features of many of these projects 
are unique and cater to basic socio-economic needs of the tribal population in the country – whether 
they are on education, health, upliftment, employment or welfare related.  Based on the 1 st  year 
findings of the monitoring exercise of the NGO run projects, the major recommendations are: 
• Ministry should release the funds on time to the NGOs. This would facilitate the NGOs to run the 
projects smoothly, pay the salary on time to the staff and to properly maintain and improve the 
facilities at the project sites.  
• Funds should be increased across the different heads as with time, the cost of living and 
resources has increased significantly and for the NGOs to provide quality resources and facilities, 
increase in the funds is necessary.  
• Awareness about the projects and the schemes should be increased among the STs across India, 
particularly in the less accessible areas, so that the inhabitants use the nearest facilities at 
minimal cost.   
• Monitoring of these projects should be at regular intervals, to know the development of the 
projects over time and to verify if things are going ‘as planned’ and therefore implementing 
corrections and changes required for improvement in the delivery mechanism.   
• The opinions and feedback of beneficiaries and key opinion leaders should be taken and given 
importance for improvements in the projects as they observe and scrutinize the working of the 
projects very closely at the grass root level. Their gap analysis and the inputs for improvements 
can be of great use for the efficacy of the projects.  
• More emphasis should be given to the development of infrastructure and resources. This would 
elevate the quality of the project and will attract more beneficiaries. 
• One of the fundamental aims of these schemes is to bridge the gap in the literacy level between 
the general and the tribal population. To achieve this, the schemes should also focus on the 
awareness generation in the interiors and less accessible regions.  
• The safety of the girls is imperative and therefore it should be considered important and given 
proper attention at all the Girl specific projects. This would make the ST Girls and their families 
more confident in availing the facilities.  

 
 
• The Ministry should interact with NGOs on regular basis to understand the need and the 
problems faced by the NGOs in running the projects.  
• There should be an Effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism for all stake holders – the NGOs, 
beneficiaries, KOLs, community etc - where they can lodge their suggestion or complaints. The 
Ministry should take a proactive role for the same.  
• Private Companies can be given incentives by the Government if they employ ST students who 
have passed from the Computer training Centers or Vocational Training Centers. 
 
Some recommendations with reference to specific segments are:  
 
1. 
 Schools: Residential School & Non -Residential School under Grants-in-Aid scheme, Primary 
School & Middle School under ST Girls Education Scheme: The schools should emphasize on 
imparting quality education and providing clean and hygienic environment along with safety for the 
students . English should be taught as a subject from the primary level for the reason that students 
face problems when they join another school where the medium is English. Also if English is 
introduced at Class 6 th  level in the Vernacular medium schools, the students have to compete with 
English medium pupils in the 10 th  Boards, which is very difficult for them. English speaking classes 
may be introduced. Further grants for computers should be provided to each and every school. 
Scholarships and stipends should be provided to meritorious students to motivate the students, 
their parent’s and the community at large. There should also be an increase in the number of 
teachers and in the honorarium / salary paid to the teachers and the support staff. 
2.  Computer Training Centre , Typing and Shorthand Training Centre & Vocational Training 
Centres: The Courses/ Teaching / Training should be job oriented and the syllabus should match the 
current requirements of the job market, so that the students start earning as soon as the training 
ends. Also, if the students are more in number at the training centres, the grants - both non–
recurring and recurring - should be increased accordingly. There should be provision for on-job 
training and placement assistance.  
3. 
 10+ bedded hospitals:  There is a dearth of medical facilities in the interiors and in remote ST 
villages . Therefore, number of 10+ bedded hospitals should be increased along with the funding for 
the medicines, medical equipments and other related aids, such as –X- Ray & Ultrasound machines, 

 
 
Pathological labs, etc. If these are not available the patients have to travel to other places for 
treatment, thus delaying the process. The honorarium and salaries of the doctors, nurses and also of 
other support staff should be increased in order to employ quality staff by the implementing 
institutions.  
4. 
 Mobile Dispensary: The Ministry should fund more such projects as the findings divulge that all 
the project units are over- stressed due to need and demand of health services by the tribes and 
especially in the remote areas. It is required that the frequency of the visits of the mobile 
dispensaries to the remote/ non-accessible areas should be increased, especially during the rainy 
seasons. There should also be provision for grants for Part- time specialist doctors (Gynaecologists, 
Paediatricians etc.).  
5. 
 Balwadi: Provision should be made for midday meals to the children. 
6.  Hostel:  Facilities like playground, library, more room space, study rooms, conveyance (bus / 
cycle), etc. should be considered at the time of evaluation of the project proposal by the NGO, as 
these are necessary for the overall development of the students.  
7.  Library : should have a large sitting arrangement and books should be available on diverse 
subjects.  
8. 
 ST Girl’s Education – Hostel: This segment is an important and popular segment under the 
Scheme, ‘Strengthening of Education among the ST girls in low literacy districts’. To make people 
aware about this scheme so that more and more girls can avail the benefit, special awareness drives 
and campaigns are required to be conducted by various state departments.  Emphasis should also 
be to provide better infrastructure at the hostel and for the safety of the girl students. 
 
 
 

 
 
Appendix-I 
  
MINUTES OF FIFTEENTH SITT ING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-
2014)  
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 23 rd  October, 2013 from 1100 to 1250 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House  Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
   PRESENT 
  
          Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3 Shri Bapi Raju kanumuru  
4 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
5 Shri Prabodh Panda 
6 Shri R. Sambasiva Rao 
7 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai  
8 Shri S. Semmalai  
9 Shri M.I. Shanavas 
10 Shri Ganesh Singh 
11 Shri Jagadanand Singh 
12 Shri Mukul Wasnik  
13 Shri Omprakash Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri A. Louis Martin    - Joint Secretary  
 
        2.    Smt. Anita B. Panda   - Director 
 

 
 
      3.  Shri Srinivasulu Gunda       Additional D irector 
 
 
                                               WITNESSES 
 
 
       1      Shri Ashok Pai      -          Joint Secretary 
       2.     Dr( Smt) Sadhna Rout -   Joint secretary 
       3.     Shri Siliditya Chaudhari – Deputy Director General 
       4.     Smt. Sangeeta Verma-      Economic Advisor  
       5.     Smt. Vibha pandey-           Chief Controller of Accounts  
       6.     Shri A.K. Angurana-           Managing Director, TRIFED. 
  
 2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s of the Committee and the 
representatives of Ministry of tribal Affairs to th e sitting of the Committee convened for 
discussion on action taken by the Government on the  observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Twenty- First Report of the Commit tee (2012-13) on ‘Tribal Welfare 
Schemes’, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 23 April, 2013. 
 
3. The Chairman also drew the attention of the repr esentatives of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs to Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions by  the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the sitting o f the Committee and desired the. 
representatives of the Ministry to  explain various  steps taken following presentation of 
the Committee‘s  Twenty- first Report. 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Af fairs  then gave a power- point 
presentation covering inter alia   mandate of the Ministry, demographic status, 
educational, health and other indicators of Schedul ed Tribes, schemes and 
programmes of the Ministry, Special Central Assista nce to the Tribal Sub Plan, Grant 
under Article 275(1) of the Constitution, scholarsh ips & fellowships to STs and their 
utilization, market development of tribal products / produce, conferring of rights  to 
scheduled tribes under Forest Rights Act, 2006, pro posed scheme of Minimum Support 
Price (MSP) for Minor Forest Produce (MFP) etc.      
 

 
 
5. Thereafter,  Members of the Committee raised que ries on various issues regarding  
impact of vocational training given to ST youth on their employability/ suitability  for 
setting up own businesses, monitoring the role   of  NGOs and the action taken against 
those indulging in violations of rules/ misappropriation of funds / misconduct in  running / 
managing  vocational training schemes, underutiliza tion of funds earmarked for  tribal  
welfare schemes,  need for  mechanism at  the National level for ensuring accountability 
for utilization of funds allocated to Tribal Sub Pl an (TSP), need to  pursue with the 
Planning Commission on the shortfall in funds under  TSP ,  formulation of guidelines on 
TSP, compensation for tribals  who  lose their land  consequent to the declaration of the 
areas as  National Parks /  forest reserves/wild li fe sanctuaries,  extension of the Pre-
Matric scholarship scheme to ST students from class  I itself, recognition and extension 
of the benefits of tribal welfare schemes to the tr ibals residing in States other than their 
home states, steps taken to preserve the tribal cul ture and inclusion of the same in the 
schemes formulated by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs,  reasons for not conferring the land 
rights to all the eligible tribals, inclusion of Ho dopathy under AYUSH, setting up of State 
level forest procurement institutions  ensuring MSP  for MFP and the urgent need for a  
National policy for tribals, etc.. Details regardin g the pendency of proposals received 
from various States for recognition of particular tribal communities like ‘Dhangar ,  Majhi’ 
etc. and the age of pendency of these proposals  were also asked.  
 
6. The representatives of the Ministry of Tribal We lfare responded to the queries raised 
by the Committee.  In respect of points for which t he representatives could not readily 
respond, the Ministry was asked to furnish written replies at the earliest.  
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt.  
    
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

 
 
Appendix-II  
MINUTES OF THE SECOND  SITTING OF THE STUDY GROUP OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-2014)  
 
The Study Group of the Committee on Estimates sat o n Wednesday, the 
18 th  December, 2013 from 1030 hrs. to 1045. hrs. in Roo m No. 52-B, (Chairman’s 
Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
          Shri Subodh Kant Sahai – Convener 
 
Members 
 
2 Shri K. Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
3 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
4 Shri Prabodh Panda 
5 Shri S. Semmalai 
6 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
7 Smt. Annu Tandon 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
       1. Shri M. Louis Martin              -        Joint Secretary 
       2. Smt. Anita B. Panda    -   Director 
       3. Shri Srinavasulu Gunda        -         Additional Director 
       4.   Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar    -   Deputy Sec retary 
       5. Shri U.C. Bharadwa              -        Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  of the Study Group of the 
Committee on Estimates to the second sitting. The S tudy Group took up for 
consideration the following draft Chapter-I of Action Taken Reports: 
 (i) *** *** *** *** *** ***;*** *** *** *** *** ** *  
 
(ii) Memorandum No. 5 and draft Chapter-I of Action  Taken Report on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Repor t of the Committee on 
Estimates (2012-13) on ‘Tribal Welfare Schemes’ per taining to the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs; and 
(iii) *** *** *** *** *** ***;*** *** *** *** *** * **  
3. The Study Group approved the categorization of r eplies as shown in the 
Memorandum and also approved the draft Reports without any modification. 
 
The Study Group then adjourned 
.  

 
 
Appendix-III  
MINUTES OF TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES         
(2013-2014)  
 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18 
th  December, 2013 from 1045 hrs. 
to 1100 hrs. in Room No. 52-B, (Chairman’s Chamber) , Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
          Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
4 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
5 Shri Prabodh Panda 
6 Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu ” 
7 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
8 Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
9 Shri Jagada Nand Singh 
10 Smt. Annu Tandon 
11 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
       1   Smt. Anita B. Panda    -  Director 
       2   Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar    - Deputy Secret ary 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the 
Committee. Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
(i) *** *** *** *** *** ***;*** *** *** *** *** ***  
(ii) Action Taken Report on the Recommendations con tained in the Twenty First 
Report of the Committee on Estimates (2012-13) on ‘ Tribal Welfare Schemes’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Tribal Affairs as app roved by the Study Group of 
Committee on Estimates; 
(iii) *** *** *** *** *** ***;*** *** *** *** *** * **  
(iv) *** *** *** *** *** ***;*** *** *** *** *** ** * 
3. The Committee adopted the abovementioned Reports  without any modification. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalise the above reports after 
factual verification by the Ministries concerned and present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee then adjourned . 
  

 
 
APPENDIX IV  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE R ECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMITT EE ON ESTIMATES 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 19  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, & 19) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
12 
 
63% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply  
Percentage of total recommendations 
Nil 
0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 8, 12 & 13)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
4 
 
 
 
21% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final 
replies of Government is still awaited. 
(Sl. No. 4, 10 & 11) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
3 
 
16% 
 