           8 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD & 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
 
 
DROUGHT MANAGEMENT, FOODGRAIN 
PRODUCTION AND PRICE SITUATION 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2010-2011) 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD &  
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
 
 
DROUGHT MANAGEMENT, FOODGRAIN 
PRODUCTION AND PRICE SITUATION 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22-11-2010 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2010 / Kartika, 1932 (Saka) 
 

 
 
 
EC No. ____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price Rs.____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2004 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules o f Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press, 
Minto Road, New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
PAGE NO. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-11) 
 
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
14 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the C ommittee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
 
24 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
Government’s replies  have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
32 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final 
replies of Government are still awaited 
 
36 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Action Taken under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
for the year- 2009 - Information received from States / UTs 
upto 31.07.2009 
 
50 
II O.M. of Ministry of Consumer Affair s, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution ) 
dated the 2nd February 2010 
 
52 
III List of priority of centres proposed for construction of 
godowns by FCI during 11th Five Year Plan (2007-12) 
 
54 
IV The details of the requirement of additional storage 
capacity finalized by HLC of FCI 
56 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Commit tee on Estimates held 
on 23rd September, 2010 
 
57 
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Second (2 nd) Report of 
the Committee on Estimates (15th Lok Sabha). 
58 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-11) 
 
 
1.  Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
  Members  
 
2.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3.  Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
4.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
5.  Shri Milind Deora  
6.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
7.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
8.  Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi  
9.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
11.  Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
12.  Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam  
13.  Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
14.  Smt. Ranee Narah  
15.  Shri Prabodh Panda  
16.  Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
17.  Shri Kabindra Purkayastha  
18.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
19.  Shri K. Jaya Surya Prakash Reddy  
20.  Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy  
21.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
22.  Shri S. Semmalai  
23.  Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
24.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma  
25.  Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh  
26.  Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
27.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
28.  Shri Lalji Tandon  
29.  Shri Manish Tewari  
30.  Shri K.C. Venugopal  
  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.        Shri U.S. Saxena    -         Joint Secretary   
 2.        Smt. Anita B. Panda           -         Additional Director  
 3. Shri Janmesh Singh    - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2010-11) having been authorized by 
the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Eighth Report on 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in t he Second 
Report of the Committee ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘ Drought Management, 
Foodgrain Production and Price Situation ’ pertaining to Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution.  
 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabh a on 24th November, 2009. The 
Government furnished their replies indicating action taken on the recommendations 
contained in the Report on 23rd April, 2010 (Department of Consumer Affairs) and 28th 
June, 2010 (Department of Food & Public Distribution). The draft report was considered 
and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 23rd September, 2010.  
 
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of Committee on Estimates ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
18th November, 2010              
Kartika 27,1932(Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)  

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1. This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report (Fif teenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
„Drought Management, Foodgrain Production and Price Situation‟ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution. 
 
1.2 The Second Report (F ifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 24th 
November, 2009. It contained 21 observations/recommendations. Action Taken Notes on 
these observ ations/recommendations were received from the Department of Consumer 
Affairs on 23rd April, 2010 and from Department of Food & Public Distribution  on 28th June, 
2010. 
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos: 3.8, 3.9, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.17 
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government‟s reply: 
 Sl. Nos: 3.3, 3.10, 3.15, 3.16, 3.18, 3.21 
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which Government‟s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos: 3.2, 3.5 
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final reply of Government is still 
awaited: 
Sl. Nos: 3.4, 3.6, 3.7, 3.14, 3.19, 3.20, 3.22 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 

2 
 
Reviewing role & functions of Price Monitoring Cell  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 3.2) 
 
1.5 The Committee recommended as below:-  
The Committee note that there is a Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) in the Department 
of Consumer Affairs to monitor the availability and prices of 17 essential commodities in 
the country including rice, wheat, atta, gram dal, tur d al, urad dal, onion, potato and sugar. 
Wholesale and retail prices are obtained by PMC from the State Food and Civil Supplies 
Departments. The cell is merely collecting and disseminating information pertaining to the 
prices of essential commodities. Even i n this role, the Committee find deficiency. For 
instance, potato is one of the items being monitored by the cell. The prices of potatoes has 
suddenly risen in recent months. The Secretary, Consumer Affairs, informed the 
Committee in regard to its availabil ity that „some people‟ are saying that the stocks of 
potatoes are sufficient and that „some people‟are saying that the excess quantity of 
potatoes exists. The Committee regret to note that the Secretary, Consumer Affairs is not 
aware of the availability po sition of potatoes when its retail prices are sky -rocketing. When 
PMC is working under him, he should have been able to provide exact information on 
availability of potatoes in the country. The above instance is sufficient to show that PMC is 
merely monito ring the prices of those essential commodities. In Committee‟s view, the 
exact role which should be played by PMC is monitoring of demand and availability 
position of essential commodities, its effects on prices and initiating necessary corrective 
steps in  coordination with the department concerned in a time bound manner. They, 
therefore recommend that the role of PMC should be redefined in the wake of current 
situation of price rise and it should be headed by an officer of the rank of Secretary 
exclusively for the purpose. He should be compressed to take necessary steps for 
controlling the prices of essential commodities. 
  
1.6  In their action taken reply, the Ministry  of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution have stated as follows:-  
Estimates on potato area and production are given by NHRDF and  Directorate of 
Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture .  During 2008 -09, there was discrepancy 
in the estimates of potato production provided by NHRDF and the trade sources. As per 
the NHRDF reports total production during the year 2008 -09 was estimated at 311.27 lakh 

3 
 
tonnes compared to the previous year‟s production of 304.42 lakh tonnes. However, trade 
sources reported a lower production of potato. Hence exact estimates of availabili ty of 
potato are not available. 
 
  The Price Monitoring Cell of the Department of Consumer Affairs is entrusted, with 
the task of monitoring of the prices and availability position of 17 essential commodities in 
the country viz., rice, wheat, atta, gram dal, tur/arhar dal, moong dal, masoor dal, urad dal, 
tea, milk, sugar, vanaspati, mustard oil, groundnut oil, potato, onion and salt, based on the 
information received from the State Food and Civil Supplies Departments. Information on 
Retail Prices is rece ived on daily basis from 27 centres of the country. Similarly, 
information on Wholesale Prices is received from 37 centres of the country on weekly 
basis. Despite the deficiency of staff, the Price Monitoring Cell studied the international 
and domestic mar ket trends of essential commodities from various sources and this 
analysis was incorporated in the Notes prepared for the High Level Meetings that were 
held regularly to enable the Committees to arrive at considered policy decisions in a time 
bound manner.  
 
  It is not possible to control the prices of essential commodities as prices are 
determined by the forces of demand and supply and vary at different markets and 
locations. It is not practically possible to bring uniformity in prices of essential commod ities 
across different states on account of the transportation and handling costs and various 
taxes levied by different State Governments, as well as the conditions of demand and 
supply that vary from place to place. In a market driven economy, State Gover nments can 
better influence the prices of essential commodities by intervening in the market by selling 
these essential commodities at specific retail outlets at prices below the prevailing market 
prices. During the periodic meetings with the State Governm ents and UT Administrations, 
they were requested to initiate steps to bring down the prices. It has also been reiterated 
by the Minister for Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution and the Prime Minister, 
that the State Governments have an important  role in checking the rise in the prices of 
essential commodities through a set of administrative and regulatory measures.  
 
  In this context the States have to take pro active measures. This has been done by 

4 
 
some State Governments. For instance, few State Governments like Maharashtra and Goa 
had taken steps to make available vegetables, particularly, potato and onion, to consumers 
at prices that were lower than market rates, when their prices were ruling high last year; in 
Maharashtra, market cess and sup ervision fee was waived for vegetables sold in retail in 
the APMC area by farmers groups, cooperatives and consumer societies; in Goa, mobile 
units are engaged in selling potato and onion and other vegetables at prices lower by     
`3-`4 per kg with the state government bearing the subsidy.  Delhi Government also 
intervened directly by supplying pulses and atta at lower rates through various outlets. 
 
1.7 In view of the rising prices of essential  commodities and the need for a better 
monitoring of the same , the Committee had  recommended that role of Price 
Monitoring Cell (PMC) in the Ministry should be enlarged  so as to move beyond 
merely collating data  regarding retail and wholesale prices  from various centres of 
the country on a daily/weekly basis.  They feel that this raw data is of hardly any use 
unless it is seen as an input in policy intervention and this intervention has to come 
at a right time.  Though the Government has not felt the need to vest PMC with more 
powers to control/check the rise in pric es of essential commodities, the Committee 
feel that the Issue of Price Rise needs constant and independent monitoring at the 
Ministry’s level and regular corrective action.  Therefore the Committee would like to 
reiterate that the technical and administra tive capacity of the PMC should be 
strengthened and its brief should be enlarged so as to enable it to play a proactive 
role in the matter. 
Further, t he Committee would like to emphasize that  Government cannot 
shirk its responsibility, which is to insulate  the poor from unprecedented hike in 
prices of essential commodities. As per their Action Taken reply the Ministry have 
taken a stand that it is not possible to control the prices of essential commodities as 
prices are determined by the forces of demand & supply.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that forces of demand & supply are not being allowed to operate in a 
healthy manner due to distortions created by market menaces like hoarding, black 
marketeering etc. It is too well-known a fact that the middlemen , hoarders and black 
marketeers create an artificial shortage of essential commodities, control the market 
and usurp the largest chunk of the profits out of the resultant price hikes.  The 

5 
 
Committee feel that the role of the Government is indispensa ble for removing these 
distortions.  The Committee would also like to reiterate the urgent need  of the 
Centre & State  Governments coordinating their efforts to check price rise.   In this 
regard, the Committee understand that a Standing Core Group under the  
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Prime Minister has already been deliberating on the 
matter, and it is hoped that Government would extract better compliance from the 
State Governments.  The Committee would like to be apprised about important 
deliberations of this Core Group.  At the same time, the Committee urge the Central 
Ministry to reiterate their suggestion to various State Governments and UT 
Administrations to use the powers under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 to 
impose stock or turnover limits for vari ous commodities like pulses, rice, sugar, 
edible oil etc. and penalize those who hold these commodities in excess of the limit.  
States, which have not done so, should be made to explain before the Standing 
Core Group of Ministers.  Besides, as the Central  Government monitors the action 
taken by States in implementing the provisions of the Act, the Committee 
recommend to the Ministry that a strategy paper can be shared with the States for 
identifying the priority interventions within the ambit of the Act so  that the price rise 
could be contained and brought to a level at which the poor people of the country 
are able, at least, to afford a basic meal. 
  

6 
 
Better implementation of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.5) 
 
1.8 The Committee recommended as below:-  
The Committee regret  to note that effectiveness of Essential Commodities Act has 
been diluted.  They learnt that two central notifications were issued on 15.02.2002 and 
16.06.2002 for removing the licensing requirements, s tock limits and movement 
restrictions on essential commodities which were specified in the Act.  Subsequent to the 
issue of these notifications, there was rise in prices of essential commodities and the 
Government had to impose restrictions by keeping in a beyance some of the provisions of 
the Central Order dated 15.02.2002 in respect of pulses, edible oils, edible oilseeds, rice, 
paddy and sugar.  Restrictions on sugar are valid till 9.1.2010 and the restrictions on other 
five items were valid upto 30.9.200 9.  These restriction orders are proposed to be 
extended beyond the validity period and the matter has been referred to the Cabinet.  In 
Committee‟s view such ad hoc measures will not result in decrease of prices of essential 
commodities.  It is imperative  to come to a permanent solution urgently to this issue which 
involve serious implications.  Interests of the people of this country cannot be 
compromised under any circumstances.  To protect their interests, Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955 should be imple mented in letter and spirit.  The Commit tee, therefore, 
recommend that a comprehensive review of the effect of the above mentioned notifications 
should be undertaken immediately.  Based on the review, a permanent notification 
withdrawing the provisions of the central orders dated 15.02.2002 and 16.06.2002 should 
be issued so as to take effective action against those who indulge in artificial price hike by 
resorting to hoarding, etc. in violation of Essential Commodities Act, 1955. 
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
The validity of the orders keeping in abeyance certain provisions of Central Orders 
dated 15.02. 2002 and 16.06.2003 have since been extended and these orders are 
presently valid till 30.09.2010, in respect of p ulses, edible oils, edible oilseeds, rice, paddy 
and sugar.  Wheat as a commodity has been withdrawn from the ambit of the orders w.e.f. 
01.04.2009, in view of the comfortable availability of the commodity.  
 

7 
 
The Committee have recommended that a comprehen sive review of the effect of 
the above mentioned Notifications should be undertaken immediately and based on the 
review a permanent notification withdrawing the provisions of Central Orders dated 
15.02.2002 and 16.06.2003 should be issued. In this regard i t is submitted that a 
Conference of Chief Ministers on Prices of essential commodities was held on 06.02.2010 
under the chairmanship of Hon‟ble Prime Minister.  It was recognized by this Conference 
that the prime concern of the Government was the insulatio n of the poor and the 
vulnerable from adverse price movements.  This responsibility has to be shared b y the 
Government at the Centre and in the States as coordinated approach to be adopted to 
tackle the issue.  The Conference recommended the constitution o f a Core Group of State 
Chief Ministers and concerned Central Ministers.  This Core Group will deliberate on and 
recommend measure to, inter -alia, better implementation of and amendment to Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955. The Standing Core Group has since been constituted and the 
First meeting of the Core Group was held on 08.04.2010 under the Chairmanship of the 
Hon‟ble Prime Minister. The suggestions of the States/UTs on the issue relating to 
amendment of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 were placed before the Core Group. 
 
1.10 The Committee are  unhappy at reply  of the Government which shows a lack 
of urgency and seriousness on their part to tackle the price rise.  It is really sad that 
the Government is taking recourse to adhoc measures .  The Committee is 
distressed to note that instead of doing away with the afore  mentioned notifications 
forthwith, it is merely keeping their applicability in abeyance.  It has been well 
documented that the prices of various commodities soared after these changes 
were notified.  The Committee feel that  the Core Group constituted for the purpose 
must come out with effective suggestions on better implementation of the EC Act, 
otherwise it will lead to further price escalation, and the consequent hardships to 
the poor people of the country. 
The Committee have been time and again emphasizing that t he menace of 
rising prices can be tackled only through concerted efforts of the Centre & and the 
States.  The Core Group of the Government should prevail upon the State 
Governments to implement the Essential Commodities Act in letter & spirit.  Various 

8 
 
unscrupulous middlemen are taking advantage of the indifferent attitude of the 
Government.  They are manipulating  prices by withholding s tocks.  The Committee 
is of the considered view that  through better utilization of the Essent ial 
Commodities Act & curbing / checking the activities of various middlemen, the huge 
differentials between farm-gate and retail prices could be checked.   In this regard, 
the Committee would like to express their r egret over the lax implementation of the 
Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of Supply of Essential Commodities 
Act, 1980. The low rate of arrests & convictions made under this Act is unacceptable 
to them in view of widespread cases of non -availability of essential commodities at 
reasonable prices in the recent past.   The Committee thus recommend that the 
Ministry should ensure better enforcement of the two Acts by the State 
Governments through the said Core Group. They would also like to be appr ised of 
the number of meetings of the Core Group held so far, their recommendations and 
action taken on these by the Government. 
  

9 
 
Lack of Storage Facilities 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 3.22) 
 
1.11 The Committee recommended as below:-  
The Committee note that 15.34 lakh tonnes of foodgrains were stored under CAP 
(covered and plinth) system in open space, as on 15.08.2009, in various States in the 
country.  Out of this about 9.99 lakh tonnes of foodgrains are stored under CAP in Punjab 
and Haryana alone.  The Committee note that a plan scheme has been formulated by the 
Government to build and increase the storage capacity for storage of foodgrains by FCI in 
the country.  An amount of `291 crore was proposed by the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution for the implementation of the scheme.  However, Planning Commission 
had approved only an outlay of `149 crore.  A quantum of 20,000 metric tonnes of wheat 
and rice was declared as damaged during 2008 -09.  One of the main reasons for this 
damage was the prolonged storage of foodgrains in open space under CAP system.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that this issue should be taken up at the highest level 
with the Planning Commission for the allocation of the amount proposed by the 
Department.  Construction of godowns by FCI either by its own or in collaboration with 
private sector should be taken up by the Government on priority basis.  Necessary steps 
should also be taken to avoid damage of foodgrains stored in the custody of FCI, CWC, 
SWCs including overhaul and repair of existing godowns, installation of modern 
equipments in order to contain moisture content of foodgrains and to prevent destruction of 
foodgrains by rodents and other biotic and abiotic factors.  
 
1.12 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 Under the Plan Scheme for construction of storage godowns the Ministry had 
initially proposed a total outlay  of `291 crores out of which `87.92 crores and `1.12 crore 
was proposed for the NE States and J& K respectively.   However, the Planning 
Commission approved an outlay of `149 crores only, out of which `125 crores is to be 
released as equity for FCI and `24 crores to North Eastern States as Grants in Aid. 
 
 The FCI has prepared a shelf off project to es tablish new godowns of capacity 
totaling 3.41 lakh tonnes with an estimated construction cost of `164 crores (without land 
cost) in various States during 11 th Five Year Plan (2007 -12). The details are given at 

10 
 
Annexure-III.  The Planning Commission has how ever allocated an amount of `125 
crores for FCI.   The actual number of godowns taken up out of this allocation will depend 
on the availability of land.  
 
 To bridge the storage gap, this Department has formulated a scheme for 
construction of godowns through private entrepreneurs.   The proposals for creation of 
storage capacity in the various States are considered by the State Level Committee (SLC), 
and are finally approved by the High Level Committee (HLC) of FCI.  The HLC has given 
its approval for construction of storage godowns for a capacity of 127.65 lakh tonnes.  The 
State-wise details of storage capacity approved by HLC are given at Annexure-IV.  FCI 
will offer a guarantee of 7 years for construction of new godowns under the Scheme.  The 
godown is to be taken on hire from Private parties through CWC/SWCs (which will be the 
implementing agency). 
 
    In order to ensure expeditious construction of godowns, the Guarantee Scheme has 
been reviewed and it has been decided that wherever CWC and SWCs have land and if 
this is at the identified locations and within storage capacity finalized, CWC/SWCs may 
construct godowns on priority for which FCI will provide 6 years Guarantee.  CWC/SWCs 
have already started construction of 5.87 lakh tonnes of storage capacity.  
 
 There are well defined quality control norms specified by the Government for 
procurement of good quality foodgrains for distribution under TPDS, similarly there is a 
well established procedure to avoid damage of foodgrains stored by FCI.   
 
  Prior to commencement of Rabi and Kharif Procurement Seasons, the Department 
of Food & Public Distribution formulates uniform specifications for procurement of good 
quality foodgrains for the Central Pool. These uniform specifications are circulated to FCI, 
all State Governments and their agencies, with the instructions to ensure that foodgrains 
procured strictly conforms to uniform specifications. 
 
Facilities for cleaning and drying of foodgrains are provided at the procurement 
centres by State Governments t o ensure good quality foodgrains well within the uniform 

11 
 
specifications are procured by FCI and State agencies. Moisture meter, physical analysis 
kits, etc. are also provided at the procurement centres. Instructions are also issued that 
proper stitching an d stenciling on grain bags should be carried out.  Dunnage material, 
tarpaulin and other materials for safe storage of procured food stocks are also provided.  
The Quality Control officers of FCI and State Governments regularly monitor the quality of 
foodgrains at the time of procurement. 
 
Samples of procured foodgrains are drawn from the procurement centres and are 
got analyzed in the laboratories to know their physical quality parameters including 
moisture content.  Discrepancies, if any, observed in the quality of procured foodgrains are 
immediately brought to the notice of concerned authorities of the FCI and State 
Governments for taking immediate remedial measures.  
 
 Procured foodgrains are stored in covered godowns as well as under CAP (Covered 
& Plinth) storage (wheat and paddy only) for varying periods.  During storage, scientific 
code of practices for safe storage of foodgrains are adopted by FCI and State agencies.  
Regular prophylactic and curative treatments are carried out for the control o f insect pests.  
Proper aeration, cleaning and brushing of foodgrains are also carried out regularly.   
 
 Quality Control officers of FCI and State agencies regularly monitor the quality of 
foodgrains including category of foodgrains and insect infestation , if any, and suggest 
immediate remedial measures.  These inspections and remedial measures are displayed 
on the stack card of each stack in the godown. 
 
  Similarly, at the time of distribution of foodgrains to States/UTs, there is a well 
defined procedure of joint inspection/sampling of the stocks by State Government authority 
and FCI to ensure that only good quality foodgrains conforming to PFA Standards are 
issued under Targetted Public Distribution System (PDS) and other welfare schemes.   
 
Wherever in cidence of distribution of poor quality foodgrains to consumers are 
brought to the notice, action is taken against the officials found responsible. 
 

12 
 
1.13 Though the Government had submitted a detailed reply to the Committee’s 
recommendation on the shortage  of storage facilities, the Committee are not 
impressed in view of a large number of reports on the rotting of staggering quantity 
of foodgrains lying in CAP facilities due to rains and floods in Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Uttarakhand, Haryana and U.P. Of late, me dia have  highlighted several such  
incidents and the Hon’ble Supreme Court has also reprimanded the Government for 
laxity. The Committee are of the opinion that the Government should have taken 
necessary proactive measures in augmenting their storage facilities, keeping in 
view the burgeoning foodgrain procurement requirements under the Food Security 
Act, rather than waiting for the crisis to precipitate. Now, as the Government has 
understood to have started certain sche mes to augment storage capacity,  the 
Committee desire that these schemes/programmes should be expedited  and the 
construction of proper godowns for storage must be completed on war footing to 
prevent further loss.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress 
of the scheme s and storage facilities created during the current year at the action 
taken stage.   Meanwhile, the Committee are of the view that t here is still 
considerable scope for making the storage of foodgrains more realistic and 
effective.  The Ministry should dev ice a way of calculating the State wise/year wise 
demand for storage space, fix  targets accordingly and thereafter proceed for 
construction of godowns in a planned manner.   This planning should be done with 
inputs from States and concerned agencies at vari ous levels .  Private players 
should be further incentivized to play a proactive role in augmenting storage 
capacity.  The Committee are of the considered view that the Government should 
provide soft loans at affordable rates and subsidies to the private players to set up 
godowns.  
The Committee feel  that the issue of proper procurement should also be 
addressed by the Government since it is the first step towards a healthy scientific 
management of foodgrains and fair remunerati on to the farmers.  At various places  
instances of agents acting in collusion with the FCI officials  and procuring 
foodgrains, thus leading to denial of MSP to the farmers  have come into light .  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should be vigilant to ensure 

13 
 
that agents and middlemen are not involved in the procurement of foodgrains from 
the farmers. 
The Committee would also like to express their anguish at the improper 
implementation of Quality Control Measures.  Th e nexus between officials and 
private traders  to overstep the quality control requirements is well -known.  
Therefore  the Committee urge the Ministry to take stringent measures and penalize 
those found guilty of indulging in such activities with strict punishment. Further, the 
Committee would like to point out that it is high time that the Government 
streamlined the entire chain of Procurement, Storage, Transportation & Distribution 
of food grains to ensure timely availability of quality foodgrains to the people. At the 
same time, in view of the Ministry’s stand about press reports being exaggerated, 
the Committee also feel that the Ministry must activate their PR mechanism and 
issue press notes in case false or exaggerated reports appear in the public domai n 
because their image stands severely dented today due to the recent media 
onslaught on the rotting of foodgrains. The Committee also await the outcome of 
the various schemes announced by the Government to enhance its storage facilities 
at the action taken stage.  
 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.8) 
 
The Committee notes that futures’ trading gives the advance and aggregated 
information of the likely price scenario of a particular commodity at future date. As 
such, there are possibilities that futures trading may spawn excessive speculation 
and cause ar tificial price rise. Even the Expert Committee appointed by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs has concluded that no strong conclusion can be 
drawn on whether introduction of futures trade is associated with decrease or 
increase in spot price volatility. T he Expert Committee did not give 100% green 
signal for futures trading. Since, food security of the country is at stake, the 
Committee recommends that futures trading in wheat, rice, tur, urad dal and sugar 
should be banned till the country achieves self s ufficiency in the production of 
these items on a continuous basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  The Estimates Committee has very rightly observed that futures‟ trading gives 
advance and aggregated information of the likely price scenario of a particular commodity 
at a future date.  However, it apprehends that there are possibilities that futures trad ing 
may spawn excessive speculation and cause artificial price rise.  However, in a well 
regulated market, excessive speculation can be prevented through effective use of the 
relevant regulatory tools by the Regulator.  And that is exactly what the Forward  Markets 
Commission the Regulator of commodity market has been doing quite effectively. That is 
why the Abhijit Sen Committee did not find any evidence to suggest that the futures market 
was responsible for the price rise. However, the committee did not dr aw any firm 
conclusion about spot price volatility vis -a –vis futures trading because of the limited data 
(2.5 years only) available on futures trading as it was quite new then. Three years have 
passed since then and on the basis of the last 6 years‟ data,  it can be said that there is no 
evidence of the futures trading causing any inflation.  

15 
 
 
 Futures‟ trading in a commodity is a mechanism for price discovery and price risk 
management and not a mechanism to control the prices nor is it responsible for pric e rise 
in any commodity. The prices of any commodity are governed by the physical demand and 
supply factors. Futures markets are, therefore, in no way responsible for the inflationary 
pressure on the prices of the commodities. Price information emanating f rom the futures 
market, however, can be used by policy makers to take corrective policy initiatives for 
supply side or demand side interventions to bridge the supply-demand gap. 
 
 Futures trading in wheat, tur, urad and rice, were suspended in January/Febr uary 
2007. The suspension of futures trading in wheat was revoked on 15 th May 2009. 
Suspension of the other three commodities continues. Futures‟ trading in these 
commodities was suspended as an abundant caution to address the then perception in 
some quart ers that futures‟ trading in commodities has an inflationary pressure on the 
prices of these commodities (the perception has been later proved to be incorrect). Futures 
trading in sugar which was suspended on 26 th May 2009 for a period upto 31 st December 
2009 has been extended till 30th September 2010. 
 
 The prices of these commodities after suspension of futures trading did not show 
any declines. On the other hand, they increased substantially after suspension of futures 
trading as will be evident from the facts given below: 
 
  Spot price of rice increased from `1077.90 per 100 Kg (on 27th February 2007, the 
day of suspension from the futures markets) to a high of `1632.05   (on 27th 
January 2009) and is presently at `1580.35 (on 29th March 2010).  
 Spot price of urad increased from `3550.70 per 100 Kg(on 23rd  January 2007,  the 
day of its suspension from futures markets) to a high of `6000 (on 7th November 
2009) and is presently at `4921.75 (on 29th March 2010).  
 Spot prices of arhar (tur) increased from `2337.20 per 100 Kg (on 23rd  January 
2007, the day of its suspension from futures markets) to a high of `6068.75 (on 11th 
July 2009) and is presently at `4437.50 (on 29th March 2010).  

16 
 
 Spot price of sugar increased from `2263.90 per 100 Kg -(on 26th May 2009 , the 
day of its suspension from futures markets) to a high of `4063.50 ( on 7th January 
2010)  and is presently at `3033.45 (on 29th March 2010)  
 As far as wheat is concerned, the supply situation in wheat is quite comfortable 
(production in 07-08, 08-09 and 09-10 has been 78.57 million tons, 80.68 million tons and 
80.28 million tons (estimate) respectively). The buffer stocks of Government are also very 
comfortable. Even otherwise also, wheat is a broad commodity and barring a few 
occasions, the producti on has been sufficient to cater to the demand. The marginal 
shortfalls, whenever there, can always be made up by imports as wheat is a global 
commodity and is more easily available. Besides, presently wheat futures and spot prices 
are marginally above MSP.  There is, therefore, no case for suspending wheat from the 
futures market.   
 
  Except wheat, futures trading is already banned in all other commodities referred to 
in the report of the Committee.  In the case of wheat, a conscious decision was taken to 
revoke the ban as indicated ab ove.  At present, there is no untoward movement in wheat 
prices.  The situation is constantly monitored and FMC would take necessary action as 
considered appropriate. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 3.9) 
 
The Committee note with concern that about 2 lakh tonnes of imported pulses 
are lying in and around Tuticorn and Mumbai Ports. As the domestic production of 
pulses is much less than the consumption, the country is importing pulses at higher 
cost to meet th e requirements of the people. Prices of pulses, particularly that of 
Arhar and Urad  are already very high in the country. Permission to store such large 
quantities of pulses in the vicinity of the ports would further lead to availability 
constraints and f urther price rise. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
regular inspections should be conducted by the authorities concerned and strict 
action taken against those importers who store essential commodities, after import, 
in such large quantities in and around the ports and even other places. All the ports 

17 
 
should also be instructed to ensure immediate movement of pulses and sugar 
imported through their ports. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  In view of the increasing prices of essential commodities particularly  Sugar and 
Pulses and to discourage storage of these commodities in the Port area including licensed 
area after import, punitive demurrage charges/license fee in respect of Sugar and Pulses 
have been imposed. For cargo that is stored beyond 21 days, four t imes the rate 
applicable after the free period in the port is charged; No such penalty exists for yellow 
peas and raw sugar.  Ports are taking all possible measures to ensure immediate 
evacuation of essential commodities by Rail by keeping close coordinati on with them. The 
4 agencies viz. PEC, MMTC, STC and NAFED make arrangements for safe storage of 
imported pulses in the Port warehouses, Central Ware house Corporations/ State Ware 
house Corporations. The stocks of imported pulses are generally cleared by the 4 
agencies within the prescribed time period.  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 3.11) 
  
The Committee note with satisfaction that the Central Pool of stocks of wheat 
and rice are quite comfortable.  Country witnessed record production of both wheat 
and rice during the previous season.  As a result, opening balance for the current 
season for both wheat and rice was very comfortable.  However, if the production of 
rice during the current khariff season is less than the requirements due to drought 
etc., the Government propose to consider import of rice to increase its availability in 
the market.  Reduction of impo rt duty on rice is under consideration.  The 
Committee find that this ‘under consideration’ affair  is very often a lengthy and 
cumbersome procedure.   By the time a decision is taken by the Government, the 
situation goes out of control and the Government finally react in a knee-jerk manner.  
As the people are the ultimate sufferers  in such situations, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should take advance action to assess the 

18 
 
expected production of rice during khariff 2009 -10 and appropriate measu res 
including import of rice should be initiated on time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Record procurement of 287.36 and 336.84 lakh  tonnes of rice have been made 
during Kharif Marketing Season 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 respectively.  The procurement of 
rice is 280.60 lakh tonnes in current Kharif Marketing Season 2009 -10 as on 24 th May, 
2010 against the estimated procurement of 260 lakh  tonnes of rice, for the entire KMS 
2009-10 (i.e., till September, 2010).  FCI has informed that the procurement during KMS 
2009-10 may be around 320 lakh tonnes.  The stocks of rice in the Central Pool are 
sufficient to meet the requirement of TPDS and ot her Welfare Schemes at current level of 
allocation.  Hence, at present there is no need to undertake import of rice for the Central 
Pool. 
 
In order to increase the availability of rice in the country as well as to contain the 
rise in prices, Government has allowed duty free import of rice.  Further, the ban on export 
of non-basmati rice has been continued.  The rice and wheat situation is reviewed by the 
Government regularly. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 3.12) 
  
 The Committee are  not convinced with the argument that domestic prices of 
wheat and rice are linked to international prices even when the country is self -
sufficient in these essential commodities.  In this regard, the contention of the 
Ministry that the open market prices are affected by many factors viz. production, 
procurement, stocks, speculative trading by private traders due to variation in 
international prices etc. is not acceptable to the Committee.  When a commodity is 
domestically produced in adequate quantum and i ts availability is sufficient to meet 
the requirements of the people, then there is no question of domestic prices getting 
affected by the global outlook.  It is the duty of the Government to protect the 
people from such unscrupulous elements which indulge  in artificial price hike of 
essential commodities.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 

19 
 
should bring in necessary controls in regard to insulation of domestic prices from 
the effects of international prices when a commodity is availabl e in sufficient 
quantity domestically to meet the requirements of the people.  Strict action should 
be taken against those middlemen who indulge in speculative hike of prices under 
the plea of global outlook. 
 
Reply of the Government 
India has had record p roduction of wheat during Rabi Marketing Season 2008 -09 
and 2009-10 and sufficient quantum of foodgrains has been procured by Government in 
order to meet the requirement of TPDS and other welfare schemes. The steps taken by 
Government to curb speculative price rise are as follows:-  
(i) Powers have been vested with State Governments for taking action under 
the provisions of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Prevention of Black 
marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980. 
(ii) To enable the State Governments/UT Administrations to take effective action 
for undertaking de-hoarding operations under the essential Commodities Act, 1955, 
it was decided to enable State Governments to impose stockholding limits by 
keeping in abeyance so me provisions of the Central Order dated 15.2.2002 in 
respect of pulses, edible oils, edible oilseeds, rice and paddy for the period up to 
30.09.2010.  In respect of sugar, the Central Government has also issued orders 
providing for stock-holding/ turnover limits which are as follows: -  
Stockholding: (i) in Kolkata and extended area –  
(a) recognized dealers who import sugar from outside West Bengal - 10, 
000 quintals; 
(b) other recognized dealers – 2000 quintals  
Turnover – No dealer can hold the stock of sugar for a period 
exceeding 30 days from the date of receipt by him of such stock. 
(iii)  The details of the raids conducted, value of goods confiscated and persons 
booked for violation of rules under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, during the 
year 2009 as reported by State Governments/UT Administrations are at Annexure-
I. 

20 
 
(iv) The State Governments/ UT Administrations are empowered to detain such 
persons under the Prevention of Black marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980, whose activities are found to be prejudicial to the 
maintenance of supplies of commodities essential to the community.  Details of 
detention orders issued under the said Act and as reported to the Central 
Government by the State Governments/ UT Administra tions during the year 2009 
are given below:-  
 
Name of the State 2009 
Gujarat 31 
Tamil Nadu 112 
Orissa 02 
Maharashtra 02 
Total 147 
 
 (v) The State Governments/ UT Administrations have been repeatedly 
requested to strictly enforce both the Acts and also monitor such enforcements. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 3.13) 
 
 The Committee note that the Food Corporation of India on the instructions 
from the government of India has been undertaking sale of wheat at pre -determined  
prices in the open market from time to time to have a moderating influence on the 
Open market Prices.  In order to check the inflationary trends in the food economy, 
the Central government proposes to release 30 lakh tonnes of wheat and 15 lakh 
tonnes of rice under this open market sale scheme during 2009 -10.  These releases 
were proposed to be effected  between September 2009 to March 2010.  However, 
since the briefing of the Committee on the subject on 28.8.2009 till the second 
evidence on 05.10.2009, the scheme was at proposal stage only and the Department 
had given the replies such as state –wise alloc ations were being finalized and the 
detailed guidelines of release of wheat and rice under OMSS, 2009 -10 are being 

21 
 
finalized etc.  Quick decisions and effective implementation of the decisions taken is 
the need of the hour to address the issue of present i nflationary trends in the food 
economy.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that immediate decisions should 
be taken on allocations to state, time and place of release of foodgrains and the 
issue price.  The release of wheat and rice should commence witho ut any further 
loss of time.  Action taken in this regard should be intimated to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Open Market Sale Scheme (Domestic) for wheat was introduced in October 
1993.  Various pricing patterns like State -wise, Center wi se, Zone wise etc. have been 
adopted on different pricing parameters. To check inflationary trends in food economy, 
Government has released 20 lakh MTs wheat and 10 Lakh MTs Rice to States/UT 
Governments under OMSS (D) for distribution to household consume rs during the period 
October, 2009 to March, 2010.  State/UTs Governments have also been permitted to 
convert the wheat released under OMSS(D) into atta for distribution to retail consumers.  
In addition to above, 10 lakh MTs wheat has also been allocated for sale to bulk 
consumers in various States/UTs through open tenders by FCI during the period October, 
2009 to March, 2010. 
 
 Allocation of 5 Lakh MT wheat for tender sale to small processors has also been 
made to State Governments.  10.8 Lakh MTs wheat h as been allocated for tender sale by 
FCI to bulk consumer out of expected savings from the allocation of 20 lakh tonnes to 
states for retail consumers referred above.  Further, 250 MT of wheat has been allocated 
to the Union Territory of Lakshadweep for di stribution to retail consumers out of expected 
savings from allocation of 10 lakh MT wheat made to the State Governments for 
distribution to retail consumers during January-March, 2010. 
 
In addition to this a quantity of 37400 MT wheat and 17000 MT rice un der OMSS 
(D) has been allocated to NAFED for sale to retail consumers for the month of January 
2010 to March 2010.  A quantity of 32684.21 tonnes of wheat and 11000 tonnes of rice 
under OMSS (D) have also been allocated to NCCF for the month of January 201 0 to 
March 2010. 

22 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 3.17) 
 
 The Committee note that Minimum Support Price for food crops viz. wheat 
and paddy was higher than Statutory Minimum Price (SMP ) of sugarcane in the last 
two years.  This has been stated as one of the reasons for shifting of sugarcane 
farmers to other crops.  When sugarcane farmers are not getting remunerative price 
for their crops, there is little hope that they will continue to raise the sugarcane 
crop.    Even though, SMP has been raised to `107.76 from `81.18 per quintal with 
additional recovery benefits, the Committee recommend that a comprehensive 
review of methodology of arriving at SMP should be conducted and a higher SMP 
should be fixed for cane growers so as to encourage them to raise sugarcane crops 
continuously.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 In view of increase in MSP of wheat and paddy in the recent past, to check against 
further shift in area from sugarcane and with a vie w to ensure that cultivation of sugarcane 
is not rendered unattractive and unprofitable vis -à-vis wheat and paddy so as to ensure 
adequate production of sugarcane and sugar, the Government has amended its sugarcane 
pricing policy to fix “Fair and Remunerat ive Price” (FRP) for sugarcane during 2009 -10 
sugar season instead of a Statutory Minimum Price (SMP) previously fixed by the 
Government.  Under FRP, the farmers would get an “upfront” payment of margins on 
account of profit and risk, not available under SMP.   As recommended by the Commission 
on Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP), the Government has determined a Fair & 
Remunerative Price (FRP) for sugarcane for 2009-10 sugar season at `129.84 per quintal, 
linked to a basic recovery rate of 9.5% subject to a minimum of `1.37 for every 0.1 
percentage point increase in recovery above 9.5%.  The FRP for 2009 -10 sugar season is 
50.5% higher than the all India weighted average cost of producti on and transportation of 
sugarcane of `86.27 per quintal at 9%, and therefore gives adequate margin to the 
farmers.  It is also 51% higher than the SMP for sugarcane at `81.18 per quintal for 2008 -
09 sugar season, escalated to 9.5% basic recovery rate.  Th e FRP for 2010 -11 sugar 
season has been determined at `139.12 per quintal linked to a basic recovery rate of 9.5% 

23 
 
subject to a premium of `1.46 for every 0.1 percentage point increase in recovery above 
9.5%.  
 In order to promote sugarcane production to im prove sugar availability, the Central 
Government, inter alia,  gives long -term loans from Sugar Development Fund (SDF) at  
concessional rate of interest, which at present is 4% per annum, for sugarcane 
development schemes to improve sugarcane variety and ca ne cultivation practices to 
increase cane productivity as well as recovery of sugar.  The quantum of SDF loan for the 
purpose that a sugar factory can get has been recently increased in May 2009 from `2.7 
crore to `5.4 crore.  
 Keeping in view low sugarcan e production during the last year, the Government 
also announced in July 2009,  a short term loan scheme for purchase of seeds, fertilizers 
and pesticides from SDF for cane development under which concessional loans  at 4% per 
annum of `1 to `2.5 crore is available to each sugar factory depending upon their crushing 
capacity.  This loan is required to be passed on to the farmers by the sugar mills, which in 
turn will improve sugarcane productivity and production.  
 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.3) 
 
 The Committee note that presently prices of pulses, onion and potato are 
very high in the market thereby causing severe hardships to the people.  They, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should implement vigorously Market 
Intervention Schemes in coordination with the State Governments concerned and 
NAFED to ensure reasonable price to both the growers and consumers. 
                    
Reply of the Government 
 
This relates to Ministry of Agriculture.  
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 3.10) 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs is implementing 
a scheme for distribution of imported pulses through Public Distribution System as 
a one time measure. As per the scheme, the subsidy given by the Central 
Government is limited to `10 per Kg. Moreove r, one kg of pulses is distributed to 
each family irrespective of the size of the family. The Committee consider this 
grossly inadequate in view of the large intake of pulses by the people of the country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the pulses  be distributed regularly 
through PDS and the quantum of pulses distributed be commensurate to the family 
size of the beneficiary. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The Department of Consumer Affairs operates a Scheme since November 2008, 
under which imported pulses are sold by PEC, STC, MMTC , NAFED and NCCF  to the 
State Governments for distribution under the PDS @ 1 kg per family per month at a 
subsidy of `10 per kg. The distribution may be restricted to BPL families but could cover a 

25 
 
part of APL families also, depending on the availability and distribution logistics. Since 
availability of pulses is limited, the quantity of pulses to be distributed under PDS Scheme 
cannot be enhanced. The scheme is now extended up to 31.3.2011. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 3.15) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the percentage of sugar levied on 
sugar mills for distribution under PDS, has been decreased from 65% in 1984 to 10% 
in 2009.  In view of this anticipated less production of sugar during the current year, 
levy percentage has been increased to 20% from October, 2009.  The Government’s 
stand that increase in percentage of levy s ugar would mean a higher subsidy to the 
Government is not acceptable to the Committee.  In case of imposition of 10% of 
levy sugar, 90% of the sugar production goes to open market where there is no 
price control regime.  In such a situation, price of sugar  in open market rises 
arbitrarily and uncontrollably.  As of now, most of the middle class families are not 
eligible for PDS sugar and they have to bear the brunt of artificial price rise of sugar.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the percentage o f levy sugar should be 
increased so as to distribute sugar to middle class families also through PDS.  Price 
fixed for APL families may be slightly higher than the price given to BPL families.  
This would take care of the subsidy burden of the Government a nd at the same APL 
families would get sugar at a justified price. This would also be a check on the 
market price of sugar. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Central Government, with a view to ensure better targeting, has restructured  
supply of levy sugar unde r the PDS in February, 2001 and restricted its supply to BPL 
families in the country except the North -Eastern States, Hill States and Island Territories 
where universal coverage has been allowed.  Inclusion of all categories of beneficiaries 
under the PDS in all States/UTs will go against the Government‟s policy of better targeting 
and will increase the subsidy burden of the Government. 

26 
 
Further, sugar mills supply levy sugar to the Government at a loss.  The Central 
Government determines levy sugar price pa yable to sugar mills by taking into account the 
sugarcane price as fixed under the provisions of the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966.  
Under the provisions of said Order, the Central Government fixed the Statutory Minimum 
Price (SMP) of sugarcane upto 2008 -09 sugar season.  With effect from 2009 -10 sugar 
season, the concept of SMP has been replaced by the „Fair and Remunerative Price‟ 
(FRP) which is considerably higher than the SMP.  The SMP for 2008 -09 sugar season 
was `81.18 per quintal linked to 9% with increase of `0.90 for every 0.1% point increase in 
recovery above 9% whereas the FRP for 2009-10 sugar season has been fixed at `129.84 
per quintal linked to 9.5% recovery level with increase of `1.37 for every 0.1% point 
increase in the recovery above 9.5%, which is higher by about 51%.  However, in practice, 
sugar mills generally pay cane price higher than the SMP/ FRP fixed by the Central 
Government.  As such, sugar mills suffer loss when they supply levy sugar to the 
Government.  The levy obligation on sugar factories has been increased from 10% to 20% 
in 2009 -10 sugar season with a view to make adequate levy sugar available to PDS 
beneficiaries.  In order to cover APL population, the levy obligation on sugar factories will 
have to be further enhanced.  This will constrain the capacities of sugar factories to pay 
remunerative cane price to sugarcane farmers.   
  Therefore, it is difficult to accept the recommendation of the Committee to supply 
levy sugar to all APL card-holders. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 3.16) 
 
 The Committee note that the Central Government with a view to incentivize 
improvement in productivity of sugarcane cultivation and recovery of sugar 
production has decided to assist the sugarcane growers with soft loans from Sugar 
Development Fund.  Howeve r, this loan is not directly given to sugarcane farmers.  
It is disbursed to sugar factories, who in turn, pass on the loans in case or kind to 
the sugarcane growers.  In this regard, the Government has clarified that SDF loans 
can only be given to a sugar  factory and not directly to the farmers, after the 
necessary security has been provided by the sugar factory as per the provision of 
the Sugar Development Fund Act, 1982.  In Committee’s view leaving entirely the 

27 
 
process of loan disbursement and its recov ery to the sugar mill will not be in the 
interest of farmers.  Even though there is a rule that the sugar factory shall pay a 
penal interest of 6% per annum on the amount not disbursed to the cane growers, it 
will be difficult to verify whether the loan am ount is fully disbursed to the cane 
growers.  As the present system puts the cane growers at the mercy of sugar 
factories, the Committee recommend that the loans to cane growers should be 
directly disbursed to them through banks.  If necessary, an amendmen t to the 
Sugarcane Development Fund Act, 1982 may be made in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
As per the Sugar Cess Act, 1982, cess is levied and collected on sugar produced by 
the sugar factories which is, inter alia, to be utilized for the development of the sugar 
factories, to make the sugar factories more viable and to stabilize the price of sugar.  
Accordingly, the funds are utilized for the benefit of sugar factories.  Further, the scheme 
for Short -term Cane Development loans was notifie d on 20.7.2009 for giving financial 
assistance for purchase of seeds, fertilizers and pesticides under Rule 17 -A of Sugar 
Development Fund Rules, 1983.  It is a onetime scheme in which the applications were 
required to be submitted on or before 30.11.2009 and the loans are required to be 
disbursed by 15.5.2010.  Majority of loans to the extent of budget available have already 
been disbursed.  Since the scheme has ended, it is felt that no purpose will be served in 
considering amendment to Sugar Development Fund Act at this stage especially when it 
one time scheme only.  It may, however, be reiterated that the scheme provides for 
adequate safeguards which include mandatory disbursement of fund, in cash or in kind, to 
the farmers within 90 days, payment of pen al interest @ 6% in case of default, recall of 
loan with penal interest in case of any deviation and appointment of specific monitoring 
agency separately for each individual loan, to oversee proper utilization of the loan and 
adherence to the terms and conditions of the sanction thereof. 
 
It is also not practical to monitor disbursement to and recovery of loan from farmers 
in the absence of sugar factories taking the responsibility and furnishing the requisite 
security for SDF loan.  The sugar factories are required to pass on the benefits of the cane 
development to the farmers in cash or in kind by supply of seed and fertilizers etc. within 
specified time period.  The disbursement is monitored both by the Central and the State 

28 
 
Governments. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 3.18) 
 
The Committee note that the Government is not holding any buffer stocks of 
sugar, regularly, as being done in the case of wheat and rice.  Sugar stocks are 
released by sugar mills for sale in open market.   In this regard, they note that the 
Government has conducted excise checks to check the stocks with with sugar mills 
as there were complaints that sugar mills were showing bogus sales.  During such 
raids unreleased stocks are converted into levy sugar.  This year about five lak h 
tonnes of unsold sugar by sugar mills were converted into levy sugar.  In 
Committee’s view, this is a kind of hoarding which also leads to price hike in the 
market.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that apart from conversion into levy 
sugar, punitive action should also be taken against those sugar mills which indulge 
in this kind of activities.  Moreover, excise check should be conducted invariably on 
all sugar mills instead of waiting for complaints.  The Committee further recommend 
that the Governme nt should consider holding of buffer stocks of sugar by FCI at 
least to the level of normative requirement so as to intervene timely in the case of 
shortage in the availability of sugar in the market.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  The protection of the consumer‟s interest is of prime importance.  This goal is 
sought to be achieved by the Central Government through influencing the supply of sugar 
in the market, altering tariffs on import of sugar, regulating export of sugar and makin g 
available sugar through the Public Distribution System to the targeted population.  The 
actions being taken by the Central Government in trying to influence the availability of 
sugar in the market through levy system as also operating mechanism of regulated release 
of non-levy sugar has been in vogue for a long time.  For this purpose, the monthly release 
orders specifying the quantity to be sold by each sugar mill are issued both in respect of 
levy sugar and non-levy sugar.  In order to ensure that the sugar mills sell allotted non-levy 
sugar within the validity period of the release order, it has been provided in the monthly 
release orders for sale of non -levy sugar that any quantity which remains unsold / 

29 
 
undespatched shall be converted into levy sugar.  It penalizes the defaulting sugar mills as 
the market price of non -levy sugar is much higher than levy sugar.  However, in case of 
chronic defaulting sugar mills in supplying levy sugar to the Government, punitive action 
under the provisions of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 is taken.  
 
As regards the suggestion of the Committee that the Government should consider 
holding buffer stock by FCI at least to the level of normative requirement, it is submitted 
that the Central Government creates buffer sto ck only when there is excess production of 
sugar.  The buffer stock is created with a view to stabilize sugar prices and help sugarcane 
farmers as buffer subsidy and the additional credit which sugar mills get on creation of 
buffer stock has to be utilized for payment of cane price as a first charge.  The buffer stock 
is dismantled when situation improves.   A buffer stock of 20 lac tonnes and 30 lac tonnes 
was created on 1 st May, 2007 and 1 st August, 2007, respectively, each for a period of one 
year in 200 6-07 sugar season, a surplus season.  The first buffer stock of 20 lac tonnes 
was dismantled in the last two quarters of 2007-08 season while the second buffer stock of 
30 lac tonnes was dismantled in phases when sugar production in 2008 -09 sugar season 
declined considerably.  This policy is time-tested.  
 
If the suggestion of the Committee is accepted, FCI will be holding sugar even in 
years of normal production while there may not be any need to have sugar stocks in such 
a situation. This will put burden on the resources of FCI as carrying cost is involved in 
holding stocks.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 3.21) 
 
 The Committee are not satisfied with the present system of Targeted Public 
Distribution System which does  not benefit a vast section of the society particularly 
middle class families.  Priority must be given to BPL and AAY families and there is 
no second opinion in that.  However, PDS should also benefit middle class families 
who fall in the category of Above Pov erty Line families.  At present allocations 
under APL category are made depending upon the availability of foodgrains in the 
Central Pool and the Past offtake.  The Committee feel that universalisation of PDS 

30 
 
would provide a solution to the current woes of  the PDS in the country.  In this 
regard, the Government’s apprehension that the poor household will have to pay a 
higher amount to obtain the same quantity of foodgrains is unwarranted.  The 
foodgrains and other commodities being distributed to the BPL/AAY families should 
continue to be at the same subsidized price.  The Committee recommend that two 
slabs of prices should be created for distribution of commodities under universal 
PDS.  The lower slab of prices is to be fixed for BPL/AAY families and the hi gher 
slab for APL families.  Moreover, along with foodgrains, sugar and pulses should 
also be given regularly under the Public Distribution System.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) was introduced in June, 1997 with a 
view to target the poor sections of society, as the earlier Universal Public Distribution 
System did not adequately focus on the poor and had urban bias.  At present, under 
TPDS, the level of subsidy is already 87% and 86% on wheat and rice respectively for 
AAY category.  It is 73% and 74% for wheat and rice for BPL category and it is 60% on 
wheat and rice supplied to the APL category.  This is because the Central Issue Prices 
(CIPs) for rice and wheat for AAY, BPL and APL categories have not been revised sin ce 
December, 2000, July, 2000 and July, 2002. 
 
 If the universal Public Distribution System as it existed prior to 1997 is to be 
restored, then even if allocations are made for 18.04 crore households (this number of 
households was as per estimated  populat ion by Registrar General of India as on 1 st 
March, 2000), the total annual requirement of rice and wheat at the scale of 35 kg.  per 
household per month would be 76 million tonnes.  Further, if the total ration cards issued 
by the State and UT Governments up to 31.10.2009 are considered, this number is 24.23 
crores.  At the scale of 35 kg. foodgrains per household per month, the actual requirement 
of these households would be around 102 million tonnes of wheat and rice per annum. 
 
 Procurement of such huge quantities of wheat and rice would necessitate a near 
stoppage of private trade in foodgrains in the country and operation of only Government 
procurement system.  Since procurement of rice and wheat cannot be organized at such a 

31 
 
level, their imports will become necessary.  Also the scale of issue will accordingly have to 
be reduced.  
 
 Further, in order to manage the level of subsidy, the issue prices of rice and wheat 
will have to be increased substantially from the present Central  Issue Prices (CIPs) which 
have not been revised during the last seven to nine years.  This would also mean that BPL 
and AAY families would end up not only getting much reduced scale of issue but also have 
to pay higher CIPS.  Hence Universalisation of PDS is not feasible. 
 
As regards distribution of sugar and pulses under TPDS, it is stated that from 
1.2.2001, allocation of levy sugar to States/ UTs is being made only for BPL/AAY families, 
except for North Eastern States, hilly States and island territories for which the allocation is 
being made for coverage of BPL as well as APL families.  It is expected that APL families 
will be able to buy sugar from the open market.  At present there is no proposal to include 
pulses in regular distribution under TPDS as  this too would involve huge Government 
procurement and crowding out of private trade in  pulses where domestic production is 
short of demand.  However, in order to contain price rise of pulses & edible oils, the 
Central Government imports them as per requ isitions of State/UT Governments and 
subsidizes for their distribution to consumers.   
  

32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 3.2) 
 
The Committee note that there is a Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) in the 
Department of Consumer Affairs to monitor the availability and prices of 17 
essential commodities in the country including rice, wheat, atta, gram dal, tur dal, 
urad dal, onion, potato a nd sugar. Wholesale and retail prices are obtained by PMC 
from the State Food and Civil Supplies Departments. The cell is merely collecting 
and disseminating information pertaining to the prices of essential commodities. 
Even in this role, the Committee fi nd deficiency. For instance, potato is one of the 
items being monitored by the cell. The prices of potatoes has suddenly risen in 
recent months. The Secretary, Consumer Affairs, informed the Committee in regard 
to its availability that ‘some people’ are sa ying that the stocks of potatoes are 
sufficient and that ‘some people’  are saying that the excess quantity of potatoes 
exists. The Committee regret to note that the Secretary, Consumer Affairs is not 
aware of the availability position of potatoes when its retail prices are sky-rocketing. 
When PMC is working under him, he should have been able to provide exact 
information on availability of potatoes in the country. The above instance is 
sufficient to show that PMC is merely monitoring the prices of those ess ential 
commodities. In Committee’s view, the exact role which should be played by PMC is 
monitoring of demand and availability position of essential commodities, its effects 
on prices and initiating necessary corrective steps in coordination with the 
department concerned in a time bound manner. They, therefore recommend that the 
role of PMC should be redefined in the wake of current situation of price rise and it 
should be headed by an officer of the rank of Secretary exclusively for the purpose. 
He should be compressed to take necessary steps for controlling the prices of 
essential commodities. 
  

33 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Estimates on potato area and production are given by NHRDF and  Directorate of 
Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture .  During 2008 -09, there was discrepancy 
in the estimates of potato production provided by NHRDF and the trade sources. As per 
the NHRDF reports total production during the year 2008 -09 was estimated at 311.27 lakh  
tonnes compared to the previous year‟s production of 304.42 lakh tonnes. However, trade 
sources reported a lower production of potato. Hence exact estimates of availability of 
potato are not available. 
 
  The Price Monitoring Cell of the Department of Con sumer Affairs is entrusted, with 
the task of monitoring of the prices and availability position of 17 essential commodities in 
the country viz., rice, wheat, atta, gram dal, tur/arhar dal, moong dal, masoor dal, urad dal, 
tea, milk, sugar, vanaspati, mustard oil, groundnut oil, potato, onion and salt, based on the 
information received from the State Food and Civil Supplies Departments. Information on 
Retail Prices is received on daily basis from 27 centres of the country. Similarly, 
information on Wholesale  Prices is received from 37 centres of the country on weekly 
basis. Despite the deficiency of staff, the Price Monitoring Cell studied the international 
and domestic market trends of essential commodities from various sources and this 
analysis was incorpor ated in the Notes prepared for the High Level Meetings that were 
held regularly to enable the Committees to arrive at considered policy decisions in a time 
bound manner.  
  It is not possible to control the prices of essential commodities as prices are 
determined by the forces of demand and supply and vary at different markets and 
locations. It is not practically possible to bring uniformity in prices of essential commodities 
across different states on account of the transportation and handling costs and va rious 
taxes levied by different State Governments, as well as the conditions of demand and 
supply that vary from place to place. In a market driven economy, State Governments can 
better influence the prices of essential commodities by intervening in the ma rket by selling 
these essential commodities at specific retail outlets at prices below the prevailing market 
prices. During the periodic meetings with the State Governments and UT Administrations, 
they were requested to initiate steps to bring down the pri ces. It has also been reiterated 

34 
 
by the Minister for Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution and the Prime Minister, 
that the State Governments have an important role in checking the rise in the prices of 
essential commodities through a set of administrative and regulatory measures.  
 
  In this context the States have to take pro active measures. This has been done by 
some state governments. For instance,  few state governments like Maharashtra and Goa 
had taken steps to make available vegetables, particularly, potato and onion, to consumers 
at prices that were lower than market rates, when their prices were ruling high last year; in 
Maharashtra, market cess and supervision fee was waived for vegetables sold in retail in 
the APMC area by farmers groups , cooperatives and consumer societies; in Goa, mobile 
units are engaged in selling potato and onion and other vegetables at prices lower by `3-
`4 per kg with the state government bearing the subsidy.  Delhi Government also 
intervened directly by supplying pulses and atta at lower rates through various outlets. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.5) 
 
The Committee regret to note that effectiveness of Essential Commodities Act 
has been diluted.  They learnt that two central notifications were issued on 
15.02.2002 and 16.06.2002 for removing the licensing requirements, stock limits and 
movement restricti ons on essential commodities which were specified in the Act.  
Subsequent to the issue of these notifications, there was rise in prices of essential 
commodities and the Government had to impose restrictions by keeping in 
abeyance some of the provisions of the Central Order dated 15.02.2002 in respect of 
pulses, edible oils, edible oilseeds, rice, paddy and sugar.  Restrictions on sugar are 
valid till 9.1.2010 and the restrictions on other five items were valid upto 30.9.2009.  
These restriction orders are proposed to be extended beyond the validity period and 
the matter has been referred to the Cabinet.  In Committee’s view such ad hoc 
measures will not result in decrease of prices of essential commodities.  It is 
imperative to come to a permanent solution u rgently to this issue which involve 
serious implications.  Interests of the people of this country cannot be 
compromised under any circumstances.  To protect their interests, Essential 

35 
 
Commodities Act, 1955 should be implemented in letter and spirit.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a  comprehensive review of the effect of the above 
mentioned notifications should be undertaken immediately.  Based on the review, a 
permanent notification withdrawing the provisions of the central orders dated 
15.02.2002 and 16.06.2002 should be issued so as to take effective action against 
those who indulge in artificial price hike by resorting to hoarding, etc. in violation of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The validity of the orders keeping in abeyance certain provisions of Central Orders 
dated 15.02.2002 and 16.06.2003 have since been extended and these orders are 
presently valid till 30.09.2010, in respect of pulses, edible oils, edible oilseeds, rice, paddy 
and sugar.  Wheat as a commodity has been withdrawn from the ambit of the orders w.e.f. 
01.04.2009, in view of the comfortable availability of the commodity.  
 
          The Committee have recommended that a comprehensive review of the effect of the 
above mentioned Notifications should be undertaken immediately and based on the review 
a permanent  notification withdrawing the provisions of Central Orders dated 15 .02.2002 
and 16.06.2003 should be issued. In this regard it is submitted that a Conference of Chief 
Ministers on Prices of essential commodities was held on 06.02.2010 under the 
chairmanship of Hon‟ble Prime Minister.  It was recognized by this Conference that the 
prime concern of the Government was the insulation of the poor and the vulnerable from 
adverse price movements.  This responsibility has to be shared by the Government at the 
Centre  and in the States as coordinated approach to be adopted to tackl e the issue.  The 
Conference recommended the constitution of a Core Group of State Chief Ministers and 
concerned Central Ministers.  This Core Group will deliberate on and recommend measure 
to, inter -alia, better implementation of and amendment to Essentia l Commodities Act, 
1955. The Standing Core Group has since been constituted and the First meeting of the 
Core Group was held on 08.04.2010 under the Chairmanship of the Hon‟ble Prime 
Minister. The suggestions of the States/UTs on the issue relating to amen dment of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 were placed before the Core Group. 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF GOVERNMENT  
IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.4) 
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the prices of essential 
commodities such as rice, tur dal, urad dal, gram dal, vegetables and sugar are very 
much high which has put the common man in severe hardship. They find that the 
demand and supply the ory has failed by the perceptions and speculations of the 
middlemen in the supply chain. For instance, the country is not self sufficient in the 
production of pulses and also, presently, in the production of sugarcane. As a result 
of which the country has to import pulses and sugar to large extent at a high price. 
In this regard, the Committee note that the Government has allowed duty free import 
of pulses and raw sugar. However, the prices of these essential commodities are 
still sky rocketing even after the duty free import to meet the demand and to 
augment supply. In this regard, the committee fi nd that the fixation of prices of 
essential commodities has been entirely left to market forces leaving the consumer 
at the mercy of greedy traders. Wholesalers and retailers in the supply chain decide 
the prices of essential commodities and there is no co ntrol of the Government at 
present to limit their profit margins. The situation neither favours the producers ie 
farmers nor the consumers. The producers are not getting the remunerative prices 
of their produce right at the time of crop harvesting the pric es go down resulting in 
loss to farmers and as soon as the produce reaches the market from the agricultural 
field the prices start sky-rocketing. Middlemen such as wholesalers and retailers are 
fully exploiting the situation in collusion with some concerne d authorities and 
earning huge profits by increasing the prices arbitrarily and artificially on the basis 
of speculations and perceptions. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should expeditiously come out with a new legislation for cont rolling 
the retail prices of essential commodities such as rice, wheat, pulses, edible oils, 
sugar, milk and vegetables. Provisions of the legislation should include limitation of 
profit margins of wholesalers, retailers and others in the supply chain to a  definite 
percentage, setting up of a monitoring authority for monitoring the actions of 

37 
 
middlemen such as wholesalers, retailers and others and stern action to be taken 
against those who arbitrarily hike prices of essential commodities for their own 
advantage. The action taken in this regard should be submitted to the Committee 
immediately.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  It is the endeavour of the Central Government to ensure that essential commodities 
are available to consumers at reasonable prices. In a ma rket oriented economy the prices 
are determined by the market forces of demand and supply. The direct approach to control 
the prices of essential commodities is neither feasible nor practical. Therefore, 
Government has tried to bring down the prices of ess ential commodities through indirect 
measures such as,  
 
(1)   Increasing domestic production of essential commodities. 
(2)   Facilitating imports of essential commodities in short supply.  
(3)   Protecting vulnerable sections of society through Targeted Public Distribution  
System (TPDS) and Antodaya Anna Yojna (AAY).  Under the TPDS, wheat, rice, 
sugar and kerosene oil are allocated to State Governments for distribution through 
the Fair Price Shops.  The Central Issue Price for rice and wheat has also not been 
revised since 1 -7-2002.  In addition, there are two schemes for edible oils and 
pulses, namely, distribution of imported pulses by State Governments through PDS, 
@ 1 kg per family per month at a subsidy of `10 per kg; and distribution of edible 
oils to States/UTs for distribution to ration card holders @ 1 kg per ration card per 
month at a subsidy @ `15/kg. 
(4) Empowering State Governments / UT Administrations to take effective action to  
bring out the hoarded stock of these items to ensure their availability to the common 
people at reasonable prices – by enabling the State Governments to invoke Stock 
Limits in respect of paddy, rice, pulses, sugar, edible oils and edible oilseeds under 
the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.  The validity of the Central Order has been 
extended up to 30-9-2010.  
 
  The prices of essential commodities will vary across different states on account of 

38 
 
the transportation and handling costs and various taxes levied by d ifferent State 
Governments, as well as the conditions of demand and supply that vary from place to 
place. State governments also have in place systems to watch prices and take corrective 
measures. For example, the Government of Tamil Nadu has constituted a  Price Watch 
Committee under Chairmanship of Chief Secretary; Government of Maharashtra has in 
place a Price Monitoring Cell under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary.  
 
  In a market driven economy, State Governments can better influence the prices of  
essential commodities by intervening in the market by selling these essential commodities 
at specific retail outlets at prices below the prevailing market prices. Hence, during the 
periodic meetings and through Video conference with the State Governments and UT 
Administrations, they were requested to initiate steps to bring down the prices. It has also 
been reiterated by the Minister for Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution and the 
Prime Minister, that the State Governments have an important role  in checking the rise in 
the prices of essential commodities through a set of administrative and regulatory 
measures. 
 
  This has been done by some state governments. For instance,  state governments 
like Maharashtra and Goa had taken steps to make availabl e vegetables, particularly, 
potato and onion, to consumers at prices that were lower than market rates, when their 
prices were ruling high last year; in Maharashtra, market cess and supervision fee was 
waived for vegetables sold in retail in the APMC area by farmers groups, cooperatives and 
consumer societies; in Goa, mobile units are engaged in selling potato and onion and 
other vegetables at prices lower by `3-`4 per kg with the state government bearing the 
subsidy. Delhi Government also intervened direct ly in partnership with Delhi Grain 
Merchants Association, by supplying pulses and atta at lower rates through various outlets, 
which had the necessary effect of bringing various wholesalers and retailers to toe the line 
and reduce their prices. 
 
  It was r ecognized in the recently held on 6 th February, 2010 Conference of Chief 
Ministers that the prime concern of the Government was the insulation of the poor and the 
vulnerable from adverse price movements, the responsibility of which had to be shared by 

39 
 
the Government at the Centre and in the States through a coordinated approach. The 
conference recommended the constitution of a Core Group of State Chief Ministers and 
concerned Central Ministers to deliberate on and recommend measures to: 
 
(i) Increase agricultural production and productivity(including long term policies 
for sustained agricultural  growth); 
(ii) Reduce the gap between farm gate prices and retail prices;  
(iii) Better implementation of and amendment to E.C. Act; 
(iv) Ensure better and effective delivery of essential commodities to the 
vulnerable sections of society; 
(v) Augmentation of warehousing and storage capacity (including cold chains); 
(vi) Issues relating to inputs viz. seeds/fertilizers etc. 
 
  Accordingly, a Core Group has been set up by the Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister. Its first 
meeting was held on 8th April 2010. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.6) 
 
The Committee note with concern that the Department of Consumer Affairs 
does not have exact information on the issue  of stock limiting orders by States on 
pulses, edible oils, rice, paddy and sugar.  It has been stated that 15 States have 
either actually issued stock limit orders or are in the process of issuing the same.  
Exact details should have been given in this regard.  Moreover, there is no 
uniformity in issuing stock limiting orders by States.  A few States have issued 
stock limit orders on all the above items, a few States have issued stock limit orders 
on wheat and pluses only and some have issued orders on only licensing 
requirements/stock declaration.  The Committee are of the strong view that the 
provisions of the Essential Commodities Act shou ld be implemented uniformly 
throughout the country.  In this regard, they note that the State Governments, who 
have not issued stock limiting orders, have been repeatedly requested by the 
Department to do so.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that t he issue of 

40 
 
stock limiting orders should be made mandatory for the States for receiving 
foodgrains from Central Pool. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  20 State Governments/UTs have issued stock limits for all or some of the five items 
(pulses, edible oils, edib le oilseeds, rice and paddy ) or any of the items. { Of these 20, 5 
States have issued stock limits orders in respect of all the five items; 7 States have issued 
stock limits orders in respect of four items (except paddy); 4 States have issued stock 
limits order in respect of three items; 4 States have issued stock limits orders in respect of 
one item.} 
 
          6 States have issued licensing requirements/ stock declaration orders. 9 States/UTs 
have not issued either stock limits or stock declaration / licensing requirements. 
 
           Further, in respect of sugar, the Central Government have also issued Orders 
providing for stock-holding/turnover limits which are as follows: 
 
         Stockholding:  
(i) in Kolkata and extended area – 
      
(a) recognized dealers who import sugar from outside West 
Bengal- 10,000 quintals; 
(b) other recognized dealers -2000 quintals; 
 
(ii) in other places – 2000 quintals. 
 
Turnover: No dealer can hold the stock of sugar for a period exceeding 30 days 
from  the date of receipt by him of such stock. 
 
  It is stated that 23 State Governments/ UT Administrations have issued stock limits 
in respect of Sugar. The remaining States have not issued any orders so far.  
 
  It is submitted that the defaulting State Governments/Union Territor y 
Administrations have been repeatedly requested in various fora to issue the stock limits 

41 
 
orders so that they could take effective action against those indulging in malpractices. 
Central Government Orders in this respect enabled the State Government/UTs t o impose 
stock limits on specific commodities as per local situation to prevent hoarding and 
blackmarketing. It is also pointed out that some of the State Governments/UT 
Administrations have intimated that they are non -producing States and are dependent on  
their neighbours for their needs.  Since the different States vary in their production and 
consumption patterns, it may not be possible for the Central Government to ensure 
uniform stock limits orders. The Central Government has, however, been making 
strenuous efforts to persuade the State Governments to monitor the effective 
implementation of the Essential Commodities Act. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.7) 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs does not have 
any proposal to bring in any amendment to the Essential Commodities Act at this 
stage as the Department feel that the available provisions are adequate, if properly 
implemented, to achieve the desired objectives.  However, perusal of the reasons 
furnished by a few States for the less number of prosecutions and convictions 
under the Essential Commodities Act, shows that there is a need for bringing 
necessary amendments to the Act.  The reasons such as (i) the cases detected are 
compounded instead of punishing due to large n umber of cases, (ii) difficulties of 
enforcing officials in playing dual role of launching prosecutions before the court of 
law as well as proceedings before the District Collector and (ii) Magistrate Courts 
inability to give priority to the disposal of ca ses under the Essential Commodities 
Act due to pendency of large number of criminal cases, should be liked into by the 
Department as they prove to be a hindrance for the effective implementation of the 
Act.  Particularly compounding of cases will only enco urage those persons to 
indulge in such acts again and get away with fines.  Compounding of cases ought to 
be stopped forthwith to make the Act effective.   Moreover, offences under the 
Essential Commodities Act have an impact on food security of the countr y and 
therefore speedy trial of the cases is a must.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Government should consider setting up of Special Courts in every State on 

42 
 
lines of Debt Recovery Tribunals, to hear exclusively the cases pertaining to 
Essential Commodities Act and thereby compounding of cases can be stopped and 
proceedings before the district collectors can also be brought under such special 
courts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As submitted earlier, a Conference of Chief Ministers on Prices of essential 
commodities was held on 06.02.2010 under the chairmanship of Hon‟ble Prime Minister.    
The Conference recommended the constitution of a Core Group of State Chief Ministers 
and concerned Central Minist ers.  This Core Group will deliberate on and recommend 
measure to, inter-alia, better implementation of and amendment to Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955. The Standing Core Group has since been constituted and the  First meeting of 
the Core Group was held o n 08.04.2010 under the Chairmanship of the Hon‟ble Prime 
Minister.  The suggestions of the States /UTs on the issue relating to amendment of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 were placed before the Core Group. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 3.14) 
 
 The Committee note that the household consumers in the country consume 
about 30-35% of the sugar available in the market.  Rest of the 60 -65% of the sugar 
is consumed by bulk consumers who constitute the non -household sector.  The 
Government has imposed a st ock holding limit of 15 days for the requirements of 
bulk consumers.  The Committee feel that merely imposing a stock holding limit will 
not help in the present situation.  It should be monitored by the Central and State 
agencies whether these bulk consume rs are releasing their excess stocks or not.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend  that the Central Government either with its 
own monitoring mechanism or with the help of State Governments check up the 
sugar stock of these bulk consumers. If anyone hoards more than the limit, prompt 
and strict action should be taken against them. 
 

43 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Central Government has imposed stocking limit on bulk consumers of sugar 
vide notification dated 22.08.2009 which, subsequently, has been superseded by another 
notification dated 18.05.2010.  The notification dated 18.05.2010 has come into effect from 
21.05.2010 and shall remain in force for a period of ninety days.  An advisory has also 
been issued to Food & Civil Supplies Departments of all States / Union Territory 
Administrations on 08.09.2009 requesting them to assist the Cent ral Government in its 
efforts to moderate the prices of sugar in the open market.  The Directorate of Sugar does 
not have necessary field formations to check sugar stocks of bulk consumers. As such, the 
recommendation of the Committee is being forwarded to  the State Governments / UT 
Administration for necessary action. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 3.19) 
 
 The Committee note that the Department of Food and Public Distribution has 
specifically advised the States to strictly implement monthly certification by village 
panchayats etc. regarding delivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops in time and 
their distribution to ration card holders and allotment of Fair price Shops to Self 
Help Groups (SHGs).  In this regard, the Committee find that only 10 States and one 
Union Territory have started monthly certification by village panchayats etc.  
Similarly, about 86,000 Fair Price Shops have only been allotted to SHGs, 
cooperatives etc. out of 5 lakh FPS in the country.  The Committee expect that 
concerted efforts would be made by the Department for the implementation of 
certification system in other States as well in a time bound manner.  They 
recommend that certification should included reporting irregularities in FPS to the 
concerned officials for str ict action on those involved in irregularities.  The 
Committee further recommend that the efforts should be made to allot as many 
FPSs as possible to women self help groups on a turnover commission basis.  This 
would enable the SHGs to earn a livelihood an d also eliminate irregularities to a 
large extent.  Moreover, electronic weighing machines should be provided to FPSs 

44 
 
as a central scheme to prevent misuse by the staff in the measurement process.  
The Committee also recommend the fool proof measures shoul d be taken in 
coordination with State Governments to check issue of fake ration cards.  Strict 
action should be taken against those who indulge in this kind of activity.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 All State/ UT Governments vide letter dated 02.02.2010 ( Annexure-II) have been 
requested for strict compliance/ implementation of the observations of the Committee and 
to send an action taken report on each of the issue. 
 
As per information received upto 31.12.2009, 15 State/ UT Governments are doing 
monthly cer tification by Village Panchayat/ Urban Local Bodies/ Vigilance committees/ 
Women‟s Self-help group on delivery of TPDS commodities (foodgrains, etc.) at fair price 
shops and their distribution to ration card holders during allocation month.  Others are yet  
to report. 
 
As on 31.12.2009, 29 State/ UT governments have reported allotment of FPS to 
institutions/ self-help groups. 
 
As regards installation of Electronic Weighing machines at FPSs, the State/ UT 
have been requested for compliance. 
 
As regards action  against the officials/ persons involved in issuance of bogus/ 
ineligible ration cards and also action against the families who were found in possession of 
such ration cards fraudulently,  this Department has been stressing upon State/ UT 
Governments from time to time through written communications as well as in meetings 
with the State/ UT Government officials.  As a result of implementation of 9 -point action 
plan and special campaign, 170.40 lakh bogus/ ineligible ration cards have been deleted 
by 20 States/ UTs.  
 
 
 

45 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 3.20) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the present system of enumeration 
of eligible BPL  families for inclusion in Targeted Public Distribution System is 
fraught with serious deficiencies.  The number of BPL as per Central Government 
estimates is 6.52 crore which includes 2.43 Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) families.  
However, the State and UT G overnments have issued a total of 11.04 crore BPL 
cards.  In this regard, the Committee note that the Central Government’s statistics is 
based on 1993 -94 poverty estimates of Planning Commission and population 
estimates of the Registrar General of India as  on 1 st March, 2000.  It is not 
acceptable to the Committee that the number of BPL families have come down from 
6.52 crore to 5.91 crore as per the poverty estimats of 2004 -05 projected on March, 
2009.  Relying on estimates to calculate the number of BPL f amilies may not be 
accurate and the ground reality may be different.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that a complete enumeration of BPL and AAY families should be 
undertaken on war footing by the Central Government in coordination with State 
Governments so as to have and exact list of BPL/ AAY families.  Norms for 
identification of BPL/ AAY families may also be reviewed.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Planning Commission is the nodal agency of Government of India for estimating 
poverty at national and State levels.  For allocations of foodgrains to States and UTs under 
Targeted Public Distribution (TPDS), Department of Food & Public Distribution uses the 
number of Below Poverty Line (BPL) families based on 1993 -94 poverty estimates of 
Planning Commission and population estimates of the Registrar General of India as on 1 st 
March, 2000.  This number of BPL families is 6.52 crore, which includes 2.43 crore 
Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) families. 
 
 Planning Commission constituted an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Prof. 
D. Suresh Tendulkar to review the methodology for estimation of poverty.  The Expert 

46 
 
Group has submitted its report on 08 th December, 2009 and it is being examined by the 
Planning Commission. 
 
 Ministry of Rural Development had issued guidelines in 2002 to the States and UT 
Governments for identification of BPL families.  For formulating guidelines for next BPL 
census in rural areas, Ministry of Rural Development constituted an  Expert Group in 
August, 2008 to suggest methodology for conducting the BPL census.  The Expert Group 
has submitted its report in August, 2009, which has been circulated by Ministry of Rural 
Development among the States/UTs and the concerned Central Minist ries for their 
comments.  The report of the Expert Group has also been posted on the Ministry of Rural 
Development website.  The methodology for the next BPL Census would be finalized by 
Ministry of Rural Development after taking into consideration the com ments/ suggestions 
received. 
 
 Ministry of Rural Development would issue guidelines to carry out next BPL Census 
in Rural areas across the country which would cover all the households of Rural areas at 
the time of survey.  In respect of urban areas, Planni ng Commission would be working out 
guidelines for identification of the poor. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 3.22) 
 
 The Committee note that 15.34 lakh  tonnes of foodgrains were stored under 
CAP (covered and plinth) system in open space, as on 15.08.2009, in various States 
in the country.  Out of this about 9.99 lakh tonnes of foodgrains are stored under 
CAP in Punjab and Haryana alone.  The Committee no te that a plan scheme has 
been formulated by the Government to build and increase the storage capacity for 
storage of foodgrains by FCI in the country.  An amount of `291 crore was proposed 
by the Department of Food and Public Distribution for the implemen tation of the 
scheme.  However, Planning Commission had approved only an outlay of `149 
crore.  A quantum of 20,000 metric tonnes of wheat and rice was declared as 
damaged during 2008 -09.  One of the main reasons for this damage was the 
prolonged storage of foodgrains in open space under CAP system.  The Committee, 

47 
 
therefore, recommend that this issue should be taken up at the highest level with 
the Planning Commission for the allocation of the amount proposed by the 
Department.  Construction of godowns by FCI either by its own or in collaboration 
with private sector should be taken up by the Government on priority basis.  
Necessary steps should also be taken to avoid damage of foodgrains stored in the 
custody of FCI, CWC, SWCs including overhaul and repair of existing godowns, 
installation of modern equipments in order to contain moisture content of 
foodgrains and to prevent destruction of foodgrains by rodents and other biotic and 
abiotic factors.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Under the Plan Scheme for constr uction of storage godowns the Ministry had 
initially proposed a total outlay of `291 crores out of which `87.92 crores and `1.12 crore 
was proposed for the NE States and J&K respectively.   However, the Planning 
Commission approved an outlay of `149 crores only, out of which `125 crores is to be 
released as equity for FCI and `24 crores to North Eastern States as Grants in Aid. 
 
 The FCI has prepared a shelf off project to establish new godowns of capacity 
totaling 3.41 lakh tonnes with an estimated construc tion cost of `164 crores (without land 
cost) in various States during 11 th Five Year Plan (2007 -12). The details are given at 
Annexure-III.  The Planning Commission has however allocated an amount of `125 
crores for FCI.   The actual number of godowns taken up out of this allocation will depend 
on the availability of land.  
 
 To bridge the storage gap, this Department has formulated a scheme for 
construction of godowns through private entrepreneurs.   The proposals for c reation of 
storage capacity in the various States are considered by the State Level Committee (SLC), 
and are finally approved by the High Level Committee (HLC) of FCI.  The HLC has given 
its approval for construction of storage godowns for a capacity of 12 7.65 lakh tonnes.  The 
State-wise details of storage capacity approved by HLC are given at Annexure-IV.  FCI 
will offer a guarantee of 7 years for construction of new godowns under the Scheme.  The 

48 
 
godown is to be taken on hire from Private parties through  CWC/SWCs (which will be the 
implementing agency). 
    
 In order to ensure expeditious construction of godowns, the Guarantee Scheme has 
been reviewed and it has been decided that wherever CWC and SWCs have land and if 
this is at the identified locations a nd within storage capacity finalized, CWC/SWCs may 
construct godowns on priority for which FCI will provide 6 years Guarantee.  CWC/SWCs 
have already started construction of 5.87 lakh tonnes of storage capacity.  
 
 There are well defined quality control no rms specified by the Government for 
procurement of good quality foodgrains for distribution under TPDS, similarly there is a 
well established procedure to avoid damage of foodgrains stored by FCI. 
   
  Prior to commencement of Rabi and Kharif Procurement S easons, the Department 
of Food & Public Distribution formulates uniform specifications for procurement of good 
quality foodgrains for the Central Pool. These uniform specifications are circulated to FCI, 
all State Governments and their agencies, with the i nstructions to ensure that foodgrains 
procured strictly conforms to uniform specifications. 
 
Facilities for cleaning and drying of foodgrains are provided at the procurement 
centres by State Governments to ensure good quality foodgrains well within the uniform 
specifications are procured by FCI and State agencies. Moisture meter, physical analysis  
kits, etc. are also provided at the procurement centres. Instructions are also issued that 
proper stitching and stenciling on grain bags should be carried out.  Dunnage material, 
tarpaulin and other materials for safe storage of procured food stocks are a lso provided.  
The Quality Control officers of FCI and State Governments regularly monitor the quality of 
foodgrains at the time of procurement. 
 
Samples of procured foodgrains are drawn from the procurement centres and are 
got analyzed in the laboratories  to know their physical quality parameters including 
moisture content.  Discrepancies, if any, observed in the quality of procured foodgrains are 
immediately brought to the notice of concerned authorities of the FCI and State 
Governments for taking immediate remedial measures.  

49 
 
 
 Procured foodgrains are stored in covered godowns as well as under CAP (Covered 
& Plinth) storage (wheat and paddy only) for varying periods.  During storage, scientific 
code of practices for safe storage of foodgrains are adopted by FCI and State agencies.  
Regular prophylactic and curative treatments are carried out for the control of insect pests.  
Proper aeration, cleaning and brushing of foodgrains are also carried out regularly.   
 
 Quality Control officers of FCI and State ag encies regularly monitor the quality of 
foodgrains including category of foodgrains and insect infestation, if any, and suggest 
immediate remedial measures.  These inspections and remedial measures are displayed 
on the stack card of each stack in the godown. 
 
  Similarly, at the time of distribution of foodgrains to States/UTs, there is a well 
defined procedure of joint inspection/sampling of the stocks by State Government authority 
and FCI to ensure that only good quality foodgrains conforming to PFA Stand ards are 
issued under Targetted Public Distribution System (PDS) and other welfare schemes. 
   
  Wherever incidence of distribution of poor quality foodgrains to consumers are 
brought to the notice, action is taken against the officials found responsible. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
18th November, 2010              
Kartika 27,1932(Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES. 
 
  

50 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
          Action Taken under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
 
 
          for the year- 2009 - Information received from States / Uts upto 
31.07.2009 upto 31.12.2009 
        
S.No.  State/Uts 
No.of 
Raids  No. of  No. of  No. of  Value of Reported  
      persons  persons  persons  goods upto 
      arrested prosecuted convicted confiscated   
            
in Rs. 
Lakh   
1 Andhra Pradesh 7873 43     Nil 1 233.31 December 
2 Assam 2382 5     Nil     Nil Nil 
December 
$ 
3 Arunachal Pradesh Nil 3 3 Nil Nil November 
4 Bihar 17 8     Nil     Nil 1.69 December 
5 Chhattisgarh 751 36 90 66 858.27 December 
6 Delhi 93 98 76    Nil Nil December 
7 Gujarat 28025 30 89    Nil 528.31 December 
8 Goa 30 Nil     Nil    Nil Nil December 
9 Haryana 107 8 1    Nil 0.82 
December 
* 
10 Himachal Pradesh 24642 3 2    Nil 10.99 December 
11 Jammu & Kashmir           
Not 
Reported 
12 Jharkhand           
Not 
Reported 
13 Karnataka 1659 137 9 3 24.58 December 
14 kerala 48829 21 2    Nil 121.47 
December 
*** 
15 Madhya Pradesh           
Not 
Reported 
16 Maharashtra 1688 2565 1562    Nil 13842.38 December 
17 Manipur Nil NIl    Nil    Nil  Nil 
November 
** 
18 Meghalaya 8 Nil 4    Nil  Nil December 
19 Mizoram 366 Nil Nil Nil Nil December 
20 Nagaland Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil December  
21 Orissa 35494 7 149 9 14.56 December 
22 Punjab 122 54 34 26 464.52 December 
23 Rajasthan 281 3 62 Nil 36.89 March 
24 Sikkim Nil Nil    Nil    Nil December 
25 Tamil Nadu 16404 4775 1471 7 623.25 December 
26 Tripura 66 2 2    Nil 0.65 December 

51 
 
27 Uttaranchal           
Not 
Reported 
28 Uttar Pradesh 39684 1023 1491    Nil 1929.48 December 
29 West Bengal 161 117 16    Nil 90.4 December 
30 A & N Islands 208 Nil    Nil    Nil Nil December 
31 Chandigarh 8 9    Nil    Nil 7.97 December 
32 D & N Haveli 3 2    Nil    Nil 0.22 December 
33 Daman & Diu           
Not 
Reported 
34 Lakshadweep Nil Nil    Nil    Nil Nil November 
35 Pondicherry 512 63 68 15 15.53 December 
  Total 209413 9012 5131 127 18805.29   
 
 * - Except - August & September ** - Except  August & October 
 
 
***- Except October $ - Except August 
   
 
Updated as on 7.4.2010 
      

52 
 
ANNEXURE - II 
 
BY FAX/SPEED POST  
PARLIAMENT MATTER  
 
No. 20/03/2010-PD.II 
Government of India 
Ministry of Consumer Affair, Food & Public Distribution  
Department of Food & Public Distribution  
 
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi – 110 001 
Dated  the 2nd  February 2010 
 
To 
 
 The Secretary 
Department of Food & Civil Supplies  
All States/UTs 
 
 
 
Subject:  Follow up action on recommendation contained in the Second Report of the Estimates 
Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Drought Ma nagement, foodgrain 
production and price situation’.  
 
Sir, 
 
 I am directed to refer to the recommendations/observation contained in the Second Report 
of the Estimates Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the above noted subject and to say that the 
Committee has desired to implement the following recommendations/observations mentioned in 
para No. 3.19 & 3.20 and has also sought compliance/implementation report immediately: - 
 
(i)  Monthly Certification by Village Panchayat /Urban Local Bodies/Vigilance committees/ 
Women’s Self-help group on delivery of TPDS commodities (foodgrains, etc) at fair shops 
and their distribution to ration card holders during allocation month should include 
reporting irregularities in FPS to the   concerned officials for strict action on those 
involved in irregularities.  
(ii)  The Committee desired that efforts should be made to allot as many as FPSs as possible to 
women self help groups on a turn -over Commission basis.  
(iii) Electronic Weighing machines shoul d be provided to FPSs to prevent misuse by the Staff 
in the measurement process.  
(iv) The Committee also recommend that the fool proof measures should be taken by the 
State/UT Governments to check issue of fake ration cards. Strict action should be taken 
against those who indulge in this kind of activity.  
(v)  The Committee also recommended that a complete enumeration of BPL & AAY families 
should be undertaken on war footing for exact number of BPL/AAY households in the 
State/UTs.  

53 
 
 
You are requested to send action taken report on the above issues for appraising of the 
position to the Estimates Committee, Lok Sabha.  
 
Yours faithfully, 
 
 
(M.C. Jeph) 
Under Secretary to the Government of India  
Tel: 011-23097017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

54 
 
Annexure-III 
 
LIST OF PRIORITY OF CENTRES PROPOSED FOR CONSTRUCTION OF GODOWNS BY FCI 
DURING 11TH FIVE YEAR PLAN (2007-12). 
 
SL. 
NO. 
NAME OF THE  
CENTRE 
PROPOSED CAPACITY 
 (Fig. in   ) 
ESTIMATED COST 
(Rs.in Crores) 
I- ASSAM REGION 
1 Changsari 50,000  with siding Rs. 25  
2. Hailakandi 5,000  Rs.1.5  
3. Karimganj 5,000 Rs.1.75 
4. Kokrajhar 5,000 Rs.1.75 
5.  Nowgaon 25,000 with siding Rs.17.5 
6. Dibrugarh 25,000 with siding Rs.17.5 
7. Fakiragram  5,000 Rs.1,75 
 Total 1.20 lakh    Rs.66.75   
II TRIPURA 
1. Nandannagar 2,500 (within  Existing  
              Complex). 
Rs.1.25 
2. Kumarghat 5,000 Rs.3.0 
 Total: 7,500 Rs.4.25 
III. MANIPUR 
1. Jiribam 7,500 Rs.4.5  
2. Senapati 5,000 Rs.3.00 
3. Churachandpur 2,500 Rs.1.50 
 Total: 15,000 Rs.9.0 
IV NAGALAND 
1. Kohima 5,000 Rs.3.0 
2. Dimapur 5,000 Rs.3.0 
 Total: 10,000    Rs.6.0   
V. MEGHALAYA 
1. Baghamara/South 
Garo Hills. 
2,500 Rs.1.50 
2. Shillong 5,000 Rs.3.0 
 Total: 7,500 Rs.4.50 
North Zone: 
VI JAMMU & KASHMIR 
1. Srinagar Valley  
(Rly Siding). 
20,000 Rs.12 
 
2.  Pulwama 2,500 Rs.1.5 
3. Udhampur 15,000 Rs.9.0 
 Total: 37,500    Rs.22.5   
 

55 
 
VII. HIMACHAL PRADESH . 
1. Kinnaur 1,670 Rs.1.0 
2. Bilaspur 5,000 Rs.2.0 
3. Mandi 5,000 Rs.2.0 
4. Nahan 5,000 Rs.2.0 
5.  Nagrota Bagwan 5,000 Rs.2.0 
6.  Shimla 5,000 Rs.2.0 
 Total: 26,670    Rs.11.0  
VIII. SIKKIM   
1.  Jorthang 5,000 Rs.3.0 
IX JHARKHAND 
1. Chakradharpur 15,000 Rs.7.50 
X BIHAR 
1. Mohania/Kaimur 25,000 Rs.7.25 
XI ORISSA 
1. Dungarpalli 10,000 Rs.3.0 
2. Mancheswar 10,000 Rs.3.0 
3. Baripeda 10,000 Rs.3.0 
 Total: 30,000    Rs.9.00  
XII WEST BENGAL 
1. Jalpaiguri 10,000 Rs.3.0  
 WEST ZONE   
XIII CHHATTISGARH 
1. Balod 10,000 Rs.3.0 
2. Akaltara 10,000 Rs.3.0 
 Total: 20,000 Rs.6.0 
XIV MAHARASHTRA 
1. Bhandara 10,000 Rs.3.0 
 SOUTH ZONE   
XV UNION TERRITORY 
1. Lakshadweep 2,500 Rs.1.25 
 Total: 2,500 Rs.1.25 
 Grand Total: 3,41,670  Rs.164.00 
 
  

56 
 
Annexure-IV  
 
THE DETAILS OF THE REQUIREMENT OF ADDITIONAL  STORAGE CAPACITY 
FINALIZED BY  HLC   OF FCI  
 
(Figures in tonnes) 
 
  Andhra Pradesh    …    36,000 
  Bihar     … 3,00,000 
  Chhattisgarh    …      5,000 
  Gujarat     …    45,000 
  Haryana    …      38,80,000 
  Himachal Pradesh   …        1,42,550 
  J & K     … 3,61,690 
  Jharkhand    … 1,75,000 
  Karnataka    … 2,05,000 
  Kerala     …    15,000 
  Maharashtra    …    99,500 
  Punjab     …       71,25,000 
  Tamil Nadu    … 3,45,000 
  Uttarakhand    …       25,000 
  West Bengal    …      5,000 
              
   GRAND  TOTAL  …  127.65 lakh tonnes  
 
 
 
  

57 
 
APPENDIX - I 
MINUTES OF TWELFTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-2011) 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 23 rd September, 2010 from 1430 hrs. to 
1720 hrs. 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Director 
2.  Smt. Juby Amar  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration Draft Report on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on the subject „Drought Management, Foodgrain Production and Price 
Situation‟ pertaining to Ministry of Con sumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution. The 
Committee adopted the Draft Report with some modifications. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report and present the 
same to Parliament. 
 
5. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx. 
 
6. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx. 
 
7. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
  
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
                MEMBERS 
2 Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
3 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
4 Shri P. Karunakaran  
5 Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
6 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
7 Shri Prabodh Panda 
8 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
9 Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
10 Shri S. Semmalai 
11 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
12 Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh 
13 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
14 Shri K.C. Venugopal 

58 
 
APPENDIX - II 
(vide introduction to Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND (2ND) REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (15TH LOK SABHA). 
 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/observations: 
 
21 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
(Nos. 3.8, 3.9, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.17 - Total 6) 
 
 
 Percentage 
 
28.57% 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government‟s reply:  
(Nos. 3.3, 3.10, 3.15, 3.16, 3.18, 3.21 - Total 6) 
 
 
 Percentage 
 
28.57% 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which Government‟s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee:  
(Nos. 3.2, 3.5 - Total 2) 
 
 
 Percentage 
 
9.52% 
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited:  
(Nos. 3.4, 3.6, 3.7, 3.14, 3.19, 3.20, 3.22 - Total 7) 
 
 
 Percentage 
 
33.33% 
 
 
          