 
 
       32  
 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS 
(DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS) 
 
PERFORMANCE OF SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI)  
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2013-2014) 
 
THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
 
_____________________________________________ 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
 
THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2013-2014) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS 
(DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS) 
 
PERFORMANCE OF SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendati ons contained in the Twenty 
Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 04 January, 2014 
       Presented to Lok Sabha on 05 February, 2014 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   
  December, 2013/Agrahayana    , 1935(Saka)  
________________________________________________________ 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
PAGE  NO.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14) 
 
(iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(v)  
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
8 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
 
23  
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
24  
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect o f which final replies 
of Government are still awaited 
 
29  
  
APPENDICES  
 
 
I Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Study Group he ld on 18 
December, 2013 
 
33  
II  Minutes of the Twenty First Sitting of the Committe e on 
Estimates (2013-14) held on 18 December, 2013 
 
35  
III Analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Twent y Second 
Report of Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14) 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
4 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
5 Shri Khagen Das 
6 Shri Pralhad Joshi 
7 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
8 Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
11 Kum. Meenakshi Natrajan 
12 Shri Prabodh Panda 
13 Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu ” 
14 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
15 Shri R. Sambasiva Rao 
16 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
17 VACANT 
18 Shri S. Semmalai 
19 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
20 Shri M.I. Shanavas 
21 Shri Adhi Sankar  
22 Shri Rajiv Ranjan (Lalan) Singh 
23 Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
24 Shri Ganesh Singh 
25 Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
26 Shri Jagada Nand Singh 
27 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
28 Smt. Annu Tandon 
29 Shri Mukul Wasnik 
30 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
  
SECRETARIAT  
   1.        Shri A. Louis Martin    -         Join t Secretary   
   2.        Smt. Anita B. Panda           -         Director  
   3. Shi Shrinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director  
4. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj  - Deputy Secretary 
   5. Ms. Rachna Saxena    - Committee Officer 
      
(iii) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2013-14 ) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, pr esent this Thirty-Second Report on action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations cont ained in the Twenty-Second Report of 
the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Performance of Sports Authority of India 
(SAI)’ pertaining to Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (Department of Sports).  
2. The Twenty-Second Report of the Committee (Fifte enth Lok Sabha) was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 23.04.2013. The Government furnished t heir replies indicating action taken on 
the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 14.11.2013. The draft Report was consider ed and approved on 18.12.2013 by the 
Study Group of the Committee on Estimates, constitu ted to consider the action taken replies 
furnished by the Government. Thereafter, the Report  was adopted by the Committee on the 
same day. 
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on  the recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-Second Report of Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix 
III. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
     December, 2013               
Agrahayana    , 1935 (Saka) 
FRANCISC O SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
 
 
 
(v) 
  

 
 
    CHAPTER – I 
 
  REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action  taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report of the Committee on 
Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Per formance of Sports Authority of 
India (SAI)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Youth Af fairs and Sports, Department of Sports 
(DoS). 
 
1.2 The Committee’s Twenty-Second Report (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 23.04.2013. It contained 19 Recommenda tions/Observations.  Action 
Taken Replies in respect of all the Recommendations /Observations were received from 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, (DoS) on 14.11.2013. 
 
1.3 Replies to the Recommendations/Observations con tained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been ac cepted by the 
Government: 
 Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,5,7,8,9,10,11,14,17 and18   (Total 12) 
         (Chapter – II) 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Commit tee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 Sl. Nos.    Nil      (Total Nil) 
          (Chapter – III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich the Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 Sl. Nos. 4,6,15 and 19       (Total 04) 
         (Chapter – IV) 
 

 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 Sl. Nos. 12, 13 and 16                (Total 03) 
        (Chapter – V) 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that response to comments contained in Chapter-I 
and final replies to the Recommendation contained i n Chapter-V of this Report 
should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on some 
of their Recommendations.  
 
A.   Strategy for 2020 Olympics 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
1.6 In view of putting in place a long term strateg y devised by SAI for improving 
India’s performance in 2020 Olympics, the Committee  in their original report had 
recommended to combine the said strategy with speci fic targets and urged for 
addressing the concerns regarding infrastructure an d manpower requirement well in 
time to ensure successful implementation of the sai d strategy. The Committee had also 
recommended that SAI should undertake a study of th e methods followed by China and 
Western countries in grooming sports persons and ad opt such practices as may be 
suitable to our country. 
 
1.7 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (DoS) in their  action taken reply has 
submitted that SAI has set up a Wing namely LTDP Yo uth OG’20 in preparation of 
Indian teams for Olympics 2020 and subsequent Olympic Games to train the sub-junior 
and youth category. During 2012-13 the LTDP Wing ha s reportedly conducted 108 
national coaching camps in 23 disciplines and 86 ex posures. The junior, sub-junior and 
youth teams have won 280 medals at these international competitions. 
The Ministry has further stated that a new scheme ‘ Long Term Athlete 

 
 
Development Plan (LTADP), for Mission 2020 Olympics ’ is proposed to identify 
the talented sports persons and give them state -of - the art training with a 
scientific back up and prepare them for 2020 and su bsequent Olympic 
Games. Regarding combination of strategy with speci fic targets, for 
Commonwealth Asian Games, 2014 and Olympics, 2016; it has been stated that 
specific targets have already been submitted to the  Ministry on 14 th  February, 2013 . A 
Copy of the same has been furnished. The Ministry h as noted the suggestion of the 
Committee regarding study of methods followed by China and Western countries. 
 
1.8 The Committee had urged among other things that  their concerns 
regarding infrastructure and manpower requirements should be addressed well in 
time to ensure successful implementation of the lon g term strategy of improving 
India’s Sports performance in forthcoming Commonwea lth & Asian Games and 
Olympics. There is nothing in the reply of the Gove rnment to show what action is 
proposed in this regard. The Committee would await the response of the Ministry 
of Youth Affairs and Sports (DoS) on the same. 
  
   B. Inclusion of Experts in decision making bodie s of SAI 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
1.9 The Committee in their original report had sugg ested that desirability of inclusion 
of experts from the fields of Sports Medicine and A nti Doping in the decision making 
bodies of SAI be examined with view to strengthening its effective functioning.  
 
1.10 The Ministry, in its Action Taken reply has st ated that in the 40 
th  Meeting of 
Governing Body of SAI held on 24.7.2013, it has bee n decided to include three 
members from various walks of life, which could inc lude experts from Medicine and 
Anti- Doping. It has been further submitted that th e recommendation of the Committee 
would be kept in mind while forming the new Governing Body 
 

 
 
1.11 The Committee appreciate that as recommended b y them, action has been 
taken to include among others, experts from Medicine and Anti Doping in the new 
Governing Body of SAI.  
 
  
C.    Laying of Annual Report of SAI in Parliament and its uploading on website  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
1.12 The Committee had urged the Department to ensu re timely laying of SAI’s 
Annual Reports in Parliament so that its performanc e is reviewed and on course 
correction applied in time. Taking note that SAI ha d not uploaded its Annual Reports on 
to its website from 2008-09 onwards, the Committee had expressed the hope that SAI 
will upload its Reports soon, as assured.  
 
1.13 In its action taken reply, the Ministry has st ated that the  Annual Report of SAI for 
the year 2010-11 has been laid in both Houses of Pa rliament in the Monsoon session 
2013 ( Lok sabha on 20.08.2013 and Rajya Sabha on 1 4.08.2013.  The Annual Reports 
for the years 2011-12 and 2012-13 are reportedly under preparation.  
 
1.14 The Committee regret to note that neither the Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports (Department of Sports) nor SAI has ensured t hat the Annual Report of SAI 
is prepared and laid on the Table of Parliament wit hin the stipulated period of 
nine months after closure of the Financial Year, in  spite of the lapse having been  
pointed out by the Committee. It is a sorry state o f affairs that the Annual Report 
of 2011-12 has not been laid on the Table of the Ho use even nearly one year after 
expiry of the stipulated period. The Committee urge  the Department of Sports to 
ensure that Annual Reports are laid in time and are  uploaded in SAI’s website 
immediately thereafter. 
 
D.  Female participation in sports training schemes 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 

 
 
 
1.15 Expressing concern at low percentage of female  trainees the Committee had 
recommended for encouragement of female participati on in sports training schemes 
through suitable incentive mechanism. 
 
1.16 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (DoS) , in its action taken reply has 
stated that emphasis is given for induction of maxi mum number of girls trainees 
depending upon the availability or residential acco mmodation meant for the girls. They 
have also informed that SAI is organizing National Women Sports Competitions in four 
groups covering 12 disciplines. The selected girls are offered admission under SAI 
Scheme. 
 
1.17 Though the DoS has referred to its emphasis gi ven on inclusion of 
maximum number of girl trainees in SAI Sports Promo tional Schemes as well as 
organizing of National Women Sports Competitions, n o data has been given to 
show whether there is any improvement in the number  of girl trainees, as a result 
of these measures. The Committee are constrained to  note that the reply of the 
DoS is also silent on the Committee’s recommendatio n on devising a suitable 
incentive mechanism for encouraging female particip ation in sports training 
schemes. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the DoS 
to take suitable action, under intimation to them. 
   
   E.    Completion of infrastructure projects 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 
1.18 The Committee, in their original Report had de sired to be apprised of the project 
wise details of original cost and scheduled complet ion and reasons for time and cost 
overrun, if any, and currently anticipated cost and  date of completion of various sports 
infrastructure projects undertaken by the Ministry for construction, renovation and 
upgaradation of their sports facilities. The Commit tee had recommended that every 

 
 
possible effort should be made to complete these in frastructure projects within the 
currently anticipated cost and time. 
 
1.19  The Department, in the action taken reply hav e furnished status of the projects 
as desired by the Committee. They have also stated that monitoring of the projects is 
regularly being done by the Finance Committee and Governing Body of SAI. 
1.20  It is observed from the status of 46 projects  furnished to the Committee 
that 6 projects have been cancelled and 5 projects delayed.  A 50 bedded hostel 
complex in  SAG, Alleppey which was scheduled to be  completed in July, 2007, is 
yet to be constructed. Thus, the Committee are cons trained to note that project 
implementation by SAI leaves much to be desired. Th e Committee hope that 
steps will be taken to ensure that adequate plannin g precedes project 
implementation so that there is no cancellation or inordinate delay in 
implementation of projects, in future. 
 
F.   Laying of Synthetic Track in Each State 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
1.21 In their recommendation, the Committee had inter  alia  recalled that in their 7 
th  
Report, 2010-11 they had desired that there should be at least one synthetic track in 
every State particularly in Rajasthan, Andhra Prade sh, Bihar and Goa.  In view of none 
of these States figuring in the list of projects fu rnished to the Committee, which were 
reportedly completed or in progress, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the 
position in this regard. 
 
1.22 In its response, the Ministry of Youth Affairs  and Sports (DoS) has stated that as 
regards laying of at least one synthetic track in e very State the location of such tracks is 
decided as per requirement, location of centre and availability of funds. Further it has 
been pointed out that funds for synthetic tracks ar e also provided under the USIS 
scheme of this Ministry. 

 
 
1.23 The Committee had urged, among other things, t hat the Department should 
ensure laying at least one synthetic track in every  State particularly in Rajasthan, 
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Goa. There is nothing in the stereotyped reply to 
show that the matter has been examined. The Committ ee would await specific 
response of the DoS in this regard.  
 
G.   Refresher courses/programmes organized by SAI 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 
1.24 In view of the poor attendance and response to  refresher programmes/courses 
from the State Governments/UTs organized by SAI, th e Committee had recommended 
the Department to identify the reasons and take up the matter at the level of Chief 
Ministers.  
 
1.25 As per the action taken reply, SAI NS NIS had issued circulars & letters 
repeatedly to all States/UTs to recommend the names  of their coaches for such 
courses, as advised by the Estimate Committee, still the response was not encouraging. 
 
1.26 The Committee are constrained to note that the  reply of DoS is perfunctory 
in nature.  There is nothing in the reply to show w hether the Department has 
identified the reasons for poor response from the S tate Governments for 
refresher courses offered by SAI and whether the ma tter was taken up with the 
Chief Ministers, as recommended by the Committee. T he Committee reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and urge the DoS to ta ke necessary action in this 
regard expeditiously. 
 
 
H.   Accountability of Hockey Federations 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 
1.27 Taking note that there are two competing hocke y federations viz. Hockey India 
(HI) and Indian Hockey Federation (IHF) and that ne ither of them has been recognized 

 
 
by the Government, the Committee were of the firm v iew that sports federations should 
be made accountable to the Government for performan ce of sports persons in 
international events.  
 
1.28 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (DoS) , in its response, has inter-alia  
informed that keeping in view the fact that the Int ernational Hockey Federation refused 
to give affiliation to Indian Hockey Federation (IH F) or any other body except Hockey 
India (HI), the Hon’ble Supreme Court passed an int erim order making IOA and HI 
responsible to select and field Indian hockey teams , both for men and women in all 
future international events. In order to reach an a micable solution, the Government 
reportedly held several rounds of meetings with the  officials of IOA, HI and IHF and 
finally the matter was referred to the IOA to sugge st a compromise. While response 
from IOA is awaited, the matter would be placed bef ore the Supreme Court for decision, 
in case the issue is not amicably resolved. The Dep artment has also stated that the 
settlement of the dispute will serve the game of hockey. 
 
1.29 The reply of the Ministry is conspicuously sil ent on the Committee’s 
recommendation for making sports federations accoun table to the Government 
for the performance of sports persons in various in ternational sports events in 
view of huge sums of money spent on them.  The Comm ittee, therefore reiterate 
their recommendation and desire to be apprised of t he action taken to ensure 
accountability of the sports federations.   

 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 1) 
The index of performance of SAI mainly relates to m edal tally by its trainees.  
During the last 29 years of its existence SAI train ees have won 1449 medals in 
international events (594 gold, 467 silver and 388 bronze).  The average number of 
medals in international events annually works out t o just 50. The Committee are not 
impressed by the medal tally in international event s.  The Committee feel that SAI 
should strive to achieve the best, given the resour ce constraints.  Regrettably, there is 
no system of fixing medal targets to be won by SAI trainees in various events.  This is 
necessary to review and evaluate SAI`s achievements .  The Committee hope that SAI 
will make suitable initiative in this regard. 
 
Reply by the Government 
SAI is taking all steps to increase the medal tally  of India in major international 
tournaments. SAI’s role is to provide all facilitie s for imparting competitive training to the 
selected trainees so as to achieve excellence at Na tional and international level.  SAI 
has been working on improving these facilities. Reg arding sitting of targets, the 
suggestion has been noted. 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 2)  
 
The Committee note that SAI has put in place a long  term strategy of improving 
performance of the Indian sports in 2020 Olympics.  This long term strategy contains 
midterm milestones of improving medals tally in the  forth coming Commonwealth and 
Asian Games, 2014,   Olympics, 2016 Commonwealth Ga mes, 2018, and Asian 
Games, 2019.  The Committee hope that the strategy would be combined with specific 
targets.  The Committee would also urge that the co ncerns regarding infrastructure and 

 
 
manpower requirements should be addressed well in t ime to ensure successful 
implementation of the strategy.  SAI should underta ke a study of methods followed by 
China and western countries in grooming sports pers ons and adopt such practices as 
may be suitable to our country 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
Sports Authority of India has set up a Wing namely LTDP Youth OG’20 in 
preparation of Indian teams for Olympics 2020 and s ubsequent Olympic Games. This 
wing is emphasing to train the sub-junior and youth  category. Through continuous and 
systematic training (08-10 years) they can achieve their optimum performance as per 
the potential at the international level leading to  2020 Olympic and subsequent Olympic 
games. 
 
During this financial year (2012-13) this wing has conducted 108 national 
coaching camps in 23 disciplines and 86 exposures. The junior, sub-junior and youth 
teams have won 280 medals at these international competitions.  
A new scheme namely ‘Long Term Athlete Development Plan, for Mission 2020 
Olympics’ is proposed to identifying the talented s ports persons and give 
them state -of- the art training with a scientific back up and prepare them 
for 2020 and subsequent  Olympic Games. 
As far as combination of the strategy with specific  targets for Commonwealth & Asian 
Games, 2014 and Olympics, 2016  is concerned, the s pecific targets have already been 
submitted (copy enclosed) to the Ministry on 14 
th  February, 2013  (Annexure-A).  
Regarding study of methods followed by China and We stern countries, the suggestion 
has been noted. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I) 
 
 

 
 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 3)  
The Committee note that no expert in the fields of Sports Medicine and Anti 
Doping has been included in the composition of eith er general body or the Governing 
body of SAI.  The committee suggest that desirabili ty of inclusion of experts from such 
fields in the decision making bodies of SAI be exam ined with view to strengthening its 
effective  functioning.  The committee would like to be apprised of the outcome. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
In the 40 th  Meeting of Governing Body held on 24.7.2013, it ha s been decided to 
include 3 members from various walks of life, which  could include experts from 
Medicine and Anti- Doping.  This recommendation wou ld be kept in mind while forming 
the new Governing Body. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 5)  
The committee would like to point out that the data  regarding budget allocation 
and utilization under plan schemes by SAI as given in the outcome budget 2012-13 of 
MYAs do not tally with the data given by the MYAS (DOS) during the presentation made 
to the committee on 14.6.12.  for instance, the pla n allocation for the year 2009-10 as 
shown in outcome budget is Rs.200.37 cr. Rs.173.64 for rest of India and Rs.32.01 cr 
for  Northeast).  The actual amount of plan funds s pend during 2009-10 according to 
outcome budget was Rs.206.15 cr .where as the figur e furnished to the committee was 
Rs.200.49 cr Rs. 170.41 for rest of India and 30.08  for north eastern region.  The actual 
amt. of plan funds spent during 2010-11 is Rs.347.0 1 cr. As per outcome budget 2012-
13 whereas the figure furnished to the committee in  this regard was as Rs. 326.72 cr. 
The discrepancies and present correct information to the committee. 

 
 
Reply by the Government 
The status of budget allocation vis-à-vis expenditu re incurred during the financial 
year 2009-10 by SAI under Plan is as under: 
                                               
2009 -10  
Head Budget 
allocation 
 
Expenditure Rs. in crore  
Remarks  
Plan 173.64  170.41   
Plan(NER) 32.51  30.08  (Whereas in the report Rs. 32.01 
crore has been stated, this may be 
due to typographical error as the total 
of Rs. 205.65 mentioned is correct. 
Total  205.65  200.49   
 
A statement showing the sanction number, date and a mount allocated during the 
financial year 2009-10 is provided at Annexure-B. 
 
 
The status of budget allocation vis-à-vis expenditu re incurred during the financial year 
2010-11 by SAI under Plan is as under:- 
                                                              
                                                      
                                                       
2010 -11  
Head  Budget 
allocation 
Expenditure  Rs. In crore  
Remarks  
Plan 297.00  289.55   
Plan(NER) 34.00  37.17   
Total  331.00  326.72   
 
A statement showing the sanction number, date and a mount allocated during the 
financial year 2010-11 is provided at Annexure-C
. 
 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 7)  
The Committee observe that the medical expenses ent itlements of Rs.300 per 
annum per person for trainees under sports promotio n schemes such as army boys 
sports company (ABSC) SAI training centre (STC) & s pecial area games (SAG) and 
Rs.500 per  annum per persons for trainees under ce ntre of excellence  (CoE) scheme 
are too low to meet the medical costs.  Similarly, the insurance allowance per head per 
annum @ Rs.150 is obviously too low.  Sports person s are prone to injuries during the 
training and the amount o f medical allowance shoul d be sufficient to cover the 
expenses incurred on medical consultation and cost of medicines.  The committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the medical enti tlements and insurance allowance 
need to be suitably enhanced and there should be pe riodical revision keeping pace with 
inflation.  
 
Reply by the Government 
 
The financial assistance provided to trainees under  the SAI Sports Promotional 
Scheme is periodically reviewed and enhanced depend ing upon escalation in boarding 
commodities, Sports kit, transportation charges, Sc hool Fee & medicines  etc. The 
Finance Committee of SAI in its 62 nd  meeting held on 20 th  December, 2012 decided that 
the boarding charges should be revised every year k eeping in view increase in price 
index. 
 
The Chairman, Governing Body of SAI and Hon’ble Min ister  of Youth Affairs & Sports 
(I/C), has accorded approval for revision of Annual  Trainees Block Grant with respect to 
trainees of SAI Training Centers (STCs), Special Ar ea Games Centers (SAGs) and 
Army Boys Sports Companies (ABSCs).  
Current expenditure allocation (except boarding cha rges) per trainee per annum is as 
follows: 
 
 

 
 
S.  
No. 
Item  Allocation per annum  
(in Rupees)  
  ABSC STC SAG 
1 Sports Kit 2000  4000  4000  
2 Competition Exposure 2000  3000  3000  
3 Education Expenses 1000  1000  1000  
4 Medicines Expenses 300  300  300  
5 Premium of Insurance 30  30  30  
 Total  5330  8430  8430  
  
In order to meet inflationary trends and resulting cost escalation, an Annual Trainee 
Block Grant of Rs.12,000/-(Rupees twelve thousand O nly) per trainee per annum has 
been approved to cover expenditure towards Sports K it (maximum of Rs.5000/-), 
Competition Exposure, Educational expenses, Medical , Insurance and Miscellaneous 
expenses for all trainees of STC, SAG and ABSC Schemes. 
   
The revised Boarding charges have been effective fr om 1 
st  March, 2013 as per 
the following chart:- 
S. No.  Name  of the Scheme  Boarding charges per 
day/per trainees for 
Special Category 
State(NER, Sikkim, 
J&K, Himachal Pradesh 
& Uttarakhand) 
Boarding charges 
per day/per 
trainees for Rest 
of India 
1. Army Boys Sports 
Companies (ABSC),  
SAI Training Centers 
(STC), Special Area 
Games (SAG) 
Rs.200/- Rs.175/- 
2. COE Rs.225/- Rs.225/- 
3. NSTC (Residential) Rs.125/- Rs.125/- 
 
SAI has proposed to include certain Categories of t rainees for Medical Insurance Policy 
in line with proposed scheme for SAI staff.  

 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 8)  
 
Wrestling is one of the traditional sports of India.  There were recent media report 
suggesting that wrestling may not figure in Olympic  competition from the year 2020 
Olympics onwards.   Secretary (Sports) has assured the Committee that the matter will 
be taken up very strongly with International Olympi c Committee (IOC) through various 
channels to ensure that wrestling is not dropped fr om Olympics 2020 onwards.  The 
committee would await the outcome of these efforts. 
 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
International Olympic Committee (IOC) Executive Boa rd (EB) at its meeting held 
on 12.02.2013 recommended that wrestling, governed by the International Federation of 
Associated Wrestling Styles (FILA), be not included in the list of core sports for the 2020 
Olympics. Wrestling had to contend with baseball/so ftball and squash for inclusion in 
the 2020 Olympic programme as an additional sport. 
 
This decision of IOC came as a surprise and was a v ery unfortunate development. The 
Government of India believed that this decision to exclude the sport of wrestling from 
the 25 core sports needed to be reconsidered more s o in view of the fact that wrestling 
not only has universal appeal but is also very affordable. 
 
The Ministry took up the matter with the Internatio nal Olympic Committee requesting it 
to reconsider its decision and retain wrestling in the category of core sports for Olympic 
Games. It also requested India’s member in the IOC to take up the matter strongly and 
make every effort to get wrestling included in the list of core sports. 
 
Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Youth Af fairs & Sports wrote to Sports 
Ministers of 70 countries, where wrestling is popul ar and wrestlers from which 
participated in London Olympics, 2012, requesting t hem to take up the matter with the 

 
 
IOC and impress upon it the need to retain wrestlin g among the core sports in Olympic 
Games. 
 
Secretary (Sports) also wrote to Foreign Secretary for enlisting the support of the 
Ministry of External Affairs and for directing the Indian Ambassadors and High 
Commissioners of the countries, whose wrestlers par ticipated in London Olympics in 
2012, to call on their respective Sports Ministers and convince them to take up the 
matter with IOC in right earnest. 
Executive Board (EB) of the International Olympic C ommittee (IOC) at its meeting held 
at St. Petersburg (Russia) on 29 
th  May 2013 recommended that baseball/softball, 
squash and wrestling be proposed to the 125 th   IOC Session for possible inclusion as an 
additional sport on the Olympic programme for the 2020 Olympic Games. 
 
IOC at its 125 
th  session held in Buenos Aires  Argentina on 8 th  September 2013 has 
decided to include wrestling in the 2020 Olympics in addition to 25 core sports. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 9)  
 
SAI has undertaken projects of construction, renova tion and up-gradation of 
sports infrastructural facilities spread across 26 locations out of which only 7 project are 
stated to have been completed.  The remaining proje cts are at various stages of 
implementation.  The committee would like to be app rised of the project wise details of 
original cost and  scheduled  completion and reason s for time and cost overrun, if any 
and currently anticipated cost and date of completi on.  The committee desire that every 
possible efforts should be made to complete these i nfrastructure projects within the 
currently anticipated cost and time and ensure that  the infrastructural facilities are 
available for the benefit of the trainees sooner.   
 
 
 

 
 
Reply by the Government 
The status of projects is as per details provided a t Annexure-D. Every effort is 
being made to complete the projects within the orig inal cost and time. Monitoring of the 
projects is regularly being done by the Finance Committee and Governing Body of SAI. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 10)  
 
The committee were informed that the work of laying  synthetic athletic tracks in 
13 SAI Training Centers and regional centers was un der implementation during the last 
three years out of which 8 had been completed.  The  work at Tarn Taran (Punjab) and 
Shillong was scheduled to be completed by January a nd March, 2013 respectively and 
the work at remaining three centers is in different  stages of progress.  The committee 
would like be informed whether the work in Tarn Tar an and Shillong centers has since 
been completed.  The committee hope that the work i n the remaining three Centers will 
be completed within the originally anticipated time and cost.  Further, the committee had 
recommended in their 7 
th  Report, 2010-11 that there should be at least one synthetic 
track in every state particularly in Rajasthan, And hra Pradesh, Bihar and Goa.  
However, none of these states figure in the list of  projects furnished to committee which 
are stated to have been completed or in progress.  The committee would like to be 
apprised of the position in this regard.  
 
Reply by the Government 
 
The work of laying of Synthetic Athletic Track at T arn Taran (Punjab) had been 
completed as on 31-3-2013. Only the marking of lane s etc. on the Track Surface and 
subsequent certification by the IAAF was left to be  done. The work shall be taken over 
from the CPWD after necessary certification. 

 
 
Status Report of Synthetic Track is provided at Annexure-E. 
  As regards laying of at least one synthetic track i n every state, it is stated that 
location of SAI synthetic tracks is decided as per requirement, location of centre and 
availability of funds. It is also pointed out that funds for synthetic tracks are also 
provided under the USIS scheme of this Ministry. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 11) 
 
Annual assistance of @ Rs. 50 lakhs to each state a t Rs. 25 lakhs to each Union 
Territory for a period of 2 years is extended under  Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme 
(USIS) since 2010-11. However, the Secretary (Sport s) conceded during the evidence 
held on 14.06.2012 that out of eleven projects sanc tioned not even a single project had 
been completed by States during the first two years  of the scheme. It has been stated 
that four states (Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, West Be ngal and Mizoram) which had 
received funds under USIS in the inaugural year of the scheme i.e. 2010-11 have not 
submitted the required progress Reports, statements  of expenditure and utilization 
certificates in respect of the funds received, even  after a lapse of more than a year. The 
Committee feel that there is a need to ascertain as  to why most of the States are not 
attracted to the scheme and on the basis thereof take appropriate remedial measures to 
improve performance of the scheme. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
Out of the four projects sanctioned in the year 201 0-11, Mizoram have since 
completed the project. Himachal Pradesh has also co mpleted the sanctioned work, but 
a few administrative formalities are yet to be comp leted. West Bengal did not even 
commence the work for which funds were released. It was requested by them to change 

 
 
the sanction for another project which was not perm issible under General Financial 
Rules (GFRs).  Hence, they were asked to return the  amount along with interest as 
stipulated in the sanction order as per GFRs. There after, West Bengal have requested 
to permit them to utilize the funds for the project  for which the sanction was accorded. 
Their request is under consideration. 
 
ii. The projects being sanctioned under Urban Sport s Infrastructure Scheme (USIS) 
and the admissible limit from out of Central funds are as follows: 
 
S. No.  Name of field of play  Financial Limit  
1. Synthetic Athletic Track  Rs.5.50 cr. With norma l lighting. 
2. Synthetic Hockey field  Rs.4.50 crore (Rs.5.00 c rore with 
normal lighting) 
3. Synthetic turf Football ground Rs.4.50 crore wit h normal lighting  
4. Multipurpose Hall of size 60M x 
40M   
Rs.6.00 crore 
  
iii. Excess cost of any project of the State has to  be borne by them only. This is one 
of the reasons for slow progress of the projects un der USIS since the States find it 
difficult to meet the excess cost over and above the financial limit mentioned above. 
iv. The projects are entrusted by the States to the  State Public Works Department 
(PWD). The tender processing of PWD takes considerable period of time. 
 
2. The USIS scheme is under review. The reasons for  slow progress and its lack of 
attraction will be examined and remedial measures w ill be taken to improve the 
performance of the scheme.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 14) 
The committee note that out of existing 1109 coache s, only 172 are women 
constituting less than 16%.  The committee wonder w hether the strength of women 
coaches corresponds to any norm.  The committee wou ld like this aspect be examined 
and take corrective action as may be necessary to maintain gender balance.  
 
Reply by the Government 
 
Keeping in view the existing total strength of coac hes in SAI, number of women 
coaches is very less. The coaches in different disc ipline are appointed in SAI in view of 
the requirement projected by various units of SAI w hich are based on the number of 
trainees in different centers. It is to mention tha t out of 1697 applications received, about 
370 applicants are women and eligible candidates wi ll undergo selection process as per 
laid down procedure. However, while appointing fres h coaches as mentioned above 
vacancies reserved for women coaches are 40 out of 200 i.e. 20% of the post, are for 
women candidates. More number of women coaches can be inducted if suitably placed in 
the merit list. Keeping in view the observations of  the committee, further steps shall be 
taken with the approval of Competent Authority to induct women coaches & to encourage 
women sportspersons to adopt coaching as a career. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 17) 
 
The committee not the candid admission by the MYAS that there is an acute 
shortage of qualified persons as sports physiothera pists, conditioning experts, sports 
nutritionists, sports psychologists, and sports ana lysts who are an integral part of the 
coaching team of elite sports persons.  The committ ee urge MYAS to initiate required 
measures immediately to address the shortage of var ious sports specialists plaguing 
SAI. 
  
 

 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
For filling the post of Scientific Officer, the pro cess has been initiated. M/s  
Ed.CIL(India) Limited, Noida has been asked for con duct written tests for 19 vacancies 
of Jr. Scientific Officer, & 5 posts of Jr. Scienti fic Assistants. Applications  have been 
invited. A copy of the details of posts/advertiseme nt is provided at  Annexure-F. NSFs 
are given assistance under scheme of Assistance to NSFs, inter-alia, to use services of 
support staff as stated above based on their demand and availabilities of funds.  
   
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 18) 
 
The Committee are perturbed to learn about the ban imposed on Indian 
Weightlifting Federation for one year by Internatio nal Weightlifting Federation 
consequent to reported doping offences by a few wei ghtlifters. Considering the 
seriousness of the issue, the Committee feel that t he matter requires to be gone into 
detail for preventing such incidents in future. The  Committee would suggest that an 
Expert Committee be formed immediately to study the  menace in its entirety and 
suggest preventive measures. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
The Government and National Anti Doping Agency are working towards “Dope 
Free” Sports in the country in co-ordination with s takeholders to rid sports of this 
menace and create a clean and healthy environment f or sports in India. The National 
Anti Doping Agency is taking stringent measures against doping in sports by conducting 
dope tests during in-competition and out-of-competi tion on sportspersons. The 
Government has repeatedly announced zero tolerance for violators of the anti-doping 
regulations. In this endeavor, NADA has conducted 1 5698 dope tests during the last 
four years on athletes.  
 

 
 
 The Justice Mukul Mudgal Committee was constituted  with an objective to 
enquire into all aspects of the issues relating to prevalence of doping. The 
recommendations of the Committee, are, inter-alia, to strengthen Anti Doping Education 
and to improve awareness among athletes. Based on t he recommendations of the 
Committee, an action plan has been prepared by the Ministry and circulated for action 
by the respective stakeholders.  
As per the action plan, NADA has initiated strength ening process of education and 
awareness on anti-doping measures focusing on athle tes and coaches in rural areas. 
Total of 16 medical experts and eminent sportsperso ns have been identified to be part 
of the Anti-Doping Education Programme. Among the i nitiatives to improve the 
awareness on anti doping measures, effective dissem ination of information through 
education programmes focusing on coaches and suppor ting persons, adopting WADA 
printing materials on doping and distribution of pa mphlets and putting up posters and 
banners during events has been planned.  
 
 During the period from 2009-2012, NADA has conduct ed numerous workshops, 
educational and awareness programmes about the WADA  prohibited substances and 
methods in sports across the country for sports-per sons, young athletes, coaches and 
supporting staff. Across the year, NADA has conduct ed outreach programs at various 
SAI centers and over 8000 sports persons, including  supporting staff attended such 
programs. The technical officials of NADA are regul arly visiting Sports Authority of India 
(SAI) Regional Centers and other places (wherever t raining camps are held) and 
educating the athletes on doping in sports and harm ful side effects of the dope 
substances by conducting lectures/seminars/ worksho ps etc. on regular basis. The 
doping control handbook is printed in seven languag es namely English, Hindi, Bengali, 
Malayalam, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu for distributi on among the sports community. 
NADA officials are engaged in delivering lectures at various centers / coaching camps in 
the following topics  
• Dope Sample Collection Procedure 
• Adverse Effects of Dope Substances 
• Rights and Responsibilities of Athletes 

 
 
• Result Management and Anti Doping Rule Violation 
• Therapeutic Use Exemption Certificate 
• Role of Anti-Doping Panel 
 
 To achieve a better outreach and to reach the mass es, NADA is coordinating 
with CBSE schools and School Games Federation of In dia both at National and 
Regional levels for programs regarding anti-doping measures through sport events 
organized by the Federations. Such school events wi ll help improve the awareness 
levels of students directly as well as through the school coaches to cater to young 
athletes.  
 
 Keeping special focus on rural sports centers vari ous Anti-Doping awareness 
Symposia and workshops have been conducted in the P YKKA events and at SAI 
Training Centers (STC) in rural areas. As a result of such concrete steps, effective 
action is been taken by Government to reduce the incidence of doping in sports with the 
objective of eliminating the doping menace from sports.  
 

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Nil 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 4) 
 
The committee are distressed to note that annual re ports of SAI for the years 
2010-11 and 2011-12 have not been laid in parliament depriving the parliament of timely 
scrutiny thereby impacting the accountability proce ss.  SAI`s defence that the delay is 
due to late receipt of data from its units is unten able in the age of computerization / 
online transmission of data and reflects very poorl y on its functioning.  The committee 
urge the department of sports to ensure timely layi ng of SAI`s Annual reports so that its 
performance is reviewed and on course correction applied in time.  Incidentally, SAI has 
not uploaded its Annual reports onto its website fr om the year 2008-09 onwards nor has 
it responded to committees query in this regard whi ch clearly indicate its admission of 
lapse.  The committee hope SAI will upload its annu al reports soon, as assured and will 
not be found wanting in this respect in future. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
2008-09, 2009-10 
 
A new website of SAI is being developed by NIC and the data will be placed in the site. 
 
2010-11 
 
The Annual Report of SAI for the year 2010-11 has b een laid in the both Houses of  
Parliament in the Monsoon Session 2013 (Lok Sabha o n 20.08.2013 & Rajya Sabha on 
14.08.2013). 
 
 

 
 
2011-12  , 2012-13  
All necessary data has been received from all the H eads of centre/Sub Centre/ 
Institute/Division of SAI HQ and the same is being scrutinized and consolidated. Annual 
Report for the year 2011-12 & 2012-13 is under preparation. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 6) 
 
The committees note with regret the out of total nu mber of 14120 trainees under 
SAI sports promotion schemes, only 4227 trainees ar e girls.  The committee in their 7 
th  
report 15 th  Lok Sabha had recommended measures to encourage wo men participation 
in sports such as provision for gender budgeting to enable earmarking of separate funds 
under various heads and schemes for women sports persons and recruitment of women 
coaches to train women trainees.  However, there do es not appear to be any marked 
improvement in the last two years.  The committees are disappointed with the 
stereotyped reply of department of sports that the SAI schemes are open to both boys 
and girls without any discrimination.  In view of t he very low percentage of female 
trainees, the committee emphasize that female parti cipation in sports training schemes 
needs to be encouraged by suitable incentive mechan ism in order to improve gender 
diversity in sports.    
 
Reply by the Government 
 
During the induction of trainees under SAI Sports P romotional Schemes 
emphasis is given for induction of maximum number o f girls trainees depending upon 
the availability or residential accommodation meant for the girls. 
 

 
 
For encouraging women participation in sports, SAI on behalf of MYA&S, is also 
organizing National Women Sports Competitions in fo ur groups covering 12 disciplines. 
The selected girls are offered admission under SAI Scheme. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-I) 
  
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 15) 
 
The committee are concerned to note that capacity b uilding measures such as 
refresher courses organized by SAI for improving / updating the skills of coaches of 
states/UTs are not getting encouraging response fro m the States /UTs as is evident 
from the poor attendance in the refresher programme organized by SAI in 2012 only five 
states/UTs only have sent their coaches to attend t he programme in August, 2012 that 
too after SAI postponed it once due to non response  from substantial number of states.  
In view of the need for updating the skills of coac hes, the committee feel that reasons 
for the poor response need to be identified and the  matter taken up at the level of chief 
ministers as recommended in the context of NPFAI in one of the preceding paragraphs. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
SAI NS NIS had issued circulars & letters repeatedl y to all States/UTs to 
recommend the names of their coaches for such cours es as advised by the Estimate 
Committee but still the response was not encouraging. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter-I)  
 
 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 19) 
 
There are two competing Hockey Federations viz. Hoc key India and Indian 
Hockey Federation and neither of them has been reco gnized by the Government 
pending court cases. Pursuant to a judgment from Hon’ble Supreme Court, Government 
is stated to be working with the Hockey India which  has been recognized by 
International Hockey Federation. The dismal perform ance of Indian Hockey team in the 
London Olympics, 2012 is partly attributed to the s hortcomings in the selection process. 
Though sports federations are autonomous in so far as the selection of the players for 
international events is concerned, the Committee fe el that these federations must be 
made accountable for the performance of teams as th e Government spends huge 
amount of money on their training and participation  in the international events. For 
instance, fund allocation to the Hockey Federation of India in 2011-12 was as much as 
Rs. 1809 crore. The Committee are of the firm view that sports federations should be 
made accountable to the Government for the performa nce of the sports persons in 
international events. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
On 11 th  March, 2011, the Hon’ble Supreme Court passed an i nterim order 
making IOA and HI responsible to select and field I ndian hockey teams, both for men 
and women in all future international events. Befor e this order, another interim order 
was passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in August, 2010 directing IOA, IHF and HI to 
hold discussion with the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports to sort out the matter. All 
these orders were passed by the Supreme Court keepi ng in view the fact that the 
International Hockey Federation refused to give aff iliation to IHF or any other body 
except Hockey India. 
 
The Government held meetings with the Indian Olympi c Association (IOA), Hockey 
India and Indian Hockey Federation to reach an amic able solution in the matter. After 
several rounds of meetings with the officials of In dian Olympic Association, Hockey 

 
 
India and Indian Hockey Federation, the matter was referred to the IOA to suggest a 
compromise. The response of the IOA is awaited and the IOA has been requested to 
expedite the matter. In case the matter is not amic ably settled, the Government would 
place all the facts & action taken by it before the Hon’ble Supreme Court for decision. 
Hockey India and Indian Olympic Association are responsible to select the Indian teams 
for international events. Hockey India is responsib le to field Indian team in all 
international events as per the direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
 
As of now, the Government of India has not accorded recognition either to IHF or the HI. 
However, the International Federation of Hockey (FIH) recognizes Hockey India as the 
national body of India to field its team in the international events.  
 
The review of the performance of the National Teams in International Competitions is an 
ongoing process. The Government believes that settl ement of the dispute between 
Hockey India and the Indian Hockey Federation will serve the game of hockey. To 
improve the performance of hockey, the Government h as taken various steps such as 
organizing coaching camps, engaging foreign coaches, etc. 
 
The performance of Indian Hockey is improving. Recent performances are as follows:- 
1. Senior Women Hockey team won Bronze Medal in World Cup in 2013. 
2. Junior Men team won JOHAR BHARU CUP in 2013. 
3. Senior Women team won Bronze Medal in Asia Cup in 2013. 
4. Senior Men team won Silver Medal in Asia Cup in 2013. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter-I) 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FI NAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 12) 
 
National Playing Fields Association of India (NPFAI ) was established in the year 
2009 as an institutional arrangement to protect ope n spaces and playing fields. While 
NPFAI is the apex body, all State Governments are e xpected to set up similar bodies at 
State level which would be affiliated with national  body with a view to creating national 
awareness of the social benefits that flow out of p laying fields and open green spaces. 
Since commencement of the scheme in 2009, only 12 s tates are stated to have 
formed/or in the process of forming State Level Pla ying Field Associations. The general 
guidelines for development of playfields circulated  by the Ministry to all the State 
Governments have also not elicited any feedback. On  perusal of information made 
available to them, the Committee received an impres sion that the Department of Sports 
has not been very proactive in effectively pursuing  with the State Governments except 
perfunctorily sending reminders after long gaps. Th e Committee feel that it is high time 
that the matter is taken up at the level of Chief M inisters underlying the significance of 
the NPFAI and benefits likely to accrue to the people. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
The issue relating to setting up of State level Pla ying Fields Associations is being 
taken up with the State Governments at higher level s.  The State Governments are also 
being requested to take follow up action on the gen eral guidelines for development of 
playfields and provide feedback in the matter.   
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 13) 
 
There has been massive shortage of coaches.  As aga inst the sanctioned 
strength of 1524 coaches in SAI, there are only 110 9 coaches in position (974 regular 
including 172 women coaches and 135 on contract).  The shortage in the number of 
coaches is as many as 415.  SAI has claimed that no  sports discipline was affected due 
to deficiency of coaches.  The committee do not agr ee with the view.  Performance of 
SAI trainees would have certainly been much better had  there been full strength of the 
coaches.  The committee, therefore, desire that urg ent steps should be taken to fill up 
vacancies against sanctioned strength of coaches and the committee be informed of the 
action taken in this regard.  
 
Reply by the Government 
 
  In order to address the shortage of coaches in SA I, recruitment of coaches in 
phased manner has been planned and accordingly  app ointment of 200 coaches in the 
disciplines of Archery, Athletics, Badminton, Boxin g, Cycling, Fencing, Hockey, 
Gymnastic, Judo, Kayaking & Canoeing, Rowing, Shoot ing, Swimming & Diving, 
Taekwondo, Volleyball, Weightlifting, Wrestling, an d Wushu has already been initiated. 
The said numbers of coaches are being recruited kee ping in view the requirement 
projected by various units of SAI. In response to a dvertisement for recruitment of 
coaches in said discipline 1697  applications have been received. . Further, Olympians in 
the aforesaid disciplines who have applied & found eligible for the post of coach in SAI 
have been selected through interview and have been sent the offer of appointment. The 
whole process of selection for other applicants is likely to be completed shortly. 
 
Observation/Recommendations (Sl. No. 16) 
 
The Committee welcome the initiative to set up a Na tional Institute of Sports 
Sciences and Medicine (NISSM) as a leading institut e to support high performance 
sport persons and to take up high quality research in the field of sport science and sport 

 
 
medicines. The detailed project report for the Inst itute is expected to be finalized by 
July, 2013. The Committee would await the progress in establishing NISSM. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
Draft Detailed Project Report in respect of Nationa l Institute of Sports Sciences 
and Medicine (NISSM)   prepared by Ernst & Young ha d been submitted to the Ministry 
which was circulated to all the stakeholders of the  then Expert Group/ High Power 
Committee inviting their comments. An interactive s ession had also been taken in this 
regard where views and recommendations expressed by  the stakeholders have been 
discussed for appropriate inclusion in the Draft Re port. Apart from this,   certain 
shortcomings had been noted by the Ministry in the Draft Detailed Project Report 
submitted to the Ministry by NSDC in respect of the  Institute.  Accordingly, NSDC was 
requested to revise the Report. The final Detailed Project Report has been submitted to 
the Ministry on 24/10/2013. However, an Addendum to  the DPR is also being submitted 
by NSDC. Necessary follow up action is being taken by the Ministry in the matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
     December, 2013 
              
Agrahayana    , 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
 

 
 
APPENDIX - I 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND  SITTING OF THE STUDY GROUP OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-2014)  
 
The Study Group of the Committee on Estimates sat o n Wednesday, the 
18 th  December, 2013 from 1030 hrs. to 1045. hrs. in Roo m No. 52-B, (Chairman’s 
Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
          Shri Subodh Kant Sahai – Convener 
 
Members 
 
2 Shri K. Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
3 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
4 Shri Prabodh Panda 
5 Shri S. Semmalai 
6 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
7 Smt. Annu Tandon 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
       1. Shri M. Louis Martin              -        Joint Secretary 
       2. Smt. Anita B. Panda    -   Director 
       3. Shri Srinavasulu Gunda        -         Additional Director 
       4.   Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar    -   Deputy Sec retary 
       5. Shri U.C. Bharadwa              -        Deputy Secretary 
 

 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  of the Study Group of the 
Committee on Estimates to the second sitting. The S tudy Group took up for 
consideration the following draft Chapter-I of Action Taken Reports: 
 (i) *** *** *** *** *** ***;*** *** *** *** *** ** *  
(ii) *** *** *** *** *** ***;*** *** *** *** *** ** * 
(iii) Memorandum No. 6 and draft Chapter-I of Actio n Taken Report on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Repo rt of the Committee on 
Estimates (2012-13) on ‘Performance of Sports Autho rity of India (SAI)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Tribal Affairs; and 
3. The Study Group approved the categorization of r eplies as shown in the 
Memorandum and also approved the draft Reports without any modification. 
 
 The Study Group then adjourned . 

 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
MINUTES OF TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2013-14)  
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18 th  December, 2013 from 1045 hrs. 
to 1100  hrs. in Room No. 52-B (Chairman’s Chamber) , Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
              PRESENT 
  
          Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
           Members     
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Shri Khagen Das  
3 Shri K. Bapi Raju Kanumuru  
4 Dr. Thockchom Meinya  
5 Shri Prabodh Panda 
6 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
7 Shri S. Semmalai 
8 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
9 Smt. Annu Tandon 
10 Shri Mukul Wasnik 
11 Shri Omprakash Yadav 
               
                SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin           -       Joint Sec retary 
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda          -       Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda      -       Addl. Direct or 
4. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar  -       Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri  Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the 
Committee. Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
(i) ***   ***   *** 
(ii) ***   ***   *** 
(iii) Action Taken Report on the Recommendations co ntained in the Twenty Second 
Report of the Committee on Estimates (2012-13) on ‘ Performance of Sports Authority of 
India (SAI)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Youth Af fairs & Sports (Department of Sports) 
as approved by the Study Group of Committee on Estimates. 
(iv)  ***   ***   *** 
3. The Committee adopted the abovementioned Reports  without any modification. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalise the above reports after 
factual verification by the Ministries concerned and present the same to Lok Sabha.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
APPENDIX - III  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SECOND REPO RT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 19  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,5,7,8,9,10,11,14,17 and 18) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
12 
 
 
63.15% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committe e do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
Nil 
 
Nil 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
(Sl. Nos. 4, 6,15 and 19)  
  
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
4 
 
 
 
21.05% 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final 
replies of Government is still awaited. 
(Sl. No. 12, 13 and 16) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
3 
 
 
15.8% 
 
 
 