7 
 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS 
(DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS) 
 
 
SPORTS – POLICY, INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRAINING 
FACILITIES 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2010-2011) 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 


SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS) 
 
(SPORTS – POLICY, INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRAINING FACILITIES)  
_______ 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.11.2010 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
     November, 2010/ Agrahayana, 1932(S) 
________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 


EC No. ____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price Rs.____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2004 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press, 
Minto Road, New Delhi. 
 
 
 
  
 

CONTENTS 
 
 Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-11)                     (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2009-10)                      (v) 
                                  
INTRODUCTION   (vi) 
CHAPTER I  INTRODUCTORY 1 
CHAPTER II  
 
 
(i) 
(ii) 
FINANCIAL ALLOCATION AND NEED FOR 
FURTHER RESOURCE MOBILIZATION 
 
Budgetary allocation 
Mobilizing Resources from Corporate Sector 
 
19 
 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER III  
 
 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
 
(viii) 
(ix) 
ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTATION OF 
NATIONAL SPORTS POLICY, 2001 
 
Integration of Sports with Education 
Broadbasing of Sports 
Development of Sports Infrastructure 
Training facilities for sportspersons and   
coaches 
Scientific Back-up to sportspersons 
Participation of Women in Sports 
Participation of persons with disabilities in  
Sports 
Functioning of National Sports Federations 
Appraisal of National Sports Policy  
 
30 
 
 
30 
32 
42 
48 
 
65 
66 
71 
 
74 
82 
CHAPTER IV  
 
 
(i)  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
PREPARATIONS FOR COMMONWEALTH 
GAMES, 2010 
 
Institutional Arrangement  
Financial Allocation & Expenditure 
Development of Infrastructure & its use 
Training of sportspersons 
 
85 
 
 
86 
88 
91 
96 
  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
101 
  ANNXURES  
 I Details of assistance provided from National 
Sports Development Fund (NSDF) 
 
130 
 II Statement of Grants released to Sports 
Federations during last three years 
 
134 

 III Guidelines for more efficient management of 
Coaching camps, selection of coaches, 
selection of Athletes, etc 
 
137 
 IV Status of Competition and Training Venues for 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 
 
140 
 V Status of Competition and Training Venues for 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 
 
143 
   APPENDICES   
  Minutes of the Sitting s of the Committee held 
on 27.10.09 , 04.01.10, 23.03.10 , 10.08.10, 
19.08.10 and 26.08.10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-11) 
 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
    Members  
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
5. Shri Milind Deora  
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
7. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
8. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi  
9. Shri P. Karunakaran  
10. Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
11. Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
12. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam  
13. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
14. Smt. Ranee Narah  
15. Shri Prabodh Panda  
16. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
17. Shri Kabindra Purkayastha  
18. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
19. Shri K. Jaya Surya Prakash Reddy  
20. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy  
21. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
22. Shri S. Semmalai  
23. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
24. Shri Madan Lal Sharma  
25. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh  
26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
27. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
28. Shri Lalji Tandon  
29. Shri Manish Tewari  
30. Shri K.C. Venugopal  
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.         Shri U.S. Saxena    -          Joint Secretary   
 2.        Smt. Anita B. Panda           -          Additional Director  
 3. Smt. Juby Amar   -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2009-10) 
 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
    Members  
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
5. Shri Milind Deora  
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
7. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
8. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi  
9. Shri P. Karunakaran  
10. Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
11. Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
12. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam  
13. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
14. Smt. Ranee Narah  
15. Shri Prabodh Panda  
16. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
17. Shri Kabindra Purkayastha  
18. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
19. Shri K. Jaya Surya Prakash Reddy  
20. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy  
21. Shri C. Rajendran 
22. Shri S. Semmalai  
23. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
24. Shri Madan Lal Sharma  
25. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh  
26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
27. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
28. Shri Lalji Tandon  
29. Shri Manish Tewari  
30. Shri K.C. Venugopal  
 
(v) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2010-2011) having been authorized 
by the Committee to present this Preliminary  Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Sports - Policy, Infrastructure and 
Training Facilities’ p ertaining to Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (Dep artment of 
Sports).  
 
2. The subject was selected for detailed examination by the Committee on 
Estimates (2009-2010), taking into account the urgent need to promote sports culture in 
India. Though quite a few Indian sportspersons have made a mark in events like Chess, 
Tennis, Badm inton, Wrestling, Boxing, Archery and Shooting, India ranks quite low 
among the countries winning Olympic medals for various sports disciplines, despite 
having a billion-plus population. The subject ‘Sports – Policy, Infrastructure and Training 
Facilities’ was carried forward for examination & report during the year 2010-2011 in the 
wake of the fact that the XIX  Commonwealth Games would be held in Delhi during 3 -17 
October, 2010. 
 
3. The Committee would like to express their gratitude to the Committee on 
Estimates (2009-2010) for selection and examination of the subject and thereby 
providing valuable guidance to the present Committee. 
 
4. The Committee held six sittings on the subject, out of which three were convened 
for briefing /oral evidence by the representatives of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports (Department of Sports). The Committee also invited representatives of Indian 
Olympic Association (IOC) & few National Sports Federations for oral evidence. The 
representatives of IOC, Archery, Athletics, Football, Kabaddi & Kho -Kho Federations 
alongwith representatives of Paralympic Committee of India appeared before the 
Committee. They enlightened the Committee on various issues relating to development 
of Sports in the country. The representatives of Organ izing Committee for XIX 
Commonwealth Games, 2010, Delhi also appeared before the Committee.   
 

5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Youth Affairs and Sports (Depart ment of Sports), IOA, Organizing Committee for 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 & various NSFs who appeared before the m and placed 
their considered views on the subject. The Committee also wish to thank them for 
furnishing the information required in connection with examination of the subject during 
the briefings and oral evidences. 
 
6. The Report was considered & adopted by the Com mittee at the sitting held on 
26.08.2010. 
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of the 
Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
1st November, 2010              
Kartika 10, 1932(S) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
       CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 Sports and games have always been seen as an integral component in all round 
development of human personality. Apart from being a means of physical exercise and 
fitness, sports and games have been a medium of entertainment, generation of a spirit 
of healthy competition, bonding and pride in the community and an avenue of 
constructive preoccupation of young people. 
1.2 There has been a sea change in the competitive aspect of sports over the years. 
Excelling in sports is no lon ger a matter of physical stamina & endurance but is a result 
of complex  mixture of training, scientific back -up comprising physiological, 
biomechanical, nutritional & psychological elements, availability and use of international 
standard equipment, adoption of research based modern technique s and utilization of 
modern infrastructure. All these aspects need to be regularly developed on the basis of 
new research studies. 
1.3 India has, of late , been  positioning herself as an important host 
country/destination for organizing a variety of discipline -specific/multi-discipline mega 
international sports events . The Afro-Asian Games were held at Hyderabad in 2003 
followed by Commonwealth Youth Games in Pune in 2008. Now the stage is being set 
for the main Commonweal th Games at Delhi in October, 2010 . Hosting international 
sports events has a definite positive impact on development of sports in a country. It 
leads not only to an overall development of sports infrastructure but also encourages  
sports culture among the people at large.  

 
2 
 
1.4 As regards the performance aspect, India‟s sports performance at various events 
over the years has not been very encouraging.  In the overall Olympic Games scenario, 
India which is the second largest country in term of population and seventh largest in 
term of area, has won only 20 medals so far in spite of participating in the Olympics 22 
times since 1900. Besides, an individual Gold medal could be won only in 2008. In fact, 
after the 1980 Olympics, India had failed to win any medal f or the next 3 Olympics. 
Now, it has slipped to the 50 th rank from 23 rd in 1951. Same is the case in Asian 
Games. India was at second place in the  inaugural Asiad at Delhi in 195 1. In the last 
games held at Doha  in 2006, India was at seventh position; behin d Korea, Japan, 
Kazakhistan, Thailand & Iran – countries which are smaller and have far less 
population. 
1.5 It was in this backdrop , that the Committee took up this subject for detailed 
examination and report. 
 Organizational Set up 
1.6 Sports is  a State subject. Sports promotion is basically the responsibility of 
various National Sports Federations, which are autonomous. At the Central Government 
level, the role of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports is to create the infrastructure 
and promo te capacity building for broad -based sports as well as for achieving 
excellence in various competitive events, at national and international level.  
 The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, Government of India owes its origin to the 
Department of Sports, w hich was set up in the year, 1982 at the time of the IXth Asian 
Games in New Delhi. During the International Youth Year , 1985, it was upgraded to the 

 
3 
 
Department of Youth Affairs & Sports. On 17 th May, 2000, it bec ame a full -fledged 
Ministry. The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has been bifurcated into two separate 
Departments namely, Department of Youth Affairs and Department of Sports, under 
independent charge of two separate Secretaries, with the overall charge of a Union 
Minister of State (Independent charge) with effect from 29th April, 2008. 
I. Department of Sports comprises of the following two divisions: 
(A) Sports Division – It looks after all the activities of the Department, except issues 
relating to Commonwealth Games 2010. 
(B) Commonwealth Games-2010 Division – A separate division was created as per 
the recommendations of the Group of Ministers on 25.10.2004 to look after matters 
relating to the preparations for holding Commonwealth Games, 2010 in Delhi. 
 (II)  Attached Offices under the control of Department of Sports:  
(a) The Sports Authority of India (SAI) is the nodal agency at the national level 
to promote excellence in sports; 
(b) The Lakshmibai University of Physical Education (LNUPE) is the national 
apex institution for Physical Education; 
(c) Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) Mission Directorate 
(within the Department of Sports) to promote basic sports infrastructure 
and sports competitions at the grassroots level; 
(d) National Playing Fields Association of India (NPFAI), a society re gistered 
under Societies Registration Act, 1860  to protect, promote and preserve 
playing fields throughout the country;  

 
4 
 
(e) National Anti -Doping Agency (NADA), which is responsible for test -
planning, result management, disciplinary and appellate functions to  
prevent use of drugs in sports and promoting  clean sports; 
(f) National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL), which is responsible for dope 
testing and related research activities. 
 (i) Sports Authority of India (SAI)  was set up in 1984 as an autonomous body with 
the objective of promoting sporting excellence. SAI is managed by a Governing Body 
under the Chairmanship of Union Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports. The aims and 
objectives of SAI are as follows: 
 To promote and broad-base sports in the country. 
 Talent identification and development. 
 To implement schemes/programmes for achieving excellence in sports in 
 different di sciplines at international level in order to establish India as a 
major sporting power. 
 To manage the Stadia in Delhi, which were constructed /renovated for the IXth 
Asian Games held in 1982. 
 To act as an interface between the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports & other 
agencies concerned with the promotion/development of sports in the country. 
 To establish, run, manage and administer the inst itutions to produce high calibre  
coaches, sports scientists and physical education teachers. 
 To plan, construct, acquire, develop, take over, manage, maintain and utilize 
sports infrastructure and facilities in the country. 
 To initiate, undertake, sponsor,  stimulate and encourage research projects  
related to various sports sciences for upgradation of sports, sportspersons and 
coaches;  
 Other incidental issues concerning promotion, development and excellence in 
sports. 
 
1.7 Sports being a State subject, all the State Government/Union Territories have 
either Directorates of Sports or have Sports Authorities or C ouncils. Some States have 
both bodies. Besides, there are autonomous bodies also like the Indian Olympic 
Association (IOA) & various National Sports Federations. 

 
5 
 
 
1.8 IOA is the National Olympic Committee affiliated to International Olympic 
Committee and is responsible for the promotion and development of sports in India, 
conduct of National Games and for the partici pation of Indian teams in multi -disciplinary 
mega sports events such as the Olympic Games, the Commonwealth Games, the Asian 
Games and their various editions. 
1.9 National Sports Federations are autonomous registered societies fully 
responsible and accountable for the overall management, direction, control, regulation, 
promotion and development of their  discipline. They are in turn recognized by the 
various international federation s & also by  IOA. The Ministry recognizes one National 
level Sports Federation in each discipline for purpose of development and promotion of 
their respective disciplines.  The Ministry determines the eligibility conditions for 
recognition of NSFs and determines their entitlements for various types of financial 
assistance like training and participation of teams in national and international 
tournaments, purchase of equipments, coaching with support etc.  The individual 
federations are responsible for the conduct of national championships in their respective 
sports disciplines, talent identification and development and overall development of the 
sport. In the last 3 years ( 2007-2010), Federations/Associations in 59 disciplines were 
given grants by the Central Government.1 
 
 
                                                             
1 Please refer to Chapter -III for the list of Sports Federations and grants received 
by those in the last 3 years. 

 
6 
 
Sports Policy 
1.10 Physical education, games and sports have been receiving attention over 
successive Plans.  However, it was only after India hosted the IX Asian Games in 1982 
that “Sports” as a subject of policy started receiving attention. National Sports Policy, 
1984 was the first move towards developing an organized and systematic framework for 
the development and promotion of sports in the country, and the precursor of the 
present National Sports Policy, 2001. 
Text of the National Sports Policy, 2001 was provided to the Committee as under: 
 Preamble to National Sports Policy, 2001 
1.11 Activities relating to Sports and Physical Education are essential components of 
human resource development, helping to promote good health, comradeship and a 
spirit of friendly competition, which, in turn, has positive impact on the overall 
development of personality of the youth. Excellence in sports enhances the sense of 
achievement, national pride and patriotism. Sports also provide beneficial recreation, 
improve productivity and foster social harmony and discipline. 
1.12 A Resolution on the National Sports Policy was laid in both Houses of Parliament 
in August, 1984. The National Sports Policy, 1984 was formulated with the objective of 
raising the standard of Spor ts in the country. The National Education Policy, 1986 also 
incorporated the objectives of the Policy in so far as the Education Sector was 
concerned. The National Sports Policy, 1984 provided inter-alia, that the progress made 
in its implementation would be reviewed every five years to determine the further course 
of action, as may be necessary, following such review. 

 
7 
 
1.13 Over the years, it has transpired that even as the National Sports Policy, 1984 
encompasses various facets in respect of encouraging sp orts in the country, the 
implementation of the same is not complete and leaves much to be desired. The goals 
and objectives laid down in the Policy are yet to be substantially realized. A need has, 
therefore, been felt to reformulate the National Sports Po licy in more concrete terms, 
spelling out the specific measures required to be taken by the various agencies, which 
are involved, in various ways, in promoting sports in the country. 
 Introduction 
1.14 In terms of the National Sports Policy, 2001, the Cent ral Government, in 
conjunction with the State Government, the Olympic Association (IOA) and the National 
Sports Federation will concertedly pursue the twin objectives of "Broad -basing" of 
Sports and "Achieving Excellence in Sports at the National and Inter national levels". 
Sports activities, in which the country has potential strength and competitive advantage, 
need to be vigorously promoted. Towards this end, Sports and Physical Education 
would be integrated more effectively with the Education Curriculum. 
1.15 While the broad -basing of Sports will, primarily remain a responsibility of the 
State Governments, the Union Government will actively supplement their efforts in this 
direction and for taping the latent talent, including in the rural and tribal areas.  The 
Union Government and the Sports Authority of India (SAI), in association with the Indian 
Olympic Association and the National Sports Federations, will focus specific attention 
on the objective of achieving excellence at the National and International levels. 
  

 
8 
 
 Infrastructure development 
1.16 The question of inclusion of "Sports" in the Concurrent List of the Constitution of 
India and introduction of appropriate legislation for guiding all matters involving national 
and inter-state jurisdiction, will be pursued. 
 Broadbasing of sports 
1.17 Considering the key role of sports in national life and for inculcating national pride 
in the younger generation, the objective of br oad basing, that is, universaliz ation or 
mass participation in Sports assumes special significance. It is imperative to ensure that 
the educational institutions, Schools and Colleges in both rural and urban areas; the 
Panchayati Raj Institutions, Local Bodies, the Government machinery, the Sports 
Associations and Industrial Undertakings,  as also the various Youth and Sports Clubs, 
including those of the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) throughout the country 
are, and remain, fully associated with this Programme. Efforts will be made to promote 
and encourage women‟s participation in spor ts. The Union and State Governments, as 
well as the Sports Federations/Associations will endeavour to promote a "club culture" 
for the speedier development of Sports in the country. 
1.18 In the National Sports Policy, 2001, high priority will be accorded t o the 
development of Sports in the rural areas to harness the available talent and potential. In 
this context, the Village Panchayats/Gaon Sabhas as well as rural Youth and Sports 
clubs will be mobilized to facilitate development of the requisite infrastructure and for the 
identification of talent through an appropriate competition structure in the rural areas as 
also in the disadvantaged and remote parts of the country which appear to merit special 

 
9 
 
consideration under various schemes including for the Nort h East. Efforts will also be 
made for tapping such potential as swimming in coastal areas and Archery in tribal 
areas. The available talent will be nourished and actively supported. Geographically 
disadvantaged Regions will be extended additional support f or the promotion of Sports. 
There has been a strong tradition of Indigenous and traditional games in practically all 
parts of the country through ages. Indigenous games will be promoted through schemes 
related to rural sports. 
 Integration with Education 
1.19 The integration of Sports and Physical Education with the Educational 
Curriculum, making it a compulsory subject of learning up to the Secondary School level 
and incorporating the same in the evaluation system of the student, will be actively 
pursued. A National Fitness Programme would be introduced in all Schools in the 
country, steps initiated to augment the availability of infrastructure, including play fields/ 
sports equipment and action taken to provide Physical Education Teachers in 
educational i nstitutions through, inter -alia, the training of selected teachers in these 
disciplines. Specialized Sports Schools may also be set up. An appropriate Inter -school 
and Inter- College/University competition structure would be introduced at the National, 
State and District levels. 
1.20 The availability of adequate sports facilities throughout the country is basic to the 
development and broad -basing of Sports. In addition to the Union and State 
Governments, the sustained involvement of other agencies, includin g the Panchayati 
Raj Institutions, Local Bodies, Educational Institutions, Sports Federations/Associations. 

 
10 
 
Clubs and Industrial Undertakings will be enlisted in the creation, utilization and proper 
maintenance of the Sports infrastructure. While existing play fields and stadia, both in 
rural and urban areas, will be maintained for sports purposes, the introduction of 
suitable legislation may be considered for providing open areas to promote sports 
activities. Steps would be taken to evolve low cost functio nal and environment -friendly 
designs in this regard, so that maximum benefits could be derived through relatively low 
levels of investment. Efforts will also be made to optimally utilize the available 
infrastructure and manpower and Special Coaching Cam ps organised, during the 
vacations, to provide intensive training to talented sportspersons, even as they pursue 
their academic work. 
 Excellence in Sports 
1.21 The Union Government would focus attention on achieving Excellence in Sports 
at the National and I nternational levels. Various sports disciplines will be prioritized on 
the basis of proven potential, popularity and international performance. Particular 
emphasis will be placed on the development of such priority disciplines and the 
prioritization review ed, from time to time. The IOA and the State Governments would 
also accord higher priority to such disciplines. In planning the development of various 
disciplines, the genetic and geographical variations within the country would be taken 
into account so th at in areas of potential, in particular disciplines, timely steps may be 
taken to harness the existing and emerging talent. Centers of excellence will be set up 
to identify and train outstanding sportspersons including sports academies where young 
and talented sports persons will be groomed to achieve higher levels of performance in 
the international sports arena. 

 
11 
 
 National Sports Federations (NSFs) 
1.22 It is recognized that the management and development of Sports are the function 
of the Indian Olympic Association and the National Sports Federations, which are 
Autonomous Bodies and who, in turn, have affiliated State level and District level 
Associations. The Government and other concerned agencies and the 
Federations/Associations have, therefore, to wor k together harmoniously and in a 
coordinated manner to fulfil the objectives of the National Sports Policy, 2001. At the 
same time, the Indian Olympic Association and the various Sports 
Federations/Associations will need to demonstrate orientation towards the achievement 
of results and ensure tangible progress in the field of Sports, keeping which in view, 
model bye -laws/organizational structures may be formulated for the NSFs, in 
consultation with them, and with due regard to the Olympic Charter, so as to make the 
functioning of the Federations/Associations transparent, professional and accountable. 
1.23 Acknowledging the importance of National Championships for developing 
competitive spirit and for talent -scouting, it would be incumbent on the 
Federations/Associations to hold Annual Championships in various disciplines in all 
categories, viz, Seniors, Juniors and Sub -Juniors (for both Men & Women) at the 
District, State and National levels. Each National Federation would draw up the Annual 
National Calendar of these events sufficiently in advance, every year, which would be 
compiled and published by the IOA. Greater emphasis will be placed on promoting the 
development of Sports amongst the juniors and sub -juniors and the more talented 
amongst them identified for Special Training and Support. 

 
12 
 
1.24 Effective participation in International Events, especially the Olympics, Asian and 
Commonwealth Games, is a matter of National prestige. Participation in these Events 
has, so far, largely been restricted to those di sciplines in which creditable performance 
is anticipated. The contingents to represent the country in such events need be chosen 
in due time, in the light of performance and promise, in National Championships and 
elsewhere. Long Term Development Plans (LTD Ps) will be prepared for each Sports 
discipline, incorporating details of standard of performance, targeted levels of 
performance, participation in competitions at national and international levels, sports 
exchanges, scientific support and the holding of i nternational competitions in the 
country. The implementation of the LTDPs will be reviewed periodically and the same 
would be continued, as a Rolling Plan year after year. The release of Government 
assistance would be considered on the basis of performance  relating to the LTDP in 
question. 
 Scientific back-up to Sports Persons 
1.25 The significance of scientific -back up to Sports stands well -established. 
Accordingly, action will be initiated to strengthen this area, in accordance with 
international standard s. Experts would be associated with each Sports Discipline or 
Groups of Sports Disciplines, on a continuing basis, to provide the requisite support in 
terms of nutrition, psychology, medicine, pharmacology, physiology, bio -mechanics and 
anthropometry2 as well as other branches of Sports Sciences. Suitable mechanisms 
would be introduced to achieve co -ordination between the laboratory and the field, that 
is, between the Coaches and the Sports Scientists, and particular care taken to ensure 
                                                             
2  A Branch of physical anthropology 

 
13 
 
nutritional su pport to talented sports persons and to sustain their mental health and 
competitive spirit. 
1.26 Appropriate research and development measures will also be initiated for the 
promotion of sports and to impart spe cial skills to promising sports persons so that they 
are enabled to give of their best in international and other prestigious competitions. The 
SAI and other public and private organisations will be involved in such research and 
development programmes. The SAI and the NSFs would take coordinated steps 
towards the modernisation of the infrastructure required for the training of sports 
persons and to provide them with scientific support for achieving Excellence in Sports. 
 Sports Equipment 
1.27 Suitable measures will be initiated to ensure access to sport s equipment of high 
quality. While the approach to import of equipment would, no doubt, bear the long term 
interests of the indigenous sports goods manufacturers in mind, the import of raw 
materials as well as finished sports goods of international quality  should be permissible 
under Open General License. Similarly, Sports Federations/Ass ociations and other 
recognized organizations involved in Sports Promotion, as also eminent Sports persons, 
may be  extended exemption of customs d uty. The matter re lating to  exemption from 
sales tax for Sports Goods and of free movement of raw materials and finished sports 
goods in the country would be pursued with the State Governments. 
  
 

 
14 
 
 Training and Development of Coaches, Sports Scientists Judges, Referees and 
 Umpires 
1.28 The Policy recognizes that the standards of coaching and scientific back up in 
the country and those pertaining to umpires, judges and referees needs to be upgraded. 
Concerted steps will be taken to train Coaches, Sports Scientists, Judges, Referees and 
Umpires, in line with international standards. In addition to developing such expertise on 
an institutional basis, within the country, the deputation of promising persons to Training 
Courses, Conferences. Seminars, workshops and tournaments abroad, so t hat they 
remain abreast of relevant developments in their fields, will be encouraged. Coaches 
would receive rigorous training for up -gradation of skills and may also be deputed 
overseas for the purpose. 
 Incentives to Sports Persons 
1.29 Incentives provide  recognition and financial security to distinguished sports 
persons, during and after their sporting careers, and also motivate the youth in the 
serious pursuit of sports activities. Adequate assistance will be extended for Insurance 
Cover and Medical Trea tment in the event of such eventuality/requirement. Job 
reservation for sportspersons as per the prescribed categories will continue. 
1.30 Social Recognition, the Conferment of Awards and Honours at the National, 
State, and District levels, incentives in t he form of Cash Awards and Avenues of 
Employment will be important elements of the National Sports Policy, 2001. Alongside 
sports persons, suitable incentives will be provided to Coaches, Judges and Referees 
for developing skills and enriching their experience. 

 
15 
 
 Sports and Tourism 
1.31 The Policy recognizes the inter -dependence and inter -relationship between the 
Sports and Tourism sectors, the integrated development of which is capable of 
generating very substantial revenues and ensuring a high volume of tourist traffic from 
within the country and from overseas, while simultaneously promoting a sports & fitness 
culture in the country. Adventure Sports, in particular, have great potential for the 
promotion of tourism. Towards this end, the concerned Ministr ies/Departments of the 
Union and State Governments, that is those handling Sports, Tourism and related 
subjects, will strive to draw up joint/unified Plans and Proposals for various parts of the 
country, with due reference to the possibilities in the North  Eastern Region, and to 
execute these programmes in a systematic and coordinated manner. 
 Resource Mobilization for Sports 
1.32 Insufficiency of financial resources has been a major constraint in promoting 
sports in India. While the Union and State Governm ents would need to arrange higher 
budgetary provisions, special efforts are equally called for to mobilize corporate funds 
for the development of Sport s in the country. Accordingly, C orporate Houses would be 
approached and encouraged to adopt and support p articular disciplines (as well as 
sportspersons) in the longer term; for this purpose. Tripartite Agreements between the 
Government and the concerned Sports Federations and the Corporate Houses may be 
entered into for different Sports Disciplines. In the c ontext of the Policy of Economic 
Liberalization, the Private/Corporate sectors would be more closely involved with the 
promotion of Sports, in general, and to build and maintain Sports infrastructure, in 

 
16 
 
particular, with requisite emphasis on the latest te chnologies. A suitable package of 
incentives may also be evolved for this purpose. Eminent sports persons of established 
merit will be encouraged to set up and manage Sports Academies. 
1.33 It may be recalled that a National Sports Development Fund has bee n created 
with initial contribution of the Union Government. All contributions (from within and 
outside the country) to this Fund have been extended 100% exemption from Income 
Tax. The mobilization of resources for the Fund will be strenuously pursued and the 
feasibility of exempting the incomes o f Sports Federations and Sports persons (from 
sources other than employers) from payment of Income Tax explored. 
1.34 The revenues generated by the sale of Broadcasting Television Rights of Sports 
Events will be sha red between the concerned Sports Federation/Association s and the 
Broadcasting/Telecasting agency, public or private, on mutually agreed terms, through 
appropriate revenue sharing arrangements. 
 Mass Media 
1.35 The role of Mass Media is central to the popularization of Sports amongst the 
people at large. The Electronic Media, including the National Broadcasters, the Private 
Channels and t he Print Media would be suitably  mobilized for strengthening a sports 
culture in the country. 
 Globalization 
1.36 As a resurgent India confidently enters the New Millennium, Sports (and related 
activities) will be increasingly utilized as a medium for promoting cooperation and 

 
17 
 
friendship in the Region, as also globally. Sports Exchange Programmes will be 
pursued with all friendly Nations, with emphasis, on the one hand on Advance Training 
for Sports persons and Coaches, Scientific Support, the latest Research Aids and 
Development of Infrastructure, and earning laurels for the country, in Sports and 
Games, on the other. 
1.37 The National Sports Policy, 2001 would be reviewed, periodically, in order, inter -
alia, to incorporate changes/modifications which may be necessitated by technological 
and other advancements in the field of Sports.  
 
1.38 Financial allocation for Sports in the country forms Chapter II of the report. 
Various issues in implementation of National Sports Policy, 2001  have been taken up in 
Chapter III. Chapter IV  deals with the preparation of India for the Commonwealth 
Games, 2010 in Delhi – in terms of development of infrastructure & providing training to 
sportspersons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
18 
 
CHAPTER  II 
 
FINANCIAL ALLOCATION AND NEED FOR FURTHER RESOURCE MOBILIZATION 
 
2.1 The National Sports Policy acknowledges that insufficiency of financial resources 
has been a major constraint in promoting sports in India. It states that w hile the Union 
and State Governments would need to arrange higher budgetary provisions, special 
efforts are equally called for to mobilize corporate funds for the development of Sport s 
in the country. Accordingly, Corporate Houses would be approached and encouraged to 
adopt and support particular disciplines (as well as sports persons) in the longer term; 
for this purpose. Tripartite Agreements between the Government and the concerned 
Sports Federations and the Corporate Houses may be entered into for different Sports 
Disciplines. 
 (i)  Budgetary allocation 
2.2 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports was asked to furnish a statement o n the 
budgetary allocation and utilization since 2005 -2006 till date. The following statement 
was accordingly furnished to the Committee in March, 2010: 
Rs. in crore  
Year  Budgetary allocation  Actual expenditure  % of utilization 
Plan  Non-Plan Plan  Non-Plan  Plan  Non-Plan  
2005-06 309.34 32.89 265.16 32.68 85.71 99.36 
2006-07 379.50 36.51 340.13 35.54 89.63 97.34 
2007-08 534.77 114.79 510.11 101.50 95.39 88.42 
2008-09 1121.00 217.70 1121.00 217.36 100.00 99.84 
2009-10 2716.00 680.06 2428.55* 677.58** 89.42 99.63 
* Actual Expenditure upto February 2010.  
** Inclusive of release of Rs. 413.90 crore to OC, which has been appro ved and 
sanction is under issue. 
2.3 As informed by the Ministry, the Budget Estimates for 2009 -2010 in  respect of 
Plan and Non-Plan Schemes of the Department of Sports is as under:   

 
19 
 
(a) Plan Schemes  
 (Rs. in crore) 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme BE 
2009-10 
Items of expenditure and 
broad objectives of the 
Scheme  
1. Panchayat Yuva Krida aur 
Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) 
160.00 (i) Grants to States/UTs for 
development of playfields in 10% 
of village and block panchayats   
(ii) Grants to States/UTs for 
acquisition of sports equipments, 
accessories, sports fixtures, 
consumables and 
repairs/maintenance 
(iii) Grants to States/UTs for  
meet operational expenses of 
non-competition activities 
including honorarium to 
Kridashree and maintenance of 
infrastructure etc. 
(iv) Grants to States/UTs for 
organizing sports competitions at 
block level, district level, state 
level and national level. 
2. Nagar Palika Yuva Krida aur 
Khel Abhiyan (NPYKKA) 
Urban Sports Infrastructure 
Scheme (USIS) – a new 
scheme under formulation  
5.00 For creation of sports 
infrastructure in urban areas   
3 Assistance to National Sports 
Federations (NSFs) 
41.00 Grants to NSFs for holding 
National tournaments, 
international tournaments in 
India and participation in 
international sports competitions, 
organizing of national coaching 
camps 
 
4 Talent Search & Training 3.00 assistance to promising 
sportspersons for training and 
training-cum-competitions in 
India and abroad, for purchase 
of equipment and for scientific 
support; and assistance to 
supporting personnel such as 
coaches, sports scientists, 
doctors, masseurs etc. for 

 
20 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme BE 
2009-10 
Items of expenditure and 
broad objectives of the 
Scheme  
undergoing specialized training 
and for attending 
seminars/conferences and major 
international sports events and 
for appearing in qualifying 
examinations.  
 
5 National Sports Development 
Fund 
15.25 assistance to elite athletes either 
directly or through their 
respective National Sports 
Federations for their specialized 
training within the country and 
abroad, exposure in international 
competitions, scientific support, 
equipments, accessories, out of 
pocket allowance, nutritional 
supplements etc. 
6 Scheme for promotion of 
sports and games in schools, 
colleges and universities 
5.00 It has now been decided to 
expand the coverage of existing 
SAI schemes by earmarking 
additional funds in lieu of the 
Scheme of Sports and Games in 
schools, colleges and 
universities.   
 
7 Promotion of sports among 
disabled  
5.00 (i) Grant for sports coaching and 
purchase of consumables & 
non-consumable sports 
equipment to Schools 
(ii) Grant for Training of 
Coaches 
(iii) Grant for holding District, 
State & National level 
competitions for the disabled. 
 
8 Special Cash awards to medal 
winners in international sports 
events including Rajiv Gandhi 
Khel Ratna Award  
5.00 Grant of special cash awards to 
winners of medals in Olympic 
Games, Asian Games, 
Commonwealth Games, World 
Cups and Championships, Asian 
Championships, Commonwealth 
Championships in disciplines 
covered in Olympic Games, 
Asian Games and 

 
21 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme BE 
2009-10 
Items of expenditure and 
broad objectives of the 
Scheme  
Commonwealth Games and their 
coaches   
9 Pension to meritorious 
sportspersons  
5.00 Grant of pension to 
sportspersons who have won 
gold, silver and bronze medals in 
Olympic Games, World 
Cup/World Championships, 
Asian Games, Commonwealth 
Games and Paralympic games 
and have at tained the age of 30 
years and have retired from 
active sports career  
10 Sports Authority of India 164.00  (i) Sports Promotion and 
Development Activities              
(ii) Training & Management   
(iii)  Maintenance of Stadia & 
Buildings  
(iv) Academic Programmes 
(v) National Sports Talent 
Contest 
(vi) Army Boys Sports 
Companies 
(vii) Special Area Games. 
(viii) SAI Training Centre 
(ix) Centre of Excellence 
(x) National Coaching Scheme 
(xi) Central Pool of Technical 
Sports 
(xii) Physical Education 
Programmes                   
(xiii) Computerized Sports Data 
Bank with National/ International 
network. 
 
11 Laxmibai National University 
of Physical Education, Gwalior 
23.00 (i) To prepare qualified leaders in 
the field of physical education 
and   
(ii) to undertake, promote and 
disseminate research and also 
publish literature in this field. 
(iii) to provide professional and 
academic leadership to other 
institutions. 
(iv) to provide vocational 

 
22 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme BE 
2009-10 
Items of expenditure and 
broad objectives of the 
Scheme  
guidance and placement 
services to people in this field. 
(v) to promote mass participation 
in physical education activities. 
(vi) to undertake extra curricular 
studies, extrusion programmes  
 
12 National Anti Doping Agency 
(NADA) 
2.25 (i) responsible for promoting, 
coordinating, and monitoring the 
doping control pro gramme in 
sports in all its forms in the 
country 
 
(ii) Expenses on the functioning 
of Anti Doping Disciplinary 
Panel, the Anti Doping Appeal 
Panel  
 
(iii) sample collection of athletes 
and wide dissemination of  
information as well as education 
of athletes and coaches about 
the ill effects of doping and 
nature of banned substances  
13 National Dope Testing 
Laboratory (NDTL) 
14.00 (i) responsible for t esting dope 
samples and for conducting 
advance research on the subject 
by maintaining close association 
with the WADA and WADA 
accredited laboratories 
(ii) procurement of equipment for 
dope testing 
(running expenses of the 
laboratory 
14 Scheme for contribution to 
World Anti Doping Agency 
(WADA) 
0.50 As a member of WADA, the 
payment of annual contribution is 
made. 
15 Commonwealth Games, 2010 2000.00 (i) SAI Stadia Renovation 
(ii) All India Tennis Association 
(iii) Preparation of teams  
(iv) Upgradation/ creation of 
venues 
(v) Overlays 
(vi) Equipments and furnishings 

 
23 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme BE 
2009-10 
Items of expenditure and 
broad objectives of the 
Scheme  
of stadia 
 
 Total: 2448.00  
 
 (b) Non-Plan Schemes 
 (Rs. in crore ) 
S. 
No
. 
Name of the Scheme BE 
2009-10 
 
1 Scheme of Assistance to 
National Sports Federations  
3.00 (i) National Championships 
(ii) payment of salary of assistant 
secretary etc of NSFs 
2 Arjuna Award 1.10 (i) award money 
(ii) other expenses connected 
with award ceremony viz hotel 
accommodation, travel, 
ceremony dress etc of awardees  
3 Dhyanchand Award 0.20 -do- 
4 Dronacharya Award 0.32 -do- 
5 Sports Authority of India 38.00 (i) salary, pension etc of SAI 
employees 
(ii) electricity, water charges, 
property tax of SAI offices and 
stadia  
6 Laxmibai National University 
of Physical Education  
7.00 (i) salary and pension etc of 
LNUPE employees 
(ii) maintenance cost of campus  
7 National Sports Championship 
for Women  
1.10 Assistance to States/UTs for 
holding block, district, state and 
national level competitions and 
making expenses towards 
lodging & boarding and travel 
expenses of women participants 
8 National Welfare Fund for 
sportspersons 
1.00 (i) pension to existing pensioners 
(ii) grant of lumpsum financial 
assistance to outstanding 
sportspersons of yesteryears and 
their families, who brought glo ry 
to the nation  but are now living 
in indigent circumstances 
(iii) assistance for medical 

 
24 
 
S. 
No
. 
Name of the Scheme BE 
2009-10 
 
treatment etc  
9. Commonwealth Games 2010 264.42  
 Total 316.14  
 
2.4 The Budgetary allocation for the Department of Sports during 2009 -10 and its 
percentage of total budget was furnished to the Committee as under:  
Rs. in crore  
Name of the 
Department  
Budgetary allocation (RE)  % of total expenditure of 
GOI   
Plan  Non-Plan Plan*  
 
Non-Plan**  
Department of Sports 2716.00 680.06 0.86 0.096 
       * Total Plan expenditure of GOI during 2009-10 was Rs. 3,15,176 crore.  
       **  Total Non-Plan expenditure of GOI during 2009-10 was Rs. 7,06,371 crore. 
 
2.5 Department of Sports also added the following during evidence:  
 “As regards the budgetary allocations, indeed, Sir, we wholeheartedly agree that 
 they are low and they can be improved.  It is our consistent effort to show our 
 performance so that allocations are increased accordingly.” 
 
2.6 Secretary, Department of Sports further added: 
 “At the moment, we are falling short both in terms of total numbers and in terms 
of nurturing them into national and world -level sportspersons. One of the main 
reasons for that is under funding of the sports sector. To give a very small 
example, until the Scheme for preparation of sportsperson in the Commonwealth 
Games was sanctioned in June, 2008, we were allowed, through Sports 
Authority, to spend only Rs. 225 per head per day for a total of six to eight weeks 
of training a young sportsperson… 
 …. My submission before the hon. Committee is that in order to improve 
our performance increase in investment, increase in funding in sports sector is 
very important. Then we will be guided by whether we are spending it 
appropriately or not and in  the present scheme for coaching sports persons, I 
would submit that we have identified the areas where results will be shown.” 

 
25 
 
2.7 A representative of Archery Federation also expressed anguish over the 
inadequacy of funds for sports during evidence as under: 
 “The budget of the Sports Ministry has been very low. As compared to China 
and other countries, we are nowhere near them. Hardly Rs. 600 crore is the 
budget allocation for the Ministry of Sports. More money is required for holding 
competitions and mor e money is required for talent hunt and international 
competitions.” 
 
2.8 Concerned with the requirement to provide financial help for promotion of 
traditional sports of India, for instance, Archery, Kabaddi, Wrestling etc., the Committee 
enquired from the Ministry about funds allocated to these disciplines in the last five 
years till date. In their reply sent in March, 2010, the Ministry furnished the information 
as under:  
“The existing schemes of Government of India and Sports Authority of India (SAI) 
lay adequate focus on the promotion of traditional and indigenous games. 
 Under the Scheme of Assistance to National Sports Federations (NSFs), 
the sports federations dealing with indigenous/traditional games such as Archery, 
Chess, Kho -Kho, Tug of War, Kabaddi, Wrestling etc. have been given 
Government recognition and are provide d with financial assistance for 
promotional and developmental activities in their respective disciplines. 
 The details of financial assistance to the sports federations dealing with 
indigenous/traditional games under the Scheme of Assistance to NSFs during  
the last five years including 2009-10 (upto 31.12.2009) are given below: - 
(Rs. in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Association 
2005-
06 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
(upto 
31.12.2009) 
1. Archery 
Association of 
India 
51.75 94.68 81.67 96.10 139.00 
2. All India Chess 
Federation 
78.94 112.46 239.94 221.40 163.00 
3. Atya Patya 
Federation of 
India 
12.00 15.50 8.50 16.50 6.00 
4. Kho-Kho 
Federation of 
India 
12.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 4.00 
5. Indian Hockey 
(Men) 
96.46 92.09 125.18 156.99  
 

 
26 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Association 
2005-
06 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
(upto 
31.12.2009) 
Federation 143.00 
6. Indian Hockey 
(Women) 
Federation 
78.81 111.64 191.65 74.51 
7. Indian Amateur 
Kabaddi 
Federation  
24.69 13.95 25.68 32.08 12.00 
8. Tug of War 
Federation of 
India 
11.50 20.75 3.50 6.00 10.00 
9. Wrestling 
Federation of 
India 
209.82 32.58 6.15 200.42 64.00 
10. Malkhamb 0.00 0.00 3.75 9.00 0.00 
 
(ii) Mobilizing Resources from Corporate Sector 
2.9 The Ministry had made efforts to mobilize resources for sports from the 
Corporate Sector. Details of the initiatives taken by the Ministry for involvement of 
corporate sector in sports promotion were furnished as under:- 
 “National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) was instituted by the Central 
Government in 1998 with a view to mobilizing resources from the Government as 
well as non -governmental sources, including the private/corporate sector and 
non-resident Indians, for promotion of sports and games in the country. In order 
to make contributions to the Fund attractive, 100% exemption from income tax is 
available on all contributions.  To begin with, the Government made a 
contribution of Rs. 2.00 crore during the year 1998 -99.  Further Government 
contribution is on matching basis to the contributions received from other 
sources”.   
 
2.10 The objects of the NSDF were given as under: 
“(i) to administer a nd apply the moneys of the Fund for promotion of sports in 
general and specific sports disciplines and individual sportspersons in particular 
for achieving excellence at the National and International level; 
(ii) to impart special training and coaching in relevant sports disciplines to 
sportspersons, coaches and sports specialists; 

 
27 
 
(iii) to construct and maintain infrastructure, as may be required for promotion of 
sports excellence in sports; 
(iv) to supply equipm ent to Governmental and Non -Governmental Organizations 
and individuals with a view to promoting excellence in sports; 
(v) to identify problems and take up research and development studies for 
providing support to excellence in sports; 
(vi) to promote inter national cooperation, in particular, exchanges which may 
promote the development of indigenous sport and human resources as also the 
activities which are within the amount of Exchange Programmes entered into 
between India and other countries; and 
(vii)to provide low interest or interest free loans for projects and activities related 
to any of the aforesaid projects. 
 
 Under NSDF, assistance to elite athletes is provided either directly or 
through their respective National Sports Federations for their specialized training 
within the country and abroad, exposure in international competitions, scientific 
support, equipment s, accessories, out of pocket allowance, nutritional 
supplements etc.  
 During 2007 -08, Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) and Steel 
Authority of India Limited (SAIL) contributed Rs. 15 crore and Rs. 1 crore 
respectively. During 2008 -09, BCCI con tributed Rs. 35 crore.  At present, the 
corpus is Rs. 63.64 crore. Assistance of Rs. 3.48 crore was provided to 
sportspersons/institutes from NSDF during 2008 -09 and Rs. 3.21 crore during 
2009-10 so far.” 
 
2.11 The National Sports Policy, 2001, further pro poses to enter into Tripartite 
Agreements between the Gove rnment, Sports Federations and Corporate H ouses to 
adopt and support particular disciplines. Asked about the efforts made in this regard, the 
Department of Sports in a written reply stated:  
 “No Tripartite Agreements have been signed between the Government, National 
Sports Federations and Corporate Houses. However, Long Term Development 
Plans (LTDPs) in respect of all the Sports disciplines covered under the „Priority „ 
and „General‟ Category have b een finalized by SAI in consultation with 
concerned National Sports Federation s (NSFs). Financial assistance is being 
provided to NSFs  for conducting National Championships and International 
Tournaments in India, participation in International tournaments abroad, 
organizing coaching camps, procuring sports equipment, engagement of foreign 
coaches.  

 
28 
 
 As for the involvement of the corporate houses in the promotion and 
development of sports and games in the country, the National Sports 
Development Fund (NSDF) was instituted by the Central Government in 1998 
with a view to mobilizing resources from the Go vernment as well as non -
governmental sources, including the private/corporate sector and non -resident 
Indians, for promotion of sports and games in the country. In order to make 
contributions to the Fund attractive, 100% exemption from income tax is available 
on all contributions.  To begin with, the Government made a contribution of Rs. 
2.00 crore during the year 1998 -99.  During 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, the 
Government received Rs. 1 crore from Steel Authority of India (SAIL) and Rs. 50 
crore from the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI).” 
 
2.12 When asked about the criteria adopted by NSDF to assist sportspersons and the 
number of sportspersons assisted by it, the Department of Sports submitted: 
  
“The broad parameters for utilization of funds from NSD F include selection of top 
level sportspersons, who are medal winning prospects in Olympics, 
Commonwealth Games, Asian Games and other International competitions. The 
assistance is given for their customized training within the country and abroad, 
exposure in international competitions, scientific support, equipments, 
accessories, out of pocket allowance, nutritional supplements etc. to prepare 
them for winning medals at international events.  It is also used to support/assist 
small infrastructure projects that have special relevance.  Recently financial 
assistance amounting to Rs. 2.27 crore has been sanctioned in favour of 
Dibrugarh University for „One  College-One Sports‟ project. Similarly  Department 
of Mountaineering and Allied Sports, Manali has been s anctioned assistance of 
Rs. 1 crore for  procurement of Alpine Skiing and Grass Skiing equipment.   
The total corpus of the NSDF as on 31.12.2009 is Rs 63.70 crore. 
 Details of assistance given from NSDF to sportspersons is given in the 
statement placed at Annexure-I.” 
 
2.13 Many sports disciplines except Cricket are in dire need of sponsors. When asked 
whether any efforts are being made to rope in the Corporate Houses  to sponsor 
particular disciplines other than cricket, the Department of Sports stated: 
 
 “Contributors to NSDF are free to specify the purposes for which the funds 
 contributed by them can be utilized.” 
 
 

 
29 
 
2.14 On the role that Corporate S ector can play in promoting sports, a representative 
of Archery Federation inter alia requested the Committee during evidence, as under: 
 “…It should be compulsory on the Corporate H ouses and public sector 
undertakings to have reservation for employment of  sports people. Secondly, 
some budget, maybe one per cent, they should pay for promotion of sports. Now 
Hero Honda and others are doing it. Why not everyone should contribute? In 
Korea and China, various public sectors or private sectors have adopted games.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
30 
 
CHAPTER  III 
 
 ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL SPORTS POLICY, 2001 
(i) Integration of Sports with Education 
3.1 The National Sports Policy, 2001 envisages the integration of Sports a nd 
Physical education with the e ducational curriculum, making it compulsory subject of 
learning  up to secondary level and incorporating the same in the evaluation system of 
the student. 
3.2 Secretary, Department of Sports informed the Committee while briefing them on 
the subject as under: 
“We have taken up w ith the Ministry of Human Resource Development that 
physical education should be linked at the lowest possible level, that is, from 
Kindergarten and Primary School. It is now conventional wisdom that only by 
developing a critical mass of sports persons or young persons who are involved 
in play of all kinds, at all levels, will there emerge talent and mainstreaming of 
sports as a very significant achievement -oriented and occupation -oriented 
endeavour for all young persons in our country. We hope that by enco uraging 
and working with the Department of School Education and the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development we will be able to push further the integration of sports 
with physical education and increase the emphasis on physical education as a 
compulsory subject, particularly for young children at the primary school levels.” 
 
3.3 When the Ministry was asked about the efforts made by the Government in this 
regard, the Ministry (Department of Sports) in a post briefing reply stated: 
“Both New Education Policy 1 986 and the National Curriculum Framework 2005 
provide that sports and physical education are an integral part of the learning 
process, and are necessary for overall development of learners. 
 Ministry has stressed the importance of integration of sports and physical 
education with the learning process in the meetings of the Central Advisory 
Board of Education (CABE). Minister for Youth Affairs & Sports has also written 
to the Minister for Human Resource Development in August 2009 stating that it is 
essential that physical education and sports are given at least one period every 
day compulsorily in the school curriculum, beginning from elementary school 
onwards and while opening new schools, the authorities giving permission should 
insist that adequate open grounds be provided for playing fields. State 

 
31 
 
Governments and local governments must be persuaded to make available land 
for use as playgrounds in all schools and colleges. The Ministry has als o 
suggested that a small percentage of the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) budget 
may be earmarked for sports and physical education activities.” 
 
3.4 The Secretary further added during evidence as under: 
 “We have tried from the Ministry to integrate sports a nd physical education as 
part of the school curriculum at all levels, specifically from the primary level 
onwards. We have approached the Human Resource Development Ministry, the 
School Education, the Central Advisory Board of Education, and we have also 
repeatedly requested that physical education be given a very structured time slot 
in the curriculum of every child from primary school onwards. 
  It is now a generally accepted development principle  that nutritious diet 
and physical education are as importa nt as the academies for every child.  We 
have been persisting with our efforts, but I would seek the indulgence of the 
Committee to support us in this endeavour, that is, integration of physical 
education and sports in the curriculum of schools in the count ry. We feel that we 
will have to bring up a generation of young persons who are sports -minded 
because, only, when we get a critical mass of sportspersons or a certain number 
of sportspersons will we be able to take from them the talented sportspersons 
and give them adequate training.” 
 
3.5 The integration of sports with education will require the development of 
necessary infrastructure in schools, for example, playgrounds in schools. When asked 
about the Government‟s policy in this regard, the Secretary during evidence stated as 
follows: 
 “There was an issue of linking playgrounds to schools.  We , on our part , have 
taken it up formally at all formal forums with the Human Resource Development 
Ministry.  We have also canvassed it in the Central Advisory Boa rd of Education 
meetings.  We have written to them.  We have requested that a certain norm 
should be adopted for opening a new school which must have a certain area for 
a playground depending on whether it is a primary school, middle school or a 
higher-secondary school.  We will continue to press that Ministry to adopt the 
norm.  It is one of our agenda as well to ensure that every school has a playfield.” 
 
3.6 On being ask ed by the Committee whether it was  not compulsory for every 
school to have a Physical Training teacher, the representative of the Ministry 
(Department of Sports) explained as under: 
 
“The National Policy on Education, 1986 and the National Curriculum Framework 
of 2005 state that it is an integral part of school curriculum. In reality, howe ver, 

 
32 
 
there are no PT teachers; there is no period for PT in most schools. There is no 
marking system unlike in a few States, including Goa, where they are also 
evaluating the students on the basis of physical education. Most States do not 
have it.” 
 
3.7 On this issue, the representative of the Indian Olympic Association during 
evidence added: 
 “It is not only the physical education but it is the programme in the educational 
institutions particularly in the schools which matter.  The training institutions for 
physical education which produce physical teachers need to be strengthened.  Of 
course, that is the State subject.  The States also have to come forward to 
strengthen these areas.” 
 
3.8 Emphasizing the need of integration of sports with education, Secr etary, 
Department of Sports stated as follows during evidence: 
 “Sports at the international and national level has become a specialized 
endeavour – very specialized and backed by technical knowledge and by a lot of 
support from various related areas like physiology, pharmacology, biomechanics, 
nutrition, sports medici ne, etc. We would want that these specialized areas 
become part and parcel of our higher education as well as our sports facilities 
across the country. Here, the largest amount of assistance and initiative will have 
to come from the national Government.” 
 
(ii) Broadbasing of Sports  
3.9 There is a severe inadequacy of basic sports infrastructure at the grassroots 
level, especially in rural a reas. Similarly, there is also lack of sports competitions in the 
rural areas. Given the fact that, less than 5% of the population has access to sporting 
facilities and organized sports, the need for promoting sports infrastructure at the 
grassroots level in a phased but time bound manner has been repeatedly emphasized 
in various fora. In this regard, as per their Annual Report, the Ministry was implementing 
four Centrally Sponsored Sports Infrastructure Development Schemes during the Xth 
Five Year Plan period, which were transferred to the State Sector w.e.f. 1.4.2005 viz., 

 
33 
 
the Scheme of Grants for the Creation of Sport s Infrastructure, the Scheme of Grants to 
Rural Schools for the purchase of sports equipment and the development of play 
grounds; the Scheme of Grants for the promotion of Games & Sports in Universities and 
Colleges; and the Scheme of Grants for the Instal lation of Synthetic Playing Surface. 
Under these erstwhile Centrally Sponsored schemes, financial assistance was being 
provided to State Governments, educational institutions and NGOs for the creation of 
sports facilities on a cost sharing basis. With the closure of these schemes, there has 
been no provision for providing financial assistance to State Governments, Educational 
Institutions and NGOs for the creation of sports infrastructure. 
 
3.10 Keeping these factors in view and with the objective of promot ing mass 
participation in sports and widening the seedbed of talent , the Government launched a 
national programme titled „Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan‟ (PYKKA) in 2007-
08, for the first time, for the creation of basic sports infrastructure in all village and block 
panchayats of the country over a period of 10 years and organizing sports competitions 
at block, district, state and national levels. All the 2,50,000 village and block panchayats 
and equivalent units will be covered during this period. The scheme will not only 
contribute to public health and social inclusiveness, but also stimulate the economic 
activities within the sports sector, as it would lead to an exponential growth in the 
demand for sports instructors, coaches, sports equipment and consumables and sports 
events and related support services. Promotion of indigenous games and the expansion 
of the talent pool through the identification and nurturing of rural sports talent, are som e 
of the major benefits of the scheme.  
 

 
34 
 
3.11 As per the background material sent to the Committee, u nder the Scheme, 
financial assistance is given to a village/block panchayats for the following purposes:- 
(i) One Time Capital Seed Grant for development o f sports infrastructure viz. 
development of playfield, athletic track, fencing of playfield, goal posts, poles for net 
games, outdoor fitness equipments etc  at Rs. 1 lakh for village panchayats and Rs 5 
lakh for block panchayats.  This will be contributed on 75:25 basis between the Central 
Government and State Governments for normal States and on 90:10 basis for Special 
Category States. 
(ii) Annual Acquisition Grant at Rs 10, 000 per annum to each village panchayat and 
Rs. 20,000 per annum to each block pan chayat for a period of five years for acquisition 
of sports equipments, accessories, sports fixtures, consumables and 
repairs/maintenance.  This grant is 100% central grant.  
(iii)  Annual Operational Grant at Rs. 12,000 per annum to each village panchayat  
and Rs. 24, 000 per annum to each block panchayat for a period of five years to meet 
operational expenses of non -competition activities including honorarium to Kridashree 
and maintenance of infrastructure etc. This grant is 100% central grant.  
(iv)  Annual Competition Grant for organizing tournaments at block level, district 
level, State level and National level as per details given below: 
(i) Rs. 50, 000 per annum to each block panchayat for organizing 
block level competitions. 
(ii) Rs. 3 lakh per annum to each d istrict for holding district level 
competitions. 
(iii) Rs. 10 lakh per annum to each State and Rs. 5 lakh to each UT per 
annum for holding State/UT level competitions. 
(iv)  Rs. 50 lakh per annum for holding national level competitions.  
   Annual competition grant is a 100% central grant.  
(v) Prize Money at Rs. 25,000 Rs. 15,000 and Rs. 5,000 as 100% Central grant to 
first three village panchayats at the block level tournaments (all 6,373 blocks) and at Rs. 

 
35 
 
50,000, Rs. 30,0000 and Rs. 10,00 0 as 100% Central grant to the first three block 
panchayats at the district level tournament (all 607 districts). 
 Assistance of Rs. 250.77 crore to 28 States for covering 22854 village 
panchayats and 601 block panchayats has already been approved. Out of which, Rs. 
83.85 crore was released to States during 2008-09 and Rs. 42.90 crore during 2009-10. 
 
3.12 On being asked about the action plan of the Government for implementation of 
this scheme, the Ministry in a written reply explained: 
“The scheme envisages covering around 2.50 Lakh village panchayats and 6400 
block panchayats in a phased manner over the eleventh and twelfth plan over a period 
of ten years at an annual coverage of 10 per cent as per details given below:   
YEAR COVERAGE of  
Village Panchayats 
 (in %) 
Village 
Panchayats, 
including clusters 
(Nos) 
Block Panchayats 
2007-08 Since there would be some gestation period in grounding the 
progress in year (200 7-08) which would be preceded by a 
strong awareness campaign com ponent, the year wise 
coverage is suggested as under : 
2008-09 10% 20,000 637 
2009-10 10% 20,000 637 
2010-11 10% 20,000 637 
2011-12 10% 20,000 637 
2012-13 12% 24,000 765 
2013-14 12% 24,000 765 
2014-15 12% 24,000 765 
2015-16 12% 24,000 765 
2016-17 12% 24,000 765 
Total 100% 2,00,000 6,373 
 
3.13 When asked about the criterion for selection of villages under PYKKA, the 
Secretary (Department of Sports) explained as follows: 

 
36 
 
 “The Scheme envisages for PYKKA, over ten years – every year 10 per cent of 
all village panchayats that have to be covered. As is the practice in all the CSSs 3, 
the States makes an allocation in its own Budget; it is matched by the Central 
Government‟s allocation. But the identification is done by the State Governments 
of all the panchayats that are to be covered on an annual basis. What we would 
expect is that the State Governments follow it.” 
 
3.14 Considering that 90% of the funding in PYKKA is done by the Central 
Government, the Committee desired to know as to how the Governmen t ensures that 
village panchayats dominated by SC/ST or other weaker section s of the society are not 
ignored, the Secretary, during evidence, assured the Committee as under: 
“In selection of village panchayats, our present guidelines are, that, wherever 
panchayats do not exist, equivalent units will be selected on a specific criteria. 
The issue of inclusion of all panchayats is of prime importance. We do insist, 
while we look at the list sent by the State Governments, on how the selection has 
been done. But as of now, we are still trying to get the scheme off the ground. If 
we find, in our annual review, that there has been concentration of certain kinds 
of panchayats, we will ensure that in the next round, we will include weaker 
sections dominated panchayat s or vulnerable panchayats, in terms of their 
geographical background and other areas. If there is any report received by us 
that there has been favouring of any particular region or area, we will ensure that 
we will intervene effectively to prevent it.” 
 
3.15 Asked about the achievement of PYKKA, the Department of Sports submitted the 
following: 
 “The scheme has been received very well by the States and majority of them 
have already make budget provisions with State share.  The administrative 
structure at centre and states has been put in place.The Governing Council of 
PYKKA, which is the apex body, has already held two meetings and addressed 
most of the issues raised by the State Governments, including flexibility in 
composition of state, district and bloc k level committees; pro -rata funding for 
panchayats with large population; convergence with NREGA; and coverage 
@20% per annum for north eastern states and border districts; etc.  In order to 
ensure proper implementation of the scheme, a strong monitoring s ystem has 
been put in place by launching a computerized MIS, which has been developed 
by NIC.  The computerized MIS provides for online submission and processing of 
proposals; online monitoring financial and physical progress; and comprehensive 
data base o n the playing fields and competitions held under the scheme, 
including number and details of participants. All the States have made necessary 
                                                             
3 Centrally sponsored schemes 

 
37 
 
budget provision in their state budget and almost all of them have disbursed both 
central and state grants to appr oved village and block panchayats.  Executive 
Committee at state, district and block level have been appointed. PYKKA 
implementing agency and playgrounds have been identified. Most of the States 
have appointed `Kridashrees or Community coach‟ who will run the PYKKA 
centre at village/block panchayats. Manual for training of Master trainers and 
kridashrees were prepared in collaboration with LNUPE, Gwalior and UNICEF. 
As against target of training of 600 master trainers during 2009 -10, 254 master 
trainers have so far been trained in 3 courses who will turn train 40 kridashree 
per year in the training programme being organized state level. Government of 
India provide assistance @Rs.2000/- per trainee for the training.” 
 
Achievement during the year 2008-09 
3.16 Proposals complete in all respects received from 24 States were approved for 
providing central grants of Rs.250.78 crore  to develop sports infrastructure facilities in 
22,854 village panchayats and 601 block panchayats during 2008 -09. Entire allocation 
of Rs. 92 crore was released to States (Rs. 83.85 crore was given  to 19 State 
Governments upon fulfilling terms & conditions given in the PYKKA scheme for 
infrastructure development and the remaining Rs. 8.15 crore, was released to SAI for 
onward transmissi on to states for conducting annual com petitions at block, districts, 
States and national level. 
Achievement during the year 2009-10 
3.17 Budget of Rs.160 crore has been provid ed for the year 2009 -10. Those S tates 
which had shown certain progress in impleme nting the scheme were given the balance 
amount of first instalment of the approved grant for the year 2008-09.  Funds to the tune 
of Rs.99.78 crore have been released as on 31.10.2009 to the States (i.e. Rs.69.78 
crore  towards infrastructure grant and Rs. 30.00 crore through SAI to States for 
conducting competitions during 2009-10. Further, proposals from another 5 States were 
approved for providing grant of Rs.14.64 crore to cover 1,234 village panchayats and 53 
block panchayats. 
 
STATE-WISE DETAIL OF GRANT-IN-AID RELEASED TO STATES UNDER PYKKA 
DURING 2009-2010 
S.N.  NAME OF STATE  ANNUAL 
ACQUISITION 
GRANT  
ANNUAL 
OPERATIONAL 
GRANT  
TOTAL  
1  ANDHRA PRADESH  12080000  14496000  26576000  
2  ASSAM  3016000  3619200  6635200  
4  CHATTISGARH  5050000  6060000  11110000  

 
38 
 
5  GOA  135000  162000  297000  
6  GUJARAT  7065000  8478000  15543000  
8  HIMACHAL PRADESH  1700000  2040000  3740000  
10  KERALA  650000  780000  1430000  
12  MAHARASHTRA  13795000  16554000  30349000  
13  MANIPUR  696000  835200  1531200  
15  NAGALAND  960000  1152000  2112000  
16  ORISSA  3425000  4110000  7535000  
17  PUNJAB  6305000  7566000  13871000  
18  RAJASTHAN  4585000  5502000  10087000  
19  SIKKIM  360000  432000  792000  
20  TAMILNADU  6685000  8022000  14707000  
22  UTTAR PRADESH  26835000  32202000  59037000  
23  UTTARAKHAND  3850000  4620000  8470000  
24  WEST BENGAL  2005000  2406000  4411000  
TOTAL 99197000  119036400  218233400  
      
 
 
State-wise sanction and release of grants under PYKKA scheme during 2008-09 
and 2009-10  
(Rs. In crore) 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
No. of Village 
Panchayats 
approved 
No. of Block Panch- 
chayats approved 
Total Amount 
approved 
Funds released 
2008-
09 
2009-10 2008-09 2009-10 2008-
09 
2009-
10 
2008-09 2009-
10 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
 
-- 355 -- 32 -- 5.56 -- 4.44* 
2. Andhra  
Pradesh 
 
2199 2190 113 113 25.98 25.98 12.99* 12.99** 
3. A & N  
Islands 
 
 19  01  0.23   
4. Assam 
 
333  22  4.81   3.85* 
5. Bihar 
 
847  53  10.44  5.22* 5.02** 
6. Chhattis- 982  14  10.11   5.06* 

 
39 
 
garh 
 
7. Goa 
 
19  4  0.35   0.18* 
8. Gujarat 
 
1369  22  14.20   7.10* 
9. Haryana 
 
619  12  6.51  3.26* 3.25** 
10. Himachal 
Pradesh 
 
324  8  4.02  2.01* 2.01** 
11. J&K 
 
413  14  5.32  2.66* 2.10** 
12. Jharkhand 
 
 403  21  4.79  2.39* 
13. Kerala 
 
100  15  1.60  0.86* 0.80** 
14. 
 
 
Karnataka 
 
 565    6.22  3.12* 
15. Madhya  
Pradesh 
 
2304  31 18 23.65  11.82*  
16. Meghalaya 
 
 83    1.32  1.06* 
17. Maharashtra 
 
2689  35 8 27.55  8.91* 4.86* 
18. Manipur 
 
79  4  1.08  0.87*  
19. Mizoram 
 
82 164 3 5 1.07 2.08 0.85* 0.21** 
20. Nagaland 
 
110  5  1.48  1.18* 0.30** 
21. Orissa 
 
623 623 31 31 7.34 7.34 3.67* 3.67** 
4.38# 
22. Punjab 
 
1233  14  12.55  6.27* 6.27** 
23. Rajasthan 
 
869  24  9.43  3.71* 1.01* 
3.71** 
24. Sikkim 
 
16 32 10 20 0.67 1.35 0.54* 0.13** 
25. Tamil Nadu 
 
1261  38  13.82  5.00* 1.91* 
26. Tripura 
 
104  4  1.36  1.09*  
27. Uttar  
Pradesh 
 
5203  82  53.91  10.00* 16.96* 
28. Uttrakhand 
 
750  10  8.89  3.00* 1.45* 
4.45** 
29. West 
 Bengal 
 
335  33  4.63   2.32* 
 Total 
 
22854 4434 601 249 250.77 54.87 83.85* 105.00 

 
40 
 
 Funds  
released to  
SAI for  
annual 
competitions 
      8.15 30.00 
 Grand Total       92.00 135.00 
 
* First installment for the first year 
** Second Installment for the first year # First installment of second year 
 
3.18 When the Committee enquired about the names of the States/UTs , which have 
furnished Utilization Certificates for the funds received during the last two years , the 
Department of Sports, in a written reply, submitted as follows: 
 “The grant-in-aid released for the purpose of creation of sports infrastructure is a 
non-recurring grant.  As per general financial rules, in case of non-recurring grant 
the grantee has to submit the utilization certif icate within twelve months of the 
closure of the financial year.  The grant -in-aid was sanctioned and released 
during 2008 -09 for the first time, therefore the utilization certificate can be 
submitted by the States/UTs upto 31-03-2010.” 
 
3.19 Asked further  about the steps taken to ensure submission of Utilization 
Certificates by States/UTs, the Department assured: 
“The condition of submitting the utilization certificate is incorporated in the 
sanctioned letter itself.  No further grant will be released to s uch State/UT, unless 
the utilization certificate, which has become due, is submitted.” 
 
3.20 On being asked about the results achieved in PYKKA, the Department in a 
written reply stated: 
 “During the year 2008 -09 grant -in-aid has been sanctioned to 24 States for 
creation of Sports infrastructure, procurement of sports equipment and operation 
of the PYKKA centres in 22854 village panchayats and 601 block panchayats.  
Thus, the total number of centres 23455 will be playfields for playing various 
games.  T his is the second year of the implementation of the scheme.  The 
development of playfields and procurement of sports equipment is under process 
by the States/UTs.  The States which have been released the funds, have been 
requested to submit the progress report which will be compiled and submitted.” 
 
 

 
41 
 
3.21 During evidence, the Secretary, Department of Sports further added: 
 “To answer the question on PYKKA outcomes, the encouraging response to 
PYKKA in the very quick encouragement and response that it has received from 
State Governments, is one of our most heartening responses that we have 
received.  It is yet too early to make a very clear quantitative or qualitative 
assessment of how it has been undertaken.  We are very happy to know that at 
block-level competitions we had almost 5 ½ lakh young people who participated 
all over India.  At district -level we had almost 3 lakh; at State level almost a lakh; 
and at national level again it was  a lesser number. But the biggest 
encouragement that we se e is this participation at block level.  At the moment, 
just like in any beginning, we are looking at access and at participation.  Slowly 
we believe that this participation will yield to higher quality and talent emerging 
out of this continuous process.” 
 
3.22 On the Committee‟s observation that Rs.10,000 per village panchayat per annum 
is a meagre amount to either buy equipment or develop infrastructure, the Secretary, 
Department of Sports said: 
 “The Scheme has been in operation only for one ye ar. We wou ld certainly 
 welcome modifications to the Scheme.” 
 
3.23 During evidence, t he Committee suggested that in view of paucity of funds , 
instead of covering 10% village panchayats, 5% should have been covered so that 
adequate funds could have been made available to a particular village. The Secretary, 
responded as follows: 
“On the other hand, we have been requesting that it should be covered in five 
years. My initial plea to the Committee  that we are under-funded is amply shown 
by the fact that if I have to cover every panchayat, it will take me ten years. If the 
sum of Rs. 1 lakh has already become inadequate, I do not expect that it will 
meet any kind of expenditure ten years from now. S o, any recommendation, any 
suggestion on the modification of the Scheme will be more than welcome. We 
will certainly take it on board. We will certainly go by what the experience has 
shown us how to implement the Scheme. The entire issue revolves around 
under-funding of the sector. We are not being able to fulfil our objectives of 
broad-basing the way we want to do it.” 
 

 
42 
 
3.24 PYKKA has been launched by the Government to encourage  in rural areas, 
when asked about the efforts of the Government to encourage sp orts in urban areas, 
the Secretary, Department of Sports informed the Committee as follows, during 
evidence: 
 “We also felt that while we have covered the rural areas through this scheme and 
the State Governments, we still need to do something for the Urba n Areas. So, 
we have a proposal to include a scheme for sports in the urban areas and to 
broad base it in the same manner as we have done under PYKKA. This scheme 
is before the Planning Commission and we hope that in the mid -term appraisal of 
the Plan, this scheme would be looked at with sympathy.” 
 
3.25 The Department of Sports in a written reply further informed: 
“The Department of Sports now proposes to formulate a new Urban Sports 
Infrastructure Scheme, which will aim at providing sports infrastructure in urban 
areas and will cover (a) National Games, (b) other sports infrastructure and (c) 
playing fields.  
At pres ent, there is no scheme in the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports under 
which assistance can be given to the State Governments for conduct of National 
Games. In past, assistance has been given by the Ministry in relaxation of 
provisions of the Scheme of As sistance to National Sports Federations (NSFs). 
Planning Commission has also in past provided assistance of Rs. 40.51 crore 
and Rs. 67 crore to the Government of Assam and Government of Jharkhand 
respectively for National Games, Guwahati (2007) and Nationa l Games, Ranchi 
(2009) in the form of Additional Central Assistance (ACA). ACA of Rs. 110 crore 
has been sanctioned to the State of Kerala for conduct of 35 th National Games 
scheduled to be held in Kerala in May 2010.   
So, the proposed Urban Sports Infras tructure Scheme will provide, inter alia, a 
framework for assistance to States hosting National Games for creation and 
upgradation of sports infrastructure.  
 The new Scheme is likely to be finalized by beginning of the next financial 
year.” 
 
(iii) Development of Sports Infrastructure 
3.26 As per the last All India Education Survey (2002) only half of the primary schools 
in India have playing fields. When asked about the efforts being made by the 
Government to develop infrastructure, the D/o Sports in a written reply stated: 

 
43 
 
 “It is a fact there is inadequacy of playing fields both in rural and urban areas. 
With a view to addressing the problem of sports infrastructure, especially in rural 
areas, Government has introduced from 2008 -09 the nation -wide centrally 
sponsored scheme entitled Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA), 
which aims at creating basic sports facilities in all village and block panchayats of 
the country in a phased manner in next 10 years and providing access to 
organized sports competitions at block, district, state and national levels.    
  Further, with a view to addressing the problem of dwindling playing fields, 
National Playing Fields Association of India has been set up as a Society under 
the Societies Registration Act 1860 on 24th February 2009 with Union Minister for 
Youth Affairs and Sports as the chairperson and eminent persons such as Shri F 
S Nariman, Shri Bishen Singh Bedi, Smt P T Usha, Smt Indu puri, Cdr Nandy 
Singh and Shri Bhaichung Butia among others as members of the Society.   
 
  The main focus of the NPFAI would be on protecting and preserving 
existing playfields and promoting new ones, apart from developing standards and 
norms process, for making available playing fields and open spaces. 
 
  While the NPFAI  will be the apex body, all State Governments would be 
encouraged to set up similar societies at the state level, which would be affiliated 
with the national society.  This initiative is expected to create a national 
awareness of the social benefits that f low out of playing fields, playgrounds and 
open green spaces in terms of quality of life and social inclusiveness.  All the 
State Governments have already been requested to set up such bodies.” 
 
3.27 The Secretary added during evidence: 
 “What has been obs erved both in the rural and in the urban areas, today, is that 
playing fields for children, both structured and unstructured, are slowly 
disappearing. Therefore, the Society, at the apex level, hopes to develop 
benchmarks, guidelines and prototypes where, we can show some models to the 
State Governments and the urban area local bodies to protect and preserve open 
spaces where children can play in a safe environment. We do hope, that, this 
initiative which we had started only last year, will gain momentum; w e hope it will 
also get a lot of support from community groups and from people of all sections.” 
 
3.28 The Secretary further added: 
 “Protection, promotion and preservation of open spaces are already mandated by 
law in some States. They have taken far reaching steps. But, unfortunately, these 
open spaces are either being used for older persons to walk, to rest and to jog, 
or, as parks. Very often young children are prevented from using them as 
playfields. Given our demographics, given our preponderance of y oung 

 
44 
 
population, it would be very necessary that these playing fields, at least one per 
village Panchayat, if not more, in a phased manner, should be set aside for 
playing fields and playing areas. We have our National Playing fields Association. 
We are ur ging all the State Governments to adopt a framework such as the 
national one, get them affiliated, draw up bench marks and draw up some kind of 
outlines and broad parameters for developing the playgrounds in every village  
and town.” 
 
3.29 With the new developments in the  field of sports, synthetic (ast ro) turfs have 
become important for athletics, hockey etc. The Committee enquired about the steps 
taken by the Government for laying of synthetic turfs  to which the Department of Sports 
in a written reply responded as follows: 
“The Governing Body of SAI has approved for laying of Synthetic Turfs for 
Athletics and Hockey in various States at various locations. A list of the approved 
projects for laying Synthetic Hockey Surface and Synthetic Track is given below.” 
                                                              
Details of Hockey Surfaces at various locations in India. 
 
Name of States Location Syn. Hockey Surface 
  Completed 
 
Proposed  
Assam Kokarajhar - 1 
Chhattisgarh Rajnandgaon - 1 
Gujarat Gandhinagar 1 - 
Haryana Sonepat 
Kurukeshtra 
1 - 
1 
Himachal Pradesh Shillaroo 1 - 
Karnataka Bangalore 
Medikari 
1 
1 
- 
- 
Kerala Kollam  - 1 
Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 
Tikamgarh 
2 - 
1 
Maharashtra Kandivali 
Aurangabad 
- 
- 
1 
1 
Mizoram Thenzual - 1 
Orissa Sundergarh 1 - 
Punjab Patiala 
Amritsar 
2 
- 
- 
1 
Uttarakhand Dehradum - 1 
Uttar Pradesh Lucknow 
Bareilly 
AMU(Aligarh) 
1 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
West Bengal Kolkata 1 - 

 
45 
 
Details of Synthetic Athletic Track at various locations in India. 
Name of States Location Syn. Athletic Track 
 
  Completed 
 
Proposed  
Assam Guwahati - 1 
Gujarat Gandhinagar - 1 
Haryana Sonepat 1 - 
Karnataka Bangalore 
 
1 - 
Kerala Trivandrum 
Kollam  
- 
- 
1 
1 
Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 
Gwalior 
- 
- 
1 
1 
Maharashtra Kandivali 
Aurangabad 
1 
- 
- 
1 
Orissa Bhubeshwar - 1 
Punjab Patiala 
Tarn taran 
2 
- 
- 
1 
Uttarakhand Dehradum - 1 
Uttar Pradesh Lucknow - 1 
West Bengal Kolkata - 1 
Manipur Imphal - 1 
Tamilnadu Tiruneveli - 1 
 
3.30 The Committee wanted to know about the factors which are taken into 
consideration while choosing locations for laying of synthetic surfaces, the Department 
of Sports in a post evidence reply explained: 
“Availability of talent available in the area and facilities made available  by States 
are two main factors that influence the decision regarding choosing locations for 
laying of synthetic surfaces.  
The synthetic surfaces for Hockey, Athletics and other sports disciplines at SAI 
Centres/ Sub-Centres are being laid, keeping in vie w the potential, popularity of 
the game in the area and the availability of requisite sports infrastructure.” 
 
3.31 When enquired by the Committee about the reasons for non -uniformity in laying 
synthetic surfaces, a representative of the Ministry during evidence explained: 

 
46 
 
“About Patiala, that is our National Institute of Sports which is the premier 
institute for all our training activities including the last -mile training. In fact, to 
improve our current medal prospects for the Commonwealth Games, the athletic 
camp is going on in Patiala. Patiala has two tracks because the load is there. 
Sonepat is our Regional Centre. Therefore, we have built that track at our 
Regional Centre where again we have the camps. Bangalore again is our 
Regional Centre. Kandivali is a big SAI Traini ng Centre. We construct athletic 
tracks in our training centres. The higher priority is given to our Regional Centres 
which are bigger than our normal SAI  Training Centres. That is where SAI 
constructs its infrastructure both in terms of hockey turf as we ll as in terms of 
synthetic athletic tracks.” 
 
3.32 When asked about the parameters which a State Government or Municipal 
Corporation is expected to follow while constructing a new stadium, the Department of 
Sports explained as follows: 
“No parameters have  been prescribed either by the Ministry or Sports Authority 
of India. Local bodies like municipal corporations prescribe their own parameters 
in this regard.  As far as construction of playfields, multipurpose halls, stadia etc 
at SAI centres is concerned,   all the SAI works are being done on deposit basis 
by the CPWD and in some cases by NBCC and by State PWD.  For design and 
drawing, CPWD takes the help of professional consultants/architects.  Sports 
infrastructure is designed based on all design paramete rs like functional 
requirement.  As such, SAI does not provide any standard design for any 
construction work except for fields of play dimensions which are standardized by 
the concerned International Sports Federation.” 
 
3.33 During evidence, a representat ive of All India Football Federation, enlightened 
the Committee about the policy of the Government regarding the provision of stadia for 
sports other than cricket as follows: 
 “We are very happy as far as Government support is concerned. What we really 
fail to understand is the policy. You name the town, you name the State, we have 
got beautiful cricket stadium. Why can‟t these cricket stadia be converted into 
multipurpose stadiu m? I just cannot understand this. We have got two in 
Ahmedabad at Motera and Navrangpura Stadium but they would not give it to 
football or for that matter to any other games. And Eden Gardens, in good old 
days 30 years ago is to be for football and cricket . But why all these stadia are 
exclusively for cricket, I just cannot understand because the Curator of the Eden 

 
47 
 
Gardens told me one day that it takes 21 days to prepare a pitch and to convert it 
into football ground. All these stadia can be converted into a football ground.” 
 
3.34 He further added: 
 “We are going with the begging bowls. There is no way that we can prevail upon 
the cricket association. Even some of the corporation stadia, they are not giving 
it. That is the only thing where you could help u s out... Ambedkar stadium is the 
only stadium we have besides the National Stadium. I am sure, they will never 
give it to us for football. I would like my colleagues to know that all games can be 
played in this stadium like a National Stadium. I suggest th at all the stadia should 
be multipurpose stadia.” 
 
3.35 A representative of Amateur Kabbadi Federation of India added during evidence: 
 “As far as the stadium part was concerned, to the best of my knowledge most of 
the stadia belong either to the State Governm ents or their management rests 
with the respective Sports Councils. Very often it happens, not again criticizing 
cricket, that at the time of cricket season the doors of these stadia are shut for all 
other sports. We are not simply allowed to enter the stadia. This is something 
where we need your help. Let cricket flourish. It has already flourished. But we 
should not be deprived.” 
 
3.36 He further added: 
 “We have never lost a gold medal in Kabaddi. In the Asian Games, we got the 
gold medal; in the SAF games we have won the gold last time. We have lost only 
once and that was in SAF. But today we do not have any indoor stadium. Just to 
mention, this game was being played on mud and I think everybody sitting in this 
august gathering must have seen Kabaddi being played in mud somewhere in 
his childhood. Now the game has come to mat. Right from day one, the children 
are playing in the mud and we are getting the t alent and that is probably the key 
of our success in this game. But today this game has come to synthetic mat and 
unfortunately we do not have mats. So, it becomes very difficult for the talent to 
train at their respective places. We have to bring them for  training to places 
where synthetic mats are available and then also only for a limited period of time 
training can be imparted. Up to the level of State capital the infrastructure has 
reached. If we can expand the infrastructural facilities to the level o f tehsil, that 
will probably be the right place to develop the talent at the age of ten years 
onwards. That is the time when talent shapes up for gold medal.” 
 

 
48 
 
3.37 When Secretary, Department of Sports was asked to explain the Ministry‟s 
position on the matter, she clarified during evidence as under: 
 “They are being used.  Hockey is the only turf, the Astroturf or the synthetic 
surface, which is not amenable to any other sport.  So, we are trying in our effort 
to encourage multi-purpose stadia where at least three to four team games can 
be played and this is the focus in the PYKKA scheme as well at the grass root 
village level and above to ensure that the amount which is set apart is used in a 
manner that you can play at lea st three to four team games in that.  We leave 
this selection of the games and sports to the actual implementing agency and 
they can choose from a large number of other indigenous games as well as other 
games and sports, whatever suits that particular village.” 
 
(iv) Training of Sportspersons and Coaches 
3.38 Talent identification and providing training facilities to the sportspersons is done 
by SAI under its following Sports Promotional Schemes: 
 
(i) National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC) 
(ii) Army Boys Sports Company (ABSC) 
(iii) SAI Training Centre (STC) 
(iv) Special Area Games (SAG) 
(v) Extension Centre of STC/SAG for wider coverage 
(vi) Centre of Excellence (COE) 
 
 Details provided to the Committee by the Ministry is as under: 
(i) National Sports Talent Contest Scheme (NSTC) 
 
 Objective 
 
3.39 The main concept of the scheme is to PLAY & STUDY in the same school. The 
scheme envisages scientific scouting of talent at optimum age essential for converting 
the genetically and physiologically gifted children into future medal hopes in various 
competitions at National and International level. The children in the age group of 8 -14 
years are inducted under the scheme. 

 
49 
 
 Adoption of Schools 
 Under the scheme the school having good sports infrastructure are  adopted.  
Each adopted school in addition to the services of coaches for imparting training to the 
trainees will get financial assistance for purchase of consumable sports equipment.   
 
 Extension of NSTC scheme to Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV) 
 Keeping in view the need to promote sports in remote and rural areas & to 
provide greater balance for village children, the Governing Body in its 27 th meeting held 
on 9 th July, 2001 approved the proposal for extension of NSTC Scheme to Navodaya 
Vidyalaya having the requisite infrastructure.   
  
 Extension of NSTC Scheme to School having Tradition of Indigenous Games & 
 Martial Arts (IGMA) : 
 
3.40 Likewise to promote indigenous games & martial arts in the schools in rural and 
semi-urban areas and scouting of  talent in these games for nurturing in modern sports, 
the Governing Body of SAI in its 28 th meeting held on 12 th November, 2001 approved 
the proposal for adoption of schools runs by Educational Institutions for promotion of 
indigenous games & martial arts  as part of the existing NSTC scheme.  Under the 
scheme equipment support i.e. a wrestling mat and a mult -gym along with stipend to 
trainees are provided. 
  
 Extension of NSTC Scheme to Akharas  
 In-order to create a broader base for modern Wrestling and supplement the 
efforts made by various akharas, the Governing Body in its 30th meeting held on 10th 
April‟2003 approved adoption of Akharas under NSTC Scheme. 
 
  
 

 
50 
 
 Extension of NSTC scheme to Sports Centres adopted on the pattern of akharas 
 
 Similarly on the pattern of akharas in the Governing Body  in its 31st meeting held 
on 20th September‟2006 approved adoption of Sports Centres on the pattern of akharas. 
Under the scheme, high performance Sports Centres being run specially the priority 
discipline such as Athletics, Judo, Wrestling, Boxing, Swimming other recognized 
martial arts akin to modern sports may be provided with the supports as is being 
provided to the Akhara and the trainees of Akharas under NSTC Scheme. 
 
 Selection Criteria   
 
3.41 The selection of trainees under the above scheme is done on potential basis and 
performance basis.   
1) Trainees who are medal winners in State/National Level Competitions are 
automatically admitted into the Scheme subject to their being found medically fit.   
2) Trainees who are medal winners at District Level Competition or have participation in 
State Level Competitions are admitted subject to their being found fit medically and 
physically and also have the required potential which is assessed by battery of test.    
3) And for deep selection from the remote, tribal & coastal areas the trainees are also 
selected by organizing competitions among participants.  Under this criterion for 
team games as well as individual events, the participant are made to play and 
selection done by a Selection Committee consisting of representatives of SAI, 
School/Akhara, SAI coaches, Sports Scientists etc. The sports persons identified on 
this basis are offered admission after age verification, medical examination and 
found suitable by applying battery of tests. 
 
 Disciplines Covered 
 Athletics, Boxing, Badminton, Basketball, Football, Gymnastics, Hockey, Judo, 
Swimming, Kabbaddi, Wrestling, Volleyball, Table Tennis, Tennis, Indigenous games & 
Martial Art. 

 
51 
 
 
 Facilities Provided 
 Presently under the Scheme selected trainees are admitted both on residential 
and non- residential basis.  The trainees are provided with the following facilities :-  
1) REGULAR SCHOOLS 
SN Particulars Amount 
(Rupees) 
1 Boarding & Logging per head per day for 300 days 75.00 
2 Sports Kit (per annum) 2000.00  
3 Accidental insurance including medical (p.a.) 150.00  
4 Competition exposure (per annum) 2000.00  
5 Stipend for 10 months (per head) 3000.00  
6 Annual grant to the school for purchase of sports 
equipment (per annum) 
20000.00  
 
2)  INDIGENOUS GAMES & MARTIAL ARTS  
 
SN Particulars Amount  
1 Sports Kit (per annum) 1500.00 
2 Accidental insurance including medical (per annum) 150.00 
3 Stipend for 10 months (per head per month) 3000.00  
4 Annual grant to the school for purchase of equipment 
(per annum) 
20000.00 
5 Annual grant to the school for organizing compet. for 
scouting talent (per annum) 
25000.00 
 
3)  NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS 
 
SN Particulars Amount  
1 Sports Kit (per annum) 1500.00 
2 Stipend for 10 months (per head per month) 3000.00 
3 Competition exposure (per annum) 1500.00 
4 Accidental insurance including medical (per annum) 150.00 
5 Annual grant to the school for purchase of equipment 
(per annum) 
20000.00 
 
4)  AKHARAS  
 
SN Particulars Amount  
1 Stipend  1000.00 
2 Accidental insurance including medical 150.00 
 

 
52 
 
5)  EXTENSION OF AKHARAS UNDER NSTC SCHEMES 
SN Particulars Amount  
1 The adopted Akharas in addition the service of 
experienced coach will be provided with one set of 
Wrestling Mat and or Multi-Gym.  
 
2 The Akharas identified for equipment support will be 
provided one set of wrestling mat or multi-gym. 
 
3 The trainees of the adopted Akharas are provided 
with stipend  (per month per trainee) 
1000.00 
 
 At present there are 22 Regular Adopted schools, 27 schools adopted to promote 
indigenous games/martial arts, 49 Navodaya Vidyalayas and 33 Akharas and 02 Sports 
Centres on t he pattern of akharas have been adopted in which Total of 2387 (1841 
Boys, 546 Girls) are being trained. 
 
(ii) Army Boys Sports Company Scheme (ABSC) 
 
 The main concept of the scheme is to achieve excellence at international level by 
using excellent infrastructure and efficient administrative and disciplined environment of 
the Army. The scheme is a joint venture of the Army Authorities and Sports Authority of 
India.  Boys in the age group of 8-16 years of age are inducted under the scheme.  After 
attaining the required age, the trainees are also offered job in the Army at junior 
commissioned officers. 
 
SELECTION CRITERIA   
3.42 The selection criteria based on battery of tests prevailing since 1989 has also 
been modified during 1999 -2000 so as to give more emphasis on performance. At 
present the selection of trainees under the above scheme is done on potential basis and 
performance basis. 

 
53 
 
1) Trainees who are medal winners in State/National Level Competitions are 
automatically admitted into the Scheme subject to their age verifications and being 
found medically fit.   
2) Trainees who are medal winners at District Level Competition or have participation in 
State Level Competitions are admitted subject to their age verifications and being 
found fit medically and physically and also have the required potential which is 
assessed by battery of tests. 
3) And for deep selection from the remote, trib al & coastal areas the trainees are also 
selected by organizing competitions among participants.  Under this criterion for 
team games as well as individual events, the participant are made to play and 
selection done by a Selection Committee consisting of r epresentatives of SAI, Army, 
SMC and SAI coaches.  The sports persons identified on this basis are offered 
admission after age verification, medical examination and assessing their potential 
by applying battery of tests in the following manner: 
 
a) Application of specific games/Skill tests.  For this the participants could be made 
to play and the short listing be done by the Committee 
b) Age verification of the short listed participants for this the age should be between 
8 to 16 years.  
c) Application of Battery of t ests on sports persons qualifying the specific 
games/skill tests & age-verification to assess their potential. 
d) Medical examination of the sports persons qualifying the above tests. 
 
DISCIPLINES COVERED 
 Athletics, Archery, Basketball, Boxing, Diving, Gymnastics, Handball, Hockey, 
Kayaking & Canoeing, Football, Swimming, Shooting, Rowing, Volleyball, Wrestling & 
Weightlifting. 

 
54 
 
FACILITIES PROVIDED 
 Under the Scheme the inmates are provided Boarding &  lodging, Educational 
Expenses, Sports kit, Insurance, Medical cover, Competition exposure & scientific 
coaching from experienced coaches.   
Norms of Assistance to the Trainees 
S.No. Particulars Amount  
1. Sports Kit (p.a.) 2000.00 
2. Educational expenses (per head p.a.) 1000.00 
3. Sports Equipment (p.a.) 27500.00 
4. Maintenance of Playfield and  20000.00 
Magazine/Periodical  (p.a.) per unit 2500.00 
5. Boarding/loading 300 days (per head) 125.00  
6. Competition exposure  2000.00 
7. Medical  300.00 
8. Insurance  150.00 
9 One time grant of linen and Blankets etc. 2000.00 
 
At present there are 15 Centres in which 1044 Boy‟s trainees are being trained. 
 
(iii)     SAI Training Centres (STC) 
 
 The main concept of the scheme is to train meritorious sports persons in the age 
group of 14 -21 years. Under the scheme, STC are set up in joint collaboration with 
State Govt./UT Administration and SAI. The following facilities are to be provided by the 
State Government and Sports Authority of India: 
a) Facilities to be provided by the State Government : 
i) A suitable building for hostel with facilities for catering, library, recreation and 
family accommodation for Incharge of the Hostel and the coaches.  

 
55 
 
ii) Playfields/ Indoor Hall/ Swimming depending on the disciplines identified. 
iii) Maintenance of playfields for day to day training. 
iv) Annual maintenance of the hostel building.   
 
b) Facilities to be provided by SAI: 
i) Furniture for hostel and catering equipment. 
ii) Nutritious and balanced diet. 
iii) Sports kit. 
iv) Coaches. 
v) Sports equipment. 
vi) Medical assistance and insurance. 
vii) Administrative and catering staff. 
viii) Electricity, water and administrative staff. 
SELECTION CRITERIA   
 
3.43 The selection criteria based on battery of tests prevailing since 1989 has also 
been modified during 1999 -2000 so as to give more emphasis on performance.  At 
present selection of trainees is done on two basis, potential based and performance 
based.  Train ees who are medal winners in State/National Level Competitions are 
automatically admitted into the Scheme subject to their being found medically fit.  
Trainees who are medal winners at District Level Competition or have participation in 
State Level Competi tions are admitted subject to their being found fit 
medically/physically and also have the required potential which is assessed by battery 
of test. 
 
AGE GROUP 
Sports persons in the age group of 14 -21 years are admitted under the scheme.   
Relaxation be giv en in meritorious cases and also in disciplines of Gymnastics and 
swimming. The trainees are admitted into the Scheme on residential and non-residential 
basis. The trainees admitted on residential basis are provided Boarding and Lodging 

 
56 
 
facilities, sports kit, sports equipment, competition exposure, insurance, medical 
expenses etc. as per norms given below.  
 
DISCIPLINES COVERED 
Athletics, Archery, Badminton, Basketball, Boxing, Canoeing & Kayaking, Cycling, 
Football, Gymnastics, Hockey, Handball, Judo, Kab addi, Karate, Lawn Tennis, Rowing, 
Swimming, Speak -Takraw, Shooting, Table Tennis, Taekwando, Volleyball, Wrestling, 
Wushu, Softball, Weightlifting & Fencing. 
FACILITIES PROVIDED 
Under the Scheme selected trainees in addition to scientific training from experienced 
coaches are provided Boarding & lodging, Sports kit, Competition exposure, insurance 
& medical cover, education and TA/DA for Home time once a year.  The management, 
maintenance and upkeep of the sports & other facilities of the Centre are looked after by 
the SAI. A statement showing details of financial assistance provided to residential 
trainees under the scheme is given below :- 
Annual Maintenance grant Rs.7.50 lacs per centre per annum. 
Residential Trainees: 
SN Particulars (Per head) Amount 
1 Boarding Expenses (per day per head) Non- Hilly Areas for 
330 days 
125.00  
Per day per head for Hilly Areas for 330 Days 140.00 
2 Sports Kit  4000.00 
3 Competition Exposure  3000.00 
4 Education Expenses 1000.00 
5 Medical Expenses 300.00 
6 Insurance 150.00 
7 Other Expenses 100.00 
 
Non-Residential Trainees: 
SN Particulars Amount  
1 Sports Kit (per trainee per year) 4000.00  
2 Stipend (per trainee per year) 6000.00  
3 Competition exposure (per trainee per year) 3000.00  
4 Insurance  150.00 

 
57 
 
 
At present there are 58 Centres in which 8205 (5580 Boys & 2625 Girls) are being 
trained. 
(iv)      Special Area Games Scheme (SAG) 
 
3.44 The main concept of the scheme is to scout natural talent for modern competitive 
games and sports from tribal rural coastal and hilly areas of the country and also from 
regions having genetic geographic advantage and nurture them scientifically for 
achieving excellence in modern competitive games and sports. The trainees are 
adopted in the age group of 14-21 years. 
 
SELECTION CRITERIA   
 
3.45 The selection criteria based on battery of tests prevailing since 1989 has also 
been modified during 1999 -2000 so as to give more emphasis on performance.  At 
present selection of trainees is done on two basis, potential based and performance 
based.  Trainees who are medal winners in State/National Level Competitions are 
automatically admitted into the Scheme subject to their being found medically fit.  
Trainees who are medal winners at District Level Competition or have participation in 
State Level Competitions are admitted subject to their being found fit 
medically/physically and also have the required potential, which is assessed by battery 
of test 
 
FACILITIES PROVIDED 
3.46 The trainees are admitted into the Scheme on residential and non -residential 
basis. The trainees admitted on residential basis are provided Boarding and Lodging 
facilities, sports kit, sports equipment, competition exposure, insurance, medical 
expenses etc. as per norms given below:  
Annual Maintenance grant is Rs.7.50 lacs per centre per annum. 

 
58 
 
Residential Trainees : 
SN Particulars (Per head) Amount 
1 Boarding Expenses (per day per head) Non- Hilly Areas for 
330 days 
125.00  
Per day per head for Hilly Areas for 330 Days 140.00 
2 Sports Kit  4000.00 
3 Competition Exposure  3000.00 
4 Education Expenses 1000.00 
5 Medical Expenses 300.00 
6 Insurance 150.00 
7 Other Expenses 100.00 
 
Non-Residential Trainees: 
SN Particulars Amount  
1 Sports Kit (per trainee per year) 4000.00  
2 Stipend (per trainee per year) 6000.00  
3 Competition exposure (per trainee per year) 3000.00  
4 Insurance  150.00 
 
DISCIPLINES COVERED 
3.47 Athletics, Archery, Badminton, Boxing, Basketball, Canoeing & Kayaking, 
Cycling, Fencing, Football Gymnastics, Hockey, Judo, Karate, Kabaddi, Rowing, 
Shooting, Swimming, Taekowando, Volleyball, Wrestling, Weightlifting & Wushu. 
At present there are 21 Centres in which 1917 (1142 Boys & 775 Girls) are being 
trained. 
(V) Extension Centre of STC/SAG Centres to Cover School/Colleges for Wider 
 Coverage 
 The basic concept of the scheme is to develop sports standard in schools and 
colleges who organise specific sports and have shown commendable results. The 
trainees in the age group of 14-21 years are adopted under the scheme. 
 
 

 
59 
 
SELECTION OF THE INSTITUTION 
 Schools and colleges actively involved in sports and having adequate 
infrastructure are eligible under this scheme.  The institution should have a past history 
of producing national and international sports persons.  The Schools and Colleges 
should also agreeable to the norms laid down by the Sports Authority of India from time 
to time.   
 SELECTION OF TRAINEES & AGE GROUP 
3.48 There will be not more than 20 trainees in a School/College between the age 
group of 14 to 21.  The students of nearby schools/coll eges can also be admitted.  The 
selection of trainees will be done by a duly constituted committee consisting of (1) 
Regional Director or his representative (2) The Head of the College/Institute or his 
representative (3) Experts/Coaches from the school/col lege of the concerned discipline 
(4) Outstanding sports persons of the area.   The recommendation of the Committee will 
be sent to Head Office concerned for final approval.   Age can be relaxed in case any 
sportspersons is showing commendable results and h as exceptional talent.  For age 
relaxation, the above committee will send his recommendation to the concerned Head 
Office.   
 MONITORING  
3.49 These Extension Centres would be monitored by the nearest STC/SAG and the 
Regional Centre Head under which it fal ls.  The power to sanction such centres would 
rest with the Director General, SAI which would be put up to the Finance Committee for 
information.  
NORMS APPROVED FOR EXTENSION CENTRES OF STC/SAG   
Annual Maintenance grant upto Rs.1.00 lacs per centre per annum for 20 players 
SN Particulars Amount  
1 Sports Kit (per trainee per year) Rs.4000.00 
2 Stipend (per trainee for 10 months in a year) Rs.6000.00  
3 Competition exposure Rs.2000.00  
4 Insurance (P.A.) Rs.150.00  
5 To support infrastructure and equipment in the identified 
institutions, financial support per trainee per year 
Rs.5000.00 

 
60 
 
 The services of coaches will be provided to these Schools/Colleges on 
requirement basis. 
 At present there are 75 Extension Centres in which 1202 (746 Boys & 456 Girls) 
are being trained. 
(vi)     Centre of Excellence Scheme (COE) 
3.50 The scheme envisages training of elite sports persons in particular discipline, 
which provides advance training and also meet competition exposure including foreign 
competitions.  These Centres of Excellence also serve regular coaching camp for the 
best available talent in India and provide two or possibly three concurrent layers of 
highly skilled sports persons giving a wider choice of talent and continuity for later 
selection to National Teams. 
SELECTION CRITERIA  
  
1) Best six in Sr. National Competitions or Jr. International Competitions are eligible for 
admission provided they have the potential to continue in competitive sports for at 
least 2 to 3 years. 
2) The admission to Centre of Excellence is for those who excel from various Schemes 
of SAI as well as talented sports persons scouted collectively by the SAI and 
National Sports Federations for advance training, to enable them to develop their 
sports excellence, and to make them medal winners at International Tournaments.  
3) The trainees in the age group of 17 to 25 and above are admitted. 
FACILITIES PROVIDED 
 Under the Scheme selected trainees in addition to scientific training from 
experienced coaches are AC 2nd Class to and fro train fare for Home town twice a year 
and are provided the following facilities:  
Residential Trainees 
SN  Particulars  Amount  
1 Boarding Expenses for 330 days (per day per head) 175.00  
2. Sports Kit 6000.00  

 
61 
 
3. Competition Exposure 3000.00 
4. Medical Expenses 500.00 
5. Insurance  150.00 
6. Other Expenses 100.00 
 
Non - Residential Trainees: 
SN Particulars Amount  
1 Sports Kit (per trainee per year) 6000.00  
2 Stipend  9000.00 
3 Competition exposure 3000.00 
4 Insurance  150.00 
 
 The Scheme is presently being run at six Regional Centres. The disciplines being 
implemented are Athletics, Hockey, Badminton, Lawn Tennis, Swimming, Weightlifting 
Volleyball, Wrestling, Billiards, Shooting, Cycling, Wushu, Taekwando, Karate, Boxing, 
Kabaddi, Judo and Gymnastics and Table Tennis.  
 
DISCIPLINES COVERED 
 Athletics, Badminton, Boxing, Cycling, Gymnastics, Hockey, Judo, Karate, 
Kabaddi, Lawn Tennis, Shooting, Swimming, Table Tennis, Taekwando, Wrestling, 
Weightlifting, & Wushu. 
 
At present there are 12 Centres in which 343 (223 Boys & 120 Girls) are being trained. 
 
NEW INITIATIVE TAKEN DURING THE LAST ONE YEAR AND FUTURE PLANS  
 
Enhancement in boarding expenses : To meet the price escalation of food items and to 
provide better nutrition food to trainees inducted in various SAI Schemes food expenses 
are enhanced per trainee per day as given below: 
Army Boys Sports Company (ABSC)  : Rs.75/- to Rs.125/- 

 
62 
 
SAI Training Centres (STC)   : Rs.100/- to 125/- (Non-Hilly area) 
       : Rs.110/- to 140/- (Hilly area) 
Special Area Games (SAG)    : Rs.100/- to 125/- (Non-Hilly area) 
       : Rs.110/- to 140/- (Hilly area) 
Centre of Excellence (COE)   : Rs.150/- to 175/-  
 Enhancement of boarding facilities from 200 days to 330 days in COE Scheme. 
 Enhancement of Sports Kit amount from Rs.3000/ - to Rs.6000/- per trainee per year 
in COE Scheme 
 Relaxation of upper and lower age limit of trainees under SAI Sports Promotional 
Schemes. 
 Provision of Small Synthetic Surface in Hockey. 
 
3.51 Only 12,509 boys and girls are being trained under the National Sports Talent 
Scheme (NSTC), SAI Training Centres Schemes (STC) and Special Area Games 
Scheme (SAG).  Asked if this number was enough to meet the requirements and 
aspirations of the country in the field of sports and games especially when vast amount 
of talents and potentials are available in the country which remain untapped, the 
Department of Sports in a written reply stated as follows: 
 “SAI has been tapping and nurturing sports potential in number of sports 
disciplines under its Sports Promotional Schemes namely National Sports Talent 
Contest (NSTC), Army Boys Sports Company (ABSC), SAI Training Centre 
(STC), Special Area Games (SAG) & Centre of Excellence (COE).  SAI has been 
constantly increasing its intake of talented sports persons.  During the last five 
year, the following numbers of trainees were imparted coaching under the above 
said SAI Promotional Schemes.  
2005-2006 10630 
2006-2007 12561 
2007-2008 15010 
2008-2009 15098 
2009-2010 15115 
As on date, 15,115 trainees are being trained in various SAI Promotional 
Schemes throughout the country.  The talented children selected from far flung 

 
63 
 
areas of the country including rural/coastal/tribal under these schemes are 
provided nutritious diet, coaching facilities with scien tific back and requisite 
sports equipment and competition exposure to achieve excellence in their further 
performance.           
Another recent initiative has been adoption of Sports Centres and 
Akharas, wherein equipment support like mat/multi -gym and sti pend is provided 
to the selected trainees along with Coaching support.  These apart, synthetic 
surfaces are being laid at various Centres so that sports persons can make use 
of modern facilities. 
As on date, 94 Extension Centres are operational under the S cheme in 
various Schools and Colleges. 
Sports is a State subject.  As such the State Govt./UT Administration are 
also implementing different sports promotional schemes. Under the National 
Coaching Scheme of SAI, Coaches are also provided for the State Coac hing 
Centres, Educational Institutions, University field stations etc. for strengthening 
their sports programme/activities.   
This apart, various sports control boards e.g. Railways Sports Control 
Board, All India Public Sector Sports Control Board, Servic es Sports Control 
Board etc are also playing a pivotal role in promoting sports in the country.   
However, in order to increase the outreach of activities of SAI, there are 
constraints with regard to manpower (administrative/technical) and funds 
availability.” 
 
3.52 Over the years there have been only marginal increase in the number of trainees 
undergoing training in Sports Authority of India from 15010 in 2007-08 to 15115 in 2009-
2010. When the Department was asked to explain the reason for this, they replied:  
 “It is true that there has been only marginal increase in the number of trainees 
under different sports promotional schemes of SAI during the period 2007-08 due 
to budgetary con straints.   However, SAI is making efforts to increase its talent 
base and promote and develop sports through its schemes of Extension Centres 
for wider coverage in Schools, Colleges/Institutions.” 
 
3.53 Foreign exposure is essential for excelling in international competitions. On being 
asked w hether adequate foreign exposure is being provided to sportspersons in 
different disciplines to improve their competitiveness with USA, R ussia, China, Japan, 

 
64 
 
Korea etc., the criteria for selecting sportspersons for training abroad and the number of 
sportspersons who have been trained abr oad, during the last five years alongwith 
expenditure incurred, the Department of Sports in a written reply stated as follows: 
“Adequate foreign exposure to sportspersons for train ing and participation in 
international competitions abroad is being provided under the Scheme of 
Assistance to NSFs and National Sports Development Fund.  
 Under the Scheme of Assistance to NSFs, level of assistance with regard 
to air passage cost, lodging  & boarding, competition fee, local conveyance etc is 
given to NSFs depending upon to categorization viz., Priority, General and 
Others.  
 In respect of Priority category, teams are cleared at full cost (lodging &  
boarding, air passage cost, local conveyance etc) for participation in Olympics, 
World, Asian, Commonwealth, SAF and Afro -Asian Championships/Games or 
mandatory required international pre -qualifying tournaments for these 
championships. In addition, free board and lodging as per the approved norms is 
provided for two other training -cum-competition exposures per year to be agreed 
upon in the Long Term Development Plan (LTDP) meetings. For remaining 
exposures limited to a maximum of four only in year, air passage cost is allowed.  
In respect of General category of sports disciplines, teams are cleared at full cost 
for participation in Olympics, World, Asian and Commonwealth 
Championships/Games or pre-qualifying tournament for these championships.  In 
addition, two exposures at air passage cost are allowed.     
 Under the Scheme of Assistance to NSFs, assistance is not given directly 
to sportspersons. It is given to NSFs. Details of assistance released to NSFs 
during last three years are given in Annexure-II.   
Under the Scheme of NSDF, elite athletes, who are medal winning prospects in 
Olympics, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games and other international 
competitions, are selected for financial assistance from NSDF.  The assistance is 
given for their customized trai ning, both in India and abroad, to prepare them for 
winning medals at international events. Details of assistance released to 
sportspersons under NSDF is given in Annexure-I.” 
 
3.54 Secretary, Department of Sports added during evidence: 
 “As regards international exposure in SAI, there is no scheme or programme as 
such.  But in our scheme of preparation of sportspersons for Commonwealth 
Games, we have sent 2567 persons abroad so far.  They are across 17 
disciplines which are part of the Commonwealth Games scheme.” 
 
 
 

 
65 
 
3.55 On the issue of training to coaches, she further added: 
 “Then, in terms of coaches, that is an area where we need a huge effort for 
increasing the quantity, the quality as well as the refresher training for the 
coaches.  We are activating the existing schemes. We are also looking at various 
ways in which the existing coaches can be sent for refresher training.  One of the 
most encouraging developments has been that in a few countries with whom we 
have signed international cooperation agreements, we have been able to do a 
coach exchange programme. We send trained coaches to those countries for 
short-term refreshers so that they are brought up -to-date with that country‟s 
strength.   
  SAI and all other coaches are eligible for it.  In the last year, I am informed 
that over 20 coaches were deputed to Hungary for in -service training.  Next year 
we plan to double this number. NIS, Patiala is also running the coach 
development programmes which will be further modernized and strengthened.” 
 
(v) Scientific back-up to Sportsperson – R&D 
3.56 One of the objectives of National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) is to identify 
problems and take up research & development studies for providing support to 
excellence in sports. When t he Committee enquired about the number of research & 
development studie s funded from NSDF since its institution in 1998 and their 
findings/achievements, the Department of Sports, in a written reply informed: 
“Research & Development projects have not been undertaken so far. Sports 
industry is not fully developed in the country  at present. If any viable project is 
received for funding R&D in sports, it would be given serious consideration.” 
 
3.57 On the issue of R&D in Sports, Secretary, Department of Sports said: 
”The issue of R&D was raised.  Indeed we have to push a little harder in terms of 
improving our inputs into R&D and sports science.  At the moment our active 
effort is to get BIS standards to look into improving the quality of sports goods 
that are being produced.  We are  working on a proposal to have their standards 
like we have in a number of other commodities for improving each and every 
equipment that is produced in the country.” 
 

 
66 
 
3.58 A representatives of Indian Olympic Association ( IOC), during evidence also 
emphasized the need for scientific support in following words:- 
 “To achieve excellence, we not only need the systematic training but we need 
scientific training also.  In Hockey, earlier we had won eight gold medals.  But 
today we are not even in the medal bracket when it comes to Olympic Games.  In 
fact, we did not even qualify for Olympics but it is not because we do not have 
talented players or the synthetic pitches.  We have got everything but we lack 
scientific support.  For example, in hockey, whenev er our team gets a penalty 
corner, there is so much of excitement because public thinks that penalty corner 
gives an opportunity to score a goal.   The teams from countries like Germany or 
Holland or Australia or South Africa are trained on scientific line s.  They are told 
how much pressure they have to put to push or to hit the ball.  All these things 
are done in a very scientific way but we lack in this.” 
 
 
(vi) Participation of women in sports 
3.59 National Sports Policy states that efforts will be made to promote and encourage 
women‟s participation in sports. When asked about the steps taken in this direction, the 
Department of Sports submitted:  
“There is already a National Championships for Women. The scheme, started in 
1975, aims at promoting sports a mongst women. Under the scheme, national 
level competitions are preceded by holding of lower level competitions (Block, 
District & State level) for which States/ UTs are provided financial assistance as 
per norms.  
Further, all Schemes of the Ministry incl uding the recently introduced Scheme of 
Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) and Schemes of the Sports 
Authority of India are inclusive schemes i.e., are open to all, wherein youth 
belonging to any class, region and religion can participate.”  
 
3.60 When the Department of Sports was asked w hether it is true that scarcity of 
women coaches, lack of sports grounds and sponsors for sportswomen are acting as a 
hindrance in promoting sports among women, especially in suburbs and rural areas and 
the steps being taken to solve these problem, the Department in a written reply stated:  

 
67 
 
 “All Schemes of the Ministry and Sports Authority of India are inclusive 
schemes and benefits and facilities available under these schemes are equally 
applicable to sportspersons of both the genders. 
  
 It is true that the number of women sports coaches is on the lower side. At 
present, out of 1258 regular coaches, 181 are women coaches, which is 15% 
only of the total coach strength. But it is felt that availability of wom en coaches in 
lesser number cannot be considered as a hindrance in the development of sports 
amongst women because now -a-days men training women sportspersons or 
women training men sportspersons is not uncommon.  Men coaches are also 
acceptable to women trainees. 
   
 As for promotion of sports among women, the Scheme of National Sports 
Festival for Women, in operation since 1975, has been found to be quite 
successful in promoting sports amongst women including in the s uburbs and 
rural areas. 
   
 The national level competitions under this scheme are organized in three 
groups at different venues in the country so as to promote greater awareness of 
sports among the women folks.  This year, 2677 sportswomen participated in the 
National level competitions, in 12 sports disciplines. 
  
 Under the other SAI Sports Promotional Schemes also, women trainees 
are being  imparted training in different sports disciplines.  Details of the number 
of sports women receiving training are given below: 
 
STATEMENT SHOWING THE NUMBER OF SAI CENTERS AND STRENGTH OF 
TRAINEES 2009-2010 
Name of the  
Scheme 
No. of 
Centres 
No. of Trainees 
(Residential) 
No. of Trainees 
(Non-Residential) 
   Total 
  Strength 
  Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total  
NSTC School 22 35 18 53 675 219 894 947 
IGMA 27 0 0 0 234 114 348 348 
Jawahar 
Navo- 
Daya 
Vidyalayas 
49 0 0 0 338 138 476 476 
Akharas 32 0 0 0 612 25 637 637 
Sports 
Centre on 
the Pattern 
of 
Akhara 
04 0 0 0 78 13 91 91 
Army Boys 15 1175 0 1175 0 0 0 1175 

 
68 
 
Sports 
Companies 
SAI Training 
Centre(s) 
58 2908 994 3902 2545 1211 3756 7658 
Special Area 
Games 
21 973 660 1633 234 152 386 2019 
Ext. Centre 
of 
STC/SAG 
82 0 0 0 839 600 1439 1439 
Centre of 
Excellence 
12 208 117 325 0 0 0 325 
Total: 322 5299 1789 7088 5555 2472 8027 15115 
          Boys            Girls    
Grand Total:        10854           4261          15115  
 
 Besides, the recently introduced Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan 
 (PYKKA) is expected to bring revolution as far as the participation of women in 
 sports is concerned and would help in spotting and further training of the 
 talented youth.” 
 
3.61 The Committee asked about the number of women hostels out of total sports 
hostels under Sports Authority of India. The Department of Sports replied as under:  
 “There are 91 Sports Hostels under various sports promotional schemes of SAI, 
 out of which, residential facilities for girls trainees are available in 49 Hostels.” 
 
 
3.62 Responding to the query on the cases of sexual harassment of sportswomen and 
the existing mechanism within various sports bodies and the Ministry to deal with cases 
of sexual harassment of sportspersons, the Department of Sports replied: 
 “For prevention of sexual harassment of women at work places, Committees 
 have been set up in the Ministry and SAI in accordance with the guidelines laid 
 down by  the Supreme Court of India relating to sexual harassment of women 
 workers at work places.   

 
69 
 
With regard to the cases pertaining to sexual harassment of women trainees at 
 SAI centres, the inquiry is conducted either by the Committee set up in 
SAI for this purpose or by any other Committee, as is decided by the competent 
authority in SAI. Ministry  will ask SAI to carry out an elaborate exercise and to 
come out with a well -defined mechanism for prevention of sexual harassment of 
women trainees at SAI centres across the country.  
Ministry will also write to NSFs asking them to put in place mechanism for 
dealing with cases of sexual harassment of women sportspersons belonging to 
disciplines dealt with by them.” 
 
 
3.63 The Committee further enquired about the measures being taken to improve the 
gender imbalance among sportsperso ns and to encourage sport swomen to which  the 
Ministry explained as follows: 
“Benefits and facilities available under all schemes of the Ministry as well as that 
of SAI are equally applicable to sportspersons of both the gender. Recently 
introduced PYKKA will give a great fillip to girls taking parts in sports in large 
numbers as the Scheme of PYKKA operates from the grassroot level and aims at 
creation of basic sports facilities in all village panchayats and block panchayats in 
the country in a phased manner during next ten years and providing access to 
organized sports competitions at block, district, state and national level.  
  
Further, efforts are constantly being made to increase the intake of the number of 
sports women under different sports promotional schemes of SAI.  As of now, 
there are 4261 women trainees receiving trainin g at different SAI Centres in 
various disciplines, all over India.”  
 
3.64 When asked whether the Government is considering to formulate any scheme to 
deal with the specific prob lems being faced by Sportswomen, the Department of Sports 
clarified: 
 “There is no proposal for introduction of a new scheme for women sportspersons 
However, as stated in reply to previous question, benefits and facilities available 
under all schemes of the Ministry as well as that of SAI are equally applicable to 
sportspersons of b oth the gender and that the recently introduced PYKKA will 
give a great fillip to girls taking parts in sports in large numbers.” 
 
 

 
70 
 
3.65 On a related query on gender budgeting, she elaborated as under: 
 “On the issue of gender budgeting, the hon. Member asked very correctly as to 
whether there is any separate allocation for women.  The entire Sports Policy is 
considered to be an inclusive policy, inclusive in terms of gender, in terms of 
ability and in terms of other parameters. As of now, there is no gend er budgeting 
within the allocation of the Department of Sports. However, having said that, in 
our actual implementation, every effort is made to ensure that participation as 
well as nurturing of talent and gender parity is kept totally in view. For example , it 
is a fact that if there is 50:50 representation, it does not reflect the correct gender 
balance of the population. There are several social reasons for that, but when it 
comes to competition, we find this balance is correcting itself , slowly, but very 
surely. So, one very positive indication we have is that in the national level and 
district level, in PY KKA competitions, which have started only a year or two ago, 
the participation of women and women‟s teams is increasingly getting larger. In 
some States it has been observed, for example in Tamil Nadu, the participation 
of women far exceeds that of men at the State level championships. We are in 
the process of collating a database. We will go into the reasons why it (women‟s 
participation) is lacking in some States. But , wherever, there are mixed group of 
trainees in the SAI Centres, separate hostels do exist for women. As far as core 
probables for the Commonwealth Games are concerned, women training camps 
are separate. For example, the women‟s h ockey team is training in Bhopal and 
the men‟s hockey team had its training partly in Pune and partly in Delhi before 
the World Cup. In our final selection, among our cream of talent, which has been 
identified in 17 Commonwealth Games disciplines, there ar e 635 men and 485  
women 
  So, we are trying to get the balance right and this is conscious effort, 
although there is, as yet, no separate allocation for women.” 
 
3.66 On being pointed out by the Committee  that the balance seems to be corrected 
by the urban girls and not the rural ones, the Secretary, Department of Sports clarified: 
 “Actually among the core probables for the Commonwealth Games, out of 485 
women, I am informed that more than 75 per cent are from rural background.  
But the fact is that the gender balance is a reflection of the participation of girls in 
the school system, in the general social situation that exists in the various States.  
So, we do find , that, wherever the social indicators are good, the participation of 
girls has gone up.  T herefore, in the Northern States, it is a fact that we are not 
getting the kind of participation, but in our national teams across the 17 
disciplines, this balance is right both for the regions as wells as for gender.” 
 
3.67 When the Committee emphasized t he need for gender budgeting, the Secretary, 
Department of Sports agreed: 

 
71 
 
 “Certainly, we will take this on our implementation agenda.  Immediately what we 
would like to do as an immediate measure is that in our PYKKA scheme when 
we are training our master  trainers, we will take up certain districts or any rural 
regional unit or rather special unit and take all the eligible women and train them 
as master trainers so that they can in turn be enabled to train other kridashrees.   
It is a first step and I have asked my officers to see how we can actually 
implement this idea.  This suggestion did come out of the hon. Committee‟s 
observations to us in the last hearing as well.  We will take this further as you 
have said. 
  I do as sure you that in every selection in the Ministry, there is a clear 
mandate right from the top , that, 50 per cent minimum should be girls, whether it 
is in volunteers for the Commonwealth Games or whether it is in the teams or 
whether it is in selection of sports persons for awards or for other benefit 
schemes.  There is a direction and something which we are happy to adopt and 
follow through that minimum 50 per cent should be girls.  We are going to try and 
implement this in our programmes as well.  We hope  to be able to show the 
Committee some results on this.” 
 
(vii) Participation of persons with disabilities 
3.68 Budgetary allocation of 2 schemes viz. „Promotion of Sports among disabled‟, 
„Promotion of Sports in Universities and Colleges‟ lapsed during the year 2007 -08 & 
2008-09 due to non -formulation of these schemes. When asked about the reasons for 
delay in their formulation, the Department of Sports stated as follows: 
 “Scheme of Sports & Games for Disabled has been approved in November 2009 
 only. The Scheme of Sports & Games for the Disabled has the following 
 components:- 
 (i) Grant for sports coaching and purchase of consumables & non -
consumable  sports equipment for Schools 
 (ii) Grant for Training of Coaches 
 (iii) Grant for holding District, State & National level competitions for the 
 disabled. 
 After approval of the Scheme  by the competent authority, a notice was issued in 
January 2010 in national dailies inviting applications from schools to seek 
assistance for engagement of coaches and procurement of sports equipment.  In 
response, Ministry received 142 applications.  The  Apex Committee, constituted 
for implementation of the Scheme, has held two meetings on 26.2.2010 and 
8.3.2010 to approve 61 schools for assistance under the Scheme.” 

 
72 
 
 
3.69 On being enquired about the efforts being made by the Government to provide 
training to persons with disabilities and to develop the r equired infrastructure for them, 
keeping in mind their special requirements, the Department of Sports  in a post 
evidence reply stated as follow: 
 “Under the Scheme of Assistance to NSFs, assistance is bei ng provided to three 
NSFs dealing with disabled sportspersons, namely Paralympic Committee of 
India (PCI), Special Olympics Bharat (SOB) and the All India Sports Council for 
the Deaf for participation of disabled sportspersons in national and international  
competitions, training and equipment and other support including training the 
trainers. These three NSFs specifically deal with disabled category of 
sportspersons and therefore, they keep in view the special requirements of 
disabled sportspersons.  
 For development of disabled-friendly sports infrastructure and facilities, a copy of 
Guidebook on Creating Sporting & Recreational Activities for Persons with 
Disabilities, brought out by the Office of the Chief Commissioner for Persons with 
Disabilities, will be sent to SAI and concerned NSFs.   
 Further, the Schools, who will receive grants from the Ministry for engagement of 
coaches on contract basis and for procurement of sports equipment under the 
recently introduced Scheme for Promotion of Sports and Games  among 
disabled, will also be supplied a copy of the aforesaid Guidebook.” 
 
3.70 During evidence, a representative of the Paralympic Committee of India (PCI) 
informed the Committee as under: 
 “There are five categories of disabled persons; physically disabled, mental 
retardness, cerebral disorder, blind and wheelchair groups.  From 1994 we have 
been participating in all the international events and winning medals.  In 2004 we 
won a Gold Medal in Athletics.  We had given a world class performance in 
javelin throw. 
 There is first ever gold medal in athletics.  But still the Government has no 
recognition towards out disabled sports persons.  But for all the disciplines, the 
Government is very kind enough to sanction Rs.12 lakh but it is very insufficient.   
We have a number of events and each even has all the disciplines like blinds 
have to play in the individual event.  Therefore, more funds should be given to 
us.   
 Secondly, according to the recent policy of the Government, para -sports are not 
eligible f or cash awards.  This is a total indiscrimination towards the disabled 
sports persons.  They say para-Olympics is a closed event but it is an open event 

 
73 
 
and it is conducted after the Olympics.  Even we have sports in Commonwealth 
Games.  We have Para-Asian Games after the Asian Games.  Recently we have 
conducted on International Wheel Chair Sports and we stood second in the 
overall championship.  China stood first and next one is India with 110 medals.  
Apart from that, we are being discriminated against in cash awards.  
 We do not have proper coaching centres.  SAI has been always loaded with their 
own sports.  We are not against their centres but we should also be given a 
chance and provisions should made for our athletes also.  As regards training 
facilities, as such we do not have any specialised coaches but still we could be 
able to manage and have won medals.  Apart from this, we do not have any 
administrative expenses for meeting our own expenses.  We have a lot expenses 
to meet.  We have all the disci plines like archery for which equipment has to be 
purchased.  It is commonly known that it is more an individual effort.  The 
participant cannot buy even the archery.  We have got very good shooters.  In 
the World Championship, we have won medals.  We have  power lifters and for 
everything we need equipment.  Most of our federations are supporting our 
handicapped children.” 
 
3.71 In a Memorandum submitted to the Committee , PCI explained the problems 
being faced by them. They submitted that the grants  given by the Ministry of Sports for 
holding National championships is not adequate and it be enhanced keeping in view the 
number of disciplines, events, participation. PCI has submitted that unlike other National 
championships, in Paralympics sports the n umber of participants are more. This is due 
to various classes of disability for example in a 100 M run there will be only one event in 
regular athletic but in Paralympics t here will be around 16 events for different classes 
depending on the degree of disa bility. There is no provision of giving cash awards for 
meritorious paralympic sportspersons , though their achievements are taken into 
consideration in the overall medal tally. 
 
3.72 PCI further highlighted their grievance on the unavailability of infrastructure in the 
following statement: 
 “All the Stadium  coming under Central/State Governments, SAI should have 
accessible facilities like wheel chair ramps to all building entries, wheel chair 
friendly lifts/ elevators, wheel chair toilets, special accessible entry and exit to 
field, accessible audience seati ng etc. A particular time slot to be allocated for 
the disabled sports persons to practice in these stadia so that it will not hamper 
the other activities in the field. During the camps, the accommodation also should 

 
74 
 
have accessible facilities like ramps, wheel chair toilets etc. Special for wheel 
chair bound athletes the rooms should have attached wheel chair accessible 
toilets and cots. It is since 5 and half years that the Government has given 
recognition to disabled sports but the infrastructure required is not upgraded. 
 Since there is no separate stadium for Paralympic sports, it would be beneficial if 
a scheme is made to give land to the PCI affiliated State bodies in each State/ 
UT so that these lands can be used for construction of stadia exclusively for 
Paralympic sports, training centres and offices. It is also requested that in each 
and every state /UTs an office accommodation be given to the PCI affiliated 
bodies to carry on the development activities”. 
 
3.73 On the issue of training fa cilities for disabled sportspersons,  PCI stated as 
follows: 
“At present there is no separate training facility where a disabled athlete get his 
training. There are no trained coaches who can train a disabled athlete. All the 
existing training facilities in the country to be modified for disabled friendly and be 
given for disabled sports tr aining also. Also there is a di re need of sending the 
coaches for specialized training to train disabled sports persons in a scientific 
method. SAI should make a programme to send i ts coaches for such special 
training programmes every year so that there will be coaches to coach disabled 
sports persons.” 
 
 
(viii) Functioning of National Sports Federations 
3.74 As per the Allocation of Business Rules, the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
has been mandated to deal with Indian Olympic Association and National Sports 
Federations to work for promotion and development of sports in India. The Ministry 
recognizes one National level Sports Federation in each discipline for the purpose of 
development and promotion of their respective disciplines. These federations are 
autonomous registered societies fully responsible and accountable for the overall 
management, direction, control, regulation, promotion, and development of their 
disciplines.  T hey are, in turn recognized, by the various international federations and 
also by the Indian Olympic Association. 
 

 
75 
 
3.75 The Committee desired to know the criteria for giving recognition to a ny sports 
body by the Ministry . The Department of Sports in a supp lementary reply submitted as 
under:  
“Following are taken into consideration while taking a decision to grant Ministry‟s 
 recognition to a National Sports Federation:  
 The current legal status of the organization.  
 Recognition by the International and Asian Federation.  
 Recognition by the IOA.  
 Its undisputed status as an Apex Body in India  
 Its all India spread.  
 The role and contribution of the organization in promoting and  
  developing Sports in India.  
 Its internal financial and management practices and standards.  
 Its electoral practices. 
 Its protection and promotion of players interests and welfare.” 
 
3.76 The Committee further enquired about  the procedure of selection of  the 
President, Vice President and membe rs of India n Olympic Association and National 
Sports Federations.  Asked as to whether any  eligibility criteria have been formulated 
for the purpose, the Department of Sports in a written reply stated: 
“Elections to posts of Presidents, Vice Presidents, Secretary Generals etc in 
Indian Olympic Association and National Sports Federations are governed in 
accordance with their respective constitutions and Bye-Laws.  
Government insists on fair and transparent  process of election. Ministry has 
issued instructions to IOA and NSFs to ensure that election to sports bodies 
should be governed by clear, transparent and fair rules and that they should 
observe following  cardinal principles in the conduct of elections of sports bodies: 
(i) a clean electoral roll, known to the public in advance 
(ii) well-defined election schedule  
(iii) independent returning officer 
(iv) secret ballot.” 
 
 
3.77 Selection Committees of Sports Federations do not have many veteran 
sportspersons as those are outnumbered by non -sportspersons.  Experience of veteran 

 
76 
 
sportspersons thus is not made use of while selecting play ers. When the comments of 
Department of Sports were sought, the Department of Sports in a written reply stated: 
“Following constitution of Selection Committees is prescribed in the Guidelines to 
the Schemes of Assistance to NSFs for selection of sportspersons for 
participation in international sports events: 
(i) President of the concerned NSF 
(ii) an eminent sportsperson (Arjuna Awarde e or an international medal 
winner)  
(iii) National Coach 
(iv) Government Observer appointed by the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, 
to be associated in all activities of NSF  
It is mandatory for the Federation to inform Government Observer about 
selection committee meetings and major national and international competitions.    
Further, Ministry has issued detailed guidelines for more efficient management of 
coaching camps, selection of coaches, selection of athletes, etc in September 
2008. A copy of the circular is placed at Annexure III.” 
 
3.78 The NSFs are also alleged to be plagued by corruption, inefficiency, favoritism, 
nepotism in selection of sportspersons etc. When asked by the Committee whether it is 
a fact and if so , the steps proposed to be taken by the Government in this regard, the 
Department of Sports, in a written reply stated:  
“The recognition of National Sports Federations (NSFs) by the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs & Sports is governed by the guidelines given in the Scheme of Assistance 
to NSFs. Three basic requirements given in the Scheme are:  
(i) fair, transparent and democratic elections;  
(ii) fair selection of national teams; 
(iii) financial accountability 
 
The Government looks into these issues while considering the proposals of the  
NSFs seeking financial assistance from the Ministry.”   
 
3.79 To a query as to whether there should be an independent monitoring body to 
monitor the functioning of National Level Sports Federations, the Department stated: 

 
77 
 
“At present, there is no Government managed mechanism to regulate functioning 
of NSFs because these are autonomous bodies which are self-governed.  
The Government continuously makes efforts to ensure good governance in NSFs 
and in case of any deviations, the Government does interv ene to rectify the 
matter.” 
 
3.80 The Committee desired to have the details of the efforts made by the Govt. to 
ensure good governance in National Level Sports Federation (NSFS)  since in case of 
any deviations, the Government intervenes to rectify the matter. Asked as to how many 
such cases have occurred over the past few years when the Government had to 
intervene, the Department of Sports stated: 
“With the objective of bringing in transparency and fairness in functioning of 
NSFs that receive financial assistance from the Government, the Ministry has 
introduced a system of annual recognition of NSFs based on submission of 
required documentation. Unde r this system introduced from 2010, all NSFs are 
required to submit, in the first instance, documents such as their registration 
certificate, accreditation letters from Asian and international federations, names 
and addresses of office bearers, details of state affiliates and their office bearers, 
last three years‟ annual reports and audited accounts, details of championships 
conducted, selection criteria, composition of the selection committee and details 
of technical officials. Once annual recognition is granted, the federations have to 
submit limited number of documents, annually, to avail themselves of automatic 
renewal.  
  
 Response to the new procedure introduced by the Ministry has been quite 
encouraging. As of now, 53 NSFs have applied for annual rec ognition. Out of 
this, 39 have qualified for annual recognition. Out of these, 34 have fulfilled all 
requirements and have been accorded annual recognition for the calendar year 
2010 and 5 federations, which have partially fulfilled the requirements, have been 
granted provisional recognition.  
  
 Whenever disputes occur between/among various factions of a 
Federation, the Ministry tries to sort out the dispute by hearing the concerned 
parties. As a result of Ministry‟s interventions, disputes in respect of f ollowing 
NSFs were resolved:  
 
(i) Shooting Ball Federation of India 
(ii) Taekwondo Federation of India 

 
78 
 
(iii) Karatedo Federation of India 
(iv) Netball Federation of India 
(v) Throwball Federation of India 
  
 If the Ministry‟s efforts do not succeed and/or  parties decide to take their 
dispute to the Court, then the Ministry stops dealing with the Federation and 
stops giving grant to it till the matter is decided by the Court or they resolve their 
differences on their own. Following are the Federations in wh ich there are 
unresolved disputes:  
 
(i) Ball Badminton Federation of India – Fighting in two groups 
(ii) Cycling Federation of India -Pending in Court 
(iii) Bodybuilding Federation of India- Fighting in four-five groups”  
 
3.81 Asked about the mechanism by which the Ministry regulate the functi oning of the 
Sports Federations, the Department of Sports in a supplementary reply explained as 
follows: 
“With a view to ensuring financial accountability, the Ministry insists upon the 
federations to follow proper accounting procedures and have their accounts 
audited on regular basis which is also a prerequisite for obtaining and 
maintaining recognition with the Ministry. They have to submit timely utilization 
certificates to the Ministry with respect to all the grants received by them. Any 
federation, not submitting the UCs in time, is not given any further financial grant. 
The accounts of the federations receiving financial grant of more than Rs. 1 crore 
are audited by Comptroller & Auditor General.  
From January, 2010, a mandatory annual recognition procedure for the NSFs 
has been introduced.   In order to update records of National Sports Federations 
(NSFs), the Government has undertaken an exercise to collect and maintain the 
data/documents with reg ard to legal, financial, management and operational 
status of NSFs.  NSFs have also been asked to draw the calendar of their 
activities for the year so as to enable players/States units, Association of Indian 
Universities (AIU) and School Games Federation of India to plan their 
participation and sporting activities. 
 Only those NSFs, who have submitted the requisite documents, including 
financial statements, prescribed by the Ministry, has been granted fresh 
recognition certificate in 2010.  Subsequent annual renewal will be subject to 
submission of the annual report & audited accounts and other details.” 
 

 
79 
 
3.82 Providing details of the mode in which the Ministry provides funds to the 
Federations and the criteria on the basis of which these organizations are selected for 
receiving funds in a particular year, Department of Sports stated: 
“The Ministry provides assistance to the National Sports Federations for the 
following activities under the Scheme of Assistance to Federations: 
(i) conduct of National Championships for both men and women in Senior, Junior 
and Sub Junior category  
(ii) conduct of international championships in India 
(iii) participation of sportspersons and teams in international sports competitions 
abroad  
(iv) organizing of national coaching camps 
(v) engagement of foreign coaches   
(vi) procurement of sports equipment   
 
In order to be eligible for assistance the NSFs must meet the following criteria:  
(i) they should maintain their recognized status with the Ministry.  
(ii) they should fo llow proper, democratic and healthy management practices 
which provide for greater accountability and transparency at all levels.  
(iii) they should have proper accounting procedures at all levels and produce 
annual financial statements 
(iv) they should pr oduce an annual report within six months of completion of the 
year.  
(v) they should have impartial and transparent selection procedures.  
(vi) they should ensure compliance of anti-doping measures of World Anti-Doping 
Agency (WADA) and National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA).” 
 
3.83 It has been stated by the Ministry that with a view to ensuring financial 
accountability, the Ministry insists upon the Federations to follow proper accounting 
procedures and have their accounts audited on regular basis which is als o a pre -
requisite for obtaining and managing recognition with the Ministry.  When asked h ow 
many of these follow proper accounting procedure and how many‟s accounts have been 
audited during the last five years, the Department of Sports informed: 
 
“All NSFs, being Societies registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860, are 
required to get their accounts audited by Chartered Accountants. At the time of 
grant of annual recognition, NSFs were asked to submit last three years audited 
accounts. All NSFs, whi ch complied with the Ministry‟s directions and have been 
granted annual recognition, have submitted last three years audited accounts” 
 
 

 
80 
 
3.84 When details of the C&AG‟s observations on the Sports Bodies in the  country in 
the last five years were sought, the Department of Sports in a supplementary reply 
submitted: 
“The accounts of the federations receiving financial grant of more than Rs. 1 
crore are audited by Comptroller & Auditor General. C&AG makes both specific 
and general observations.” 
 
3.85 The Committee wanted to know about the Grievance Redressal Mechanism in 
these Federations and the role of the Ministry in this regard, the Department of Sports 
informed: 
“Most NSFs do not have proper grievance redressal mechanism. Ministry has 
been insisting upon the NSFs for good governance practices. Recently, Ministry 
has declared IOA and all NSFs as public authorities under Right to Information 
Act, 2005. This measure will go a long way in grievance redressal as the affected 
parties can access information under RTI Act.”  
 
3.86 National Level Sports Federations are autonomous bodies . Yet they should also 
be made accountable. Asked about the Government s proposal  to establish a Sports 
Regulatory Authority to ensure accountability of such Federations , the Department of 
Sports clarified: 
“There is no proposal to establish a Sports Regulatory Body.  However with the 
objective of bringing in transparency and fairness in functioning of National 
Sports Federations, the Ministry insists upon the federations to fol low democratic 
and healthy management practices, which provide for greater accountability and 
transparency at all levels and have robust financial procedures.  
Regarding the elections, all the federations have to fulfill certain critical minimum 
requirements viz. a well defined electoral college, a definite election schedule, an 
independent returning officer and secret ballot. 
For selections of the teams also, there are well -defined guidelines issued by the 
Government which require all the federations to wo rk out a well -calibrated 
selection criteria after taking into account the performances at national, 
international tournaments, selection trials, guidelines and practices followed at 
international level. They are also required to notify selection trials and  the 
selection committee well in time.  
The Federations have to follow proper accounting procedures and have their 
accounts audited on regular basis. They have to submit timely Utilization 

 
81 
 
Certificates to the Ministry with respect to all the grants receive d by them. Any 
federation not submitting the UCs in time is not given any further financial grant. 
 
Apart from the above, the F ederations also have to give due consideration to the 
following: 
a) Proper functioning of affiliated units.  
b) Measures for the protection of players‟ interests, both during their playing 
 careers and thereafter.  
c) Introduction of impartial machinery for the redressal of player's grievances.  
d) Organization of tournaments at all levels.  
e) Measures to broad -base and pop ularize sports, especially through the 
 establishment of clubs, the organization of local tournaments, and the 
 creation of infrastructure.”  
 
3.87 The Department of Sports submitted before the Committee: 
Government is not satisfied with the functioning of  National Sports Federations 
(NSFs), because none of them have fully complied with the good governance 
practices prescribed by the Government in the guidelines for recognition of 
NSFs.  A recent study undertaken by the Government shows that most of the 
NSFs are not having proper election bye -laws that can ensure fair and 
transparent elections. Similarly, most federations do not have reservation for the 
representation of Sportspersons on their respective management; and also do 
not have a proper grievance re dressal mechanism for Sportsperson.  The 
Badminton Association of India and the Swimming Federation of India have held 
elections in June 2010 and elected office bearers who are in breach of the 
Government guidelines with regard to age and tenure. 
With a vi ew to ensuring proper adherence to the Government guidelines, a 
system of annual recognition of NSFs has been introduced with effect from the 
current calendar year (2010).  Under this system, annual recognition is granted to 
those federations that fully co mply with the Government guidelines.  During the 
current year, out of the total of 68 NSFs, only 42 have been accorded annual 
recognition for 2010. 
Further, at present, the Bench of the Hon‟ble Chief Justice of Delhi High Court is 
hearing a Public Interest Litigation against the mismanagement of NSFs.  On the 
directions of the Hon‟ble Court for Government to take immediate stand on the 
enforcement of Government guidelines pertaining to tenure limits,  which were 
kept in abeyance since 2001, the Government h as restored the tenure limits and 
imposed an  age limit of 70 years on members of all recognized NSFs, including 
the Indian Olympic Association.  The order dated 1.5.2010 issued by the 
Government is based on international best practices, including those ad opted by 
the International Olympic Committee. The Order dated 1.5.2010 provides:   
  
(i) The President of any recognized NFS, including the IOA can hold the 
office for a maximum period of twelve years with or without break. 

 
82 
 
(ii) The Secretary (or by whatever other designation such as Secretary 
General or General Secretary by which he is referred to) and the 
Treasurer of any recognized National Sports Federation, including the 
IOA, may serve a maximum of two successive terms of four years 
each after which a minimum c ooling off period of four years will apply 
to seek fresh election to either post. 
(iii) The President, the Secretary and the Treasurer of any recognized 
National Sports Federation, including the Indian Olympic Association, 
shall cease to hold that post on attaining the age of 70 years. 
The conditions (i) to (iii) above will be subject to the proviso that it shall not 
disturb the current tenure of any member, provided he/she has been properly 
elected to the post.  In other words, the tenure condition will become o perative for 
all future elections as they may be conducted in future in their normal course. 
IOA and NSFs agitated against Government order dated 1 st May, 2010.  
However, the matter was also discussed with International Olympic Committee 
on 18.6.2010 where in representative of IOA were also present.  The following 
emerged from the meeting: 
 
 That the open dialogue process had contributed to a positive understanding 
 That the sports movement in India  will review its governance practices and 
adopt, as its minimum standard, the basic universal principles of good 
governance recommended by the Olympic Congress 
 Government of India has always respected the autonomy of sports bodies but not 
without strong and visible good governance practices 
GoI is bound by Court orders and there is no scope for review of the 1.5.2010 
orders, as the matter is sub-judice.” 
 
(ix) Appraisal of National Sports Policy 
3.88 The Ministry of Youth Affairs had proposed a new Comprehensive National 
Sports Policy, the draft of which was discussed with all stakeholders viz State 
Governments, Indian Olympic Association (IOA), National Sports Federations, eminent 
sportspersons and sport administrators.   
The main thrust of the draft Comprehensive National Sports Policy, 2008, was on 
pro-active involvement of the Central Government in the promotion of sports at the 
grassroots level by way of broad -basing sports infrastructure and promoting mass 
participation in sports and games through organized rural competitions. The draft policy 

 
83 
 
also considered the issues of regulation of the sports bodies and transfer of the subject 
of „sports‟ from State List to Concurrent List.  
After careful consideration of the whole  matter, the Government decided that the 
existing National Sports Policy 2001 is sufficient to achieve the goals set of both mass 
participation and the promotion of excellence in sports and wants to withdraw the draft 
Comprehensive National Sports Policy for following reasons:  
(i) The objective of broad -basing sports infrastructure and mass participation in sports 
and games at the grassroots level has been comprehensively addressed by introduction 
of the centrally sponsored scheme entitled „Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan‟ 
(PYKKA). 
(ii) Regulation of sports bodies is being addressed separately within the existing 
guidelines of government for recognition of NSFs, by incentivizing good governance, 
including transparency, by linking grants under the Sche me of Assistance to NSFs to 
performance and good management practices.   
(iii) Ministry has decided to withdraw the Constitution (Sixty -First Amendment) Bill 
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 24.11.1988 proposing transfer of „sports‟ from the State 
List to the Concurrent List of the Constitution of India as the required support from 
States could not be obtained. The primary reason for proposing the transfer of „Sports‟ 
from the State List to the Concurrent List was to cater to the need of regulating the 
activities and functioning of National Sports Federations/Associations, which is already 
within the powers conferred upon the Union under Entry 97 of List I read with Article 248 
of the Constitution of India. It is felt that there is no need to shift „sports‟ from  State List 
to Concurrent List and if at all, a need is felt at any point in time for enacting a National 
Sports Law, the Central Government is competent to take it up under the Residuary 
Powers available under Entry 97 in the Union List of the Seventh Sch edule of the 
Constitution of India. 
(iv) it would be more beneficial to focus on the implementation of the existing National 
Sports Policy 2001 than replace it with a new sports policy at this stage. Whatever 

 
84 
 
policy decisions, including calibration of exis ting policy, required, can be addressed 
within the available policy framework, which is broad enough for this purpose. 
3.89 The Committee wanted to know whether it was  a fact that the draft National 
Sports Policy, 2007 could not be finalized because of str ong opposition from Indian 
Olympic Association and National & State Sports Federations, the Department of Sports 
clarified through a written reply: 
“Other than the basic features of the existing National Sports Policy 2001, which 
were part of the draft Comprehensive National Sports Policy, 2007, 
establishment of an independent sports arbitration and mediation mechanism 
based on international best pract ices for resolution of disputes arising within or 
between NSFs or between an individual NSF and the players and ensuring 
development of sports in conformity with Olympic Charter  was the main feature 
of the draft National Sports Policy 2007.There was stron g opposition from IOA 
and NSFs against proposed establishment of Sports Regulatory Body, as they 
felt that it would affect their autonomy.” 
 
3.90 The National Sports Policy 2001, has a provision which States  that it would be 
reviewed periodically in order to incorporate changes/modifications which may be 
necessitated by technological and other advancements in the field of sports.  The 
Committee wanted to know whether it has ever being reviewed since the last 9 years, 
the Department of Sports explained: 
“Keeping in view the twin objectives viz., broad-basing of sports and promotion of 
excellence in sports of National Sports Policy 2001, review of existing schemes 
of Ministry and SAI and introduction of new sche mes is an ongoing process. For 
attaining the objective of broad -basing of sports, the Ministry has introduced in 
2007-08 the Scheme of Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA), which 
aims at creation of basic sports facilities in all village panchayat s and block 
panchayats of the country in a phased manner over a period of 10 years and 
providing access to organized sports competitions at block, district, state and 
national levels. Other schemes of the Ministry and SAI, which aim at broad -
basing of sports and promotion of excellence of sports by way of identification of 
talent and nurturing and training of the identified talent are also reviewed 
regularly and corrective measure are taken wherever required.”  
 

 
85 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
Preparations for Commonwealth Games, 2010 in Delhi 
4.1 The XIX Commonwealth Games (CWG) are scheduled to be held in Delhi from 
3rd October, to 14 th October, 2010. This is the second time that CWG are being held in 
Asia after Kuala  lampur in 1998. At the General Assembly of the Commonwealth 
Games Federation (CGF) held in Montego Bay, Jamaica 2003,  the Indian Olympic 
Association (IOA) bid for Games. The bid was successful and the XIX CWG were 
allotted to Delhi in 2003. The Host city contract was signed in November, 2003. 
Thereafter, Organizing Committee, CWG was formed as a registered society, with 
President of IOA as Chairman. The Games will be held in17+1 (EAD –Elite Athletics 
with Disability) disciplines in which around 8000 sportspersons will participate. As per 
the Ministry, approximately 100000 visitors are expected for the Games. 
 
4.2 The major elements involved in the preparations for, and conduct of, the Games 
include the establishment of the required sports venue s and other related infrastructure, 
the establishment of a G ames Village for the CGW -2010, technical and administrative 
arrangements for the conduct of the Games, the necessary security arrangements, and 
up-gradation of the civic infrastructure. In addition, steps will also have to be taken for 
the preparation of t eams for the Games with a view to enhancing the Indian medal 
prospects in the Games. While the responsibility for the establishment of the sports and 
other infrastructure directly related to the conduct of the Games, preparation of the 
teams, and the security related arrangements, lies mainly with the Central Government, 
the responsibility for the conduct of the Games vests in an Organizing Committee, 

 
86 
 
which has been set up as a registered autonomous body, and the Government of NCT 
of Delhi (GNCTD) is responsible for up-gradation of civic infrastructure in Delhi. 
 
(i) Institutional Arrangements  
4.3 GOM: Initially a Group of Ministers was constituted in 2004 under the 
Chairmanship of Human Resource Development Minister. Now, a new GOM has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Minister of Urban Development to review the 
projects and take decisions as required to facilitate smooth implementation of all 
activities connected with the Commonwealth Games. 
Co-ordination Committee  of the Minister, Youth Affair s and Sports, the Organizing 
Committee constituted by Minister, Youth Affairs and Sports to review the progress of all 
aspects of the preparation for the Commonwealth Games and take decisions to 
facilitate speedy progress.  
Organizing Committee: Headed by IOA Chairman, for the Conduct of the Games. 
Committee of the Secretaries  chaired by Cabinet Secretary to review and co -ordinate 
all activities related to CWG-2010. 
Empowered Committee of the Delhi Government chaired by Chief Secretary to ensure 
speedy clearances to the projects. 
Empowered Security Committee chaired by Home Secretary to oversee and approve 
the security arrangements for CWG 2010. 
Infrastructure Monitoring Committee  chaired by Secretary, Sports to review the 
progress related to the Sports infr astructure and co -ordinate activities of all the 
stakeholders. 

 
87 
 
4.4 As per decisions taken at the level of the Core Group of Ministers  (GOM), 
initially set up under the chairmanship of the Union Minister for Human Resource 
Development, to coordinate arrang ements for the Games, the required sports venue 
infrastructure is to be established mainly by the Sports Authority of India (SAI), with 
some venues having been allotted to the Delhi Development Authority (DDA) and the 
GNCTD/NDMC. The responsibility for dev eloping the Games  Village has been given to 
the DDA and, to the extent possible, is to be developed on a Public -Private Partnership 
basis. For p urposes of financial allocation , the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports will 
be responsible for the sports ve nue infrastructure allotted to the SAI, and for the Tennis 
venue allotted to All India Lawn Tennis Association (AITA), the special arrangements 
that may be required for preparation of teams for the Games, and the funds to be 
provided to Organizing Committee for the conduct of the Games. In addition, funds were 
also provided, through the budget of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports to the 
State Government of Maharashtra for the sports infrastructure for the Commonwealth 
Youth Games ( CYG)- 2008 held in Pune. Funds for the infrastructure to be developed 
by the DDA are to be provided from the budget of the Ministry of Urban Development, 
for the security arrangements from the budget of the Ministry of Home Affairs, and for 
the civic infrastructure though th e Plans of the GNCTD and the Jawahar Lal Nehru 
National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM). The funds to be provided to the 
Organizing Committee would be on a “Revenue Neutral” basis, on the assumption that 
the conduct of the Games would generate sufficient re venues through sale of 
broadcasting rights, advertising, sponsorship, merchandising, and ticketing, etc. 
 
 

 
88 
 
 (ii) Financial Allocation & Expenditure 
4.5 The Committee wanted to know about the initial Budget Estimate for conducting 
Commonwealth Games and subsequent increase, the Department of Sports informed 
as under: 
 “As estimated by the Indian Olympic Association (IOA), in 2003, the initial budget 
estimate for conducting Commonwealth Games, 2010 was Rs.655.00 crore and 
the current estimate for the same is Rs.11,494 crore which includes apart from 
expenditure on sports infrastructure (Competition and Training Venues and 
conduct of the Games), expenditure also on Broadcasting, Security, 
Telecommunication Network etc.” 
 
4.6 On being asked about the actual e xpenditure vis-à-vis allocation (as on 1 st July, 
2010) of all Ministries/Departments involved in the Games . The Department of Sports 
furnished information on the allocation aspect only, which is as follows: 
   Annexure-I 
S.No. Agency Purpose Amount ( in 
Crores) 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MOYAS) 
1. Sports Authority of India (SAI) Sports Infrastructure for 
5 major stadia complex 
2460 
2. Sports Authority of India (SAI) Sports Fitness 
equipment & 
Furnishing of  Stadia 
14.35 
3. Delhi University (DU) Jamia Milliai 
Islamia (JMI) & Delhi Public School 
(DPS) 
Sports Infrastructure 350.71 
4. All India Tennis Association (AITA) Tennis venue 65.65 
5. Central public works Department 
(CPWD) 
Big Bore Shooting 
Range at CRPF centre, 
Kadarpur, Haryana 
28.5 
6. Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports 
(MOYAS)  
Re- creation of Sports 
facilities in NCR 
15 
 
 
Sub-Total (Sports Infrastructure – MOYAS)                                            2934.21 
7. Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports 
(MOYAS)/ Sports Authority of India 
(SAI) 
Preparation of Teams 
for CWG 2010  
678 
8. Organising Committee Conduct of the Games 1620* 
9. Organising Committee Overlay 687* 
10. Organising Committee Timing Scoring Result 87.25 

 
89 
 
(TSR) & Games Times 
Sports Equipment 
11. Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. 
(MTNL) 
Telecom Infrastructure 182 
Sub-Total (MOYAS)                                                                                       3254.25 
 Total (MOYAS) 6188.46 
 Ministry of Urban Development 
(MOUD) 
  
12. Delhi Development Authority (DDA) Sports infrastructure 827.85 
Total (MOUD) 827.85 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (I&B) 
13. PrasarBharti, Press Information 
Bureau (PIB) and India Trade 
Promotion Organization (ITPO) 
Host Broadcasting, 
International 
Broadcasting Centre 
and Main Press Centre  
482.57** 
Total (M/ IB) 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
14. Electronic Corp. of India Ltd. ECIL) Security and 
surveillance equipment 
for stadia & venues 
375 
15. Delhi Police Additional Posts, 
Security equipment and 
vehicles etc.  
172 
16. Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) Intelligent Traffic 
Management System 
200 
Total (MHA) 747 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW) 
17. Ministry of Health and family Welfare 
(MOHFW) 
Sports Medicine and 
Injury Centre, 
Safdarjung Hospital  
70.72 
Total (MOHFW) 70.72 
Ministry of Culture 
18. Archeological Survey of India (ASI) Refurbishment  of  
monuments 
25.75 
 
 
Total (Ministry of Culture) 25.75 
Government of India  
19. Govt. of Delhi  Sports and 
infrastructure 
2800 
 
 
20. Govt of Maharashtra & Civic agencies 
pune 
Sports and civic 
infrastructure and 
security for 
Commonwealth Youth 
Games, Pune 2008 
351.48 
 Grand Total 11494 

 
90 
 
* As Loan to OC ** Out of this ` 187 crores is a loan to Prasar Bharti 
 
4.7 Out of budgetary allocation of Rs. 1 1494 crore, Rs.  4459.48 crore is the budget 
for development of Sports Infrastructure. The details, as furnished by the Department of 
Sports are given below: 
Budget for Sports Infrastructure 
S.No. To For Amount (Rs. in 
crores) 
I. Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MoYAS) 
1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sports Authority of India (SAI) 
 
Competition and Training Venues 
J.N. Stadium Complex 961.00 
Major Dhyan Chand 
National Stadium 
262.00 
Indira Gandhi Stadium 
Complex 
669.00 
Dr. SPM Swimming Pool 
Complex 
377.00 
Dr. Karni Singh Shooting 
Ranges 
149.00 
Others 
(Consultancy/Professional  
Charges) 
42.00 
Total (SAI) 2460.00 
2. Delhi University (DU), Jamia 
Millia Islamia (JMI) and Delhi 
Public School (DPS) 
Competition and Training 
Venues 
350.71 
3. All India Tennis Association 
(AITA) 
Tennis – Competition and 
Training Venues 
65.65 
4. Central Public Works 
Departments (CPWD) 
Big Bore Shooting Range 
at CRPF Centre, 
Kadarpur 
28.50 
Total (MoYAS) 2904.86 
II. Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) 
5. Delhi Development Authority 
(DDA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Siri Fort Sports Complex  241.32 
 Yamuna Sports Complex 210.86 
 Games Vill TRG-Athletics 253.40 
 
 
 
 
 
 Games Vill TRG -
Swimming 
 Games Vill-Weight Lifting 
 Games Vill -Operational 
Zone 
 Games Vill -International 
Zone 
 Saket TRG-Badminton 5.47 

 
91 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SiriFort TRG-Badminton 38.92 
 SiriFort TRG-Squash 
 SiriFort TRG-Swimming 
 SiriFort TRG-Tennis 
 Yamuna TRG -
Gymnastics 
36.70 
 
 Yamuna TRG-Hockey 
 Yamuna TRG -Lawn 
Bowls 
 Yamuna TRG-Swimming 
 Yamuna TRG-Archery 
 Consultancy 41.18 
Total (MoUD) 827.86 
                             III. 
6. 
 
 
 
 
Govt. of Delhi 
 
 
 
 
Thyagaraj Sports  
Complex-Competition and 
Training Venues 
 
297.45 
Ludlow Castle Hall TRG -
Wrestling 
20.33 
Chattrasal Stadium TRG -
Athletics 
98.98 
7. NDMC Talkatora Indoor Stadium 150.00 
Shivaji Stadium TRG -
Hockey 
160.00 
Grand Total 4459.48 
 
4.8 Asked about the actual expenditure so far, the Secretary during evidence held on 
10th August, 2010 stated: 
“The actual expenditure will be known once the  Games are over” 
 
(iii) Development of Infrastructure and its use 
4.9 Regularly reports appeared in the press about Commonwealth Games 
Infrastructure Projects running behind schedule. When asked about the reasons for 
delay in completion of these projects and the likely date of completion, the Department 
of Sports in a written reply stated:  
“Some of t he projects had fallen behind the schedule. Recovery plan for these 
has been worked out which inter -alia includes increase in the number of 
supervisory staff and labour, increase in working hour, deployment of additional 

 
92 
 
machineries, close monitoring and p rocurement of critical and special items to 
complete the work within the revised target date. 
An updated progress report  in respect of all the competition and training venues 
is enclosed as Annexure- IV” 
 
4.10 International experts of the Commonwealth Games Federation have expressed 
concern over the continuously extending deadlines of the completion of games projects.  
Works in Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium, the main venue for the event is lagging behind.  It 
was supposed to be delivered by December 2009 bu t the new deadline ha d been 
extended to June -end.  Apart from Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, the SP Mukherjee 
swimming venue is also delayed and the deadline has been extended again.  Asked 
about the reasons fo r the delay and the efforts being made in this rega rd, the 
Department of Sports explained: 
“The work at all the sports infrastructure projects for Commonwealth Games is 
progressing at a rapid pace. Requirements of Opening and Closing Ceremonies 
necessitated construction of a tunnel in the Jawahar Lal Nehru  Stadium on 
account of which the completion date of this stadium has to be extended.  A 
highly complicated roof structure, being done for the first time in India, of Dr. S.P. 
M. Swimming Pool Complex required very careful execution, on account of which 
it is taking some additional time. However, recovery schedules have been 
worked out and these stadia/venues will be completed well before the Games.  
Four stadia viz. Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium, Talkatora Stadium, 
Yamuna Sports Complex (Archery), and Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Ranges have 
already been completed. The Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium was 
inaugurated on 24 th Jan 2010. The Stadium has just hosted the World Cup 
Hockey from 28 th Feb 2010 to 13 th March 2010. The Dr Karni Singh Shooting 
Range was inaugurated on 31 st Jan 2010 and the Test Event for Shooting was 
held here form 17 th Feb 2010 to 28 th Feb 2010. Both these Stadia have been 
acclaimed as world class stadia. The Talkatora Boxing Stadium is also complete 
and was inaugurated on 24 th Feb 2 010. It was the venue for Commonwealth 
Boxing Championship form 10 th March 2010 to 18 th March 2010. The Archery 
venue at Yamuna Sports Complex has also been inaugurated on 5 th March 2010, 
and hosted the Archery Test Event from 7 th March 2010 to 13 th March 2010. All 
the venues will be completed well in time before the Games.” 
 
 

 
93 
 
4.11 Secretary, Department of Sports explained, during evidence: 
“Sir, the only point that I would like to make is that in the last three months the 
preparation for the Commonw ealth Games have picked up speed. We have 
actually held four major international tournaments in preparation of the 
Commonwealth Games in the stadia which are going to be used in the 
Commonwealth Games. 
The overall experience has been very useful to us for rectifying all the defects 
that we feel would come to light in these competitions. The conduct of 
competitions was of international standard and particularly the World Cup 
Hockey has been mentioned all over the world and has received widespread 
appreciation from the players, the team, the technical officials as well as the FIH.  
The FIH has repeatedly said in its press statement that the best stadium in the 
world is the Delhi Hockey Stadium.” 
 
4.12 The status of competition and training venues as on 5.8.201 0 is given in 
Annexure-V. 
 
4.13 Asked about the time & cost overruns in development of projects alongwith 
reasons, the Committee was informed as follows: 
 In so far as Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports is concerned, the initial budget, 
 revised budget and the reasons for increase (Project-wise) are indicated below :- 
S.No Project Initial 
Estimate 
(In crore) 
Revised 
Estimate 
(In 
crore) 
Reasons for increase 
Sports Authority of India - Upgradation/Renovation of SAI Stadia 
1. Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium 455 961 i)At the time of preparation of costs estimates, in 2006, Venue  
 Briefs for these stadia were not available. These were to  be  
 provided later.  
ii)Escalation in prices of construction material over this period  
of time of have also contributed to overall increase in Cost  
Estimates. 
iii)Alterations and additions at venues necessitated by  
 mandatory requirements of the Commonwealth Games  
Federation (CGF)/International Federations.  
iv)Items such as Taxes/Statutory Levies, Closed Circuit 
Television (CCTV), Intelligent Building Management System 
(IBMS), LAN, PBX etc, which had not been included in  
earlier estimates have now been included in the Revised 
Estimates.  
2. Indira Gandhi Stadium 113 669 
3. Dr. S.P.M. Swimming Pool 
Complex 
145 377 
4. MDC National Stadium 
Complex 
113 262 
5. Dr. Karni Singh Shooting 
Range 
16 149 
6. Consultancy for SAI Stadia --- 42 

 
94 
 
 
 Total  1000  2460 
 
 
Delhi University (DU) 
1. Competition/Training Venue 222.27 306.41 i)Increase in ‘Built Up Area’ as per requirement of OC;  
ii)Increase in rates of structural steel;  
iii)Increase in ‘Value Added Tax (VAT)/Service Tax and 
Labour Cess (not included earlier);  
iv)Increase in area of Multipurpose Hall, Grand  Stand and the 
‘Field of Play (FOP); 
v)Addition of sports lighting of one venue and increase in lux 
level for lighting at Competition venue for ‘High Definition 
Television (HDTV)’; 
vi)Security related equipments; and  
vii)Cost of electronic sub-station and grid connection. 
Jamia Millia Islamia University (JMI) 
1. Training Venues for Table 
Tennis & Rugby 7 
33.41 42.57 i)Increase in rates of steel; 
ii)Change in specification of wooden floor;  
iii)Change in specification of Rugby field to match with 
those of Competition Venue; 
iv)Increase lux requirements for sports lighting; and  
v)DG sets and strengthening of grids.  
All India Tennis Association (AITA) 
1. Development/Upgradation of 
R.K.Khanna Tennis Stadium 
30.00 65.65 i)Increase in price of Steel; 
ii)Increase due to requirements of DUAC and MCD;  
iii)Increase in spectators capacity at Centre Court;  
iv)Laying of synthetic surface and preparation of ‘Field of 
Play (FOP); 
v)Cost of Techno-financial audit by Government approved 
agency; 
vi)Enhanced lux level in FOP for HDTV;  
vii)Security related equipments;  
viii)Video Screens and Score Boards; and  
ix) Intelligent Building Automation System.  
 
CRPF Academy 
1. Big Bore Shooting Range, 
Kadarpur 
15.00 28.50 i)Construction of ‘Baffle Wall’, as finalized by the  
representative of CGF during site visit on 9 th March, 2009; 
ii)For making additional provisions for compound lighting 
Public Address System; 
iii)Modification in the architectural concept plan for 
‘Facility Block’; and  
iv)Additional requirement for funds for development of 2 
km. stretch of road of CRPF leading to the CRPF campus.  
 
 

 
95 
 
4.14 On the issue of investment s made in infrastructure and its impact on the 
economy, the Secretary, Department of Sports explained as follows during evidence: 
“The Government of India and the City of Delhi together, the infrastructure 
investment is around Rs.10000 crore, as it stands today. This involves creation of 
State of the Art sports infrastructure, city infrastructure, which in any case would 
have been created, but has been created on an accelerated pace; at the most, at 
the narrow level, the revenues will accrue to the games, to the Organizing 
Committee of the Games, through sponsorships, merchandizing, broadcasting 
revenues etc. The Organizing Committee has p resented a revenue neutral 
budget. They have presented anticipated revenues to an increased amoun t or a 
revised amount of Rs. 16 20 crore; the Cabinet is yet to consider this allocation 
under its non-plan budget. But the Committee is confident of generating up to Rs. 
1620 crore in its own revenues, only for the games-related sponsorship, ticketing, 
broadcasting and merchandizing, etc. 
  
 As far as the city is concerned, the city will have, I would say, the 
snowballing impact of the infrastructural investment , that has gone into it. It will 
have a very highly improved transport system, both metro and buses. It will also 
have a very modern network of roads and flyovers. It will also presumably be 
beautified for the games; the expected tourists‟ arrivals, on a v ery conservative 
estimate, given the large number of the state of the world economy, are 100000, 
only for the games. This, I am talking, is only about the immediate impact that the 
sport event is likely to have. In addition, we are hopeful of getting a spe cific study 
conducted of the larger economic impact of events of this nature on the economy 
as a whole. This is not a very widely studied subject; what is more studied is the 
immediate impact, due to tourist arrivals, hotels, hotel development and most 
importantly the development of service industries and service infrastructure 
which are to stay as legacies, beyond the game. 
  
 
4.15 When t he Committee wanted to know how the infrastructure , which is being 
developed for Commonwealth Games , will be used  and ma intained in future, the 
Secretary replied: 
 “We will ensure that for the Commonwealth Games, the infrastructure which is 
being created we will show away that they can be and will be maintained and 
used for sporting purposes as well as other purposes withou t being a continuing 
drain on public exchequer.  We are seeking expert advice, professional advice to 
see how operation and maintenance of this state of the art infrastructure that has 
been created can be used and the fields of play are preserved for the s tandards 
for which they have been created.” 
 

 
96 
 
 
4.16 She further added: 
“So, now we have already started a process very actively. We have identified 
transaction advisor to advise the Ministry of Sports on what should be the legacy 
use of the Sports Authority of India‟s stadia. In addition to that we have taken the 
help of an i nternational expert through our international partners, the U.K in our 
international cooperation programme to come and speak to all the stakeholders 
on how they should plan for post -Games use of the various facilities that have 
been created. All the person s and all the agencies, big and small – I am saying 
big and small because some have one small stadia and some have many 
training grounds, whereas the Sports Authority of India has five stadia to look 
after – were given a general exposure and an orientation  workshop on how they 
should start planning for their use. The Sports Ministry itself is actively engaged 
in working out with the transaction advisor on what are the potential uses. The 
core of this entire exercise is, as you have rightly mentioned, there should be a 
revenue model whereby the maintenance does not become a continuing burden 
on the Government exchequer. Secondly, the core field of play that has been 
created, whether it is a track or turf or a badminton court or a tennis court, should 
be maint ained as such and should not be diverted to non -sports use. Further, 
there is a large enough area which can go for – I would not call it commercial as 
in business – but certainly revenue generating purposes and to identify those 
areas, the kind of uses tha t they can be put to and most important of all the kind 
of management and administration that would be most professionally oriented to 
carry out these tasks. These have been successfully tried elsewhere and we 
have had very useful advices on how they are b eing put to use, let us say in 
Manchester or in Melbourne. These are very preliminary. What we have been 
looking at is how do I ensure public access which means all school children, all 
young persons. They should be permitted to make use of these facilitie s in 
whatever terms and conditions. At the same time, they should be maintained at a 
level for attracting international sports events. Most of them abroad have been 
used as a combination of sports and leisure activities. So, we are very actively 
engaged in  this process and certainly looking forward to further guidance and 
advice as we go along through the process. First identifying what we can do and 
actually looking for partners who will do this for us. All other agencies, we hope, 
will follow the lead tha t we have given. We hope, by the time Games are over, a 
party will be put in place. These are very preliminary. So, this should not be taken 
as cast in stone. Since they are public property, there will be public consultation.” 
 
(iv) Training of Sportspersons 
4.17 The Secretary, Department of Sports explained how the sportspersons are being 
trained for CWG during evidence, in following words: 

 
97 
 
“We are trying, for the first time, under the Commonwealth Games umbrella, a 
very ambitious scheme for preparation of  Indian teams for the Commonwealth 
Games. It is being done for the very first time in the last five decades. We have a 
reasonable sized scheme wherein we can train 1100 to 1200 sports persons in 
the 17 disciplines that are included in the Commonwealth Game s. These 1200 or 
so core probables are being trained in camps that are run by the Sports Authority 
of India at their own centres and a couple of them in centres that are owned and 
controlled by the State Governments. We ensure nutritional supplements and 
dietary supplements of the highest standards, foreign exposures of a minimum of 
four and going up to almost a dozen, provide coaches at national and 
international levels, wherever the Federations have asked for them, and supply 
equipment of world -class quality. This scheme has been specially designed for 
improving our medals tally in the Commonwealth Games.” 
 
4.18 She added: 
“There are three components to the scheme. The three components are: training 
and exposure of the selected sportspersons – 305 days in a year plus foreign 
exposures and top level foreign coaches plus Indian coaching, scientific support -
personnel attached with all the core probables. These scientific sports -personnel 
include sports analysts, physiotherapists, psychologists, mental trainers  etc. 
These are the people who train them to be properly motivated. 
 The second component is the Rs.85 crore for the upgradation of the 
Sports Authority infrastructure. These are predominantly upgradation of the 
hostels. The third component is that of the scientific and medical support. Under 
this scheme, approximately, 235 numbers of foreign exposures have since been 
sanctioned and undertaken. All the sportspersons, who have been selected to be 
part of this international exposure, have gone on these tours.  I am informed that 
Rs.33 crore has been spent by the Sports Authority on sports-science-sport. ” 
 
4.19 Secretary, Department of Sports further added: 
“As regards the issue of Commonwealth Games, I had already said in my 
opening remarks that the Government  of India, for the first time has set aide Rs. 
678 crore for a scheme for preparation of athletes and sports persons for the 
Commonwealth Games, 2010. Of this amount, over Rs. 375 crore is specifically  
for training 1200 probables who have been selected, w ho are in national camps 
and who are being provided with equipment, personal consumables, coaching 
both national and international, foreign exposures, and dietary requirements as 
stipulated in international sporting events and international sporting regula tions. 
We expect to improve the medals tally in the Commonwealth Games to the level 
expected. I understand or I have been informed that we were the fourth in 
Melbourne and we expect to improve this to at least third if not the second 
position in the Medals tally.” 
 

 
98 
 
4.20 When asked as to how many sportspersons are being trained for the 
Commonwealth Games, the Department of Sports submitted as follows: 
“Number of sportspersons identified, for training in all the disciplines of 
Commonwealth Games 2010, is  giv en in the table below. Their number is now 
being pruned down gradually for each discipline to ensure that the best players 
are given further training upto CWG, 2010” 
 
Sl. No. Discipline No. of athletes 
Identified for training 
Men Women 
1. Archery 32 32 
2. Athletics 104 71 
3. Aquatics 55 50 
4. Badminton 22 18 
5. Boxing (M) 42 00 
6. Cycling 28 16 
7. Gymnastics 23 36 
8. Hockey 44 39 
9. Lawn Bowls 15 15 
10. Net Ball (W) 0 30 
11. Rugby 7s (M) 32 00 
12. Shooting 88 58 
13. Squash 15 12 
14. Table Tennis 19 17 
15. Tennis 20 20 
16. Weightlifting 32 28 
17. Wrestling 56 28 
18. EAD* 28 15 
 Total 655 485 
  
 *EAD : Elite Athletes with Disability. 
4.21 Secretary, Department of Sports informed as follows: 
“In addition, I am extremely happy to report that our efforts in preparing our 
teams are also slowly bearing fruits.  In these four championships, we have the 
Commonwealth Boxing in which we have 35 gold medals.  In the Commonwealth 
Shooting which was held  in February, we have got 23 gold medals. In archery 
where a large number of countries participated, we have four gold medals.  In 
tennis, India ranks number 11 out of 200 countries in men‟s events.  Both our 
hockey team and the athletics team have improve d tremendously from their 
earlier performances.  We hope to keep up this momentum of  training further 
intensifying our efforts in all these major sporting disciplines.  Our teams have 

 
99 
 
participated abroad and over the last three to four months, we have got  a total of 
224 medals in various disciplines literally from A to Z. We are extremely 
heartened by this encouragement and we do believe that we with the same level 
of funding, efforts and the same amount of intensity, our teams will do even 
better in the coming years.  We are going to see the Commonwealth Games and 
the Asian Games. Of course, we are also going to prepare for the Olympics in 
2012.   That is so far as the preparation of our team and our goal of promoting 
excellence in sports are concerned.” 
 
4.22 Regarding expenditure on training, the Secretary informed during evidence. 
  “So far we have spent Rs. 291 crore on training our teams, on   
  infrastructure, on sports science backup and medical support.” 
 
4.23 When asked whether this expenditure includes infrastructure also, she clarified: 
“The infrastructure expenditure is not included here.  The scheme for preparation 
of our sportspersons for the Commonwealth Games has an allocation of Rs. 678 
crores over the last about two and a half years. Now , it is divided into four major 
components. The training component includes training for teams for 17 
disciplines, foreign exposures and equipment, both personal and team 
equipment.  On this, we have spent Rs. 177.45 crores upto  date.  On the sports 
science backup, we have spent Rs. 33 crores and we will complete the exercise 
in the coming year. Most of our Sports Authority of India centres will have state -
of-the-art sports and science facilities. In this scheme, we also have a small 
component of improving the infrastructure in SAI centres. We had an allocation of 
about Rs. 100 crores. We have already spent Rs. 78.62 crores so far and we 
have upgraded several hostels of SAI.  We have rebuilt some of the old and 
degraded buildings.  This is all over India bec ause our trainees were being 
trained at centres around the country. It was hoped that we will be able to train 
them in various disciplines in our SAI centres.  The beneficiaries, of course, have 
been the SAI trainees, and, it will continue in the years to come also.  
 The identified venues as I have been informed are Kolkata, Bangalore and 
Pune.  Pune has been a very big training camp for several disciplines.  Patiala, 
Bhopal, Guwahati , Gandhi Nagar  and Nagpur also have them.  A few of them 
have been held in Delhi also.” 
 
4.24 On being asked why only some States have been chosen, the Secretar y, 
Department of Sports replied: 
 “It is because Nagpur centre has Powerlifting as the game. We have Squash in 
Chennai.  We have Wrestling in Patiala, Sonepat, Hockey  for women in Bhopal 
and men in Pune, lawn bowling in Guwahati, Archery in Kolkata and Bangalore, 

 
100 
 
Aquatics in Pune and Bangalore, Athletics in Patiala, Bangalore, Kolkata and 
Trivandrum. We have spread it in four different cities to give them acclimatisati on 
training in different weather zones.  Badminton has been in Hyderabad and 
Bangalore because the two top coaching centres are being run by our foremost 
world renowned coaches, Prakash Padukone and Gopichand in these cities.  
Then we have boxing in Patial a and HP, Cycling in Patiala because Patiala is 
one of our oldest and most premier sports institutes.  So, the facilities are very 
beneficial for hosting some of these training camps.  
  
4.25 She further added: 
“The attempt has been to use the available infrastructure in some of our States to 
host our training camps. But this is not the end of our endeavour.  I would 
request your indulgence in this matter that my funding levels should be kept up 
for the Training Scheme.  This is for the first time in 50 to 60 years that some 
meaningful amounts have been sanctioned for training our sportspersons.  We 
are already showing returns in all the investments that have been made within a 
short time. So, we feel that if this funding level is kept up, this momentum will  
also be kept up so that the same trainees will go on to win further international 
laurels in the Asian Games which are at the end of the year, followed by the 
Olympics in 2012.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
101 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
5.1 In so far as the Budgetary allocation in respect of sports is concerned, the 
Committee observe that prior to the year 2007 -08, the total allocation (both Plan 
and Non-Plan) for the same had remained in the Rs. 300 -400 crore bracket with 
around 90% utilization. The  Committee further observe that the funding received 
a substantial boost only in 2007 -08 onwards, when funds were actually allocated 
to the Ministry for the preparations required to host the XIX Commonwealth 
Games in Delhi in the year  2010. The Ministry were allocated Rs. 33 96.06 crore 
(RE both Plan and Non -Plan) in F.Y. 2009-2010, apart from Rs. 413.90 crore to the 
Organizing Committee of the Commonwealth Games, which already stand s 
utilized. The Committee were later informed that the revised total allocation for 
CWG was Rs.  11494 crore, out of which Rs. 4459.48 crore was the Budget for 
development of sports infrastructure.  While the actual figures of the total 
allocation and expenditure for the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in the 
current year  can only be known after the conclusion of the Commonwealth 
Games, the Committee are of the view that the increased allocation for sports this 
year was just a knee -jerk reaction of the Government to host an International 
sports meet. Even then the initial estimates  for CWG was rev ised from Rs. 6 55 
crore to Rs. 11494 crore. Though the Ministry had submitted reasons for such 
cost escalations, the Committee are far from convinced. Now they  can only hope 
that the funds would be utilized in an efficient and prudent manner. Disturbed 
with the constant media coverage on allegations of corruption, misuse of funds, 
overspending on equipment , huge time and cost overruns in preparing various 

 
102 
 
Games venues etc., the Committee desire that such allegations, if prove n true, 
would be probed most seriously to fix the accountability and the proven cases 
would be dealt with stringently.  
The Committee also feel that to inculcate sports culture in the country, 
consistency in providing appropriate fund s for the Ministry needs to be 
maintained to yield the  desired results. Thus, the  Committee hope that adequate 
budgetary allocation would be continued for the Ministry to sustain its efforts to 
promote sports, even after the Commonwealth Games, since investment in sports 
infrastructure, training facilities and related activities is an essential pre -requisite 
not only to produce potential medal winners in various national and international 
sports events, but also to provide a healthy alternative to the burgeoning youth 
population of the country.  In this connec tion, the Committee are disheartened to 
know that the National Sports Development Fund  (NSDF), which mobilizes 
resources to promote sports from Government and Non -Government sources, 
including the C orporate sector and NRIs, had a meagre corpus of just Rs. 63.70 
crore as on 31st December 2009, as so far only BCCI and SAIL have contributed to 
it. The Committee feel that the concept needs an aggressive campaigning  to 
convince Corporate Houses to contribute to the NSDF as part of their Corporate 
Social Responsibility, Besides, the Committee desire that the Sports Policy, 2001 
needs to be modified so as to include a provision that all Government 
Departments should devote a fraction of their budgets to promote sports talent. 
Also all tax incentives given for sport s matters need to be re -examined to ensure 
that the funds spent on training of sportspersons etc. could be made tax -free. 

 
103 
 
Private establishments engaged in such endeavours to promote sports should 
also be given  tax incentives. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports should  work out the modalities of these  proposals in 
coordination with Ministry of Finance and inform the Committee about the  
outcome.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the Long Term 
Development Plan prepared by SAI on the matter and the steps taken to 
implement the Plan.  At the same time, the Committee also feel the need to 
emphasise upon transparency and accountability in sports funding matters to 
develop certain level of confidence among those who wish to sincerely contribute 
for promoting a healthy sports culture in the country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
104 
 
 
5.2 The Committee observe that one of the reasons for lack of sports culture in 
India is over -emphasis on academics resulting in sports taking a back seat in 
school education. Though, the New Education Policy, 1986 , National Curriculum 
Framework 2005 and the National Sports Policy, 2001 have recognized the need 
for integration of sports and physical education with educational curriculum, t he 
required thrust in its implementation is yet to be seen .  The Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports have reportedly made some efforts in this regard through 
meetings and written communication s with the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (HRD), yet a decisive change has not come so far. The Committee 
feel that though Indians do have enthusiasm for sports, yet the lack of an 
effective policy so far has worked against it. The Government must acknowledge 
the fact that since training for sports invariably starts at a young age, sports are 
required to be included at the primary level education to bring up a sport s-loving 
generation at par with those in other countries in Asia, Europe and the Americas. 
The Committee also f eel concerned about issues such as lack of  uniformity in 
allocating a period in school s for physical education/sports, dearth of required 
infrastructure like playgrounds  in the schools  as well as shortage of physical 
education teachers. 
 Therefore, t he Com mittee are of the view that to develop sports culture 
among school children certain norms in favour of promoting sports should be 
adopted by the Ministry of HRD  in the field of education . For instance, availability 
of a playground should  be there in all schools . Secondly, it should be the 

 
105 
 
responsibility of schools and colleges to integrate  sports with academics. A t 
least one indoor and one outdoor sports activity should be made compulsory for 
school children of all ages . Achievements in Sports and games in national and 
international events by students should be rewarded with grace marks in their 
overall assessment. These steps would provide the necessary boost to sports 
and games among the youth population,  would create demand for PT Inst ructors 
in schools  and colleges and thus , training in physical education & sports will 
become lucrative for employment purposes also. T he Committee also desire that 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports should explore the feasibility of more 
coordination between the departments handling sports and education so that the 
physical education segment of the curriculum could benefit from the expertise of 
the sports department . The Committee  also desire that the Ministry of HRD may 
be apprised of their suggestions to ensure necessary action on the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
106 
 
5.3 The Committee observe that excelling in sports is no longer a matter of 
stamina and endurance  alone. Sports at national and international level has 
become a specialized endeavour comp rising physiological, bio -mechanical, 
nutritional & psychological elements. It has been rightly said that in today‟s 
world, an international sports star is not just born or found, but is created 
through a  well-researched and discipline -specific scientific process, backed by 
appropriate incentives. The specialists in these disciplines in India are, however, 
a counted  few. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that sports should be 
developed as a science and its physiology, pharmacology, biomechanic s, 
nutrition and medicine, etc. need to be a part of higher education. These 
disciplines should be popularized and be made available in maximum number of 
institutes. The Committee desire that Ministry of Youth Affairs and sports should 
continue to take up the matter with the Ministry as well as the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare of HRD and other relevant bodies/institutes and urge them to take 
concrete steps in this direction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
107 
 
5.4 Indigenous games like Wrestling, Kabaddi, Kho -Kho etc. are extremely 
popular among rural youth. In this context, t he Committee appreciate the efforts 
of the Ministry in launching a new scheme in the year 2007 -08 namely Panchayat 
Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) for around 2,50,000 village and 6400 block 
Panchayat units in the country . The Committee observe that with the transfer of 
four centrally sponsored Sports Infrastructure Development Schemes to the State 
sector w.e.f. 1.4.2005 , the  development of sports infrastructure had come to a 
standstill due to paucity of funds  with the States. Hence, PYKKA was launched in 
2007-08 to enable the State Governments get the requisite C entral assistance , 
which will help them in achieving the goal of „broadbasing of sports‟.  Assistance 
of Rs. 250.77 crore for covering 22854 village Panchayats and 601 block 
Panchayats ha ve been stated to be approved under the scheme so far.  The 
Committee hope that promising local sports talent available in each village/block 
would be identified and encouraged under the scheme. 
 In this connection, t he Committee feel that PYKKA is an ambitious 
programme in view of the sheer number of village and block Panchayats in the 
country. At the same time, the  Committee are of the view that the current amount 
of Rs.22,000 per annum be ing given to each village panchayat as Annual 
Acquisition and Operational Grants for acquisition of sports equipment, 
accessories, repairs/maintenance  and to meet operational expenses  is grossly 
insufficient. The Committee feel that under the current economic scenario in the 
country, it is virtually impossible to do anything concerning sports even at the 
village level with such a meagre sum and thus recommend that the same needs 

 
108 
 
to be a realistic amount. The Committee desire that the Ministry should conduct a 
study of the cost factor involved in providing even the most basic sports facility 
in a village and accordingly modify the scheme with revised amount. The 
Committee hope that the amount would be increased from next Financial  Year 
onwards. 
 As regards, achievement of PYKKA so far, the Committee note from the 
Ministry‟s deposition that the scheme has received good response from State 
Governments. The Committee, however, observe that the target of training master 
trainers during the year 2009 -2010 could not be achieved. Only 254 master 
trainers could be trained as against a target of 600. Training of master trainers 
and kridashrees is of u tmost importance for the success of PYKKA . The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the State Governments should be asked to 
achieve the target in the best possible manner . The Committee also desire the 
Government to ensure that village panchayats dominated by SC/ST or other 
backward sections of the society are adequately covered under PYKKA. The 
Committee further recommend that a Monitoring Committee with local MPs /MLAs 
as its members may be set up in their constituencies to monitor the 
implementation of PYKKA.  The Committee are also of the opini on that the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS ) 
could be linked with the same. As the PYKKA empowers the village/Block 
Panchayats to create basic sports facilities in their area, employment 
opportunities thus emerging could be given to the rural workforce. The 

 
109 
 
Committee would urge the Ministry of Sports to consult Ministry of Rural 
Development on the matter and take suitable action.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
110 
 
5.5 From the deposition of the Ministry made before them, the Committee note 
that in order to promote sports infrastructure in urban areas, a new Urban Sports 
Infrastructure Scheme has already been proposed and an allocation of Rs. 5 crore 
has been made for the sa me in the current year . The Committee are aware that 
our country has 5161 cities/towns/urban agglomerations and the broadbasing of 
sports could result only after covering these urban areas too. They hope that the 
scheme would receive favourable response an d be operationalised soon. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
111 
 
5.6 The Committee note  that at present there is no scheme in the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs under which assistance can be given to State Governments for 
conducting of National Games. Therefore, in the past, assistance has been given  
for the same  by the Ministry in relaxation of provisions of the Scheme of 
Assistance to National Sports Federations (NSFs). The Planning Commission has 
also in the past provided assistance of Rs. 40.51 crore and Rs. 67 crore to the 
Government of Assam and Government o f Jharkhand respectively for National 
Games, Guwahati (2007) and National Games, Ranchi (2009) in the form of 
Additional Central Assistance (ACA). ACA of Rs. 110 crore was sanctioned to the 
State Government of Kerala for conduct ing the 35th National Games in May 2010. 
The Committee feel that such ad hoc measures should not be made for 
permanent events like National Games. The Committee  note that the Urban 
Sports Infrastructure Scheme referred to in the previous recommendation will 
cover National Games, othe r sports infrastructure and playing fields  too as the 
National Games are organized in State Capitals . The Committee are of the view 
that there is urgent need to support the States in hosting National Games. Thus, 
the Committee would urge the Ministry to ke ep the fund requirements under this 
Head in view while preparing the estimates for the new Urban Sports 
Infrastructure Scheme. The Committee would further emphasize upon the need to 
set up a permanent corpus of funds by the Central Government with a specif ic 
amount to be contributed by each State as a mandatory condition. The corpus 
should be utilized by the States for regular hosting of National Games as well as 
for establishing sports infrastructure required by them for the same.  The 
Committee also feel  that the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports must coordinate 

 
112 
 
with the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting so as to highlight the 
achievement of our sportspersons in various disciplines in the National Games 
as well as in other national and international sports events. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
113 
 
5.7 At present, in the field of several sports like Athletics and Hockey, 
synthetic surfaces like Astroturfs are being used the world over. The Committee 
are, however, dismayed to learn that there is no uniformity in develop ment of 
synthetic surfaces in the country. At present there are only 5 synthetic Athletic 
Tracks in the country while 14 are proposed to be laid. Besides there are just 12 
Synthetic Hockey surfaces in the country and 12 more are proposed to be laid. 
Several States like Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Goa do not have any 
synthetic surface. The Committee had felt that the presence of such surfaces was 
not uniform in the country to which the Ministry took the stand that a part from 
availability of talent i n a particular area & facilities made available by State, 
existence of Sports Authority of India (SAI) centre is also a factor , which is taken 
into consideration while choosing location for laying of synthetic surface s. Since 
SAI does not have centres in all the States, this has led to a situation where some 
States have more than one surface whereas some have none. The Committee  are 
not convinced by this argument and feel that there is no dearth of sports talent in 
the country and e xistence of a proper infrastructure can lead to discovery and 
development of hidden talent and popularity of a particular sport. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that there should be some uniformity in development of  
sports infrastructure across the States.  To begin with, at least one Athletic track 
must be made available in every State. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the timelines for laying the proposed synthetic surfaces in the country. 
 
 

 
114 
 
5.8 The Committee are constrained to note that there is no optimal utilization 
of the existing stadia. They have been made to understand by sports experts that 
a cricket stadium can be utilized as a multi -purpose stadium for sports like 
football and Kabaddi with minor changes. The Committee , however,  fail to 
understand the logic of keeping the stadia unutilized except for cricket matches, 
while other sports are being given a cold shoulder by the authorities. The 
Committee therefore recommend that instead of keeping a stadium exclusively 
for use of one spor t discipline , these should be optimally used for various 
disciplines. In fact, the Committee feel that the Ministry should adopt the policy of 
constructing multipurpose stadia in view of less availability of land . This will not 
only reduc e expenditure to b e incurred for construction of stadia for each 
discipline but will also lead to proper utilization of such stadia. The Committee 
also desire that schools near these stadia should also be allowed access to them 
for conducting matches & tournaments. A proper schedule for allotment of Stadia 
to schools should be prepared and followed for the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
115 
 
 
5.9 As far as the efforts of the Government in the field of talent identification 
and imparting training to sportspersons  is concerned, the Committee note that 
the Sports Authority of India is running six schemes for the same. From the 
figures made available to them, the Committee observe that there has been only a 
marginal increase in the number of trainees who are being tr ained in SAI 
Promotional Schemes throughout the country that is, from 15010 persons in the 
year 2007-08 to 15115 persons in 2009-10. It is a very grim indication of the status 
of sports in a country  having billion-plus population as well as the largest you th 
population in the world . The contention of the Government is that budgetary 
constraints are the reasons for this state of affairs. The Committee therefore urge 
the Ministry to approach the authorities for budget enhancement. Besides , very 
large Governme nt establishments like Railways and the Army can be asked to 
expand their bank of talented sportspersons. The Committee are also  of the view 
that all unnecessary administrative expenditure on SAI should be curtailed by the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs &  Sports so that funds could be provided to find and 
train the talented sportspersons. 
 As regards foreign training of sportspersons, the Committee are appalled 
to note that the number of such persons since 2001 has never exceeded 20, 
though as preparation of sportspersons for CWG, 2567 persons h ave reportedly 
been sent abroad for the first time. The Committee thus, recommend that 
adequate foreign exposure should be regularly provided to deserving 
sportspersons, who show a consistent performance and fitness levels, as those 

 
116 
 
are the medal winning prospects for the country in various international level 
tournaments. For this a proper schedule should be prepared  and followed. Such 
training should be given well in advance of the start of a tournament as any last-
minute effort on this front does not produce desired results. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
117 
 
5.10 Coaches are vital for training the sportspersons. The refore apart from 
ensuring adequate number of coaches to train the sportsperson s, improving and 
maintaining their quality with suitable refresher courses is very important . The 
Committee feel that there is a need to open more coaching centres at the 
district/regional level first so as to make coaches available for such 
sportspersons who lack resources to get coaching in big c ities & metropolises. 
Since new developments are taking place in the field of sports, the Committee 
opine that the Government should devise a programme for sending the coaches 
on refresher training at regular intervals. At present there is a coach exchange  
programme with very few countries like Hungary , with whom India has signed 
international cooperation agreement. The Committee feel that such efforts must 
be extended to countries having international level coaches and sportspersons 
like China, Japan, Sout h Korea, Germany, South Africa, Russia and Latin 
American countries too. Also, t he coach development programme run by NIS, 
Patiala should be further modernized and strengthened in consultation with 
sports scientists.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
118 
 
5.11 One of the objectives of Na tional Sports Development Fund (NSDF) is to 
take up research & development studies for providing support to excellence in 
sports. The Committee note with concern that no R&D studies have been 
undertaken so far despite the fact that NSDF was institutionaliz ed around 12 
years back. The stand taken by the  Department of Sports before the Committee 
was that if any viable project is received for funding R&D in sports , it would be 
given serious consideration , which is not convincing enough. Therefore, t he 
Committee desire the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports to become proactive 
and take the required initiative in conducting a study on providing scientific 
support to sportspersons instead of waiting for any viable project to come up.  In 
this regard, the Ministry can engage research institutions with proven track 
record or experience in the field of sports science .  Such research studies can be 
funded by the Ministry from NSDF.  The objective of the study should be to see 
how to integra te the development in the field of biomechanics, nutrition, 
physiology, pharmocology, sports medicine etc. with sports . The Committee 
further recommend that since new developments occur in the field of sports, 
engagement in R&D studies should be a continuo us process for which adequate 
funding must be ensured. The Committee desire that the Ministry may identify, in 
consultation with experts, specific areas where R&D is critically required. They 
would like to be apprised of the action plan of the Ministry on the matter. 
 
 
 

 
119 
 
5.12 The Committee note with regret that the participation of women in sports is 
abysmally low which is evident from the fact that out of total 15115 number of 
trainees in SAI centres, the number of girls was only 4261 as compared to 10854 
boys. Besides, there are no separate women sports hostels and out of 91 sports 
hostels only 49 have residential facilities for women . Apart from the gender bias 
in our society, unavailability of some gender specific facilities is responsible for 
the same. For example out of 1258 regular coaches, only 181 i.e. 15% are women 
coaches. It is but a fact that girls living in rural areas will prefer to have women 
coaches. Having noted media reports about sexual harassment of girl players by 
men coaches, the Committee are surprised to note that there is no mechanism in 
place to deal with cases of sexual harassment of sportswomen. It is only now that 
the Ministry has decided to wr ite to various National Sports F ederations to put in 
place a mechanism for the same. The Committee would like to know the status of 
the same at the action taken stage. 
 Though the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports does not feel any need for a 
separate policy for sportswomen,  the Committee are of the view that the issue 
needs attention in ord er to provide equal opportunities to girls in the field of 
sports.  Therefore, they suggest that a  scheme for sportswomen should be 
formulated on the following lines. Firstly,  the Ministry should start with Gender 
Budgeting to encourage participation of women. Separate funds should be 
earmarked to be spent on sportswomen under various heads & schemes  as 
availability of funds will incentivize the Government to spend it for the purpose it 
will be allocated. Secondly, a well defined mechanism is needed to be put in place 

 
120 
 
to prevent and deal with cases of sexual harassment in SAI. All the NSFs being 
funded by the Government should also be asked to establish such a mechanism. 
In case of failure, the concerned NSF should be de -recognized by the 
Government. Thirdly, the Government should make all efforts to increase the 
number of women coaches. To this end , some seats should be reserved for 
women in various training institutes. The Committee further counsel the Ministry 
to coordinate  with the Ministry of Women and Child Development to garner 
support on the issue and frame a scheme for discovering and nurturing sports 
talent among the women population of the country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
121 
 
5.13 The Committee are shocked to note the apathy of the Government towards 
the sportspersons with disability  which is evident from the fact that during two 
years i.e. 2007 -2008 and 2008 -2009, Budgetary allocation for a scheme for 
promotion of sports among Disabled had lapsed due to its non -formulation. The 
Committee are pained to note that n o special facilities in terms of training and 
infrastructure are provided to the  disabled. There are no proper coaching centres 
for them and there is dearth of specialized coaches to train them. Besides, SAI 
centres and stadia are hardly disabled-friendly. To add to this, there is no 
provision of giving cash awards for meritorious paralympic sportspersons, 
though their achievement are taken into consideration in the overall medal tally. 
 The Committee are very disturbed at the  plight of these sportspersons. 
Though the paralympic sports were given recognition by the Government almost 
six years back, yet the necessary support has not been provided till now . A 
scheme of „Sports & Games for Disabled‟ has been approved only now in 2 009. 
The indifferent attitude of the Government towards paralympic sports became 
clear from the statement made by the Ministry before the Committee that for 
development of disabled -friendly sports infrastructures & facilities, a copy of 
„Guidelines on crea ting Sporting & Recreational Activities for person s with 
Disabilities‟ will be sent to SAI & concerned  NSFs. It seems that Government was 
oblivious of the issue till this Committee raised it. The Committee now would like 
the Ministry to play a proactive role in the matter. 
 The Committee, also recommend that all the centres of SAI as well as 
stadia should be made disabled-friendly. The new stadia & sports venues must be 

 
122 
 
constructed on the approved norms of a disabled friendly facility.  The 
Government should also provide specialized coaches to them and such coaches 
should be regularly sent on Refresher training courses to learn the new 
developments in their field. Further, since their achievements are taken into 
consideration in overall medal tally, meritorious Paralympic sportspersons 
(medalists in international events) should also receive cash awards.  The 
Committee would urge the Ministry to bring necessary changes in their rules and 
guidelines to include these suggestions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
123 
 
5.14 Cases of m ismanagement in various National Sports Federations (NSFs) , 
who are responsible and accountable for the overall management, direction, 
control, regulation, promotion & development of particular sports disciplines are 
rampant and thus a matter of great concern to the Committee. Though it is a fact 
that these Federations are autonomous yet by virtue of the fact that they receive 
funds from the Government and function for the public, they have been rightly 
declared by the Government as public aut horities. The Committee appreciate the 
recent initiatives taken by the Government in introducing a system of annual 
recognition of NSFs to bring transparency & fairness in their functioning. The 
Committee feel that had such a step been taken by the Governm ent long back, 
the current murky situation could have been avoided. The Committee are of the 
opinion that autonomy should not lead to arbitrariness and transparency and 
accountability in dealings including election of members would definitely help the 
NSFs in gaining respect and admiration among the sports community.  The 
Committee would further like to underline the pressing need to conduct regular 
auditing of accounts of those NSFs which are being funded by the Government 
by either the C&AG or reputed Chartered Accountants. The  Committee  
recommend the Ministry to take up the matter with NSFs and also conduct 
random checking of their accounts.   The Committee are also of the view that 
there should be no discrimination by the Government in giving funds to  NSFs.  
Federation promoting indigenous games and performing well consistently like 
Kabaddi, Kho-Kho, Wrestling should not face the resource-crunch. 

 
124 
 
 The Committee are perturbed to note the absence of any grievance 
redressal  mechanism in the NSFs. The Com mittee, therefore, recommend that 
existence of such a mechanism should also be made a criterion for giving 
recognition and financial assistance by the Government to any NSF. Since the 
matter regarding the tenure of members of NSFs i s sub-judice, the Commit tee 
would like to be apprised of the final position in this regard.  The Committee 
would like the Ministry to advise the NSFs to include eminent sports persons in 
their Boards. For NSFs involved in women sports disciplines like women hockey 
etc., the Committee would recommend establishing some quota for sportswomen 
in their Boards, as well. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
125 
 
5.15 National Sports Policy, 2001, envisages that it would be reviewed 
periodically in order to incorporate changes/modificati ons which may be 
necessitated by technological and other advancements in the field of sports.  
Reviewing of existing schemes of Ministry and introduction of new schemes is a 
way of implementing the existing policy and does not imply a review of the 
National Sports Policy as has been interpreted by the Ministry of Youth Affairs 
and Sports. The Committee observe that an attempt was made to review this 
policy and a draft comprehensive National Sports Policy, 2007 was prepared. 
However, due to opposition from IO A & NSFs the draft was not approved. The 
Committee are of the view that the existing Sports Policy has not been successful 
in generating enough enthusiasm about sports in the country so far and thus 
needs certain modifications, particularly in post -CWG scenario, for instance, 
committing to establish at least one centre of excellence in sports in every State 
as per international standards and recommending a better convergence and 
coordination among departme nts handling education and sports etc. Besides 
sports quota in education and employment should be made more effective. The 
Committee further are of the view that vested interests have really har med the 
country‟s sports scene and thus there is an urgent need for establishment of an 
independent sports arbi tration and mediation mechanism , as was proposed in 
draft policy, 2007. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
existing policy be revised and a Sports Regulatory Body be established for 
resolution of disputes arising within or between NSFs or between an individual 
NSF and the players. Cases of doping and sexual harassment of sportsperson s 
should also be brought within its jurisdiction.  As the Government is examining 

 
126 
 
the possibility of a new spo rts law, the Committee would like the Ministry to 
apprise them of the issues the law is likely to address as well as the status of the 
same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
127 
 
5.16 The Committee are extremely concerned to note the delay in overall 
arrangements for organizing the XIX Commonwealth Games, 2010 in India, apart 
from the huge cost overruns as is evident from the difference in the initial cost 
estimates to the revised estimates of conducting the Games.  Inability of the 
Government to meet most of the deadlines in deve lopment of infrastructure 
projects and the consequent cost overruns are not only putting the nation in bad 
light but are casting staggering burden on the public exchequer . The Committee 
fail to comprehend that despite the Host city contract being signed in 2003, why 
the budgetary allocation for CWG was made four years later i.e. in 2007. As a 
result, t he scheme for training of sportsperson s could only be started in 2008. 
Also the development of critical sports infrastructure in time to conduct the 
Games suffered irreversibly. The Committee would like to quote the example of  
the city of London, the host city for Olympic Games, 2012, where the 
infrastructure has been nearly complete despite the Games still a good two years 
away. The Committee are of the view that ideally various projects which include 
development of stadia, training venues and development of city‟s infrastructure 
including residential facilities for sportspersons should have been completed at 
least one year before the st art of the Games.  Apart from the fact that the 
infrastructure is still not complete, the constant press reports on slippages in 
various projects is extremely disheartening. The Committee cannot but deplore 
the lethargic manner in which the matter was handled by the Central Government, 
Organizing Committee and GNCTD , particularly when the country‟s honour is at 
stake. They expect the Government to probe all charges of corruption and cost 
escalations seriously after the Games. Meanwhile the Committee als o urge the 

 
128 
 
Ministry to utilize their PR mechanism optimally in case any exaggerated reports 
appear in the media.  As for the athletes and sportspersons, the Committee 
sincerely hope that our sportspersons would give their best performance to bring 
laurels to the host country since such lifetime opportunities are too precious for 
each one of them. 
 The Committee are also concerned to note that that Government is yet to 
decide about the actual utilization as well as maintenance of the sports 
infrastructure after the CWG. The Committee recommend that care must be taken 
to ensure an optimum utilization of the same throughout the year. As regards 
overall maintenance and repair, t he agency involved in construction of a stadium 
should be made responsible for its maintenance for a specified period. The 
Committee also feel that the stadia should be given to various NSFs /Sports 
Associations for regular training of their sportspersons and holding 
championships in their disciplines. Such constant utilization of infrastructure 
would ensure their proper maintenance too, and thus in case of hosting any other 
mega sports event in future, large-scale investments on the same could, perhaps 
be avoided.  
 The Committee are of the view that absence of any policy on hos ting mega 
sports events is the re ason for  the present status of CWG projects.  The 
Committee feel that had there been proper planning, the never -ending delays in 
projects could have been avoided. The Committee desire that in future we should 
go for bidding  for organizing Mega Sports events only after the ground work in 
this regard is done. Financial Planning involving the cost -benefit analysis should 

 
129 
 
also be done well in advance keeping in view the cost escalation factors  over the 
years. The Committee also desire that the level, at which the responsibility can be 
fixed in case of failure to achieve the target should be clearly defined.  A proper 
plan of action for training the sportspersons to excel in such events should also 
be prepared.  The Committee desire that a policy be chalked out by the 
Government on these lines for organizing any Mega Sports events. The 
Government should also ensure its proper execution and transparency and 
accountability in all financial deals.  The Committee therefore recommend that the 
Ministry should serious ly consider revising the Sports Policy to address all the 
matters raised by them. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
1st November,  2010              
Kartika 10, 1932(S) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 
 
 
     

 
130 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
DETAILS OF ASSISTANCE PROVIDED FROM NATIONAL SPORTS 
DEVELOPMENT FUND (NSDF) 
 
Sl.No. Name of the sportsperson 
assisted  
from NSDF 
Purpose for 
which 
assistance 
provided 
Amount (in Rs) 
2001-2002 
1. Shri Abhinav Bindra, Shooter Training abroad   10,00,000 
               Total 10,00,000 
2002-2003 
1. Shri Abhinav Bindra, Shooter Training abroad     5,00,000 
2. Shri Anil Kumar, Athlete - do -     5,00,000 
3. Ms. Bobby Aloysius, Athlete - do -     7,50,000 
  Total               17,50.000 
2003-2004 
1. Ms. Anju Bobby Geroge, 
Athlete 
Training abroad   14,91,505 
2. Lt. Col. Rajyavardhan Rathore, 
Shooter 
- do -   78,23,496 
3. Shri Abhinav Bindra, Shooter - do -     1,90,000 
4. Ms. Bobby Aloysius, Athlete - do -   18,67,531 
5. Shri Anil Kumar, Athlete - do      8,37,794 
    Total 1,22,10,326 
2004-2005 
1. Shri Mansher Singh, Shooter Training abroad   13,28,108 
2. Shri Manavjit Singh Sandhu, 
Shooter 
- do -     7,99,390 
3. Shri Anwer Sultan, Shooter - do -     5,17,573 
4. Shri Gagan Narang, Shooter - do -     5,90,549 
5. Ms. Suma Shirur, Shooter - do -     2,73,213 
6. Shri Abhinav Bindra, Shooter - do -   13,42,506 
7. Ms. Bobby Aloysius, Athlete - do -     7,94,071 
8. Lt.Col. Rajyavardhan Rathore, 
Shooter 
- do -     5,89,932 
  Total 62,35,342 
2005-2006 

 
131 
 
1. Shri Gagan Narang, Shooter Training abroad   1,92,422 
2. Lt. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh 
Rathore, Shooter 
- do - 32,94,077 
3. Shri Anwer Sultan, Shooter - do -   1,27,301 
4. Shi Manavjit Singh Sandhu, 
Shooter 
- do -   1,28,032 
5. Ms. Anju Bobby George, 
Athlete 
- do -      71,154 
6. Shri Mansher Singh, Shooter - do -   1,00,662 
7. Shri Moraad Ali Khan - do -   9,00,000 
8 Rural Development Foundation For purchase of 
Archery 
equipment 
6,03,493/- 
  Total 54,17,141 
2006-07 
1. Shri Manavjit Singh Sandhu, 
Shooter 
Training abroad 21,62,425 
2. Shri Mansher Singh, Shooter - do -  8,35,041 
3. Shri Ronjan Sodhi, Shooter - do - 13,18,013 
4. Shri Anwer Sultan, Shooter - do -  8,32,471 
5. Shri Abhinav Bindra, Shooter - do - 37,02,661 
6. Shri Parimanjan Negi, Chess - do -  7,59,463 
  Total 96,10,074 
2007-08 
1. Shri Manavjit Singh Sandhu Training abroad  18,73,932 
2. Shri Mansher Singh -do- 16,32,578 
3. Shri Anwer Sultan -do- 4,32,887 
4. Ms. Suma Shirur -do- 5,86,124 
5. Shri Vikram Bhatnagar -do- 8,78,154 
6. Lt. Col. R.V. Rathore -do- 6,87,124 
7. Shri Parimarjan Negi -do- 13,91,176 
8. Shri Ronjan Sodhi -do- 14,32,028 
9. Sports Authority of India For construction of 
strong 
Room.  
37,50,000 
 
10. Executive Director (F), SAI Payment for Cuba 
delegation 
3,08,774 
11  Association of Indian 
Universities 
Participation of 
Indian Universities 
contingent in the 
13,43,937 

 
132 
 
world Universities 
Games in 
Bangkok. 
12. NIC Development of 
Sports Software. 
4,00,000 
13. Shri Virdhawal Khade For Training 3,20,590 
14. Shri Zoraver Singh Sandhu For Training 3,94,890 
15 Shri Abhinav Bindra For Training 6,01,248 
  Total 1,60,33,442 
2008-09 
1-5 Ms. Avnit Kaur 
Ms. Anjali Bhagwat 
Sh. Gagan Narang 
Sh. Sanjeev Rajput 
Sh.Sumresh Jung 
(plus accompanying coaches) 
For training             59,86,270 
6. Suma Shirur -do- 2,90,027 
7. Sh. Anwar Sultan -do 1,43,165 
8. Sh. Vikram Bhatnagar -do- 1,09,002 
9. Sh. Zorawar Singh -do- 6,00,928 
10. Ms. Tania Sachdev -do- 4,63,599 
11. Sh. Manavjit Singh Sandhu -do- 43,75,418 
12. Sh. Mansher Singh -do- 48,40,220 
13. Sh. Ronjan Sodhi -do- 43,36,584 
14. Sh. Abhinav Bindra -do- 9,81,229 
15. Sh. Parimarjan Negi -do- 10,93,237 
16. Sh. Virdhawal Khade -do- 10,30,656 
17. Sandeep Sejwal -do- 3,44,045 
18. Shri Anup Sridhar -do- 5,16,195 
19. Shri Naresh Kumar Sharma -do- 28,12,904       
20. Rowing Federation of India  -do- 12,78,081 
21. Judo federation of India  -do- 4,45,744 
22. All India Tennis Association -do-  29,14,560 
23. Indian Amateure Boxing 
Federation  
-do- 11,64,158 
24. Athletic Federation of India -do- 1,03,888 
25. Football Fedeation  13,50,000 
26. National Informatics Centre Engagement of 1,50,000 

 
133 
 
Programme for 6 
months 
  Total 3,53,29,910 
2009-10 (Upto 31.12.09 
1. Sh. Anil Kumar For training 6,40,977 
2.  Sh. Parimarjan Negi -do- 14,46,654 
3. Ms Tania Sachdev -do- 2,85,840 
4. Sh. Abhinav Bindra -do- 77,06,315 
5. Ms Anjali Bhagwat -do- 43,676 
6. Ms Avneet Kaur -do- 79,776 
7. Sh. Gagan Narang -do- 70,472 
8. Sh. Sanjeev Rajput -do- 71,010 
9. Sh. Sumresh Jung -do- 2,457 
10. Sh. Manavjit Singh Sandhu -do- 35,95,486 
11. Sh. Mansher Singh -do- 31,13,876 
12. Sh. Ronjan Sodhi -do- 39,72,696 
13. Sh. Naresh Kumar Sharma -do- 16,36,489 
14. Sh. Shiva Keshavan  -do- 16,24,008 
15. Sh. Jamyang Namgial -do- 7,63,209 
16. Sh. Tashi Lundup -do- 7,01,835 
17. Dibrugarh University Sports 
infrastructure 
1,36,00,000 
18. National Playing Fields  
Association of India 
Play fields 50,00,000 
19. Department of Mountaineering  
and Allied Sports, Manali 
Sports equipments 75,00,000 
  Total 5,18,54,776 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
134 
 
Annexure-II 
STATEMENT OF GRANTS RELEASED TO SPORTS FEDERATIONS DURING LAST 
THREE YEARS 
Rs. in crores 
 
S. 
No
. 
Name of the Federation 2007-2008  2008-09  2009-2010 
(upto 31st 
December 
2009) 
1. All India Carrom Federation, 
New Delhi 
0.15 0.19 0.14 
2. All India Chess Federation, 
Chennai 
2.39 2.21 1.63 
3. All India Karate -Do-
Federation,  
00 00 00 
4. All India Sports Council of the 
Deaf,N.Delhi 
0.17 0.42 0.24 
5. Amateur Baseball Federation 
of India, Keshavpuram,Delhi 
0.09 0.11 0.12 
6. Amateur Handball Federation 
of India, J & K 
0.18 0.72 0.14 
7. Atya Patya Federation of 
India, Nagpur. 
0.08 0.16 0.06 
8. Ball Badminton Federation of 
India, 
00 00 00 
9. Basketball Federation of 
India, New Delhi 
0.71 0.44 0.51 
10 Cycle Polo Federation of 
India, New Delhi 
0.14 0.15            0.09 
11 Fencing Association of India, 
Patiala 
0.06 0.24 0.31 
12 Gymnastics Federation of 
India, Jodhpur (Raj.) 
0.39 0.18 0.07 
13 Indian Body Building Fedn. 00 00 00 
14 Indian Kayaking & Canoeing 
Association, New Delhi 
0.43 0.30 0.26 
15 Indian Polo Association, 
N.Delhi 
0.02 0.06 00 
 16 Indian Power lifting 
Federation, N.Delhi 
0.11 0.16 0.12 
 
17 Judo Federation of India,  
N.Delhi 
0.92 0.62 0.50 
 
18 Kho-kho Federation of India, 
Kolkata 
00 00 0.04 
19 Korfball Federation of India, 
New Delhi. 
0.13 0.12 0.12 
20 All India Tennis Association, 0.92 0.79 0.62 

 
135 
 
New Delhi 
21 National Rifle Association of 
India, New Delhi 
7.17 3.25 0.80 
22  Netball Federation of India, 
Sahadara, Delhi 
0.14 0.18 00 
23 Roller Skating Federation of 
India, Kolkata 
0 00 00 
24 Rowing Federation of India, 
Secunderabad 
0.65 0.55 0.89 
25 Sepak Takraw Federation of 
India, Nagpur, Maharashtra 
0.11 0.12 0.09 
26 Shooting Ball Federation of 
India, 
0 0.09 0.12 
27 Softball Federation of India, 
Jodhpur 
0.09 00 0.12 
28 Squash Racket Federation of 
India, Chennai 
0.11 0.33 0.12 
29 Swimming Federation of 
India, Ahmadabad 
     0.84 0.15 0.26 
30 Table Tennis Federation of 
India, New Delhi 
3.32 1.02 1.04 
31 Taekwondo Federation of 
India, Bangalore 
0 00 0.12 
32 Tenni-Koit Federation of 
India, N.Delhi 
0.09 0.16 0.09 
33 Tennis Ball Cricket 
Federation of 
India,Gorakhpur, U.P. 
0.08 0.16 0.05 
34 Tug of War Federation of 
India, New Delhi 
0.03 0.06 0.10 
35 Volleyball Federation of India, 
Chennai 
1.04 0.63 0.74 
36 Yachting Association of India, 
New Delhi 
1.17 0.36 1.48 
 
37 Wushu Association of India, 
New Delhi 
0.11 0.31 0.31 
 
 
38 Throwball Fedn. Of India, 
Bangalore 
0.19 00 00 
39 Para Olympic, Bangalore 2.19 0.40 1.43 
      
40 
Archery Association of India, 
New Delhi 
0.81 0.96 1.39 
41 Billiards & Snooker 
Federation of India, Kolkatta 
0.33 0.37 0.39 
42 Indian Amateur Boxing 
Federation, New Delhi 
1.54 1.65 0.95 
43 Indian Hockey Fedn.,Patel 
Nagar, Delhi 
1.25 
 
1.56 1.32 
44 Indian Women Hockey 
Federation, New Delhi 
1.91 0.74 0.11 

 
136 
 
45 Indian Amateur Kabaddi 
Federation, Jaipur 
0.25 0.32 0.12 
46 Indian Weightlifting 
Federation, New Delhi 
0 0.26 0.31 
47 Athletics Federation of India, 
New Delhi 
2.33 2.28 0.12 
   
48 
Badminton Association of 
India, Rajasthan 
1.99 1.70 0.24 
    
49 
Equestrian Federation of 
India, New Delhi 
0.61 0.86 0.05 
  
50 
Football, Delhi 0.68 0.52 0.42 
 51 Indian Golf Union, New Delhi 0.56 0.18            0.16 
    
52 
Wrestling Federation of India, 
I.G.Stadium Delhi 
0.06 0.02            0.64 
    
53 
Winter Games Federation of 
India (WGFI), Daryaganj 
0 0.02 00 
54 Women‟s Cricket Fedn. of 
India, Delhi 
0.01 00 00 
   
55 
Cycling Federation  of India, 
Delhi 
0.27 00 0.02 
56 Special Olympic Bharat, New 
Delhi 
0.87 0.53 0.04 
57 Malkhamb 0.03 
 
0.09 00 
58 Amateur Soft Tennis 
Federation of India 
00 0.06 0.11 
 
 
59 Bridge Federation of India 00 0.03 00 
60 Ice Hockey 00 0.01 00 
61 School Games 00 0.13 0.44 
62 Indian Olympic Association, 
New Delhi 
2.44 2.38 2.04 
63 Sports Authority of India, 
J.N.Stadium, N.Delhi 
17.00 10.00 20.80 
64 Association of Indian 
Universities 
- - 1.58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
137 
 
Annexure-III  
F. No. 49-3/2008-SP-II 
Government of India 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
Department of Sports 
 
New Delhi the 18th September, 2008 
 
Sub: Guidelines for more efficient management of Coaching camps, selection of 
coaches, selection of Athletes, etc 
Former Chief Election Commissioner Shri T.S. Krishna Murthy was appointed by the 
Government to examine the circumstances & issues connected with dope testing of Weightlifter, 
Ms. L. Monika Devi. The Government has accepted the conclusion of the Enquiry report of Sh 
T. S. Krishna Murthy that it is nec essary to improve coordination among all concerned with the 
management of Coaching Camps, Selection of Coaches, Selection of Athletes, etc. In order to 
put this recommendation into operation, the following action should be taken immediately by all 
concerned. 
1. MANAGEMENT OF COACHING CAMPS  
(i) The Sports Authority of India, in consultation with the National Sports Federation 
concerned, shall work out a detailed yearly calendar of coaching camps, to be 
conducted in a particular discipline well in advance, in no  circumstances later than 
31st January every year. This calendar should be prepared based on the Long Term 
Development Plan (LTDP) for that discipline, and should be in consonance with the 
International/National calendar of events in that discipline. In ca se the coaching 
camp is being conducted by the National Sports Federation concerned, the same 
guidelines shall be applicable to them as well. 
(ii)  The calendar of events so prepared, should contain detailed information about dates 
and period of coaching camp, venue (SAI or any other), number of players likely to 
attend the camp, coaches and supporting personnel staff. 
(iii) The list of probables for each coaching camp, shall be decided along with the LTDP, 
on the basis of either National Championship or open selection trials. 
(iv) A panel of coaches and supporting personnel including doctors, physiotherapists, 
psychologists, physiologists, scientific officers, masseurs etc. shall be prepared and 
made a part of the LTDP. 
(v) The yearly requirements of food supplements, equipments (consumable/non -
consumable) training kits, should also be worked out while preparing the yearly 
calendar. 
(vi) The coaching calendar along with the requirements as detailed above, shall be 
circulated to all SAI centres, well in advance to enable them  to make necessary 
arrangements, and to ensure smooth conduct of the camps. 
(vii) The venue allocated for a particular coaching camp, shall not be changed under any 
circumstances, unless warranted by unavoidable situations, which shall be done only 
after taking due approval of the competent authority. 
(viii) It shall be the responsibility of SAI/NADA, to ensure that random dope tests are 
conducted in each camp as per the guidelines. 

 
138 
 
(ix) The travel plan and ticketing of every player, shall be carried out and informed to the 
player, well in advance of the dates of the coaching camp. 
(x) The National Coach shall evaluate the progress and performance of the players in 
the coaching camp, and make recommendations to the Selection Committee, 
regarding discontinuation of players showing  unsatisfactory performance, or 
inclusion of new probables giving due justification for the name.  
 
2. SELECTION OF COACHES 
(i) The National Coach shall be selected by a selection committee with President of the 
NSF concerned as its Chairman, DG(SAI), ED(TEAMS), one ex-international players 
(preferably Arjuna Awardee or International medal winner), to be nominated by the 
Government, and the nominee of IOA from the panel prepared by SAI. 
(ii) The National Coach shall be appointed by SAI, after careful consideration o f the 
names recommended by this Selection Committee. 
(iii) The Selection Committee, in consultation with the National coach, shall choose other 
members of the coaching team. 
(iv) The team of coaches, sport scientists, experts etc shall not normally be changed or 
modified, once chosen till the Asian/Olympic Games are over. 
(v) While selecting the National Coach, Assistant Coach and other members of the 
coaching team, due care should be taken to ensure, that no person with tainted 
record is selected as a member of the coaching team. 
(vi) While selecting the team for participation in any international event it shall be 
ensured, that only those coaches/supporting personnel are selected, who have been 
with the team during the coaching camp on continuous basis. 
 
3. SELECTION OF ATHLETES 
(i) The selection of sportspersons for participation in major international events shall be 
the responsibility of National Sports Federations (NSF) concerned, and Government 
and the Sports Authority of India, will not have direct involvement in the selecti on 
process, except to ensure that it is fair and transparent. 
(ii) The selection criteria/norms shall be clearly communicated by the NSFs to all 
concerned viz., players, coaches, Government Observers etc. well in advance and 
be put up on the website of the NSF concerned and also be forwarded to SAI and 
the Ministry to be put up on their respective websites. 
(iii) In case of  measurable event, the minimum qualifying norms may be fixed and  
announced along with the notice for Selection Trials and be put up on the websit e of 
the NSF concerned and also be forwarded to SAI and the Ministry to be put up on 
their respective websites. 
(iv) The holding of the selection trials should be announced at least one month in 
advance of dates of the trials. 
(v) In team events the Selection Trials should be held two months in advance and in the 
case of contact games, the selection trials should be held at least one month in 
advance of the competition event. 
(vi) The selection shall be done by a Selection Committee, consisting of the President of 
the NS F as the chairman, the National coach and eminent ex -sportspersons, 
preferably Arjuna awardees.  There shall be no Government Observer/SAI nominee, 
as member, in the Selection Committee. 

 
139 
 
(vii) The NSFs shall send invitation to the Government Observer, for attending the 
selection trials, and the selection committee meetings, as an Observer, at least 15 
days in advance, which shall further be followed up on personal basis. The 
Government Observer must send his/her report, directly to SAI and the Ministry, 
without delay. 
(viii) The national coach shall evaluate the progress and performance of each player on 
regular basis, and submit the report to the Selection Committee and Sports Authority 
of India. 
(ix) The athletes who were not in the coaching camp organized prior to th e Selection 
may be allowed to participate in the selection trials, only in exceptional cases with 
due justification. 
(x) The proceedings of the Selection should spell out in detail, the selection criteria, the 
past performance of the players, and their performance in the selection trials.   
(xi) The team once finalized for a particular event shall not be changed under any 
circumstances, unless warranted by unavoidable situations with due justification and 
the changes shall be informed to all concerned. 
(xii) NSFs shall ke ep the performance of each athlete on its web site.  This should be 
updated at least once a month along with rankings, if applicable. 
(xiii) The athlete once selected for a team, shall be treated with utmost dignity. In case of 
any doubt arising, the athlete has to be taken into confidence.  Proper appeal 
mechanism shall be put in place, to ensure proper and timely redressal of their 
grievances. 
 As specific provisions exist in the Scheme for preparation of Teams for Commonwealth 
Games 2010, matters connected  wit h management of coaching camps, selection of 
coaches, selection of core probables would continue to be governed by the provisions of the 
scheme 
-sd 
(Deepika Kachhal) 
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India 
Tele No.23384408 
 
 
1. The Director General, Sports Authority of India, 
2. The President, Indian Olympic Association, 
3. The President & Secretary General, 
 All National Sports Federations 
4. All Government Observers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
140 
 
Annexure-IV 
STATUS OF COMPETITION AND TRAINING VENUES FOR COMMONWEALTH 
GAMES, 2010 
COMPETITION VENUES 
S. No.  Agency Venue  Events  Date of Completion 
1  
Central Public 
Works Department 
J.N. Stadium  
Athletics  31-Mar-10  
Weightlifting  15-Feb-10  
Lawn Bowls  15-Feb-10  
2  I.G. Stadium 
Gymnastics  31-Mar-10  
Cycling  31-Mar-10  
Wrestling  28-Feb-10  
3  MDC National 
Stadium  Hockey  15-Dec-09  
4  
SPM 
Swimming 
Pool Complex  
Swimming  31-Mar-10  
5  
Karni Singh 
Shooting 
Ranges  
Shooting  15-Dec-09  
6  
CRPF 
Campus, 
Kaderpur, 
Gurgaon  
Big-Bore 
Shooting 31-Mar-10 
7  All India Tennis 
Association 
R. K. Khanna 
Tennis 
Complex  
Lawn Tennis  15-Mar-10  
8  Delhi University 
Delhi 
University 
Main Ground 
Rugby  15-Mar-10  
9  Govt. of NCT of 
Delhi 
Thyagraja 
Sports 
Complex  
Netball  31-Dec-09  
10  Delhi Development 
Authority 
Siri Fort Sports 
Complex  Badminton  31-Mar-10 

 
141 
 
S. No.  Agency Venue  Events  Date of Completion 
11  Squash  
12  
Delhi Development 
Authority 
Yamuna 
Sports 
Complex  
Table Tennis 31-Mar-10  
13  Archery 28-Feb-10  
14  New Delhi 
Municipal Council 
Talkatora 
Indoor Stadium  Boxing 31-Dec-09  
 
TRAINING VENUES 
Sr. No Agency Project Name Event Completion Date 
1  
All India Tennis 
Association 
RK Khanna Tennis 
Complex Tennis 15-Mar-10 
2  Central Public 
Works 
Department 
Major Dhyan 
Chand National 
Stadium 
Hockey 15-Dec-09 
3  Swimming 31-Mar-09 
4  
Delhi 
Development 
Authority 
 Games Village 
Athletics 01-May-10 
5  Swimming 31-May-10 
6  
Weightlifting & 
Wrestling 01-May-10 
7  
 Saket Sports 
Complex Badminton 25-Mar-10 
8  
 Siri Fort Sports 
Complex 
Badminton 30-Mar-10 
9  Squash 31-Mar-10 
10  Swimming 25-Mar-10 
11  Tennis 25-Mar-10 
12   Yamuna Sports 
Comlex  
Gymnastics 31-Mar-10 
13  Hockey 31-Mar-10 

 
142 
 
Sr. No Agency Project Name Event Completion Date 
14  Lawn Bowls 31-Mar-10 
15  Swimming 31-Mar-10 
16  Archery 28-Feb-10 
17  
Delhi University 
Daulatram College Rugby 7s 22-Jan-10 
18  Hindu College Rugby 7s 22-Jan-10 
19  Indoor Hall 
Boxing 
23-Mar-10 
Netball 
20  Khalsa College Rugby 7s 22-Jan-10 
21  Kirorimal College Rugby 7s 15-Apr-10 
22  Polo Ground Rugby 7s 15-Apr-10 
23  
Delhi University 
Ramjas College Rugby 7s 31-Jan-10 
24  
Sri Ram College of 
Commerce Rugby 7s 12-Apr-09 
25  
Sri Ram College of 
Commerce Wrestling (W) 15-Jul-10 
26  
St. Stephens 
College Rugby 7s 15-Apr-10 
27  
Govt. of NCT of 
Delhi 
Chhatrasal 
Stadium Athletics 31-Jan-10 
28  Ludlow Castle Hall Wrestling (M) 31-Oct-09 
29  
Thyagraj Sports 
Complex Athletics 31-Dec-09 
30  Jamia Millia 
Islamia 
Jamia Millia 
Islamia University 
Rugby 7s 31-Dec-09 
31  Table Tennis 31-Dec-09 
32  
New Delhi 
Municipal 
Council 
Shivaji Stadium Hockey 30-Dec-09 
 
  

 
143 
 
Annexure-V 
STATUS OF COMPETITION AND TRAINING VENUES FOR COMMONWEALTH 
GAMES, 2010 
 
Funded by: Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MoYAS) 
S.No. Stadium Venue 
Owner 
Start Date Completion Status 
1. JN Sports Complex-
Athletics 
SAI Jan.2008 Completed  & 
Inaugurated on 27th July, 
2010 
2. Dr. Karni Singh Shooting 
Ranges 
SAI Oct.2008 Completed & 
Inaugurated on 31st Jan, 
2010 
3. MDC National Stadium -
Hockey 
SAI Sep. 2007 Completed & 
Inaugurated on 24th Jan, 
2010 
4. JN Sports Complex-
Lawn Bowls 
SAI Oct. 2009 Completed & 
Inaugurated on 5th April, 
2010 
5. IG Sports Complex-
Gymnastics 
SAI Dec.2007 Completed  & 
Inaugurated on 10th 
April, 2010 
6. IG Sports Complex-
Wrestling 
SAI Aug.2008 Completed & 
Inaugurated on 25th 
April, 2010 
7. IG Sports Complex-
Cycling  
SAI Jan.2009 Completed & 
Inaugurated on 29th 
June, 2010 
8. SPM Swimming Pool 
Complex 
SAI Dec. 2007 Completed & 
Inaugurated on 18th July, 
2010 
9. JN Sports Complex - 
Weightlifting 
SAI Aug.2008 Completed  & 
Inaugurated on 1st April, 
2010 
10. RK Khanna Tennis 
Stadium 
DLTA June.2008 Completed & 
Inaugurated on 11th July, 
2010 
11. Delhi University-Main 
Ground-Rugby7s 
DU Aug..2008 Completed & 
Inaugurated on 15th July, 
2010 
12. Big-Bore Shooting, 
Kadarpur 
CRPF 
Academy 
Dec.2008 Completed & 
Inaugurated on 10th May, 
2010 
 
 

 
144 
 
 
Funded by : Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), GoI 
S.No. Stadium Venue 
Owner 
 
Completion Status 
1. Siri Fort Sports 
Complex‐Badminton 
DDA Completed (as reported). 
2. Siri Fort Sports Complex ‐ 
Squash 
DDA Completed (as reported). 
3. Yamuna Sports Complex – Table 
Tennis 
DDA Will be completed by 15th 
Aug,2010 (as 
reported) 
4. Yamuna Sports Complex ‐ 
Archery 
DDA Completed (as reported). 
Inaugurated on 5th 
March,2010 
 
 
Funded by : Government of Delhi 
S.No. Stadium Venue 
Owner 
Completion Status 
1. Thyagraj Sports Complex ‐ 
Netball 
Govt. of 
Delhi 
Completed (as reported). 
Inaugurated on 2nd 
April,2010 
2. Talkatora Stadium ‐ Boxing NDMC Completed (as reported). 
Inaugurated on 24th 
February,2010 
 
STATUS OF TRAINING VENUES 
Funded by : Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MoYS) 
S.No. Stadium Venue 
Owner 
 
Completion Status 
1. CPWD_DPS TRG‐LawnBowls CPWD Completed 
2. CPWD‐MDC TRG‐Hockey SAI/CPWD Completed 
3. DU‐Daulatram TRG‐Rugby7s DU Completed 
4. DU‐Hindu TRG‐Rugby7s DU Completed 
5. DU‐IndoorHallTRG‐Boxing&Netball DU Completed 
6. DU‐Khalsa TRG‐Rugby7s DU Completed 
7. DU‐Kirorimal TRG‐Rugby7s DU Completed 
8. DU‐Polo Ground TRG‐Athletics DU 15-Aug-10 
9. DU‐Ramjas TRG‐Rugby7s DU Completed 

 
145 
 
10. DU‐SriRam TRG‐Rugby7s DU Completed 
11. DU‐SriRam TRG‐Wrestling(W) DU 15-Aug-10 
12. DU‐StStephens TRG‐Rugby7s DU Completed 
13. JMI‐Rugby7s TRG JMI Completed 
14. JMI‐TableTennis TRG JMI Completed 
15. AITA‐RK Khanna TRG‐Tennis AITA Completed 
 
 
Funded by : Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) 
S.No. Stadium Venue 
Owner 
 
Completion Status 
1. DDA‐GameVill TRG‐Athletics DDA Completed 
2. DDA‐GameVill TRG‐Swimming DDA 25-Aug-10 
3. DDA‐GameVill TRG‐Weight 
Wrest 
DDA 08-Aug-10 
4. DDA‐Saket TRG‐Badminton DDA 15-Aug-10 
5. DDA‐SiriFort TRG‐Badminton DDA Completed 
6. DDA‐SiriFort TRG‐Squash DDA 15-Aug-10 
7. DDA‐SiriFort TRG‐Swimming DDA 15-Aug-10 
8. DDA‐SiriFort TRG‐Tennis DDA 15-Aug-10 
9. DDA‐Yamuna TRG‐Gymnastics DDA 15-Aug-10 
10. DDA‐Yamuna TRG‐Hockey DDA 15-Aug-10 
11. DDA‐Yamuna TRG‐LawnBowls DDA Completed 
12. DDA‐Yamuna TRG‐Swimming DDA 15-Aug-10 
13. DDA‐YamunaTRG‐Archery DDA Completed 
 
 
Funded by : Government of Delhi 
S.No. Stadium Venue 
Owner 
 
Completion Status 
1. GNCTD‐Chhatrasal 
TRG‐Athletics 
Govt. of 
Delhi 
Completed 
2. GNCTD‐Ludlow 
TRG‐Wrestling(M) 
Govt. of 
Delhi 
Completed 
3. GNCTD‐Thyagraj TRG‐ Athletics Govt. of 
Delhi 
Completed 
4. NDMC‐Shivaji TRG‐Hockey NDMC September, 2010 
 
  

 
146 
 
 
MINUTES  OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING  OF  THE  ESTIMATES COMMITTEE  
(2009-2010) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 27 th October, 2009 from 1100 hrs. to 
1345 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Shri Francisco Sardinha   –   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
2 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
3 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
4 Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi  
5 Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
6 Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
7 Smt. Ranee Narah  
8 Shri Prabodh Panda  
9 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
10 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha  
11 Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy  
12 Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh  
13 Shri Lalji Tandon  
14 Shri Manish Tewari  
15 Shri K.C. Venugopal  
 
         SECRETARIAT  
         1. Shri Bhupesh Kumar  - Director 
         2 Smt. Manju Chaudhary  -  Deputy Secretary  
          3 Shri C. Kalyanasundaram  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

 
147 
 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS 
(DEPT. OF SPORTS) 
 
1 Smt. Sindhushree Khullar -  Secretary (Sports) 
2 Shri Injeti Srinivas - Joint Secretary (Sports) 
3 Shri Sanjeev Mittal - Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
4 Shri Rahul Bhatnagar - Joint Secretary (International Sports 
   Division) 
 
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
 
5 Shri Sayan Chatterjee - Director General 
6 Shri Pravir Krishna - Joint Secretary & Special Officer 
7 Shri H.S. Kingra - Joint Secretary & Special Officer 
8 Shri S.S. Chhabra - Secretary 
9 Dr. P.C. Kashyap - Executive Director 
10 Dr. L.S. Ranawat - Executive Director 
11 Smt. Jhanjha Tripathi - Executive Director 
12 Shri Joe Sebastian - Executive Director 
13 Shri D.V. Mangla - Superintendant Engineer (Infrastructure) 
 
LAXMIBAI NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION, 
GWALIOR 
 
14 Maj. Gen. (Retd.) S.N. 
Mukherjee 
- Vice Chancellor 
 
 
NATIONAL DOPE TESTING LABORATORY 
 
15 Smt. Shila Jain - Scientist  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
officials of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (Department of Sports) to the sitting 
of the Committee. 
  

 
148 
 
3. The Secretary of the Department briefed the Committee on the subject „Sports - 
Policy, Infrastructure and Training facilities‟.  This was followed by an audio -visual 
presentation on the subject by a representative of the Ministry.  Then the Secretary and 
the representatives of the Ministry replied to the questions raised by the Members.  The 
Secretary was requested to furnish replies in writing to the questions for which answers 
were not readily available at the time of briefing.  
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
5. The Committee decided to hold the next sitting on 18th November, 2009. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
              
  

 
149 
 
MINUTES  OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING  OF  THE  ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 4th January, 2010 from 1515 hrs. to 1720 
hrs. 
 
     PRESENT 
               Shri Francisco Sardinha   –   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3. Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
4. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
5. Shri P. Karunakaran  
6. Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
7. Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam  
8. Smt. Ranee Narah  
9. Shri Prabodh Panda  
10. Shri Kabindra Purkayastha  
11. Shri K. Jaya Surya Prakash Reddy  
12. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy  
13. Shri S. Semmalai  
14. Shri Madan Lal Sharma  
15. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
16. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
17. Shri Manish Tewari  
 
              SECRETARIAT  
    1. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Director 
    2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Under Secretary 
 
     WITNESSES 
 
    MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS 
           (DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS) 
 1. Smt. Sindhushree Khullar, Secretary (Sports) 
 2. Shri Injeti Srinivas, Joint Secretary (Sports) 

 
150 
 
 3. Shri Sanjeev Mittal, Joint Secretary & Financial 
Advisor 
 4. Shri  Rahul Bhatnagar, Joint Secretary 
(International Sports Division)  
  
             SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
 
 5. Shri Sayan Chatterjee, Director General 
 6. Shri Pravir Krishna, Joint Secretary & Special 
Officer  
 7. Shri H.S. Kingra, Joint Secretary & Special Officer 
 8. Shri S.S. Chhabra, Secretary 
  
LAXMIBAI NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION, GWALIOR  
 
 9. Maj Gen (Retd) S.N. Mukherjee, Vice Chancellor, 
Gwalior   
  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports (Department of Sports) to the 
sitting of Committee.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took the oral evidence of the representatives  of the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports on the subject „Sports – Policy, Infrastructure and 
Training Facilities‟.   The Members of the Committee raised questions on various issues 
relating to the subject and the officials of the Ministry replied to the same.   The 
Secretary was requested to furnish replies in writing to the questions for which answers 
were not readily available during evidence. 
 
4. The Committee decided to hold the next sitting on 20th January, 2010.  
 
  5.         A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
151 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE  
(2009-2010) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 23rd March, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1750 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3 Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
4 Shri Milind Deora  
5 Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
6 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
7 Shri P. Karunakaran  
8 Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
9 Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
10 Smt. Ranee Narah  
11 Shri Prabodh Panda  
12 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha  
13 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
14 Shri Madan Lal Sharma  
15 Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh  
16 Shri Lalji Tandon  
17 Shri K.C. Venugopal  
 
 
 
                       SECRETARIAT  
1 Shri U.S. Saxena Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Bhupesh Kumar Director 
3 Smt. Juby Amar Under Secretary 
 
                        WITNESSES 
 
 
                          INDIAN OLYMPIC ASSOCIATION 
1 Shri A.S.V. Prasad Director 

 
152 
 
 
                        ARCHERY ASSOCIATION OF INDIA 
2 Shri Tarlochan Singh, MP Vice-President 
 
                         ATHLETICS FEDERATION OF INDIA 
3 Shri M.L. Dogra Director 
 
                         ALL INDIA FOOTBALL FEDERATION 
4 Shri Hardev Jadeja  Treasurer 
5 Col. (Retd.) BMR Mehta Director (Admn. & Media) 
 
 AMATEUR KABADDI FEDERATION OF INDIA 
6 Shri Deoraj Chaturvedi  Assistant Secretary 
7 Shri Niranjan Singh  Joint Secretary 
  
KHO-KHO FEDERATION OF INDIA 
 
8 Shri Suresh Sharma General Secretary 
 
 PARALYMPICS COMMITTEE OF INDIA 
 
9 Shri C.V. Raghunath Asstt. Secy. & Administrator 
10 Shri K.R. Shankar Iyer Treasurer  
   
 MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS  
(DEPT. OF SPORTS) 
1 Smt. Sindhushree Khullar Secretary  
2 Shri Injeti Srinivas Joint Secretary  
3 Shri Sanjeev Mittal Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
4 Shri Rahul Bhatnagar Joint Secretary  
(International Sports Division) 
 
 SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
5 Shri Pravir Krishna Joint Secretary & Special Officer 
6 Shri H.S. Kingra Joint Secretary & Special Officer 
7 Shri S.S. Chhabra Secretary 
 
 LAXMIBAI  NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF PHYSICAL 
EDUCATION, GWALIOR 
8 Maj. Gen. (Retd) S.N. 
Mukherjee 
Vice Chancellor 
 

 
153 
 
 NATIONAL DOPE TESTING LABORATORY 
9 Smt. Shila Jain Scientist 
 
 MISSION DIRECTORATE PYKKA 
10 Shri S.K. Sagar Chief Technical Advisor, PYKKA 
 
 
         
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Indian Olympic 
Association and some National Sports Federations to the sitting of Committee.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard their views on the issues relating to the subject 
„Sports – Policy, Infrastructure and Training Facilities‟.  The Members of the Committee 
also raised questions on the role of these Sports Bodies in developing sports in the 
country to which they replied. 
 
4. The officials of Sports Bodies were asked to send their proposa ls/suggestions, if 
any, on the subject for consideration of the Committee.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
5. Thereafter, the representatives of Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports were called 
in.  The Chairman welcomed them to the sitting of the Committee. 
 
 
6. The representatives of the Ministry gave evidence before the Committee on the 
subject „Sports – Policy, Infrastructure and Training Facilities‟.  The Members of the 
Committee raised questions on various issues relating to the subject and the officia ls 
replied to the same.  The Secretary was requested to furnish replies in writing to the 
questions for which answers were not readily available during the course of evidence. 
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
154 
 
MINUTES OF SEVENTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-2011) 
   
  
    The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10 th August, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 
1700 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3 Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
4 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
5 Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
6 Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
7 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
8 Shri Prabodh Panda 
9 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
10 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha  
11 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
12 Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy  
13 Shri S. Semmalai  
14 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
15 Shri Manish Tewari  
16 Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Director 
2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Under Secretary 
 
  

 
155 
 
WITNESSES 
 
          Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports (Dept. of Sports) 
 
1. Smt. Sindhushree Khullar  Secretary 
2. Shri Injeti Srinivas  Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Sanjeev Mittal Joint Secretary, Financial Advisor 
4. Shri Rahul Bhatnagar Joint Secretary (International 
Sports Division) 
5. Shri Pramod Agrawal Director (ISD) 
6. Smt. Deepika Kachhal Director (Sports) 
                      Sports Authority of India (SAI) 
 
7. Shri Sayan Chatterjee Director General 
8. Shri Pravir Krishna Joint Secretary & Special Officer 
9. Shri H.S. Kingra Joint Secretary & Special Officer 
10. Shri Gopal Krishna Secretary 
 Organizing Committee, Commonwealth Games, 2010 
 
11. Shri Jarnail Singh CEO 
12. Shri V.K. Verma DG 
13. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi SDG (F&A) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports (Deptt. of Sports) and 
Organizing Committee for Commonwealth Games, 2010 to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. Thereafter the Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports (Deptt. of Sports) and Organizing Committee for 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 on the subject „Preparation for Commonwealth Games, 
2010‟ as a part of the examination of  the subject „Sports – Policy, Infrastructure and 
Training Facilities‟. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 

 
156 
 
MINUTES OF NINTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-2011) 
   
   The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19 th August, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 
1610 hrs in Committee Room 62, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
2 Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
3 Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
4 Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam 
6 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
7 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
8 Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9 Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
10 Shri S. Semmalai 
11 Shri Manish Tewari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
 1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Director 
 2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the 
subject „Sports – Policy, Infrastructure and Training Facilities‟ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Youth Affairs & Sports (Department of Sports). 
 
4. During the course of consideration of the report, certain modifications were 
suggested by the Members of the Committee. 

 
157 
 
5. As the di scussion could not conclude, the Committee decided to meet again to 
consider and adopt the draft Report. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 

 
158 
 
MINUTES OF TENTH  SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2010-2011) 
   
 
   The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26 th August, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 
1545 hrs in Chairman‟s Chamber, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Shri Sanjay Jaiswal 
4 Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Maadam 
6. Shri Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
7 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
8 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
9 Shri Lalji Tandon 
10 Shri Manish Tewari 
11 Shri K.V. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
 1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Director 
 2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the 
subject „Sports – Policy, Infrastructure and Training Facilities‟ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Youth Affairs & Sports (Department of Sports). 

 
159 
 
4. The Committee adopted the draft Report with few modifications suggested by the 
Members of the Committee. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report in the light of  
modifications suggested as well as other consequential changes arising out of the 
factual verification, if any, by the concerned Ministry and present the same to the 
Hon‟ble Speaker, as the ongoing Monsoon Session of Parliament was scheduled to 
close shortly. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 