1 
 
33 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
CROP DIVERSIFICATION 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendati ons contained in the 
Twenty Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2013-2014) 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
            
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

2 
 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
CROP DIVERSIFICATION 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendati ons 
contained in the Twenty Third Report (Fifteenth Lok  Sabha) 
of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 04.01.2014 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 05.02.2014 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
18 December, 2013/ Agrahayana 28, 1935 (Saka) 

3 
 
CONTENTS  
  
PAGE NO.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14)              
INTRODUCTION   
CHAPTER I Report  
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s reply 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect o f 
which final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES   
I Minutes of Twenty First Sitting of the Committee 
on Estimates held on 18.12. 2013. 
 
 
        II Analysis of the action taken by Governme nt on 
the recommendations/observations contained in 
the Twenty First Report of Committee on 
Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14) 
 
  Shri Francisco Sardinha  - Chairman  
MEMBERS  
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
4 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
5 Shri Khagen Das 
6 Shri Pralhad Joshi 
7 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
8 Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
11 Kum. Meenakshi Natrajan 
12 Shri Prabodh Panda 
13 Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu” 
14 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
15 Shri R. Sambasiva Rao 
16 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
17 VACANT 
18 Shri S. Semmalai 
19 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
20 Shri M.I. Shanavas 
21 Shri Adhi Sankar  
22 Shri Rajiv Ranjan (Lalan) Singh 
23 Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
24 Shri Ganesh Singh 
25 Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
26 Shri Jagada Nand Singh 
27 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
28 Smt. Annu Tandon 
29 Shri Mukul Wasnik 
30 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  1. Shri A. Louis Martin   -     Joint Secretary 
  2. Smt. Anita B. Panda  -     Director 
                        3.        Dr Y. Arun Kumar           -     Deputy Secretary   
                        4.        Shri Abhishek Singh Yadav    -     Committee Assistant   

5 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2013-14 ) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, pr esent this Thirty First Report on action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the 
Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Tribal Welfare Schemes’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs.   
  
2.   The Twenty First Report of the Committee (Fift eenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 23 April, 2013. The Ministry of Tribal Aff airs furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in the Twent y First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
21 
st  October, 2013. As replies given by the Ministry to  a number of recommendations/ 
observations were not specific, the Committee held discussion with the representatives of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 23.10.2013.  Further replies on a number of Recommendations 
were furnished by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs on  21November, 2013. The draft report was 
considered and approved on 18 December, 2013 by the  Study Group of the Committee on 
Estimates, constituted to consider the action taken  replies furnished by the Government. 
Thereafter, the Report was adopted by the Committee  at their sitting held on 18 December, 
2013.  
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on  the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty First Report of Committee on Estimates ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in   
Appendix II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
19 December, 2013              
28 Agrahayana,1935 (Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
 
 

6 
 
CHAPTER - I 
                                                              REPORT 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Twenty-Third Report of the 
Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Cr op Diversification’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation). 
1. 2. The Committee’s Twenty-Third Report (Fifteent h Lok Sabha) was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 30 April, 2013. It contained 18 Recomm endations/Observations. Action 
Taken Replies in respect of all the Recommendations /Observations were received 
from the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agr iculture and Cooperation) on                
14 November, 2013.  
1.3  Replies to the Recommendations/Observations co ntained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under: 
(i) Recommendations/ Observations which have been a ccepted by the 
Government  
           Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17 & 18                 (Total-14) 
                                          (Chapter- II)  
(ii) Recommendations/ Observations which the Commit tee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply   
           Sl. No. Nil                                                                      (Total-NIL) 
                                                                                                               (Chapter-III)                  
(iii) Recommendations/ Observations in respect of w hich the Government’s replies  
have not been accepted by the Committee 
        Sl. Nos. 7 & 9                                                                 (Total-2)    
                                                                                                             (Chapter-IV)  
(iv) Recommendations/ Observations in respect of wh ich final reply of the 
Government is still awaited 
Sl. Nos. 13 & 15           (Total-2)  
                      (Chapter-V) 

7 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that response to comments contained in Chapter-1 
and final replies to recommendations contained in C hapter-V of this Report 
should be furnished expeditiously.  
1.5. The Committee will now deal with the action ta ken by the Government on some 
of their Recommendations.   
 
A. Need to Stabilise Domestic Prices of Edible Oils  and Pulses 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 2 & 5) 
1.6 The Committee in their original report had reco mmended that in the light of the 
need for accelerated crop diversification and achie ving self sufficiency in production of 
pulses and oilseeds, specific targets must be fixed  for the Twelfth Five Year Plan and 
strategy evolved to achieve the same. Besides, the Committee had desired to know 
the physical targets set for utilisation of Rs. 100  crore budgeted under Oil Palm Area 
Expansion (OPAE) scheme during 2012-13 and their ac hievement, as well as the 
roadmap, if any, prepared to enhance production of vegetable oils and reduce its 
import.  
1.7 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agri culture and Cooperation), in its 
action taken reply, has stated that target has been  set for increasing pulse production 
by an additional 4 Million Tonnes by the end of Twe lfth Five Year Plan. Besides, target 
has been set to increase availability of vegetable oils sourced from oilseeds, oil palm 
and Tree Borne Oilseeds (TBOs) to 9.51 Million Tonn es, i.e. an increase of 2.45 
Million Tonnes by increasing oilseed production by 6.58 Million Tonnes, increasing oil 
palm area by additional 1.25 lakh ha, and enhance s eed collection of TBOs by 5 lakh 
Tonnes for the same period. The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) has also stated that on account of inc reasing imports of pulses and 
oilseeds to meet domestic demand, domestic prices a re affected by international 
markets. Therefore, domestic prices of urad and tur  are being pushed below 
remunerative prices as these commodities are being imported at prices below MSP 

8 
 
and oil palm prices in the domestic market are impa cted due to volatility in 
international prices. Therefore, it is necessary th at import duty on oilseeds varies on 
counter-cyclical manner with international prices s o as to stabilize prices of edible oils 
at reasonable levels and import duties are levied o n pulses to ensure that landed price 
of imported pulses do not fall below MSP. These wou ld help stabilize prices of pulses 
and oilseeds at reasonable levels and incentivize p roduction and technology adoption 
by growers in the country leading to reduce depende nce on imports and enhanced 
food security in pulses and edible oils.  NHM and C rop Diversification Programme in 
Original Green Revolution States (Punjab, Haryana a nd Western Uttar Pradesh) are 
also being implemented to diversify the area from cereal crops.  
1.8 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agri culture and Cooperation) also 
reported that achievement of Oil Palm cultivation d uring 2012-13 was 26,121 ha, as 
against the target of 16,500 ha under OPAE. Besides , the National Mission on 
Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP) has reportedly been a pproved for Twelfth Five Year 
Plan which seeks to increase the availability of ve getable oils from average of 9.21 
Million Tonnes (from last 5 years) to 15.00 Million  Tonnes by the end of Twelfth Five 
Year Plan. It has been stated further that with inc reasing share of imports, domestic 
prices of various oils are impacted due to volatili ty in international prices particularly 
that of Palm Oil. This has increased the vulnerabil ity of domestic producers and 
consumers.  Therefore, calibration of import duty s tructure wherein rate of import 
duties varies in counter-cyclical manner with inter national prices, would help in 
stabilizing prices of edible oil at reasonable leve ls and incentivize better technology 
adoption by oilseed growers.  This would reduce our  dependence on massive oil 
imports and contribute towards enhancing food security in edible oil sector.  
1.9 The Committee agree with the view of the Minist ry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) that it  is necessary to stabilize 
domestic prices of edible oils and pulses to incent ivise production and 
whenever these commodities are imported at prices b elow MSP, import duty 
should be structured in such a way that import pric es are above MSP. The 
Committee hope that this issue has been taken up wi th the Ministry of 

9 
 
Commerce and the Ministry of Finance. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the outcome. 
 
B. Need for Remedial Steps to Ensure Full Utilizati on of Funds  
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 3) 
1.10 The Committee, in their Original Report, had d esired that the reasons for 
underutilization of funds under three schemes viz. National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM), National Horticulture Mission (NHM) and Hor ticulture Mission for the North-
East and Himalayan States (HMNEH), which are being implemented to facilitate crop 
diversification, should be gone into and remedial steps taken to ensure full utilization of 
funds during the Twelfth Five Year Plan period.  
1.11  In response, the Ministry of Agriculture (Departmen t of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) in its action taken reply dated 14 Nov ember, 2013 has stated that the 
shortfall in utilization of funds provided for NHM is due to restricted releases to the 
implementing agencies, which, in turn is the result  of delay in release of 15 per cent 
matching State share by various State Governments; submission of necessary 
documents (like Audited Utilization Certificate of previous year, Audited Statement of 
accounts component wise, latest physical and financ ial progress report, etc.) and 
submitting projects involving credit linked back ended subsidy assistance.  
Various steps are stated to have been taken to hold  frequent meetings of 
Empowered Committee of NHM to clear project based p roposals, pre-positioning of 
inputs in advance for season based activities by St ate Horticulture Missions, 
sensitizing States to submit proposals and other re levant documents for release well 
in time and delegation of more powers at the State level to approve project based 
activities. 
 The Committee have also been apprised that as per t he Report received from 
the States covered under NFSM, the distribution of hybrid rice seed has increased 
from 7.12 per cent in 2007-08 to 44.41 per cent of the target fixed at the terminal year 

10 
 
of the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2011-12) and furthe r increased to 92.91 per cent 
during 2012-13. 
1.12 The reply of the Ministry of Agriculture (Depa rtment of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) has dealt with only a part of the reco mmendation concerning NHM 
and is completely silent on NFSM and HMNEH. The Com mittee would await the 
response of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in this regard.  
 
C. Proactive measure to increase the percentage sha re of cropped areas for 
coarse cereals 
 Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 7) 
1.13 The Committee, in their original report, were of the firm view that proactive 
measures are necessary to increase the percentage share of cropped areas for coarse 
cereals, which can be grown in regions characterize d by scanty rainfall, and 
wasterlands. The Committee also felt that the Minis try of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation) in coordination with t he Ministry of Rural Development 
should undertake identification and reclamation of wasterlands and its use for 
cultivating coarse grains for expanding diversified agriculture. 
1.14 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agr iculture and Cooperation) in its 
reply has stated that the various activities permitted under MGNREGA implemented by 
the Ministry of Rural Development for reclamation o f wastelands inter-alia  include 
construction of irrigation canals, land development , digging of farm ponds, horticulture 
plantation, farm bunding on land or homestead owned  by households belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes or below poverty line families. The Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperat ion) has also stated that it is 
implementing Initiative for Nutritional Security through Intensi ve Millets 
Promotion (INSIMP) programme for promotion of cultivation of m illets including 
wastelands in all major coarse cereal growing State s.  The Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) has als o stated that cultivation of coarse 
cereals would be undertaken under National Food Sec urity Mission (NFSM) during 

11 
 
Twelfth Five Year Plan to increase area and product ivity of coarse cereals in all major 
coarse cereals growing States. 
1.15 There is nothing in the reply of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation) to indicate, whether i dentification and reclamation 
of wastelands and its use for cultivating coarse gr ains for expanding diversified 
agriculture was undertaken and if so, the outcome o f the exercise. The 
Committee wonder why the Ministry of Agriculture ha s ignored this aspect in 
their reply. The Committee would await the Governme nt’s response in this 
regard. 
 
D. Efforts to Augment Horticultural Production in N orth East States and Sub-
Himalayan Northern States 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 9) 
1.16 
 Emphasizing upon the need for sustained and acceler ated efforts to augment 
production of horticulture/plantation crops in view  of the changing dietary pattern and 
growing demand for fruits/vegetables, the Committee had recommended that the huge 
potential in North-East States and the sub-Himalaya n Northern States, which are 
endowed with necessary agro-climatic conditions for  horticultural plantation, should be 
fully harnessed by proper planning and setting targets. 
1.17 In response, the Ministry of Agriculture (Depa rtment of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) in its action taken reply, has inter-alia  stated that the area under fruits 
and vegetables in HMNEH States has increased from 1 .4 million ha in 2001-02 to 2.0 
Million ha in 2011-12 with corresponding increase i n production from 10.1 Million 
Tonnes to 16.5 Million Tonnes. The Ministry has als o stated that in order to maintain 
momentum of this growth, HMNEH activities are propo sed to be continued during the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan with more focus on productiv ity improvement measures 
coupled with creation of infrastructure for post ha rvest management, marketing and 
processing. 

12 
 
 The Committee have also been apprised that the Min istry of Food Processing 
Industries has launched “National Mission on Food P rocessing” (NMFP) during the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan and the States/UTs have been  provided flexibility to take up 
new schemes under NMFP to suit their local requirem ents. The Ministry has added 
that the Mission is likely to help States to realiz e the potential of food processing 
sector particularly for Agri-horticulture.  
1.18 The Committee note that the reply of the Ministry o f Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) has not  specifically addressed the 
issue of proper planning and setting targets for ha rnessing the huge potential in 
the North-East States and Sub-Himalayan Northern St ates. The Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and would aw ait specific target set for the 
future in this regard. 
 
E. Absence of Seed Banks in Himachal Pradesh, Jammu  & Kashmir and 
North East States 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 14) 
1.19 The Committee, in their original recommendatio n had noted that ‘Seed Bank 
Scheme’ was aimed to address the contingency salvat ion if the first crop sown by the 
farmer has failed and desire to know why such seed banks were not established in 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and North East St ates. They desired to be 
apprised of the reasons for the same as well as the  time when these States will be 
covered under the scheme. 
1.20 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agr iculture and Cooperation), in its 
reply, has inter-alia stated that for North East States, Assam Seeds Corp oration is 
participating regularly in the Seed Bank Scheme. Fo r other North East States, the 
National Seeds Corporation (NSC), State Farm Corpor ation of India (SFCI) and 
Uttarakhand and Tarai Development Seeds Corporation  (UK&TDC) are maintaining 
the seeds. 

13 
 
1.21 The action taken reply of the Ministry of Agri culture (Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation) has not indicated whet her there are any seed 
banks in Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh and w hether these States 
have been brought under Seed Bank scheme. The Commi ttee would await this 
information.    
 
F. Reforms in Land Use Policy 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 15) 
1.22 The Committee, in their original report, had n oted that according the 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, promotio n of contract farming, land 
leasing and land sharing Company with some adaptation would lead to desired vertical 
integration of all aspects of diversification leadi ng to rural transformation.  In this 
regard, the Committee had felt that such reforms in  land use policy ought to be 
preceded by a thorough study of merits and de-merit s, impact on landless labourers 
and agricultural population, establishment of regul atory mechanism and so on and 
suggested that an expert Committee be formed to go into all aspects of the matter in 
depth and the Committee be informed of its recommendations.  
1.23 In response, the Ministry of Agriculture (Depa rtment of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) in the action taken reply has stated as under: 
“The Committee of State Ministers, In-charge of Agr iculture Marketing to 
Promote Reforms in its Final Report submitted in January, 2013 has made 
the following recommendations in respect of contract farming : 
(1) To encourage contracting parties and simplifyin g and rationalizing 
the registration process : 
(a) District level authority may be set up for Regi stration of Contract 
Farming and no market fee should be levied under it . The APMC should 
not be the authority for registration/dispute settl ement under Contract 
Farming; and 
(b) The disputes may be settled within fifteen days  and the decretal 
amount of appeal should not be more than 10% of the  amount of goods 
purchased under Contract Farming. Appeal should be disposed off within 

14 
 
15 days.  No solvency certificate/Bank guarantee ma y be required from 
private sponsor/operator, if payment is made to the  farmers on the same 
day of procurement of  their produce; 
(2) States should promote small and marginal Farmer s’ 
Groups/Associations or their Company/Society to enc ourage Contract 
Farming in the States.  Successful template of Cont ract Farming may be 
developed after studying the successful Models adop ted in other 
countries. 
State Governments have been asked to convey views o n policy 
recommendations of the Committee”. 
1.24 The Ministry’s reply has not addressed the nee d for studying the merits 
and de-merits, impact on landless labourers and agr icultural population, 
establishment of regulatory mechanism before introd uction of reforms in land 
use policy. The Committee’s suggestion for constitu tion of an expert Committee 
to go into all aspects of the matter indepth has al so not been heeded to. The 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge expeditious action in 
the matter. 
 
G. Steps to check serious imbalance in cold storage  capacity 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 18)  
1.25 The Committee found that cold storage in the c ountry is hugely lopsided in 
respect of only one commodity viz. potatoes.  They had also observed from the 
commodity-wise distribution of cold storage in the country that the cold storage 
capacity meant for fruits and vegetables is as litt le as 0.39 per cent whereas the 
capacity for potatoes is 75.36 per cent and multipurpose cold storage capacity is 23.09 
per cent.  Therefore, the Committee had emphasized that the serious imbalance in 
cold storage capacity requires to be addressed urge ntly with a view to promoting 
production of fruits and vegetables and other horti culture produce and to prevent 
distress sale of produce by farmers.  
1.26 In response, the Ministry of Agriculture (Depa rtment of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) in the action taken reply has stated t hat Creation of infrastructure 

15 
 
facilities such as pack houses, cold storages, Cont rolled Atmosphere  (CA) storage, 
Ref Vans, etc are being promoted under NHM, HMNEH a nd NHB schemes. Besides, 
a National Centre for Cold-chain Development (NCCD) has been constituted in DAC to 
provide further stimulus to cold chain sector. Besi des, States are being encouraged to 
go in for multi-commodity multi-chamber cold storag e units. The Ministry has also 
stated that the Ministry of Food Processing Industr ies (MFPI) is also operating a plan 
scheme to provide financial assistance to project p roposals for cold chain 
infrastructure development. 63 cold chain projects approved to create 146861 MT of 
cold storage, 97257 MT of CA/MA storage, 19300 MT o f deep freezer, 81.1 lakh litre 
per day of milk storage, 43.2 MT per hour of IQF and 314 numbers of reefer carriers. 
The Ministry has also stated that DAC is implementi ng the Central Sector 
Scheme ‘Agri-business Development through Venture C apital’ and ‘Project 
Development Facility’ for development of agri-business sector in the country. 
The Ministry has also furnished a comparative state ment of potatoes vis-à-vis 
multipurpose cold storage during 2010-11 to 2012-13: 
Year Cold Storage  Cold Storage 
(Potatoes) 
Cold Storage 
(Multipurpose) 
2010-11 19 0 19 
2011-12 46 11 35 
2012-13 64 42 22 
 
1.27 The action taken reply does not address the is sue raised by the 
Committee regarding hugely lopsided cold storage ca pacity in respect of only 
one commodity viz. potatoes. The Ministry’s reply h as only provided a 
comparison of the cold storage of potatoes and mult ipurpose cold storage 
during the period 2010-11 and 2012-13 under the ass isted schemes and has not 
indicated as to what steps are contemplated to addr ess the huge imbalance in 
the existing cold storage capacity in favour of onl y potatoes. The Committee 
would await the Government’s response in this regard. 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDTIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that while predominant monocultu re and continuous 
cropping of rice-wheat have led to self sufficiency  in foodgrains, they have also 
created many agro- ecological problems like deterio ration in soil cultivation, excessive 
exploitation of underground water, etc.  The per ca pita availability of foodgrains is 439 
grams per day against the recommended level of 500 grams per day whereas the 
availability of oils and fats is about 20 grams per  day against the requirement of 40 
grams per day and availability of pulses less than 32 grams per day against 
recommended level of 55 grams per day.  The Committ ee feel that in order to ensure 
nutritional security and to address adverse agronom ical conditions, there is a need for 
diversification from cereals dominated production s ystem to horticulture, oilseeds and 
pulses. Our country is bestowed with diverse agro-c limatic conditions favourable for 
cultivation of diverse crops.  Though efforts have been made over the years to move 
towards crop diversification, the Committee feel th at well thought out strategy coupled 
with concerted action is necessary to achieve desir ed results in crop diversification.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture  & Cooperation is 
implementing schemes of National Horticulture Missi on (NHM) and Horticulture 
Mission for North- East and Himalayan States (HMNEH ) for holistic development of 
Horticulture sector.  During XII Plan, NHM Scheme i s being revamped by including 
other ongoing schemes on Horticulture viz. HMNEH, N ational Horticulture Board 
(NHB), Coconut Development Board (CDB), Central Ins titute of Horticulture (CIH), and 
National Bamboo Mission (NBM).  The various crops c overed included in Mission are 

17 
 
fruits, vegetables, spices, flowers, medicinal and aromatic plants, plantation crops 
(coconut, arecanut, cashewnut,  cocoa) to diversify area from cereal crops.  
  National Food Security Mission (NFSM) was  implem ented  during the XI plan  
to enhance the area expansion and productivity of p ulses in 468 districts of 16 states  
viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gu jarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Pun jab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal and  it would be cont inued in XII plan to diversify the 
area from  cereals to pulses to  for improving the soil fertility and domestic  
requirement of pulses. 
 Integrated scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil palm an d Maize (ISOPOM) was 
implemented during XI plan in 14 major oilseeds gro wing states viz., Andhra Pradesh, 
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, M adhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Prades h and West Bengal to expand 
area and productivity of oilseeds as well as to div ert the area from low yielding cereals 
to oilseeds.  
Crop Diversification programme in Original Green Re volution States is  also 
being implemented during 2013-14 in three states  n amely Punjab, Haryana and 
Western Uttar Pradesh to divert area from water guz zling crops like paddy, wheat to 
alternate crops including agro-forestry based cropp ing system  to arrest depletion of 
ground water and restoration of soil fertility.   
 Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and Agricultural Universities 
(SAUs) have also developed short duration varieties /hybrids of oilseeds and pulses as 
alternatives to cereals and best fitted in existing  cereal based cropping systems like 
Rice-Rice/Rice-Wheat. The leguminous crops (cowpea,  frenchbean, dolichos, 
blackgram, greengram and horsegram) have been identified as inter-crops in the wider 
spaced perennial fruit crops (mango, guava, sapota,  fig and annona). The oilseeds 
and pulses are being promoted to replace low yieldi ng rice and low irrigated wheat to 
enhance the farm income.  
 
(Ministry of Agriculture,  Department of Agricultur e & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13 .11.2013)  

18 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 2) 
 The Committee have been informed that over the yea rs priority was given to 
pulses and oilseeds following a regionally differen tiated strategy that suited the agro-
climatic regions.  During the period 1950-51 to 201 0-11, this initiatives have reportedly 
been resulted in increase in area by 16.49 million ha in oilseeds; 7.23 million ha under 
pulses; 1.65 million ha in potatoes; 7 million ha i n vegetables, fruits and others; 5.36 
million ha in cotton; and 3.7 million ha in sugarca ne.  During the period 2006-07 to 
2011-12 (estimates), the production of wheat and ri ce has grown from 169.2 million 
tones to  198.2 million tones (increase of 17 per c ent) and production of pulses and 
oilseeds has grown from 38.5 million tones to 47.2 million tonnes (increase of 23 per 
cent).  The Committee feel that in the light of the  need for accelerated crop 
diversification and achieving self sufficiency in p roduction of pulses and oilseeds, 
specific targets must be fixed in this regard for t he Twelfth Five Year Plan and strategy 
evolved to achieve the same.  The Committee would await action taken in this regard.  
 
Reply by the Government  
  The national production target of various crops i s being fixed on yearly basis. 
The production target for pulses and oilseeds has b een fixed at 19.00 and 31.00 
million tonnes for the year 2013-14.  It is aimed t o increase pulses production by an 
additional 4 million tonnes over normal production in 2011-12 by end of XII Plan 
period.  It is also envisaged to increase availabil ity of vegetable oils sourced from 
oilseeds, oil palm and TBOs to 9.51 million tonnes,  i.e., an increase of 2.45 million 
tonnes by increasing oilseed production by 6.58 mil lion tonnes, increasing oil palm 
area by additional 1.25 lakh ha. and enhance seed collection of TBOs by 5 lakh tonnes 
for the same period. Crop development programmes li ke National Food Security 
Mission (NFSM) and National Mission on Oilseeds and  Oil Palm (NMOOP) would be 
implemented during XII Plan to achieve higher produ ction of pulses and oilseeds to 
meet growing domestic demand.  In order to encourag e farmers for production of 
oilseeds and pulses, MSP of these crops have been e nhanced substantially to ensure 
remunerative prices for farmers. However, on accoun t of the increasing imports of 
pulses and oilseeds to meet domestic demand, domest ic prices are also affected by 

19 
 
international markets.  Therefore, domestic prices of urad and tur are being pushed 
below remunerative prices as these commodities are being imported at prices below 
MSP and oil palm prices in the domestic market are impacted due to volatility in 
international prices.  Therefore, it is necessary t hat import duty on oilseeds varies on 
counter-cyclical manner with international prices s o as to stabilize prices of edible oils 
at reasonable levels and import duties are levied o n pulses to ensure landed price of 
imported pulses do not fall below MSP.  These would  help stabilize prices of pulses 
and oilseeds at reasonable levels and incentivize p roduction and technology adoption 
by growers in the country leading to reduce depende nce on imports and enhanced 
food security in pulses and edible oils.  NHM and C rop Diversification Programme in 
Original Green Revolution States (Punjab, Haryana a nd Western Uttar Pradesh) are 
also being implemented to diversify the area from cereal crops.  
 
(Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture  & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated  13.11.2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 1.9 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 3) 
 There are five Schemes implemented by the Ministry  of Agriculture (Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC)), to facilitat e crop diversification towards more 
remunerative and productive crops.  The Committee f eel that the achievement under 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM), left much to  be desired.  There has been 
under-utilization of budgetary provision to the ext ent of Rs.222 crore in 2008-09 and  
Rs.347 crore in 2009-10, Rs.89 crore in 2010-11 and  Rs.61 crore in 2011-12.  It is 
disappointing to note that distribution of hybrid s eeds under the programme achieved 
just 44 per cent of the target, during 2011-12.  Di stribution of hybrid seeds and 
farmers’ field schools did not meet their stipulate d targets.  For instance, in the year 
2011-12, only 44.41 percent of the set target could  be achieved in the component of 

20 
 
distribution of hybrid seeds.  Similarly, under the  National Horticulture Mission (NHM) 
Scheme, the shortfall in utilization of budgetary p rovision was as much as Rs.861 
crore during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period (20 07-08 to 2011-12).  For the 
Scheme on Horticulture Mission for North-East and H imalayan States (HMNEH), the 
shortfall in utilization of budgetary target was Rs .816 crore during the period with 
Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand utilizing less tha n 50 percent of the allotted funds.  
The Committee desire that the reasons for underutilization of funds under the schemes 
should be gone into and remedial steps taken to ens ure full utilization of funds and 
effective performance of the schemes during the Twelfth Five Year Plan period. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 As per the Report received from the States covered  under National Food 
Security Mission (NFSM), the distribution of hybrid  rice seed has increased from  
7.12% in 2007-08 to 44.41 % of the target fixed at the  terminal year of IX Plan (2011-
12) and further increased to 92.91% during 2012-13.  Similarly under Farmers Field 
School (FFS) component of NFSM, achievement is quite appreciable as it was 85.88% 
of targets fixed during 2011-12 . 
The shortfall in utilization of budgetary provision  during XI Plan under National 
Horticulture Mission (NHM) with reference to  recur ring expenditure (RE) is to the 
tune of Rs. 118.00 crore which is due to restricted  releases to the implementing 
agencies as result of  delay in  (i) release of 15%  matching state share by various 
State Governments, ii) submission of necessary docu ments (like Audited Utilization 
Certificate of previous year, Audited statement of accounts component wise, latest 
physical and financial progress report, etc.) and ( iii) submitting projects involving 
credit linked back ended subsidy assistance.   
 
Various action have been taken   to hold  frequent meetings of Empowered 
Committee of NHM to clear project based proposals, pre-positioning of  inputs in 
advance for season based activities by State Hortic ulture Missions, sensitizing States 
to submit proposals and other relevant documents fo r release well in time, delegation 

21 
 
of more powers at the state level to approve projec t based activities and holding 
meetings  with States in the months of March and Ap ril   for approval of action plans 
for the following year. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture,  Department of Agricultur e & Cooperation O. M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013.) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 1.12 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee appreciate that the Department of Agr iculture & Cooperation 
(DAC) has undertaken a programme `Bringing Green Re volution to Eastern India 
(BGREI)’ under the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana to  bring crop diversification in the 
States of Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Od isha, Eastern Uttar Pradesh and 
West Bengal.  Since many of these States have high rainfall areas, the management 
of surface and ground water has reportedly been pri oritized by the DAC.  As many of 
these States periodically battle issues regarding water logging and inundation affecting 
their agricultural productivity, the Committee hope  that these States will take 
advantage of new varieties of rice, wheat and musta rd suitable for such areas, 
emerged from the research carried out by CSSRI, Kar nal.  The Committee also hope 
that the initiative to introduce pulses in the agri cultural systems in the States 
implementing BGREI would be successful in ensuring economical use of nitrogen 
content in the soil, which gets depleted due to con tinuous sowing of rice and wheat.  
The Committee would like to be informed of the targ ets and achievements under 
BGREI during each of the last five years. 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 “Bringing Green Revolution to Eastern India (BGREI)” was initiated since 2010-11 and 
the programme is intended for improving the rice pr oductivity in rice based cropping system in 
Eastern States such as Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Eastern Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal through development of appr opriate infrastructure with a view to 
addressed the various production constraints. 
   Under BGREI Programme, flood tolerant rice varie ties like Swarna Sub-1 and salinity 
tolerant varieties CSR-36 and CSR-43 are promoted t hrough cluster demonstrations involving 
scientists of various research institutes. Besides,  these varieties are also promoted through 
cluster demonstrations under National Food Security Mission. 
    Pulse crops are also promoted under NFSM in all  the districts of Eastern States 
except for few districts of Assam and Jharkhand to improve soil fertility and also enhance the 
production and productivity of pulses. 
Since inception of the programme (i.e. 2011-12), the production of rice in implementing 
States has increased substantially and 56.08% of to tal rice production in the country in 2012-
13 (4 th  Advance Estimates), compared to 48.95% in 2010-11. Details of rice production targets 
and achievement since implementation of BGREI in eastern India are as under: 
(Lakh Tonnes) 
Sl.  
No 
. 
State  Norm 
al 
(2007-
08 to 
2011-
12) 
PT  
2010-
11 
2010 -11  
A 
 ( BGREI 
implementin 
g year 
PT  
2011-
12 
 
2011 -
12 
A 
PT  
2012-
13 
 
2012 -
13* 
A  
1.  Assam 41.83  39.00  47.37  41.00  45.16  42.60  45.62  
2.  Bihar 47.74  52.00  31.02  53.00  71.63  70.50  73.36  
3.  Chhattisg 
arh 
52.23 
 53.00  61.59  50.00  60.28  60.20  66.09  
4.  Jharkhand  25.07  34.20  11.10  31.30  31.31  32.30  30.27  
5.  Odisha 67.81  68.00  68.28  77.00  58.07  72.50  76.40  
6.  Uttar 123.40  126.00  119.92  130.50  140.22  133.80  144.13  

23 
 
Pradesh 
7.  West 
Bengal 
143.50 
 161.00  130.46  148.00  146.06  149.0  149.62  
 Total for 
Seven 
States 
501.58  533.20  469.74  530.80  552.73  560.90  585.49  
 % Share 
of Seven 
States 
51.58 
 52.27  48.95  52.03  52.49  53.93 56.08  
 ALL-India  972.42  1020.0 
0 
959.70  1020.0 
0 
1053.0 
1 
1040.0 
0 
1043.9 
9
 
P.T.- Production Target, A-Achievement, *-4th   Advance Estimate  
 
 It may be seen from the above statement that the p roduction of rice increased 
substantially during 2012-13 over the normal in all  the states. The maximum gain was 
recorded in Bihar followed by Chhattisgarh, Jharkha nd, Uttar Pradesh, Assam and 
West Bengal. The major share of this achievement can be attributed to implementation 
of BGREI along with NFSM and other crop development programmes.  
(Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture  & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013.) 
 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note that steps have been taken for increasing production of 
vegetable oils through promotion of oil palm cultiv ation by launching a special Scheme 
on Oil Palm Area Expansion (OPAE) under Rashtriya K rishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) 
during 2012-13.  The OPAE scheme includes a strateg y which indicates the State-
specific targets for area expansion, intervention f or oil palm research and 
development, institutional linkages and initiatives for creating facilities in needy States.  
The Committee desire to know the physical targets s et for utilization of Rs.100 crore 

24 
 
budgeted for financial year 2012-13 under the schem e and the achievement there 
against during the year.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
roadmap, if any, prepared to enhance the production  of vegetable oils and reduce its 
import from other countries. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 Oil Palm cultivation was targeted of 16500 hectare s in the country within the 
budgetary allocation of  Rs.100.00 crores  under Oi l Palm area expansion (OPAE) a 
sub-scheme of  RKVY during 2012-2013.  However, oil palm cultivation has been 
reported on an area of 26121 ha. including left out  area from the previous year (2011-
12).  In order to enhance the production of vegetab le oils and reduce its imports, 
National Mission on Oilseeds and Oilpalm(NMOOP ) TB Os has been approved from 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs for XII plan.   The approach of Mission is to be 
expanding area of operation, harnessing the potenti al in the area/district of low 
productivity, research, resource and conservation t echnologies, strengthening of 
inputs delivery mechanism and post-harvest services  besides, a focus on tribal area 
particularly for tree born oilseeds during XII Plan .  The Mission also envisages an 
increase in availability of vegetable oils from las t five years average availability (2006-
2007 to 2010-2011) of 9.21 million tonnes to 15.00 million tons by the end of 12 
th  Plan. 
The coverage of the Mission is Mini Mission-I ( on oilseeds) in 19 states, Mini Mission-
II (on Oil Palm) in 19 states and Mini Mission-III( on Tree Borne Oils) in 28 states. 
 However, with increasing share of imports, domesti c prices of various oils are 
impacted due to volatility in international prices,  particularly that of palm oil. This has 
increased the vulnerability of domestic producers a nd consumers.  Therefore, 
calibration of import duty structure wherein rate o f import duties varies in counter-
cyclical manner with international prices, would he lp in stabilizing prices of edible oil at 
reasonable levels and incentivize better technology  adoption by oilseed growers.  This 
would reduce our dependence on massive oil imports and contribute towards 
enhancing food security in edible oil sector.  

25 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture  & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 1.9 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 6) 
 
 Coarse cereals like maize, jowar, bajra and small millets contain nutrition and 
have health benefits.  The Committee are unhappy to note that the area of total coarse 
cereals has reduced by 9.24 million ha during the period 1950-51 to 2010-11.  It is only 
in the year 2010-11, a dedicated programme on initi ative on Nutritional Security 
through Intensive Millet Programme (INSIMP) has bee n launched for promotion of 
millets in 1000 compact blocks covering about 25000  villages.  The scheme is aimed 
to provide market linked production support, upgrad e millet processing technologies 
and cereals, awareness regarding health benefits to  promote balanced nutrition.  The 
Committee desire that the programme should be expanded to cover the entire arid and 
semi-arid regions of the country.  The Committee wo uld like to be informed of the 
results of the programme. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 The programme on Initiative on Nutritional Securit y through Intensive Millet 
(INSIMP) launched during 2011-12 and continued duri ng 2012-13 and 2013-14 in 16 
states. INSIMP  programme has made a significant co ntribution in area expansion, 
improvement of yield and creation of awareness and demand for millet grains in the 
country. 
An area of 7.73 lakh ha during 2011-12 and 8.30 lak h ha during 2012-13 was 
covered under demonstration of improved package of ractices (PoP) of millets. Area 
under millets showed increasing trend in respect of  sorghum in Andhra Pradesh and 

26 
 
Tamil Nadu; finger millet in Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, small millet in the states of 
AP, Karnataka, Maharashtra and arrest of area in the States like Karnataka (sorghum), 
Tamil Nadu (bajra) and Uttar Pradesh (small millets ). Significantly higher yield under 
INSIMP demonstrations of millets have been reported  over the state average yield of 
2010-11. 
About 300 post-harvesting units have been establish ed in the states of Andhra 
Pradesh (70), Gujarat (5), Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh (1) (1 50), Maharashtra (11), 
Tamil Nadu (25) and UP (31).  These units have facilitated increased availabilit y of 
raw material for value added millet based food products. 
Awareness generation campaigns (food festivals, mil let melas, road show, 
hoardings, circulation of recipes in regional langu age, use of jingles) organized by the 
implementing states have created increased awarenes s and demand for millet. 
Besides, millet based Mid-day-Meal programme has be en successfully launched on 
pilot scale basis by Andhra Pradesh in Mahboobnagar  district, Karnataka in Kolar 
district and Maharashtra in Pune Rural district. Th e programme has been extended in 
08 more districts in Karnataka during 2013-14. 
Under centrally sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oils eeds, Pulses, Oil Palm 
and Maize   (ISOPOM ), maize development programme  was implemented during 11 th  
Plan  in 15 states viz.,  Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Ch hattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Od isha, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Jammu & kashmir, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West  Bengal to  increase area, 
productivity and production  of maize. 
   INSIMP and maize component of ISOPOM  have been subsumed in National 
Food Security Mission (NFSM) and  coarse cereals wi ll be undertaken under NFSM 
from 2014-15 to cover semi and semi-arid regions of the country.  
 
(Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture  & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 8)  
The Committee observe that as against the budgetary  target of Rs.550 crore 
during the year 2011-12 under the “Integrated Schem e of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm 

27 
 
and Maize (ISOPOM)”, the actual was Rs.616 crore.  The Committee regret to note 
that although the actual expenditure exceeded the b udgetary target by Rs.66 crore, 
the achievement of the targeted area expansion unde r oil palm was merely 24.4 per 
cent.  As against the target of 270 ha during the y ear 2011-12, the achievement was 
just 65.91 ha.  The Committee urge the Ministry of Agriculture to look into the reasons 
for this dismal performance under the scheme and ta ke such remedial measures as 
necessary under intimation to the Committee to ensure targeted achievement. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 During the year 2011-12, the Government of India l aunched a special 
programme on “Oil Palm Area Expansion” (OPAE) under  RKVY to bring more area 
under Oil Palm cultivation in the Country. Under In tegrated Scheme of Oilseeds, 
Pulses, Oilpalm & Maize (ISOPOM), twelve states viz ., Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu,Maharashtra,Kerala,Gujarat,Odisha,Assam, Tripura,Mizoram,Goa and 
West Bengal  are covered. But Assam, Tripura and We st Bengal  is not implementing 
the programme neither under ISOPOM nor under OPAE.  Under OPAE, 9(nine) states 
viz., Andhra Pradesh,Karnataka,TamilNadu,Gujarat,Od isha,Maharashtra, Chattisgarh, 
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh are covered. In the S tates of  Kerala and Goa, the 
Oil Palm Development Programme is being implemented  under ISOPOM. Due to non 
availability of suitable areas in these States, only 65.91 ha. area was brought under Oil 
Palm cultivation as against 270 ha. targeted  area fixed for 2011-12. However, the 
Government of India is making efforts to motivate t he North Eastern States for Oil 
Palm cultivation as huge potential area were identi fied by Dr. Rethinam Committee  
constituted by Department of Agriculture & Co-opera tion. Department has also 
formulated National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Pal m (NMOOP), which will be 
implemented during 12 th  plan period. Under the Mission, additional 5(five)  new States 
viz.,   Bihar, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Sik kim   are included for Oil Palm 
cultivation.    
  

28 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture,  Department of Agricultur e & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 10) 
 
 As agriculture in the country is largely dependent  on the vagaries of monsoon, 
there is wide-scale fluctuation on food production year after year.  The Ministry of 
Agriculture has stated that there is need for bette r predictability of temporal and spatial 
distribution of rainwater, surface water flow and g round water for proper agricultural 
planning.  The Committee would like to be apprised as to what efforts were made to 
realize the aforesaid need and the outcome thereof. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 Central Water Commission (CWC) is monitoring live storage status of 85 
important reservoirs spread across the country on w eekly basis and issue Reservoir 
Storage Bulletin to various stakeholders including Ministry of Agriculture. During 12 
th  
Plan, telemetry system is also being installed on r eservoirs so as to automatically 
know reservoirs storage status. 
 Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is carrying out assessment of ground 
water resources periodically after every two years in association with states.  The 
assessment of ground water resources involves estim ation of annual replenishable 
ground water resources (recharge), annual ground wa ter draft (utilization) and the 
percent of utilization with respect to recharge (st age of development) and the net 
ground water availability for future irrigation use.     
 As per the latest assessment made by the CWC in 20 10, the live storage 
capacity of completed projects is 253.388 billion c ubic meter (BCM) , the live storage 
capacity of project under construction and under co nsideration for construction by 
various State Governments are 50.969 BCM and 104 BC M respectively, totalling 
about 408 BCM.  The State Governments are identifyi ng additional storage/ diversion 
projects for making full use of available surface water. 

29 
 
 The present long range forecasting system based on  the statistical models has 
shown some useful results in predicting the all Ind ia season rainfall and this method 
has performed better than the earlier models. Minis try of Earth Sciences (MoES) has 
recently launched an ambitious project (Monsoon Mis sion) to improve monsoon 
forecast in short range (3 days), medium range (7 d ays), extended range (15 days to 
one month) and seasonal range (3 months) time scale . Indian Institute of Tropical 
Meteorology (IITM), Pune is coordinating and workin g along with different climate 
research centres from India and abroad on the devel opment of a coupled Climate 
Forecast System (CFS) model for seasonal and extend ed range forecast of Indian 
summer monsoon rainfall.  National Centre for Mediu m Range Weather Forecast 
(NCMRWF), Noida has been engaged to improve Global Forecasting System (GFS) 
for short and medium range.  India Meteorological Department (IMD) has responsibility 
to run GFS for operational weather forecast and iss ued medium range weather 
forecast for seven parameters viz. rainfall, maximum and minimum temperatures, wind 
speed and direction, relative humidity and cloudine ss quantitatively for the next five 
days at district level.  The accuracy of short rang e weather forecast is about 70-95% 
and for medium range weather forecast (rainfall) is  of the order of 75-85% in monsoon 
and more than 85% in non-monsoon period.  
Gramin Krishi Mausam Sewa (GKMS) project has been i nitiated during XII Plan 
with the objective to downscale existing district l evel Agromet Advisory Service (AAS) 
to block level which will enable farmers to take up  sowing and other farm operations 
more judiciously. 
(Ministry of Agriculture,  Department of Agricultur e & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
 
 
 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 11) 
 

30 
 
 It is observed from the State-wise data regarding exploitation of underground 
water that Punjab has the highest percentage of exp loitation of ground water at 80 
percent followed by Delhi (74 percent), Rajasthan ( 69 percent), Haryana (59 percent) 
and Tamil Nadu (36 percent).  As regards salinity o f ground water found in 71 units, 
Andhra Pradesh leads with 38 units followed by Guja rat (14 units) and Tripura (11 
units).  It appears that adoption of direct seeding  of paddy reduces the exploitation of 
underground water upto 66 to 75 percent when compar ed to transplanted rice.  The 
Committee desire that factual position in this rega rd be ascertained, practicability of 
direct seeding of paddy examined and if the outcome  is positive, urgent measures be 
taken to propagate the method in all the aforesaid States. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 Direct-seeded rice (DSR) is a feasible alternative  to conventional puddled 
transplanted rice with good potential to save water , reduce labour requirement, 
mitigate green-house gas (GHG) emission and adapt t o climatic risks. Rice is direct-
seeded by two methods viz., dry and wet seeding bas ed on the physical condition of 
crop field. Dry seeding is practiced in rainfed low land, upland and flood-prone areas. 
Wet seeding is common practice in irrigated areas.  It offers several advantages like 
faster and easier establishment, reduced labour and  less drudgery, earlier crop 
maturity by 7-10 days, more efficient water use and  higher tolerance to water deficit, 
and often higher profit in areas with an assured wa ter supply. The system has been 
proved to be cost-effective and farmers’ friendly b ut requires further improvement in 
technological approach to realize greater benefits.  
Punjab is a water scarce state and water table is c onstantly going down in the 
state. Paddy which is a major crop in the state con sumes more than 50% of water 
consumed in agriculture. Traditionally, paddy is gr own by planting seeds in a small 
nursery and manually transplanting the paddy saplin gs.  The seasonal water 
requirement of puddle low-land transplanted rice an d aerobic (direct seeded) rice in 
tropical climate is in the range of 1650-3000 mm and 935 mm . 

31 
 
  DSR is being propagated in various states through  Crop development 
programmes Like NFSM, BGREI and RKVY by organizing demonstrations on farmer’s 
field in all rice growing states.  ICAR, SAUs and i nternational organizations like 
CIMMYT, IRRI also conducted demonstrations on DSR t o envisage the benefits of 
water and energy in comparison to conventional transplanting. 
(Ministry of Agriculture,  Department of Agricultur e & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 12) 
 
 The Committee urge that the results of the project  on reclamation and 
management of water-logged and saline soils, carrie d out by the Central Soil Salinity 
Research Institute, Kerala and the experiment carri ed out by the All India Coordinated 
Research Project on Ground Water Utilisation, Ludhiana, which has indicated potential 
of saving irrigation water upto 20-30 percent by ad opting the laser land leveling 
technique, need to be published so that similar pro jects are taken up for 
implementation, subject to viability. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 A number of technical/extension bulletins and leafl ets have been published by 
ICAR and SAUs  are as under: 
• Extension Bulletin on Laser Leveller for precision  land leveling for judicious use 
of water in Punjab, Krishi Vigyan Kendra , Kapurthala, PAU, Ludhiana. 
• Extension leaflet on Precision land leveling for i mproving water productivity 
published by CSSRI, Karnal. 
• Technical bulletin on “Laser Land Leveling: A Prec ursor Technology for 
Resource Conservation”.  Rice-Wheat Consortium Bulletin Series7, New Delhi. 
• Manual for Laser Land Leveling, Rice-Wheat Consort ium Technical Bulletin 
Series 5 (under NATP). New Delhi – 110012 (ref.p.156/cor.)   

32 
 
 Laser Land Leveler is also being promoted under NF SM and RKVY to reduce 
the requirement of irrigation water. 
(Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture  & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 14) 
 
 The Committee note that the `Seed Bank Scheme’ has  been implemented by 
the Seed Division of the DAC from 1999-2000 with th e objective of meeting 
requirements of seeds during natural calamities and  unforeseen conditions.  The 
objective of the scheme is to address the contingen cy salvation, if the first crop sown 
by the farmer has failed.  The Committee would like  to be informed as to why such 
Seed Banks have not been established in the States of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu 
and Kashmir and North-East States and when these St ates will be covered under the 
scheme.  
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 Seed Bank Scheme is open to all State Governments/ State Seeds Corporations 
who are required to submit proposals for financial assistance for revolving funds as per 
the requirement of seeds to be maintained in Seed b anks for contingency situation 
(natural calamity/unforeseen conditions) in their state. 
 As far as North-East-States are concerned, Assam S eeds Cooperation is 
participating in this programme regularly.  To meet  the requirement of seeds of other 
NE States for contingency situation, the National S eeds Corporation (NSC), State 
Farm Corporation of India (SFCI), Uttarakhand and T arai Development Seeds 
Corporation (UK&TDC) are maintaining the seeds.   
 Ministry of Agriculture,  Department of Agricultur e & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 

33 
 
(Please see para No. 1.21 of Chapter-I) 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 16) 
 
 The Minimum Support Price (MSP) can be used as an instrument to promote 
crop diversification by announcing higher prices of  certain commodities in comparison 
to others.  The Committee, however, note that MSP a s an instrument of crop 
diversification can be effective only if all the St ates are capable of undertaking large 
scale procurement operation.  As majority of the St ates do not have proper 
procurement infrastructure, the Committee desire th at the Centre should take 
necessary steps to ensure that States strengthen th e existing system of implementing 
MSP in order to promote crop diversification in the country.  
 
Reply by the Government 
 
  Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Dis tribution has taken various 
steps  to strengthen procurement of  crop produce  are as under: 
• Before the start of every marketing season, conven es a meeting of State Food 
Secretaries, FCI and other stake holders to prepare  a detailed action plan for making 
the arrangements of procurement in the coming marke ting season. Details of number 
of procurement centres to be opened and arrangement s like purchase of packaging 
material and storage space are discussed in the meeting.  
 
• Sufficient numbers of procurement centres are open ed by FCI/State Government 
agencies in consultation with the State Governments  procurement keeping in view the 
procurement potential and geographical spread of th e State concerned. Review is 
made from time to time on the need for additional p rocurement centres, if any, during 
the procurement season and required additional procurement centres are also opened. 
 
• In view of National Food Security Act (NFSA), the Government has decided to revise 
the policy of procurement and distribution of coars e grains providing for active role of 
FCI also along with the state agencies for their pr ocurement and the distribution on 

34 
 
priority under Mid Day Meal (MDM) or Integrated Chi ld Development Scheme (ICDS) 
Schemes, besides  Targeted Public Distribution System ( TPDS). 
 
• It is not the exclusive responsibility of the Gove rnment of India alone and the State 
Governments are also required to make requisite arr angements for procurement of 
foodgrains at MSP so that the farmers do not have to resort to distress sale. Majority of 
the procurement of wheat, rice and coarse grains is done through State Agencies. 
(Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture  & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013.)  

35 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 17)  
 Marketing and processing are the two basic pre-req uisite for promoting crop 
diversification.  According to DAC, rural marketing  systems needs to be strengthened 
and modernized.  The foremost requirement for the s ame is to promote storage and 
processing facilities to avoid the loss of agri-hor ti produce.  The Committee would like 
to be informed as to what action has been taken in this regard and the targets and 
achievements during each year of the last three years. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
Schemes on Development/Strengthening of Agricultura l Marketing 
Infrastructure ,Grading and Standardization (AMIGS)  and Gramin Bhandaran 
Yojana (GBY) are being implemented for grading and standardization of produce. 
 The physical targets and achievements of storage a nd primary processing 
facilities developed during last three years since 2010-12 under both schemes 
are as under:  
S. 
No. 
Period AMIGS 
(in number) 
GBY 
(in lakh tonnes) 
  Target Achievement  Target Achievemen 
t  
1 2010-
11 
520 1173 20 26.62 
2 2011-
12 
520 1317 20 33.92 
3 2012-
13 
400 1259 45 89.73  
 
 Food Corporation of India(FCI) undertakes the func tions of procurement, storage, 
movement and distribution of foodgrains only (prima rily wheat & rice).  Besides, its 
own storage capacities, FCI are utilizing hired cap acities from Central Warehousing 

36 
 
Corporation (CWC),  State Warehousing Corporations (SWCs) , State Governments 
and private parties.  
• Creation of Storage capacity under Plan Scheme: FC I’s owned capacity is created 
under the Plan Scheme approved by GOI under five ye ar plans. There is a proposal to 
augment 6, 10,860 MT capacity for food grain godown s by FCI during 12th Five Year Plan 
(2012-17). This includes 5,34,640 MT  in North East  Areas including Sikkim and 76,220 
MT capacity in the areas other than North East. The  details of targets and capacity 
completed under Plan Scheme during last three years i.e. 2010-11, 2011-12 & 2012-13 are 
given as below:  
Year Target Achievement  
2010-11 7500 MT  5000 MT 
2011-12 20825 MT 11255 MT 
2012-13 13360 MT 4570 MT 
Grand Total  41685 MT 20825 MT 
 
 
  
• Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) creates scie ntific storage facilities together 
with grading and analysis facilities. During the last three years, following has been the 
position towards achievements viz. a viz. targets f or creating storage capacity by 
CWC: 
  
Year Target Achievements 
2010-11 1.77 1.45 
2011-12 2.06 2.09 
2012-13 2.10 2.35 
  
• In addition to construction of storage capacity un der Plan Scheme, Government of 
India/FCI has formulated a scheme called Private En trepreneurs Guarantee (PEG) 

37 
 
Scheme for construction of storage capacity through  Private Entrepreneurs, CWC & 
SWCs. Under (PEG) scheme, a capacity of 203.76 lakh  MT has been approved for 
construction of godowns at various locations in 19 States. Out of this, a capacity of 
111.11 LMT has been sanctioned to private investors  and a capacity of 7.76 LMT & 
29.28 LMT has been allotted to CWC & SWCs respectiv ely. Thus the total capacity 
sanctioned/ allotted is 148.15 lakh MT. A capacity of 77.98 lakh MT has already been 
created under the scheme.  
 This Department is implementing the Central Sector Scheme " Agri-
business Development through Venture 'Capital and P roject Development 
Facility for development of the agri- business sect or in the country ". The 
targets and achievements of the scheme during each year of the last three years 
are as under:  
 
Year Physical 
Target 
Physical 
Achievement  
Processing 
Units 
Cold 
Storage 
2010-11 65 85 66 19 
2011-12 65 121 75 46 
2012-13 100 125 61 64 
 
 During the XI Plan, Venture Capital Assistance (VC A) has been sanctioned 
to the tune of Rs 120.17 Crore for 409 projects acr oss the country benefitting 
approximately 48685 farmers for procurement of thei r produce and generating 
employment to approximately 30710 persons in rural areas with total investment 
leverage of Rs. 1461.02 Crores.  
 Under National Horticulture Mission (NHM) 714 cold  storage projects have 
been sanctioned with a capacity of 43.11 lakh MT si nce 2005-06 to address 
issues on post harvest management. In addition, 18 CA storage , 57 refrigerated 
vans, 1160 mobile/ primary processing , 3893 low co st onion storage structures, 
135 ripening chambers,608 evaporative/low energy co ol chambers and 21410 
Pusa zero energy cool chambers were established. Be sides, for facilitating better 
marketing facilities, 25 wholesale markets, 237 rur al markets, 160 functional 
infrastructures for collection, grading etc, 33 ret ail markets/ outlets were 

38 
 
established. 
 
 Under Horticulture Mission for North East and Hima layan States (HMNEH), 
cold storage capacity of 1.80 lakh MT has been crea ted. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture,  Department of Agricultur e & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 18) 
 
 According to the Report of Central Institute of Po st-Harvest Engineering and 
Technology, the post-harvest losses of fruits and v egetables were found to be in the 
range of 5.8-18 per cent.  The Committee find that cold storage in the country is 
hugely lopsided in respect of only one commodity-po tatoes.  It is observed from the 
commodity-wise distribution of cold storage in the country that the cold storage 
capacity meant for fruits and vegetables is as litt le as 0.39 per cent whereas the 
capacity for potatoes is 75.36 per cent and multipurpose cold storage capacity is 23.09 
per cent.  The Committee hardly need to emphasize t hat the serious imbalance in cold 
storage capacity requires to be addressed urgently with a view to promoting 
production of fruits and vegetables and other horti culture produce and to prevent 
distress sale of produce by farmers. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 Creation of infrastructure facilities such as pack  houses, cold storages, 
Controlled Atmosphere  (CA) storage, Ref Vans, etc are being promoted unde r NHM, 
HMNEH and NHB schemes.  Besides, a 
National  Centre for Cold-chain Development 
(NCCD)  has been constituted in DAC to provide further stim ulus to cold chain sector.  
States are being encouraged to go in for multi-comm odity multi-chamber cold storage 
units. 

39 
 
 Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MFPI) is a lso operating a plan scheme 
to provide financial assistance to project proposal s for cold chain infrastructure 
development.  63 cold chain projects approved   to create 146861 MT of cold storage, 
97257 MT of CA/MA storage, 19300 MT of deep freezer , 81.1 lakh litre per day of milk 
storage, 43.2 MT per hour of IQF and 314 numbers of reefer carriers.    
This department is implementing the Central Sector Scheme “Agri-business 
Development through Venture Capital and Project Dev elopment Facility for 
development of agri- Business sector in the country .  The objective of Venture Capital 
Assistant (VCA) Scheme is to capitalize rural infra structure and create non-farm 
employment. A comparative statement of potatoes vis -à-vis multipurpose cold storage 
for the last three years assisted under the schemes is as under:  
Year Cold Storage Cold Storage 
(Potatoes) 
Cold Storage 
(Multipurpose) 
2010-11  19 0 19 
2011-12  46 11 35 
2012-
13 
64 42 22 
 
 
 The activities proposed to be undertaken by these projects are exclusively 
linked with the farmers by way of backward linkages  providing assured market to them 
for selling their produce comparatively at better p rice. The backward linkages with 
farmers in these projects are made compulsory in or der to ensure that promoters 
extended assured market to them for purchasing their produce as raw material.  
(Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture  & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013.) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 1.27 of Chapter-I)  
  

40 
 
                                                        CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
                                                                       
 
                                                                        -NIL- 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDTIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 7) 
 
 The Committee are also of the firm view that the p roactive measures are 
necessary to increase the percentage share of cropp ed areas for coarse cereals, 
which can be grown in regions characterized by scan ty rainfall, and wastelands as 
there is still 46.71 million hectare of wastelands in the country according to the 
Wastelands Atlas of India (2011).  The Committee fe el that the Ministry of Agriculture 
in coordination with the Ministry of Rural Developm ent undertake identification and 
reclamation of wastelands and its use for cultivati ng coarse grains for expanding 
diversified agriculture.  The Committee would like this aspect to be examined and 
necessary action taken expeditiously under intimation to them. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 Ministry of Rural Development is implementing Maha tma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA). The various act ivities permitted under 
MGNREGA for reclamation of wasteland are like const ruction of irrigation canals, land 
development, digging of farm ponds, horticulture pl antation, farm bunding on land or 
homestead owned by households belonging to the Sche duled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes or below poverty line families. The other ac tivities are permitted such as 
NADEP composting, vermi-composting, liquid bio-manu res especially in context of 
small and marginal farmers for reclamation of lands . Ministry of Agriculture is 
implementing INSIMP programme for promotion of cult ivation of millets including 
wastelands in all major coarse cereal growing states.  The cultivation of coarse cereals 
would be undertaken under NFSM during XII Plan to i ncrease area and productivity of 
coarse cereals in all major coarse cereals growing states.  
 (Ministry of Agriculture,  Department of Agricultu re & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, date 13.11.2013) 

42 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 1.15 of Chapter-I) 
 
 Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 9) 
 
The Committee feel that there is need for sustained  and accelerated efforts to 
considerably augment production of horticultural/pl antation crops in view of the 
changing dietary pattern and growing demand for fru its/vegetables.  Further, the huge 
potential in North-East States and the sub-Himalaya n Northern States endowed with 
necessary agro-climatic conditions for horticultura l plantation, must be fully harnessed 
by proper planning and setting targets. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 During 2001-02, Department of Agriculture & Cooper ation, Ministry of 
Agriculture launched Technology Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture in 
North-Eastern States (TMNE). The mission was furthe r was extended to three 
Himalayan States of Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Prade sh and Uttarakhand in 2003-
04 and renamed as Horticulture Mission for North- E ast and Himalayan States 
(HMNEH) for covering all districts of the states in  the year 2010-11. The Mission 
covers entire spectrum of horticulture right from p roduction to consumption through 
backward and forward linkages.  
 The  various components covered under the Mission are production of planting 
material of horticulture crops and vegetable seeds in public and private sector, area 
expansion with improved varieties of horticulture c rops and protected cultivation, 
rejuvenation/ replanting of senile plantations, tis sue culture laboratories, centre of 
excellence in public sector, creation of water reso urces, organic farming, horticulture, 
mechanization , pollination supports through bee ke eping, mushroom development, 
promotion of integrated nutrient & pest management harvest management & 
marketing infrastructure and setting up of processing units. 

43 
 
   The area under fruits and vegetables in HMNEH st ates has increased from 1.4 
million ha in 2001-02 to 2.0 million ha in 2011-12 with corresponding increase in 
production from 10.1 million tonnes to 16.5 million  tonnes due to implementation of 
HMNEH. During 2012-13, area and production of fruit s and vegetables is estimated at 
2.1 million ha and 17 million tonnes, respectively. 
 The total approved outlay for HMNEH for the XII Pl an is Rs. 3000.00 crore. An 
amount of Rs. 550.00 crore has been earmarked for t he current year 2013-14, of 
which Rs. 400.00 crore for North Eastern States and  Rs. 150.00 crore for Himalayan 
States. 
 In order to maintain the growth momentum of hortic ulture sector, HMNEH 
activities are proposed to be continued during the XII plan period with more focus on 
productivity improvement measures coupled with crea tion of infrastructure for post 
harvest management, marketing and processing.   
Ministry of Food Processing Industries has launched  “National Mission on Food 
Processing” (NMFP) during the XII (2012-13).The Sta tes/UTs have been provided 
flexibility to take up new schemes under NMFP to su it their local requirements keeping 
in view the availability of raw material in the res pective states.  The Mission is likely to 
help the States to realize the potential of Food Pr ocessing Sector particularly for 
various Agri-horticulture.  
(Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture  & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 1.18 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
  
  

44 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY 
OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 13) 
 
The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the DAC  to train the Common 
Service Centre operators in Agriculture with a view  to enhancing their capacity to 
address specific queries from the farmers including  those relating to crop 
diversification.   Since the facility of disseminat ion of information through CSC has 
been rolled out only in a few States i.e. Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Assam, 
Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Karnataka and Kerala, the C ommittee stress that steps 
should be taken to extend the facility in all State s within a time frame under intimation 
to the Committee.  
 
Reply by the Government  
 The training of the Common Service Center operator s is planned during Phase-
II of National e-Governance Programme in Agricultur e (NeGP-A) project which is part 
of National Mission on Agriculture Extension and Te chnology. In addition to this, 
access to Kisan Knowledge management System is bein g extended to Common 
Service Center operators in all the states. Once co mpleted, same will enable the CSC 
operators to receive the agriculture related querie s from the farmers and escalate the 
same to the officers concerned. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture  & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
 
Observations/ Recommendations (Sl. No. 15) 
According the Department of Agriculture and Coopera tion, promotion of 
contract farming, land leasing and land sharing Com pany with some adaptation would 
lead to desired vertical integration of all aspects  of diversification leading to rural 

45 
 
transformation.  The Committee feel that such refor ms in land use policy ought to be 
preceded by a thorough study of merits and de-merit s, impact on landless labourers 
and agricultural population, establishment of regul atory mechanism and so on.  The 
Committee suggest that an expert Committee be forme d to go into all aspects of the 
matter in depth and the Committee be informed of its recommendations.  
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 The Committee of State Ministers, In-charge of Agr iculture Marketing to 
Promote Reforms in its Final Report submitted in Ja nuary, 2013 has made the 
following recommendations in respect of contract farming: 
(3) To encourage contracting parties and simplifyin g and rationalizing the registration 
process: 
 
(c) District level authority may be set up for Regi stration of Contract Farming 
and no market fee should be levied under it. The AP MC should not be the 
authority for registration/dispute settlement under Contract Farming; and 
 
(d) The disputes may be settled within fifteen days  and the decretal amount of 
appeal should not be more than 10% of the amount of  goods purchased 
under Contract Farming. Appeal should be disposed o ff within 15 days.  No 
solvency certificate/Bank guarantee may be required  from private 
sponsor/operator, if payment is made to the farmers  on the same day of 
procurement of  their produce; 
 
(4) States should promote small and marginal Farmer s’ Groups/Associations or their 
Company/Society to encourage Contract Farming in th e States.  Successful 
template of Contract Farming may be developed after  studying the successful 
Models adopted in other countries. 
 

46 
 
State Governments have been asked to convey views o n policy recommendations 
of the Committee. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation O.M. No. 1-3/2013-
CU-II, dated 13.11.2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 1.24 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
19 December, 2013             
 
Agrahayana 28,1935(Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
 
  

47 
 
MINUTES OF TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES         
(2013-2014)  
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18 th  December, 2013 from 1045 hrs. 
to .... hrs. in Room No. 52-B, (Chairman’s Chamber) , Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
          Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2 Shri Khagen Das  
3  Shri K. Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
4 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
5 Shri Prabodh Panda 
6 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
7 Shri S. Seemmalai 
8 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
9 Smt Annu Tandon 
10 Shri Mukul Wasnik 
11 Shri Omprakash Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
       1. Shri M. Louis Martin              -        Joint Secretary 
       2. Smt. Anita B. Panda    -   Director 
       3. Shri Srinavasulu Gunda        -         Additional Director 
       4. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar    -   Deputy Secre tary 
       5. Shri U.C. Bharadwa              j-        Deputy Secretary 

48 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the 
Committee. Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
(i) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
(ii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
(iii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
(iv) Action Taken Report on the Recommendations con tained in the Twenty Third 
Report of the Committee on Estimates (2012-13) on ‘ Crop Diversification’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Departme nt of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) as approved by the Study Group of Committee on Estimates. 
3. The Committee adopted the abovementioned Reports  without any modification. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalise the above reports after 
factual verification by the Ministries concerned and present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
. 
  

49 
 
APPENDIX II  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE R ECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY THIRD REPORT OF THE COMMITT EE ON ESTIMATES 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 18  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, & 18) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
 
 
14 
 
78% 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committe e do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
Nil 
 
 
0% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
(Sl. Nos. 7 & 9)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
11% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final 
replies of Government is still awaited. 
(Sl. No. 13 & 15) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
 
2 
 
11% 
 
 