17 
 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
 
INDIAN PORTS – INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT & 
CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES] 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2011-2012) 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
 
 
INDIAN PORTS – INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT & 
CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) pertaining 
to the Ministry of Shipping on the subject „Indian Ports – 
Infrastructure Development & Capacity Enhancement] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2012 / Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 


EC No.________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: ` ________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General 
Manager, Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi – 110002. 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2011-12) (ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
25 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government‟s reply 
 
32 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
Government‟s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
34 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
45 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Annexure-I as quoted in the Action Taken Reply by 
the Ministry in response to Recommendation of the 
Committee in Para No.5.2 
 
48 
II Annexure-II as quoted in the Action Taken Reply by 
the Ministry in response to Recommendation of the 
Committee in Para No.5.2 
 
65 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee on 
Estimates held on 19th April, 2012 
 
 
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 
Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of Committee on 
Estimates  
 
75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-12) 
 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
 Members 
 
2 Shri Raj Babbar  
3 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
4 Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer  
5 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty  
6 Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
7 Shri Dhruvanarayana  
8 Shri T. K. S. Elangovan  
9 Shri Ninong Ering  
10 Shri Prahlad Venkatesh Joshi  
11 Shri P. Karunakaran  
12 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru  
13 Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
14 Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
15 Shri Datta Meghe  
16 Shri Prabodh Panda  
17 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
18 Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
19 Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia  
20 Shri S. Semmalai  
21 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi  
22 Shri M. I. Shanavas  
23 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
24 Shri Ganesh Singh  
25 Shri Ijyaraj Singh  
26 Shri Jagada Nand Singh  
27 Shri Radha Mohan Singh  
28 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
29 Smt. Annu Tandon  
30 Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  1.        Shri P.K Grover    -         Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri S.C. Chaudhary  - Director  
  3.        Smt. Anita B. Panda           -         Additional Director  
  4. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2011-12) having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Seventeenth Report on 
action taken by the Government on the R ecommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the subject „ Indian 
Ports – Infrastructure Development & Capacity Enhancement ‟ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Shipping.  
 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22 November, 2010. The 
Government furnished their replies indicating action taken on the recommendations 
contained in that Report on 20 October, 2011 .  The Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 19 April, 2012.  
 
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  of Committee 
on Estimates is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
24th April, 2012              
Vaisakha  4,1934 (Saka) 
 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 
 
  

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Committee on Estimates deals with the act ion taken by 
Government on the R ecommendations/Observations contained in the Ninth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject „Indian Ports – Infrastructure Development & 
Capacity Enhancement‟ pertaining to the Ministry of Shipping. 
 
1.2 In their Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 22 nd November 2010, the Committee had examined in detail various issues 
concerning specific programmes and schemes for the capacity enhancement and 
infrastructure development of port sector, for instance, operating cost ratio, private 
sector participation, productivity, hig her turnaround time & international standards, 
transshipment facility, dredging capacity, hinterland connectivity, security, 
environmental clearance, coastal shipping development, corporatization of ports etc.    
 
1.3 Action Taken Notes in respect of the 16 R ecommendations/Observations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of Shipping  and 
categorized as under: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Sl. Nos. 5.1, 5.4, 5.6, 5.8, 5.10, 5.12 and 5.13             Total:    07 
Chapter: II 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s reply: 
 Sl. Nos.  5.16        Total:    01  
Chapter: III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government‟s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 Sl. Nos. 5.2, 5.3, 5.5, 5.7, & 5.11    Total:       05 
Chapter:  IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: 
 Sl. Nos. 5.9, 5.14 & 5.15     Total:      03 
Chapter:  V 

 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to the 
implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted by the 
Government.  In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement the 
Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
further desire that Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in Chapter -I and Final A ction Taken Replies to the Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early 
date. 
 
1.5 Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Shipping have been 
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The C ommittee will now deal 
with the action taken by the Government on some of their Recommendations/  
Observations which need reiteration or merit comments.  

A. Implementation of various Projects under National Maritime Development 
Programme (NMDP) 
  
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 5.2) 
 
1.6 The Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note the initiative of the Ministry to formulate the National 
Maritime Development Programme (NMDP) as a flagship programme which 
aims for large -scale infrastructure development in all the major ports and their 
capacity enhancement during the period 2009 -2012 in two phases. It is a large 
scale programme spread over all the major ports with participation of the private 
sector as well. However, the Committ ee find that the progress in the 
implementation of the projects under the NMDP  is far from satisfactory. Out of a 
total of 276 projects with an investment of ` 55.804 crore, which are scheduled 
to be completed by the year 2011 -12, only 53 projects of 64.88  million metric 
tonne capacity are complete and 77 projects are under implementation. 25 
projects have been dropped and the rest 127 projects are yet to start as those 
are in various stages of planning , approval and  awarding. The Committee also 
note that the port capacity as on 31.03.2009 was 574.77 million metric tonnes & 
the utilization was 530.39 million metric tonnes which was above 90 percent of 
capacity utilization. The C ommittee note that the traffic forecast for major ports 
as per the Ministr y‟s Perspective Plan, is projected to be 739.14 million metric 
tonnes in 2011 -12 reaching up to 1595.07 million metric tonnes in 2025 -26. 
Thus, the Committee note with dismay that the Ministry has not been able to 
create adequate capacity of major p orts to accomm odate further rapid increase 
in traffic. Since the Ministry had formulated the NMDP after extensiv e 
assessment and feedback from major port authorities, users and trade 
requirements, the Committee fail to understand as to why not even 25 percent of 
the targeted projects could be achieved under NMDP. The tardy progress makes 
it evident that all 276 projects will not be completed by the end of 11 th Five Year 
Plan and would be carried forward thus resulting in massive cost overruns. The 
Committee further note that perhaps realizing this, the Minist ry has decided to 
create a new Perspective Plan for the Maritime sector for Twelfth and Thirteenth 
Five Year Plan upto the year 2020. The Committee hope that the said Plan 
would be prepared urgently and realistic year -wise targets would be set 
alongwith appropriate mechanism to ensure its implementation. The C ommittee 
would like to be apprised of the progres s on the  matter. At the same time, the 
Committee, deplore the prevailing situation and would like to be apprised of the 
reason attributed to the delay as well as dropping of projects. The Committee 
expect the Government to understand the significance and i mpact of timely 
completion of projects under NMDP on the business carried by the m ajor ports, 
as these ports are already facing stiff competition from a number of minor ports 
functioning in States like Gujarat, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. 
 
As regards spe cific projects, the Committee are constrained to note that 
infrastructure projects at Mumbai and Paradip ports have missed their 
completion dates and the same has been revised. For instance, the project of 
construction of the 2nd Chemical berth of Pir Pau,  that was scheduled to be 
completed by March 2010 at Mumbai Port was later assigned a new date in July 
2012. Similarly the channel deepening project at Paradip Port missed its 

completion date of January, 2009 and was anticipated to be completed by June, 
2010. As missing timelines would result in hug e cost overruns, the Committee 
exhort the Min istry to  make realistic claims and timelines based on better 
planning and execution.  
 
The Committee also note with concern that against the internationa l standard of 
a gap of about 30 percent  between the installed capacity and the traffic, the gap 
in major ports is just 8 percent  which, in turn has led to a substantial increase in 
waiting time for the ships. Due to heavy traffic and over utilization of capacity, the 
maintenance work of machines at the ports also suffers as there is hardly any 
idle capacity to relay the work for maintenance. Consequently, this can be 
hazardous to life and limb of port workers as well as detrimental to the 
functioning of the port. The Com mittee observe that with the country growi ng at 
the rate of 9 percent  and the manufacturing sector at 12 percent,  it is imperative 
that the ports sector matches with the pace as facilitator of the international trade 
which enables the country‟s economy to grow at a faster rate.  
 
In this backdrop, the Committee desire that the Ministry should monitor all the 
ongoing projects under NMDP on regular basis and ensure timely completion of 
all projects. The Committee hope that 77 projects under implementation wil l be 
completed within the set timelines. The Committee feel that all other pr ojects 
which are in various stages of finalization and awarding should be executed with 
due promptitude. The Committee desire that the Ministry should furnish a 
statement enlisting all completed projects, as on date, under NMDP and status 
of hitherto incomplete projects alongwith reasons for delay to them. The 
Committee exhort the Ministry to be proactive about traffic forecasting and 
capacity addition. It is of paramount importanc e to focus on adequate capacity 
and high productivity in order to render services of an international standard by 
all major ports.” 
 
 
1.7 The Ministry of Shipping, in their action taken reply, inter-alia stated as under:- 
“ 
1. Under the National Maritime Development Programme (NMDP) formulated by 
the Ministry of Shipping, 276 projects to be taken up for implementation over the 
period from 01.04.2005 to 31.03.2012. Total investment involved under the 
Programme is ` 1,00,339 crores at 2004-05 prices.  Out of this, ` 55,804 crores 
is for the Port Sector and the balance is for the Shipping and Inland Water 
Transport Sectors.   
 
2. In the major p orts, projects undertaken under National Maritime Development 
Programme cover the entire gamut of activities, namely construction/upgradation 
of berths, deepening of channels, rail/road connectivity projects, equipment 
upgradation/modernization schemes and other related schemes for creation of 
backup facilities. 
 
3. The scheme-wise distribution of pr ojects and the estimated cost along with the 
pattern of funding is shown below:  
 

(` in Crore) 
Project Head No. of 
Projects 
Budgetary 
Support 
Internal 
Resources  
Private 
Investment  
Others Total  
Deepening of 
channels/ berths, 
etc. 
25 2731.00 3340.00 185.00 48.00 6304.00 
Construction/ 
reconstruction of 
berths/ jetties, 
etc. 
76 563.00 3867.33 28083.24 50.00 32563.57 
Procurement of 
Equipments, etc. 
52 0.00 1427.87 1075.00 130.00 2632.87 
Rail and Road 
connectivity 
works  
45 90.00 2232.24 0.00 3634.25 5956.49 
Others 78 225.00 2904.10 5162.10 55.60 8346.80 
Total 276 3609.00 13771.54 34505.34 3917.85 55803.73 
 
4. As on 30.07.2011 total 67 projects involving an investment of  ` 7187.85 crores 
have been completed and 70 projects are under progress envisaging an 
investment of  ` 18583.04(Annexure-I) 
 
5. The newly formulated Maritime Agenda 2010 -2020 has projected the traffic vis -
à-vis capacity projection for the 12 th FYP and by the y ear 2020 with specific port 
capacity augmenting projects for all the major ports as well minor ports in the 
States.(Annexure-II) 
 
6. A total of 29 projects under PPP mode have been completed & made operational 
creating an additional capacity of 198.46 MMT wit h investment of about ` 
8367.04 crores. After standardization of model Concession agreement (MCA) 
documents in 2008, the award of PPP projects in port sector has taken off at a 
faster pace. In the year 2009 -10, 13 PPP  port projects were awarded in m ajor 
ports for Capacity of 75.24 MMT with proposed investment of ` 4120.39 crore. In 
the year 2010 -11, a total of 9 PPP port projects were awarded for a capacity of 
51.76 MMT with proposed investment of ` 3194.80 crore. During the current 
financial year 2011 -12, a total of 23 nos. of PPP projects in port sector have 
been identified and targeted to be awarded for capacity of 230.37 MMT & 
proposed investment of ` 16672.62 crores. 
 
7. To monitor the timely award of PPP Projects in port sector, milestones for award 
of projects have been specified and regular monitoring and follow up is taken up 
with major ports and the concerned Ministries/Departments. 
 
The reasons for delay in respect of projects are given in statement placed at 
Annexure-1”. 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.8 Observing that the progress made in the implementation of various 
projects under National Maritime Development Programme  (NMDP) is far from 
satisfactory, the Committee , in their original Report, had desired the Ministry of 
Shipping to monitor all the on -going projects on regular basis for the ir timely 
completion. It was in this context, the Committee had urged that the Ministry 
should furnish a statement delineating the projects, which have been completed  
under NMDP and status hitherto of the incomplete projects alongwith the 
reasons for their delay.  Further, it was recommended that the Ministry ought to 
be proactive about traffic forecasting and capacity addition to ensure that 
services rendered by all major ports in India are of international standard.   
However, the Committee are concern ed to note from the action taken reply , that 
the matter has not been accorded the urgency and importance it deserves, 
especially when the Committee in their earlier Report had pointed out that not 
even 25 percent of the targeted projects could be achieved inspite of the deadline 
for their completion by the year 2011-12.    
In the action taken reply, the Committee have been informed by the 
Ministry that as on 30 July, 2011,  67 projects could be completed with an 
investment of ` 7187.85 crore and 70 projects are under progress with a 
projected investment of ` 18583.04 crores.  This clearly indicates that so far the 
Ministry has been able to spend only 12.88 percent out of the total projected 
outlay of ` 100,399 crore provid ed for the port sector during the entire Eleventh 
Plan. Even if the envisaged expenditure for the ongoing projects is taken into 
account, the percentage of utilisation of outlays comes out to be only 46.18 
percent.  The situation is alarming as the Ministry has miserably failed to perform 
both financially and physically in implementing the various projects under NMDP. 

The Committee while taking a serious view of the current state of affairs, would, 
once again, like to emphasize the need to ensure optimum ut ilisation of outlays 
provided for the projects. They would also like the Ministry to step up monitoring 
efforts for ensuring that the projects are completed by the stipulated timeline.   
Another disturbing revelation is that the financial projections for 
investment in the port sector of ` 100,339 crores, which has been quoted by the 
Ministry in their reply is at 2004 -05 prices.  The Committee cannot understand as 
to why the costing was not revised as per the prices which were prevailing 
during the beginning  year of the Eleventh Plan i.e. 2007 -08.  The Committee 
would like to know the factual position in this regard.  In case, no revision has 
been done, the Committee are inclined to conclude that the planning process of 
the Ministry has been completely outdat ed due to which the actual investment 
requirement might be far more than the projected one. The Committee strongly 
feel that the Ministry should take stock of the situation and take suitable remedial 
action to ensure realistic assessment of the investment required for the port 
projects during Twelfth Five Year Plan as per the current prices so that a clearer 
picture could emerge. 
Further, from analysis of a statement furnished by the Ministry regarding 
port-wise status of NMDP as on 31 July 2011, the Commit tee find that in the 
Chennai Port, out of the total of 14 projects under NMDP, 7 projects have been 
dropped i.e. in terms of percentage, the projects have been dropped by 50 
percent. The Committee fail to comprehend the reasons for such a huge drop in a 
major port which contributes significantly in the import -export activity in the 
country.  In this backdrop, the Committee would like the Ministry to specifically 
examine the reasons for the huge drop in the projects for Chennai port and its 
impact on the projected capacity of the port and inform them accordingly. 

Overall, the Committee are inclined to conclude that the Ministry has 
neither seriously planned their projects nor monitored all the ongoing projects to 
ensure their timely completion. Besides, the Ministry has avoided providing 
complete information sought  by the Committee on the steps taken to increase 
the installed capacity in relation to the traffic or any systematic and realistic 
analysis for traffic forecasting and the capacity addition in the various ports of 
the country. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
once again emphasize the Ministry to ensure that projects under NMDP are 
reviewed regularly and the remedial action taken on the identified grey areas for 
their timely completion. This would prevent adhocism in plann ing of the various 
projects which would ultimately percolate in achieving the desired gap between 
installed capacity and traffic as per the international standards.  Further, it would 
also provide better traffic forecasting and capacity addition to avoid o ver-
utilization of port capacity.  The Committee expect the Ministry to meticulously 
carry out action on the desired lines so that the port sector can grow at a faster 
rate and match the pace of economic growth of the country. At the same time, the 
Committee wish to point out that ports use many of the natural resources such 
as water and land which also affect the socio-economic fabric of the area around. 
Therefore, it should be made obligatory on the part of the port authorities to 
ensure that, as stipulat ed, they must spent one per cent of their net profit of the 
preceding year towards Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) for activities such 
as setting up schools, hospitals, creches, recreational centres and make 
available sanitation facilities, drinking water etc. for the welfare of the local 
populace residing the vicinity of the Ports. In this regard, the Committee would 
like to be apprised about the details of various activities carried out under CSR 
by each of the major ports in the country. 

 
B. Utilization of funds by major ports 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.3) 
 
1.9 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the major ports like Paradip Port, Kandla Port, 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port and Mumbai Port have not been able to utilize the funds 
allocated to them for development/maintenance work during the last 3 years. For 
example for Paradip port, out of total budgetary allocation of ` 83.40 crore in 
2006-07, expenditure was only ` 23.15 crore. D uring the year 2007 -08 out of ` 
100.00 crore, ` 42.05 crore were spent and in 2008 -09 out of ` 288.00 crore, ` 
101.47 crore were spent. The Committee find i t strange that on the one hand 
inadequate capacity and outdated machinery/infrastructure lead to inordinate 
delays, higher turnaround time and deficiency of service in the ports, yet, on the 
other hand the Port Authorities have not been able to utilize fun ds available to 
them for the purpose. The Ministry‟s sta nd that long procedures of non -standard 
contract and infirmities in tender documents have adversely affected the 
utilization of funds point towards a lack of perspective as well as sound planning 
of projects to be executed. The Committee note that now a Committee has been 
constituted by the Ministry for standardization of procedures and documents for 
award of contracts. The Committee are unable to understand as to why such 
ground work was not done befo re handing out contracts for execution of work. 
The Committee feel that to undertake such critical projects, it is essential that a 
professional approach is followed by the m ajor ports/Ministry to streamline 
procedures. The Committee are further distressed  to note that inaccurate 
estimate of the amount of dredging/quantity to be dredged in the channel and 
basin deepening projects have also been the reasons for non -utilization of 
allocated funds. The Committee feel that half -hearted measures have seriously 
dented the professional standing of the major p orts with the result that these 
ports ar e fast losing out to many non - major/private ports. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to monitor the uti lization of funds allocated to m ajor 
ports on a monthly basis and advise the Port Chairmen accordingly from time to 
time to adhere to project schedules. The Commi ttee also exhort the Ministry 
/major ports to be proactive in their planning and utilize the funds effectively. The 
Committee desire that all the sche mes/projects awaiting completion should be 
dealt with due promptitude and the future projections for funds requirement be 
done more realistically in the New Perspective Plan”. 
  
1.10 The Ministry of Shipping, in their action taken reply, inter-alia stated as follows:- 
“It is stated that in the year 2006 -07, there was an allocation of ` 83.40 crore  
comprising of ` 40.00 crore as GBS and 43.84 crore as IEBR in respect of 
Paradip Port. The amount allocated as GBS could not be released/spent as the 
RCE of the project was under consideration. The expenditure was only ` 23.15 
crore out of IEBR. Similarly, in the year 2007 -08, an allocation of ` 100.00 crore 
comprising of ` 45.00 crore as GBS and ` 55.00 crore as IEBR was made in 
respect of Paradip Port. An amount of ` 42.05 crore was spent out of the 
allocation of IEBR. ` 45.00 crore allocated as GBS for the „Deepening of Channel‟ 

project at Paradip Port was approved by the CCEA on 17.11.2005 at original 
estimate cost of ` 154.842 crore with 1/3 of its estimated cost as grant-in-aid from 
Government of India.  Sanction of the Government was conveyed on 2.12.2005.  
PPT had floated a tender on 16.12.2005 and this tender  had to be discharged on 
3.6.2006 as the quoted price of L1 tenderer was 73.74% higher than t he value of 
work put to tenderer.  The tender was re -invited on 3.2.2006 and price bid was 
opened on 8.9.2006.  The quoted price of lowest tenderer i.e. Dredging 
Corporation of India (DCI) was 72.66 percent higher than the value put to tender.  
Accordingly the revised cost estimate of the project from ` 154.84 crore to ` 
253.359 crore was approved by the CCEA in its meeting held on 29.11.2007.  
Budgetary support was ,limited to ` 45 crore only.  Sanction of the Government to 
PPT was issued  on 13.12.2007. I n the year 2008 -09, no GBS was allocated to 
the Paradip Port. An amount of ` 287.99 crore was allocated as IEBR and an 
amount of ` 101.47 crore only was spent.  
 
As regards Kandla Port, Jawaharlal Nehru Port and Mumbai Port are 
concerned, only IEBR ( Internal resources of Port) component was allocated to 
these ports in the last three years. No Government support was given to these 
ports in these years.  
 
The Ministry of Shipping is reviewing the progress on the expenditure of 
Port Sector at the level of Secretary (Shipping) in its meetings with senior officers 
regularly. As and when required, directions are being issued to all concerned on 
utilization of funds allocated to the m ajor ports as well as other Organizations 
under control of Ministry of Shipping.  
 
Further, monthly review and monitoring meetings are taken on the progress 
of release and expenditure of GBS at the level of Joint Secretary (Ports) to 
ensure timely action for approval of projects and consequent release &  
expenditure of budgetary funds allocated. The details of allocation and 
expenditure of budgetary funds for the year 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 are given 
below:  
(` in crore) 
Year BE RE Expenditure %age w.r. to 
BE 
%age w. r. to 
RE 
2009-10 385.50 369.93 276.11 71.62 74.63 
2010-11 388.48 394.28 369.82 95.19 93.80 
 
As far as projects are concerned, milestones as per time lines have been fixed for 
all PPP port projects for creation of additional capacity through construction of 
berths and jetties and mechanization of berths which is b eing reviewed every 
quarterly. These timelines are also being monitored and reviewed by Planning 
Commission and Cabinet Secretariat regularly. 
  
On the planning front, the Ministry has taken timely initiatives in 2010 itse lf to 
prepare a realistic long -term perspective plan namely  the “Maritime Agenda 
2010-20” for the decade.  This is a very comprehensive strategic plan document 
of the Ministry which also covers in details the plans for development of non -
major ports by Maritime States”. 
 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.11 The Committee in their earlier Report had expressed their displeasure that 
on the one hand, the inadequate capacity and outdated machinery/infrastructure 
have led to inordinate delays, higher turnaround time and deficiency of services 
in the ports, on the other, certain Port Authorities viz. Paradip Port, Kandla Port, 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port and Mumbai Port have not been able to utilize the funds 
allocated to them.  In this backdrop, the Committee had emphasized that the 
Ministry/major ports should adopt proa ctive planning for effective utilisation of 
the allocated outlays which, in turn, would ensure timely completion of the 
projects. For the critical projects, the Committee had suggested adoption of 
professional approach to streamline the procedures, followe d by the monthly 
monitoring of the utilisation of funds by the ports. However, the Committee regret 
to note that the action taken reply has nothing concrete to establish that the 
issue raised by the Committee has actually been taken seriously by the Minist ry, 
since the reply merely states that as and when required, directions are being 
issued to all concerned authorities of ports for utilisation of the allocated funds.   
 The Committee are also not convinced with the submission of the Ministry 
that monthly review and monitoring meetings are being done regularly to assess 
the progress of expenditure of Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) and Internal and 
Extra Budgetary Resource (IEBR) allocated to various ports.  Analysis of the 
action taken reply reflects a contr ary state of affairs.  The same has been 
analyzed in the following paragraphs: 
(i) For Pradip Port, the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) provided for 2006 -07 
could not be released/spent as the Revised Cost Estimates (RCE) of the 
project was under consideratio n. The percentage of expenditure under 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources for the said year was only 52.81 

percent.  For the year 2007 -08, no information for utilisation of GBS has 
been provided by the Ministry.  The percentage of utilisation of IEBR f or 
the said period was 76.45 percent.  As far as 2008 -09, no GBS was 
provided and the percentage of utilisation of outlays under IEBR was only 
35.23 percent.  This clearly indicates lack of monitoring of utilisation of 
outlays by the Port Authority/Ministry with regard to Pradip Port. 
(ii) For Kandla Port, Jawaharlal Nehru Port and Mumbai Port only Internal and 
Extra Budgetary Resource (IEBR) is stated to be provided for 2006 -07, 
2007-08 and 2008 -09. No outlays under Gross Budgetary Support  (GBS) 
were provided for these ports. However, the Ministry has not provided the 
outlay and the utilisation status of Internal and Extra Budgetary Resource 
by the aforementioned ports. The Committee expect a precise reply from 
the Ministry in this regard. 
(iii) The Commit tee also note that the Ministry has not provided any 
information about the standardization of award of contracts for the various 
projects inspite of the fact that a Committee has already been stated to be 
constituted by the Ministry to look into the matter . The Committee, in their 
original Report had opined that the Ministry‟s long procedures of non -
standard contract and infirmities in tender documents have adversely 
affected the utilisation of funds.  They once again emphasize that the 
Ministry should expe ditiously streamline and standardize the process of 
awarding contracts for the various projects and would like to know the 
progress made by the Committee constituted by the Ministry on the issue.   
The Committee, in their earlier recommendation had opined that the 
inaccurate estimate of the amount of dredging/quantity to be dredged in the 
channel and basin deepening is one of the reasons for poor utilisation of funds.  

However, the Ministry has neither commented upon the Committee‟s viewpoint 
nor any initiative is reported to have been taken to have a realistic assessment of 
dredging.  The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that necessary action 
in this regard is actually taken and also like to be apprised of the details thereof. 
 
C. Implementation of Port Capacity Enhancing Projects  
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.5) 
 
1.12 The Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note with dissatisfaction that productivity and turnaround time of 
all major ports is below international standards, as admitted by the Secretary, 
Shipping during oral evidence. Though there has been a marked improvement in 
average turnaround time from 10.10 days in 1990 -91 to 3.85 days in 2008 -09, 
the average pre-berthing detention time and average output per ship berth day is 
still not up to the international standards despite some improvement. The 
variations between the major ports in the productivity and turnaround time in the 
country itself is quite substantial irrespective of the type of cargo being handl ed. 
The Committee also note that due to 93 percent  capacity utilization in ports as 
stated by Secretary (Shipping), delays are bound to occur with increased waiting 
time. As the Ministry is hopeful of improvement in the current scenario after the 
completion of various Port capacity enhancing projects, the Committee suggest 
that the Ministry should expedite the implementation of these projects to reduce 
higher turnaround time and waiting periods. Level of mechanization with 
technologies of international stan dard should also be increased substantially to 
increase average output per ship berth day. The Ministry should ask Port 
Authorities to conduct periodic reviews of the factors critical to their functioning 
and initiate corrective action accordingly”. 
 
1.13 The Ministry of Shipping in their action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“Overall capacity available at major ports as on 31.3.2011 is 670.13 million tones 
whereas the traffic handled was only 569.91 million tones.  Although it i s ideal to 
maintain a gap  of 30 percent  between the installed capacity and the traffic 
according to the conventional international norms, it may not be possible to 
maintain the exact g ap all the time.  The gap of 30 percent  is generally required 
to be maintained in order to take c are of maintenance works at the berths, 
approaches to the berths, equipments etc.   Efforts are continuously being made 
to enhance the capacity of the m ajor ports to reach the level of International 
Standards. 
 
Similarly, in regard with the connectivity, a ll the m ajor ports are well 
connected with rail and road and a number of projects by NHAI, Railways etc., 
are being taken up for smooth movement and faster evacuation of cargo  
Processes at major ports are being simplified with the implementation of 
automation and Port Community Systems in all the major ports, which enables 

all the users in Port Operation to lodge their paper electronically for faster 
clearance. 
 
 The average output per ship berthin g in 2006 -07 was 9745 tones which 
reached 10482 tons in the year 2009 -10.  The performance indicators are being 
monitored regularly by the Ministry port wise for enhancing productively and 
efficiency levels”. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
1.14 In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that even though there has 
been a marked improvement in the average turn around time from 10.10 days in 
1990-91 to 3.85 days in 2008 -09, the average pre -berthing detention time and 
average output per ship berth day are s till not upto the international standard.  In 
the light of the above, the Committee had urged the Ministry to expedite the 
implementation of various Port capacity enhancement projects. However, the 
Committee regret to note that instead of taking the desire d steps to widen the 
gap between the installed capacity and the traffic to match with the conventional 
International Standard, the Ministry has endorsed that although it is ideal to 
maintain a gap of 30 percent between the two, it may not be possible to ma intain 
the exact gap all the time.  The Committee note that as on 31  March 2011, the gap 
between the overall capacity and the traffic handled at major ports was 14.95 
percent, which is just about 50 percent compared with the conventional 
International Stan dard. The Ministry while arguing that it may not always be 
possible to maintain the desired gap of 30 percent have not explained as to how 
maintenance works at berths, approaches to Berth, equipments etc. are carried 
out satisfactorily in ports despite the  requisite gap not being available. The 
Committee strongly feel that the Ministry should endeavour to ensure that the 
existing gap is enhanced, by taking suitable measures to avoid overuse of the 
ports. They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendati on and urge the 
Ministry to expedite the implementation of the Port capacity enhancing projects.  

Besides, the Committee would also like to be informed about the various 
constraints, which are being faced by the Ministry in the implementation of these 
projects followed by objective analysis of the same to ensure that the desired 
gap of 30 percent is achieved.  
 The Committee also note that in response to the issue of increasing the 
level of mechanization with technologies of international standard, the Ministry in 
their action taken reply has informed the Committee that the processes are being 
simplified with the implementation of automation and Port  Connectivity Systems 
in major ports. However, the Ministry has only furnished the information 
regarding the increase in average output per ship berthing from 9745 tons in 
2006-07 to 10482 tons in the year 2009 -10.  Since, the latest information has not 
been provided, the Committee cannot but conclude that the Ministry/Port 
Authorities have not been regularly con ducting the reviews of the factors critical 
to the functioning of ports.  Therefore, the Committee are of the opinion that the 
issue needs to be addressed again as a part of the preparatory exercise before 
launching of projects in full scale for their implementation.  The Committee would 
like the Ministry to take the desired action and inform them accordingly. 
 
D. Enhancement of dredging capacity in the ports 
 
Observation/recommendation (Para No. 5.7) 
 
1.15 The Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Dredging Corporation of India (DCI) is the entity providing dredging 
services for maintenance and is responsible for creation and maintenance of 
draft at all major ports. Several Indian ports face the problem of inadequate draft 
which translates into their  inability to service bigger vessels. However, the 
Committee are shocked to learn that DCI has not been able to procure any new 
dredging machinery in the past nine years and that chartered dredgers like the 
Dariyamanthan developed snags thus compelling the  ports to give dredging 
contracts to foreign companies inspite of the presence of a GOI -owned entity in 
the field. The Committee fail to comprehend as to why the Government has not 

taken any measures in this regard during the past years despite infrastruct ure 
projects being delayed badly due to non -availability of dredgers. Further, the 
Committee fail to see any justification as to why no capacity enhancement was 
envisaged for the dredging capability of m ajor ports, when the Ministry was 
formulating its fla gship program – the National Maritime Development 
Programme (NMDP). It shows a complete lack of foresight on their part. 
Nonetheless the Committee desire to be apprised of the reasons for the lack of 
dredgers in DCI and the steps taken, if any, to fulfill the requirements. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry conduct a detailed study of the 
dredging capacity and requirements of all major ports and take necessary action 
to enhance the same. The committee are of the opinion that ideally the DCI 
should have 1.5 times more capacity than the actual requirements so as to 
accommodate breakdown & maintenance of dredgers and any other unforeseen 
incidents. Till then, in order to tide over the present deficiency of dredgers, the 
Ministry should get into agreements with efficient dredging companies worldwide 
as a short term measure because adequate draft in the country‟s ports would 
contribute substantially in attracting better business for them. The Committee 
would also desire to be apprised of the progre ss on the procurement of the 
dredgers by the DCI, in due course”. 
 
1.16 The Ministry of Shipping in their action taken reply stated as follows:- 
“Dredging Corporation of India has placed orders for acquisition of three IHC 
built TSHD dredgers of 5500 Cu.M capacity each which will be delivered and put 
to commercial operation between October, 2012 and December,2013. Further 
DCI has added to its capacity with the induction of one new Cutter Suction 
Dredger and a Back -hoe dredger is expected to join the fleet very shortly. With 
the addition of these vessels,  DCI has projected a capacity enhancement from 
the existing about 80 Mln CuM to 110 Mln CuM.  
The Dredger Manufacturing Companies in the world are very few. DCI had 
earlier gone for tendering for capacity en hancement but could not go ahead with 
the same as due to the business restructuring of the identified party led to some 
legal complications and the order could not be placed. There are no full fledged 
dredgers manufacturing yards within India. The cutter suction dredger that joined 
the fleet recently was manufactured in India (by MDL, a PSU Yard under MoD) 
with foreign collaboration. 
Further the dredging market in the world is very closely held with a few 
international companies ruling the same. DCI has ear lier tried to supplement its 
available capacity by chartering of dredgers but that has proved to be not cost 
effective.  
Some private dredging companies have recently come into foray and with the 
inherent flexibility they enjoy they have procured Chinese b uilt dredgers which 
are less costly. But experts in the field have cautioned that some of these 
dredgers do not meet the quality parameters and may not be reliable and are 
prone to break downs. 
It is not economically viable to maintain 1.5 times of the req uired capacity as the 
maintenance cost of dredgers is very high   and will deplete the bottom lines 

when a dredger is idle as it will have no revenue but will continue to incur the 
running costs for minimum manning etc. 
In terms of the Maritime Agenda for 2010-20 the capacities of all the major ports  
are projected to rise from the existing level of about 600 Mln T to about 1400 Mln 
T in 2019 -20.   Major ports in India have drawn up ambitious expansion plans 
during the next decade to create substantial addit ional capacity.  Apart from the 
ongoing projects for deepening of channels /Berths etc., valued at around ` 1500 
Crore, the major ports are planning for projects r equiring dredging for ` 8500 
Crore ` during 2010-20. 
As stated above DCI has already placed or der for three dredgers which will join 
fleet between Oct 2012  to December 2013. Further, the Company has projected 
for procurement of   two 9000 Cu.M capacity dredgers and other ancillary crafts 
in 12th Plan involving an outlay of about ` 1792 Crore”. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
1.17 In response to Committee‟s recommendation regarding conducting a 
detailed study to assess the dredging capacity and take suitable steps for 
enhancement in all the major ports, the Dredging Corporation of India (DCI) has 
now placed orders for acquisition of three IHC built TSHD dredgers of 5500 CuM 
capacity each, which would be put for their commercial operation between 
October, 2012 and December, 2013. The Ministry has apprised the Committee that 
the capacity would further be e nhanced with the induction of one new Cutter 
Section Dredger and a Back -hoc dredger which is expected to join the fleet very 
shortly. However, the Committee note that the Ministry has not been specific in 
giving the timeline for induction of Back -hoc dredger.  Moreover, the Committee 
are of the opinion that the Ministry has not been categorical enough to establish, 
whether the enhancement in the capacity from existing 80 Mln CuM to 110 Mln 
CuM would be sufficient enough to cater all major ports in India. Th e Committee 
expects a specific response from the Ministry going by the logic that the need of 
the hour is for enhancement of dredging capability of major ports in India.    
The Committee also note from the action taken reply that the Dredging 
Corporation o f India (DCI) could not procure more dredgers as the „Identified 

Party‟ had some legal issues with regard to their business restructuring.  Further, 
the Committee are not convinced with the reason forwarded by the Ministry that 
the overseas dredging market  is cartelized by few international companies. Even 
if it is so, as one cutter suction dredger was produced domestically by a PSU 
under Ministry of Defence, the Committee feel that the DCI should approach them 
for further orders too.  The Committee are of the opinion that more avenues need 
to be explored with other potential partners for procuring more dredgers.   
 The Committee in their earlier Report had also opined that ideally the DCI  
should have 1.5 times more capacity than the actual requirements so as to 
address the issues relating to the breakdown and maintenance of dredgers or 
any other unforeseen circumstances.  However, the Ministry has stated that it is 
economically not viable to maintain 1.5 times of the required capacity as the 
maintenance cost of dredger is very high and will deplete the bottom lines.  
Moreover, DCI is of the opinion that when a dredger remains idle, it will earn no 
revenue, but will incur the running costs f or minimum manning.  The Committee 
do not agree with the above views as the reply itself is contradictory. When the 
deficiency of dredger has badly impacted most of the major ports, the question 
of loss of revenue due to dredgers remaining idle, simply doe s not arise.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the 
Ministry to clarify the issue and take action as per their recommendation. The 
Committee should be apprised of the precise action taken in this regard. 
 
E. Ports Security Concerns  
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.11) 
       
1.18 The Committee had recommended as follows:- 

“The 26/11 terrorist attack on Mumbai was an eye -opener bringing forth the 
issue of maintaining adequate and fo olproof security at all Indian p orts. The 
Committee observe that the Ministry is taking measures to tighten the security at 
Indian ports. Since a lot of infrastructure development is taking place through the 
PPP model in the several ports, the Committee feel that security  scenar io at 
privately managed ports/terminals should be properly standardized and the 
concessionaire be urged to adhere to all the prescribed safety measures. The 
committee desire that security at all major ports be upgraded and adequate 
container scanners be installed wherever required. The Committee strongly urge 
the Ministry initiate measures to have proper co-ordination between port security, 
the customs Department, the Indian Navy and the coast guard, so as to have a 
thorough vigil on the entire coast. Quick reaction teams should be deployed at all 
major ports comprising of CISF, port security, Coast Guards and Navy. The 
Committee also desire that the automatic identification system through radar be 
installed all along the coast-line in collaboration with Coast Guard at the earliest. 
Separate routes should be specifie d for small vessels/fishing boa ts of less than 
20 meters length and those not equipped with the Automatic Identification 
System Class „B‟. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that all Port 
Authorities remain vigilant and pro active in this regard as it is a matter of 
national security and cannot be compromised under any circumstances. The 
Committee note that though the Ministry has undertaken some action regarding 
the latest measures/equipment to enhance port security, it is taking lot of time to 
complete. As any slip -up in future would be catastrophic in light of the 26/11 
terrorist attack on Mumbai, the Committee, strongly recommend that all security 
measures be strictly implemented at the e arliest at the ports so that all 
emergencies such as terror attacks, collision of containers, accidental oil spills, 
poisonous gas leakages, dumping of harmful e -waste etc. could be handled 
effectively.  
 
 Another matter posing danger to the lives of peopl e residing near ports is 
the presence of a large amount of hazardous goods in ports like the Mumbai 
Port and Jawaharlal Nehru Port. In this regard, the Committee are alarmed at 
certain press reports which indicate that around 409 MT of hazardous and toxic 
material like brass ash, old nickel -cadmium batteries etc. is lying unattended on 
these ports and needs to be neutralized urgently. Reportedly the matter is stuck 
due to inaction by certain Government departments, which are required to give 
no-objection-certificates on the matter. The G overnment of India, by virtue of 
being a signatory to the Basel Convention, 1992 that addresses issues like 
transboundary movement and shipment of hazardous waste and its disposal, is 
expected to take prompt measures for time ly and appropriate disposal of toxic 
wastes lying in its ports. The Committee, are appalled at the gross negligence on 
the part of Government to attend to such critical issues which poses a direct and 
serious threat to public health. The C ommittee, therefore, deplore the 
insensitivity of the departments involved and recommend the Ministry to urgently 
approach the concerned departments for appropriate disposal and clearance of 
hazardous goods from all Indian ports. The Committee hope that th e matter 
would be given critical importance. The C ommittee also desire that the Ministry 
should immediately seek reports from all major and minor port authorities on any 
hazardous cargo including e-waste lying in their premises and urge th em to take 
urgent action for its evacuation. The C ommittee desire to be apprised of the 
progress on the matte r through a detailed note from the Ministry. Besides, they 

would also like to  know the progress on the Government  proposal to install 
advanced radioactive material detectors in all major ports”. 
 
 
1.19 The Ministry of Shipping in their action taken reply stated as follows:- 
“After the attack in Mumbai the Ministry had constituted a High Powered 
Committee to look into the existin g security arrangements in the m ajor ports and 
recommend improvements.  Based on the recommendations of the Committee 
all the ports have been directed to deploy CISF and introduce CC TVs, RIFD 
technology and access control systems.  Bomb Disposal Squads are also being 
raised.   A minimum of 2 s peed boats are engaged for patrolling purposes.  
Further all the ports except VPT, VOCPT, PPT and EPL are having the vessel 
traffic monitoring system (VTMS) for identifying the vessels and guide them for 
safe navigation into the ports.   VPT, VOCPT, PPT an d EPL are tracking the 
vessels through GPS, Radar and Automatic Identification System. All major ports 
under Ministry of Shipping are ISPS compliant.  
 
All the ports are applying IMDG code approved by International Maritime 
Organization for handling storag e and transportation of Dangerous and 
hazardous goods. 
 
All the ports have regul ations made on this subject. The hazardous cargo lying 
uncleared in the Port is being disposed as per the provisions of Section 61 & 62 
of the Major Port Trust Act, 1963.  Mini stry is also monitoring the presence of 
hazardous goods in the ports.  Ministry had issued directions to ports 
subsequent to the chlorine gas leak incident which happened in Mumbai, on the 
methodology of handling hazardous goods (copies enclosed).  The ports do not 
have any e -waste lying in their premises.  Ministry of Shipping has been asked 
by Ministry of Home Affairs to install Radioactive Material Detectors at the 
entry/exit points of all the ports by 2012 as a part of Megaport initiative.  The 
Detectors are being manufactured by M/s. ECIL, Hyderabad.  The survey of 
Entry/Exit points have been completed in all the ports by DG (Shipping) involving 
ECIL, BARC.  All the ports have been asked to place the order of the equipment 
s as per the terms and conditi ons finalized by the Ministry on 20.07.2011 and 
requested all the Maritime States/Boards to direct the ports to install the 
equipments by 2012”. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
1.20 The Committee while taking note of the significance of maintaining 
adequate and foolproof security at all the ports in aftermath of 26/11 terrorist 
attack on Mumbai, had opined that the security scenario at privately managed 
ports/terminals should be prope rly standardized and concerned concessionaires 
be urged to adhere to all the prescribed safety measures, besides upgrading the 

security infrastructure.  The action taken reply reflects that some measures have 
been taken by the Ministry.  Nevertheless, some of the important issues raised by 
the Committee have remained unaddressed.  The above view point of the 
Committee would be amply corroborated in the succeeding paragraphs: 
 With regard to coastal security, the Committee had strongly recommended 
that the M inistry should initiate measures to have proper coordination between 
port security, the Customs Department, the Indian Navy and the Coast Guard.  
However, the Committee note with disappointment that nowhere in the reply the 
Ministry has indicated about the  much desired coordination with the above 
authorities for ensuring vigilance in the coastal areas of the country which are 
quite vulnerable to smuggling, terrorist and other anti -social activities. The 
Committee express their anguish over the way in which a crucial matter raised by 
them has been dealt with.  Thus, while reiterating their earlier recommendation, 
the Committee desire the Ministry to take urgent and concrete action especially, 
as pointed out in their earlier Report, when it comes to the matter  of national 
security nothing can be compromised under any circumstances.  
 Another issue which the Committee had raised in their earlier Report was 
regarding dumping of about 409 MT toxic material like brass ash, old metal – 
cadmium batteries etc. in Mumb ai and JLN ports.  In this regard, the Committee 
had emphasized that the Government of India, by virtue of being a signatory to 
the Basel Convention, 1992, should address the issue like transboundary 
movement and shipment of hazardous waste and its disposa l and take 
expeditious action for disposal of toxic waste lying in the ports. It was also 
suggested that the Ministry should immediately seek reports from all major and 
minor ports of the country on any hazardous cargo including e -waste lying in 
their prem ises and urged to take action for their evacuation. However, the 

Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry in their action taken reply has 
vaguely suggested that hazardous cargo lying uncleared in the ports was being 
disposed as per provisions of M ajor Port Trust Act, 1963, while categorically 
denying stockpiling of any e -waste in the premises of the ports.  Nevertheless, 
the Committee are of the strong opinion that the Ministry need to revisit the 
Committee‟s recommendation and report back about th e hazardous materials 
lying in the various ports taking into cognizance frequent media reports about 
dumping of e-waste especially in Chennai and Kochi ports.   
The Ministry has also not responded to the information sought by the 
Committee regarding the pr ogress made by the Government for installation of 
advanced radio active material detectors in all major ports by this year, as their 
reply has merely stated that the said detectors were being manufactured by M/s. 
ECIL, Hyderabad.  The Committee would like to be apprised about their 
installation position. 
The Committee, while reiterating their earlier recommendation, also desire 
that the entire issue of coastal security, collision of containers, accidental oil 
spills, poisonous gas leakages and dumping of ha rm ful e-waste be addressed in 
a stipulated time frame by the Government. 
  

CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.1) 
 
Ports are vital to the country as these enable the nation to trade with rest of the 
world. The major ports in India act as conservancy and pilotage authorities besides 
operating terminal facilities for maritime trade. However, with passage of time, most of  
these ports have become deficient in modernization and productivity, despite an overall 
increase in port trade. As the projected capacity of major ports in the 11 th Plan period is 
likely to go beyond one billion tonne, the Government of India has initiate d certain 
efforts like the NMDP scheme to invest in restructuring these ports and increase their 
efficiency and capacity. Also, during the course of the examination of the subject by the 
Committee, the Government of India added another port i.e. the Port B lair Port as 13 th 
Major Port in the list of other 12 major ports, in June, 2010. The Committee Welcome 
these steps since minor ports are proving to be a major challenge to the major ports 
due to the traffic diversion and attractive tariffs as well as exhau stion of capacity 
utilization at the major ports. This underlines the need to improve and increase the 
cargo handling capacity of major ports further. The following paragraphs would touch 
upon various aspects of the subject and the Committee‟s views and recommendations 
on the same”. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
No Comments. 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.4) 
The Committee are glad to note that the operating cost -ratio of Ports has been 
reducing over the last decade. However, it is around 60% which is still on the higher 
side. The Committee observe that although all the major ports function on a cost plus 
model, thereby make profits, yet higher expenditure on salaries, pension liabilities and 
day to day operation cost, eats into the profit marg ins. Thus, the Committee suggest 
that the ports should not only minimize the operating cost ration through capacity 
expansion i.e. through higher volumes, but also through reducing cost of operation 
through mechanization, long -term planning and efficient m anagement. The Committee 
also desire that all major ports should try to maximize productivity through efficient 
human resource utilization and a critical analysis of the functions performed by Port 
workers to remove redundancy at all levels. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
All the Ports have taken up mechanization of cargo loading unloading operation 
by installing new handling systems like conveyors, wagon tripplers, reclaimas etc.  The 
existing old and obsolete equipment are being replaced by new ones to i mprove the 
efficiencies in port operations and management. Ports are encouraged to take up the 

new expansion projects through PPP mode only to bring in new technologies and 
efficient management practices from the private partners. 
 
The infusion of latest technologies in mechanized handling of cargo through 
commissioning of PPP projects with th e experience and management of International 
Port oper ators has brought in increased level of efficiencies and productivity through 
efficient human resource utilization. 
 
  
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.6) 
It is a matter of concern that India does not have a transshipment facility till date. 
The proposed International Container Transshipment Terminal (ICTT) at Cochin Port is 
thus critical to Indian Port Busine ss. However, the Committee note with dismay that the 
ICTT at Cochin Port, which was supposed to be commissioned in second half of 2009, 
is not ready yet. The second revised date for its completion was given by the Ministry 
as October 2010. During the cours e of examination of the subject, the Ministry 
projected three different time -lines for the project namely November, 2009, May, 2010 
and October, 2010, which indicates total lack of respect for timelines and projects 
schedules. The Committee would like to k now whether the ICTT has finally 
commissioner now. The non -availability of transshipment facility in our country leads to 
longer delivery time for goods being exported and loss of competitive advantage for the 
Ports. The Committee feel that the Ports at Si ngapore, Hong Kong and Sri Lanka have 
such facilities and thus have a professional edge over the Indian Ports. The Committee, 
therefore, impress upon the Ministry to expedite the commissioning of the ICTT at 
Cochin , if not done till now. The Committee als o hope that the progress of Mega 
Container Terminal at Chennai is satisfactory. Besides, as Port Blair has been declared 
a Major Port now, the Committee recommend that the feasibility study of an ICTT at 
South Andamans should be completed soon”. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
International Container Transshipment Terminal (ICTT) at Vallarpadam 
envisages development of facilities for handling mother container ships of 8000+TEU 
capacities. The facilities include 1800 metres berth and supporting handling equipments 
for annual throughput of 3 million Twenty feet Equivalent Units (TEUs) along with 
supporting infrastructure. In terms of the Licence Agreement between Cochin Port Trust 
and M/s India Gateway Terminal Private Ltd (IGTPL), the terminal is to be deve loped in 
phases. Phase -I of ICTT comprises of construction of 600 metres berth and 
development of stacking area and other allied facilities including supporting 
infrastructure of 17.2 Km four lane National Highway (NH) connectivity from 
Kalamassery to Vall arpadam, Rail connectivity and Capital Dredging, with a handling 
capacity of 1 million TEUs has been commissioned on 11 th February, 2011. Phase II of 
the project for extension of berth by 1200 meters and providing related facilities, with a 
handling capacity of additional 2 million TEUs, is expected be completed by 2017. 
 
Development of Mega Container Terminal at Chennai Port 
 
The Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) has considered and approved the 
project of Chennai Port Trust in its meeting held on 12th October, 2010 for 
“Development of Mega Container Terminal at Chennai Port on Design, Build, Finance, 

Operate and Transfer (DBFOT) basis under Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode 
with a concession period of 30 years at a total estimated cost of Rs. 3686.00 crores” 
 
The bid due date for the RFQ applicants in respect of project “Development of Mega 
Container Terminal” was initially fixed as 9.12.2010. Subsequently, on the request by 
applicants bid due date was extended up to 19.1.2011. Due to non -receipt of 
environmental clearance for the project and apprehending that environmental clearance 
may contain stipulations which may have financial implications on the project. The 
bidders sought further extension of the due date which was agreed to and extended 
initially up 14.2.2011 and thereafter up to 18.4.2011.  
 
Two of the pre-qualified applicants had sought further extension of bid due date by two 
months. In the case of one of the applicants, extension was being sought to enable 
their new consortium partner  to conduct detailed technical study and analyse the traffic 
data provided by the consultant and to prepare and submit a competitive bid. In the 
case of second applicant, extension was sought on grounds that the project is sensitive 
to upfront capital cost  and stretching of the const on account of environmental 
clearance will hurt the viability of the project. Considering the non -receipt of the 
environmental clearance and the requests of the bidders for extensions, the bid due 
date had been extended by Chen nai Port Trust initially up to 15.6.2011 and thereafter 
up to 30.8.2011 due to non -receipt of security clearance in respect of the new 
consortium partner. After receipt of Security Clearance, only single RFP bid has been 
received by the Port and the bid is presently under evaluation by Chennai Port.   
 
The decision relating to Port Blair Port Trust, to be developed as the 13 th Major Port of 
India, has been presently kept in abeyance due to organizational and operational 
reasons. A study for development of a  transshipment port at Campbell Bay at Great 
Nicobar Island has been undertaken by the Ministry of Andaman & Nicobar 
Administration. 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.8) 
 
The Committee observes with regret that at Kolkata and Haldia Ports the parcel 
load has been reduced due to inadequate draft. Kolkata Port, being an estuarine port, 
has limitation of draft apart from siltation, which is a chronic problem. The situation at 
Haldia Dock has also deteriorated due to non -implementation of River Regulatory  
Measures for the last seven years and no dredging could be undertaken due to non -
availability of dredgers in 2007 -08 and 2008 -09. The Committee are surprised to note 
that though siltation is a permanent feature of the morphology of Kolkata Port and 
Haldia Port, hardly any pro -active measures was taken to tackle it, rather, the situation 
was allowed to deteriorate for want of dredgers. The Committee are not convienced 
with the reasons given by the Ministry in this regard, for instance, financial resources o f 
Ports being inadequate for dredging or non - availability of private investment for it. The 
committee feel that the Government should have stepped in at the appropriate time for 
dredging, as has been the international practice, and pursued for better budg etary 
support to undertake the same. The Committee thus strongly urge the Ministry to 
ensure implementation of River Regulatory Measures and deploy as many dredgers as 
required to improve draft at both the locations. The Committee also suggest the Ministry 
to study the matter on priority and take long term measures like river training works - 
rebuilding of spurs, river bank protection, river regulatory measures including capital 
dredging, engage expert institutions of world repute to study the channel and 

operationalize the alternate locations with good draft and low siltation for instance, the 
Sagar Island near Kolkata Port. The Committee are aware that Kolkata and Haldia 
cater to the entire North -East of India, as well as Nepal and Bhutan, for export and 
import, hence the Ministry should take all necessary action to improve the situation in 
these ports. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Government of India is reimbursing the total maintenance dredging expenditure 
incurred in Kolkata/Haldia river channel.  DCI  is engaged to dredge and maintain the 
channel and six dredgers are continuously working in the channel to maintain the 
depth.  As the size of the vessels is increasing in the Shipping business, more drafts 
are required in the Ports.  In order to overcome the problem, Kolkata Port Trust is 
developing Haldia -II and Diamond Harbour to reduce dependency on the existing 
channel. The feasibility reports in respect of both the proposed projects are under 
Finalization by the port. 
 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.10) 
The Committee further learn with regret that many projects of infrastructure 
development and capacity enhancement at the major ports are not only getting 
delayed/deferred due to problems in land acquisition but in some cases, it is turning out 
to be a very cumbersome process ending in litigation too. The Committee, therefore, 
advise that the Ministry should constitute a local Committee consisting of DM/elected 
representative/State Government official/Ministry before commencement of land 
acquisition, which can look into grievances arising out of displacement/ 
rehabilitation/compensation issues and try to settle the matter within the ambit of the 
law of the land. The Committee also recommend that local people from whom land is 
acquired for projects should be preferred for jobs in the project itself, provided they are 
found suitable for it. The Committee strongly feel that all commitments made to the land 
owners should be strictly adhered to so as to ensure landholders co -operation in the 
implementation of such projects. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should 
desist from getting involved into unnecessary litigation which ends up delaying the 
project for an indefinite period or deferring it altogether. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As far as infrastructure projects in major Ports is concerned, generally the 
projects are taken up in the land already available with the ports and hence the 
requirement for land Acquisition by Ports and Ministry of Shi pping does not arise. 
However, the sugg estions are noted for guidance where land acquisition has to be 
done. 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.12) 
The Committee note that a common interface, a port Community System (PCS) 
to bring all Major Ports and various stakeholders at one platform, i s not fully functional 
at present. A fully functional port Community System is a must speed up various 
processes, usher in greater deal of transparency and streamline services rendered by 
Indian Ports. The Committee feel that since India has emerged as a m ajor player in the 
information technology domain, the Ministry of Shipping should leverage that expertise 

and implement the Port Community System at the earliest. From the security point of 
view too, establishing port Community System is absolutely critica l since the entire 
security infrastructure is based upon electronic data and tracking systems. The 
Committee also observe that an electronic data exchange will enable port customers 
and users to make quick decisions about logistics. The Committee feel that  all port 
users, for instance shipping lines/agents, surveyors/stevedores, Banks, container 
freight stations, regulatory agencies, customs house agents, importers, exporters etc. 
should the be able to utilize the  available resources at the ports in a secu re manner, 
once Port Community System is established as a central hub. It will also enhance the 
ability of the decision makers to maker a more informed decision about capacity 
utilization, costs and all parameters pertaining to logistics of ports business.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Port Community System network must be 
established and operationalised at the earliest, in all ports”. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Port Community System (PCS) is intended to integrate the economic flow of 
trade related documents/information and function as centralized hub all the Major Ports 
of India and other stakeholders like shipping lines/Agents, container Agents, Sureyors, 
Stevendoes, Banks, Container Freight Stations, Custom House Agents, Importers, 
Exporters, Railways/CONCOR, Government Regulatory Agencies etc. for exchanging 
electronic messages in a secure manner through a common interface. 
Initially, all 12 Major Ports had been identified for connecting electronically with PCS.  
STATUS: By the Major Port, the vessel and container related massages system was 
implemented on 31/12/2007, Cargo and Transport related massages implemented on 
31/3/2008. Finance messages (Assessment) im plemented during March, 2009 and e -
payment module (for few ports) implemented during September, 2009. Subsequently, 
MMD related messages was also made ONLINE. Around 5 -6 lakhs messages are 
being exchanged every month. 
 
Implementation EDI/PCS in the Non -Major Ports: As decided in the MSDC meeting 
held on 31.82010, to generate awareness in all the Maritime Sate the 
workshop/seminar has been conducted at the following states for non -major ports 
jointly with Customs under the control of: 
 
Tamil Nadu Maritime Board on 23/10/2010 at Chennai 
Gujarat Maritime Board on 11/11/2011 at Ahmadabad 
Government of Andhra Pradesh on 24/11/2010 at Hyderabad  
Government of Karnataka on 1/12/2010 at Karwar. 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.13) 
 
The Committee are sad to note that environmental clearance has also become 
another key factor for delay of Port projects in Mormugao, Visakhapatnam, Kandla and 
Paradip ports. A moratorium has been imposed on environment clearance for new ports 
and harbours  till a study on the cumulative impact of ports along the coast on 
environment is conducted in view of the Prof. Swaminathan Report, which had stated 
that the mushrooming of Ports and Harbours had an adverse impact on the country‟s 
marine and coastal envir onment. The Committee is convinced about the importance of 

maintaining a healthy balance between development and environment and is of the 
view that the eco system has to be preserved along with infrastructure development. At 
the same time, the Ports need capacity enhancement to support the country‟s 
economy. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that the Ministry should ensure that 
all their projects are prepared with due regard to the protection of coastal and marine 
environment in the first instance. T hey should have a dedicated team of professionals 
working on environmental clearance in tandem with the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests before commencement of projects because collaboration and co -operation 
between the two Ministries is the only way to m ove ahead for fast paced sustainable 
development of all sectors”. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
As per existing guidelines/ procedures, the construction of all the development 
projects is being taken up in the Ports after receipt of environmental clearance. All the 
new projects of development are cleared by Ministry of Environment & Forests as per 
provision of CRZ, 2010. The proposals are cleared by State/UT Coastal Zone 
Management Authori ties (SCZMA) in the respective States after holding stipulated 
public hearings. Actual construction starts after obtaining necessary environment/  
Forest clearances. Further, Ports formulate Environment Management Plans (EMPs) 
for keeping a watch over the e nvironment issues during construction phase. Po rts also 
take up aforestation and plantation in the port land. 
 
 
  

CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT‟S REPLY 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.16) 
 
The Committee note that non -major ports are beyond the purview of Tariff 
Authority for Major Ports (TAMP), whereas only major ports are regulated by it. The 
Committee also note that since its constitution in April, 1997, a review of th e benefits of 
such a regulatory body has not been undertaken. The Committee desire that such a 
review should be conducted without any further delay and critically analyzed. The 
Committee also suggest that a level playing field should be there for all ports  in the 
country, under a single regulator with a quasi -judicial mandate for setting disputes. The 
committee observe that some of the non -major ports are even bigger than major ports 
in terms of their business and clientele, hence it make all the more sense  to do away 
with such a demarcation between major and non -major ports. The Committee, 
therefore, suggest that necessary amendments be considered to the Major Ports Trust 
Act, 1963 to cater to the changed scenario.  
 
In this connection, the Planning Commission is understood to have 
recommended that Major Port Trusts be allowed to decide their own tariffs once they 
reach optimum capacity, so that these are able to thwart price -related competition from 
minor ports. The c ommittee would like to know whether the same has been accepted. 
The Committee also note that the States controlling non -major ports are against a 
single regulatory authority. They suggest that the Ministry should push for a single 
regulatory regime and adv ise the State Governments that they can always have the 
controlling stake in the functioning of non -major ports, but they would be subjected to 
an impartial regulatory institution for developing a level playing field, as eventually the 
market condition and  service would determine the tariffs. The Committee also desire 
the Ministry to incorporate the suggestion in the draft Major Ports Regulatory Authority 
Bill 2009 and develop a long term vision keeping in mind that in the future the 
nomenclature of major a nd non-major ports will only remain by definition, as 100% FDI 
and private sector participation in Ports business can change the entire industry in the 
years to come.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Ministry of Shipping had prepared the Ports Regulat ory Authorities Bill and 
held consultations with the stake holders including the State Gove rnments. The 
objectives are to liberalise the current regulatory regime and to bring about level playing 
field between the Central Government Ports and the State Gov t. Ports which are not 
under the TAMP.  
 
As regards the suggestions of the Committee to bring the non -major ports under 
the regulatory regime with a mandate for setting disputes, it is stated that the regulatory 
framework in the draft Ports Regulatory Authority Bill is proposed to be extended to 
cover the entire port sector including the non-major ports. The draft Bill envisages to set 
up a separate State Ports Regulatory Authority in each of the Maritime States with 
jurisdiction over the non -Major Ports situated in the respective States. The Draf t Bill 

also envisages establishment of an Appellate Tribunal to adjudicate any dispute 
between two or more service providers or between a service provider and a group of 
consumers. 
 
The recommendations of the Planning Commission that the Major Port Trusts be 
allowed to decide their own tariff once they reach optimum capacity to face tariff related 
competition from non-major ports, have been noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT‟S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 5.2) 
The Committee note the initiative of the Ministry to formulate the National 
Maritime Development Programme (NMDP) as a flagship programme which aims for 
large-scale infrastructure development in all the major ports and their capacity 
enhancement during the period 2009-2012 in two phases. It is a large scale programme 
spread over all the major ports with participation of the private sector as well. However, 
the Committee find that the progress in the implementation of the projects under the 
NMPT is far from satisfactory. Out of a total of 276 projects with an investment of Rs. 
55.804 crore, which are scheduled to be completed by the year 2011 -12, only 53 
projects of 64.88 million metric tonne capacity are complete and 77 projects are under 
are implementation. 25 projects have been dropped and the rest 127 projects are yet to 
start as those are in various stages of planning, approval & awarding. The Committee 
also note that the port capacity as on 31.03.2009 was 574.77 million metric tonnes & 
the utilization wa s 530.39 million metric tonnes which was above 90% of capacity 
utilization. The committee note that the traffic forecast for major ports as per the 
Ministries‟ Perspective Plan, is projected to be 739.14 million metric tonnes in 2011 -12 
reaching up to 1595 .07 million metric tonnes in 2025 -26. Thus the committee note with 
dismay the Ministry has not been able to create adequate capacity of Major Ports to 
accommodate further rapid increase in traffic. Since the Ministry had formulated the 
NMDP after extensive  assessment and feedback from Major Port, authorities, users 
and trade requirements, the Committee fail to understand as to why not even 25% of 
the targeted projects could be achieved under NMDP. The tardy progress makes it 
evident that all 276 projects will not be completed by the end of 11 th Five Year Plan and 
would be carried forward thus resulting in massive cost overruns. The Committee 
further note that perhaps realizing this, the Ministry has decided to create a new 
perspective plan for the Maritime s ector for 12 th & 13 th five year plan upto the year 
2020. The Committee hope that the said plan would be prepared urgently and realistic 
year-wise targets would be set alongwith appropriate mechanism to ensure its 
implementation. The committee would like to be apprised of the progress on the matter. 
At the same time, the committee, deplore the prevailing situation and would like to be 
apprised of the reasons attributed to the delay as well as dropping of projects. The 
Committee expect the government to under stand the significance and impact of timely 
completion of projects under NMDP on the business carried by the Major Ports, as 
these ports are already facing stiff competition from a number of minor ports functioning 
in States like Gujarat, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh. 
 
As regards specific projects, the Committee are constrained to note that 
infrastructure projects at Mumbai and Paradip Ports have missed their completion dates 
and the same has been revised. For instance, the project of construction of 2 nd 
Chemical berth of Pir Pau, that was scheduled to be completed by March 2010 at 
Mumbai Port was later assigned a new date in July 2012. Similarly the channel 
deepening project at Paradip Port missed its completion date of January, 2009 and was 
anticipated to  be completed by June, 2010. As missing timelines would result in hug 
cost overruns, the Committee exhort the Ministry of make realistic claims and timelines 
based on better planning and execution.  

 
The committee also notes with concern that against the i nternational standard of 
a gap of about 30% between the installed capacity the traffic, the gap in major ports is 
just 8% which, in turn has led to a substantial increase in waiting time for the ships. Due 
to heavy traffic and over utilization of capacity,  the maintenance work of machines at 
the ports also suffers as there is hardly any idle capacity to relay the work for 
maintenance. Consequently, this can be hazardous to life and limb of port workers as 
well as detrimental to the functioning of the port. The Committee observe that with the 
country growing at the rate of 9% and the manufacturing sector at 12% it is imperative 
that the ports sector matches with the pace as facilitator of the international trade which 
enables the country‟s economy to grow at a faster rate.  
 
In this backdrop, the Committee desire that the Ministry should monitor all the 
ongoing projects under NMDP on regular basis and ensure timely completion of all 
projects. The Committee hope that 77 projects under implementation will be com pleted 
within the set timelines. The Committee feel that all other projects which are in various 
states of finalization and awarding should be executed with due promptitude. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should furnish a statement enlisting all co mpleted 
projects, as on date, under NMDP and status of hitherto incomplete projects alongwith 
reasons for delay to them. The Committee exhort the Ministry to be proactive about 
traffic forecasting and capacity addition. It is of paramount importance to foc us on 
adequate capacity and high productivity in order to render services of an internatio nal 
standard by all major ports. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
“1. Under the National Maritime Development Programme (NMDP) formulated by 
the Ministry of Shipping, 276 projects to be taken up for implementation over the 
period from 01.04.2005 to 31.03.2012. Total investment involved under the 
Programme is Rs. 1,00,339 crores at 2004 -05 prices.  Out of this, Rs. 55,804 
crores is for the Port Sector and the balance is for the Shipping and Inland Water 
Transport Sectors.   
 
  2. In the Major Ports, projects undertaken under National Maritime Development 
Programme cover the entire gamut of activities, namely construction/upgradation 
of berths, deepening of channels, rail/road connectivity projects, equipment 
upgradation/modernization schemes and other related schemes for creation of 
backup facilities. 
 
3. The scheme-wise distribution of projects and the estimated cost along with the 
pattern of funding is shown below:  
 
 
(Amount in ` Crores) 
Project Head No. of 
Projects 
Budgetary 
Support 
Internal 
Resources  
Private 
Investment  
Others Total  
Deepening of 
channels/ 
berths, etc. 
25 2731.00 3340.00 185.00 48.00 6304.00 

Construction/ 
reconstruction 
of 
berths/jetties, 
etc. 
76 563.00 3867.33 28083.24 50.00 32563.57 
Procurement 
of Equipments, 
etc. 
52 0.00 1427.87 1075.00 130.00 2632.87 
Rail and Road 
connectivity 
works  
45 90.00 2232.24 0.00 3634.25 5956.49 
Others 78 225.00 2904.10 5162.10 55.60 8346.80 
Total 276 3609.00 13771.54 34505.34 3917.85 55803.73 
 
4. As on 30.07.2011 total 67 projects involving an investment of  Rs. 7187.85 crores 
have been completed and 70 projects are under progress envisaging an investment 
of  Rs. 18583.04(Annexure-I) 
 
5. The newly formulated Maritime Agenda 2010-2020 has projected the traffic vis-à-vis 
capacity projection for the 12 th FYP and by the year 2020 with specific port capacity 
augmenting projects for all the major ports as well minor ports in the 
States.(Annexure-II) 
 
6. A total of 29 p rojects under PPP mode have been completed & made operational 
creating an additional capacity of 198.46 MMT with investment of about Rs. 8367.04 
crores. After standardization of model Concession agreement (MCA) documents in 
2008, the award of PPP projects in port sector has taken off at a faster pace. In the 
year 2009 -10, 13 PPP port projects were awarded in Major Ports for Capacity of 
75.24 MMT with proposed investment of Rs. 4120.39 crore. In the year 2010 -11, a 
total of 9 PPP port projects were awarded f or a capacity of 51.76 MMT with 
proposed investment of Rs. 3194.80 crore. During the current financial year 2011 -
12, a total of 23 nos. of PPP projects in port sector have been identified and 
targeted to be awarded for capacity of 230.37 MMT & proposed inv estment of RS. 
16672.62 crores. 
 
7. To monitor the timely award of PPP Projects in port sector, milestones for award of 
projects have been specified and regular monitoring and follow up is taken up with 
major ports and the concerned Ministries/Departments. 
 
The reasons for delay in respect of projects are given in statement placed at 
Annexure-1. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter – I) 
 
 

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.3) 
The Committee notes that the major ports like Paradip Port, Kandla Port, 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port and Mumbai Port have not been able to utilize the funds 
allocated to them for development/maintenance work during the  last 3 years. For 
example, for Paradip Port, out of total budgetary allocation of Rs. 83.40 crore  in 2006-
07 expenditure was only 23.15 crore, during the year 2007 -08 out of Rs. 100.00 crore, 
42.05 cr. Were spent and in 2008-09 out of 288.00 crore, 101.47 crore were spent. The 
Committee find it strange that on the one hand inadequate capacity and outd ated 
machinery/infrastructure lead to inordinate delays, higher turnaround time and 
deficiency of service in the ports, yet, on the other hand the Port Authorities have not 
been able to utilize funds available to them for the purpose. The Ministry‟s stand that 
long procedures of non -Standard contract and infirmities in tender documents have 
adversely affected the utilization of funds point towards a lack of perspective as well as 
sound planning of projects to be executed. The Committee note that now a Commi ttee 
has been constituted by the Ministry for standardization of procedures and documents 
for award of contracts. The Committee is unable to understand as to why such ground 
work was not done before handing out contracts for execution of work. The Committe e 
feel that to undertake such critical projects, it is essential that a professional approach 
is followed by the Major Ports/Ministry to streamline procedures. The Committee are 
further distressed to note that inaccurate estimate of the amount of dredging/ quantity to 
be dredged in the channel and basis deepening projects have also been the reasons 
for non -utilization of allocated funds. The Committee feel that half -hearted measures 
have seriously dented the professional standing of the Major Ports with the result that 
these ports are fast losing out to many non - Major/private ports. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to monitor the utilization of funds allocated to Major Ports on 
a monthly basis and advise the Port Chairmen accordingly from time to time to adhere 
to project schedules. The Committee also exhort the Ministry /Major ports to be 
proactive in their planning and utilize the funds effectively. The Committee desire that 
all the schemes/projects awaiting completion should be dealt with due pr omptitude and 
the future projections for funds requirement be done more realistically in the New 
Perspective Plan. 
Action Taken by the Government 
It is stated that in the year 2006 -07, there was an allocation of Rs. 83.40 crore  
comprising of Rs. 40.00 crore as GBS and 43.84 crore as IEBR in respect of Paradip 
Port. The amount allocated as GBS could not be released/spent as the RCE of the 
project was under consideration. The expenditure was only Rs. 23.15 crore out of 
IEBR. Similarly, in the year 2007-08, an allocation of Rs. 100.00 crore comprising of Rs. 
45.00 crore as GBS and Rs. 55.00 crore as IEBR was made in respect of Paradip Port. 
An amount of Rs. 42.05 crore was spent out of the allocation of IEBR. Rs. 45.00 crore 
allocated as GBS was for the “Deepening of Channel” project at Paradip Port was 
approved by the CCEA on 17.11.2005 at original estimate cost of Rs. 154.842 crore 
with 1/3 of its estimated cost as grant -in-aid from Government of India.  Sanction of the 
Government was conveyed on 2.12.2005.  PPT had floated a tender on 16.12.2005 and 
this tender  had to be discharged on 3.6.2006 as the quoted price of L1 tenderer was 
73.74% higher than the value of work put to tenderer.  The tender was re -invited on 
3.2.2006 and pri ce bid was opened on 8.9.2006.  The quoted price of lowest tenderer 
i.e. Dredging Corporation of India (DCI) was 72.66% higher than the value put to 
tender.  Accordingly the revised cost estimate of the project from Rs. 154.84 crore to  
Rs. 253.359 crore w as approved by the CCEA in its meeting held on 29. 11.2007.  
Budgetary support was limited to Rs. 45 crore only.  Sanction of th e Government to 
PPT was issued on 13.12.2007. In the year 2008 -09, no GBS was allocated to the 

Paradip Port. An amount of Rs. 287 .99 crore was allocated as IEBR and an amount of 
Rs. 101.47 crore only was spent.  
 
As regards Kandla Port, Jawaharlal Nehru Port and Mumbai Port are concerned, 
only IEBR ( Internal resources of Port) component was allocated to these port s in the 
last three years. No Government support was given to these ports in these years.  
 
The Ministry of Shipping is reviewing the progress on the expenditure of Port 
Sector at the level of Secretary (Shipping) in its meetings with senior officers regularly. 
As and when r equired, directions are being issued to all concerned on utilization of 
funds allocated to the Major Ports as well as other Organizations under control of 
Ministry of Shipping.  
 
Further, monthly review and monitoring meetings are taken on the progress of 
release and expenditure of GBS at the level of Joint Secretary (Ports) to ensure timely 
action for approval of projects and consequent release & expenditure of budgetary 
funds all ocated. The details of allocation and expenditure of budgetary funds for the 
year 2009-10 and 2010-11 are given below:  
 ( ` in crore) 
Year BE RE Expenditure %age w.r. to 
BE 
%age w. r. 
to RE 
2009-10 385.50 369.93 276.11 71.62 74.63 
2010-11 388.48 394.28 369.82 95.19 93.80 
 
As far as projects are concerned, milestones as per time lines have been fixed for 
all PPP port projects for creation of additional capacity through construction of berths 
and jetties and mechanization of berths which is being reviewed  every quarterly.  These 
timelines are also being monitored and reviewed by Planning Commission and Cabinet 
Secretariat regularly. 
 
On the planning front, the Ministry has taken timely initiatives in 2010 itself to 
prepare a realistic long -term perspective plan namely the “Maritime Agenda 2010 -20” 
for the decade.  This is a very comprehensive strategic plan document of the Ministry 
which also covers in details the plans for development of non -major ports by Maritime 
States. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.5) 
The Committee note with dissatisfaction that productivity and turnaround time of 
all major ports is below international standards, as admitted by the Secretary, Shipping 
during oral evidence. Though there has been a marked improvement in average 
turnaround time from 10.10 days in 1990 -91 to 3.85 days in 2008 -09, the average pre -
berthing detention time and average output per ship berth day is still not up to the 
international standards despite some improvement. The variation  between the major 
ports in the pr oductivity and turnaround time in the country itself is quite substantial 
irrespective of the type of cargo being handled. The Committee also note that due to 

93% capacity utilization in ports as stated by Secretary (Shipping), delays are bound to 
occur wi th increased waiting time. As the Ministry is hopeful of improvement in the 
current scenario after the completion of various Port capacity enhancing projects, the 
Committee suggest that the Ministry should expedite the implementation of these 
projects to r educe higher turnaround time and waiting periods. Level of mechanization 
with technologies of international standard should also be increased substantially to 
increase average output per ship berth day. The Ministry should ask Port Authorities to 
conduct periodic reviews of the factors critical to their functioning and initiate corrective 
action accordingly. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Overall capacity available at Major Ports as on 31.3.2011 is 670.13 million tones 
whereas the traffic handled was only 569.91 million tones.  Although it is ideal to 
maintain a gap of 30% between the installed capacity and the traffic according to the 
conventional international norms, it may not be possible to maintain the exact gap all 
the time.  The gap of 30% is generally required to be maintained in order to take care of 
maintenance works at the berths, approaches to the berths, equipments etc.   Efforts 
are continuously being made to enhance the capacity of the Major  Ports to reach the 
level of International Standards. 
 
Similarly, in regard with the connectivity, all the Major Ports are well connected 
with rail and road and a number of projects by NHAI, Railways etc., are being taken up 
for smooth movement and faster evacuation of cargo. 
 
Processes at Major Ports are be ing simplified with the implementation of 
automation and Port Community Systems in all the Major Ports, which enables all the 
users in Port Operation to lodge their paper electronically for faster clearance. 
 
The average output per ship berthing in 2006 -07 was 9745 tones which reached 
10482 tons in the year 2009 -10.  The performance indicators are being monitored 
regularly by the Ministry port wise for enhancing productively and efficiency levels”. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
Observation/recommendation (Para No. 5.7) 
The Dredging Corporation of India (DCI) is the entity providing dredging services 
for maintenance and is responsible for creation and maintenance of draft at all major 
ports. Several Indian ports  face the problem of inadequate draft which translates into 
their inability to service bigger vessels. However, the Committee are shocked to learn 
that DCI has not been able to procure any new dredging machinery in the past nine 
years and that chartered dr edgers like the Dariyamanthan developed snags thus 
compelling the ports to give dredging contracts to foreign companies inspite of the 
presence of a GOI -owned entity in the field. The Committee fail to comprehend as to 
why the Government has not taken any measures in this regard during the past years 
despite infrastructure projects being delayed badly due to non -availability of dredgers. 
Further, the Committee fail to see any justification as to why no capacity enhancement 

was envisaged for the dredging cap ability of Major Ports, when the Ministry was 
formulating its flagship program – the National Maritime Development Programme 
(NMDP). It shows a complete lack of foresight on their part. Nonetheless the Committee 
desire to be apprised of the reasons for the lack of dredgers in DCI and the steps taken, 
if any, to fulfill the requirements. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
conduct a detailed study of the dredging capacity and requirements of all major ports 
and take necessary to enhance the same. The Committee are of the opinion that ideally 
the DCI should have 1.5 times more capacity than the actual requirements so as to 
accommodate breakdown & maintenance of dredgers and any other unforeseen 
incidents. Till then, in order to tide over the pre sent deficiency of dredgers, the Ministry 
should get into agreements with efficient dredging companies worldwide as a short term 
measure because adequate draft in the country‟s ports would contribute substantially in 
attracting better business for them. Th e Committee would also desire to be apprised of 
the progress on the procurement of the dredgers by the DCI, in due course. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
Dredging Corporation of India has placed orders for acquisition of three IHC built 
TSHD dredgers of 5 500 Cu.M capacity each which will be delivered and put to 
commercial operation between October, 2012 and December,2013. Further DCI has 
added to its capacity with the induction of one new Cutter Suction Dredger and a Back -
hoe dredger is expected to join th e fleet very shortly. With the addition of these 
vessels, DCI has projected a capacity enhancement from the existing about 80 Mln 
CuM to 110 Mln CuM.  
The Dredger Manufacturing Companies in the world are very few. DCI had 
earlier gone for tendering for cap acity enhancement but could not go ahead with the 
same as due to the business restructuring of the identified party led to some legal 
complications and the order could not be placed. There are no full fledged dredgers 
manufacturing yards within India. The cutter suction dredger that joined the fleet 
recently was manufactured in India (by MDL, a PSU Yard under MoD) with foreign 
collaboration. 
Further the dredging market in the world is very closely held with a few 
international companies ruling the same. DCI  has earlier tried to supplement its 
available capacity by chartering of dredgers but that has proved to be not cost effective.  
Some private dredging companies have recently come into foray and with the 
inherent flexibility they enjoy they have procured C hinese built dredgers which are less 
costly. But experts in the field have cautioned that some of these dredgers do not meet 
the quality parameters and may not be reliable and are prone to break downs. 
It is not economically viable to maintain 1.5 times of  the required capacity as the 
maintenance cost of dredgers is very high   and will deplete the bottom lines when a 
dredger is idle as it will have no revenue but will continue to incur the running costs for 
minimum manning etc. 
In terms of the Maritime Agenda for 2010-20 the capacities of all the Major Ports  
are projected to rise from the existing level of about 600 Mln T to about 1400 Mln T in 
2019-20.   Major Ports in India have drawn up ambitious expansion plans during the 
next decade to create substanti al additional capacity.   Apart from the ongoing projects 

for deepening of channels/Berths etc., valued at around `1500 Cr., the major ports are 
planning for projects requiring dredging for `8500 Cr. during 2010-20. 
As stated above DCI has already placed or der for three dredgers which will join 
fleet between Oct 2012   to December 2013. Further, the Company has projected for 
procurement of  two 9000 Cu.M capacity dredgers and other ancillary crafts in 12 th Plan 
involving an outlay of about Rs.1792 Crore. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.11) 
       The 26/11 terrorist attack on Mumbai was an eye -opener bringing forth the issue 
of maintaining adequate and foolproof security at all Indian Ports. The Committee 
observe that the Ministry is taking measures to tighten the security at Indian Ports. 
Since a lot of infrastructure development is taking place through the PPP model in the 
several ports, the Committee feel that security  scenario at privately managed 
ports/terminals should be properly standardized and the concessionaire be urged to 
adhere to all t he prescribed safety measures. The committee desire that security at all 
major ports be upgraded and adequate container scanners be installed wherever 
required. The Committee strongly urge the Ministry initiate measures to have proper co-
ordination between  port security, the customs Department, the Indian Navy and the 
coast guard, so as to have a thorough vigil on the entire coast. Quick reaction teams 
should be deployed at all major ports comprising of CISF, port security, Coast Guards 
and Navy. The Commit tee also desire that the automatic identification system through 
radar be installed all along the coast -line in collaboration with Coast Guard at the 
earliest. Separate routes should be specified for small vessels/fishing boasts of less 
than 20 meters length and those not equipped with the Automatic Identification System 
Class „B‟. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that all Port Authorities remain 
vigilant and pro active in this regard as it is a matter of national security and cannot be 
compromised under any circumstances. The Committee note that though the Ministry 
has undertaken some action regarding the latest measures/equipment to enhance port 
security, it taking lot of time to complete. As any slip -up in future would be catastrophic 
in light of  the 26/11 terrorist attack on Mumbai, the Committee, strongly recommend 
that all security measures be strictly implemented at the earliest at the ports so that all 
emergencies such as terror attacks, collision of containers, accidental oil spills, 
poisonous gas leakages, dumping of harmful e-waste etc. could be handled effectively.  
 
 Another matter posing danger to the lives of people residing near ports is the 
presence of a large amount of hazardous goods in ports like the Mumbai Port and 
Jawaharlal Nehr u Port. In this regard, the Committee are alarmed at certain press 
reports which indicate that around 409 MT of hazardous and toxic material like brass 
ash, old nickel-cadmium batteries etc. is lying unattended on these ports and needs to 
be neutralized ur gently. Reportedly the matter is stuck due to inaction by certain 
Government departments, which are required to give no -objection-certificates on the 
matter. The government of India, by virtue of being a signatory to the Basel Convention, 
1992 that address es issues like transboundary movement and shipment of hazardous 

waste and its disposal, is expected to take prompt measures for timely and appropriate 
disposal of toxic wastes lying in its ports. The Committee, are appalled at the gross 
negligence on the p art of government to attend to such critical issues which poses a 
direct and seriou s threat to public health. The C ommittee, therefore, deplore the 
insensitivity of the departments involved and recommend the Ministry to urgently 
approach the concerned depa rtments for appropriate disposal and clearance of 
hazardous goods from all Indian Ports. The Committee hope that the matter would be 
given critical importance. The committee also desire that the Ministry should 
immediately seek reports from all major and m inor port authorities on any hazardous 
cargo including e-waste lying in their premises and urge th em to take urgent action for 
its evacuation. The committee desire to be apprised of the progress on the matte 
through a detailed note from the Ministry. Besid es, they would also like to know the 
progress on the Govt‟s proposal to install advanced radioactive material detectors in all 
major ports. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 After the attack in Mumbai the Ministry had constituted a High Powered 
Committee to  look into the existing security arrangements in the Major Ports and 
recommend improvements.  Based on the recommendations of the Committee all the 
Ports have been directed to deploy CISF and introduce CC TVs, RIFD technology and 
access control systems.  Bomb Disposal Squads are also being raised.   A minimum of 
2 speed boats are engaged for patrolling purposes.  Further , all the ports except VPT, 
VOCPT, PPT and EPL are having the vessel traffic monitoring system (VTMS) for 
identifying the vessels and guide them for safe navigation into the ports.   VPT, VOCPT, 
PPT and EPL are tracking the vessels through GPS, Radar and Automatic Identification 
System. All Major Ports under Ministry of Shipping are ISPS compliant.  
 
All the ports are applying IMDG code appro ved by International Maritime 
Organization for handling storage and transportation of Dangerous and hazardous 
goods. 
All the ports have regul ations made on this subject. The hazardous cargo lying 
uncleared in the Port is being disposed as per the provision s of Section 61 & 62 of the 
Major Port Trust Act, 1963.  Ministry is also monitoring the presence of hazardous 
goods in the Ports.  Ministry had issued directions to Ports subsequent to the chlorine 
gas leak incident happened in Mumbai on the methodology o f handling hazardous 
goods (copies enclosed).  The Ports do not have any e -waste lying in their premises.  
Ministry of Shipping has been asked by Ministry of Home Affairs to install Radioactive 
Material Detectors at the entry/exit points of all the Ports b y 2012 as a part of Megaport 
initiative.  The Detectors are being manufactured by M/s. ECIL, Hyderabad.  The survey 
of Entry/Exit points have been completed in all the Ports by DG  (Shipping) involving 
ECIL, BARC.  All the Ports have been asked to place the  order of the equipment s as 
per the terms and conditions finalized by the Ministry on 20.07.2011 and requested all 
the Maritime States/Boards to direct the Ports to install the equipments by 2012. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter – I) 
 
 

CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.9) 
           The Committee note that the road and rail connectivity to all major ports is not 
satisfactory and leaves a lot to be desired, though some work has been undertaken to 
develop hinterland for speedy evacuation of cargo from ports. The Committee also  
observe that two other Central Ministries namely the Ministry of Railways and the 
Ministry of Road Transport are the implementing authorities responsible for rail and 
road connectivity of ports, respectively. The Committee also note that most of such 
projects are delayed thus adding to the existing evacuation deficiencies and bottlenecks 
in the movement of cargo. The Committee further observe that the process of land 
acquisition and agitation by local people on account of acquisition of their land is 
extremely complex and time taking which is also holding up the completion of such 
projects. For instance, the Committee are constrained to note that construction of 4 
lane port connectivity road for Mormugao Port Trust at Goa is held up, due to certain 
issues b etween MPT and Government of Goa, particularly the acquisition of 
Government land for 5.2 Kilometers stretch of road, due to encroachment problems. 
The Committee during their visit to Goa were pained to note that several areas of 
disagreement exist between the MPT and State Government on the matter. As the work 
has been stalled for the last 6 years, the Committee advise MPT and Government of 
Goa to co -operate with each other and resolve the impasse at the earliest. The 
Committee also desire that MPT should not go on a confrontation course with 
Government of Goa and should consider a suitable alternate alignment for the disputed 
5.2 Kilometers of road stretch, as a last resort to break the impasse. The Committee 
exhort the Ministry to resolve similar issues c oncerning the connectivity between 
Chennai and Ennore Ports, Kokata and Haldia Ports etc. too.  
 
In this backdrop, the Committee also feel that projects involving land acquisition, 
displacement/rehabilitation of people need a very careful approach. Before 
commencement of the project, the local administration/representatives and the 
concerned State Government should be consulted and taken into confidence to ensure 
smooth acquisition of land or rehabilitation of displaced people. All rehabilitation 
processes should be in place before undertaking any such project. The benefits 
accruing from such projects should be well publicized and advertised to send a positive 
message to the local people so as to convince them that such projects not only benefit 
the port industry but add to the infrastructure development of the region as well as the 
economy of that particular area. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
 

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.14) 
The Committee note with dissatisfaction that despite having a 7500 KM coast 
line, coastal shipping has not made much progress in the country due to reasons 
ranging from lack of policy initiatives and financial incentives in areas such as customs 
and procedures for seamless movement of coastal cargo, to inadequate repair facilities 
for coastal vessels and need to incentivize partnership between coastal shipping and 
minor ports. The Committee also observe that there are ce rtain legal hurdles in the 
development of coastal s hipping, as stated by the Ministry in terms of licensing and 
taxation on fuel for coastal and riverine traffic. The Committee suggest that a uniform 
licensing policy should be put into place to incentivize coastal shipping and thus provide 
an alternative t o rail/road/air cargo movement within and along the country‟s coastline. 
The Committee also suggest that the Ministry should revisit its fifty -year old coastal 
shipping laws so as to enable Indian cargo to be moved by India -registered vessels 
only along th e coastline as in the case of countries like Indonesia. The Committee are 
convinced that such a move will promote coastal shipping as well as create ample 
employment opportunities for the Indian entities. As the Ministry is stated to be working 
to develop a coastal policy, the Committee would like to be apprised of the progress on 
the matter. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
A draft Cabinet Note on Coastal Shipping Policy is under process in which these 
issues are being covered and considered.     
 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION (Para No. 5.15) 
The Committee note that out of all the major ports of the country, Ennore Port is 
the only corporate entity at present. It has been functioning as a corporate entity 
managed by a professional Board since 2001. The Committee note with pleasure that 
Ennore P ort has wiped out all its accumulated losses and has steadily been earning 
profits. It has already been conferred a Mini Ratna Category -I status since its 
corporatization. The Committee observes that decision regarding corporatization of 
Major Ports was to  be taken by the Government after evaluating the performance of 
Ennore Port. To this end a Committee of Experts was set up which had submitted its 
Report in 2006. The Committee are, however, distressed to note that four years have 
already lapsed since its submission and it is still „under examination of the Ministry‟. 
The Committee impress upon the Ministry to review the report at the earliest. As the 
Ministry has been asked to initiate steps for corporatization of at least 3 major ports 
including JNPT in F ebruary, 2010, the Committee would like to know the status of the 
same.  
 
The Committee also note that major ports are governed by the Major Ports 
Trusts Act, 1963 (MPTA) which has many restrictive provisions. Corporatization of 
Ports is necessary as it wi ll not only give complete autonomy to the port to quickly 
respond to commercial situations but will also lead to a much faster decision making 
process. Ports will become less dependent on budgetary support and it will certainly 
increase their capacity to raise resources from the market. The Committee observe that 
faster decision making can help the Indian Ports in taking quicker value decisions and 
increase efficiency and productivity for all stakeholders. Keeping the same in view, the 

Committee support the  recommendation of the Expert Committee that major ports be 
corporatized at the earliest. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
This Ministry has already initiated action for corporatization of Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port. In this connection, a „Note for the Cabinet‟ has been prepared and put up to the 
Hon‟ble Minister of Shipping for his approval. Thereafter, it will be circulated to all the 
concerned Ministries/Departments for their comments. It will be finalized in the light of 
the comments of these organizations and put up for the approval of the Cabinet. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
24th April, 2012              
Vaisakha  4,1934 (Saka) 
 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 
  

APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF SIXTEENTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-2012) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19th April, 2012 from 1130 hrs. to 1345 hrs. 
in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Franscisco  Sardinha - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2.  Shri Ninong Ering 
3.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
4.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
6.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
7.  Shri S. Semmalai 
8.  Shri M.I. Shanavas 
9.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
10.  Shri Ganesh Singh 
11.  Shri Jagadanand Singh 
12.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
      1.    Shri P. K. Grover     - Additional Secretary 
      2.    Shri S. C. Chaudhary    - Director 
      3.    Smt. Anita B. Panda    - Additional Director 
      4.    Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar    - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
(i) ***  ***  ***  *** 
 

(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in 
the Ninth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the sub ject „Indian Ports 
– Infrastructure Development and Capacity Enhancement‟ pertaining to Ministry 
of Shipping.  
 
4. The Com mittee adopted the draft Report  at *** and (ii) above with some 
modifications suggested by the Members of the Committee as per Annexure. 
 
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the above Report s in 
the light of modifications suggested *** *** *** *** *** *** and present the same to the 
Parliament on a date convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
Annexure 
 
Modifications carried out in the Comments of the Committee of the Draft Action 
Taken Report on the subject „Indian Ports – Infrastructure Development and 
Capacity Enhancement‟ pertaining to the Ministry of Shipping 
 
1. On page No. 9, Para No. 1.8, in the second line (from the top) the following lines 
may be added: 
 
“… At the same time, the Committee wish to point out that ports use many of the 
natural resources such as water and land which also affect the socio -economic 
fabric of the area around. Therefore , it should be made obligatory on the part of 
the port authorities to ensure that, as stipulated, they must spent one per cent of 
their net profit of the preceding year towards Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) for activities such as setting up schools , hospitals, creches, recreational 
centres and make available sanitation facilities, drinking water etc. for the welfare 
of the local populace residing in the vicinity of the Ports. In this regard, the 
Committee would like to be apprised about the details of various activities 
carried out under CSR by each of the major ports in the country.” 
  

APPENDIX - II 
(vide introduction to Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-12) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/observations: 
 
16 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
(Nos. 5.1, 5.4, 5.6, 5.8, 5.10, 5.12, 5.13  - Total 07) 
 
 
 Percentage 
 
43.75% 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s reply:  
(Nos. 5.16 - Total 01) 
 
 
 Percentage 
 
6.25% 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which Government‟s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
(Nos. 5.2, 5.3, 5.5, 5.7, 5.11 - Total 05) 
 
 
 Percentage 
 
31.25% 
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited:  
(Nos. 5.9, 5.14, 5.15 - Total 03) 
 
 
 Percentage 
 
18.75% 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 