i 
 
    
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
(Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained 
in Eighteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment - „Programmes and Schemes for 
the welfare of persons with disabilities‟) 
  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   27th April, 2010 
 
Lok Sabha Secretariat 
New Delhi 
 
 
April, 2010/   Baisakha, 1932(S) 
 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
CONTENTS 
         Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE (2009-2010)          
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION                 (v) 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….. 1-19 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by Government……………………………………. 
 
20-43 
 
 
Chapter III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s 
replies………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
44-46 
Chapter IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
47-55 
Chapter V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still 
awaited……………………… 
 
 
 
56-63 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of sitting of the Estimates Committee held on 30 th 
March 2010. …………………………………………………… 
 
64-65 
 
II. Analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 
Eighteenth Report of Estimates Committee (14 th Lok 
Sabha) ………………………………………………………… 
 
66 
 
 
 
   
 

iii 
 
 
 
        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES   
      (2009-2010) 
 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
                MEMBERS 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
3 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4 Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
5 Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
6 Shri Milind Deora  
7 Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
8 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
9 Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi  
10 Shri P. Karunakaran  
11 Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
12 Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
13 Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
14 Shri Vikrambhai Arjanbhai Madam  
15 Smt. Ranee Narah  
16 Shri Prabodh Panda  
17 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
18 Shri Kabindra Purkayastha  
19 Shri C. Rajendran  
20 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
21 Shri K. Jaya Surya Prakash Reddy  
22 Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy  
23 Shri S. Semmalai  
24 Shri Madan Lal Sharma  
25 Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh  
26 Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
27 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
28 Shri Lalji Tandon  
29 Shri Manish Tewari  
30 Shri K.C. Venugopal  
 
    SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Bhupesh Kumar - Director 
3. Smt. Juby Amar - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Satyakaam Yadav - Executive Assistant 
.  
 

iv 
 
                INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been authorized by 
the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifth Report 
on action  taken by  Government  on  the recommendations contained in  the 
E i g h t e e n t h  Report of Estimates Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.               
 
2.  The Eighteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sa bha 
on 20 th October 2008. The Government furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 6 th August 2009 The 
Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Estimates Committee (2009 -
2010) at their sitting held on 30th March 2010. 
 
3.  The Report has been divided into the following Chapters:-  
 
I. Report; 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by Government; 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of Government‟s replies; 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee; 
and 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report of Estimates Committee (14th Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix  -II.It would be observed  there  from that  out  of  33  
observations/recommendations made in t h e Report, 17 recommendations i.e. 52% 
have been accepted by Government and the Committee do not desire to pursue 2 
recommendations i.e. 6% in view of Government‟s replies. Replies of Government 
in respect of 7 r ecommendations i.e. 21 % have not been accepted by the 
Committee and replies in respect of 7 r ecommendations i.e. 21 % is still awaited. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                   FRANCISCO SARDINHA 
April  23, 2010       Chairman,  
Vaisakha 3, 1932(S)               Committee on Estimates 
 

1 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the 18th Report of the Estimates Committee 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment – 
“Programmes and Schemes for the welfare of persons with disabilities”. 
 
1.2 The Committee‟s 18 th Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 20 th October, 2008.  It contained 33 observations/ recommendations.  
Action Taken Notes on all these observations/recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.   
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the Report 
have broadly been categorized as under: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accep ted by the 
Government:  
Sl. Nos. 4, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30  
(Total 17, Chapter -II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s reply: 
Sl. Nos. 6, 31      (Total 2, Chapter-III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which Government‟s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 5, 10, 11, 18, 23    (Total 7, Chapter-IV) 
 

2 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 3, 16, 19, 26, 27, 32, 33    (Total 7, Chapter-V) 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the recommendations 
for which only interim replies have been given by the Government should be 
furnished expeditiously. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on some 
of the recommendations /observations in respect of which Government‟s replies 
have not been accepted by them.. 
 

3 
 
NEED FOR SEPARATE DEPARTMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
1.6 After going into the functioning of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment and Rehabilitation Council of India, the Committee felt that there is a 
need for consideration of a separate department dealing with persons with 
disabilities.  The Committee recommended as:- 
“The Constitution of India ensures equality, freedom, justice and dignity 
of all individuals and implicitly mandates an inclusive society for all, 
including persons with disabilities. The Committee selected the subject 
programmes and schemes for the welfare of persons with disabiliti es for 
examination and had detailed interactions with the representatives of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Rehabilitation Council of 
India and NGOs. 
According to the Census 2001, there a re 2.19 crore persons with 
disabilities in India. Now -a-days there have been vast and positive 
changes in the perception of the society towards these people. It has 
been realized that a majority of these persons can lead a better quality 
of life if they ha ve equal opportunities and effective access to 
rehabilitation measures. The Government of India has enacted three 
legislations for persons with disabilities viz. (i) Persons with Disabilities 
(Equal opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participatio n) Act, 
1995; (ii) National Trust for welfare of persons with Autism, Cerebral 
Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disability Act, 1999; and (iii) 
Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992. National Policy for persons 
with disabilities has also been announced in February, 2006. After going 
into the functioning of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
and Rehabilitation Council of India, the Committee feel that the Act and 
convention lay many obligations upon the Government and society. The 
subject of Disability still falls under the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment and keeping in view the increased obligations in terms of 
convention as well as Act and the changing scenario both economic as 

4 
 
well as social and political, there is a need f or consideration of a 
separate department dealing with persons with disabilities. The 
Committee also feel that though the policy has been rightly pronounced 
and legislations have also been enacted but the benefits that are 
intended have not reached the dis abled beneficiaries. There is ample 
scope for improvement in several spheres of working of the Ministry and 
RCI. These aspects have been dealt with in greater detail by the 
Committee in the succeeding paragraphs.” 
1.7 The Ministry of Social Justice and Emp owerment has not furnished any 
comments on the need for a separate department dealing with persons with 
disabilities.  The Committee are of the view that the number of disabled 
persons in our country is very large (2.19 crore) and they need focused 
attention to provide them the required benefits, services and rehabilitation.  
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is implementing schemes 
relating to various other sections of the society and as such they are not able 
to pay as much attention to execu tion of schemes for the welfare of the 
disabled persons as required and to meet the duties and obligations desired 
by the Acts of Parliament and the conventions of the society to be performed 
by the Executive.  Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earl ier 
recommendation and urge upon the Government that there is urgent necessity 
of creating a separate department dedicated for the welfare of the disabled. 

5 
 
UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH 
DISABILITIES (UNCRPD) AND LACK OF AWARENESS 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
1.8    The Committ ee had noted that India had ratified the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities (UNCRPD) and there was lack 
of awareness about the ministries programs & schemes, the Committee 
recommended:- 
“The National Policy recognizes that persons with disabilities are 
valuable human resource for the country and seeks to create an 
environment that provides them equal opportunities, protect their rights 
and encourages their full participation in s ociety. The focus of the 
policy is primarily on prevention of disabilities, early detection and 
appropriate intervention, physical and economic rehabilitation 
measures, inclusive education, employment in the public as well as the 
private sector and self -employment, creation of a barrier free 
environment and development of rehabilitation professionals. The 
Committee notes   that India has ratified the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities (UNCRPD). By 
doing this, India has reaff irmed its commitment towards the 
International Policy Framework in respect of persons with disabilities. 
The Committee, therefore, are of the view that now it has become 
obligatory to incorporate the essence of the UN convention in our 
planning, implementation, monitoring and review processes pertaining 
to the welfare of disabled persons. 
The Committee also note that there is a wide gap between the 
policy and  grassroot reality. There is lack of awareness about 
disabilities. The Ministry have not taken since re measures to create 
awareness. Although the policy has been formulated, proper 
implementation is lacking.   Even the local MPs/MLAs are not apprised 
about the various welfare schemes.   The Committee recommend ed 
that the Ministry should devise a mechanis m to effectively associate 
Panchayati Raj institutions, local bodies and involve MPs/MLAs of the 

6 
 
country in the process of implementation of National Policy for disabled 
persons, 2006. They also recommend that the Ministry should assign 
the work relating t o evaluation of implementation of National Policy for 
persons with disabilities to an autonomous body having expertise in 
the field.” 
1.9 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their action taken reply 
stated as follows:- 
“The Ministry of Social  Justice and Empowerment is in the 
process of preparing draft amendments to the Persons with Disabilities 
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 
1995, incorporating provisions of the UN Convention for the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities to the extent they do not already figure in the 
Act.  State Governments and concerned Central Ministries have also 
been addressed to implement provisions of the Convention. 
  The Central Coordination Committee (CCC) constituted under 
Section 3 of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995, is mandated, as 
per Section 8 of the Act, to serve as the national focal point on 
disability matters and facilitate the continuous evolution of a 
comprehensive policy towards solving the problems faced by p ersons 
with disabilities. The CCC is chaired by the Minister for Social Justice 
and Empowerment. Three Members of Parliament, including two 
Members of the Lok Sabha and one Member of the Rajya Sabha, are 
elected to serve as members of the CCC.” 
1.10 The Co mmittee note that the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment is in the process of preparing draft amendments to the Persons 
with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full 
Participation) Act, 1995, incorporating provisions of the UN Convention for the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities to the extent they do not already figure in 
the Act.  
The Committee regret to note that the Ministry is silent on the 
recommendation that Panchayati Raj Institutions / Local bodies/MPs/MLAs 

7 
 
should b e involved in the process of implementation of National Policy for 
Disabled Persons, 2006.  The Committee desire that a monitoring Committee 
under the Chairmanship of the local MP should be formed to review the 
implementation of the National Policy for Disabled Persons, 2006 .  It should 
comprise of the local  MLAs and District Magistrate.  It should conduct 
periodic meetings and send its reports to the Ministry of Social Justice & 
Empowerment.  This monitoring Committee should have minimum three 
meetings in  a year.   
Lack of information about the schemes and policies of the Government 
is a major barrier in the welfare and rehabilitation of the disabled people.  As it 
is upto the stakeholders to ensure that those schemes and policies that do 
exist are taken advantage of, it becomes imperative for the ministry to build a 
strong network of advocacy and awareness of its policies and welfare 
schemes.  To this end, it is necessary to involve local communities as without 
their cooperation, no rehabilitation programme can sustain. 
The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the 
Government to urgently finalise the draft amendments to the „Persons with 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) 
Act, 1995 by incorporating the provisions of the UN Convention for the Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities and introduce the Bill in Parliament without further 
delay.  The Committee also urges the Government to involve the Panchayati 
Raj institution, local MPs/MLAs and loca l communities in the process of 
implementation of National Policy for the Disabled Persons, 2006. 

8 
 
SUPPORTED GUARDIANSHIP SCHEME  
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
1.11 Taking note of the fact that the disabled persons need proper care, the 
Committee had recommended:- 
“Under the Scheme Supported Guardianship Rs.500/ -p.m. per 
beneficiary is provided to 10 beneficiaries per district in 36 districts for 
encouraging relatives, friends and institutions to accept legal 
guardianship of destitute and abandoned disabled p ersons. The 
Committee were informed that keeping in view the limited availability of 
funds at present only upto 10 beneficiaries per district are being 
covered under the scheme.   According to an evaluation study, the 
Guardianship Scheme can have significa nt impact over a large area in 
the country if the present coverage of the scheme is enlarged. The 
Committee are not convinced with the reason put forth by the Ministry 
that due to limited availability of funds the scheme is confined to only 
10 beneficiarie s per district.   The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take steps to implement this scheme in other districts 
of the country at the earliest and the amount of assistance should be 
suitably increased from Rs.500, which is a meager amount to tak e 
proper care of disabled persons.” 
1.12 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their action taken reply 
stated as follows:- 
“The Supported Guardianship Scheme was initiated by the National 
Trust for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities, on a pilot basis, to provide 
financial assistance @ Rs .500 per month per beneficiary covering 10 
beneficiaries per district in 36 districts.  On the one hand, the total 
number of beneficiaries thus cover ed was too small to have any 
substantial effect in the community and on the other, the amount 
required was too high (Rs .21.6 lakhs per annum for just 360 
beneficiaries) for the National Trust to scale it up to cover any 

9 
 
substantial number of beneficiaries,  say 10000 for which the amount 
required would have been Rs .6 crore per annum.  Seeing this, the 
Board of the National Trust in its 31st meeting held on 3.6.2008 
decided to discontinue the scheme with effect from 1.4. 09.  
 Ministry of Rural Development ha s recently announced “Indira 
Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme”. Under this scheme, 
persons with severe and multiple disabilities, who are below poverty 
line  and in the age group of 18 -64 years, are given disability pension 
of Rs.200 per month.  
 Besides, many State Governments are also providing Disability 
pension/ allowance to Persons with Disabilities.” 
1.13 The Committee are distressed to note that the Ministry had decided to 
discontinue the “Supported Guardianship Scheme” of assisting @ Rs.500 /- 
per beneficiary (10 beneficiaries per district in 36 districts) w.e.f. 01.4.2009 due 
to lack of funds.   The Committee take further note of the observation of the 
evaluation study that the Guardianship scheme can leave significant impact 
over a large ar ea in the country if the present coverage of the scheme is 
enlarged.  In view of the same t he Committee reiterate the recommendation 
that the “Supported Guardianship Scheme” should be restarted and 
implemented in all the districts of the country at the ear liest in coordination 
with Ministry of Rural Development.  The Committee further observe that 
paucity of funds cannot be a reason to discontinue the scheme in the social 
sector as the primary responsibility of mitigating the hardships faced by 
persons with  disabilities lies with the Government and a ll efforts should be 
taken to bring persons with disabilities in the main stream.   

10 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTES PROVIDING  
MEDICAL TREATMENT & REHABILITATION 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
1.14 Observing that there are o nly seven National Institutes providing medical      
treatment and rehabilitation of persons with disabilities, the Committee had 
recommended:- 
 
“The Committee were informed that seven National Institutes at New 
Delhi, Dehradun, Kolkata, Secund erabad, Mumb ai, Cuttack and 
Chennai have been set up in the country which are specialized in 
various disabilities and are working for the development of 
rehabilitation manpower providing specialized services to persons with 
disabilities; and research and development o f models for delivery of 
services. Four other National Institutes at Bangalore, Mumbai, Mysore 
and Ranchi under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are also 
working in the field of medical treatment and rehabilitation of persons 
with disabilities. The Committee in this regard are of the view that only 
these handful National Institutes are not sufficient to cater the needs of 
persons with disabilities. These National Institutes will not be able to 
cover all parts of the country.  They therefore, recomm end that the 
Ministry should make efforts to set up more such institutes all over the 
country, region-wise and preference should be given to those regions 
where such Institutes have not so far been set up. They also 
recommend that the existing National Ins titutes should also be 
upgraded as per international standards and strengthened and 
together with the local non -governmental organisations should reach 
the blocks and villages where their services are required the most.” 
1.15  The Ministry of Social Justic e and Empowerment in their action taken reply 
stated as follows:- 

11 
 
“The Ministry agrees that there is a need to set up more National 
Institutes, but there is no provision in the Ministry's XI Plan for this 
purpose. It can, therefore, now be considered while  formulating the XII 
Five Year Plan.” 
1.16 The Committee are not satisfied with the Ministry‟s reply that there is a 
need to set-up more National Institutes, but no provision has been made in the 
Eleventh Plan and that the same can now be considered while formulating the 
XIIth Five Year Plan.  The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
the Ministry should set -up more such institutes all over the country  and take 
up this issue with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for 
providing adequate funds for the purpose.  The Committee also suggest that 
every State of the country should have at  least one institute of international 
standards to provide such services  and the Ministry should be more pro -
active in its planning while formulating five year plans. 

12 
 
COMPOSITE REGIONAL CENTERS 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
1.17 Expressing concern over the number of Composite Regional Centers for 
persons with disabilities to provide for both preventive and promotional aspects of 
rehabilitation, the Committee had recommended:- 
“The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have set -up five 
Composite Regional Centres for persons with disabilities at Srinagar, 
Sundernagar (Himachal Pradesh), Lucknow, Bhopal and Guwahati to 
provide for both preventive a nd promotional aspects of rehabilitation 
like education, health, employment and vocational training, research 
and manpower development, rehabilitation for persons with disabilities, 
etc.  These centres have been working as extended arms of National 
Institutes in each of the disabilities and providing services to persons 
with all type of disabilities at one place. The Committee feel that more 
such Composite Regional Centres should be set up in every State in 
the country. The Ministry also in their written re ply furnished to the 
Committee have underlined the need to establish one Composite 
Regional Centre in each State.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should take expeditious steps to establish 
more Composite Regional Centres in the coun try.  They would like to 
be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard.” 
1.18 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their action taken reply 
stated as follows:- 
“In addition to existing five Composite Regional Centres at Srinag ar, 
Sundernagar (Himachal Pradesh), Lucknow, Bhopal and Guwahati, the 
Ministry has set up a Composite Regional Centre for p ersons with 
disabilities at Patna, in February, 2009.” 
1.19 The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has set -up a new Composite 
Regional Centre at Patna, but at the same time note with regret that the 
Ministry has mentioned nothing about setting-up Composite Regional Centres 
in various other parts which are not covered including South and West of 

13 
 
India.  The Committee feel that there is need to set up more such centers in 
each State to provide services like education, health, employment and 
vocational training, res earch and manpower development and rehabilitation 
for persons with disabilities.    The Committee, therefore, reiterate thei r earlier 
recommendation. 

14 
 
PAY SCALES OF TEACHERS/PROFESSIONALS OF SPECIAL SCHOOLS 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
1.20   Noting that pay scales of teachers / professionals of special schools are not at 
par with general school teachers that no staff is willin g to teach / work, the 
Committee recommended:- 
“The Committee are constrained to note that the pay scales of 
teachers/professionals of special schools are not at par with general 
school teachers. The pay scales of teachers are so low that no staff is 
willing to teach or work. The teachers/professionals leave special 
schools and join other schools offering higher remuneration. As such, 
there is great dearth of good teachers in special schools for children 
with special needs. The present level of honorarium f or special 
educators varies from Rs.2800/ - to Rs.6000/ - p.m., depending upon 
the qualification and experience of the educator. They also note that 
there is great disparity in the rate of honorarium for teachers of special 
school and those who are working i n Government/Government 
sponsored schools while both are giving the same services. The 
Committee have been informed that Rehabilitation Council of India 
(RCI) is advocating same terms and conditions of services for teachers 
qualified with diploma/degree in general education and diploma/degree 
in special education. One of the recommendations of the evaluation 
study conducted by Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai is that in 
order to retain and attract well qualified staff, it is necessary to 
reconsider the honorarium currently offered. The proposal to revise the 
cost norms of the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme, 
including honoraria has been considered by the Expenditure Finance 
Committee on 12.5.2008 and will now be placed before the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs.  The Committee are of the view that 
disparity in salary structure of staff working in NGOs and in other fields 
is the root cause for staff leaving at regular intervals for higher 
remuneration and they, therefore, strongly recom mend that the 

15 
 
teachers of special schools should be paid good salary so that they do 
not leave the schools for want of good salary and children with special 
needs are not deprived of good teachers. 
        The Committee also recommend that the proposal to revise the 
cost norms of the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme including 
honoraria as considered by Expenditure Finance Committee should be 
placed before Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs immediately 
and action thereon should also be taken expeditiously.” 
1.21 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their action taken reply 
stated as follows:- 
“Cost norms under the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme, 
including for staff honoraria, are being revised with effect from  2009-
10.” 
1.22 The Committee note with dissatisfaction that the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment is silent on the recommendation to bring the pay 
scales of teachers / professionals of special schools at par with general 
school teachers.  Education is the most i mportant tool for social and 
economic empowerment of the disabled.  Economic rehabilitation of the 
disabled will happen only if they are mainstreamed into the general education 
system through Inclusive education, which necessitate the recruitment and 
retention of highly trained and sensitized teachers by making their job 
attractive by upgradation of their pay scales keeping in view the specialization 
required in their role.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate the recommendation 
that the disparity in salary  structure be mitigated to attract skilled staff and 
professionals.   

16 
 
RESERVATION OF POSTS IN GOVERNMENT SERVICES FOR DISABLED 
PERSONS  
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
1.23 In order to promote participation & role of persons with disabilities in the 
public sector, the Committee had recommended: 
“Under Section 32 of PWD Act 1995, there is a provision that 
Government should identify the posts where reservations for persons 
with disabilities are to be made.  In Section 33 of PWD Act, it is 
mentioned that there w ould be reservations in employment of 3% 
vacancies in identified posts. The status of reservation in various 
Ministries/Dept. against identified posts in Grade A,B,C &D is 3.07%, 
4.41%, 3.76% and 3.18% respectively. For PSUs the reservation 
status in Grade  A,B,C and D is 2.78%, 8.54%, 5.04% and 6.75% 
respectively. The nodal Department in respect of these reservations is 
the Department of Personnel & Training. The Committee are 
astonished to note that the nodal department i.e. Department of 
Personnel and Training have data/ information only upto the year 2004 
and according to the available data, out of total 1352 posts reserved 
for person with disabilities only 563 have been filled up. The 
Committee also note with dissatisfaction that there are so many 
Ministries/Departments where not even a single post is reserved for 
persons with disabilities. One of the reasons put forth for not filling up 
the posts by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is that 
UPSC have not identified higher posts in the Govt. for the persons with 
disabilities. In the absence of identification, naturally these posts have 
not been filled up.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
take expeditious steps to fill up all vacant posts for persons with 
disabilities and should also take up the matter of identifying the higher 
posts with UPSC as early as possible. 
         Under PWD Act, there is a provision that these posts should be 
periodically identified and revised in various categories of service in the 

17 
 
PSUs at the interv al of three years. The Committee are constrained to 
note that the last such revision was done by the Ministry in 2001. The 
Committee view very seriously the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry 
towards persons with disabilities. For years together no eff orts have 
been made to identify and revise the posts in various categories of 
services in the PSUs. They, therefore, recommend that the exercise to 
identify and revise the posts in PSUs according to PWD Act, 1995 
should be undertaken without any further de lay and the Committee be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. The Committee also 
recommend that a separate panel should be set up for promotion of 
disabled persons and PWD Act should be amended accordingly.” 
1.24 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their action taken reply 
stated as follows:- 
“Action with regard to filling up of vacant posts is to be taken by the 
Department of Personnel & Training and the concerned cadre 
controlling authorities for various cadres. The Department of Per sonnel 
and Training has issued instructions vide OM No. 36038/2/2008 -Estt. 
(Res) dated 10.12.08 (Annexure -III) to launch a special recruitment 
drive to fill up backlog vacancies reserved for persons with disabilities. 
  As per the PWD Act, all appropriate Governments i.e. 
concerned Ministries/ Departments and State Governments, are 
required to take action for identification of posts. The last notification 
regarding identification of posts for Government employment (including 
Public Sector Units) was issued by this Ministry on 17.01.2007, in 
supersession of the earlier identification done by the Ministry in 2001. 
Through the notification of 2007, the number of categories of identified 
posts has been increased from about 3300 to 5000. 
         The Ministry is presently drafting amendments to the Persons 
with Disabilities Act, 1995, during which the recommendation regarding 
setting up of a separate panel for promotion of persons with disabilities 
will be duly considered.” 

18 
 
1.25 The Committee had taken note of iss ues of significant and vital 
importance for the welfare of the disabled persons viz. identifying the posts 
where reservation for persons with disabilities are to be made to the extent of 
3% of vacancies in identified posts.  However, the Committee note wit h 
concern that in this regard the nodal department i.e. Department of Personnel 
and Training have data/information only upto 2004 and out of total 1352 posts 
reserved for persons with disabilities, only 563 were filled up.  In so many 
Ministries/Departments not even a single post was reserved for the disabled 
persons and in case of higher posts, UPSC had not identified such posts.  
Besides the revision of posts reserved for the disabled in PSUs were to be 
identified and revised at the interval of three year s (last such revision done in 
2001).  The Committee is also distressed to note that the PSU‟s have not 
implemented the quota for persons with disabilities.  The Ministry of Social 
Justice & Empowerment should direct the PSU‟s to implement the disabilities 
quota at the earliest. 
 The Committee expresses serious concern that the Government have 
implemented the recommendation partially.  It has not been mentioned that 
how many vacancies were filled by the Department of Personnel and Training 
at the time of spe cial recruitment drive taken up in 2008 to fill up backlog 
vacancies.  It is a matter of satisfaction that the categories of identified posts 
in various departments including PSUs have been increased from about 3000 
to 5000 vide last notification issued in  2007 in this regard.  However, how 
many disabled persons have been actually appointed in various departments 
including PSUs has not been made clear. 
 Keeping the above points in view, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire to impl ement the same fully in letter and spirit 
including the issues raised above. 

19 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1.26 The Committee would like to emphasise that they attach the greatest 
importance to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  They would, therefore, urge that the Government should keep a 
close watch so as to ensure expeditious implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by them.  In case it is not possible to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for a ny reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.27 The Committee desire that replies in respect of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter V of the Report may be finalized and final replies of the 
Government furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 

20 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCPETED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para No.4) 
 
National Trust Act covers autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation or a 
combination of any two or more of such conditions and includes a person suffering 
from severe multiple disabilities. The main objectives of this trust are to enable and 
empower persons with disabilities to live as independently and as fully as possible, to 
extend support to registered organizations for providing need based services and to 
evolve procedure for appointment of legal guardians for persons with disabilities 
requiring such protection. The Committee note that the trust has generated income of 
Rs.551.98 lakh, Rs.1289.83 lakh, Rs.1032.11 lakh, Rs.887.94 lakh, Rs.895.17 lakh 
and Rs.991.24 lakh during the year 2001 -02, 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 
and 2006 -07 respectively and the utilization is Rs.396.31 lakh, Rs.505.69 lakh, 
Rs.607.31 lakh, Rs.620.39 lakh, Rs.375.86 lakh, Rs.442.22 lakh for the same period.  
The Committee are distressed to note that National Trust could not fully utilize the 
funds from 2001-02 to 2006-07.      They are astonished to note the reasons given by 
the Ministry for lower utilizat ion of funds in comparison to the income generated 
through corpus of National Trust, that 286 districts are having no NGOs working in 
this area. The Committee view this lackadaisal attitude of the Ministry seriously and 
recommend that every sincere effort should be made to encourage NGOs to serve in 
the unserved districts for ensuring optimum utilization of the funds and also to ensure 
that the disabled beneficiaries in those districts are not deprived of their right to live a 
dignified life. They also recommend that mentally ill persons should also be included 
under the National Trust Act. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

21 
 
During the recent past, number of measures and initiatives have been taken 
to expand the scope and coverage of existing schemes and also to intr oduce 
innovative schemes like health insurance scheme for disabled persons called 
“Niramaya” covering the entire country (except J&K). Due to all these measures and 
efforts,  not only the number of  beneficiaries covered increased manifold but also 
the utilization of funds (i.e. expenditure) by the National Trust improved to Rs 9.10 
crore in 2007-08 and Rs 16.62 crore in 2008-09 against income of Rs 9.97 crore and 
9.98 crore respectively.  
 
 National Trust is making all efforts to encourage NGOs to serve in  unserved 
districts of the country. 
 
 "Mental Illness" is one of the disabilities defined in the Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 1995, and mentally ill persons who come under the category of 
"person with disability" as defined in the Act, are entitled to consequential benefits as 
provided therein.  
 
Aspects relating to treatment of mentally ill are covered under Mental Health 
Act, 1987. Section 53 of the Act also provides for appointment of guardians for 
mentally ill persons. 
  
The issue of bringing mentally  ill persons under the purview of the National 
Trust Act, will be considered, in consultation with all concerned stakeholders, when a 
review of the Act as a whole is undertaken. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.7, Para No.7) 
 
The annual budget allocation for the years 2002 -03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-
06, 2006-07 and 2007 -08 were Rs.229.50 crore, Rs.219.50 crore, Rs.250.60 crore, 

22 
 
Rs.250.60 crore, Rs.243.00 crore, Rs.221.00 crore and e xpenditure for the same 
period is Rs.193.27 crore, Rs.168.87 crore, Rs.177.15 crore, Rs.195.72 crore, 
Rs.183.06 crore and Rs.191 crore respectively.  The Committee are surprised to see 
the wide variation in budget allocation and actual expenditure by the M inistry. The 
allocated funds have not been fully utilised.  The situation, to say the least is very 
alarming.  The reasons advanced by the Ministry are - the late receipt of 
recommendations from State Governments and delay in receipt of grants -in-aid 
proposals from the NGOs.   The Committee while expressing their deep concern on 
the under utilization of funds recommend that as project proposals and projections for 
budget are drawn up well in advance, effective planning, implementation and 
monitoring should be ensured to make optimum use of allocation received annually.  
Regarding pendency of utilization certificate, the Ministry informed that the grant -in-
aid for a financial year is being released only after receipt of the utilization certificate 
for the prev ious year. However, a representative of the Ministry agreed during the 
evidence that getting the utilization certificate in time is creating problem.  The 
Committee view this attitude of the Ministry in giving varying information about the 
actual situation very seriously and desire that while furnishing the information to a 
parliamentary Committee, the Ministry should be extra vigilant. 
 
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should make all efforts to 
recover the grant -in-aid from those NGOs who ha ve either misused the grants or 
have not furnished utilization certificate for the grant -in-aid received by them.  They 
also recommend that appropriate penal action should be taken against those NGOs 
who have misused the grants.  
 
The Committee further not e that multi -disciplinary grants in Committees for 
supporting voluntary organisations does not have any representation of disabled 
persons or their Associations.  They recommend that the Ministry, as was agreed 
during the evidence, should invariably make e fforts to ensure the representation of 
disabled persons in the multi-disciplinary grant in Committee. 
 

23 
 
The Committee were also informed that the persons engaged in the work of 
inspection/monitoring are not specialized in the field and the inspection report s are 
prepared by the inspecting team in a standardized and comprehensive format 
prescribed by the Ministry.   N ot convinced with the reply of the Ministry, the 
Committee recommend that monitoring/inspection of the projects, including review of 
past performance, staff, data regarding beneficiaries, maintenance of records should 
be done by persons specialized in the field. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to ensure transparency and optimum utilization of funds under grant -
in-aid schemes of the Ministry, th e Government has launched a web based software 
solution titled “NGO Partnership System (NGO-PS)” under the National Portal of India 
(http://india.gov.in) for interactions with NGOs. The initiative is aimed at enforcing 
transparency in the process of approval and rejection of any application submitted by 
NGOs, VOs or Civil Society Organizations for seeking grant from the Government. In 
addition, optimal utilization of allocations under Annual Plans will also be facilitated by 
effective planning, implementation and monitoring of schemes.  
 
The Ministry will, in future, be fully vigilant in furnishing information, as desired 
by the Committee. The grants are released to a particular organization, only after 
receipt of utilizat ion certificate for the last grant sanctioned to that organization. 
However, in some cases, the organizations which receive grant in a particular year 
and had not applied for grant in following years, the utilization certificate remains 
pending with them. Efforts are being made to get utilization certificates for such 
cases. 
 
Wherever cases of misuse of grants by NGOs/ implementing agencies are 
reported, State Governments concerned are requested to look into such complaints. 
Penal action and/ or recovery of  grants from implementing agencies will be carried 
out through the State Government.  

24 
 
 
 The Ministry has advised State/UT Governments to include persons with 
disabilities or their associations in the multi -disciplinary grants in aid committees 
constituted by them. 
 
The Ministry takes up special evaluation of projects under the Deendayal 
Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme through independent agencies, in addition to the 
inspections of projects carried out by the State Governments.  This monitoring 
mechanism will be further strengthened as recommended by the Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.8, Para No.8) 
 
The Committee have been informed that proposals for grant -in-aid under 
Deendayal Rehabilitation Scheme are required to be sent by NGOs to the concerned 
State Government/UT Administration in the prescribed applications form along with 
project detail, annual report and other documents such as audited accounts, 
utilization certificates for the previous year, etc. Proposals from various NGOs are 
examined by a multi-disciplinary grant-in-aid Committee of the State Government/UT 
Administration, alongwith inspection reports of the State Governments. The 
recommendations are then sent by the State Governments/UT Administration to the 
Ministry. Inspection can be carried out by any agency other than the State 
Government/UT Administration that may be designated by the Ministry.  
Recommended proposals are considered by the Ministry on the basi s of the model 
projects and detailed norms laid down in the scheme and past performance of the 
organisation. Grant-in-aid can be provided to a maximum of 90% of the admissible 
grant while 10% is to be borne by the NGO.  The Committee are constrained to note 
that the Ministry do not even possess the data regarding number of proposals of 
NGOs received during the years 2004 -05, 2005 -06, 2006 -07. They therefore, 
recommend that Ministry should evolve a mechanism to maintain data regarding 

25 
 
number of proposals received and grant sanctioned to maintain the transparency. 
 
 The Committee are distressed to find that the processing of application for a 
grant-in-aid has a lengthy procedure. The inspection takes place after a long gap of 
submission of application resultin g disbursement of first installment of grant to the 
NGOs at the end of the financial year and the second installment in the next financial 
year. They also note that the procedure to sanction the grants is complicated with 
several channels within channel and it leads to delay. No time frame has been fixed 
for the disposal of applications at various stages and release of grant. The Committee 
are not convinced with the reasons put forth by the Ministry that (i) delay by State 
Governments, (ii) delay in complet ion of procedural formalities and (iii) non -
availability of matching staff in the Ministry causes delay in sanctioning and releasing 
the grants.   They recommend that provisions about the time frame at every stage of 
disposal of the application should be m ade in the Act itself. The status of the 
application should be placed at the internet for the information of the 
NGOs/individuals as is done in the case of issuance of passport. They also 
recommend that the Ministry should allow those NGOs who have proven record in 
the field to apply direct to the Ministry to save the procedural delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Data regarding number of proposals received from Sate Governments is now 
being maintained under the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme. Data 
regarding sanctioned grant is already available and is prepared every year. 
 
In order to ensure transparency and optimum utilization of funds under grant -
in-aid schemes of the Ministry, the Government has launched a web based software 
solution titled “NGO Partnership System (NGO-PS)” under the National Portal of India 
(http://india.gov.in) for interactions with NGOs. The initiative is aimed at enforcing 
transparency in the process of approval and rejection of any application submitted by 
NGOs, VOs or Civil Society Organizations for seeking grant from the Government. 

26 
 
The suggestion regarding permitting NGOs with a proven record in the field to apply 
directly to the Ministry is also under active consideration.  
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9, Para No.9) 
 
 The Committee notice that from the year 2007 -08, the Ministry have started 
tapering off grant in projects already funded for seven years in urba n areas to 
encourage gradual self-reliance of NGOs. Tapering off is done by 5 per cent in every 
alternate year so as to reduce the level of funding to 75 per cent level. The 
Committee are of the view that in the present era of commercialization, there are very 
few corporats who donate for social cause. Everyone wants something in return. 
NGOs being Charitable organisations, cannot venture in to commercial field. In these 
circumstances, tapering off the grants will create a big problem for NGOs to perform 
their activities. This decision will result into phasing out of some programmes of the 
NGOs and negate the legislative mandate of equality and full participation for the 
disabled.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should devise 
such mech anism through which NGOs can become self -reliant to meet their 
expenses and tapering off the grants should be reduced from 75% to a lower level. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Efforts will be made to improve fund-raising capabilities of NGOs, so that they 
become self-reliant. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12, Para No.12) 

27 
 
 
 District Disability Rehabilitation Centre scheme (DDRC) basically seeks to 
provide comprehensive services to the persons with disabilities at the grass root level 
through creation of infrastructure and capacity building at district level for awareness 
generation, rehabilitation, training/guiding of grass root level functionaries.  Under this 
scheme, rehabilitation s upport is provided to the persons with disabilities.  The 
Committee are distressed to note that there are only 199 DDRCs and only 128 are 
operational. They are of the view that every district of the country should have one 
DDRC.  The Secretary, Ministry of  Social Justice and Empowerment while deposing 
before the Committee stated that in an ideal scenario, there should be a  district 
disability rehabilitation centre at least one in each district.  The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should make expedit ious efforts to operationalise the 
remaining sanctioned DDRCs.  After that, the Ministry should take concrete steps to 
set up more DDRCs in unserved districts of the country.   Special care is required to 
cover those districts which are truly backward and where the prevalence of disability 
is higher and services as well as facilities for the disabled persons are meager. The 
Committee reiterate that the people‟s representatives and local bodies henceforth be 
kept informed about DDRC schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 At present the number of functional DDRCs has increased to 173 out of 199 
sanctioned so far.  The Ministry would take steps to operationalise the remaining 
sanctioned DDRCs, and would make efforts to set up more DDRCs, based on the 
criteria reco mmended by the Committee.  DDRCs will also be advised to keep 
people's representatives and local bodies informed about their programmes and 
activities.   
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.13, Para No.13) 
 

28 
 
The Committee have been informed that National Handicapped Finance and 
Development Corporation (NHFDC) was established in 1997 with an objective to 
provide loans at concessional rates to persons with disabilities for setting up an 
enterprise, or for the purpose of education, etc. Loan applications have to be 
submitted in the prescribed format through the State Channelising Agency and 
branches of Punjab & Sind Bank or Oriental Bank of Commerce. Projects upto 
Rs.1.50 lakh are sanctioned  by State Channelising Agency/ Bank and loan 
applications seeking more than Rs.1.50 lakh are sanctioned by NHFDC. The 
Committee note that the limits to provide loans at subsidized rates for the working 
people were decided more th an a decade ago.   They, th erefore, recommend that 
these limits should be revised in view of growing inflation.  The Committee also note 
that there are 44 State Channelising Agencies. They recommend that all Nationalised 
banks should be given instructions to accept loan applications  of disabled persons 
and more State Channelising Agencies should be opened to facilitate the 
beneficiaries. 
          
          The Committee also feel that persons with disability find it very difficult to 
commute by public transport. They have to depend on vehicles specifically meant for 
them, driven by them or driven for them. Procuring such vehicles is difficult.  They, 
therefore, recommend that NHFDC should provide conveyance loan without interest 
to disabled persons. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
(i) The Corporation has increased the loan limits for various activities under 
NHFDC schemes at the 56th Board Meeting held on 15th May, 2009.  The loan limits 
for various activities under NHFDC schemes stand revised, as follows:- 
 
Particulars of the Loan/activity Existing loan Amount Revised loan Amount 
1. For setting up small business 
service/training sector. 
-Rs 1.0 lakh for sales 
trading activity. 
 
-Rs 3.0 lakh for 
service sector activity. 
-Rs 3.0 lakh for sales 
trading activity 
 
-Rs 5.0 lakh for 
service sect or 
activity. 

29 
 
2. For Agriculture Activities: 
Agricultural production, irrigation, 
horticulture, sericulture, purchase of 
agricultural machinery/ equipment 
for agricultural service, marketing of 
agriculture products etc. 
Rs 5.00 lakh Rs 10.00 Lakh 
3. For p urchase of vehicle for 
commercial hiring 
Rs 5.00 Lakh Rs 10.00 Lakh 
4. For self -employment amongst 
persons with mental Retardation, 
cerebral Palsy and Autism. 
Rs 3.00 Lakh Rs 5.00 Lakh 
5. For setting up small industries 
unit 
Rs 5.00 Lakh Rs 25.00 Lakh 
  
 
(ii)    As regards instruction to Banks to accept loan application of disabled 
persons, the Banking Division of the Ministry of Finance has been requested to look 
into this matter. Further, the Corporation has been continuously following up with 
State Go vernment Authorities for nominating State Channelising Agencies in 
States/U.Ts in the following cases: 
 
- where the State Channelising Agency has not been nominated or 
- where the State Channelising Agency nominated by the Government has 
either expressed its i nability to implement NHFDC Schemes or not been 
functional. 
         
(iii)   The NHFDC in its Board of Directors‟ meeting dated 15.5.09, 
considered the matter and felt that its present financial resources would not permit it 
to provide interest-free conveyance loan to persons with disabilities. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.14, Para No.14) 
 
The Committee note that under Assistance to Disabled Persons (ADIP) 
Scheme modern assistive  devices are provided to needy person with disabilities 
through NGOs/NIs/ALIMCO/ DDRCs. The main objective of the scheme is to assist 

30 
 
the needy physically handicapped persons with durable, modern and standard aids 
and appliances which can promote their phy sical, social and psychological 
rehabilitation.  They further note that for expanding its coverage, the Ministry has 
revised the scheme w.e.f. 1.4.2005 and under the revised scheme, motorized tricycle 
for persons with locomotor disabilities, software for p ersons with visual disabilities 
using computer etc. are provided.  The assistive devices costing up to Rs. 6,000/- are 
given to the disabled persons free of cost whose monthly income is upto Rs. 6,500/ - 
and 50% of the cost to those having an income between Rs. 6,501/- and Rs. 10,000/- 
per month. The Committee are of the view that the income limit for supply of the 
assistive devices to the needy persons with disabilities should be revised as these 
limits were decided long back. 
 
           The Committee furt her note that the assistive devices provided under ADIP 
scheme are of sub standard quality. The Ministry in their reply have also agreed that 
there have been oral complaints during meeting with implementing agencies of 
schemes of Assistance to disabled per sons for purchase/fitting of Aids/Appliances 
(ADIP) scheme. The Committee are also constrained to note that the Ministry do not 
have any agency which monitors the quality of these devices. Even crutches supplied 
to the beneficiaries are of sub -standard and  have caused accidents. They also 
disagree with the view of the Ministry that their scheme is a special intervention 
basically keeping in view the needs of the poor disabled persons and they include 
those equipments and appliances which are within their fi nancial limits.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should not compromise with the 
quality of equipments for disabled persons which can prove hazardous. They strongly 
recommend that for maintaining the standard of assistive devices some agency 
should be appointed which may be authorized to give them certification, like the BIS, 
to market these products for the safe use of the beneficiaries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

31 
 
A Committee for revision of ADIP Scheme has been constituted, which will 
inter alia examine revision of the income limit of the beneficiaries.   
  
Under the provisions of the ADIP Scheme, the aids and appliances supplied 
under the scheme must be ISI certified.  
 
 [Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.15, Para No.15) 
 
The Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS) provides support to 
Non-Government Organisations in delivering various rehabilitation services to 
persons with disabilities.  This scheme was sta rted with the objective of ensuring 
effective implementation of the Persons with Disabilities (PWD) Act, 1995 by creating 
an enabling environment and encouraging non -governmental organisations through 
financial assistance for undertaking projects for the welfare of the disabled in different 
disciplines including the areas of education, training and rehabilitation services.  
Under this scheme activities like special schools for children with orthopedic, speech, 
hearing, visual and mental disabilities, vocati onal training centres, pre -school and 
early intervention programme, half way homes, etc. are taken up. The Committee 
note that eleven half way homes set up by NGOs provide vocational training, 
counseling to persons with disabilities and their families to facilitate reintegration with 
the family/society and medical advice/treatment for taking care of occasional 
psychiatric problems.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
encourage NGOs to set up more halfway homes under this scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 NGOs are encouraged to seek grant in aid under the scheme for Half way  
Homes.  The State Governments have been requested to recommend proposals of 
setting-up half way homes by suitable NGOs, preferably linked to mental hospitals. 
  

32 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.17, Para No.17) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry are not following a proper procedure to 
inform the NGOs about the status of their proposals. Many a time they are kept in the 
dark about the status especially the amount of grant that will be sanctioned, etc. They 
have to come personally to Delhi from far flung areas to know the status of their 
proposals. The Committee also note that in case of new proposals  for grant-in-aid, 
the minutes of screening Committee are made available on the Ministry's website so 
that the organisations know whether their proposal is recommended. If the proposal 
is not recommended, the reasons for not recommending the proposal can a lso be 
seen on the website.   The Committee desire that the same procedure should be 
followed for all the proposals for grant -in-aid. Status of all proposals of all the NGOs 
should be displayed on the website of Ministry so that every NGO can easily find o ut 
the status of their proposal and chalk out their plans accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to ensure transparency and optimum utilization of funds under grant -
in-aid schemes of various Ministries, the Government has launched a web based 
software solution titled “NGO Partnership System (NGO -PS)” under the National 
Portal of India (http://india.gov.in) for interaction with NGOs. The initiative is aimed at 
enforcing transparency in the process of approval and rejection of any application 
submitted by NGOs, VOs or Civil Society Organizations seeking grant from the 
Government and also to track the status of each case. All NGOs are being requested 
to sign in and participate in this system. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.20, Para No.20) 
 

33 
 
The Committee note that Chief Commissioner/State Commissioners for 
Persons with Disabilities are mandated to take steps to safeguard the rights and 
facilities of the persons with disabilities. They have certain powers of a Civil Court 
under Section 63 of the PWD Act. These are similar to the powers vested in the 
National Commissions for SC, ST, Minorities, Women, etc. The Committee are 
perturbed to note tha t many States do not appoint separate State Commissioners 
and the Secretary of the concerned department is entrusted with the additional job of 
Commissioner for persons with disabilities. This is a clear violation of the accepted 
legal principle that imple mentors cannot judge the enforcement part also.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should look into this matter and make a 
stringent rule in this regard so that every State should invariably appoint a separate 
Commissioner for persons with disabili ties. The Committee also note that Chief 
Commissioner/State Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities is a Quasi Judicial 
Authority and has power of civil court and they therefore, recommend that the 
enforcement powers should also be vested to enable the CCD to discharge his duty 
effectively and if need be, suitable amendment should be made in the existing Act. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The State Governments are being advised regularly to ensure that the State 
Commissioners for Persons with Disabilities ar e appointed on a full -time basis. The 
Minister of Social Justice & Empowerment has also written to all Chief Ministers in 
this matter. A suitable provision in this regard is also proposed to be incorporated 
while amending the Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995. 
 
Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities (CCPD) and State 
Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities (SCPD) are functionaries in the nature of 
Ombudsmen. Such functionaries are not generally assigned functions of an 
executive or enforcement nature. 
  
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 

34 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.21, Para No.21) 
 
 The persons with disabilities who are gainfully employed are provided 
insurance coverage under the normal insurance sche mes of LIC (with certain 
restriction and extra premium) and the persons with disabilities who are not 
employed/not employable are covered under Jeevan Adhar and Jeevan Vishwas 
Schemes.  National Trust has also formulated a Health Insurance Scheme Niramaya 
for the persons with four types of disabilities, viz. Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities covered under the trust.  The scheme is to be 
launched in the 10 selected districts of the country in the first phase to provide 
affordable health insurance to persons with aforementioned disabilities to encourage 
health services seeking behaviour among persons with disability and to improve the 
general health condition and quality of life of persons with disability.  The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should formulate such other health policies like 
Niramaya covering the persons with other disabilities also. They also desire that the 
Ministry should take expeditious steps to launch Niramaya in every district of the 
country.  The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should encourage other 
insurance companies to formulate cashless health insurance policies for persons with 
disabilities as the Government hospitals are not able to cope up with the increasing 
pressure. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Niramaya health insurance scheme was initially started in 10 selected districts 
on pilot basis which was extended to the entire country (except J&K) within 4 months 
of its launch due to its huge popular demand.  However, due to increasing number of 
beneficiaries getting enrolled under the scheme, it is increasingly becoming difficult 
for the National Trust to bear the cost of scheme from its meager resources.  
 
 The Ministry has already taken up the matter with the Insurance Division of the 
Ministry of Finance to issue instructions to insurance companies to formulate 
cashless health insurance policies for persons with disabilities. 

35 
 
 
 The Ministry of Labour and Employment has launched a health insurance 
scheme “Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yoja na (RSBY)” for the unorganized sector 
workers belonging to BPL category. The Ministry has requested Ministry of Labour 
on 11.9.2008 to ensure that no worker or his family member is excluded under 
RSBY on account of any disability. 
   
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.22, Para No.22) 
 
 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has formulated a scheme 
viz.  “Incentive to Employees in the Private Sector” w.e.f. 01.04.2008 which is 
applicable to the persons with disabilities whose monthly income is up to Rs.25,000/- 
p.m. and working in the private sector, who are also covered under the Persons with 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 
1995 and the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, 
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999.  The Government has 
encouraged private sector to employ persons with disabilities - atleast 5% of their 
work force should c onsist of them. Under this scheme, employer's share of 
contributions for EPF and ESI for the first three years will be made by the 
Government. In fact, the Ministry of Labour and Employment is in the process of 
finalizing the changes in EPF and ESI Rules. 
 
         The Committee recommend that Ministry of Labour and Employment should 
finalize the changes in EPF and ESI Scheme/Rules immediately and apprise them 
about the changes made within 6 months of presentation of the Report. 
 
        The Committee are o f the view that since several irregularities in employee 
contribution towards ESI, EPF, etc. have been noticed, the Ministry should be extra 
vigilant in implementing this scheme.  They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 

36 
 
of Social Justice and Empowerment should devise an effective mechanism to monitor 
the implementation of the scheme. The Committee also desire that the Government 
should explore the possibility of giving more incentives like tax exemptions/ relaxation 
to private sector employers in order to encourage them to employ more persons with 
disabilities. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The EPFO and ESIC, of the Ministry of Labour and Employment have issued 
necessary notifications on 31.3.2008 (Annexure I & II).  
 
A High Level Monitoring Committee (HLMC) has been constituted 
by the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment to monitor the 
implementation of the Scheme of Incentives to Employers in the Private 
Sector for providing employment to persons with disabilities. Three 
meetings of the HLMC have been held so far. The meetings are chaired 
by Secretary, Labour & Employment, and co-chaired by Secretary, 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment and are attended by 
representatives of various Ministries involved in implementation of the 
scheme, EPFO and ESIC.  Representatives of apex organizations of 
Indian industries are also invited as Special Invitees.   
 
Incentives like tax exemptions/ relaxation to private sector employers in order 
to encourage them to employ more persons with disabilities are to be consi dered by 
the Ministry of Finance. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.24, Para No.24) 
 
 The Constitution of India ensures equality, freedom, justice and dignity of all 

37 
 
individuals and implicitly mandates an inclusive society for all including persons with 
disabilities.   Many legislations have been enacted for the welfare of the disabled 
persons. The Committee note that although the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment has taken various steps to create general awareness about 
programmes and schemes for welfare of persons with disabilities such as information 
available with DDRCs is disseminated through camps organized by DDRCs, NGOs, 
NIs and ALIMCO for the distribution of aids and  appliances to the disabled, but there 
is a wide gap between the grassroot reality and the policy. Its proper implementation 
is lacking. Even the local corporators, MLAs, MPs are not kept informed about the 
various welfare schemes. The Committee are of the  view that more attention is 
needed in this regard.  This is very sensitive area, where training should be given to 
people working in the field. The life of disabled persons is challenging.  They are 
subjected to lot of humiliation.  So, the Ministry have to become extra cautious about 
providing amenities to them. The Ministry should take more stringent steps to create 
awareness about early detection, intervention, treatment of disabilities among general 
public.  They therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take advantage of 
electronic media, small tele -films, ads on disabilities for creating awareness about 
detection and treatment of the disabled through television, as this is very popular 
source of creating awareness about disabilities. The Ministry should also address this 
issue through Press. Programmes and schemes regarding camps, etc. should be 
advertised in National level newspapers. Steps should be initiated to stage nukad -
natak (street shows), etc. relating to persons with disabilities in small villages, towns, 
etc. 
         The Committee have also been informed that for creating awareness in rural 
areas, Anganwadi workers are provided assistance to disseminate information to 
pregnant women regarding prevention and early detection of disabilitie s. These 
programmes have been taken up in 30 districts of UP, Bihar and 13 districts of 
Assam.  The Committee recommend that this programme should be implemented in 
every district of all the States in the country. 
 
          The Committee note that a disab ility helpline has been set -up in Delhi and 

38 
 
Mumbai which provides complete information about the disability, the benefits 
available and the procedure for obtaining the benefits by persons with disabilities.  
They recommend that disability helpline should b e established in every State so that 
none of the disabled persons is deprived of the benefits of the schemes.  
         
         They also recommend that new medium of communication needs to be 
explored to create awareness about the achievements. While des igning the website, 
it should be made user friendly and more interesting by including few case studies 
and statistics. 
 
The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment with the coordination of other Ministries should take up National Level 
Programme to eradicate deadly diseases like flurosis, leprosy, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Short radio programmes and TV spots have been prepared and aired/shown 
from time to time. Advertisements have been issued regularly to publi cise the 
scheme of incentives to employers for providing employment to persons with 
disability.   
 
The State Governments have been advised to establish disability helplines at 
the State level. 
 
The Rehabilitation Council of India has launched a new web por tal 
“Punarbhava” which gives extensive information on matters relating to disabilities 
and various schemes/programmes for the empowerment of persons with disabilities.  
 
 The work of making the website of the Ministry disabled -friendly has been 
commenced and it will be made disabled-friendly on priority.   
 
 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is responsible for programmes for 

39 
 
eradication for diseases.   
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.25, Para No.25) 
 
The Committee note that in 1986 when RCI was set-up there were only 
24 institutions, which were imparting training to personnel and professionals 
in the field of rehabilitation and special education. Now RCI has 288 
institutions. It is appreciable but still this number is insufficient to cater to the 
need of trained personnel in a vast country like India which has nearly 2.19 
crore disabled persons.  They therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
take steps to set up more trai ning institutions in the country specially in far 
flung areas and in those areas where there is no institution. 
 
The Committee have been informed that distance education training is 
being imparted through 9 open universities under which 7000 professionals 
are trained every year. The Committee are of the view that distance education 
training should be imparted through more universities so that more 
professionals can be trained because we need about 8 lakh special educators 
and professionals. They recommend that the Ministry should take expeditious 
steps to provide distance education training through more universities. 
 
The Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI) is offering short term courses 
for general school teachers through foundation courses organized by B hoj 
University in MP and nearly 260 centres are operational. After getting basic 
education in special schools, students are brought to the main school, so that 
they do not find it difficult to integrate in the society later on. So, it becomes 
imperative th at general school teachers should also be trained to educate 
these children. Otherwise their purpose of getting education in general 
schools will be defeated. The Committee are of the view that a large number 
of general school teachers need to be trained.  They recommend that RCI 

40 
 
should offer short term courses for general school teachers through 
foundation courses/seminars in more universities, so that large number of 
general school teachers are trained to help the disabled students. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has set up 7 National 
Institutes which impart training in various aspects of disability. There is no 
provision for setting -up more institutes in the XI Plan. However in addition to 
five existing Composite Rehabilitation Centres (CRCs), a new CRC has been 
set up in Patna in February, 2009. 
The Ministry has requested the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (MHRD) to encourage more and more universities to provide 
distance education programme for rehabilitation professionals. 
 
The MHRD already has a large programme of orientation of school 
teachers to teach children with special needs - especially under the Sarva 
Shiksha Abhiyan. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.28, Para No.28) 
  
 The Committee further note that RCI has established Zonal Coordination 
Committees in collaboration with Non Governmental Organisations in 7 States i.e. 
Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Meghalaya, Punjab, Andhra P radesh, Tamil Nadu 
and Gujarat. These Co -ordination Committees maintain vigil on the functioning of 
training institutes in their respective zones. These Committees strengthen the training 
programmes under their zone by inviting professionals/personnel and NGOs in their 
workshops/seminars/sensitization programme, etc. These seven Committees are 
looking after all the States of the country. Thus each Committee has to look after 

41 
 
atleast 5-6 States, which is a very difficult task. The Committee recommend that th e 
Ministry should take expeditious steps to set -up more Zonal Coordination 
Committees especially in those regions where a large number of training institutes 
are located to maintain vigil on the functioning of these training institutes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Rehabilitation Council of India has been requested to take action on the 
recommendation. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.29, Para No.29) 
 
 According to census 2001, ther e are 93.01 lakh women with disabilities, i.e. 
42.46% of the total disabled population. The Committee have been informed that 
though preference is given to girls/women in all schemes of the Ministry/NGOs but no 
social security scheme has been planned for t he disabled girls/women.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should formulate a social security scheme 
for disabled girls/women so that their future can be secured to some extent. If these 
girls become independent, some boys might come forward to marry them. 
 
             The Committee are dismayed to note that there is no provision for stringent 
punishment for those persons who commit atrocities such as sexual assault against 
disabled girls. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter 
with Ministry of Home Affairs and if need be, necessary amendments be made in the 
IPC and Cr. P.C. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Various social security schemes are already being implemented, e.g. 
Janashree Beema Yojana, Aam Admi Bima Yojana, Rashtriy a Swasthya Bima 
Yojana, and the recently launched Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension 
Scheme, which also cover girls/women with disabilities.  Further, some State 

42 
 
Governments are also providing pension/unemployment allowance to persons with 
disabilities including women.   
 
The matter of stringent punishment for atrocities against disabled girls 
recommended by the Committee, has been referred to the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.30, Para No.30) 
  
 Under Persons with Disabilities Act, there is a provision for providing training 
to persons with disabilities and vocational training is provided to persons with 
disabilities through vocational rehabilitation centres run by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and by various NGOs supported by the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment with grants-in-aid scheme. The Ministry of Labour and Employment is 
running 20 Vocational Rehabilitation Centres and 144  Vocational Training Centres 
are run by NGOs and supported by Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. In 
addition to this, Ministry of Labour and Employment has been providing non -formal 
job oriented skill training through 7 Skill Training Workshops (S TWs) and 
rehabilitation services in rural areas through 11 Rural Rehabilitation Extension 
Services. The Committee are of the view that Vocational Rehabilitation Centres run 
by the Ministry of Labour and Employment and NGOs are very less in comparison to 
the population of disabled persons.  They recommend that the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment should encourage NGOs to set up more Vocational 
Rehabilitation Centres in different parts of the country especially in those areas where 
there is no such Vocational Rehabilitation Centres. They also recommend that the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment should also set up more Vocational 
Rehabilitation Centres. The Committee also stress that courses provided by these 
institutions should cater to present day needs. 
 
Reply of the Government 

43 
 
 
 Efforts will be made to assist more Vocational Training Centres under the 
DDRS. Vocational training offered by NGOs at present under DDRS includes trades 
related to computer training, desktop publishing etc, that are in lin e with the present 
day needs.  
 
 Ministry of Labour & Employment have been requested to take necessary 
action on the recommendations. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 

44 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT‟S REPLY 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.6, Para No.6) 
 
 National Trust is implementing a scheme called SAMARTH to provide 
residential facility - both short term and long term. The Committee note that this 
scheme provides residential facility to 35 children, out of which only nine seats are for 
the BPL beneficiaries and rest are all paid seats. The scheme deprives poor disabled 
persons.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that seats for BPL beneficiaries 
should be increased. The Committee also note that the scheme is based on tapering 
of grants. At the Ninth year, the grants will be stopped. The Committee are of the 
view that this scheme should not be based on 100% tapering of grants. It will  
discourage NGOs to come forward to take up projects under this scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should review this scheme and 
instead of 100% tapering of the grants, it should be tapered off to certain lower 
extent. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Samarth scheme was initiated on a pilot basis with 9 seats for BPL 
beneficiaries, out of total 30 beneficiaries per centre.  The scheme was revised in 
December, 2007 whereby all 30 seats were reserved for adult BPL beneficiaries or 
destitute children in case of new centers/ new vacancies in existing centers.   
 
 As far as 100% tapering of grant under the scheme is concerned, this 
arrangement was made with a view to (i) making NGOs self -sufficient by raising 
resources from philanthropic organiza tions, private sector as well as general public, 
(ii) reducing the burden of recurring expenditure on National Trust and (iii) making 
available funds to the National Trust, for expanding the existing schemes as well as 
for introducing new ones.  However,  appreciating the problem of the NGOs in 

45 
 
running the centers with such type of tapering grants compounded by cost inflation, 
other support systems and fund raising capabilities are being enhanced through 
Organizational Development Programmes being organized  by the National Trust 
from time to time for its registered organizations.   
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
  
Recommendations (Sl. No.31, Para No.31) 
 
 The unemployment allowance as well as disability pe nsion is provided to the 
persons with disabilities by State Governments/UT Administrations according to their 
financial capacity. Unemployment allowance varies from Rs.75/- to Rs.500/- p.m. and 
disability pension varies from Rs.60/ - p.m. to Rs.1000/ - p.m. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that only just Rs.75/- p.m. is given as unemployment allowance and 
Rs.60/- p.m. is given as disability pension in several States. It seems to be mockery 
of disabled persons. They are of the view that this meager amount of unemployment 
allowance/disability pension is degrading and insulting for disabled persons as it 
would create inferiority complex among them.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Ministry should take up the matter with State Governments and 
encourage them to raise the amount of unemployment allowance/disability pension, 
keeping in mind the present inflation. The Ministry should also fix certain amount as 
minimum unemployment allowance/disability pension being provided to disabled 
persons by State Governments/UTs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The State Governments are autonomous in taking decisions with regard to 
unemployment allowance/disability pension being provided by them since the 
subject “Relief to Disabled” is in the State list of subjects under the Constitution of 
India. 
 
However, the Ministry of Rural Development has recently launched the Indira 
Gandhi National Disabled Pension Scheme,  under the National Social Assistance  

46 
 
Programme, under which the Central Government will contribute Rs.200 per month  
for disability pension, with at least a matching contribution by the concerned State 
Governments. The scheme is applicable to persons with severe or multiple 
disabilities in the age group of 18-64 years, in the BPL category.  
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 

47 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.1, Para No.1) 
 
 The Constitution of India ensures equality, freedom, justice and dignity of all 
individuals and implicitly mandates an inclusive society for all, including persons with 
disabilities. The Committee selected the subject programmes and schemes for the 
welfare of persons with disabilities for examination and had detailed interactions with 
the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
Rehabilitation Council of India and NGOs. 
 
According to the Census 2001, there are 2.19 crore persons with disabilities 
in India. Now-a-days there have been vast and positive changes in the perception of 
the society towards these people. It has been realized that a majority of these 
persons can lead a better quality of life if they have equal opportunities and effective 
access to rehabilitat ion measures. The Government of India has enacted three 
legislations for persons with disabilities viz. (i) Persons with Disabilities (Equal 
opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995; (ii) National 
Trust for welfare of persons w ith Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and 
Multiple Disability Act, 1999; and (iii) Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992. 
National Policy for persons with disabilities has also been announced in February, 
2006. After going into the functioning  of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment and Rehabilitation Council of India, the Committee feel that the Act 
and convention lay many obligations upon the Government and society. The subject 
of Disability still falls under the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and 
keeping in view the increased obligations in terms of convention as well as Act and 
the changing scenario both economic as well as social and political, there is a need 
for consideration of a separate department dealing with persons with disabilities. The 
Committee also feel that though the policy has been rightly pronounced and 

48 
 
legislations have also been enacted but the benefits that are intended have not 
reached the disabled beneficiaries. There is ample scope for improvement in several 
spheres of working of the Ministry and RCI. These aspects have been dealt with in 
greater detail by the Committee in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 No reply. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
  
Recommendations (Sl. No.2, Para No.2) 
  
 The National Policy recognizes that persons with disabilities are valuable 
human resource for the country and seeks to create an environment that provides 
them equal opportunities, protect their rights and encourages their full participation in 
society. The focus of the policy is primarily on prevention of disabilities, early 
detection and appropriate intervention, physical and economic rehabilitation 
measures, inclusive education, employment in the public as well as the private sector 
and self -employment, creation of a barrier free environment and development of 
rehabilitation professionals. The Committee note that India has ratified the United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of People with Disab ilities (UNCRPD). By doing 
this, India has reaffirmed its commitment towards the International Policy Framework 
in respect of persons with disabilities. The Committee, therefore, are of the view that 
now it has become obligatory to incorporate the essence of the UN convention in our 
planning, implementation, monitoring and review processes pertaining to the welfare 
of disabled persons. 
 
         The Committee also note that there is a wide gap between the policy and 
grassroot reality. There is lack of awareness about disabilities. The Ministry have not 
taken sincere measures to create awareness. Although the policy has been 
formulated, proper implementation is lacking.   Even the local MPs/MLAs are not 
apprised about the various welfare schemes.   The Committee recommend that the 

49 
 
Ministry should devise a mechanism to effectively associate Panchayati Raj 
institutions, local bodies and involve MPs/MLAs of the country in the process of 
implementation of National Policy for disabled persons, 2006. They also recom mend 
that the Ministry should assign the work relating to evaluation of implementation of 
National Policy for persons with disabilities to an autonomous body having expertise 
in the field. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowe rment is in the process of 
preparing draft amendments to the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, 
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995, incorporating provisions of the 
UN Convention for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities t o the extent they do not 
already figure in the Act.  State Governments and concerned Central Ministries have 
also been addressed to implement provisions of the Convention.   
 The Central Coordination Committee (CCC) constituted under Section 3 of 
the Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995, is mandated, as per Section 8 of the Act, to 
serve as the national focal point on disability matters and facilitate the continuous 
evolution of a comprehensive policy towards solving the problems faced by persons 
with disabi lities. The CCC is chaired by the Minister for Social Justice and 
Empowerment. Three Members of Parliament, including two Members of the Lok 
Sabha and one Member of the Rajya Sabha, are elected to serve as members of the 
CCC. 
           The State Co-ordination Committee, constituted under Section 13 of the PwD 
Act, to serve as the focal point on disability matters, has 3 Members of Legislative 
Assembly (MLAs) as its members. In the proposed amendment to the PwD Act, 
establishment of district level monitorin g committee on disability, with representation 
of Panchayati Raj Institutions, is being considered. 
 
Para 62 of the National Policy for Persons with Disabilities, adopted in 
February, 2006, envisages, "a comprehensive review will be done on the 
implementation of the National Policy" every five years. Thus, the first review will be 

50 
 
done in 2011, for which action will be initiated at the appropriate time. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
  
Recommendations (Sl. No.5, Para No.5) 
 
 Under the Scheme Supported Guardianship Rs.500/ -p.m per beneficiary is 
provided to 10 beneficiaries per district in 36 districts for encouraging relatives, 
friends and institutions to accept legal guardianship of destitute and abandone d 
disabled persons. The Committee were informed that keeping in view the limited 
availability of funds at present only upto 10 beneficiaries per district are being 
covered under the scheme.   According to an evaluation study, the Guardianship 
Scheme can ha ve significant impact over a large area in the country if the present 
coverage of the scheme is enlarged. The Committee are not convinced with the 
reason put forth by the Ministry that due to limited availability of funds the scheme is 
confined to only 10 beneficiaries per district.   The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take steps to implement this scheme in other districts of the country at 
the earliest and the amount of assistance should be suitably increased from Rs.500, 
which is a meager amount to take proper care of disabled persons. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Supported Guardianship Scheme was initiated by the National Trust for 
the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple 
Disabilities, on a pilot  basis, to provide financial assistance @ Rs 500 per month 
per beneficiary covering 10 beneficiaries per district in 36 districts.  On the one hand, 
the total number of beneficiaries thus covered was too small to have any substantial 
effect in the community and on the other, the amount required was too high (Rs 21.6 
lakhs per annum for just 360 beneficiaries) for the National Trust to scale it up to 
cover any substantial number of beneficiaries, say 10000 for which the amount 
required would have been Rs 6 c rore per annum.  Seeing this, the Board of the 
National Trust in its 31 st meeting held on 3.6.2008 decided to discontinue the 
scheme with effect from 1.4. 09.  

51 
 
 
 Ministry of Rural Development has recently announced “Indira Gandhi 
National Disability Pensio n Scheme”. Under this scheme, persons with severe and 
multiple disabilities, who are below poverty line  and in the age group of 18-64 years, 
are given disability pension of Rs 200 per month.  
  
 Besides, many State Governments are also providing Disabilit y pension/ 
allowance to Persons with Disabilities. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
  
Recommendations (Sl. No.10, Para No.10) 
 
 The Committee were informed that seven National Institutes at New Delhi, 
Dehradun, Kolkata, Secundrabad, Mumbai, Cuttack and Chennai have been set up in 
the country which are specialized in various disabilities and are working for the 
development of rehabilitation manpower providing specialized services to persons 
with disabilities; and research and development of models for delivery of services. 
Four other National Institutes at Bangalore, Mumbai, Mysore and Ranchi under the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are also working in the field of medical 
treatment and rehabilitation of persons with disabilities. The Committee in this regard 
are of the view that only these handful National Institutes are not sufficient to cater 
the needs of persons with disabilities. These National Institutes will not be abled to 
cover all parts of the  country.  They therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
make efforts to set up more such institutes all over the country, region -wise and 
preference should be given to those regions where such Institutes have not so far 
been set up. They also recomme nd that the existing National Institutes should also 
be upgraded as per international standards and strengthened and together with the 
local non -governmental organisations should reach the blocks and villages where 
their services are required the most. 
 
Reply of the Government 

52 
 
 
 The Ministry agrees that there is a need to set up more National Institutes, but 
there is no provision in the Ministry's XI Plan for this purpose. It can, therefore, now 
be considered while formulating the XII Five Year Plan. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
  
Recommendations (Sl. No.11, Para No.11) 
  
 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have set -up five Composite 
Regional Centres for persons with disabilities at Srinagar,  Sundernagar (Himachal 
Pradesh), Lucknow, Bhopal and Guwahati to provide for both preventive and 
promotional aspects of rehabilitation like education, health, employment and 
vocational training, research and manpower development, rehabilitation for persons  
with disabilities, etc.  These centres have been working as extended arms of National 
Institutes in each of the disabilities and providing services to persons with all type of 
disabilities at one place. The Committee feel that more such Composite Regional  
Centres should be set up in every State in the country. The Ministry also in their 
written reply furnished to the Committee have underlined the need to establish one 
Composite Regional Centre in each State.   The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should take expeditious steps to establish more Composite Regional 
Centres in the country.  They would like to be apprised of the Reply of the 
Government by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In addition to existing five Compos ite Regional Centres at Srinagar, 
Sundernagar (Himachal Pradesh), Lucknow, Bhopal and Guwahati, the Ministry has 
set up a Composite Regional Centre for persons  with disabilities at Patna, in 
February, 2009. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
  

53 
 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.18, Para No.18) 
 
 The Committee note that under Assistance to Disabled Persons (ADIP) 
Scheme modern assistive devices are provided to needy person with disabilities 
through NGOs/NIs/ALIMCO/ DDRCs. The main objective of the scheme is to assist 
the needy physically handicapped persons with durable, modern and standard aids 
and appliances which can promote their physical, social and psychological 
rehabilitation.  They further note that for expandin g its coverage, the Ministry has 
revised the scheme w.e.f. 1.4.2005 and under the revised scheme, motorized tricycle 
for persons with locomotor disabilities, software for persons with visual disabilities 
using computer etc. are provided.  The assistive devices costing up to Rs. 6,000/- are 
given to the disabled persons free of cost whose monthly income is upto Rs. 6,500/ - 
and 50% of the cost to those having an income between Rs. 6,501/- and Rs. 10,000/- 
per month. The Committee are of the view that the inco me limit for supply of the 
assistive devices to the needy persons with disabilities should be revised as these 
limits were decided long back. 
 
           The Committee further note that the assistive devices provided under ADIP 
scheme are of sub standard quality. The Ministry in their reply have also agreed that 
there have been oral complaints during meeting with implementing agencies of 
schemes of Assistance to disabled persons for purchase/fitting of Aids/Appliances 
(ADIP) scheme. The Committee are also c onstrained to note that the Ministry do not 
have any agency which monitors the quality of these devices. Even crutches supplied 
to the beneficiaries are of sub -standard and have caused accidents. They also 
disagree with the view of the Ministry that their scheme is a special intervention 
basically keeping in view the needs of the poor disabled persons and they include 
those equipments and appliances which are within their financial limits.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should not co mpromise with the 
quality of equipments for disabled persons which can prove hazardous. They strongly 
recommend that for maintaining the standard of assistive devices some agency 
should be appointed which may be authorized to give them certification, like the BIS, 

54 
 
to market these products for the safe use of the beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A Committee for revision of ADIP Scheme has been constituted, which will 
inter alia examine revision of the income limit of the beneficiaries.   
  
 Under the provisions of the ADIP Scheme, the aids and appliances supplied 
under the scheme must be ISI certified.  
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
  
Recommendations (Sl. No.25, Para No.25) 
 
 The Committee note tha t in 1986 when RCI was set -up there were only 24 
institutions, which were imparting training to personnel and professionals in the field 
of rehabilitation and special education. Now RCI has 288 institutions. It is appreciable 
but still this number is insuf ficient to cater to the need of trained personnel in a vast 
country like India which has nearly 2.19 crore disabled persons.  They therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should take steps to set up more training institutions in 
the country specially in far  flung areas and in those areas where there is no 
institution. 
 
        The Committee have been informed that distance education training is being 
imparted through 9 open universities under which 7000 professionals are trained 
every year. The Committee are of the view that distance education training should be 
imparted through more universities so that more professionals can be trained 
because we need about 8 lakh special educators and professionals. They 
recommend that the Ministry should take expeditious steps to provide distance 
education training through more universities. 
 
       The Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI) is offering short term courses for 
general school teachers through foundation courses organized by Bhoj University in 

55 
 
MP and nearly 26 0 centres are operational. After getting basic education in special 
schools, students are brought to the main school, so that they do not find it difficult to 
integrate in the society later on. So, it becomes imperative that general school 
teachers should also be trained to educate these children. Otherwise their purpose of 
getting education in general schools will be defeated. The Committee are of the view 
that a large number of general school teachers need to be trained.  They recommend 
that RCI should of fer short term courses for general school teachers through 
foundation courses/seminars in more universities, so that large number of general 
school teachers are trained to help the disabled students. 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The Ministry of Social Justic e and Empowerment has set up 7 National 
Institutes which impart training in various aspects of disability. There is no provision 
for setting -up more institutes in the XI Plan. However in addition to five existing 
Composite Rehabilitation Centres (CRCs), a new CRC has been set up in Patna in 
February, 2009. 
  
 The Ministry has requested the Ministry of Human Resource Development 
(MHRD) to encourage more and more universities to provide distance education 
programme for rehabilitation professionals. 
 
 The MHRD already has a large programme of orientation of school teachers 
to teach children with special needs - especially under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan.  
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 

56 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.3, Para No.3) 
 
The Persons with Disabilities (equal opportunities, protection of rights and full 
participation) Act, 1995 (PWD Act) enacted to giv e effect to the Proclamation on the 
full participation and equality of the people with disabilities in the Asia and Pacific 
region is applicable only to seven disabilities viz. blindness, low vision, leprosy-cured, 
hearing impairment, loco-motor disability, mental retardation and mental illness. This 
Act also provides for both preventive and promotional aspects of rehabilitation like 
education, employment, vocational training, job reservations, research and 
manpower, creation of barrier free environment, re habilitation of persons with 
disabilities, unemployment allowance, establishment of home for persons with 
disabilities, etc. The Committee note that no sincere effort has been made to 
effectively implement the PWD Act, 1995. The commitment made in the Tent h Five 
Year Plan of reaching the un -reached disabled persons remained unfulfilled. The 
Committee were informed that steps had been initiated for amendment to the 
Persons with Disabilities (opportunities, protection of rights and full participation) Act, 
1995. Consultation with stakeholders at national level was undertaken. The 
suggestions received from the stakeholders are examined for amending the Act.   
The Committee are of the firm view that though Act is in place, proper implementation 
of it is lacking and they, therefore, recommend that Ministry should examine the 
suggestions received from stakeholders in the country expeditiously and accordingly 
bring amendments in the PWD Act in consonance with the UNCRPD within a 
timeframe after presentation of the Report to the House.  
          The Committee are also of the view that there are certain other disabilities like 
thallassaemia, flurosis, cochlear implant, etc, that have not been recognized in the 
PWD Act, 1995 so far. They recommend that Ministry should examine all such 

57 
 
disabilities and explore possibility to give recognition to these major disabilities in the 
PWD Act. 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
After holding wide consultations with various stakeholders, the Ministry is 
drafting amendments to the Person s with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, 
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995, based on suggestions 
received and provisions of the UNCRPD.  
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.16, Para No.16) 
 
The Committee find that the criteria of releasing grant -in-aid are based on the 
number of beneficiaries found present on the day of inspection, the number of 
beneficiaries covered in the grant for the previous financial year a nd the prescribed 
ceiling of 15 per cent increase in number of beneficiaries over the previous year. 
They feel that the criteria evolved is totally illogical. The inspection generally takes 
place in winter season or rainy season and the disabled students remain absent from 
the school for many days during these seasons. The absenteeism of children with the 
disabilities is high due to the associated medical complication. Therefore, in their view 
it is unjustified that just on the basis of one day s attendance , grant-in-aid is decided. 
NGOs have to bear expenses according to the prescribed teacher-student ratio. Even 
if the students remain absent, NGOs have to pay teachers salaries, perks, etc. and 
bear all the expenses.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that grants should be 
sanctioned on the basis of children enrolled. However, Government should make 
note of the attendance of disabled children over a period of time. The Ministry should 
explore the possibility to constitute a regulatory body to conduct regul ar inspection in 

58 
 
schools. 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The guidelines of the DDRS scheme will be suitably amended to provide a 
more rational basis for release of assistance. Moreover, State Governments will be 
requested to involve Panchayati Raj Institutions & local bodies in regular inspections 
of such schools. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.19, Para No.19) 
 
The scholarship to persons with disabilities is provided from the intere st 
earned from investment made under the National Disability Fund available in various 
public sector banks.  Students with 40% or more disability whose monthly family 
income does not exceed Rs.15,000/ - are eligible for scholarship. A scholarship of 
Rs.700/- p.m. to day scholars and Rs.1,000/ - p.m. to hostellers is provided to those 
students who are pursuing graduate and post graduate level technical or professional  
courses. Rs.400/- p.m. to day scholars and Rs.700/- p.m. to hostellers is provided for 
pursuing diploma and certificate level professional courses. The Committee have 
been informed that the Ministry have awarded 1443 scholarships and 447 
scholarships have been continued. The Committee are constrained to note that in 
comparison to large number of disabled persons in our country, only 1443 
scholarships are provided, which are quite meager. The Secretary, Ministry of social 
Justice and Empowerment during the interaction with the Committee have accepted 
that about the scholarships we have really not b een able to do much about it. But 
then we have a small scheme under which some scholarships are given to the 
disabled students to pursue their higher professional courses´. The Committee are 
also of the view that the amount provided under this scheme is to o meager to bear 
educational expenses.    They therefore, recommend that the Ministry should review 
this scheme in the present scenario and accordingly increase the amount provided 

59 
 
under this scheme and also make earnest efforts to provide more scholarship s to 
more students with disabilities.  
 
          The Committee desire that to encourage the persons with disabilities, 
nationalized banks may be asked to extend education loans to disabled persons to 
pursue higher studies on lesser simple rate of interest . This way the banks will also 
be fulfilling their social obligations towards society and will help in bringing the 
disabled persons to the main stream. They recommend that this matter may be 
pursued with the Ministry of Finance and nationalized banks for implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Board of Management of the National Fund for People with Disabilities, in its 
meeting dated 25.8.2008 has already directed examination of the feasibility to 
increase number and rate of scholarships. Further, action is being taken in that light.   
 
As regards extending education loan to persons with disabilities by 
nationalized banks on lesser and simple rate of interest, the Banking Division of the 
Ministry of Finance has been requested to issue necessary instructio ns to the banks 
in compliance of the recommendation. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.26, Para No.26) 
 
The RCI monitors the performance of recognized institutions through 
inspections, surprise visits by experts, monitoring of the Zonal Coordination 
Committee, involvement of the concerned universities and State Governments, by 
way of feed back from the students and teachers and action on the complaints of 
irregularities in coordinati on with the Chief Commissioner of Disabilities. The 
Committee are of the view that measures taken by RCI are not adequate to keep a 
vigil on the performance of recognized institutions. Secretary, Ministry of Social 

60 
 
Justice & Empowerment during oral evidence had expressed the opinion that there is 
need for constant vigilance regarding functioning of these organisations.  Even a bit 
of carelessness on the part of RCI will adversely affect the performance of these 
institutions.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry should look into this matter 
with great seriousness and devise a mechanism to keep a strict vigil on the working 
and performance of the recognized institutions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Amendment to the RCI Act is under consideration for which purpose the RCI 
has sent certain proposals to the Ministry. While considering these amendments, the 
above recommendation will also be kept in view. 
  
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.27, Para No.27) 
 
The Committee are astonished to note that RCI, is having a part -time 
Chairman since its inception. Though the Act does not make a specific mention 
anywhere, it only mentions that there has to be a Chairperson under Section 3 Sub -
Section 3. It also mentions under Section 8 Sub -Section 2 that the Council may 
determine the appropriate allowances for the Chairperson. In the present scenario, 
RCI's activities have increased on a large scale in regulating and promoting 
manpower development. So, there is a great need to have a full time Chairperson to 
guide its activities and maintain close liaison with the Ministries and for interacting 
with State Governments, Vice Chancellors of the Universities and rehabilitation 
professionals inside and outside the country. It is an established fact that success of 
an organization to a large extent depends upon the proficiency and interest shown by 
the Head, who is at the helm of affairs.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Ministry should take concerteous steps to appoint a full -time Chairperson in RCI and 
place the matter before the Cabinet urgently. 
 

61 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The matter of appointing a full -time Chairperson in RCI involves amendment 
to the RCI Act, 1992, and will be considered with other amendments required in it.  
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.32, Para No.32) 
 
Disability Certificates are issued by the Medical Board duly constituted by the 
Central and State Governments. The Medical Board consists of three members out of 
which at least one member has to be specialist in the particular field for assessing 
locomotor/visual disability including low vision/hearing and speech disability, mental 
retardation and leprosy cured, as the case may be. The Committee find that due to 
complicated procedure getting a disability certificate is very difficult for persons with 
disabilities. The Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment has deposed 
before the Committee  that only 22 percent of the targeted population has been 
issued Disability Certificate. The Committee have been informed that the Committee 
set up to simplify the procedure of issuing  Disability Certificate  has recommended 
that the power to certify disability should be brought down from the district level to the 
CHC or the PHC level. These recommendations can be implemented by an 
amendment in the rules notified under the PWD Act and the Ministry are in the 
process of preparing those rules.  The Committee  recommend that the Ministry 
should take expeditious steps to amend the relevant rules notified under the PWD 
Act. 
 
             The Committee find that if a person is refused Disability Certificate, he/she 
has to again give a representation to the Medical Board, which would then review the 
decision having regard to all the facts and circumstance of the case and pass such 
order in the matter as it thinks fit. The Committee find it ironical. A person who has 
been refused to get Disability Certificate by Medi cal Board again has to give 

62 
 
representation to Medical Board. The Committee are of the view that if once Medical 
Board has refused, it will hesitate to issue the disability certificate.  So, in such cases 
the competent authority to reconsider the issuance o f Disability Certificate should be 
other than the Medical Board. The Committee, therefore, recommend that this 
procedure should also be reviewed thoroughly and amended accordingly. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is in the process of finalizing 
amendments to the rules, for streamlining the procedure for certification of disability. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009] 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No.33, Para No.33) 
 
Various travel concessions are provided to persons with disabilities. They are 
given 75% concession in railway journey. Some States give them free transportation 
by bus and some States give 50% concession. For availing these concessions 
different passes are iss ued to persons with disabilities. So the person with disability 
has to obtain several passes, which creates problem for them. It is a fact that for a 
person who is suffering from disabilities, keeping various passes during travel is very 
difficult.   The Committee recommend that to overcome the problem of keeping up 
various passes, the Ministry should issue National Identity Card containing all the 
particulars of individuals to persons with disabilities, which should be valid for availing 
all travel concessions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action on this recommendation will be taken in consultation with concerned 
Ministries viz. Railways, Civil Aviation, Road Transport & Highways, etc.   
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment OM No.3-31/2008-DD IV  
dated 6.8.2009]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                               FRANCISCO 
SARDINHA 
April 23, 2010                                        Chairman,  
Vaisakha 3,1932(S)               Committee on Estimates 
 

64 
 
APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE (2009-2010) 
           
          The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 30th March, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 
1800 hrs. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
                                  MEMBERS 
 
2 Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan  
3 Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
4 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
5 Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi  
6 Shri P. Karunakaran  
7 Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
8 Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
9 Shri Prabodh Panda  
10 Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy  
11 Shri Madan Lal Sharma  
12 Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh  
13 Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Sigh  
14 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
15 Shri Lalji Tandon  
16 Shri Manish Tewari  
17 Shri K.C. Venugopal  
                       SECRETARIAT  
1 Shri U.S. Saxena Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Bhupesh Kumar Director 
 
WITNESSES 
 
******   ******  ****** 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the  Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following d raft Reports and 
adopted the same with some modifications/additions: 
 (i) ******    ******   *******  

65 
 
 (ii) Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in Eighteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Ministry of Social 
Justice & Empowerment –„Programmes and Schemes for the welfare  of persons 
with disabilities‟. 
 
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the Draft Reports in the  
light of the modifications and also to make verbal and other consequential changes, 
if any, arising out of factual  verification by the concerned  Ministries and present the 
same to the House. 
 
4. ******    ******   *******  
5. ******    ******   *******  
6. ******    ******   *******  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

66 
 
APPENDIX - II 
(vide introduction to Report) 
 
Analysis of the action taken by Govern ment on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth (18 th) Report of the Estimates Committee (14 th Lok 
Sabha). 
 
(v) Total number of Recommendations/observations:   33 
 
(vi) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
(Nos. 4, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30 - Total 
17) 
Percentage        52% 
 
(vii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s reply: 
(Nos. 6, 31 - Total 2) 
Percentage        6% 
 
(viii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which Government‟s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(Nos. 1, 2, 5, 10, 11, 18, 23 - Total 7) 
Percentage        21% 
 
(ix) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: 
(Nos. 3, 16, 19, 26, 27, 32, 33 - Total 7) 
Percentage        21% 
 
 