 
 
19 
 
 
MINISTRIES OF POWER; COAL AND NEW & 
RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
POWER GENERATION – DEMAND AND SUPPLY 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THIRTEENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES] 
 
  
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2012-2013) 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 

 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
2012-2013 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRIES OF POWER; COAL AND NEW & RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
POWER GENERATION – DEMAND AND SUPPLY 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THIRTEENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES] 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2012 
______________________________________________________________________ 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
19 December, 2012/Agrahayana 28, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
S 
 
       E 
 
 
             A 
 
                      L 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EC No. ___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price:  _____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of 
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110002. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Page 
Composition of the committee on Estimates (2012-13)          (iii) 
Introduction                (v) 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
16 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply 
 
62 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
69 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited 
 
80 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I List of Hydro Projects (tentative) for likely benefits during 12th plan 88 
 
II Inter-regional links planned for 12th Plan and/or early 13th Plan 90 
 
III Location-wise list of ITIs adopted/ being adopted by CPSUs 91 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the  sitting of the Committee on Estimates held on 11 
December, 2012 
 
93 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee on Estimates 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2012-13) 
 Shri Francisco Sardinha, MP  - Chairman 
 MEMBERS 
2.  Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, MP 
3.  Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty, MP 
4.  Shri Harish Chaudhary, MP 
5.  Shri N.S.V. Chittan, MP  
6.  Shri Khagen Das, MP 
7.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, MP 
8.  Shri Pralhad Venkatesh Joshi, MP 
9.  Shri K. Bapi Raju Kanumuru, MP 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire, MP 
11.  Dr. Thokchom Meinya, MP 
12.  Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik, MP 
13.  Kum. Meenakshi Natrajan, MP 
14.  Shri Prabodh Panda, MP 
15.  Dr. Vinay Pandey, MP 
16.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana, MP 
17.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao, MP 
18.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia, MP 
19.  Shri S. Semmalai, MP 
20.  Shri Arjun Charan Sethi, MP 
21.  Shri M.I. Shanavas, MP 
22.  Shri Adhi Shankar, MP 
23.  Shri Jagdish Sharma, MP 
24.  Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP 
25.  Shri Ganesh Singh, MP 
26.  Shri Ijyaraj Singh, MP 
27.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh, MP 

 
 
28.  Shri Uma Shankar Singh, MP 
29.  Smt. Annu Tandon, MP 
30.  Shri Mukul Wasnik, MP 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Director 
3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Janmesh Singh  - Committee Officer 
  

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (201 2-13) having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Nineteenth Report on 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the subject ‘Power 
Generation – Demand and Supply’ pertaining to the Ministries of Power; Coal and New  
& Renewable Energy.  
 
2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 th December, 2011. 
Action Taken Notes on all the observations/recommendations , as related to respective 
Ministries, were  received from the Ministry of Power on 7 th September, 2012, the 
Ministry of Coal on 12 th October, 2012 and the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy on 
28th June, 2012.  The Draft action taken r eport was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 11th December, 2012.  
 
3. An anal ysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report of Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
14 December, 2012 
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
Chairman, 
Committee on Estimates. 
 
 
  
  

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee on Estimates 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Power Generation – Demand & Supply’ pertaining 
to the Ministry of Power and Ministry of Coal and Ministry of New & Renewable Energy.  
 
1.2 The Committee’s Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 28.12.2011. It contained 32  observations/recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes on all these observations/recommendations  as related to respective Ministries  
have been received from the Ministry of Power on 7 th September, 2012, the Ministry of 
Coal on 12th October, 2012 and the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy on 28 th June, 
2012.  
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:  
Para Nos.  6.1, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.10(i), 6.12, 6.14, 6.15, 6.16, 6.17, 6.18, 6.19, 
6.20(ii), 6.20 (iii), 6.20 (iv), 6.20 (vi), 6.20 (viii), 6.20 (ix), 6.20 (x) & 6.20 (xii)  
(Chapter II) 
Total = 20 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s reply:  
Para Nos. 6.3, 6.5 & 6.20 (vii)        
           (Chapter III)  
                     Total = 3 
 

 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government ’s replies have 
not been accepted by the Committee  
Para Nos. 6.2, 6.6, 6.10 (ii), 6.13 & 6.20 (v)    (Chapter IV)  
Total = 5 
           
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited:  
Para Nos. 6.4, 6.11, 6.20 (i) & 6.20 (xi)     (Chapter V) 
Total = 4 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that final replies in respect of comments contained 
in Chapter I of this report as well as the Recommendations contained in     
Chapter V of this Report for which only interim replies have been furnished 
should be furnished expeditiously.  
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on some of 
the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 
A. Eleventh Plan Targets 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 6.2) 
 
1.6 While deploring the fact that the Government had initially set unrealistic targets, 
then reduced it at the mid -term appraisal stage, the Committee in their Original Report 
on the subject had recomme nded that the targets for the Twelfth Five Year Plan should 
be set up after carrying out a scientific analysis and by a real time assessment of all the 
factors involved in the construction of power plants, the limited coal supply etc. as well 
as the analysis of the delay causing issues during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. 
 

 
 
1.7 The Ministry of Power in the action taken reply dated 7 th September, 2012 has 
stated that t he capacity addition requirement is based on the studies carried for 
determining the capacity  addition required to meet the projected demand . During the 
11th Plan, Planning Commission had fixed a capacity addition target of 78,700 MW.  
However, as per Mid -Term Appraisal (MTA) of Planning Commission in 2009, capacity 
addition target was revised to 62,374 MW. Out of which, capacity totaling to 54,964 MW 
was commissioned . Elaborating on the issue, the Ministry has stated that i nspite of 
strenuous efforts made, some projects of 11th Plan did  slip on account of exogenous/ 
endogenous factors , some of whi ch include l ocal issues like various demands and 
apprehensions of local people, environmental issues, contractual issues, delay in supply 
and erection, geological surprises like poor geologica l strata, formation of cavities and 
natural calamities like flood, earthquake etc. 
 
Regarding the 12th Five Year Plan, the Ministry has stated that as per the Report of 
Working Group on Power, capacity addition of 75,785 MW comprising 9,204 MW Hydro, 
63,781 M W Thermal and 2,800 MW Nuclear ha s been proposed. All the  projects 
totaling to 75,785 MW have reportedly been firmed up based on a scientific analysis 
and the present status of implementation of the projects. It has been stated further that 
these projects have all the requisite inputs/clearances in place, and th erefore have a 
high degree of certainty of materializing during 12th Plan.   
 
1.8 With regard to the capacity addition proposal of 75,785 MW for the 12 th Five 
Year Plan, the Ministry of Power has submitted that the projects have all the 
requisite inputs an d clearances in place and therefore, have a high degree of 
certainty of materializing during the 12 th Plan. The Committee hope that learning 
from past experience, the Ministry will make all out efforts to ensure that the 
proposed capacity addition is achie ved without fail during the 12 th Plan. The 
Ministry has not, however, clarified as to how the difficulties faced during the 11 th 
Plan will be addressed, if they arise again during the 12th Plan. 
 

 
 
Delays in project implementation during the 11 th Plan have been partly 
attributed to contractual issues and geological surprises like poor geological 
strata, formation of cavities, etc. The Committee are of the strong view that 
contractual issues can be identified and sorted out beforehand as tendering and 
contracting are not new practices in the public sector infrastructure projects. The 
Committee, further feel that with advancements in the field of Geo -Sciences, 
Satellite Imagery etc., geological surprises can be prevented to a large extent by 
effectively utilizing the knowledge and inputs available with specialized bodies 
like Geological Survey of India. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and exhort the Ministry to take all necessary steps to ensure 
that project impediments are resolved expeditiously and projects are executed in 
time without time over-run during the 12th Plan.  
 
 
B.  Fund requirement for the power sector 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 6.4) 
 
1.9 The Committee, while noting that it would be a monumental task to arrange huge 
funds for the power sector, had emphasized that the Government should streamline the 
funding procedure.  Besides, they had urged that the recommendations of the sub -
Committee of Group of Ministers on financial issues of th e power sector and that of the 
High-Powered Committee should be seriously considered and implemented by the 
Government without any further loss of time. They had also desired to be apprised of 
the modalities and implementation status of National Electricity Fund (NEF). 
 
 
1.10 The Ministry of Power in their action taken reply dated 7 th September, 2012 has 
inter-alia, stated that the Sub -Committee of the Group of Ministers has submitted its 
interim report on 19 th February, 2009 and final report on 6 th October, 2010. The final 
report alongwith the interim report of the Sub -Committee has since been considered 

 
 
and adopted by the Group of Ministers in its meeting held on 29 th October, 2010. State 
related recommendations have been referred to State Governme nts for redressal. Tax 
related proposals have been referred to Ministry of Finance and the same are now 
under examination by the Ministry of Power in consultation with CEA, PFC and REC. 
The Ministry has also stated that since the National Electricity Fund (NEF) Scheme was 
approved on 13 th December, 2011, no disbursement could be made in financial year 
2010-11 and 2011-12. 
 
1.11 No information has been furnished by the Ministry regarding the 
recommendations made by the High -Powered Committee consisting of 
representatives of various financial institutions and banks, formed to deliberate 
on the issue of availability of finance to Power Sector and the action taken 
thereon. The Ministry has also not explained as desired by the Committee the 
modalities of the Nati onal Electricity Fund. The Committee express their 
displeasure over the failure of the Ministry to furnish the requisite information. 
The Committee require the Ministry of Power to provide the desired information 
within a month from date of presentation of this report. 
 
 
C. Foreign Direct Investment in power sector 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6.6) 
1.12 In order to attract greater FDI inflows, the Committee in their Report had 
emphasized that the policy regime in the power sector should be further liberalized and 
the Committee be apprised of the blue print, if any for the future strategy. 
 
1.13 The Ministry  of Power in the  action taken reply dated 7 th September, 2012 has 
stated as follows:- 
“As per extant policy, Foreign Direct Investment  (FDI) up to 100% is permitted 
subject to the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, under the automatic route, 
for: 

 
 
1. Generation and transmission of electric energy produced in hydro electric, 
coal/lignite based thermal, oil based thermal and gas based thermal power 
plants. 
2. Non-Conventional Energy Generation and Distribution. 
3. Distribution of electric energy to households, industrial, commercial and 
other users and 
4. Power Trading” 
 
 
1.14 The Ministry of Power has merely reproduced a portion of the policy 
document without explaining the steps taken or proposed to be taken to attract 
sufficient FDI to power sector. As brought out in the Economic Survey 2011 -12, 
there are financial health and viability issues across the entire spectrum of power 
sector generation , transmission and distribution. In the present power sector 
scenario, all efforts need to be made to attract FDI as these funds bring along 
new technologies, inputs and skills sets. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
reiterate that the Ministry of Power should revisit the incentive structure for FDI in 
power sector and take proactive steps to attract desired quantum of FDI flows. It 
is essential that the Ministry also comes out with a blue -print to chalk out future 
strategies in this regard. 
 
 
D. Pilferage of Coal 
  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 6.10 (ii)) 
 
1.15 The Committee had opined that a substantial portion of coal is pilfered due to 
lack of vigil and proper oversight on the part of coal companies and certain 
unscrupulous elements. They, therefore, had recommended that the reality of illegal 
activities of coal pilferage in coal mines and coal trading areas must be acknowledged 
and dealt with sternly by the Government. They also urged the Government to have an 
independent audit of coal production and actual dispatch on a quarterly basis. 
 

 
 
1.16 The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply dated 12 th October, 2012 has 
stated as under:- 
 
The subsidiary-wise information is as under: 
Company comments 
ECL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The total command area is  spread over seven districts of two states, 
i.e. West Bengal & Jharkhand operates 88 UG Mines and 17 OCP 
under 14 areas. The most of the mines located within villages. The 
stock yards and sidings are the main places which are prone to 
theft/pilferage of co al and transportation rote from stock yard to 
siding. The company engaged Departmental Security Personnel -
1857 Nos, CISF-940 Nos. and DGR sponsored agencies – 2109. For 
patrolling duty so as to control illegal mining as well as theft of coal 
and outsourci ng patches, camps of CISF have been established at 
different location. The CISF parties made surprise raids and check on 
illegal mining as well as movement of coal. At all theft/pilferage prone 
places, the security arrangement has been made. Interaction jo intly 
with CISF and Police Authorities have been made regularly to review 
the situation and make remedial actions. 
 
BCCL 
 
 
 
The following steps havebeen taken to curb the illegal mining – 
(i) conducting raids/patrolling at sensitive areas jointly with 
CISF/Internal Security and State Administration, (ii) Lodging 
FIRs with  the local Police Station wherever such activities 
come to notice, (iii) Whenever any site is identified, prone to 
illegal mining, immediate steps are taken to fill the sites by 
Dozing, Blasting etc. so as to prevent the access to the exposed 
openings, (iv) A Task Force already exists, constituted by DC, 
Dhanbad to prevent illegal mining. Meetings of Task Force are 
also held to review the issues. 
CCL To check pilferage of coal in and a round command areas by the 
internal security and other security arrangement vis -à-vis State Home 
Guards, DGR, CISF contingent are deployed. A high power 
committee has already been constituted by State Authorities, Deptt. of 
Home Affairs, Govt. of Jharkhand  at State level as well as District 
level. 
Measures are taken to identify the points of theft and pilferages of coal 
from coal yards, sidings. The following steps are being taken to check 
theft/pilferage of coal. 
1. Check posts have been erected at vulnerable points. 
2. Most of the coal depots have been fenced with barbed wire. 
3. Frequent surprise checks/raid is conducted by security team 
periodically with District Police Force to prevent coal theft/pilferage. 
4. Regular and intensive patrolling. 
5. Strengthening of internal security by deploying 1058 nos. of DGR 
sponsored Security, 672 Nos. of State Home Guards and 1368 Nos. 

 
 
of CISF personnel apart from 2060 nos. of Company’s Security 
Personnel. 
6. System of weighment with challan has been introduce d while 
transporting coal from one point to another. 
7. Liaison with district authority is maintained and review meetings are 
arranged every month, with concerned DC to curb illegal mining 
theft/coal pilferage. 
8. Authorized loading inspector and weighbrid ge clerks are posted at 
all the Railway Sidings for monitoring the loading and dispatch 
arrangements. 
9. Security guards are posted round the clock in all the railway sidings. 
10. Effective liaison is also maintained with State Administration 
and Police fo r maintain law and order in the respective Railway 
Siding and to check the coal pilferage / illegal trading. 
 
 
SECL There are no major law & order problems which affect production and 
supply of coal. Regular co -ordination and liaison is carried out with 
State authorities and Police for security of coalfields. There are no 
reports of coal mafia activities in SECL There are no reports of illegal 
mining of coal in leasehold areas. Also there is no large scale 
theft/pilferage of coal and theft/pilferage of co al has been reduced 
days-after days. 
 
NCL There is no law & order problem reported in NCL so far. Adequate 
security arrangements are made available for guarding vulnerable 
points. 
The following steps have been taken to curb the menace. – 
 Check posts have been established at he vulnerable points; 
 Intensive round the clock patrolling by security with the help of local 
police; 
 A system of Internal Intelligence collection under the leadership of 
Security Incharge of projects and at corporate level by 
GM(Security); 
 Close liaison is maintained with local Law & Order authorities to 
track the criminals. Also periodic meeting is done with the Law & 
Order Authorities. 
 
MCL No major law & order problem for which production and supply of coal 
is being affected. There is an existing practice that the regular 
interaction/ meetings are being held between Management and State 
Govt. authorities of different levels to ensure preventive/proactive 
measures to resolve various issues pertaining to law & order. 
There is no illega l mining in command area and no theft of coal is 
going on large scale through Mafias/Smugglers or Un-social elements. 
The following steps are being taken to eradicate/minimize the 

 
 
pilferage/theft of coal in the command area. 
 Regular and intensive patrolling is being carried out by departmental 
security personnel and also with the local Police. 
 Surprise checks are being carried out frequently to find out if there is 
any illegal activity in the command area, particularly at loading 
points, weigh bridges and at entry/exist points. 
 All the security check posts and Railway siding have been 
strengthened. 
 To further upgrade the existing security system and to prevent 
losses of Co’s property due to theft CISF is being inducted in MCL. 
 
WCL  As per records available, there is no coal mafia  operating in WCL 
 
 
Coal India Limited has reported that audit  of coal production is done by measuring  
coal stock  as per “ New Code for Uniform System of Maintenance, Control and 
Verification of Coal st ock” in all mines of Coal India  Limited on regular basis in the 
following manner:- 
(i) Monthly  measurement of coal stock is carried out by colliery surveyor, 
(ii) Quarterly  measurement  is carried out by the coal stock measurement team 
constituted  at area level, 
(iii)  Six monthly  measurement  is carried out by coal stock measurement team 
constituted  at subsidiary company level and 
(iv)  Annual measurement as well as check measurement is carried  out by coal 
stock measurement team constituted at CIL”.          
 
 
1.17  It is evident from the reply furnished by the Ministry that there have been 
proven instances of pilferage of coal, as witnessed by some of the coal 
companies particularly by BCCL and CCL in certain areas prone to coal pilferage 
like Dhanbad in Jharkhand, which is contradictory to the original stand taken by 
the Ministry. The Committee are also aware about several media reports citing 
instances of coal pilferage in coal -rich States. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
emphasize that the Ministry should take suitable steps to address the problem 
posed by pilferage of coal, in coordination with the Ministry of Railways. Also, the 
State Governments need to be suitably sensitized to come down heavily upon the 
coal mafias as the State Exchequers bear the maximum b runt of such illegal 
activities. 
  

 
 
The Ministry of Coal has not responded to the specific recommendation of 
the Committee that an independent audit of coal production and actual dispatch 
should be carried out on quarterly basis. The Ministry has simply quo ted the 
reply of the Coal India Ltd. conveying measurement of coal stock carried out by 
the Colliery Surveyors/coal stock management team. The Committee, are of the 
firm view that periodical audit of coal stocks by an independent team only can 
bring out th e factual position at the ground level regarding coal pilferage. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Coal to take necessary action to 
ensure that independent audit is carried out periodically regarding coal 
production and actual dispatch. 
 
E. Low Plant Load Factor (PLF) 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 6.13) 
 
1.18 The Committee had observed that the Plant Load Factor (PLF) of the Central 
Sector Thermal Units was lower than that of private sector. They, therefore, had 
recommended that the Government should strive to raise the PLF of their thermal power 
plants. They h ad also emphasized for strict adherence to the schedule while carrying 
out renovation and modernizations works.  
 
1.19 The Ministry of Power in their action taken reply stated as follows:- 
(i) “The Renovation &Modernization (R&M) programme is primarily aimed at 
generation sustenance and overcoming problems arising due to: 
- Generic Defects. 
- Design Deficiencies /Modifications. 
- Obsolescence of Equipments/systems. 
- In adequacies due to Poor quality of Coal. 
- Change in terminal parameters with reference to design. 
- Stringent environmental conditions.   
- Safety requirements. 
 
(ii) R&M works are generally carried out after 1,00,000 hours of operation by 
thermal power plants. Under Life Extension (LE) programme the useful life of 
the thermal units is increased by anot her 15 to 20 years. Life Extension 

 
 
activities are undertaken after 25 years of operation. There is need to check 
the remaining life of the components after about 20 years of life or 1,60,000 
hours of operation lest it may result into serious failures. A de tailed condition 
assessment along with performance evaluation of various systems / sub -
systems is carried out to identify the modifications / replacements required to 
enable plant operation for a longer period so that during the extended life the 
plant ope rates efficiently and delivers the rated or higher capacity i.e. 
uprating with improved heat rate.   
 
(iii) Based on discussions held with various utilities, the document "National 
Perspective Plan (NPP) for R&M and Life Extension of Thermal Power 
Stations up to  the year 2016 -17" was prepared by CEA in December 2009.  
Also, the guidelines for R&M/LE works of coal/lignite based thermal power 
stations had been revised.  
 
(iv) Out of 53 units (7318 MW) for LE works and 76 units (18965 MW) for R&M 
works planned for 11th Plan, LE works in 13 units (1291 MW) and R&M work 
in 59 units (14855 MW) were completed during 11th Plan period. 
 
(v) During 12th Plan LE works has been identified on 42 units (10672 MW) in 
Central Sector comprising 35 units (9202 MW) of NTPC, 4 units (840 MW) of 
DVC and 3 units (630 MW) of NLC. During 12th plan R&M works has been 
identified on 20 units (4341 MW) comprising 11 units (4050 MW) of NTPC 
and 9 units (291 MW) of NEEPCO”. 
 
1.20 With a view to raising the plant load factor in thermal power plants, Life  
Extension works and Renovation & Modernization works have reportedly been 
undertaken. The Committee, however, are disappointed to note that out of the 53 
units (7318 MW) for Life Extension (LE) works and 76 units (18965 MW) for 
Renovation & Modernization (R&M) works planned for the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan, Life Extension works in only 13 units (1291 MW) and Renovation & 
Modernization works in 59 units (14855 MW) could be completed. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the reasons for delay in complet ion of LE works in as 
many as 40 units and Renovation & Modernization works in 17 units. The 
Committee would also like to be informed as to how soon these works will be 
completed. 
 
 
 

 
 
F. Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 6.19) 
1.21 In their Original Report on the subject, the Committee had noted improper 
implementation of RGGVY at various levels and insufficient or faulty coverage of eligible 
rural house-holds. The Committee , therefore, had recommended that the Government 
should continuously take feedback from certain panels like Inter -Ministerial Monitoring 
Committee and carry out proper audits through independent agencies. They had also 
emphasized that suitable changes shou ld be incorporated in the scheme so as to also 
cover APL households. Further, the Committee had urged that higher capacity 
transformers should be installed in villages under RGGVY for future load expansion. 
 
1.22 The Ministry of Power in the action taken reply dated 7 th September, 2012 has 
stated as follows:- 
 
“Under RGGVY, electrification of un -electrified Below Poverty Line (BPL) 
households are being financed with 100% capital subsidy as per norms of 
KutirJyoti Programme. Households Above Poverty Line (APL) are required to pay 
for their connections at prescribed connection charges and no subsidy is given 
for this purpose. Infrastructure created under RGGVY is expected to be used for 
providing connections to APL by distribution utilities.  While planning f or 
infrastructure and DPRs, states were required to take into account load 
requirement of APL.  
 
Under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen  VidyutikaranYojana (RGGVY), the number and 
size of the transformers is based on the number of connections to be provided in 
the vill age and the spread of households. Under RGGVY High Voltage 
Distribution System (HVDS) is encouraged wherein a number of 10, 16 & 25 KVA 
capacity transformers are installed instead of one bigger capacity transformer 
(without compromising the transformation capacity) to reduce T&D losses and to 
minimize power pilferage. The distribution transformers of adequate capacity in 
the villages have been installed to cater to the domestic lighting load and 
providing free connection to BPL households.  Burning of trans formers was 
primarily due to overloading.  In 11th Plan, the transformers were provided 
keeping BPL load of 60 watt per family only.  In view of the recommendation of 
the Committee, under 12th Plan, it is being proposed to provide transformation 
capacity o n the basis of 250 watt load for BPL and 500 watt load for APL.   
States framed DPRs keeping in view the load requirement for next 5 years, 
therefore, factoring growth and load expansions”. 

 
 
1.23 The Committee appreciate that in pursuance to their recommend ation, the 
Ministry has taken suitable steps to provide load expansion both for BPL and 
APL families and has proposed to provide enhanced transformation capacity for 
the same under the 12 th Plan. However, in so far as various deficiencies in the 
implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) is 
concerned, the Committee, in their Original Report, had    inter-alia recommended 
for its effective monitoring through various measures. The Committee regret that 
the issues raised by them have not  been addressed satisfactorily. The reply does 
not indicate whether any action has been taken to obtain feedback from the Inter -
Ministerial Monitoring Committee and take appropriate corrective action to 
ensure effective implementation of RGGVY.  The Minist ry’s reply is also silent on 
the issue of conducting independent audits and surveys to ascertain the views of 
the beneficiaries regarding the quality and logevity of the infrastructure created 
under RGGVY. The Committee would await the Ministry’s response in this regard. 
 
G. Augmenting Budgetary Allocation of the Ministry of New & Renewable 
Energy  
 Observation/Recommendation  [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20 (i)] 
1.24 As sufficient Budgetary support is indispensable for carrying out any particular 
activity satisfactorily, the Committee had observed that the Budget of the Ministry of 
New & Renewable Energy is quite inadequate being only 0.24 per cent of the Union 
Budget Estimates for 2010-11 resulting in a lot of difficulties to the Ministry.  Therefore, 
they had recommended that the said Budget needs to be increased to at least 1 per 
cent of the Union Budget and desired the Ministry to pursue the matter with the 
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for better allocation in next year’s Budget.   
1.25 The Ministry of New & Renewable Energy has inter alia stated as follows :- 
“During 2010-11, the budget allocation to the Ministry was Rs. 1000 crore which 
corresponds to on ly 0.26 % of the actual total Plan Expenditure of Rs. 3,79,029 
crore.  For FY 2011 -12 ...the actual allocation by Ministry of Finance was Rs. 
1200 crore which corresponds to 0.28% of the total Plan Expenditure (RE 2011 -
12) of Rs. 4,26,604 crore).  ...The a ctual allocation BE 2012 -13 has however 
been Rs. 1385 crore.  The same corresponds to 0.27% of BE 2012 -13 of Rs. 

 
 
5,21,025 crore.  While the Ministry would endeavour to hasten the pace of 
utilization of the existing allocation for the current year and seek enhanced 
allocation at RE stage, it will pursue with Planning Commission for a four -fold 
increase in its allocation at the time of Annual Plan discussions for FY 2013 -14 
with adequate and proper details as suggested by the Committee.” 
 
1.26 The Committee had recommended that the Budget of the Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy needs to be increased to at least 1 per cent of the Union 
Budget.  The Committee note that the Budgetary allocation to the Ministry of New 
& Renewable Energy has shown a very margina l increase from 0.26% in 2010 -11 
to 0.28 per cent in 2011 -12 (RE) as percentage of actual total Plan Expenditure.  
For the current year 2012 -13, the percentage is 0.27 per cent.  The Ministry h as 
informed that they would endeavour to seek from the Planning  Commission 
enhanced allocation at RE Stage for the current year and a four -fold increase in 
the Budgetary allocation at the time of Annual Plan discussions for FY 2013 -14.  
Considering the significance of new and renewable energy in the overall energy 
sector, the Committee would urge the Planning Commission to enhance 
allocation to 1 per cent of the Union Budget for the Ministry of New & Renewable 
Energy during 2013-14. 
 
H. Assessing renewable energy potential 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20(v)] 
 
1.27 The Committee while taking note that there is no Direct Normal Irradiance (DNI) 
Map covering the entire country despite the fact that DNI Map is considered 
indispensible tool in proper assessment and full utilization of the solar potential in any 
region, had recommended that the project relating to the DNI map should be expedited 
and initiatives should be taken to prepare a high resolution energy map of India. 
 
1.28 The Ministry of New & Renewable Energy in their action taken reply  has stated 
as follows:- 
 

 
 
“DNI is one of the critical inputs for ascertaining the techno -economic feasibility 
of any solar power project using concentrating collectors.  It can be estimated to 
a fair degree from the data normally recorded by metrological d epartment and 
facilitate initial identification of potential sites.   However, DNI is a strong function 
of atmospheric turbidity and can vary in future at a given site depending on 
progress of urbanization and industrial activity in the region.   
 
At present, 45 radiation observatories of IMD are equipped to monitor global 
solar radiation, while only a few measure DNI. 51 stations of CWET are 
additional where DNI as well as global solar radiation is monitored.   
 
As a part of cooperation between Nat ional Renewable Energy Laboratory 
(NREL), USA and Solar Energy Centre of the MNRE, high -resolution solar 
resource maps have been prepared based on satellite data.  CWET is also 
working on developing solar atlas based on actual measurements, and it is 
expected that preliminary draft of solar atlas would be ready in about one year 
time”. 
 
1.29 The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy though acknowledges DNI as a critical input for ascertaining 
long term feasibility of solar projects yet has not indicated a clear road map for 
complete DNI mapping of India. The Committee are of the view that in the 
absence of such mapping, the potential sites cannot be fully identified and 
utilized. They, therefore, reiterate their earlie r recommendation and recommend 
expeditious completion of the country’s Solar atlas. 
 
The Committee also regret to note that the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy has not indicated whether any action has been taken to prepare a high 
resolution renewable energy map of India. To tackle power deficit there is an 
urgent need to tap other renewable sources for generating power. Moreover, the 
Committee feel that with vast expanse and diverse renewable energy sources in 
our country, it is of utmost necessity to have high resolution renewable energy 
mapping, covering the entire country. The Committee expect the Ministry to 
ensure that a complete blue -print of such mapping of the country is made at the 
earliest and would like to be apprised of the progress in this regard. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER –II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 6.1) 
 India is a fast growing economy. Power is one of the critical inputs for the growth 
of economy and if the nation has to grow at a consistent rate of 8 to 9 per cent, the 
power generation capacity needs to be significantly augmented. Despite a rise in the 
installed power generation capacity over the past decades, the demands of fast growing 
economy like ours are not being met fully due to under -performance in the power sector 
in several fronts as well as shortage of required coal linkages. As a result the gap 
between demand and supply of power has been widening over the years. In terms of 
percentage, the sup ply of power was short by 7.1 percent in 2003 -04, which has 
increased to 8.2 percent during April to August, 2011. 
 
 During the current year 2011 -12, which is also the terminal year of the XIth  Five 
Year Plan period, the Ministry of Power has reportedly k ept the lowest ever target of 
only around 7,675 MW capacity addition, instead of the earlier target of 20,000 MW. 
The power sector in the country is bogged down by the problem of supply of coal. Coal 
based energy is the main source of Power in India. It wo uld continue to play the main 
role in the years to come. Coal based power generation capacity has been given 
preference, in view of the large domestic coal reserves and the cost of power 
generation with domestic coal being cheaper when compared to other fu els. But of late, 
there have been certain issues with the supply of domestic coal to the power sector 
despite India being the fourth largest producer of coal in the World. As a result, the 
generation of power has suffered. The reliance on imported coal has  also increased 
over the years. There are a number of issues related to the availability of coal to power 
sector. 
 

 
 
 In a scenario where power is not equitably available and coal based plants are 
causing environmental pollution by CO 2 emissions, it is inevitable that alternate sources 
of energy are seriously explored to power homes and industries. The estimated 
potential for power generation in the country from wind, small hydel, solar & biomass 
has been estimated at over 87,000 MW. Against this, the country ’s present installed 
capacity from various renewable energy sources is mere 21,125 MW. The Committee 
feel that holistic efforts are urgently required to meet the power deficit in the country. It 
is in this backdrop that the Committee had selected the subje ct ‘Power Generation – 
'Demand & Supply’ for examination. The observation and recommendations of the 
Committee on the subject after a detailed study and scrutiny of the same are given in 
the subsequent paragraphs. 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 6.7) 
 The Hydroelectric potential in the country has been pegged at 1,48,701 MW, out 
of which 1,45,320 MW of the potential consists of hydro electric schemes having 
installed capacity above 25 MW. The Committee are constrained to note that out of the 
above identified capacity only 33,920.8 MW (23.34%) has so far been developed & 
another 14,707 MW (10.12%) is under process. Thus around 67% of the potential 
remains untapped so fa r. The Committee express their dissatisfaction over such huge 
under-utilization of the country’s hydro potential. 
 
 As on 30 th June, 2010, 98967.2 MW of Hydro Capacity is yet to be developed in 
the country. The Committee note that Government have planned t o add 20334 MW of 
Hydro capacity during the XII th Five Year Plan period. However, even if the stipulated 
capacity is added, after the XII th Plan in 2016, around 78633 MW capacity of Hydro 
Power would remain untapped. In certain States like Haryana, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Bihar, 
West Bengal, Manipur, Nagaland, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram etc. nearly 100% of the 
Hydro Power remains untapped. In the opinion of the Committee, such a huge under 

 
 
utilization of the country’s resources is highly deplorable. Besides being  a relatively 
cheap and an environmentally benign source of power, the focus must shift towards full 
development of hydropower in future. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should identify the projects for the XIIth Plan in right earne st and start the 
awarding procedure, in order to ensure timely execution of the projects. The Committee 
should be apprised about the progress achieved in this regard at the action taken stage. 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that a number of hydro pow er projects in 
the country are facing delays/suspensions due to difficulties in getting environmental 
clearance in time. This leads to an unwanted lock up of capital and resources which 
could have been used for other purposes. The Committee firmly believe that the 
Government of India should not promote any sort of ‘Environmental Dogmatism’, as the 
issues of environmental conservation & development need to be seen in unison. It 
would be impractical to allow one issue to overshadow the other. The Committee 
recommend that the Government should expeditiously resolve all the pending 
environmental issues in a pragmatic manner . As per the Ministry of Environmental & 
Forests, the major issues are concentrated on the Ganga River Basin in Uttarakhand 
and the Siang, Su bansiri and Lohit Basins in North Eastern States. Various 
Environment Impact studies are stated to be underway by the Central Water 
Commission, IIT Roorkee and Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun.  The Committee note 
that these studies were entrusted to t hese authorities since the year 2009. They would 
like to be apprised of the progress made so far on the matter . They also desire that 
decisions taken thereafter should be in the overall interest of the country’s development. 
The Committee are aware that th e Ministry of Power is in touch with the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, the various State Governments and the local stakeholders in 
the matter. They urge the Ministry of Power that it should prevail upon all stakeholders 
to fast track their consultat ions so that the delays/suspensions in various hydro power 
projects could be prevented. 
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Hydro Electric Projects for XIIth Plan: 
A Working Group on Power has been constituted by the Planning Commission to 
formulate capacity addition for 12th Plan. The Working group on power has finalised 
tentative hydro capacity addition of 9204 MW (31 projects) during 12th Plan period. 
These 31 projects are already under construction. The region-wise / state-wise break up 
of these projects is given at Annex.-I 
 
Environment Impact Assessment Studies in North Eastern States: 
 
It may be mentioned that in May, 2008, NHPC awarded the Downstream Impact 
Assessment Study for Lower Subansiri Project to Guwahati University in association 
with Dibrugarh University and IIT, Guwahati. The Expert Committee submitted its report 
in March, 2011 and proposed a number of structural and non -structural measures for 
mitigation of downstream impact of the project under construction by NHPC.  
 
In addition, Report of the two member Technical Experts Committee consisting of 
Shri. C.D. Thatte, former Secretary (Water Resources) and Shri. M.S. Reddy, former 
Secretary (Water Resources) set up by Planning Commission vide OM dated 12.1.2011 
to examine the technical aspects as well as downstream impact of Lower Subansiri 
Project is awaited. Subsequently, as desired by Govt. of Assam, a Joint Steering Group 
has also been constituted by NHPC in consultation with Govt. of Assam on 19.4.2011.  
 
Downstream impact assessment study for Ranganadi St. -I and Pare HE Projects 
was awarded by NEEPCO to IIT, Guwahati in April, 2009 and a Draft Report in this 
regard was submitted in Oct. 2011. It is  understood that final report in this regard is 
likely to be submitted by IIT shortly. 
 
As regards the Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) Studies in North Eastern 
States, it may be mentioned that an Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) was constituted by 

 
 
Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (WR) in 
August, 2009 to evolve a suitable framework to Guide and Accelerate the development 
of Hydropower in the North East Region (NER) which recommended that the sub -basin 
wise studies may b e taken up in major tributaries of Brahmaputra. It was also 
recommended by the Group that CWC shall initially conduct the studies for Subansiri 
and Siang sub -basins in consultation with CEA and MoEF. EIA Studies for Subansiri 
and Siang Basins have since be en undertaken by CWC and M/s. IRG System South 
Asia Ltd., have been awarded the work related to carrying out of EIA Study for Subansiri 
Basin while the EIA Study for Siang Basin has been entrusted to M/s. R.S Envirolink 
Technologies Pvt. Ltd. in Dec., 2011.   
As per Work Plan Schedule, the Interim Reports for Subansiri and Siang sub -
basin giving rapid assessment have been submitted to CWC by the Consultants.  Both 
the Reports have been approved by CWC, subject to the condition that the comments 
and suggestions offered by the TAC Members would be incorporated and a corrected 
Interim Report would be furnished to MoEF for mid -term corrections/suggestions, if any.  
The corrected Interim Report for Siang Sub-Basin has since been received by CWC and 
sent to MoEF. The corrected Interim Report in respect of Subansiri Sub -Basin is, 
however, still awaited.   
 
These reports are likely to be placed before Expert Appraisal Committee shortly 
for consideration.  The draft final reports are scheduled to be submitted to CWC b y 
15.10.2012 and the final reports within 2 months of the approval of draft final reports by 
CWC.  
 The status of studies entrusted to  IIT Roorkee and  Wildlife Institute of India , 
Dehradun is as following:- 
a) Study on assessment of Cumulative Impact of Hydropower Projects in Alaknanda 
and Bhagirathi Basins upto Devprayag – IIT Roorkee – Report prepared in 
December’2011. 
b) Assessment of Cumulative Impacts of Hydroelectric Projects on Aquatic and 
Terrestrial Biodiversity in Alaknanda and Bhagirathi Basins, Utt arakhand – 
Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun-Report prepared in 2012. 

 
 
An Inter-Ministerial Group has been formed by MoEF under the Chairmanship of 
Shri B.K. Chaturvedi, Member, Planning Commission in the month of June,2012 with 
the following objective including others:-  
“To suggest environmental flow requirement that could be prescribed for various 
stretches of Bhagirathi, Alaknanda and other tributaries of river Ganga, taking into 
account suggestions in the reports prepared by the IIT Roorkee, Wild Li fe Institute of 
India and any other available report on the subject that group wishes to consider.” 
The Group is likely to give its report shortly. 
 
The following bottlenecks are being faced in the development of hydropower 
projects which needs to be addressed by all the Stakeholders for preventing the 
delays/suspensions :- 
 Land acquisition problems:  Land acquisition is a persistent issue involved in 
the implementation of a hydro project. Acquisition of land for various locations of 
the project such as  Dam, HRT, Power House, Switch yard etc. needs to be 
resolved before commencement of construction of the project.   
 
 Environment and forest issues:   Environment and Forest clearance issues 
also need to be addressed to ensure minimizing the delay in executi on of HE 
Projects.  
 
 Rehabilitation & Resettlement issues: Dislocation of the people from their 
houses/fields/workplaces etc. and their resettlement is a sensitive issue and the 
task involves a lot of time and money. Many times these issues lead to court 
cases resulting in delay in project execution/ completion. 
 
 Geological surprises:   Unfavorable geological conditions encountered during 
underground works which were not anticipated during survey and investigation is 
termed as geological surprises. Depending  upon the gravity of the geological 
surprises like collapsing of tunnel, fault zones, cavity formation, emission of 

 
 
dangerous gases, development of local stresses, ingress of water, etc. the 
completion of the project gets delayed. 
 
 Natural Calamities:  Natural calamities like unprecedented rain/flash floods, 
cloud burst, earthquake, etc. delay the completion of project. 
 
 Law & order problem & local issues:  Poor law and order in some of the states 
is also one of the reasons contributing to the delay in the implementation of hydro 
projects.  
 
 Performance of contractors and Contractual issues: In few cases, poor 
performance by the contractors and also, due to other contractual issues, 
completion of the projects gets delayed. 
 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 6.8) 
 The Committee note that in order to utilize the optimum potential of power 
generated, pumped storage plants are used, particularly in those areas where 
availability of water is in abundance. However, the Committee find that these plants 
often store power b y curtailing supply of power from those who need it most. They feel 
that pumped storage plants should continue to supply power till the scope of power 
consumption exists, since according to the Ministry, such plants are better for meeting 
of peak hour dema nd. The Committee are, thus of the opinion, that pumped storage 
plants should ensure that the existing demand for power is completely met before 
pumping back the water for re-generation of surplus power. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
A few Pumped Storage P lants are in operation in the State Sector and they 
generally operate in pumping mode during the lean demand hours when the frequency 
profile is better so as to supply power to the consumers during the peak hours. 
 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 6.9) 
 
The Committee  note with great  concern that mismatch  between demand  and 
supply of coal  acts as a  major hindrance in the generation of power. They  have 
identified  various issues in this connection, for instance the inadequate production  of 
coal, slippage in supply, poor  quality, excessive dependence  on a single  entity for 
supply, i.e. Coal India Limited (CIL) and the cost  involved  in coal washing. During  the 
oral evidence , the Ministry of Power stated that the Ministry of Coal could not  supply 
adequate   quantities  of  coal to the power units. However, the Ministry of  coal stated 
that    during the year 2009-2010, maximum target  for supply of coal was achieved. The 
Ministry of Coal , also took the stand  that  they  sell coal at 50 percent of the 
international prices and further  argued that  the Power Sector was reluctant to bear the 
cost of washing coal for power generation as the quality of domestic coal was not good. 
 
 The Committee, in this regard, have learnt  that a huge increase in the demand 
for coal due to the g overnment’s aim of providing ‘ Power to All by 2012’ has  put 
substantial  pressure  on the coal  producing  companies.  The projected  dema nd of 
coal for power generation in the current year  is 457 million tones. The Committee feel 
that the Government  should work out a long term plan for the same. The plan should 
specify  not only the production targets to be  achieved  in the long  run but  also  the 
measures  to be taken  in case any shortfall  in demand  is to be  met. For this,  initiative 
of CIL for strategic   partnership  with foreign  coal companies  and entry of private 

 
 
players in coal mining are the developments to be taken  forward  seriously. The 
Committee  desire that the long term plan   should  cover these aspects and specify  
ways and means to  encourage such partnerships. Besides, they would specifically  like 
to know  the recommendations of the T L Shankar Committee on domesti c  coal 
production and the action taken on the same.  The Committee further  desire to  be 
apprised  of the New Coal Distribution Policy to streamline the  supply of coal to the 
power  sector in order to ensure  that power generation is not adversely affec ted due to 
shortage  of good quality  coal.        
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The New Coal Distribution Policy of the Government stipulates  that Coal India 
Ltd would  be supplying  coal to the power  sector  to the extent  of 100%  of the 
normative  requirement  through legally  enforceable Fuel Supply Agreement with take 
or pay clause. In order  to ensure the supply, CIL, if required, would be importing  coal 
to bridge  the gap between demand and the availability. CIL  has also taken  steps  for 
augmenting coal washing  capacity substantially  so that good  and consistent quality  of 
coal can be  supplied  to power stations.     
In view of the severe gap in demand -supply of coal in India, Coal India 
Limited(CIL) initiated the process of importing of thermal coal to India on a long term (10 
years ) basis by floating a global Expressi on of Interest (Eol) for contract for long Term 
Offtake of Coal (CLTO) in July, 2010.After  the evaluation it was discovered that the 
“Price” quoted in 5 bids       ( for a total quoted quantity of 57 million tonne of imported 
coal for 10 years) from 2 com panies were feasible. Feasibility implies that the quoted 
price was at a discount to the market rate of coal represented by Reference Coal Index 
(RCI).  
8 Consumers in Power  and 3 consumers in Cement Sector were approached for 
off-take of this coal but none of the consumers showed any interest. Since there was no 
interest of the consumers in power & cement sectors for the off -take of imported coal,  
the process of import of coal on long-term basis has not so far yielded any results.  
As  per extant  policy ,  CIL will sign FSAs with power plants identified by Central 
Electricity Authority/Ministry of Power that have entered into PPAs and have been 

 
 
commissioned or would get commissioned by 31 st March, 2015.  The FSAs will be 
signed for the full LOA quantity of coal for 20 years, reviewable  after every  5 years with 
trigger level of 80% for disincentive and 90% for incentive.  
The additional capacity of the power projects  thus covered for coal supply during 
12th Plan, which have  come up/are likely to come up during 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12 
and first three years of the 12 th Plan, is restricted to around 60,000 MW, for which the 
total requirement is 252 MT.  When taken together with 305 MT already allowed for the 
projects up to 31.3.2009, the total coal requirement comes to 557 MT.   
 
 To meet the requirements, e -auction quantity will be reduced progressively from 
10% to 7% over the 12 th Plan period. To meet the shortfall, if any, CIL would make 
arrangements with State/Central PSUs which have been allotted coal  blocks for power 
plants and with State mining/industrial corporations and Central PSUs which are 
allocated coal blocks for commercial mining.  To achieve the desired level of production, 
the required clearances have to be expedited  
for the above said blocks by taking up with the State Governments and MoEF. If there is 
still a shortfall in meeting the FSA commitments, necessary imports will be made by 
CIL.  CIL in consultation with CEA and other concerned agencies is working out the 
modalities of import and pricing of imported coal. 
 CIL has registered  its  100% subsidiary  Coal India African Limitada (CIAL) in 
Mozambique for exploration and development of two coal blocks allotted  by 
Government of Mozambique through a bidding process.  A Memorandum of 
Undertaking has  also been signed   by CIL  with the Provincial  Govt. of Limpopo, 
South Africa for acquisition, exploration  and development of coal assets  in the 
Limpopo Province of South Africa. The share  or quantity  of coal  to be  available  from 
these sources  for CIL cannot, however,  be estimated at this stage.  
 The entry of Private Players  in coal mining  is guided by the provisions of the 
Coal Mines  (Nationalisation) CM(N), Act, 1973. The private companies engaged in 
business  of specified end users are only allowed to  do  coal mining in India. To allow 
coal mining  by private  companies for commercial mining requires  amendment to CM 
(N) Act which is pending  in Parliament.  

 
 
      The Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.L. Shankar, constituted by 
the Government to draw a road map for coal sector  in its report has, inter alia, 
recommended long term demand and supply prospects of Coal and Lignite, improving 
the procedures for approval of coal mines, Regulation and Governance in coal sector, 
restructuring of Coal India Ltd, improvement in productivi ty, technology upgradation in 
coal sector and human resource management in coal sector. Action on 
recommendations of the Expert Committee on Road Map for Coal Sector Reforms, 
which have been accepted, has been initiated and a road map indicating timelines for 
implementation of the same has been prepared and coal companies have been directed 
to implement the recommendations. Coal companies have accordingly been advised to 
take necessary action and quarterly report on implementation of recommendations of 
the Committee is also being regularly submitted. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
(OM. No. 54016/54/2011-CPD dated 12th October, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 10, Para No. 6.10 (i)] 
 In the opinion of the Committee, the present  state of affairs in the matter of 
availability  of coal to the power plants is unsatisfactory. They have been given  to 
understand  that  the gap in supply of coal to the power utilities  is mainly due to logis tic 
and  operational reasons. The number of rakes  being provided by Railways  to 
transport   coal are insufficient. As against the demand of 185  rakes per day, only 156  
rakes are available. In addition  to this, the  turnaround  time at power stations i s very 
slow  which ultimately  leads to low utilization  of the rakes capacity. Besides, uncovered  
rakes used  for coal  transportation  lead to pilferage or spoilage of coal in adverse  
weather conditions. The Committee note that there is a  provision  o f  Rail -Coal 
Interface meeting, and the issue of actual  availability  of rakes is regularly  being 
discussed with the Railways  in various fora . However,  these efforts  have fails to bring 
the required  change in the situation. The  Committee are of  the  opinion  that resolution  

 
 
of these issues require effective  coordination between all the stakeholders i.e.  
Ministries  of Coal, Power  and Railways.  The Committee, therefore, recommend  that a 
permanent mechanism  in the form  of a Coordination Commi ttee consisting  of the 
Secretaries of Power and Coal Ministries  and the Chairman, Railways Board  be 
constituted  at the  earliest  for this purpose.    
 
The Committee further  note that in some areas, the supply of coal gets affected  
due to frequent  l aw and order  problems. The Committee strongly urge that adequate 
security arrangements should be  made in and around coal fields to permit seamless 
production & uploading of coal. The Government  should also prepare contingency 
plans in coordination with the concerned State Governments  to prevent  loss of 
production  from coalfields  affected  by Law &  Order  problems.      
 
Reply of the Government 
 
An Inter -Ministerial Sub -Group in the Ministry of Coal which also comprises  
representatives of  Ministry of Power, Central Electricity Authority, NTPC, Railways and 
Planning Commission etc. regularly   monitors the  dispatch of coal to power stations 
and  takes contingency decisions, as and when required, for prioritizing movement of 
coal,  keeping in view  the  coal stock  position  at   the power stations.    
 
  An Inter -Ministerial Committee  headed by  the  Chairman, Railway Board to 
discuss the status of critical infrastructure for coal evacuation in potential coalfields  has 
been constituted.  The first meeting of the  Committee was held on 26.6.2012  , which 
was inter -alia  attended by the representatives of Ministry of Coal, CIL and coal 
companies. During the meeting, the following action points were identified:- 
 
(i) Such review meetings between Railways and Ministry of Coal may be held on 
regular basis quarterly at the level of Chairman, Railway Board for expediting critical 
projects. 
 

 
 
 (ii) Impediments in terms of EC and FC in implementing critical rail links to be 
brought to the notice of PMO by Railways for amicable solutions. 
(iii) Coal companies can take up construction of railway sidings through the 
Railway’s empanelled contractors under the supervision of Railways subject to approval 
of Detailed Project Reports by the concerned authorities. 
(iv) RITES to complete the construction of Piparwar railway siding by March 2013 
(v) Ashoka siding to be approved shortly by the railways and implemented b y South 
Eastern Railway 
(vi) Chairman, Railway Board and Secretary (Coal) to meet Chief Minister and Chief  
Secretary  of Chhttisgarhto impress upon them the need for expediting the proposed 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) with SECL, Railways and State Gover nment of 
Chhattisgarh. Follow up action is being taken accordingly. 
 
Besides the above, regular monitoring  of  infrastructure  constraints in supply of 
coal to power plants of the country is  also   undertaken  in the Ministry of Power.  
 
Law  & Order  is a state subject, hence  primarily, it is  the responsibility of State/ 
District Administration to take  necessary  deterrent  action to stop/ curb  theft/ pilferage 
of coal. However, Coal India Ltd has taken the following  steps  to check  theft/ pilferag e 
of coal :     
 
(i)   Check Posts have been established at the vulnerable points. 
 (ii) Wall fencing, lighting arrangements and deployment of armed guards round the 
clock have been done around the coal dumping yards. 
(iii) Regular patrolling is conducted in and around the mine including OB dumps. 
 (iv) Armed guards have been deployed at all Railway sidings. 
 (v) Inter-action and liaison with district officials at regular intervals and holding 
meeting with DC & District Administration, every month. 
(vi) Challans for coal transportation by trucks outside the district are being issued 
after fixing hologram and putting signatures of authorized officials of CISF to 
check pilferage. 

 
 
(vii) Regular FIRs are lodged by the management of the collieries and CISF with local 
thana against the pilferage/theft of coal. A close watch on the activities of 
criminals is being maintained by CISF. 
(viii) Management has been taking action for filling/dozing/sealing/blasting of the 
old/abandoned exposed coalfaces in phased manner. 
Ministry of Coal 
(OM. No. 54016/54/2011-CPD dated 12th October, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 6.12) 
(i) The Committee understand that the designs and specifications of the thermal 
units have improved a lost since the 1950’s, with a gradual increase in the size of the 
generating units so as to improve their efficiency but are unhappy to note that the state 
of the art technology has not been adopted and implemented fully particularly in the 
PSUs of the Ministry of Power like NTPC etc. From 30 MW, the technology has moved 
to 600-800 MW, which is termed as super critical units. The Committee note that their 
advantage is better efficiency due to corresponding rise in the steam parameters, lower 
O&M costs in the long run as well as Green House Gas emissions. In the backdrop of 
the country’s dependence on coal based thermal power generation as well as the very 
large capacity generation programme to be taken up in the near future, the Committee 
find a lot of scope for 660/800 MW supercritical units in India. The Committee also note 
that BHEL has brought out 600 MW units. They would like that the PSUs under the 
Ministry of Power like NTPC must utilize the Super Critical technology without any 
further loss of time. The Committee recommend that as far as possible the new capacity 
addition programmes of the Government should be undertaken by adopting more 
660/800 MW supercritical units. The Ministry of Power has further informed that coastal 
stations can use the unit size of 800 MW, however, for inland stations, transportation of 
heavy equipment is an issue. In the opinion of the Committee, the Government should 
arrange logi stics of transportation of heavy equipment & machinery for the inland 
stations to use supercritical units keeping in view its advantages in the long run. 
 

 
 
 The Committee further note that the Ultra Power Projects (UMPPs) of 4000 MW 
capacity have the potent ial to address the power deficit in the country but out of 16 
UMPPs identified, 4 UMPPs have so far been transferred to the developers. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the transfer of the remaining UMPPs to 
developers should be expedited. All the pre-RfQ (Request for Quotation) activities in 
respect of the UMPPs in the pipeline should be completed at a faster pace, so that they 
can be awarded to the suitable party. For the 4 UMPPs already awarded, the 
Committee would like to be apprised about their  implementation status. The Committee 
would also like to be informed by the Ministry of Power about the factors responsible for 
perceptible delays in getting requisite clearances from the respective State 
Governments for various UMPPs. They urge the Minist ry to take further concrete action 
for clearance of these UMPPs without any further delay. 
 
 (ii) The Committee would also recommend that regional imbalances in the 
availability of power should be mitigated at the earliest by the Government, as they are 
a big hindrance in the balanced development of the nation. In the opinion of the 
Committee, a sturdy system of National Grid would go a long way in realizing faster 
evacuation of power from the surplus to the deficit areas and is definitely indispensable 
for mitigating regional imbalances. In this regard, the Committee are constrained to note 
that the inter regional transmission capacity by the end of 11 th Plan is only likely to be 
27,950 MW. Besides, in several areas, transmission lines have not been establi shed. 
Under these circumstances, the Committee strongly recommend that a big push should 
be given to augment the inter regional transmission capacity of the country. As all 
regional grids have alreadybeen interconnected and developed in the form of the 
National Power Grid, the Committee expect that the regions facing acute power 
shortage would be benefitted by the exchange of operational surpluses. Those 
region/States, which are facing acute power deficit much above the national average of 
9%, should get pr iority to meet their power deficit. Since the National Electricity Plan, 
prepared by the Central Electricity Authority, also includes perspective planning for 
Twelfth Plan, the  Committee recommend that the issue of regional power imbalances 

 
 
must be appropr iately addressed therein. The Committee desire specific action to be 
taken on the same and would like to be apprised on it. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Supercritical technology is being adopted by CPSUs – NTPC & DVC.  All the 
three supercritical units of 660 MW of NTPC's Sipat have been commissioned.  Three 
supercritical units of 660 MW each of NTPC's Barh Super Thermal Power Plant are 
likely to be commissioned in the 12th Plan.  Out of the Bulk Tendering of 11 Units of 660 
MW vizSolapur (2 units), Meja JV with UPRVUNL (2 units), Nabinagar JV with BSEB (3 
units) &Mauda-II (2 Units) of NTPC and Raghunathpur -II (2 Units) of DVC.  Notification 
of Awards (NOA) for Mauda, Solapur, Meja have already been placed.  NOA for 
Nabinagar and Raghunathpur are likely t o be placed shortly.  Similarly, out of the Bulk 
Tendering of 9 Units of 800 MW of NTPC vizKudgi -I (3 Units),Darlipalli-I (2 Units), Lara-
1 (2 Units) & Gajmara -1 (2 Units), NOA for Kudgi has been placed.  For other projects, 
Award recommendations were appr oved by NTPC Board subject to Investment 
Approval,MoEF Clearance and availability of Land. 
 Supercritical units aggregatingto over 6000 MW capacity have been 
commissioned and large numbers of supercritical units are under con struction.   In the 
12th plan, Supercritical units are likely to constitute about 50 -60% of coal based 
capacity addition.  Regarding 13th plan, it has been decided that coal fired capacity 
addition shall be through supercritical units only.  All Ultra Mega Power Projects being 
implemented are necessarily required to adopt supercritical technology.  
  
Ultra Mega Power Projects 
 
 The following four UMPPs have been awarded to the successful bidder. 
 
Mundra in Gujarat :  The project (5x800MW) was handed over to the Successful 
Bidder i.e., Tata Power Company Ltd., on 23.04.2007 at the evaluated levelised t ariff of 

 
 
Rs. 2.26367/kWh.  Two units of Mundra UMPP of 800MW each have been 
commissioned on 25.02.2012 and 30.7.2012. 
 
Sasan in Madhya Pradesh :  The project was handed over to the Successful 
Bidder i.e., M/s Reliance Power Ltd., on 07.08.2007 at the evaluated levelised tariff of 
Rs. 1.19616/kWh.  Boiler foundation work for Unit -I to Unit – V has been completed and 
for Unit – VI, it is in progress and major contract for main plant for other plants have also 
been awarded to the developer. First unit of 660 MW is expected to achieve COD in 
January 2013 and the last unit in June 2014. 
 
Krishnapatnam in Andhra Pradesh  : The project was handed over to Reliance 
Power Ltd., on 29.01.2008 at the levelise d tariff of Rs. 2.33/kWh.  Order for the main 
plant equipment has already been placed by the developer.  The developer has stopped 
work at site, citing new regulation of coal pricing in Indonesia.  Lead procurer namely 
APSPDCL has issued termination notice to CAPL stating that in view of the defaults and 
anticipatory breach having no alternative, the procurers together decided and elect to 
terminate the agreement.  CAPL approached the High Court of Delhi, and the court 
passed an order which inter -alia stipulates that till the next date, no coercive steps be 
taken against the Petitioner by the Respondents.  Subsequently, Hon'ble High Court 
ofDelhi has dismissed CAPL's petition and the Interim Order has been vacated.  
Thereafter, CAPL has filed appeal in Division Bench of Delhi High Court. 
 
Tilaiya in Jharkhand :  The project was handed over to M/s Reliance Power Ltd. 
on  07.08.2009 at an evaluated levelised tariff of Rs. 1.770 per kWh.  .  Major portion of 
the project land including main plant area are forest l and. The final forest clearance has 
been received recently in November, 2010.  Government land (855 ac) and Forest land 
(1220 ac)is  yet to be handed over by State Government. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
UMPPs at bidding stage 
Chhattisgarh  :    The site for this UMPP is in district Sarguja.  All the pre -RfQ 
activities for this UMPP had been completed and the RfQ for this UMPP has also been 
issued on 15.3.2010. 
 
Orissa UMPP :  The site for this UMPP is in village Bedabahal in 
SundergahDistrict.  All the pre-RfQ activities for this UMPP had been completed and the 
RfQ for this UMPP has also been issued on 11.06.2010.  The responses received  for 
Orissa UMPP were opened on August 1, 2011 and are under evaluation.  RfP is to be 
issued after finalization of Standard Bidding Documents which are under revision.  
 
The coal blocks allocated to Chhattisgarh UMPPs have been marked as ‘no go’ 
by the Ministry of E&F.  The matter has already been taken up with MoEF but not yet 
resolved.  In view of this the last date of submission of RfQ for this project has been 
extended upto  3rd September, 2012. 
 
UMPPs in pipeline: 
 The site at Cheyyur in Kanchipuram district in Tamil Nadu has already been 
identified along with captive port at Panaiyur village.  Various studies are 
underway to prepare EIA report for environment clearance.  It is expected to 
bring this UMPP at bidding stage soon. 
 The site for Second UMPP in Andhra Pradesh has been finalized at   Nyunipalli 
village in Prakasham district of Andhra Pradesh and various activities for bringing 
the project to bid stage are being carried out.   
 The sites in Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu & Gujarat for their second UMPPs are being 
examined by CEA/PFC. 
 The offici als from PFC and CEA have visited the coastal sites for Orissa 
additional UMPP from 22.2.2012 to 24.2.2012.  One UMPP will be set up at 
Bijoypatna in Chandbali Tehsil of Bhadrak for coastal location and another UMPP 
will be set up at Narla&Kasinga Sub -Division of Kalahandi district for inland 
location. 

 
 
Factors responsible for delays in getting requisite clearances  
 
Resistance from local populace - : There has been considerable delay in site 
finalisation/land acquisition/conducting site -specific studies due to resistance from local 
populace against land acquisition. The cases being of Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, 
Karnataka UMPPs and 2nd UMPP in Andhra Pradesh. 
 
Environment and forest related issues particularly ‘Go’ and  ‘No -Go’ issue of coal 
block :  Due to 'N o Go'  categorization of the coal blocksby MoEF, the last dates for 
submission of RfQ for the Orissa and Chhattisgarh UMPPs were extended six and 
eleven times respectively. This issue effectively delays the Orissa UMPP by over one 
year.  The coal blocks of  Chhattisgarh UMPP, which is already delayed by more than 
1½ years, have not yet cleared.  
 
Long time is taken for obtaining environment and forest clearance for the projects 
which delays the bidding process and implementation of the projects. For the four  
awarded UMPPs time taken for environment and forest clearance is given below: 
 
 There has been enormous delay in obtaining water linkage for domestic coal 
based projects. Water linkage for Orissa and Chhattisgarh UMPPs were obtained 
after delay of over one and a half years.  
 
UMPP Environment clearance 
from application date 
(No of days) 
Forest Clearance from 
application date 
(No of Days) 
Sasan 169 931 
Mundra 249 1096 
Krishnapatnam 351 not needed 
Tilaiya 448 1208 

 
 
 Due to non -availability of water, sites for additional UMPPs in Orissa are being 
identified at coastal locations so that sea water can be used for the project.  
 
 (ii) Inter-regional links are planned based on the assessment of the possible 
surpluses/deficits under seasonal and peak/off -peak operational scenarios. This 
assessment is carried out considering upcoming generation projects and the load 
growth in various regions. A number of inter -regional links, as given Annex.-II, have 
been provisionally planned for the 12th Plan / early 13th Plan period: 
 
POWERGRID has been implementing various transmission projects for 
generation capacity addition under central sector, Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPP), 
grid strengthening projects and other projects, assigned to it from time to time. Presently 
POWERGRID carries about 50% of the total power of the country through various EHV 
transmission lines and has transformation capacity of more than 1,00,000 MVA. 
POWERGRID facilitates  transfer of power within and acro ss the regions for optimum 
utilisation of generation resources and for meeting power demand in various parts of the 
country.  
 
By the end of 11th Plan, National Power Grid with inter -regional power transfer 
capacity of about 27,750 MW has already been established for facilitating transfer of 
power across the country. 
 
Further, to cater to the growing capacity addition in future, POWERGRID is 
making all efforts to expand the existing inter -State transmission network in the country. 
During XII Plan, vario us high capacity HVDC and AC inter -regional links with total 
capacity of 38,400 MW have been planned to take care of inter -regional power transfer 
requirement of various planned generation projects including IPPs scheduled for 
commissioning in XII Plan. Im plementation of these links is being/ shall be taken up 
matching with progress of generation projects. 
 

 
 
In addition, in order to meet the growing power demand of the country, 
Government of India has envisaged capacity addition through private sector 
participation and a number of Independent Power Producers (IPPs) have been setting -
up/ plan to set -up power generation plants of different capacity with various time 
schedules in the country. These power generation plants are mainly coming -up in 
resource rich St ates, i.e. Odisha, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh etc. and the power generated is required to be transmitted 
to load centers located across the States and Regions.  
 
Being the nodal agency for grant of Long Term  Access (LTA) to private 
producers, POWERGRID has undertaken development of high capacity transmission 
corridors for evacuation of large quantum of power from various IPP projects in 
consultation with CEA, beneficiaries and generation developers.  
 
CERC ha s already granted regulatory approval for 11 nos. of High Capacity 
Power Transmission Corridors at an estimated cost of about Rs. 75,000 Crore. 
Implementation of these corridors is to be taken up by POWERGRID/ through Tariff 
Based Competitive Bidding in a phased manner matching with progress of generation 
projects. This shall go a long way in integrated development of transmission system in 
the country. 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 6.14) 
 The Committee note with dissatisfaction that one of the significant reasons for 
underachievement in the implementation of Power Generation Augmentation 
Programme is contractual disputes between the project authorities and the contractors 
and their vendors/sub-vendors. In the opinion of the Committee these disputes  not only 
delay the projects, but also lock up the project resources for the disputed period. Such 
disputes need to be avoided at all costs by the Government. For this, it is essential that 

 
 
appropriate model contract agreements addressing all future issues are prepared in 
advance and made available to the stakeholders. In addition, only those having 
technical expertise and efficient managerial skills should be given charge of power 
projects. As the power sector has now been thrown open for investment by the Private 
Sector, the Committee hope that better professional skills would be attracted in this 
sector to reduce occurrence of disputes. The Committee also recommend that the 
Government should revi sit the system of awarding of contracts to assess whether any 
streamlining of the procedure is required in order to obviate disputes in future. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Keeping in view the difficulties encountered in implementation of Hydro projects,  
Model Standard Bidding Document (SBD) as a guide for Civil Works Contracts for 
execution of hydro-electric projects has been finalized after extensive consultations with 
all the stake holders. The draft SBD has also been approved by the Ministry and sent 
for vetting to Ministry of Finance / Law, CVC and CAG.  
 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 6.15) 
 The Committee are dismayed to observe that one of the important areas that has 
been neglected by the Ministry is that of shortage of skilled manpower in the power 
sector.  The ambitious capacity addition programmes in the Power Sector would require 
commensurate increase in the supply of skilled manpower, as the skill requirement in 
this field is highly technical. Shortage of skilled manpower for erection and 
commissioning has been identified by the Ministry as one of the major bottlenecks in the 
implementation of ongoing power projects. The Committee would emphasize that 
development of a wide base of skilled manpower in the area of high pressure welding, 
fittings, instrumentation etc. to man various specialized requirements across the 

 
 
Generation, Transmissio n, and Distribution Units is imperative. The Committee desire 
that the Government should immediately make an assessment of the manpower 
requirement across various trades and take remedial measures well in advance. They 
note that the Ministry have taken ‘Ad opt an ITI’ initiative for this purpose. 2740 ITI 
trained persons including those from power trades have got placement in various 
sectors ofr economy, out of which 264 got placement in Power Sector since the 
inception of “Adopt an ITI” Scheme.  The Committe e are also of the view that the 
Government should look beyond the it is to impart specialized technical skills to the 
youth and absorb them in the power sector. As the Committee have already been 
informed about the training being imparted at 68 training in stitutes in the country, they 
would like the Ministry to assess as to whether it has actually addressed their need to 
have 1,50,000 skilled workers for power projects during the XIth Plan. 
 
 The Committee also note with concern the critical shortage of pow er equipment 
like Boilers & Turbines in the country, which is likely to adversely affect the capacity 
addition targets. They have been informed about an action plan being pursued by BHEL 
on the matter as well as launch of various Joint Ventures to produce and deliver various 
equipment. The Committee also find that most of these ventures are expected to 
complete their manufacturing facilities by the year 2011 or 2012. The Committee urge 
that the Ministry should monitor the progress and ensure that the produc tion of requisite 
equipment commences on time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
I. Meeting the requirement of skilled manpower 
The Ministry of Power formed 9 Sub Groups to assist the Working Group on 
Power constituted by Planning Commission. Sub Group -9 was constituted on Human 
Resources Development and Capacity Building with one of its objectives being 
reviewing and making broad assessment of manpower requirement in generation, 
transmission and distribution systems.  
 

 
 
The Sub Group has reviewed the estimates of additional manpower requirement 
made in 2007 for the 11th Plan. It has projected the additional manpower requirement 
during 11th plan to be about 3.32 lakh out of which 2.55 lakh is estimated to be 
technical and 0.77 Lakh non -technical personnel. The Sub Group report has assessed 
that given the annual intake of 11.3 lakh, 4.15 lakh, 0.93 lakh and 11.15 lakh persons in 
Engineering, Management, Polytechnic and ITI institutes respectively, there is sufficient 
number of students passing out. However, skill set in a few areas does not match the 
industry requirement. The Sub Group has emphasized the need for augmentation in 
certain skills like high pressure welder, fabricator, fitter, electrician, plumber, etc.  
 
To build the base of skilled manpower for 11th Plan and beyond, and to address 
the above issues, the Ministry of Power and the Central Electricity Authority initiated 
“Adopt an ITI” scheme in July 2007 by participating in the Directorate General of 
Employment & T raining’s Public Private Partnership (PPP) scheme for up -gradation of 
Government ITIs. Central Power Sector Undertakings have adopted 61ITIs (including 9 
new ITIs being set up by NTPC) as indicated in Annexure-III, Private Sector 
Companies 12 and State Government Companies 3. 
 
To assess the effectiveness of the “Adopt an ITI” Scheme, in line with the 
recommendations in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee on Estimate on Subject 
“Power Generation – Demand and Supply”, the Ministry of Power got a study conducted 
by the CEA in respect of  ITIs adopted by CPSUs. From the Study, it is found that: 
 
Post “Adopt an ITI” scheme; there has been increase in intake primarily in the 
trades of Welder, Electrician, Fitter, plumber, Computer Operator & Programming 
Assistant and Electronic Mechanic in the adopted ITIs.   
 
In view of the reviewed additional requirement of total technical personnel of 2.55 
lakh(out of which about 20% are technicians i.e. about 10,000/ - per annum) during the 
11th Plan as projected by the Sub G roup 9 of the Working Group on Power, it is 
estimated that the annual intake of 7272 ( no.) in adopted ITIs alongwith that in other 

 
 
ITIs including Private ones should be able to meet the requirement of power industry. 
As per information available, 2740 ITI  trained persons including those from power 
trades have got placement in various sectors of economy, out of which 264 got 
placement in Power Sector since the inception of “Adopt an ITI” Scheme. 
 
Further, CPSUs have reported improvement in the quality of tr ainees and 
trainers(ITI instructors) by organizing practical training at the power plants/ site visits for 
the ITI students, arranging training of trainers by the CPSUs at their own establishment 
or at other institutes like NPTI, etc. 
 
II. Monitoring the progress on production and delivery of power equipment 
 
BHEL has made technology tie -ups for manufacture of super -critical boilers and 
turbine generators in the country.  BHEL has also taken up capacity augmentation 
programme and have achieved capacity of 15,00 0 MW which is being extended to 
20,000 MW per year.  Several joint ventures have been set up in the country for 
manufacture of super -critical boiler and turbine generators.  The total manufacturing 
capacity of about 14,000 MW for boiler and 15,000 MW for t urbine generators per year 
is envisaged by these joint ventures.  More such joint ventures are in the pipeline. 
 
Government of India has approved bulk order for 660 MW and 880 MW super -
critical units and bids for the same have already been invited by NTPC.   As per the 
condition of the bulk orders approved by the Government, a Committee under 
Chairperson, CEA with members from Ministry of Heavy Industries and participating 
utilities to monitor the progress of the phased manufacturing programme of the bidders  
is in the process of being set-up. 
  
CEA monitors the progress of all the thermal power projects under construction 
in the country. Intensive monitoring is done in respect of units which are likely to be 
commissioned during next two years.   Supply of major equipments is also monitored for 

 
 
these projects.   Special attention is paid to the material which became critical for 
commissioning of the projects/units. 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 6.16) 
 The Nuclear Power Projects aggregating 3,380 MW constitute a major part of the 
overall capacity addition targets for the XI Five Year Plan. As per the expert opinion, the 
emissions from Nuclear Power Stations are low. Nuclear Power is economically viable 
and comparable to renewable sources. As nuclear is an environmentally benign source 
of power, the Committee is of the opinion that time has come to pool it with hydropower 
and thermal power, for which it needs the required thrust by the Government. The 
contribution of the Nuclear Energy needs to be augmented substantially from the 
present level of just two per cent in the power generation programme. The exemptions 
from the IAEA & Nuclear Suppliers Group  (NSG) have set the stage to catapult India 
into the Nuclear power era. The Committee are aware that increasing nuclear power 
generation capacity is the mandate of the Department of Atomic Energy. They hope that 
the Ministry of Power are working in coordin ation with them to identify achievable 
capacity addition targets. The Committee are also of the view that there is still scope to 
enhance and improve the public perception of nuclear power in the country while the 
Government expands its Nuclear Power Programme in the years to come. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Nuclear Power is clean, environmentally friendly and potent source of energy, 
devoid of greenhouse gas emissions.  In view of its merits, it is recognized that nuclear 
power can provide long term energy security to the country. 
 
Improvement in fuel supplies, both domestic and imports as a result of fruition of 
international cooperation has increased nuclear power generation.  The nuclear power 

 
 
generation in 2012 is expected to be 32,000 Million Unit, the highest ever generation 
from nuclear source in the country. 
 
On progressive completion of projects under construction, the current installed 
nuclear power capacity of 4,780 MW is expected to reach 10,080 MW by the end of 12 th 
Plan proposals envisage commen cement of work on eight 700 MW Pressurized Heavy 
Water Reactors, two 500 MW Fast Breeder Reactors and one 300 MW Advanced 
Heavy Water Reactor of indigenous design and eight Light Water Reactors each of 
1,000 MW and higher capacity based on foreign technica l cooperation.  The Integrated 
Energy Policy of the Government envisages reaching a nuclear power capacity of 
63,000 MW by the year 2032. 
 
Public outreach programmes have been substantially enhanced to dispel the 
apprehensions regarding nuclear power and t o create a conductive environment for 
rapid growth of nuclear power in the country.  The outreach programmes include 
structured public awareness programmes in vernacular languages targeted for public at 
large, media, State Government officials, policy make rs, decision makers, people's 
representatives, school and college students and teachers, etc.  The methods adopted 
are awareness, lectures, interactive discussions, exhibitions, visits to nuclear power 
plants, web based campaigns, TV advertisements, radio jingles, etc.  In addition, 
welfare programmes for the neighouring communities have also been enhanced as a 
part of CSR efforts. 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 6.17) 
 The Committee are pained to note that the Power sector is beset with high 
Transmission & Distribution (T&D) losses due to technical and commercial reasons. It 
results in the wastage of huge amount of power which could have been otherwise put to 
good use. It is also a financial drag on the power utilities, as the power losses translate 

 
 
into revenue forgone. The Committee are surprised to learn that during the year 2008 -
2009, the Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT&C) losses were nearly 28.44%. It is 
very hi gh compared to developed nations, where these losses are mostly in single 
digits. While expressing their displeasure over such consistently high AT&C losses, the 
Committee feel that the institutional mechanism has failed to check it. They, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Government needs to invest more to develop sturdy 
transmission network in the country, besides taking strict action against those States 
who fail to achieve targets in reducing AT&C losses . In the opinion of the Committee, it 
would go a long way in reducing technical losses. 
 
 The Committee are more perturbed about the commercial losses, which are 
nothing but pilferage of power, through drawal of unmetered electricity. It is a major 
bane for the power sector in India. The Committee, while acknowledging the 
amendment in Section 151 of the Electricity Act 2003, for strengthening action against 
theft / pilferage of electricity and making it a cognizable and non -bailable offence, 
recommend that swift, stringent and deterrent action must b e taken against such 
offenders. The Committee are aware of the limited role of the Central Government vis-à-
vis distribution issues. They would like the Government to raise this issue with the State 
Governments in all fora and suggest measures like install ation of effective camera 
surveillance systems at select locations registering very high power thefts, installation  of 
tamper proof/secured meters and Aerial bunched cables for LT lines. State 
Governments should be advised to undertake 100% metering of all  areas and 
installation of feeder meters which are meant to assess commercial loss of power in 
their respective localities. The Committee also feel that in case commercial losses 
persist despite taking all the suggested measures, connivance of departmental  staff 
cannot be ruled out. In such situations strong penal actions should be taken against 
officials found guilty. In the opinion of the Committee, the distribution losses cannot 
come down without the proactive intervention of the State Governments. The m atter 
should therefore be taken up at the highest level with the State Governments. The 
Committee further feel that it should also be the responsibility of the consumers to 

 
 
report cases of theft of power to concerned authorities, so that early action could  be 
initiated to prevent pilferage of power. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee further note that the Restructured -Accelerated 
Power Development & Reform Programme (R-APDRP) has been introduced as a major 
programme, targeted to reduce the AT&C losses upto 15% , but its implementation has 
lacked steam. The Committee recommend that a reliable monitoring mechanism should 
be developed by the Government to oversee the proper implementation of the already 
sanctioned projects under R-APDRP. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. In order to cater to the growing requirements of Inter -State transmission system, 
the POWERGRID proposes to  double its investment for the XIIth Plan to Rs.1,00,000/ - 
crore. 
 
2. The AT&C losses in the country have shown reducing trend in the past few ye ars 
and have reduced from 36.64% in 2002-03 to 27.15% in 2009-10 
 
3(a) The responsibility of reduction of AT&C losses in distribution network is with the 
State Government. However, to address the issues related to high AT&C losses, the 
Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme(R -APDRP) was 
launched by Govt. of India during 11th Plan as a Central Sector Scheme aiming to 
reduce the AT&C losses upto 15% in the selected towns/ cities having population of 
more than 30,000 (10,000 in special category states) as per 2001 census.  The scheme 
is under various stages of implementation in the country. 
3(b) Under R -APDRP, a monitoring mechanism is already in place. A Steering 
Committee under Secretary (Power) has been constituted for sanctioning an d 
monitoring of the Projects. PFC is the Nodal Agency for implementation of the R -
APDRP projects in the country and is conducting regular meetings with States / 

 
 
implementing Agencies etc. to monitor the progress of the projects and to resolve the 
implementation issues, if any. 
 
3(c) Based on the recommendations of standing committee and experience gained 
during R-APDRP implementation, following monitoring mechanism is being adopted for 
monitoring R-APDRP implementation: 
 
 Regular Monitoring and review of the  RAPDRP projects with all state utilities / 
ITIAs is being conducted by PFC and MoP at monthly intervals. In many cases, 
the intervals are less than a month.   
 During such meetings the critical issues in implementation are discussed and it 
provides a forum  for sharing of experiences / best practices among various 
utilities for resolving implementation related issues.  
 The review meetings are also conducted regularly at state HQ with utilities and 
stakeholders by PFC /MoP to discuss the critical issues and f ind solutions for the 
same.  
 The state power utilities and State Govt (through Distribution Reform Committee) 
also monitor the implementation of the project.  
 The R-APDRP steering committee also reviews implementation of RAPDRP and 
issues guidelines / direction for taking corrective measures in this regard.  
 
4(a) The matter of reduction of AT&C losses is being taken by Central Government 
with the State Governme nts at various forums including Conference of State Chief 
Ministers/ Power Ministers / Chief Secretaries, etc. 
 
4(b) States have also been requested to constitute Distribution Reform Committee at 
the State level under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary / Principal Secretary/ 
Secretary (Power/ Energy) to monitor the progress / achievement and targets of the 
scheme at State level.  
 

 
 
5. A conference of Power Ministers was held in New Delhi on 13 -07-2011 wherein 
the main theme as “viability of electricity dist ribution system” The deliberations were 
held on various issues including the measures to control the theft of electricity also. The 
Resolutions adopted during the Power Ministers Conference are as under. 
 
(i) The State governments would ensure that the account s of the utilities are audited 
upto the year 2009 -10 and also ensure that the accounts of a financial year are 
audited by September of the next financial year, henceforth. Computerization of 
accounts would be undertaken on priority, if not done already. 
(ii) The States would ensure that the distribution utilities file their Annual Tariff Revision 
Petition every year, by December – January of the preceding financial year to the 
State Regulators as stipulated by the National Tariff policy. 
(iii) The Annual Tariff Revision Petition would be filed before the SERC, keeping in view 
the increase of the Power purchase cost (which accounts for nearly 70 -80% of the 
Cost of supply) and states will ensure that the difference between ARR and ACS is 
not only bridged but is positive to generate internal surpluses which can be used for 
network expansion and maintenance. 
(iv) The State governments would ensure automatic pass through in tariff for any 
increase in fuel cost by incorporating the same in the regulations, as provided in 
Section 6 2(4) of Electricity Act, 2003. (State Governments can issue directions to 
SERCs under Section 108 of the Electricity Act, 2003). 
(v) The State governments would not only clear all the outstanding subsidies to the 
utilities, but ensure advance payment of subsid y as per the Section 65 of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 in future. 
(vi) The eligibility criteria for inclusion of towns under R -APDRP assistance with 
population of 30000 (10000 for special category states) should be reduced to 15000 
(5000 for special category stat es). All district headquarter towns in special category 
states should also be covered under R-APDRP, irrespective of their population. 
(vii) The state governments would ensure payment of all outstanding dues from 
various departments of state government and insti tutions to the distribution utilities 
or release payments from the State budget directly. 

 
 
(viii) The state governments would consider converting loans due from the state 
governments to the distribution utilities as state government equity to ensure capital 
infusion and improvement in net worth of utility. 
(ix) The state governments would take effective steps to reduce AT&C losses to less 
than 15% by administrative measures, curbing pilferage of electricity and by setting 
up special police stations and special courts to  deal exclusively with power theft 
related cases, if not done already. 
(x) States would immediately initiate steps to appoint distribution franchises in urban 
areas through competitive bidding. 
(xi) States would immediately invite bids for meeting the uncovered generation capacity 
gap viz- a -viz the requirement in their States by the end of 12th Plan. The process 
will be completed by March, 2012. 
(xii) States would create a unit in their states for integrated planning of generation, 
transmission and distribution to meet the future requirement of their states. 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 6.18) 
 The Committee feel that there is a lot of scope to use Information Technology 
(IT) in distribution and its proper usage can lead to significant cuts in AT&C losses. Part 
A of R -APDRP comprises the dissemination of some popular IT tools in the power 
sector like Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System (SCADA). Electricity is 
supplied in the country through a very complex power grid system and the losses that 
occur in transmission and distribution are very large in comparison with major 
developed countries. This occurs mainly due to inefficient safety, monitoring and control 
devices that are persisting in present distribution system. The most advanced automatic 
control system, which can perform the operations like monitoring and control is SCADA. 
SCADA is the application of computers in power system. Distribution automation is the 
major upgradation of any distribution system. This can be achieved by implementing 
SCADA. Some of the States & UTs like Gujarat and Chandigarh have reported huge 

 
 
improvement in their power distribution system by establishing SCADA. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that SCADA should be implemented across all the power 
distribution networks in the various States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under R -APDRP Part -A, funding for implem entation of SCADA/DMS is 
envisaged for towns with population greater than 4 lakhs & annual input energy greater 
than 350MU. Till date, SCADA projects worth Rs.1443.48 Cr covering 63 towns (which 
are about 94% of 67 envisaged) in 15 states have  been  sanctioned & an amount of 
Rs.313.12 Cr disbursed. Further, schemes for SCADA installation in three towns of two 
states have been appraised& are under approval. It is expected that SCADA projects for 
balance towns will be sanctioned by the Steering Committee progressively.  
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 6.19) 
 Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) is the flagship programme of 
the Government to provide access to electricity to all rural households in the country. 
The Committee regret to note that the programme has suffered due to improper 
implementation at various levels and insufficient or faulty coverage of eligible rural 
house-holds. The Ministry of Power has a lso cited certain major issues in RGGVY, for 
instance, late receipt of Detailed Project Report (DPRs) from States, poor rural 
electricity infrastructure etc. The Committee, in this regard, have been informed that the 
Government has set up an Inter -Ministerial Monitoring Committee and advised the 
States to form District Committees for the purpose. The Committee recommend that the 
Government should continuously take feedback from these panels, and convey it to the 
implementing agencies on the ground. Further,  proper audits through independent 
agencies and surveys to seek views from the beneficiaries should be conducted to 
ensure quality and longevity of the infrastructure created under RGGVY as well as 
coverage of all eligible villages in the DPRs being prepared under the scheme. 

 
 
 The Committee are of the firm opinion that RGGVY can prove to be a golden 
opportunity to electrify all villages of the country and therefore its coverage should not 
be limited to just providing free connection to the BPL families.  Po verty and deprivation 
in rural India is so pervasive that a water tight compartmentalization between APL & 
BPL households is highly untenable. In this scenario, leaving out APL households for 
electricity connection would lead to needless social strife and tensions. The Committee, 
therefore, would like to recommend that suitable changes should be incorporated under 
RGGVY so as to cover APL households too. As regards rural electrification under 
RGGVY, the Committee also note that the transformers set up in th e villages for the 
purpose are small capacity transformers, which often break down due to their inability to 
cope with increased load. The Committee, therefore, recommend that higher capacity 
transformers need to be installed in villages under RGGVY, keepi ng in view the future 
load expansion brought in the wake of increased rural electrification and rising 
standards of living. The Committee feel that the Ministry should revisit various norms 
and guidelines under RGGVY in the light of their suggestions so th at rural electrification 
in the entire country could become a reality. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under RGGVY, electrification of un -electrified Below Poverty Line (BPL) 
households are being financed with 100% capital subsidy as per norms of Kutir Jyoti 
Programme. Households Above Poverty Line (APL) are required to pay for their 
connections at prescribed connection charges and no subsidy is given for this purpose. 
Infrastructure created under RGGVY is expected to be used for providing connections 
to APL by di stribution utilities.  While planning for infrastructure and DPRs, states were 
required to take into account load requirement of APL.  
 
Under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen  Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY), the number and 
size of the transformers is based on the number o f connections to be provided in the 
village and the spread of households. Under RGGVY High Voltage Distribution System 
(HVDS) is encouraged wherein a number of 10, 16 & 25 KVA capacity transformers are 
installed instead of one bigger capacity transformer ( without compromising the 

 
 
transformation capacity) to reduce T&D losses and to minimize power pilferage. The 
distribution transformers of adequate capacity in the villages have been installed to 
cater to the domestic lighting load and providing free connect ion to BPL households.  
Burning of transformers was primarily due to overloading.  In 11th Plan, the 
transformers were provided keeping BPL load of 60 watt per family only.  In view of the 
recommendation of the Committee, under 12th Plan, it is being  prop osed to provide 
transformation capacity on the basis of 250 watt load for BPL and 500 watt load for 
APL.   States framed DPRs keeping in view the load requirement for next 5 years, 
therefore, factoring growth and load expansions. 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20(ii)] 
A number of regulations respectively govern various areas of the Renewable 
Energy sector like wind power, small hydro, solar photovoltaic etc. But, there is 
conspicuous absence of a comprehensive law which integrates these distinct sectors 
and provides them direction and a sense of purpose, in a holistic manner. The 
Committee recommend that the Government must strive to implement the National 
Renewable Ener gy Policy in a comprehensive manner that clearly sets a time -bound 
and ambitious target to be achieved and lays down a transparent and stable long -term 
incentive structure for promoting socially responsible private investment. Since 
renewable energy plants  are capital intensive, a long -term and reliable incentive 
structure will earn the confidence of both public & private sector investors. This will also 
require suitable amendments in the Central Electricity Act, the Integrated Energy Policy 
& National Tariff Policy. In this connection, the Committee are aware that the Ministry of 
Power has already amended their Tariff Policy by fixing a minimum percentage of the 
total consumption of electricity in the area of distribution licensee from solar energy. 
However its implementation remains to be done. Overall, the Committee feel that the 
Government should mobilize all stakeholders and promote institutional linkages to 
provide a new thrust to its renewable energy programmes. 

 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
While the concern of the Committee is appreciated, it is submitted that the 
economic viability/ attractiveness of different renewable energy projects and accordingly 
the level of incentives required to attract private investment in the same is strongly 
linked with (i) the technological advancements and hence cost of technology in selected 
RE sector (e.g. in solar) and (ii) the cost of conventional energy alternatives, governed, 
in turn, by the global oil prices/ economic situation.  As such, it is not feasi ble to put in 
place a stable long term incentive structure for all renewable energy technologies.  
Nonetheless, the Ministry regularly holds sector specific consultations with concerned 
major stakeholders to review and finalize its policies and programmes for each financial 
year and will continue to do so as well as mobilize and promote institutional linkages for 
further thrust to its programmes as suggested by the Committee. 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM No. F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20(iii)] 
The estimated medium -term potential for renewable energy power generation in 
the country from wind, small hydro, solar &  biomass has been estimated at over 87,000 
MW. Despite having such a good potential, the Committee are distressed to note that 
the total installed capacity from all the Renewable sources as on 31.08.2011 stands 
abysmally low at 21,125 MW. In a scenario whe re burning of 127 fossil fuels have 
generated huge environmental debate and the availability of oil to the developing world 
is going down, this under utilization of existing renewable resources warrants immediate 
remedy. The Committee, while taking cogniza nce of several enabling measures 
ushered by the Government, are constrained to observe that they are not yielding the 
required results. As per the Electricity Act, 2003, National Electricity Policy 2006 & Tariff 
Policy, 2006, the SERCs are required to fix a minimum percentage of energy from 
renewable energy sources. According to Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, it does 
not intend to force this upon the States through laws in view of diverse trends in 

 
 
economic viability/attractiveness to investors as well  as availability cost of other 
available competing power supply options in States. The Committee feel that the 
Ministry is shirking from its responsibility of ensuring implementation of the above -
mentioned Act and Policies. The Committee, therefore, recomm end that the Ministry 
should atleast advise States rich in renewable energy resources to fully exploit the 
power potential of these sources and encourage and counsel them to formulate Policy & 
Plans in line with the Acts & Policies of the Central Government. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The Ministry would lay 
increased emphasis on regular interaction with States at appropriate high levels to 
stress upon the need for speedy exploitation of the renewable energy potential available 
in their region as well as extend necessary technical support for the same apart from 
the existing various fiscal and financial incentives.   
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM No. F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20 (iv)] 
The estimated potential for power generation in the country from small hydro 
projects (SHPs) is 15,384 MW in Hilly States like J&K, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, as well as some states in the plains. The Committee are displeased 
to note that the Government has so far developed capacity of only 537 MW in the 10th 
Plan and 1400 MW has been targeted during the 11th Plan. Thus a major chunk of the 
available potential remains unexploited. As the State Governments play the biggest role 
in the development of SHPs, the Committee are of the opinion that various issues need 
to be addressed in close coordination with the State Governments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The total installed capacity of small hydro projects, as  on 31.3.2012  is 3395 MW 
and projects of about 1315 MW are in various stages of implementation.  During the 11th 
Plan a capacity of 1419  MW was added and a target of 2100 MW has been fixed for 
the 12 th Plan.   As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry is working  to 
accelerate pace of exploitation of small hydro in the country.  In this direction, the 
Ministry has stepped up its efforts to closely interact with the States and emphasized on 
establishing a method of regular project -wise monitoring.  It is strongly felt that project 
wise monitoring and regular interaction with the States and SHP developers can help to 
increase pace of implementation  of the projects. Apart from regular interaction with the 
States with high small hydro potential, the Ministry has also interacted with the States 
with moderate potential to set up SHP projects. Now quarterly review meetings are 
being held with States for close monitoring of projects.   Information regarding allotment 
of potential sites to the private sector, their implementation schedules and their Plan for 
next five years or so has been collected.                  
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM No. F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 20(vi)] 
Recently a new technology of solar submersible pumps has come up, which has 
a huge potential to alleviate power woes of the farmers and saving of substantial 
amount of power from the national grid. The Committe e recommend that Government 
should popularize & disseminate this technology among the farmers and simultaneously 
invest in Research & Development in this field.  
Various State Governments are providing open ended power subsidies to the 
farmers and once this technology is adopted on a wider scale, it can greatly ease the 
burden of huge power subsidies carried by these State Governments. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the opinion of State Governments should also be taken on 
board, and they must be persuaded to invest in the solar submersible pump technology. 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under the Off-grid Solar Applications Scheme of Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar 
Mission, the Ministry has sanctioned 1600 solar water pumping systems in Rajasthan, 
600 pump sets in Punjab, 75 pump sets in Haryana, 60 pump sets in Chhattisgarh, 45 
pump sets in Uttar Pradesh and 11 solar pump sets in Maharashtra during 2011 -12.  
These solar water pumping systems are expensive compared to the electrical pump 
sets or DG pump  sets available in the market. These pump sets cannot provide water 
for crops like wheat, rice, sugarcane, cash crops etc.  Both surface and submersible 
and DC/AC solar pump sets are available but the water output from these pump sets is 
not enough to irrigate field for most of the crops. It can be used for horticultural activities 
and can be coupled with drip irrigation system. Solar SPV pumping systems cannot 
replace the conventional electric pump sets due to initial high capital cost and technical 
limitations.   
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM No. F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20 (viii)] 
The potential of bio-gasifiers that use agricultural residue like rice husk to provide 
off grid power is enormous in the country and in the opinion  of the Committee this must 
be adequately tapped. In certain areas, for instance Champaran District in Bihar, this 
programme has been running quiet successfully, and now time has come for it to be 
replicated in other parts of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is promoting multifaceted rice husk based power generation 
programme, especially for rice growing eastern part of the country which has the 
lowest per capita electricity consumption, compri sing of eastern UP, Bihar, Orissa and 
West Bengal since December 2009. The programme aimed to provide electricity 
access to villages / hamlets for meeting unmet demand of electricity utilizing locally 

 
 
available rice husk for domestic, commercial and indust rial purposes based on 
sustainable model. So far 57 rice husk based gasifier systems have been installed for 
providing access to electricity for providing unmet demand of electricity in about 200 
villages / hamlets in Bihar. Ministry has proposed a target for providing unmet demand 
of electricity through 1000 such systems during 12 th plan period capable to provide 
electricity access in about 2000-2500 villages and hamlets.” 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM No. F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20 (ix)] 
There are a number of unelectrified remote villages/hamlets in the country where 
grid connectivity would not be possible for a variety of reasons. Therefore, Small hydro 
power generation systems,  biomass gasification based electricity generation systems, 
solar photovoltaic power plants etc. in distributed power generation mode need to be 
used depending upon the availability of resources for generation of required electricity. 
The Committee are of the considered view that the Government must pay attention to 
the Off-Grid Electrification of villages, as the power through these sources at the village 
level would be more reliable & predictable, and would save substantial expenditure 
towards erecting tr ansmission network. In this connection, the Committee would like to 
draw the attention of the Government towards the imperative need of creating proper 
repair & maintenance systems for the Renewable Power infrastructure. Further, the 
Government should not only pursue the targets of addition to the installed capacity, but 
also focus at the actual generation of power from these projects in the long run. It has 
come to the notice of the Committee that the installed capacity of renewable power falls 
to disuse a fter initial operations. This dereliction should be avoided at any cost to 
ensure full tapping of renewable energy in a sustained manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry had been implementing Remote Village Electrification (RVE) 
programme for provid ing financial support for lighting/basic electrification in those 

 
 
remote unelectrified census villages and unelectrified hamlets of electrified census 
villages where grid extension was not found feasible by the State Governments and 
hence were not covered under the Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana 
(RGGVY). Such villages were provided basic facilities for lighting/electricity through 
various renewable energy sources.  Small hydro power generation systems, biomass 
gasification based electricity generat ion systems, solar photovoltaic power plants etc 
in distributed power generation mode were used depending upon the availability of 
resources for generation of required electricity. Where none of these options were 
found to be feasible, individual household  based solar photovoltaic home lighting 
systems were supported on the requests of the state notified implementing agencies. 
The programme was implemented in states by state notified implementing agencies. 
 
Remote, unelectrified census villages and hamlets of electrified census villages 
as covered under the Programme were identified by the state governments and were 
endorsed by the Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) for non coverage under the 
RGGVY for grid electrification. REC has endorsed 11438 remote  villages and hamlets 
in 24 states as on 31/03/2012.  The state -wise details of remote villages and hamlets 
in different states are given in following Table: 
 
List of the remote unelectrified census villages/hamlets as endorsed by Rural 
Electrification Corporation (REC) as on 31/03/2012   
 
Sl. No. State Number of villages/hamlets verified by REC 
1.  Karnataka 23 150 
2.  Madhya Pradesh 972  
3.  Assam 2249  
4.  Maharashtra 362  
5.  Meghalaya 158  
6.  Arunachal Pradesh 145  
7.  Himachal Pradesh 1  
8.  Rajasthan 493 90 
9.  Manipur 166  
10.  West Bengal 93  
11.  Gujarat 49  
12.  Orissa 2116  
13.  Jharkhand 832  
14.  Chhattisgarh 1112  

 
 
Sl. No. State Number of villages/hamlets verified by REC 
15.  Uttarakhand 182 52 
16.  Uttar Pradesh 63 138 
17.  Tamil Nadu 0 73 
18.  Nagaland 11  
19.  Jammu & Kashmir 391 620 
20.  Haryana 0 149 
21.  Kerala 0 73 
22.  Bihar 80  
23.  Andhra Pradesh 0 112 
24.  Tripura 23 460 
Total 9521 1917 
Grand Total 11438 
 
As on 31/03/2012, 10120 remote  unelectrified villages and 2640 unelectrified hamlets 
have been sanctioned. The state wise details are given in the following Table. 
Sl. 
No. 
State  Total 
Villages 
Sanction
ed 
Villages 
Complete
d 
Ongoing 
villages 
Total 
hamlets 
sanction
ed 
Hamlets 
completed 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
297 297 0 1 0 
2. Andhra Pradesh 0 0 0 13 13 
2. Assam 2192 1856 166 0 0 
3. Chhattisgarh  682 568 0 0 0 
4. Gujarat 38 38 0 0 0 
5. Haryana 0 0 0 286 286 
6. Himachal 
Pradesh 
21 21 0 1 0 
7. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
440 160 280 20 0 
8. Jharkhand 720 493 207 0 0 
9. Karnataka 22 16 2 57 14 
10. Kerala 0 0 0 607 607 
11. Madhya 
Pradesh 
623 381 223 0 0 
12. Maharashtra 353 338 12 0 0 
13. Manipur 237 237 0 3 3 
14. Meghalaya 163 149 0 0 0 
15. Mizoram 20 20 0 0 0 
16. Nagaland 11 11 0 0 0 
17. Orissa 1720 602 1059 23 0 
18. Rajasthan 340 292 24 90 0 
19. Sikkim 0 0 0 13 13 
20. Tamil Nadu 0 0 0 184 101 

 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State  Total 
Villages 
Sanction
ed 
Villages 
Complete
d 
Ongoing 
villages 
Total 
hamlets 
sanction
ed 
Hamlets 
completed 
21. Tripura 85 60 23 944 715 
22. Uttarakhand 671 472 146 147 34 
23. Uttar Pradesh 284 98 18 223 86 
24. West Bengal 1201 1177 24 9 2 
25. Goa    19 0 
Total 10120 7286 2184 2640 1874 
 
Notes  
170 villages in Assam, 114 villages in Chhattisgarh, 20 villages in Jharkhand, 4 
villages in Karnataka, 19 villages in Madhya Pradesh, 3 villages in Maharashtra, 14 
villages in Meghalaya. 59 villages & 9 hamlets in Orissa, 24 villages in Rajasthan, 2 
villages in Tripura, 53 villages in Uttarakhand, and 168 villages in UP and 13 hamlets 
in Karnata ka, 161 hamlets in Tripura and 51 hamlets in Tamil Nadu have been 
cancelled by the State Governments as they were taken up for grid electrification. 
Repair and Maintenance of the systems installed under Remote Village Electrification 
Programme:  Under the provisions of the Remote Village Electrification Programme, 
maintenance and long -term sustainability of installed systems was primarily the 
responsibility of the concerned state governments. The state governments also 
undertook to provide funds and ensure replacement of batteries and other major 
maintenance expenditures as and when required. The CFA sanctioned by the Ministry 
includes the cost of 5 years Annual Maintenance Contract with the suppliers. In 
addition, a set of suggestions for long term sustaina bility of SPV home lighting systems 
had been issued to the state implementing agencies. Training of local youth in O&M, 
formation of village committees, collection of a minimum user charge etc, were some of 
the other strategies proposed by the Ministry.   
The Ministry provided additional financial support for organization of training of 
beneficiaries and awareness camps.  The Ministry also insisted that the implementing 
agencies should ensure setting up of service centers by the vendors for each around 
1000 households.   
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM No. F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 

 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20 (x)] 
Kerosene is consumed widely in the rural & semi -urban areas of the country 
towards lighting & cooking purposes. The Government of India is also providing subsidy 
for the purchase of kerosene, but a major portion of this subsidized kerosene is pilfered 
and sold in the black market. The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that 
Government must make available solar lanterns & solar ‘chullahs’ to the rural poor and 
thereby discourage the use of subsidized kerosene. The subsidy which Government is 
giving on kerosene would be enough to fund this ambitious programme & therefore no 
additional resources would be required. The Committee are of the considered view that 
this may be taken up as a pilot project in certain districts. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To promote Solar lanterns, the Ministry is providing subsidy to individual 
beneficiaries @ 30% of lantern’s cost limited to Rs.81/W p for lanterns distributed 
through State Nodal Agencies and @ 40% of the cost limited to Rs.108/W p for lanterns 
distributed through NABARD.  During 2011 -12, 78,900 nos. of Solar Lantern were 
distributed in different states in the country. 
 
The Government is also providing 30% subsidy for promoting Solar Cookers in 
the country including rural areas. The Cookers are distributed through State Nodal 
Agencies as well as other accredited channel partners - including manufactures and 
NGOs. During 2011-12, subsidy was sanctioned for a total of 16,100 nos. box type solar 
cookers and 1,980 nos. dish -type solar cookers in few states (Madhya Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Orissa, J&K and Uttarakhand) where the programme is 
being implemented.      
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM No. F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20 (xii)] 
The Committee while making a note of various Research & Development 
activities being undertaken under the aegis of the Ministry are of the firm view that 
renewable energy should be made available to the masses at an affordable price. In 
other words the transition from the laboratory to the market must be smooth & swift. As 
regards solar energy, the Ministry has expr essed hope to bring down the costs steadily 
and achieve grid parity by the year 2022. International Cooperation & R&D in renewable 
energy field have been underway with the signing of memoranda/agreements with 18 
countries, as well as various externally – aided projects. The Committee, while 
appreciating such initiatives, feel that the Government must encourage innovation to 
develop indigenous technology in this field. The Committee also recommend that the 
Government should enhance funding towards Research & Development in a time bound 
manner, so that setting up of commercial plants to produce renewable energy could be 
materialized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under JNNSM, the Ministry has a comprehensive R&D policy to support project 
proposals from various res earch organizations, in the public as well as private sector.  
The emphasis of the policy is on result oriented research involving industry with a view 
to enhance reliability and efficiency of the systems and devices and develop newer 
materials which can l ead to cost reduction in future.  Thrust areas, identified in 
consultation with the experts, have been posted on MNRE website.  In order to 
strengthen R&D programme for achieving targets under Mission, the following is 
submitted: 
 
i) Constitution of Project Monitoring Committees comprising subject area experts 
which visit the projects once in about six months and closely interact with the 
investigators of the project to see status of progress of implementation.  These 
Committees are al so empowered to suggest any mid -course corrections in the 
project configuration, if required.   

 
 
ii) The Ministry has also constituted Solar Energy Research Advisory Council under 
the chairmanship of Dr. Anil Kakodkar and having eminent scientists as members 
with a view to advice the Ministry on various technology related matter and 
oversee the strategy taking into account the on -going projects, availability of 
research capabilities and resources, international technology trends and 
possibilities of international collaboration.    
 
In order to create indigenous capabilities and capacity, the Ministry has 
substantially enhanced budget estimates for R&D. 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM No. F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 6.3) 
 The Committee have learnt that as per the report of the 17 th Electric Power 
Survey (EPS), the dema nd of electrical energy in the country is likely to be around 
2,18,209 MW for 2016 -17 and 2,98,253 MW for 2021 -22. These estimates show that 
the projected demand will be straightway doubled from 1,52,746 MW in 2011 -12 in the 
next five years which requires a capacity addition of more than 1 lakh MW in the 12 th 
Plan. 
 
 The Committee are of the considered view that the findings of the Power Survey 
must be incorporated into the policy formulations. Although the Ministry had worked out 
the requirement of capacity addition of 1,07,000 MW during 12 th Plan to meet the 
projections made in the said survey, the Committee have serious doubts about 
achievement of the same, keeping in view the downward revision of the capacity 
addition targets of the 11 th Plan. As power projects have a high gestation period, the 
Committee feel that capacity augmentation programmes should be envisaged for 7 -8 
years period and planned in a realistic manner. The committee are also of the view that 
five years plans are a narrow window f or the implementation of power projects and thus 
in order to avoid inordinate delays in execution & obviate slippages in capacity addition 
targets, the Government must assess reasons for under achievement of previous 
targets, strive to address those earnestly & then resort to long term planning. 
 
 The Committee observe that the Captive Power Plants are playing a big role in 
meeting country’s huge demand for power, as they provide an option for generating 
seamless & reliable power to various industries. As on March, 2011, the total installed 
capacity of captive power plants was 31,000 MW. These plants do not require elaborate 
transmission & distribution infrastructure & provide customized solutions for power. 

 
 
Therefore, the Committee are of the opinion that the setting -up of Captive Power Plants 
should be encouraged by the Government. The Committee further note that the Ministry 
hopes for a capacity addition of around 13,000 MW during the 12 th Five Year Plan by 
Captive Power Plants and hence recommend that the Government should come out 
with a policy to provide for duty free import of machinery for Captive Power Plants,  as it 
would go a long way in augmenting the power generation capacity of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Government has examined trends in supply of primary consumer energy and has 
also considered and examined energy requirement for the year 2016 -17, 2021 -22, 
2031-32. Power projects have long gestation. Time taken from conceptualization to 
operationalization may take four or more years depending on critical assessment of 
several factors including its impact on environment, fuel availability, bankability and 
availability of land and water. 
Government has examined in detail reasons for less than 100% achievement of 
its targets of 11th Plan, and thereafter, it has been decided to carefully select projects 
which can be operationalized for yielding benefits during 12th Plan. The requirement of 
capacity addition during 12th Plan has been accordingly decide d to be kept at 75785 
MW and also to make up for the deficit of nearly 8400 MW of 11th Plan. This is a 
subject of projects in pipeline that has a timeframe of 0-8 years. 
Government is encouraging setting up of captive power plants and accordingly 
the statutory framework has done away with the requirement of approval/clearance of 
Ministry of Power and Central Electricity Authority for setting up a captive generation 
unit. The law also ensures non-discriminatory open access for transmission of electricity 
generated from a captive generating plant to the destination of its use subject to 
availability of transmission capacity. Captive power plant can also establish and 
maintain dedicated transmission lines. There is no proposal at present for allowing duty 
free import of equipment for captive plants.   
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 6.5) 
 
 The State Electricity Boards (SEBs) have been unbundled into three distinct 
entities viz. Generation, Transmission & Distribution. Also with the enactment of the 
Electricity Act, 2003, these entities are supposed to be monitored and regulated by 
independent State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERC). Still, the State 
Governments play a predominant role indirectly, by virtue of providing funds to the 
SERCs. Moreover, many SERC Members in the State are former employees of the 
SEBs that they are now expected to regulate, independently. In such cases, SERCs are 
weakened since inception, which allows large State utilities to remain unresponsive to 
their regulations. The above -mentioned issues stem predominantly from a fundamental 
structural flaw in the curre nt operational and regulatory structure of the power sector. 
Since the reforms in the sector have progressed only to the extent of unbundling and 
establishing regulatory bodies without actually changing ownership, the effectiveness of 
the regulator to regu late the utility (which is another arm of the Government) is 
obviously limited. The policy maker, the regulator and the utility are all different parts of 
the government. The Committee, therefore, recommend that there should be 
operational autonomy for the  utilities, and functional & financial autonomy for the 
SERCs, which can be ensured by debarring employees/ex -employees of the SEBs to 
shift from one authority to the other in the same sector. Besides, as some States are still 
in the process of reorganizin g their SEBs, the Committee desire that the Government 
should issue an advisory to all State Governments on this issue. 
Para No. 6.5 of 13th Report of EC (15th Lok Sabha) 
 
Reply of the Government 
Section 131of Electricity Act 2003 provides for mandatory tr ansfer of property, 
interest in property, rights and liabilities belonged to the State Electricity Board, to the 
State Government on such terms as may be agreed between the State Government 
and the Board for the purpose of re-vesting the same in the Government Company or in 
a company or companies in accordance with the transfer scheme. 
 

 
 
Government of India has already taken initiative for reorganizing the State 
Electricity Board into separate entities of Generation, Transmission and Distribution 
segments with the purpose of making them self -sustaining and for the compliance of 
Electricity Act, 2003. The matter has also been taken up with States at highest level in 
writing and also in the Power Ministers Conferences from time to time, as result of 
which 18 SEBs out of 21 SEBs, have been reorganized. However, 3 states namely 
Bihar, Jharkhand and Kerala have not yet reorganized their SEBs. The extension has 
been granted by Government of India to them from time to time under the proviso to 
section 172(a) of the Electricity Act 2003. 
 
As regard selection of members/chairperson, financial and functional autonomy 
of SERCs, it is mentioned that in order to ensure fair & transparent selection to the post 
of Chairperson/Member of SERCs, Section 85(1) of the Electricit y Act, 2003 provides 
for constitution of a Selection Committee by the State Governments to be headed by a 
retired judge of the High Court. Further as per proviso to Section 89(2) of the Act, the 
Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the members, shall not 
be varied to their disadvantage after appointment.  
 
Further Section 89(5) of the Act provides that "Any member ceasing to hold office 
as such shall  
 
(a) not accept any commercial employment for a period of two years from the dat e 
he ceases to hold such office; and  
(b) not represent any person before the Central Commission or any State 
Commission in any manner.  
 
Explanation. -  For the purposes of this sub -section "commercial employment” means 
employment in any capacity in any organisation which has been a party to the 
proceedings before the Appropriate Commission or employment in any capacity under, 
or agency of,  a person engaged in trading, commercial, industrial or financial business 

 
 
in electricity industry and includes a director of a company or partner of a firm or setting 
up practice either independently or as partner of a firm or as an advisor or a consultant. 
 
Section 103(1) of the Act provides for establishment of separate fund by the State Govt. 
to be called as Electricity Regulatory Commission fund. The Source of the fund will be- 
 
(a) any grants and loans made to the State Commission by the State Government 
under Section 102; 
(b) all fees received by the State Commission under this Act; 
(c) all sums received by the State Commission from such other sources as may be 
decided upon by the State Government. 
 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting – 
(a) the salary, allowances a nd other remuneration of Chairperson, Members, 
Secretary, officers and other employees of the State Commission; 
(b) the expenses of the State Commission in discharge of its function under Section 
86; and 
(c) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act. 
(3)The State Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India, prescribe the manner of applying the Fund for meeting the expenses specified 
in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (2). 
 
As such there are suffici ent provisions in Electricity Act 2003 for functional and 
financial autonomy of the SERCs and fair & transparent selection to the post of 
Chairperson/Member of SERC. 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20 (vii)] 
The Committee also strongly recommend that solar photovoltaic plants should be 
installed on the rooftops of all the public buildings in Urban and Rural areas, particularly 
in the Primary Health C entres (PHCs) and Panchayat Bhawans. The Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy should urgently take up this matter with the Ministries of Urban and 
Rural development as this would help the Government to save a huge amount towards 
the cost of fuel for diesel g ensets being run in various PHCs & Panchayat Buildings. 
The mobile towers using diesel gensets can also be converted into solar power utilizing 
entities. It would also stop the obnoxious practice of siphoning -off the diesel meant for 
the gen sets in the bl ack market. Besides, the initial comparatively high installation cost 
of a PV Plant is quiet justifiable, vis-à-vis the cost incurred towards the fuel expenses. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has sanctioned a number of projects for installation of s tandalone 
solar photovoltaic power plants on PHCs, CHCs, hospitals, police stations, jails, guest 
houses, schools, colleges, universities, educational institutions, tribal hostels, 
panchayat buildings, common service centres for meeting the electrical requ irement 
where grid is either not available or very erratic.  Some of these plants have been 
installed and a number of these systems are under various stages of installation in 
different parts of the country.  Since the cost of the photovoltaic power plants  is high 
compared to the alternatives, it can only meet small requirements of electricity in 
isolated places where the supply of electricity is very erratic.   It cannot be made 
mandatory by the Ministry to be installed on all the Government buildings as t he initial 
capital expenditure is very high. The existing scheme of the Ministry has provision for 
subsidy of 30% of the project cost limited to Rs.81/W p in General Category States.  
Arranging balance cost of the project is difficult for the States. In Spe cial Category 
States like North -Eastern States, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and 
Uttarakhand, the Ministry provides 90% of the project cost.  For these States 
mobilizing 10% of the project cost from their resources is difficult.   The battery also 
needs replacement after a period of 5/6 years, which requires huge expenditure. 
   

 
 
During 2010-11, the Ministry sanctioned installation of stand -alone SPV power plants 
at 200 nos. of telecom towers of private companies in Bihar (100 nos.) and Uttar 
Pradesh (100 nos.). Of these, 184 systems have been installed.   Another project for 
installation of SPV power plants at 100 telecom towers in 11 States was sanctioned to 
BSNL. These plants are under different stages of installation.  Availability of shadow 
free area close to telecom tower for installation of solar panels is, however, a general  
constraint.  Safety and security of solar PV power plant also is an issue with telecom 
tower service providers.   
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM No. F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 6.2) 
 The Committee note that the capacity addition target for the 11 th Plan was fixed 
at 78,700 MW which was reduced to 62,374 MW by the Planning Commission following 
the mid-term appraisal of the plan. Against this, till 31.10.2011 only 41,963 MW of the 
capacity has been commissioned. The Committee are aghast to note that o nly about 67 
per cent of the scaled down target has been met in the last four years. Though a 
number of steps have been taken by the Ministry to meet the target of the 11 th Plan 
including introduction of a New Accountability System, yet the Ministry of Pow er has 
apparently further reduced the Plan target to around 52,000 MW only. In the opinion of 
the Committee, monitoring the officials and engineers handling power projects and 
holding them accountable for lapses should have been in place much earlier. The 
Committee are apprehensive as to whether within the remaining period of the 11 th Plan 
period, it would be possible to achieve even the reduced target by the Ministry of Power. 
Besides, slippages in the 11th Plan target would definitely spillover into the 12th Plan. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, are of the view that setting the target of 78,700 MW 
for the 11 th Five Year Plan was completely unrealistic. The Committee deplore the fact 
that the Government had initially set unrealistic targets, then reduced it at the Mid-term 
appraisal stage. The Committee strongly recommend that the targets for the Five Year 
Plan should be set up after doing a scientific analysis and by a real time assessment of 
all the factors involved in the construction of power plants, the lim ited coal supply etc., 
as well as the analysis of the delay -causing issues during the 11 th Plan. It is only when 
the targets are realistic that the slippages will be minimum. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Central Electricity Authori ty, which projects targets, may 
carry out necessary studies to prepare a realistic blueprint of the 12th Plan targets. 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Capacity addition targets are recommended by the Working Group on Power 
after incorporating the realistic assessment of Central Electricity Authority, which is the 
technical wing of the Ministry of Power. Chairman CEA is also a Member of the Working 
Group. 
The capacity addition requirement for a Plan period is based on the studies carried 
out to determine the capacity addition required to meet the projected demand for 
electricity.  
 Planning Commission had fixed a capacity addition target of 78,700 MW during 
11th Plan. At the time of setting  of the target, this capacity was considered realistic for 
giving benef its during the 11 th Plan. However, as per Mid -Term Appraisal (MTA) of 
Planning Commission in 2009, capacity addition target during 11 th Plan was revised to 
62,374 MW. This revision was necessitated after review of the status of the various 
power projects. Ministry of Power has not further reduced the Plan target to around 
52,000 MW.  
Capacity totaling to 54,964 MW was commissioned during 11th Plan, which is 
88.1% of the mid -term appraisal target of 62,374 MW.  As against the original target of 
15,627 MW hyd ro power the realization was 5,544 MW.  Similarly against the target of 
3380 MW nuclear power the realization was only 880 MW.  Many of the hydro and 
nuclear projects had to deal with evolving sentiments of local people.   
In spite of strenuous efforts mad e, some projects of 11th Plan did  slip on account 
of exogenous/ endogenous factors some of which are listed below:- 
(i) Local issues like various demands and apprehensions of local people 
(ii) Environmental issues 
(iii) Contractual issues 
(iv) Delay in supply and erection 
(v) Geological surprises like poor geological strata, formation of cavities, 
(vi) Natural Calamities like flood, earthquake etc. 
The above mentioned factors are usually encountered at the time of actual 
execution of work and it is difficult to anticipate the same at the time of target fixation. 

 
 
  As per the Report of Working Group on Power for 12th Plan, considering the 
requirement of capacity addition in the 12th Plan, capacity addition of 75,785 MW 
comprising 9,204 MW Hydro, 63,781 MW Thermal and 2,800 MW Nuclear is proposed. 
All the projects totaling to 75,785 MW have been firmed up based on a scientific 
analysis and status of implementation of the projects at present. These projects have all 
the requisite inputs/clearances in place, and therefore have a high degree of certainty of 
materializing during 12th Plan. Issues pertaining to fuel i.e. availability of coal/gas, which 
may impact the 12th Plan capacity addition, have been identified and are being attended 
to at the highest level in the Government.  
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6.6) 
 The Government have opened up the power sector since 1991, and the 
investment measures were further liberalized by coming into force of the Electricity Act, 
2003. Since the advent of economic reforms in India, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
has played a big role in stimulating economic activity.  The Committee note that the 
cumulative FDI inflow in the power sector from April 2000 to December  2009 was US $ 
4,448 million. In the opinion of the Committee, it is not commensurate with the 
requirements of the power sector. The estimated fund requirement for power sector 
during XIth Five Year Plan was nearly Rs. 11 lakh crore. With the 12th Plan scheduled to 
start soon, the fund requirement for this sector is set to rise manifold. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that in order to attract greater FDI inflows, the policy regime in 
the power sector should be further liberalized. The Committee would a lso like to be 
apprised of the blueprint, if any, made for the Government’s future strategy on the 
matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per extant policy, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) up to 100% is permitted 
subject to the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, under the automatic route, for: 

 
 
5. Generation and transmission of electric energy produced in hydro electric, 
coal/lignite based thermal, oil based thermal and gas based thermal power 
plants. 
6. Non-Conventional Energy Generation and Distribution. 
7. Distribution of electric energy to households, industrial, commercial and other 
users and 
8. Power Trading. 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 10, Para No. 6.10 (ii)] 
The issue of pilferage of coal & alleged activities of ‘coal mafia’  engaged  serious  
attention  of the Committee during their  deliberations with the Ministry of Coal. The 
Committee also noticed that the Ministry  was rather unwilling to acknowledge the  
severity of the prob lem. The Committee are pained to note that even the Ministry’s  
written replies on this issue were quite  evasive and failed to specify  the quantum of  
coal stolen  and losses incurred on account of  theft/ pilferage of coal.  The Committee   
are of  the view that the Ministry  and various coal companies  can not  simply wash off  
their hands  by arguing that maintenance  of law  & order is a State subject. In the 
opinion  of the  Committee , a substantial  portion of coal  is pilfered  due to lack of vigi l  
&  proper oversight  on the part of the coal companies too. The  Committee  are 
convinced  that certain  unscrupulous  elements  within the system  are hand -in- glove 
with the ‘coal mafias’  which  needs  to be probed to fix accountability on the erring  
officials.  The  measures  being  taken by the coal companies  to prevent  illegal mining 
of coal  need to  be effective  to show desired improvement  in the current  situation. 
  
In this scenario, the committee strongly recommend that the reality of ille gal 
activities of coal pilferage in coal mines and coal trading areas must be acknowledged  
and dealt with sternly at the earliest by the Government.   

 
 
The Committee also recommend that an independent  audit  of coal production& 
actual dispatch  should be  carried out on a quarterly basis.      
 
Reply of the Government 
The subsidiary-wise information is as under: 
Company Comments 
ECL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The total command area is spread over seven districts of two states, i.e. 
West Bengal & Jharkhand operates 88 UG Mines  and 17 OCP under 14 
areas. The most of the mines located within villages. The stock yards and 
sidings are the main places which are prone to theft/pilferage of coal and 
transportation rote from stock yard to siding. The company engaged 
Departmental Securi ty Personnel -1857 Nos, CISF -940 Nos. and DGR 
sponsored agencies – 2109. For patrolling duty so as to control illegal 
mining as well as theft of coal and outsourcing patches, camps of CISF 
have been established at different location. The CISF parties made 
surprise raids and check on illegal mining as well as movement of coal. At 
all theft/pilferage prone places, the security arrangement has been made. 
Interaction jointly with CISF and Police Authorities have been made 
regularly to review the situation and make remedial actions. 
BCCL 
 
 
 
The following steps havebeen taken to curb the illegal mining – 
(ii) conducting raids/patrolling at sensitive areas jointly with 
CISF/Internal Security and State Administration, (ii) Lodging 
FIRs with  the local Police Station wherever such activities come 
to notice, (iii) Whenever any site is identified, prone to illegal 
mining, immediate steps are taken to fill the sites by Dozing, 
Blasting etc. so as to prevent the access to the exposed 
openings, (iv) A Task Force already exi sts, constituted by DC, 
Dhanbad to prevent illegal mining. Meetings of Task Force are 
also held to review the issues. 
CCL To check pilferage of coal in and around command areas by the internal 
security and other security arrangement vis -à-vis State Home G urads, 

 
 
DGR, CISF contingent are deployed. A high power committee has already 
been constituted by State Authorities, Deptt. of Home Affairs, Govt. of 
Jharkhand at State level as well as District level. 
Measures are taken to identify the points of theft and pilferages of coal 
from coal yards, sidings. The following steps are being taken to check 
theft/pilferage of coal. 
1. Check posts have been erected at vulnerable points. 
2. Most of the coal depots have been fenced with barbed wire. 
3. Frequent surprise checks/raid is conducted by security team periodically 
with District Police Force to prevent coal theft/pilferage. 
4. Regular and intensive patrolling. 
5. Strengthening of internal security by deploying 1058 nos. of DGR 
sponsored Security, 672 Nos. of Stat e Home Guards and 1368 Nos. of 
CISF personnel apart from 2060 nos. of Company’s Security Personnel. 
6. System of weighment with challan has been introduced while 
transporting coal from one point to another. 
7. Liaison with district authority is maintained and review meetings are 
arranged every month, with concerned DC to curb illegal mining theft/coal 
pilferage. 
8. Authorized loading inspector and weighbridge clerks are posted at all 
the Railway Sidings for monitoring the loading and dispatch arrangements. 
9. Security guards are posted round the clock in all the railway sidings. 
10. Effective liaison is also maintained with State Administration and 
Police for maintain law and order in the respective Railway Siding and 
to check the coal pilferage / illegal trading. 
SECL There are no major law & order problems which affect production and 
supply of coal. Regular co -ordination and liaison is carried out with State 
authorities and Police for security of coalfields. There are no reports of 
coal mafia activities in  SECL There are no reports of illegal mining of coal 
in leasehold areas. Also there is no large scale theft/pilferage of coal and 
theft/pilferage of coal has been reduced days-after days. 

 
 
NCL There is no law & order problem reported in NCL so far. Adequate security 
arrangements are made available for guarding vulnerable points. 
The following steps have been taken to curb the menace. – 
 Check posts have been established at he vulnerable points; 
 Intensive round the clock patrolling by security with the  help of local 
police; 
 A system of Internal Intelligence collection under the leadership of 
Security Incharge of projects and at corporate level by GM(Security); 
 Close liaison is maintained with local Law & Order authorities to track 
the criminals. Also pe riodic meeting is done with the Law & Order 
Authorities. 
MCL No major law & order problem for which production and supply of coal is 
being affected. There is an existing practice that the regular interaction/ 
meetings are being held between Management and  State Govt. authorities 
of different levels to ensure preventive/proactive measures to resolve 
various issues pertaining to law & order. 
There is no illegal mining in command area and no theft of coal is going on 
large scale through Mafias/Smugglers or Un-social elements. 
The following steps are being taken to eradicate/minimize the pilferage/theft 
of coal in the command area. 
 Regular and intensive patrolling is being carried out by departmental 
security personnel and also with the local Police. 
 Surprise checks are being carried out frequently to find out if there is 
any illegal activity in the command area, particularly at loading points, 
weigh bridges and at entry/exist points. 
 All the security check posts and Railway siding have been strengthened. 
 To further upgrade the existing security system and to prevent losses of 
Co’s property due to theft CISF is being inducted in MCL. 
WCL  As per records available, there is no coal mafia  operating in WCL 
 

 
 
Coal India Limited has reported that audit  of coal production is done by measuring  
coal stock  as per “ New Code for Uniform System of Maintenance, Control and 
Verification of Coal stock” in all mines of Coal India  Limited on regular basis in the 
following manner:- 
 
(v) Monthly  measurement of coal stock is carried out by colliery surveyor, 
 
(vi) Quarterly  measurement  is carried out by the coal stock measurement team 
constituted  at area level, 
 
(vii)  Six monthly  measurement  is carried out by coal stock measurement team 
constituted  at subsidiary company level and 
(viii)  Annual measurement  as well as check measurement is carried out by coal 
stock measurement  team constituted at CIL.          
Ministry of Coal 
(OM No. 54016/54/2011-CPD dated 12th October, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 6.13) 
 The Committee have learnt that among various parameters to measures the 
efficiency of Thermal Power Plants, Plant Load Factor (PLF) is most important, which 
measures the average load to the installed capacity of a power plant. The PLF of 
thermal units depends  on a number of factors such as vintage of the Unit, forced & 
planned outages, availability of required quality & quantity of fuel etc. From the figures 
submitted to them regarding PLF of Central, State and Private Power Plants in the last 3 
years, the Committee note that the PLF of plants in the private sector is between 85 to 
91 percent which is more than the Central Sector thermal units where the PLF has 
remained in 84 to 86 percent bracket. In this backdrop the Committee feel that the 
Government should strive to raise the PLF of their thermal power plants. Wherever it is 
not possible to achieve these figures due to the vintage of the units, fresh Renovation & 
Modernization work should be initiated. The Committee also recommend that 
Renovation & Moderniza tion works should be carried out within a stipulated time, to 

 
 
avoid forced outages. Further, Life Extension (LE) works should be carried out only in 
those units which have the viability of running smoothly in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) The Renovation  &Modernization (R&M) programme is primarily aimed at 
generation sustenance and overcoming problems arising due to: 
 
- Generic Defects. 
- Design Deficiencies /Modifications. 
- Obsolescence of Equipments/systems. 
- In adequacies due to Poor quality of Coal. 
- Change in terminal parameters with reference to design. 
- Stringent environmental conditions.   
- Safety requirements. 
 
(ii) R&M works are generally carried out after 1,00,000 hours of operation by thermal 
power plants. Under Life Extension (LE) program me the useful life of the thermal units 
is increased by another 15 to 20 years. Life Extension activities are undertaken after 25 
years of operation. There is need to check the remaining life of the components after 
about 20 years of life or 1,60,000 hours  of operation lest it may result into serious 
failures. A detailed condition assessment along with performance evaluation of various 
systems / sub -systems is carried out to identify the modifications / replacements 
required to enable plant operation for a longer period so that during the extended life the 
plant operates efficiently and delivers the rated or higher capacity i.e. uprating with 
improved heat rate.   
 
(iii) Based on discussions held with various utilities, the document "National 
Perspective Plan (NPP) for R&M and Life Extension of Thermal Power Stations up to 
the year 2016 -17" was prepared by CEA in December 2009.  Also, the guidelines for 
R&M/LE works of coal/lignite based thermal power stations had been revised.  
 

 
 
(iv) Out of 53 units (7318 MW) for LE works and 76 units (18965 MW) for R&M works 
planned for 11th Plan, LE works in 13 units (1291 MW) and R&M work in 59 units 
(14855 MW) were completed during 11th Plan period. 
 
(v) During 12th Plan LE works has been identified on 42 units (10672 MW)  in 
Central Sector comprising 35 units (9202 MW) of NTPC, 4 units (840 MW) of DVC and 
3 units (630 MW) of NLC. During 12th plan R&M works has been identified on 20 units 
(4341 MW) comprising 11 units (4050 MW) of NTPC and 9 units (291 MW) of NEEPCO. 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20 (v)] 
 In so far as solar energy is concerned, the Committee have learnt that the 
Government has embarked upon an ambitious Solar Miss ion of deploying 20,000 MW 
of grid connected solar power by the year 2022. In this regard, the Committee note 
further that Direct Normal Irradiance (DNI), which is the amount of solar radiation 
received per unit area by a surface that is always held perpen dicular (or normal) to the 
rays that come in a straight line from the direction of the sun at its current position in the 
sky, is considered to be an indispensible tool in proper assessment and full utilization of 
the solar potential in any region. The Com mittee are dismayed to note that despite the 
ambitious JL Nehru Solar Mission, the Government is yet to prepare a complete DNI 
map covering the entire country that would make identification of high potential sites 
much easier. In this connection the Commit tee recommend that the Government must 
urge the Centre for Wind Energy Technology (CWET), Chennai to expedite the project 
relating to the DNI map of India on an urgent basis. The Committee also recommend 
that the Government should take initiative to prepar e a high resolution Renewable 
Energy map of India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
DNI is one of the critical inputs for ascertaining the techno -economic feasibility of 
any solar power project using concentrating collectors.  It can be estimated to a fair 

 
 
degree from the data normally recorded by metrological department and facilitate initial 
identification of potential sites.    However, DNI  is a  strong function of atmospheric 
turbidity and can vary in future at a given site depending on progress of urbanization 
and industrial activity in the region.   
 
At present, 45 radiation observatories of IMD are equipped to monitor global 
solar radiation, while only a few measure DNI. 51 stations of CWET are additional 
where DNI as well as global solar radiation is monitored.   
 
As a part of cooperation between Nat ional Renewable Energy Laboratory 
(NREL), USA and Solar Energy Centre of the MNRE, high -resolution solar resource 
maps have been prepared based on satellite data.  CWET is also working on 
developing solar atlas based on actual measurements, and it is expec ted that 
preliminary draft of solar atlas would be ready in about one year time. 
 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 6.4) 
 
 The funds required for the XI Five Year Plan  towards capacity addition, 
transmission, distribution and other projects was estimated as a whopping Rs. 
10,59,515 crore. It would be a monu mental task to arrange for such large funding, 
therefore, it is imperative for the Government to streamline the funding procedure for the 
Power Sector. In this context, the Committee note the recommendations of the Sub -
Committee of Group of Ministers on fi nancial issues to the Power Sector and would like 
that its recommendations should be taken on board by the Government at the earliest. 
The Committee understand that another High -Powered Committee consisting of 
representatives of various financial instituti ons and banks also exists to deliberate on 
the issue of availability of finance to the Power Sector. The Committee recommend that 
the recommendations of the afore -mentioned Committees should be seriously 
considered and implemented by the Government without  any further loss of time . The 
progress in this regard should be submitted to the Committee at the Action Taken stage. 
 
 The Committee further note with displeasure that a National Electricity Fund 
(NEF) has been set-up by the Government for loans to be di sbursed for Transmission & 
Distribution schemes as electricity distribution has been identified as the ‘weakest part’ 
in the Country’s Power Sector due to heavy Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT&C) 
losses by the Planning Commission in their mid -term app raisal. Such undesirable 
situation has led to the inability of most of the State Electricity Boards to raise funds or 
to do so only at very high rates of interest. The Committee also note the Ministry’s 
expectation that the new fund will address this issue . The Committee, however, are 
aware that the Planning Commission has decided to get the NEF Scheme reformulated 
with two key changes, i.e. instead of PFC (Power Finance Corporation) and REC (Rural 

 
 
Electrification Corporation) only, the loans would be disbu rsed by commercial banks 
too, and secondly, in the initial two years, only the distribution schemes would be 
targeted. The Committee would like to know, as to how apart from the current status of 
the reformulated NEF, the amount of Rs. 227.64 crore provide d to the Ministry for NEF 
in the Annual Plan 2010 -11 has been disbursed. The Committee also desire that the 
Ministry of Power should submit a detailed note on the modalities of the National 
Electricity Fund so as to enable them to go further into the issue. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
A Sub-Committee of the Group of Ministers on financial issues of power sector 
was constituted by the Chairman of the GoM on 31st August, 2007 under the 
Chairmanship of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission. 
 
The Sub-Committee has submitted its Interim Report on 19th February, 2009 and 
final report on 6th October, 2010.  The final report along with the interim report of the 
Sub-Committee has since been considered and adopted by the Group of Ministers in its 
meeting held on 29th October, 2010. 
 
State related recommendations have been referred to State Governments for 
redressal at State level.  Tax related proposals have been referred to Ministry of 
Finance. 
 
Other recommendations were taken up in the form of CCI Note.  It has been 
decided that Finance Ministry, Chairman, Planning Commission and Ministry of Power 
jointly discuss the matter first.  The points raised by Ministry of Finance are under 
examination by the Ministry of Power in consultation with CEA, PFC and REC. 
 
 Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved the setting up of 
National Electricity Fund (Interest Subsidy Scheme) in its meeting held on 13th 
December, 2011 to provide interest subsidy aggregating to 8466 Crs on loan 

 
 
disbursement amounting to 25,000 C rs to the State Power Utilities – both in public and 
private sector, to improve the distribution network. Guidelines for the scheme have been 
issued. A Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Power) has been 
constituted for sanctioning and monitoring of the Projects. Rural Electrification 
Corporation (REC) is the Nodal Agency to operationalize the programme. Since the 
scheme was approved on 13th December 2011, no disbursement could be made in F.Y. 
2010-11 and 2011-12. 
Ministry of Power 
(OM No. 13/11/2012-OM dated 7th September, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 6.11) 
 The Committee observe that there are multiple environmental concerns related to 
the coal sector and much  attention has not been given  by the Government  to this 
aspect. Most  of the coal reserves  in India are situated  in highly forested and tribal 
inhabited areas  where   the mining activities  is perceived as a major challenge to 
environmental conservation and rehabilitation measures.  The Committee ar e aware 
that a number of coal projects are  facing difficulties  due to delays in getting 
environmental clearances. According to the Ministry of Coal, in order to translate   
indicated reserves  into proved category, detailed drilling of the particular lan d must be  
carried out. During oral evidence, the Committee were informed  that the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests has serious  reservations about sinking of boreholes in the 
forest area to ascertain the quality and quantity of the coal reserves. The Co mmittee  
have learnt that though  more boreholes  per square kilometers were  allowed by the 
Environment Ministry on a selective  basis, it could not settle the issue  permanently. 
The Committee feel that technical  procedures  cannot be compromised in suc h matters 
to save the huge cost and manpower involved in the coal mining activity and thus  
recommend  that Government must allow  requisite  15 -20  boreholes per square  
kilometer, in order to confirm newer coal  reserves  and to expedite  the process of 
bringing it to  production stage.  
 

 
 
The demarcation of the forest areas into ‘Go’ and ‘ No Go ‘  by the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests  have generated a  lot of debate in the recent  past.  While 
noting that the Ministry of Environment  has  relented a bit in its classification of ‘No Go’ 
areas and has allowed to run projects  in these areas, the Committee feel that the 
environmental conservation vis -à-vis  development  can be balanced  by a careful yet 
practical approach  of both  the stakeholders. The Committee  deprecate any attempts  
of Environmental dogmatism which can jeopardize  vital decisions. The Government  
needs  to come out with a comprehensive  policy on granting  environmental  clearance 
to the projects  in the forest areas. The Committee d esire  that the Government should 
examine these issues sincerely. They would also like to  be informed  by the Ministry of 
Coal regarding the final  decision taken in the matter at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
All out efforts to enhance exploration quantum and speed is getting affected due 
to non -availability of statutory prospecting permission for drilling in forest areas from 
Forest departments of States and MOEF, New Delhi. Exploration programme in number 
of blocks could not start due to non -availability of forest permission. In two blocks 
exploration work was closed prematurely. The problem will continue if the existing norm 
of upto 20 boreholes per 10 Km2 is not revised to 15 -20 boreholes per Km2 for detailed 
exploration.  Permissions for exploration in 21 blocks, applied under existing rules, are 
pending. Exploration in forest area of these blocks could not be taken  up/remains 
incomplete .  
 In Sept  2009, MoEF  issued  a letter to conduct  exploration  in three Pilot 
Projects, namely, Bijul in Singrauli coalfield (MP), Chira North in Mand -Raigarh 
Coalfields (Chhatisgarh ) and Baitarani East in Talcher Coalfields (Orissa)  on trial 
basis  to assess   the impact of exploration on flora  and fauna & again on 1 0.03.2010  
conveying  the approval of Central Government for trail exploratory  drilling in same 
three blocks. 
 Local District Forest Officers (DFOs) issued  permission, in May -June 2010, to 
carry out  trial drilling in 2 blocks (Baitarani East, Orissa and  Bijul, MP ).  Presently  
drilling  is continuing  in Baitarani  East Block and Bijul block. Permission for exploration  

 
 
in 3 rd block (Chira North, Chhattisgarh )  was received  fro m local DFO Office in 
February, 2011  & drilling  in this block has concluded. 
  
1-1.5 Sq.Km.area was identified  in the above  three blocks  and exploration  
completed  in indentified  areas of  the respective  blocks. Joint reports on Baitarani  
East block  and  Chira North Block  have been  submitted  with  the DFO, Angul and 
DFO, Korba  respectively. Interim Status Report  in respect of  all these  three blocks  
has been submitted  to MoEF in the month of  May 2011. Govt  of MP  has entrusted  
the job  of impact assessment  to State Forest Reach Institute, Bhopal. Joint report   
prepared by  State Forest Research  Institute , Madhya Pradesh and CMPDIL in respect 
of  Bijul Block  has been submitted to MoEF on 31.08.2012.       
 
In the 5 th  meeting  of the GoM  held under the Chairmanship  of the Finance 
Minister on 20th September, 2011, to consider  the environmental & development issues 
relating  to coal mining and other development projects, the GoM  had  accepted  the 
recommendation to do away with the Go/No concept.  Orders to this effect have been 
issued by MOEF on 31st August 2012.            
Ministry of Coal 
(OM No. 54016/54/2011-CPD dated 12th October, 2012) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20 (i)] 
Our country is fortunate, being blessed with an abundance of sunlight, wind, 
water and biomass sources. The  Committee feel that people in all walks of life are now 
more aware of the benefits of renewable energy, especially decentralized energy 
required in villages and semi -urban / urban centres. The Ministry of Non -Conventional 
Energy has the mandate to assess and promote renewable energy through solar 
thermal devices, solar Photo Voltaic, biogas units, small hydro power units, wind 
turbines etc. After holding due deliberations with the Ministry on this aspect, the 
Committee’s recommendations are as under: 
 

 
 
(i) Sufficient budgetary support is indispensible for carrying out any particular activity 
satisfactorily to the desired level. The Committee, however, observe that the budget of 
the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy is  quite inadequate being only 0. 24% of th e 
Union Budget Estimates for 2010 -11. Though the future of power sectors depends 
heavily on renewable energy sources, the fact that the Ministry is facing a lot of 
difficulties due to the budgetary constraints, was the high point of the oral evidence of 
this Ministry before the Committee. 
 
The Committee believe that in view of the fact that there are huge energy 
disparities in the country, considerable investment in the renewable energy would give 
us manifold returns in the future. Such investments have the  potential to improve the 
lives of the marginalized sections of society like rural poor, tribals & women. It would 
also come as a boon to the people living in remote & inaccessible areas. Therefore the 
Committee recommend that the budget of the Ministry of  New & Renewable Energy 
needs to be increased to at least 1% of the Union Budget. They feel that the Ministry of 
New & Renewable Energy should accordingly work out the details of the requirements 
for Feed-in-Tariff, capital subsidy, risk guarantee, R&D, village minigrids, etc and pursue 
with the Planning Commission / Ministry of Finance with proper details for better 
allocation in next year’s Budget. 
 
Reply of the Government 
During 2010 -11, the budget allocation to the Ministry was Rs.1000 cr. which 
corresponds to only 0.26% of the actual total Plan Expenditure of Rs.3,79,029 cr. 
 
For FY 2011-12, a total budget requirement of Rs.2275 cr. for various schemes/ 
programmes was projected to Planning Commission.  Against this, the actual allocation 
by Ministry of Finance was Rs.1200 cr.  which corresponds to 0.28% of the total Plan 
Expenditure (RE 2011-12) of Rs.4,26,604 cr. 
 
For CFY 2012 -13, a total budget requirement of Rs.2,979 cr. was agreed to at 
the time of Plan discussions in Planning Commission.  The actual allocation BE 2012-13 

 
 
has, however, been Rs.1,385 cr. The same corresponds to 0.27% of BE 2012 -13 of Rs. 
5,21,025 cr. 
 
While the Ministry’s would endeavor to hasten the pace of utilization of the 
existing allocation for the current year and seek enhanced allocation at RE stage, it will 
pursue with Planning Commission for a four -fold increase in its allocation at the time of 
Annual Plan discussions for FY 2013-14 with adequate and proper details as suggested 
by the Committee. 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
 
Recommendation [Sl. No. 20, Para No. 6.20 (xi)] 
Power from Renewable Energy is a new frontier in the emerging market 
economy of energy, but the sector is beset with high cost issues, uncertainties an d 
risks. As a result, entrepreneurs are reluctant to invest in the renewable sector. Due to 
incipient risks, banks are also rather un -willing to finance these projects. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a separate Risk Guarantee Fund for Renewable 
Energy Projects should be created out of the Clean Energy Fund without any delay. In 
the opinion of the Committee, the operationalization of such a fund would cover various 
types of technological & financial risks to the investors. The Committee are aware t hat 
such a fund, in operation in many countries, has proved to be highly successful. The 
corpus of the fund should be such as can meet the funding requirements of all major 
clean energy initiatives in the Country in future. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is clarified that several renewable energy technologies, particularly small hydro, 
biomass, wind power are not new and have already reached commercial maturity, and 
do not  projects face the same levels of issues relating to high costs, uncertainties an d 
risks as in case of the solar power technologies now being promoted under the JNNSM.    
Also, the uncertainties/ risks in any specific case depend mainly by the rigorousness of 

 
 
resource assessment undertaken at selected project site governing project cap acity, the 
reliability of selected technology, the overall project design and the pattern/ sources of 
funding, domestic and foreign.  These risks can be minimized in most cases through 
adequate consideration of all such factors at DPR preparation stage its elf by competent 
consultants.  The financial risks due to FOREX variations are common to all types of 
projects with significant foreign funding.  
 
The government has already created the SPSF in case of the solar power 
projects taken up through NVVN route under phase-I of the JNNNSM.  Nonetheless, the 
recommendation of the Committee for creation of a separate Risk Guarantee Fund for 
Renewable Energy Projects out of the NCEF will be forwarded for due consideration of  
the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(OM F.No. 8/5/2010-P&C dated 22-6-2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
14 December, 2012 
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
Chairman, 
Committee on Estimates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Annexure – I 
 
LIST OF HYDRO PROJECTS (TENTATIVE) FOR LIKELY BENEFITS DURING 12TH PLAN 
S. 
No. 
NAME OF 
PROJECTS DEVELOPERS  SECT. Capacity for XIIth Plan   (in MW) 
  Northern Region   
  Jammu & Kashmir       
1 Kishan Ganga NHPC C 330 
2 Baglihar-II PDC S 450 
  Himachal Pradesh       
3 Parbati-II NHPC C 800 
4 Rampur SJVNL C 412 
5 Kol Dam NTPC C 800 
6 Kashang - I  HPPCL S 65 
7 Uhl-III BVPC S 100 
8 Sawara Kuddu PVC S 111 
9 Kashang II & III HPPCL S 130 
10 Sainj HPPCL S 100 
11 Tidong-I Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd P 100 
12 Sorang Himachal Sorang 
Power Pvt. Ltd. P 100 
13 TanguRomai-I TanguRomai Power 
Generation Ltd P 44 
  Uttarakhand       
14 TapovanVishnugad NTPC C 520 
15 SingoliBhatwari L & T P 99 
16 PhataByung Lanco Energy Pvt. 
Ltd. P 76 
17 Srinagar AHPCo. Ltd.  P 330 
   Sub total (Northern Region) 4567 
  Western Region   
  -NIL-     
  Southern Region   
  Kerala       
18 Pallivasal KSEB S 60 
19 Thottiar KSEB S 40 
  Andhra Pradesh       
20 Lower Jurala APGENCO S 240 
21 Pulichatala APGENCO S 120 
   Sub total (Southern Region) 460 
  Eastern Region   
  Sikkim       
22 Bhasmey Gati Infrastructure P 51 

 
 
Ltd. 
LIST OF HYDRO PROJECTS (TENTATIVE) FOR LIKELY BENEFITS DURING 12TH PLAN 
S. 
No. 
NAME OF 
PROJECTS DEVELOPERS  SECT. Capacity for XIIth Plan   (in MW) 
23 Jorethang Loop DANS Pvt. Ltd.,  P 96 
24 Rangit-IV Jal Power Corp. Ltd. P 120 
25 Teesta-VI Lanco Energy Pvt. 
Ltd P 500 
26 Teesta-III  TeestaUrja P 600 
    Sub total (Eastern Region) 1367 
  North-Eastern 
Region       
  Arunachal Pradesh       
27 Pare NEEPCO C 110 
28 Kameng NEEPCO C 600 
29 Subansiri Lower NHPC C 2000 
  Mizoram       
30 Tuirial NEEPCO C 60 
  Meghalaya       
31 New Umtru MeECL S 40 
    Sub total (North -Eastern 
Region) 2810 
  TOTAL (All India)     9204 
 
  

 
 
                                                                                                                     Annexure – II 
Inter-regional links planned for 12th Plan and/or early 13th Plan Capacity in MW 
Between ER - NR :  
Gaya-Varanasi 765kV S/C 2100 
Sasaram-Fatehpur 765kV S/C - line#1 2100 
Barh-Gorakhpur 400kV D/C quad 1600 
Sasaram-Fatehpur 765kV S/C - line#2 2100 
Between ER - WR :  
Ranchi – WR(Bilaspur)Sipat Pooling Point 765kV S/C via Dharamjaigarh 
during 12th plan  
2100 
Ranchi- Dharamjaigarh 765kV S/C 2100 
Jharsuguda -Dharamjaigarh-765kV D/C 4200 
Between ER - NER :  
Bongaigaon-Siliguri 400kV D/C Quad to be LILOed at Alipurduar in 
12th/13th plan 
1600 
Between NR - WR :  
Agra-Gwalior  765kV S/C line-1 at 765 kV(earlier at 400kV)  1000 
Agra-Gwalior  765kV S/C line-2 at 765kV(earlier at 400kV)  1000 
Gwalior-Jaipur 765kV S/C#1 2100 
Gwalior-Jaipur 765kV S/C#2 2100 
RAPP C&D- Shujalpur 400kV D/C 1000 

 
 
Annexure - III  
 
Location-wise list of ITIs adopted/ being adopted by CPSUs 
 
S. 
No. 
CPSU ITI name District State Existing / 
new ITI 
1 NTPC ITI Olpad Surat Gujarat Existing 
2 NTPC ITI Pali Korba Chhattisgarh Existing 
3 NTPC ITI Berhampore Murshidabad West Bengal Existing 
4 NTPC ITI Begusarai Begusarai Bihar Existing 
5 NTPC ITI Tapovan Chamoli Uttarakhand Existing 
6 NTPC ITI Uttarkashi Uttarkashi Uttarakhand Existing 
7 NTPC ITI Mouda Nagpur Maharashtra Existing 
8 NTPC ITI Dhenukanal Dhenkanal Orissa Existing 
9 NTPC ITI Anta  Baran Rajasthan Existing 
10 NTPC ITI Karimnagar Karimnagar Andhra Pradesh Existing 
11 NTPC ITI Bhadragiri Vizianagaram Andhra Pradesh Existing 
12 NTPC ITI Sundernagar Mandi Himachal 
Pradesh 
Existing 
13 NTPC ITI Malviya Nagar New Delhi Delhi Existing 
14 NTPC ITI Chenneerkara Pathanamthitta Kerala Existing 
15 NTPC ITI Faridabad  Faridabad Haryana Existing 
16 NTPC ITI UnchaAmirpur GautamBudh 
Nagar 
U.P. Existing 
17 NTPC ITI Pussore Raigarh Chhattisgarh Existing 
18 NTPC ITI Naini Allahabad U.P. Existing 
19 NTPC *Naktu Sonebhadra U.P. New 
20 NTPC *Salakati  Kokrajhar Assam New 
21 NTPC *Chatra Chatra Jharkhand New 
22 NTPC *Baloda Janjgir Chhattisgarh New 
23 NTPC *Barkagaon Hazaribagh Jharkhand New 
24 NTPC *Nabinagar  Aurangabad Bihar New 
25 NTPC *Solapur Maharashtra Maharashtra New 
26 NTPC *Sahalwas Jhajjar  Haryana New 
27 NTPC *Korba Korba Chhattisgarh New 
28 NHPC Reasi Reasi J&K Existing 
29 NHPC Leh Leh J&K Existing 
30 NHPC Uri Baramulla J&K Existing 
31 NHPC Kargil Kargil J&K Existing 
32 NHPC Ramban Doda J&K Existing 
33 NHPC Roing (under CoE 
Scheme of World 
Bank) 
Lower Dibang 
Valley 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Existing 

 
 
34 NHPC Tabarijo Upper Sibansiri Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Existing 
35 NHPC Pokhra(under 
CoEScheme of 
World Bank) 
PauriGarhwal Uttarakhand Existing 
36 NHPC Rudraprayag Rudraprayag Uttarakhand Existing 
37 NHPC Tanakpur Champawat Uttarakhand Existing 
38 NHPC Kanda Bageshwar Uttarakhand Existing 
39 DVC Chatna Bankura West Bengal Existing 
40 DVC Durgapur Burdwan West Bengal Existing 
41 DVC Raghunathpur Purulia West Bengal Existing 
42 DVC, BHEL KGITC, Bolpur(CoE) Birbhum West Bengal New 
43 DVC Koderma Koderma Jharkhand New 
44 DVC Hazaribagh Hazaribagh Jharkhand Existing 
45 DVC Chaas Bokaro Jharkhand Existing 
46 DVC ITC, Chandrapura Bokaro Jharkhand New 
47 DVC Dhanbad Dhanbad Jharkhand Existing 
48 NEEPCO  Dirang West Kameng Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Existing 
49 NEEPCO  Haflong DimaHasao(N.C. 
Hills) 
Assam Existing 
50 NEEPCO  Yupia Papumpare Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Existing 
51 NEEPCO  Tinsukia(ITI for 
women) 
BorguriTinsukia Assam Existing 
52 NEEPCO  #Williamnagar East Garo Hills Meghalaya Existing 
53 PGCIL  Bhadrawati Chandrapur Maharashtra Existing 
54 PGCIL  Bargi Jabalpur M.P. Existing 
55 PGCIL  Buxar Buxar Bihar Existing 
56 PGCIL  Marhoura Saran Bihar Existing 
57 SJVNL Berthin Bilaspur H.P. Existing 
58 SJVNL Bangana Una H.P. Existing 
59 THDC Gopeshwar Chamoli Uttarakhand Existing 
60 THDC Chamba TehriGarhwal Uttarakhand Existing 
61 NHDC Narmada Nagar 
(CoE) 
Khandwa M.P. Existing 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Appendix I 
    MINUTES OF THIRTEENTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2012-13) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th December, 2012 from 1015 hrs. to 
1100 hrs. in Room No. 52-B (Chairman’s Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
     
    Shri Francisco Sardinha - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
2. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
3. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
4. Shri Prabodh Panda 
5. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
6. Shri S. Semmalai 
7. Shri Jagdish Sharma 
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
9. Shri Ganesh Singh 
10. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
11. Smt. Annu Tandon 
 
SECRETARIAT 
        1. Shri A. Louis Martin            -       Joint Secretary  
        2. Smt. Anita B. Panda           -       Director  
        3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar -       Deputy Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman  noted that the two newly elected Members of the 
Committee i.e. Shri Harish Chaudhary and Shri Mukul Wasnik, were not present and  
welcomed the other Members present. Thereafter, t he Committee  took up for 
consideration and adoption of following draft Reports:- 

 
 
(i) Report on the subject ‘Procurement and Storage of Foodgrains’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution. 
(ii) Action Taken Report on 13 th Report of the Committee (15 th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Power Generation – Demand and Supply’ pertaining to the Ministries of 
Power; Coal and New & Renewable Energy. 
3. The Committee, then adopted the draft Report on ‘Procurement and Storag e of 
Foodgrains’ subject to the following modifications: 
(i) Para No. 7 of the Recommendations - To delete from line No. 18 to line No. 30 
and add the following at the end of the Para:- 
“The Committee feel that the poor farmers need incentive and support t o grow 
coarse cereals which undoubtedly have high nutritive value and would urge the 
Government to explore the possibility of providing incentive on acreage basis to 
the farmers to cultivate coarse cereals in the country”. 
(ii)  Para No. 9 of the Recommendations to be deleted.  
4. Thereafter, the draft Action Taken Report on 13 th Report on the subject ‘Power 
Generation – Demand and Supply’ pertaining to the Ministries of Power; Coal and New 
& Renewable Energy was adopted with an additional comment reiterati ng the 
Recommendation pertaining to ‘Enhanced Budgetary Allocation of the Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy’. The Committee emphasized that the Planning Commission should 
enhance their allocation to one per cent of the Union Budget during 2013-14. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the said Reports in the 
light of modifications/additions suggested as well as the other consequential changes 
arising out of factual verification, if any, by the concerned Ministries and present the 
same to the Parliament. 
6. The Committee, thereafter, proposed to undertake a study tour to Goa, 
Mangalore, Chennai and Port Blair from 10 to 15 January, 2013.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 
 
Appendix II 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 
 
32 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
Sl. Nos. 1, 7, 8, 9, 10(i), 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20(ii), 
(iii), (iv), (vi), (viii), (ix), (x) & (xii)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
62.51 % 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply 
Sl. Nos. 3, 5 & 20 (vii) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
3 
 
 
 
9.37 % 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
Sl. Nos. 2, 6, 10 (ii), 13 & 20 (v) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
15.62 % 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited 
Sl. Nos. 4, 11, 20 (i) & (xi)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
4 
 
 
12.50% 
 
 