16 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
INCLUDING IMPLEMENTATION OF GOLDEN 
QUADRILATERAL 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH 
REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES] 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2011-2012) 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 


 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
INCLUDING IMPLEMENTATION OF GOLDEN 
QUADRILATERAL 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26th April 2012 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2012 /  Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
 


CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-12) 
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION (iv) 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
18 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s reply 
 
35 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
Government‟s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
37 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited 
 
43 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates 
held on 10th April, 2012 
 
48 
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Eleventh 
Report of Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
51 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-12) 
 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2 Shri Raj Babbar  
3 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  
4 Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer  
5 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty  
6 Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
7 Shri Dhruvanarayana  
8 Shri T. K. S. Elangovan  
9 Shri Ninong Ering  
10 Shri Prahlad Venkatesh Joshi  
11 Shri P. Karunakaran  
12 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru  
13 Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
14 Shri M. Krishnaswamy  
15 Shri Datta Meghe  
16 Shri Prabodh Panda  
17 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
18 Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
19 Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia  
20 Shri S. Semmalai  
21 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi  
22 Shri M. I. Shanavas  
23 Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
24 Shri Ganesh Singh  
25 Shri Ijyaraj Singh  
26 Shri Jagada Nand Singh  
27 Shri Radha Mohan Singh  
28 Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
29 Smt. Annu Tandon  
30 Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
  1.        Shri P.K. Grover   - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri S.C. Chaudhary - Director  
  3.        Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Additional Director  
  4. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2011-12) having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report on 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the subject „National 
Highways Development Project including implementation of Golden Quadrilateral‟ 
pertaining to Ministry of Road Transport & Highways.  
 
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha o n 9 August, 2011. The 
Government furnished their replies indicating action taken on the Recommendations 
contained in the Report on 13 January 2012.  The Report was considered and adopted 
by the Committee at their sitting held on 10th April, 2012.  
 
3. An a nalysis of action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of Committee on Estimates 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
24th April, 2012              
Vaisakha  4,1934 (Saka) 
 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER – I 
 
     REPORT  
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee on Estimates  
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject „National Highway Development Projects Including 
Implementation of Golden Quadrilateral ‟ pertaining to the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways. 
 
1.2 The Committee‟s Eleventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was present ed to Lok 
Sabha on 09.08.2011.  It contained 23 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken 
Notes on all these observations/recommendations have been received from the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and recommenda tions contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1,3,5,6,8,10,13,14,15,17, 20,21,22 & 23      Total =14  
Chapter II 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s reply: 
 Para Nos. 11         Total=1 
Chapter III 
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government‟s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 Para Nos.  4, 7,9,12 & 19                               Total=5  
Chapter IV 
 
 (iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: 
 Para Nos.  2, 16 & 18            Total =3  
Chapter V 
 

1.4 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the recommendation s, 
for which interim replies have  been given by the Government  should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on some of 
the recommendations in respect of which Government‟s replies have not  been 
accepted by the Committee. 
 
A.    NEED TO ATTRACT PRIVATE INVESTMENT 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
1.6 The Committee had recommended as follows:  
“The Committee observe that Highway sector has a large shelf of projects, 
which can be  readily offered to private players, including those which had 
a serious setback in the year 2009-2010 due to global financial meltdown. 
Since the finan cial crisis is now over, the Committee suggest the Ministry to 
take concerted efforts to attract private players in this sector. Apart from an 
enabling fiscal environment, development of mutual trust is the fundamental  
pre-requisite to encourage  entry  of  private  investors.  Organization of  
“Business   conclaves” periodically with active cooperation of FICCI, CII and 
other corporate bodies may also lead to a positive response. In respect of 
pending Highway projects due to non -response/low response of private 
investors, the Committee urge the Ministry to explore various possibilities to 
attract bidders by way of revising the project cost, providing funds on 
concessional interest rates  and  providing updated & authentic traffic data 
flexibility in the Concessional Agreement too. 
 
From the deposition of the Ministry made before them, the Committee also 
note  that  one  of  the  fundamental  problems  faced  by  the  private  investor  
is experiments of  Government policy with many formats with varying degrees 
of success. Changes in the policy guidelines as well as project documents 
such as MCA (Model Concession Agreement), RFQ (Request for 
Qualification) and RFP (Request for proposal) have caused severe disruption 
of the award process in the past. The Committee feel that private investment 
flow into the Highway sector will purely  depend  on  the  consistent adoption  
of  long  term  policies  and  their adherence  by  the  Government  and  
therefore,  there  is  an  urgent  need  to standardize project documents and 
streamline policy guidelines vis-à-vis Public-Private Partnership (PPP). The 
Committee also suggest that a comprehensive review of project documents 
and policy guidelines keeping in mind the needs of foreseeable future  should  
be undertaken urgently. In this context, the Ministry m ay involve experts/ 
specialized  institutions and study best practices so as to facilitate an investor-
friendly environment for NHDP.  It has come to the notice of the Committee 
that there have been instances where collection of toll was stated to  have  
been  started  even  before  the  construction  of  road  commenced/was 

completed.  The Committee, therefore, desire that a financial and technical 
review of  all  Model  Concession  Agreements  (MCA)  should  be  carried  
out  by  an ind ependent Committee of outside experts and their findings 
submitted to this Committee at the earliest.” 
 
1.7 The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in the  action taken reply inter-alia 
stated as under:- 
“NHAI undertakes restructuring of projects to make them viable.  This process 
may involve restructuring of the cost of the project also.  Traffic study is 
conducted during the DPR/Feasibility stage and projections are based on such 
studies.  The policy docu ments pertaining to Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
projects, e.g. Request for Qualification (RFQ), Request for Proposal (RFP), 
Model Concession Agreement (MCA) etc. have already been standardized to 
avoid any misunderstanding or disputes with the stakeho lders to the extent 
possible.  Comprehensive and regular review of the project documents and 
policy guidelines are also undertaken to make it in tune with the changing times 
and to meet the needs of the public in the foreseeable future.”  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.8 Emphasizing the need to take prudent steps to attract private players in the 
National Highway Development Project  (NHDP), the Committee had urged the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to explore various possibilities to 
attract bidders  by revising the project cost, providing funds on concessional 
interest rate and by giving updated and authentic traffic data  flexibility in 
Concessional Agreement.  Besides, the Committee  had  felt that the private 
investment flow into the Highways Sector would purely depend on the adoption 
of consistent and long term policies and their adherence to by the Government.  
It is precisely for this reason the Committee had recommended that there is an 
urgent need to standardize project documents and streamline policy guidelines 
pertaining to Public Private Partnership to facilitate an investor friendly 
environment for NHDP.  The Committee had also suggested that a financial and 
technical review of all Model Concession Agreement s (MCAs) should be carried 
out by an independent Committee comprising of external experts and their 
findings be submitted expeditiously.  However, the Committee are surprised to 

note that instead of comprehending the recommendation of the Committee in the 
right perspective, the Ministry has submitted a routine reply stating  that National 
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) undertakes restructuring of projects to make 
them viable and the process may involve restructu ring of the cost of the project, 
without furnishing details of the action taken on the specific issues raised by the 
Committee.  Moreover, the reply simply mentions that comprehensive and 
regular review of project documents and policy guidelines are undertaken by the 
Ministry, without further elaborating on the same.  No  information has been 
provided in response to  financial and technical review of all Model Concessi on 
Agreements by an Independent Committee comprising of external experts, as 
desired by the Committee .  From the foregoing , the Committee cannot but 
conclude that the Ministry , perhaps, has not yet felt the need to attract private 
players in the National H ighway projects.  While expressing their unhappiness 
over the manner in which the Ministry has responded to the significant points 
raised by them , the Committee would like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation on the issue that suitable measures need to be devised for 
making the various projects attractive to the private parties, since the PPP is 
poised to become the pre -dominant mode of delivering infrastructure services in 
the near future. 
 
B.    NEED FOR AUGMENTATION OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF NS -EW 
CORRIDOR PROJECTS 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
1.9 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had recommended as under: 
“The Committee are distressed to note that flagship project of NHDP i.e. 
North-South  –  East-West  (NS-EW)  corridor  has  been  crippled  with  
inordinate de lays. All NS-EW corridor projects, which are under-

implementation, have well passed the date of completion as per the contracts, 
which reveals a sorry state of affairs. The project was earlier scheduled to be  
completed by December, 2009 after several extensions, but later on the 
Committee were  informed about yet another extension as December, 2010. 
The project is still incomplete as 444 km of the same is yet to be awarded as 
on date. The deposition of the Ministry that “actual date of completion can 
be estimated only after all projects of NS-EW corridor are awarded”, is in fact 
fallacious. The Committee are also not convinced with the  reasons  submitted  
by   Ministry  for  such  enormous  delays.  The Commit tee, therefore, 
recommend that all earnest  efforts should be made for expeditious  
completion  of  NS-EW  corridor  project,  balance  work  should  be awarded 
without any further delay and a High level group, such as the  NHAI Board,  
should  be  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  to  supervise/monitor  the 
progress of this project fortnightly, so that appropriate action could be taken 
to avert any further delay.  The Committee are convinced that setting 
unrealistic targets due to poor planning is the reason for repeated extensions 
of the target date  for completion of  this project.  Constant delays not only 
projects the Ministry in a bad light but also leads to cost overruns, hence the 
Committee suggest that Ministry should adopt a realistic approach in respect 
of fixing targets for the NS- EW corridor project and adhere to it.” 
 
1.10 The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in the  Action Taken reply has 
inter-alia  stated as under:- 
“The NS -EW corridor projects are being monitored closely.  Significant 
completion is anticipated by March 2012.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.11 The Committee express their unhappiness over the one-line reply by which 
the Ministry has responded to  their recommendation on the inordinate delay in  
completion of North South – East West (NS -EW) Corridor Project s.  Instead of 
providing details, the Ministry has merely mentioned that the projects are being 
monitored closely for their „significant‟ completion by March, 2012.   The Ministry 
seems to be unsure of the completion of the project s even now, despite a n 
elapse of 15 months after the revised target date of December, 2010.  It appears 
that the Ministry is not serious  to give adequate importance to the  projects and 
inspite of the inordinate delays, suitable measures are not being taken to remedy 
the situation, which is inexplicable.  The Committee had noted that even with the 

extension given upto December, 2010 , from its stipulated date of completion by 
December, 2009, the projects were still incomplete, as construction of 444 Km of 
the same had not been  awarded.  The action taken reply is conspicuously silent 
on the  issue as the Ministry has not furnished any information on whether the 
said 444 Km of the projects have been awarded by now.  In the light of the above, 
the Committee cannot but conclude that the Ministry has neither outlined any  
plan of action to accelerate the process of implementation of the NS-EW Corridor 
projects nor bothered to give details on how the Ministry would complete the 
same significantly by March, 2012.  Also, details of the monitoring mechanism to 
cut delays, if any, have not been mentioned by the Ministry.   The Committee, 
therefore, re-emphasize the need on the part of the Ministry to undertake suitable 
steps and prepare a detailed action plan for the successful completion of the NS-
EW projects.  The Committee also desire to be apprised  if the remaining 444 Km 
of the projects has been awarded to avoid cost overruns.   They would like to be 
informed about the detailed plan of  action taken / proposed to be taken by  the 
Ministry within three months from the presentation of this Report.   
C. TOLL COLLECTION ON NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
1.12 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had recommended as under: 
“The Committee feel that provisions of collection of fee/toll in perpetuity is 
fundamentally wrong and thus needs to be reviewed in the light of gained 
experiences. During the examination of the subject, the Committee also 
came across some disturbing instances such as toll collection from the 
areas, where condition of roads are very poor, exorbitant increase/hike in 
toll rates, toll plazas being  set up in close proximity with each other etc. 
The Committee are also not satisfied with the financial model of NHAI to 
indicate the benchmark Internal Rate of Return (IRR), which determines 
the optimum concession period within which the concessionaire wo uld 
recover the capital cost of the project and other project related expenditure 
besides earning a reasonable return. The Committee, therefore, would 
suggest the Ministry to review and revisit the Rules and Regulations 
regarding collection of toll, so tha t it does not become an instrument of 

malpractice and unjust profiteering by unscrupulous elements to harass 
the general public. The Committee further recommend that a just and 
comprehensive methodology should be evolved for computing the 
concession period based on sound financial evaluations. 
 
The Committee also note that the Highway projects are highly 
dependent on the traffic volume/assessment Report not only for the 
fixation of toll rates but also for fixation of concession period. Unavailability 
of updated and accurate traffic volume data/Report often leads to incorrect 
forecasts and wrong estimation of concession period. The Committee, 
therefore, emphasize that there is an urgent need to strengthen instrument 
of traffic volume data/Report in order to a ddress the problems of current 
system. In this connection, the Committee are aware that of late the 
Government, particularly the Ministry of Urban Development, has been 
encouraging projects to introduce the “Intelligent Transport System”(ITS) 
for collecting real time data for effective traffic management. An Inter -
Ministerial Core Group on ITS has also been set up by the Government to 
establish a National framework for ITS. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Ministry of Road Transport & Hig hways may 
coordinate with their counterparts in relevant sectors so that the positive 
benefits of the accurate traffic data could be utilized to work out standard 
provisions for toll collection on the National Highways.” 
 
1.13 The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in the Action Taken reply has 
inter-alia  stated as under:- 
“Action has already been taken to reduce the rate of user fee after 
recovery of the cost of production or completion of concession period. As 
per amendment to the National Highways (NH) Fee Rules published under 
GSR 15 (E) dated 12.01.2011, provides that after the concession period is 
over, the fee shall be collected by the Central Government /executing 
authority at a reduced rate of 40% of the fee being charged on the d ate of 
transfer of such section, to be revised annually in accordance with these 
rules. Further, the said NH fee rule s also provides that after the recovery 
of capital cost through user fee realized in respect of a public funded 
projects, the fee leviable would be reduced to 40% of the user fee for such 
section, to be revised annually in accordance with these rules. 
 Regarding establishment of toll plazas within close proximity, it is 
submitted that as far as possible, NHAI is fixing the toll plazas as per the 
provisions of National Highways Fee Rules. As per NH Fee Rules, 2008, 
the executing authority or the concessionaire, as the case may be, shall 
establish a toll plaza beyond a distance of ten kilometers from a municipal 
or local town area limit. Provide d that the executing authority may, for 
reasons recorded in writing, locate or allow the concessionaire to locate a 
toll plaza within a distance of ten kilometers of such municipal/local town 
area. Rule further provides that where a section of the National  Highway, 
permanent bridge, bypass or tunnel, as the case may be, is constructed 

within the municipal or town area limit or within 5 kms from such limits, 
primarily for use of residents of such municipal or town area, the toll plaza 
may be established with in the municipal/town area limit or within a 
distance of 5 km from such limits. Rule 8 (2) stipulate that any other toll 
plaza on the same section of National Highway and in the same direction, 
shall not be established within a distance of 60 km provided w here the 
executing authority deems necessary, it may for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, establish / allow the concessionaire, to establish another toll plaza 
within a distance of 60 km; provided such toll plaza is for collection of fee 
for a permanent bridge, bypass or tunnel. 
As regards estimation of concession period it is submitted that the 
traffic survey is conducted during preparation of Feasibility Report. Based 
on the traffic survey data and its projected value, the estimated cost of the 
project, user fee rate and financial modeling of the project, the period of 
concession is fixed. 
Traffic data of NHDP sections under tolling are with NHAI. 
Regarding using Intelligent Transport System (ITS) on National Highways, 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highwa ys would take up the above issues in 
the light of recommendations of Expert Committee headed by Shri Nandan 
Nilekani, Chairman, UIDAI.” 
Comments of the Committee 
1.14 In their original recommendation regarding collection of toll, the 
Committee had observed  that the same should not become an instrument of 
malpractice and unjust profiteering by unscrupulous elements to harass the 
general public.  Not satisfied with the current financial model of NHDP to indicate 
the benchmark Internal Rate of Return (IRR), th e Committee had emphasized 
upon the need for a just and comprehensive methodology based on sound 
financial evaluations for computing the concession period.  As highway projects 
are highly dependent on the traffic volume/assessment report for fixation of to ll 
rates as well as concession period, the Committee had advised the Ministry to 
strengthen the instrument of traffic volume data by introducing the Intelligent 
Transport System(ITS) on which the inter-Ministerial core group had already been 
set up by the Government.  The Ministry in their action taken reply, has merely 
quoted the National Highway Fee Rules, 2008 and the amendment to the said 

rules under GSR15(E) dated 12 January, 2011.  Regarding traffic data of NHDP 
section, the Ministry has stated that t he same lies with NHAI.  Regarding use of 
ITS on National Highways, the Ministry has informed that the matter would be 
taken up in the light of recommendations of the expert Committee headed by Shri 
Nandan Nilekani, Chairman, UIDAI.   
 From the reply tendered by the Ministry, the Committee have observed that 
although the Ministry has provided the requisite rules on fixation of toll fee, 
establishment of toll plazas etc., but has not acknowledged the fact that the rules 
are not being followed by some concess ionaires in certain areas resulting in 
malpractices and harassment of the highways users.  The Ministry has also not 
informed about the mechanism to ensure compliance of NHAI fee rules and 
action taken, if any, to prevent unscrupulous toll collectors from flouting rules.  It 
is further understood that the Ministry has already proposed to amend the 
National Highway Fee Rules, 2008 again in order to generate more revenue.  
Reportedly, these amendments would not only cause a substantial increase in 
toll on existing as well as upcoming National Highways, but also bring a majority 
of the existing two -laned roads under the toll bracket.  Though the Ministry‟s 
reply does not mention the said proposal, the Committee would  like to be 
apprised of the factual position on the same. They further observe that instances 
of toll collection at certain stretches even prior to the completion of six -laning of 
National Highways must be probed seriously so as to prevent their recurrence. 
Further, the Committee would also like to h ighlight the security hazards faced by 
workers in toll plazas too, as per a recent incidents in the NCR region in which 
one such worker was shot dead by persons unwilling to pay toll fee and desire 
that suitable measures be devised for the safety of toll plaza workers.   

The Ministry , further, seems to be non -committal about using ITS on 
national highways, which is evident from their half hearted reply to the 
Committees‟ recommendation.  The Committee are of the opinion that as the 
Ministry has already acce pted the recommendations  of the Nilekani Committee 
concerning electronic toll collection, shifting to ITS to collect traffic data would 
only make matters smoother and fool-proof.  Therefore, the Committee would like 
to reiterate their earlier recommendati on and desire to have specific reply on the 
same. 
 
D. ISSUE OF LAND ACQUISITION & COMPENSATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
1.15 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee observe that the issue of  land acquisition in general and 
compensation in particular is extremely sensitive. The Competent 
Authority for Land Acquisition (CALA), who are generally officers of Local 
Revenue Departments, are empowered to fix the compensation. However, 
the Committee came across innumerable complaints of inadequate 
compensation from PAPs (Project Affected Parties) and consequent long 
drawn arbitrations, which seriously affect the progress of NHDP. The 
Committee would like to particularly mention States like Kerala and Goa. 
In these States, several stretches of National Highways are hemmed in by 
dense residential and commercial structures, which are under constant 
fear of demolition owing to Highway Projects. As a result in these States, 
the process of land acquisition has been severely affected. The Committee 
feel that land acquisition and displacement/rehabilitation of people for 
NHDP needs a very careful and proactive role of the nodal Ministry. Before 
commencement of the project, the concerned State Government as well  
as Local Administration/ representatives should be effectively consulted to 
ensure smooth acquisition of land or rehabilitation of displaced persons. 
Association with the local people‟s representatives, MPs and MLAs, can 
also prove to be quite effective. All rehabilitation processes should be in 
place before undertaking any such project. The Committee concur with the 
views of the Ministry that the Chief Secretaries should be made Nodal 
Officers by the State Governments for land acquisition, as they are in a 
better position to coordinate with various agencies involved in the process 
in their States. Though only few States have done so, the Committee 
desire the Ministry to pursue this with other State Governments, 
vigorously.  

 
The Committee further observe t hat the State Governments/District 
Collectors have been extremely conservative in awarding compensation 
and it is the sole reason for landowners to keep litigating for decades in 
the hope of better compensation and therefore, suggest that there is an 
urgent need to sensitize State Governments/CALAs/Arbitrators to take into 
account future development potential of the land for its owner, while 
awarding the compensation. The Committee are of the firm view that the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, being  the nodal Ministry for 
Highway construction, development & maintenance, can play a pivotal role 
in this regard.  
 
The Committee further observe that in respect of Kerala and Goa, 
the Ministry/NHAI and respective State Governments have been stuck with 
the issue of 35 metres/ 45 metres/ 60 metres of highway width and 
unprecedented delay encountered in the completion of projects are likely 
to make those redundant in the light of ever increasing vehicular traffic. 
The Committee note the Ministry's suggestion that in these cases, 
“expressways” with completely new align ment and avoiding all human 
habitation, can provide the ideal solution. The Committee do understand 
that the quantum of investment required for these green -field projects 
would be very high, but considering the benefits, not only at present but in 
future as well, the Government should give a serious thought to it without 
further delay. The Committee also recommend that the Expressway 
Authority of India., as envisaged and prioritized in the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan document should be constituted as early as possible. The Committee 
are also of the view that in case s similar to Kerala & Goa, where widening 
of Highways can lead to displacement of local people or have an adverse 
effect on their livelihoods, the construction of “expressways‟ should be 
considered from the initial stage itself. They hope that these sugges tions 
would be suitably incorporated in the XII Five Year Plan, otherwise certain 
crucial National Highway Projects may not see the light of the day at all.” 
 
1.16 The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in the Action Taken Note inter-alia  
stated as follows:- 
“So far as payment of compensation is concerned, Competent Authority 
for Land Acquisition (CALA) is determining /making payments as per 
provision of Section 3G of the National Highways Act, 1956. The NH Act is 
also quite reasonable. The competent authority to declare compensation 
under Section 3G of the Act, is invariably a State Government functionary, 
who takes into account all considerations including damages, cost of 
shifting, etc. Thus provisions are in -built in the NH Act for adequate 
compensation. 
Regarding development of Expressways it is submitted that the 
Government has taken initiative for construction of 1000 km of 
Expressways in the country under NHDP phase VI. Additionally, about 
18600 km of Expressways have been identified by the Gove rnment under 

formulation of a master plan for National Expressways for the horizon year 
2012-2022, i.e. to be completed by the end of 13 th Five Year Plan, under 
phased manner. For development of such a huge net work of expressways 
an independent authority may be needed to be set up. In this regard the 
Government is exploring the possibility of setting up of an Expressway 
Authority of India.” 
Comments of the Committee 
1.17 In their original recommendation, the Committee had expressed concern 
about the process of land acquisition for construction of National H ighways 
seriously affecting the progress of NHDP.  While suggesting several measures to 
speed up the acquisition and r ehabilitation processes, particularly payment of 
compensation to the Project Affected Persons (PAPs), the Committee had 
concurred with the views of the Ministry that the Chief Secretaries should be 
made Nodal Officers by the State Governments for land acquisition.  While noting 
that only few States had done so, the Committee had desired the Ministry to 
pursue the matter with remaining State Governments vigorously.  In respect of 
Kerala and Goa, the Committee had noted the Ministry‟s suggestion that since 
the Ministry, NHAI and respective State Governments had been stuck with the 
issue of width of the highways, construction of `Expressways‟ with new 
alignments and avoiding all human habitations could provide the ideal solution.  
The Committee had recommended that the construction of expressways need to 
be considered from the initial stage of the project  itself otherwise certain crucial 
projects may not materialize.   
 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
has taken a stand that payment of compensation for land acquisition is 
determined by the Competent Authority for Land Acquisition (CALA) and that the 
concerned National Highway Act, 1956 is „quite reasonable‟ in the matter.   

 Regarding development of express ways, the Committee have been 
informed that the Government has taken initiative for construction of 1000 kms. 
of expressways in the country under the VI phase of the NHDP and additionally, 
around 18,600 kms. of expressways have been identified under formulation of the 
Master Plan for national expressways for the horizon year 2012 to 2022. 
 Considering Action T aken reply tendered by the Ministry  to their 
recommendation, the Committee feel that the Ministry has somewhat rigid view 
about the payment of compens ation to the PAPs whose land is acquired for 
construction of National Highways as the Ministry is convinced that the National 
Highways Act, 1956  adequately addresses issues arising out of the acquisi tion 
process.  The Ministry has  chosen not to reply to t he Committee‟s other 
suggestions regarding appointment of Chief Secretaries as nodal officers by the 
State Governments for land acquisition and has  not committed for pursuing the 
matter with those State Governments, who have so far not done the same.   
Therefore, the Committee are not satisfied with the inadequate reply of the 
Ministry and counsel them to be cautious  while submitting replies to the 
Committee. 
 Regarding their suggestion on development of expressways, the 
Committee have been informed by the Ministry that the same has been included 
under NHDP, Phase VI.  As e ven Phase III of NHDP is yet to be completed, the 
Committee are convinced  that the development of expressways will not take 
place in the near future as it is envisaged under phase VI only.   The Committee 
also note that various phases of NHDP have not shown requisite progress and 
would like to know as to whether phase VI , which was approved way back in 
November, 2006, is likely to commence on time.  The Committee would also like 
to be appris ed of the progress in setting up the Expressway Authority of India , 

which was prioritized way back in the Eleventh Five Year Plan document  but is 
yet to see the light -of the day .  The Committee hope that the same would be set 
up at least in the Twelfth Fiv e Year Plan, which is due to commence  from this 
year.  The Committee also desire  that in Kerala and Goa, where the progress of 
NHDP has been stalled due to severe inconvenience to the population residing 
near the proposed highways, the Government should no t wait for phase VI to 
commence and give a serious thought to provide an immediate solution to the 
difficulties faced by the local population in these States. 
 
E. NEED TO PREVENT ILLEGAL SUB-CONTRACTING 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
1.18 The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that many concessionaires of highway projects have 
been appointing sub-contractors on Engineering, Procurement and 
Construction (EPC)  basis despite lack of experience and technical 
qualifications on their part, which not only affects the quality and safety 
aspects of National Highways but also jeopardizes timely completion of 
projects. The Committee also note certain complaints  that  policies  followed  
by  the  Ministry  of   Road   Transport  and Highways  tend  to  favour  large  
contractors,  who  eventually  sub-contract  the project. The Committee, even 
while acknowledging the fact that experience  of Ministry has not been very 
good with small/medium level contractors, are not convinced  with the merit 
of Ministry‟s approach  and feel that promotion and encouragement  of  
“Medium  level”  contractors  will  not  only  strengthen  our capacity vis-à-vis 
road construction but also provide much needed exposure to our  nascent  
construction  industry.   Moreover, the  present  contractors  are, anyway, sub-
contracting the major portion either with or without the consent of Ministry. 
Hence an initiative to involve medium level contractors will bring them under 
direct control of Ministry and NHAI and make them more accountable. The 
Committee are aware of certain changes introduced in the RFQ & RFP 
documents to curtail  subcontracting, but feel that complete procedure need 
to be further streamlined and regularized with the provision of strict 
supervision, so that the pro ject  works  do  not  suffer   due  to  the  
appointment  of  substandard  EPC contractors. 
 
The Committee further observe that during 2008-09, when low response 
of market was witnessed, certain changes were introduced in the RFQ/RFP and 
MCA on the recommendations  of  B.K.  Chaturvedi  Committee.  However,  now  
when m arket  is  buoyant  and  giving  good  responses  to  the  bidding  

process,  the Ministry has been arguing about probability of suboptimal bids 
being tendered. The Committee  find such an approach  completely  confusing.  
The  Committee strongly  urge  the  Ministry to  desist  from  such  knee-jerk  
reactions  and  seek expert opinion so as to adopt a long-term consistent policy.” 
 
1.19 The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in the Action Taken Note inter-alia  
stated as follows:- 
“The policy matters with regard to PPP projects are always decided after 
obtaining expert opinion from Planning Commission and Department of 
Economic Affairs.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.20 Expressing the ir displeasure over the practice of appointing sub -
contractors on Engineering Procurement & Construction (EPC) basis despite lack 
of experience and technical qualifications, and ultimately resulting in compromise 
of quality, safety and jeopardiz ation of the  timely completion of the projects, the 
Committee in their earlier Report had emphasized certain changes to streamline 
and regularize the system of appointment of contractors with strict provision of 
supervision.  However, it is seen from the Action Taken reply furnished by the 
Ministry that key concerns of the Committee have not  been addressed.  The reply 
furnished by the Ministry on the issues raised in the said recommendation  has 
been analyzed and the comments thereto are given as under: 
(i) The Committee while noting that certain policies followed by the Ministry 
of Road Transport & Highways tend to favour large contractors, who eventually 
sub-contract the project , had emphasized that promotion  and encouragement of 
„Medium Level‟ contractors will not only strengthen the capacity of road 
construction but provide the much needed exposure to the nascent construction 
industry of the Country.  The Ministry , instead of replying to the specific point 
raised by the Committee , has adopted an evasive attitude  by simply stating that 

policy matters with regard to Public Private Partnership projects are always 
decided after obtaining expert opinion from Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance (Departm ent of Economic Affairs).   The Committee would, 
therefore, like a more specific response from the Ministry in this regard.   
(ii) The Committee in their earlier recommendation had felt that even though 
certain changes have been introduced in the Request for Qualification ( RFQ) and 
Request for Proposal ( RFP) documents to curtail sub -contractors, it is desirable 
that complete procedure needs to be further streamlined and regularized  with the 
provision of strict supervision so that the project work does not suffer due to 
appointment of sub -standard Engineering, Procurement & Construction (EPC) 
contractors.  The Committee note that the Ministry has not comprehended the 
thrust of the recommendation and thus would like the Ministry to take the desired 
action in this regard and inform them accordingly.  The Committee also feel that 
till the time sub -contracting is completely ruled out , the Ministry should ensure 
that the agreement between a contractor and a sub -contractor remains strictly on 
the lines of a Go vernment contract with appropriate clause for encashment of 
bank guarantee in cases of under -performance so that the chances of supplying 
of sub-standard material or inferior performance by the sub -contractors could be 
completely ruled out under any circumstances. 
(iii) The Committee in their earlier Report  had emphasized that taking into 
account the present market scenario and good response to bidding process, the 
Ministry should desist from knee jerk reaction to the probability of sub -optimal 
bids being tendered and had recommended to adopt a long term policy.  The 
Ministry, instead of critically analyzing the issue raised by the Committee , has 
shifted all the responsibility to the Planning Commission and the Min istry of 
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs).   As the Ministry, being aware of the 

ground realities, is required to provide appropriate inputs to the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance, such a reply is highly undesirable and 
unexpected.  The Committee would, therefore, like to be informed in detail about 
the initiatives taken by the Ministry in the matter. 
The Committee would like the Ministry to take the desired action on the 
suggested lines as per the comments given above and report the same to them. 
  

CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 Physical infrastructure has a direct bearing on sustainability of growth and 
overall development of a nation. Th us, roads in general and National Highways in 
particular can be termed as a fundamental plank for the sustained and inclusive growth 
of a country. In order to meet infrastructural requirements as well as to provide a boost 
to the economic development, the Government of India embarked upon an ambitious 
highway programme i.e. the National Highways Development Project (NHDP) in the 
late 90s in a phased manner. The project envisaged rapid construction of highways 
across the country to improve connectivity betwe en hitherto unconnected regions for 
trade, investment and employment generation, for which targets were fixed. However, 
the Committee are constrained to note that several impediments have plagued the 
project leading to inordinate delays in completion of pr ojects as per target. Absence of 
comprehensive Toll Policy, delays in Land acquisition and obtaining of clearances from 
the Environment and Railway Ministries, law and order problems, non -performing 
contractors and poor maintenance of existing highways are  some of the most critical 
issues, which need immediate attention. The Committee also feel that alongwith these, 
other issues such as balanced regional development of National Highways and road 
safety measures need to be addressed to create a world class n etwork of National 
Highways. As the situation warranted a concerted, coordinated and coherent effort to 
expedite the progress of NHDP, the Committee had selected the subject „National 
Highways Development Project including implementation of Golden Quadrila teral‟ for 
examination. The observations and recommendations of the Committee on the subject 
after a detailed study and scrutiny of the same are given in the subsequent paragraphs. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 While the Committee  have  appropriately noted the constraints faced in  the 
timely execution of National Highways Development Project due to delay in the matter 
of land acquisition, clearances required in respect of environment, forest  and wildlife 
protected areas, Law and  Order situation in s ome states etc., it is submitted that the 
Ministry  has a  well defined Toll policy and has taken several remedial measures to 
contain the  factors responsible  for delay, non –performance/ below per performance 
by the contractors to expedite the progress of NHDP and to maintain the  highways as 
per prescribed standard and specifications. To give effect, Electronic Toll Collection will 
be started on pilot basis from the current financial year itself.      
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 The initial phases of NHDP were public funded. However, later the Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP) emerged as a viable financing option for Highway projects from 
Phase-III onwards as funds from traditional sources were insufficient to meet increased 
investment needs. The Committee note that the Government has now planned an 
investment of Rs. 3, 31,000 crore in the period 2009 -2015 for upgradation of NH 

network, predominantly in the PPP mode. Experience of Public -Private Partnership 
(PPP) model shows that in volvement of private player and management augur well for 
the efficiency and quality of Road sector. However, the progress of awarding projects 
has been rather slow. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that 
“Waterfall mechanism” of awarding pr oject, which was one of the major impediments in 
the award process, has since been abandoned and now road projects will be carried 
out on all the three modes of delivering viz. BOT (Toll), BOT (Annuity) and EPC 
(Engineering Procurement Construction contrac t) concurrently rather than sequentially. 
From the latest Economic Survey (2010 -11) document, the Committee observes that 
the Work Plan for 2010-11 stipulates that of the total NH length to be developed broadly 
60 per cent would be taken up on BOT (Toll) b asis, 25 per cent on BOT (Annuity) basis 
and the remaining 15 per cent on EPC basis. The Committee have also been informed 
in this regard that now a road project not found prima facie suitable for BOT (Toll) can 
be implemented directly on BOT (Annuity) and  decision regarding the same will be 
taken by an IMG (Inter -Ministerial Group). However, still before implementing a project 
on EPC basis, it will be compulsorily tested for BOT (Annuity) and only if unacceptable 
bids are received, then the project will be awarded on EPC basis. The Committee are of 
the view that there is urgent need to streamline the system to cut delays caused by 
lengthy procedures. They would like to be apprised of the status of projects post the 
“waterfall mechanism” and hope that at lea st now the long delays in completion of NH 
projects would be avoided. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The B K Chaturvedi Committee Report, which recommended that the waterfall 
method of award of projects be dispensed with, was implemented in November 20 09. 
After November 2009 the award of projects has accelerated as may be observed from 
the details of contracts awarded tabulated below:  
  
Year Contract/concession 
awarded (in km) 
No. of contracts 
awarded  
2007-08 1234 14 
2008-09 643.4 08 
2009-10 (upto 30th Nov 2009) 1293.13 14 
2009-10 (from Dec. 2009 to Mar 2010) 2067.01 24 
2010-11 5059 50 
 
However, it is pertinent to mention that the actual   execution of the awarded 
projects may face delays due to various other reasons including such delays in land  
acquisition, obtaining forest environment and wildlife clearances for PPP projects etc. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 From the perusal of outlays under different modes of delivery of NHDP 2005 - 
2015, the Committee note that 98.6% of expenditure envisaged is accounted by BOT 
(Toll) and BOT (Annuity) – Modes of PPP projects. The Committee are  distressed to 
note that there is hardly any role for Engineering Procurement Construction Contract 
(EPC) mode. As there are various highway projects in different parts of the country, 
which may not be commercially viable and thus attract very slow/non-response from the 

market, there is  a need for introspect ion. The Committee also observe  that, the Built 
Operate Transfer (BOT) mode of delivery, being a market driven delivery mechanism, 
tends to localize development to areas, which are already developed, leading to a 
serious risk of under developed areas being ignored and differences getting further 
accentuated. Also some sections of Highways will not be attractive for bidders due to 
serious law and order problems, complex land acquisition issues etc. The Committee 
are of the view that in t hese areas, the Government has to play a more significant role, 
acting not only as a facilitator but also as an active instrument of inclusive growth and 
balanced regional development. The Committee, therefore, recommend that those 
projects, which have not  been able to attract private investors so far, should not be left 
to be doomed and that the Ministry should evolve alternate strategies for such projects 
on priority basis. Resorting to EPC mode of delivery could be one of them. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
As per the decision of the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) 60 % of the 
projects are to be awarded on BOT (Toll), 25 % on BOT (Annuity) and 15 % on EPC. 
This system envisages that projects which are not viable in BOT (Toll) or BOT (Annuity) 
may be taken up on EPC. Hence as recommended by the Committee, there is a 
provision for using EPC mode of delivery for unattractive projects. Restructuring of 
those projects, which have not been able to attract private investors, are done, if 
required, by changing the mode of delivery, including implementation of projects under 
EPC mode. The change in mode of delivery is decided by the Inter -Ministerial Group 
(IMG), headed by the Secretary (RT&H) and comprising representation from Planning 
Commission, Minis try of Finance, and Department of Legal Affairs, as per the policy 
framework suggested by the B .K. Chaturvedi Committee and approved by the 
Government. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 
 National Highways Development Project (NHDP) – the largest highways project 
ever undertaken by the country, was initiated in the late 90s to create, develop and 
improve network of 70,934 km of National Highways throughout the country. However, 
the Committee are pained to note that the progress of most of the projects has not been 
satisfactory due to procedural delays, land acquisition issues, contractual problems and 
other factors. Even the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways has 
conceded slowl y down in NHDP projects. The Committee would like to cite a few 
examples of the delays like phases 3A & 3B involving 12,109 km, in which only 2048 
km has been completed and the non-completion of Golden Quadrilateral connecting the 
four metro cities, even o n the revised date of December, 2010. The Ministry have now 
assured the Committee that  by 31 st March, 2011, around 5,500 -5,800 km of roads 
under NHDP would be awarded, which would be the highest ever award. The Ministry 
also appears to be confident about t he next year‟s target of 7,300 km. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the actual length awarded out of the present year‟s target. 
 
However, in view of the poor performance so far, they fail to understand the 
rationale behind expanding NHDP, without  even completing Phases I & II and the 
Golden Quadrilateral. As regards certain impediments in the Highways projects, with 
the setting up of an Empowered Group of Ministries, those bottlenecks are expected to 
be tackled effectively. The Committee are of th e opinion that absence of coordination 

among different Ministries/agencies and State Governments is the root cause of delay 
at every stage. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry must utilize the 
revised mechanism effectively and strive hard to develop coordination among different 
agencies at different levels so that various stages of Highway construction could be 
completed as per the work plans. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
In the year 2010 -11, 50 projects c overing a total length 5,059 km  have been 
awarded. The coordination mechanism with State Governments has been strengthened 
for implementation of NHDP with setting up of High Powered Committees under Chief 
Secretaries with Regional Officers as Member Secretary to resolve bottlenecks.  NH AI 
has further set up zonal offices with the primary aim of liasioning with State 
Governments to expedite pre -construction activities. Inter -Ministerial and the Center - 
State issues are resolved through a Committee of Secretaries constituted under 
Cabinet Secretariat.  All these measures are expected to develop coordination and 
reduce delays as recommended by Committee.  Sincere efforts have been made to 
eliminate inter-ministerial differences and to address them in a timely manner to ensure 
that various st ages of Highway construction could be implemented as per the work 
plans. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 As regards the Golden Quadrilateral, an integral component of NHDP phase -I, 
the Committee are dismayed to note an unprecedented delay in completion of the 
same. The project was originally scheduled to be completed by March, 2004 as per 
original mandate of Task Force. However, by that time, hardly 53.03% of project could 
be completed, which raises serious doubts about the inception, planning, 
implementation and monitoring of programme. Even after seven years, the Golden 
Quadrilateral is still not complete. What the Committee find more disturbing is the 
attempt of the Ministry justify the delay on the ground that programme of this magnitude 
was unprecedente d and also the construction industry in road sector was not 
adequately developed to take the work of this scale. With the decision of the 
Government to allow import of heavy road construction equipment, the delay should 
have been minimized, which is not the case. The Committee deplore  such attitude on 
part of the Ministry. NHAI has reportedly now formulated a revised strategy for 
implementation of projects as 14 Regional Offices have been opened and for land 
acquisition 192 special land acquisition units ha ve been created at State Level. In view 
of the long duration o f the projects, the Committee are  of the view that this strategy 
should have been planned much ea rlier. The Committee now exhort  the Ministry to 
monitor the implementation of Golden Quadrilateral project vigorously and complete it 
without any further delay. The Committee further recommend  that as the Golden 
Quadrilateral project connects the four mega cities, the upkeep and mainten ance of 
Highways developed under this ambitious project should be accorded highest priority. 
In addition, the Committee also feel  that without the proper development of Highways 
network around “hub” cities of the Golden Quadrilateral, Highways cannot act 
effectively as instruments of balanced regional development and inclusive growth. 
They, therefore, recommend that Ministry should make tangible efforts to build  “spokes” 
from each of the “hub” cities of Golden Quadrilateral, commensurate with the “hubs and 
spokes” pattern of transport system. During the examination of the subject, the Ministry 

had informed the Committee that the work plan to cover about top 300 towns in terms 
of population around hub cities was under consideration. The Committee would like t o 
be apprised of the decision taken by the Ministry in this regard, along with the latest 
status of the Golden Quadrilateral project. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
99.70 % of Golden Quadrilateral is complete .  Out of total length 5,846 km  4/6 
laning has been completed for 5,821 km. 
  
 As regards connectivity to important „hub‟  cities / state capitals / towns with  
Golden Quadrilateral and North-East & East-West Corridors development of 12109 km 
of National Highways are being taken up   under NHDP phase -III scheme.  This 
development scheme would also provide connectivity to important centers of 
tourism/economic activity.  The projects are implemented on Public Private Partner 
basis.  The estimated cost for projects under NHDP III is about Rs. 18000 crores.   
  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
 Toll collection work of EPC projects is being carried out through DGR  
(Directorate General Resettlement, Ministry of Defence) sponsored Ex -servicemen. 
However, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has been candid before the 
Committee to acknowledge that several complaints regarding pilferage of revenue and 
non-compliance of contract conditions have been received, some of which have been 
proved too. In this connection, the Committee have been informed that the Ministry has 
come up with “New Policy for engagement of Fee collecting Agencies” to address these 
issues. While th e impact of the new policy remains to be seen, the Committee are of 
the view that the instrument of supervision needs to be further strengthened and 
streamlined. They, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways should develop an effe ctive mechanism in coordination with NHAI to monitor 
toll collection not only in EPC projects but also in PPP projects (BOT – Toll & Annuity) 
with a view to obviate unnecessary harassment of the highway users by way of an 
illegal and unscrupulous method of  toll collection. The Committee also desire that the 
recommendations of the Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani 
on Electronic Toll Collection should be implemented at the earliest. 
 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
NHAI has already engaged fee collecting agencies through competitive bidding 
for one year contract.  The amount s quoted by these agencies are much higher than 
the present collection of NHAI.  For monitoring the fee collection activities, NHAI has 
used the service of Securi ty Agencies and Chartered Accountant firms for discreet 
observation and continuous observation for a period 72 hrs or more.  The services of 
supervision consultants, fee auditors and other agencies are also being utilized for 
monitoring of fee collection activities.  
 
Subsequent to acceptance of the report submitted by the expert committee 
headed by Shri Nandan Nilekani, Chairman, UIDAI, MoRTH has constituted and Apex 

committee vide OM dated 08.03.2011 comprising of the following members for 
implementation of Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) : 
 
i)  Dr. Y.K. Sharma, DDG, NIC    - Chairman 
ii) Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya, JS (LA&C), MoRTH - Member 
iii) Dr. Mahesh Chandra, DDG, NIC    - Member 
iv) Shri K.C. Dwiwedi, Senior Technical Director, NIC - Member 
v) Shri V.L. Patankar, Member (Tech), NHAI  - Member 
vi) Shri Manoj Dave, Head of O&M (Road)   - Member 
  L&T Infrastructure Projects Ltd. 
vii) Prof. Rajat Moona, IIT-Kanpur    - Member 
viii) Prof. A.K. Sharma, Director, School of Planning & - Member 
  Architecture, New Delhi 
ix) Shri R.C. Palekar, GM (Electronics), NHAI  - Member 
           Secretary 
 
The Terms of Reference (TOR) of the Committee is to develop strategy, process 
design, operational methodology, finalization of standards for various components of 
ETC system, evolve an institutional framework for implementation and operation of 
ETC.  
 
The Apex Committee for implementation of the ETC has submitted its report. 
Government has accepted the recommendations of the committee including the Rad io 
Frequency Identification (RFID) tag technical specification. The same has already been 
notified. Further action for implementing the recommendations is being taken by the 
Ministry and NHAI. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
 
 The Committee are  extremely con cerned to note that almost all works of 
highway projects had been delayed or were likely to be delayed. In several cases, 
period of these delays as well as corresponding cost escalations are substantial. While 
agreeing that certain complex issues and imped iments may come up in the 
implementation of Highway projects, the Committee wish to emphasize that issues such 
as Land acquisition, Railway clearance for Rail Over Bridge (ROB) design, 
environmental clearance, shifting of utilities and poor performance of contractors are of 
routine nature in a Highway construction and can be addressed with effective 
coordination, supervision and pursuance with concerned organization/agencies. 
 
Although few corrective measures have been taken by the Ministry, for instance, 
posting of a Railways officer in NHAI to expedite clearances of ROBs, changes in the 
process of awarding contracts, increase in the number of State Level Land Acquisition 
Units etc, the Committee is of view that the Ministry and NHAI have a major 
responsibility in this regard. The Committee is anguished to note NIL progress (as 
length completed) in respect of NHDP, Phase IV, VI and VII project, which were 
approved way back in th e month of July, 2008, November, 2006 and December, 2007 
respectively. The submission of the Ministry that “presently feasibility studies are being 
prepared for most of these projects”, is not convincing. The Committee desire that 
timelines should be set r ealistically while announcing a new project, after taking into 
consideration the time required on account of land acquisition, environment & forest 
clearance etc. The Committee also note that though in respect of BOT projects, delay 

does not have a direct bearing on cost overrun, as the same is being incurred by 
concessionaire, however in NHAI funded projects, delays in completion of project 
undoubtedly compound the problem of cost overrun. Besides, the amount of 
inconvenience suffered by general public due to pendency of projects though cannot be 
measured in monetary terms, remains huge. The Committee, therefore, stress that 
what is required is a paradigm shift. In this new paradigm, procedures need to be 
tightened and streamlined and the approach should be  proactive and preemptive. The 
Committee agree with the proposal of the Ministry that a project, after preparation of 
DPR, should be decided in the first instance itself, whether it is to be considered for 
procurement on BOT(Toll)/BOT (Annuity) or EPC. This will save the invaluable time lost 
due to the trial and error method being followe d presently. The Committee urge  the 
Ministry to strive hard in this regard. The Committee further note that recommendations 
of the B.K. Chaturvedi Committee have been imple mented and a revised strategy for 
NHDP have been formulated. As fo r now, the Committee understand  that according to 
the revised strategy for speedier implementation of projects, the Chief General 
Managers (CGMs) of 14 Regional Offices have been delegated f inancial as well as 
administrative powers for execution of works. In thi s regard, the Committee desire that 
the CGMs should also be made accountable for delays in implementation of projects. It 
is high time that responsibility for delays be fixed. The C ommittee also recommend that 
the mechanism/instrument of supervision of targets needs to be strict. They would like 
to know the impact of the revised strategy on NHDP, supported by facts, in the action 
taken stage. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
  
 The committee‟s concern for effective coordination, supervision and the 
pursuance with concerned organization/ agency for speedier implementation of the 
projects are noted.  In fact, the Ministry and NHAI are already striving hard in these 
directions through m anifold actions.  Regional Officers of NHAI are very much 
accountable for proper, efficient and timely implementation of projects.  Month wise and 
project wise targets are fixed for land acquisition, and civil construction activities. 
Delays do occur sometimes due to reasons beyond the control of Regional Officers and 
other concerned Officers.  Nonetheless, where delay is attributable to NHAI officials, 
necessary deterrent action will be contemplated. 
 
  There has been positive impact due to revised strateg y for implementation of 
NHDP, pursuant to recommendations of B.K.Chaturvedi Committee.  For instance, 
NHAI carried out Annual Pre -qualification of bidders and prequalified about 100 
applicants/bidders for the year 2011.  These applicants are not be require d to submit 
voluminous documents at project specific RFQ.  Similarly NHAI would take up fresh 
pre-qualification for the year 2012.  As a result, NHAI has been able to award projects 
aggregating to 4086 km of highway length during 2011 -12 upto November, 201 1 as 
against earlier achievement of 3360 km in 2009 -10 and 5058 km in 2010 -11.  The 
impact will be more visible in due course. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.14) 
 
 The Committee observe that non-performance of contractors is one of the major 
reasons for long de lays in completion of Highway projects. Also, the possibility of a 
nexus between middlemen, non -performing contractors and corrupt officials siphoning 
off project funds cannot  be ruled out. The Committee have  been given to understand 

that the contracts of such contractors, who do not perform even after periodical review, 
are terminated and the bank guarantee for performance security are encashed. As per 
stipulations, these contractors are also not being “pre -qualified” for award of any future 
project in NHA I until their performan ce improves. The Committee feel  that in an 
atmosphere, where delays have become a regular affair, blacklisting alone may not be 
effective and thus there should be a provision to impose substantial cash penalty on the 
non-performing contractors. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should 
either incorporate a provision of financial penalty or raise the amount of bank guarantee 
in the contract agreement. It will serve two purposes, firstly it will be an effective 
instrument of penalty and will act as a deterrent for non -performing contractors and 
secondly, it will keep away non -serious contractors or the contractors, who do not have 
the requisite capabilities to undertake major National Highway Project. T he Committee 
also re commend that the Ministry should ensure that bank guarantee of a non -
performing contractor is encashed and a project is not re -awarded to a black -listed 
contractor. Further, the Committee would like to emphasize upon the fact that 
construction of Highways through contracting and bidding requires a sharp and 
effective evaluation and supervision of contractors. Without this ability, poor contracting 
jobs will jeopardize the projects . Thus, the Committee recommend  that senior 
managers in NHAI should be made to  adopt an effective approach to hire capable 
contractors and supervise them sincerely and efficiently. Equally important is the need 
to be aware of the pitfalls of making inappropriate decisions in this direction for which 
responsibility should be fixed and the erring officials penalized. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Relevant clauses for imposing penalty in case of contractors‟ default are 
provided in the Contract Agreement executed between client and contractors/  
concessionaires for B.O.T(Toll), BOT (Annuity) & Engineering Procurement and 
Construction(Item rate). The supervision/Independent Consultants perform their duties 
and exercise the authority in accordance with the provisions of the contractual 
agreement.  Penalty is imposed by the client on th e defaulting contractors on the basis 
of recommendations of the Supervision/Independent consultant as per the contractual 
provision. All the s upervision/Independent consultants are appointed on transparent 
basis through International Competitive B idding (ICB).  Clear procedures are provided 
in the contract documents to make bonafide and correct decisions by all concerned.  
NHAI has been encashing Bank Guarantees from time to time, in case of default by the 
contractors. Contractors/Concessionaires once placed  in the list of poor performance 
are not permitted to bid for fresh projects till they improve their performance to the 
satisfaction of NHAI. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.15) 
 
 Regular and planned maintenance and upkeep of National Highways are of 
paramount i mportance in view of the overload they bear. Poor maintenance and 
potholes on most of the Highways have turned them into an increased safety hazard to 
the users. For instance, NH6, NH13 and NH34 are in bad condition. Other glaring 
examples of the same are Mahatma Gandhi Bridge and Rajendra Bridge in Bihar and 
Roopnarayan Bridge in West Bengal. The Panvel -Goa Highway and the Shivpuri by -
pass are some other examples of certain spots being severely accident -prone on 
National Highways. The Committee are constra ined to note that financial resources 

made available to the Ministry under Maintenance and Repairs Head (Non -Plan) have 
been only about 40% of the requirement during the last four years. The Committee are 
of the firm opinion that if due maintenance cannot be provided to existing network of 
highways, all efforts to expand its reach are meaningless and hence, recommend that 
maintenance should be accorded highest priority and the issue of inadequate allocation 
for maintenance and repairs of National Highways s hould be taken up with Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission at the highest level. The Committee also suggests 
that controlled entry of trucks, conducting of awareness programs among road users 
and night patrolling on the Highways should be undertake n for enhancing safety. 
Specific observations on the maintenance and safety aspects have been covered in the 
next two recommendations. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The Maintenance & Repair (M&R) of NHs  are carried out annually as per 
available non - plan outlay based upon extent of repair needed, inter -se priority and 
availability of funds.  Generally, the annual available allocation is of the order of about 
35-40% of the estimated requirement. 
 
 The Non -Plan allocation provided for M&R of NHs during 2011 -12 (B.E.) 
amounting to Rs. 1,027.25 crore is less than the B.E. outlay of Rs. 1,056.86 crore 
during 2010-11.  However, during 2010 -11 additional allocation of Rs. 1,000 crore was 
provided at R.E. stage in December. 2010. 
 
 This Ministry is consistently taking up the matter for enhanced allocation of fund  
under M&R.  During the current FY 2011 -12 also, Ministry of Finance has been 
requested to consider providing additional allocation of Rs. 1,000 crore for  M&R of NHs 
under the relevant budget head of this Ministry.   An additional allocation of Rs. 300 
crore has been provided by Ministry of Finance for meeting the additional expenditure 
of M&R of National Highways during Financial Year 2011-12.   
 
Following issues need favourable considerations in this regard:- 
 
The earliest indication regarding assured availability of enhanced allocations 
under RE (if at all provided) during a financial year is received in the Ministry in 
December.  This poses difficulty in taking up timely actions for preparation of 
estimates co mmensurate to available allocations, their sanctioning, tendering, 
award and implementation.  As such, expenditure may not be commensurate to 
enhanced RE allocations even if RE allocation for M&R of NHs is enhanced 
substantially to match estimated fund requirements. 
 
Further, the execution of road works has seasonal variations (which essentially 
excludes monsoon season as non -working season).  The available  working 
seasons in hilly areas,  North-East Region is very less due to much prolonged 
rainy seasons.  Also for many of the southern states, there is occurrence of rains 
in winter. 
 
Therefore, it is desirable that allocations for M&R of NHs are enhanced to match 
the requirement as per the estimated fund requirements as per this Ministry‟s 
norms right at BE stage itself rather than enhancing the same at RE stage. 
 
 

Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 The Committee have been informed that engineering/technical aspects of“Road  
Safety are being taken care of at the design stage of the National Highway itself. 
However, the Committee is pained to note that there are certain sections of National 
Highways in different parts of the country, from where recurrence of fatal accidents ha s 
been regularly reported due to their faulty design or such shortcomings. One such 
section is near „Kooteripattu ‟  on NH-45. Since the inception of this section of highway 
in 2005, about 700 accidents have already taken place, killing more than 132 people.  
The Co mmittee have  been raising his issue for the last one year. Though some 
tentative action has been reportedly taken on the matter, yet the Committee is shocked 
to know that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is still preparing a report on 
the same. This state of affairs raises serious doubts about how the sufferings of a 
common man are dealt with in the existing  set up. The Committee expresse  their 
profound anguish over the scant regard that has been shown towards the lives of the 
people and strongly deprecates the callous approach of concerned agencies. They also 
recommend that road safety issue of Kooteripattu alongwith the complaints of similar 
nature from any other section in the entire NH network should be addressed with 
utmost urgency. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should compulsorily 
carry out “road safety audit” for all future projects either at the planning stage or at the 
Detailed Project Reports stage. The needs of the local population living on both sides of 
such Highways should also be given due attention in the form of subways, foot over 
bridges, pedestrian crossings, service road, underpasses or even realignment of the 
road, if needed, because no venture, whatever be its utility or commercial viability, 
should ever compromise on safety of road users. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
NHAI have started Safety Audit for P ublic-Private-Partnership (PPP)  projects. 
Three Safety Consultancy Contracts on (i) Gurgaon -Jaipur (226 km), (ii) Surat -Dahisar 
(239 km), (iii) Chilkaluripet-Vijaywada (79 km) have been functional since May, 2010. 
Further safety consultants for fifty three PPP projects on DBFO basis for 4820 km 
length have been appointed for safety audit during development and construction 
stage. Work of Audit has already been commenced. 
 
Bids for appointment of Safety consultants for twenty six  more packages of 
length 2222 km have been received and they will be appointed shortly. 
 
In the state of Tamil Nadu, Safety Consultants on following projects have been 
appointed by NHAI in accordance of schedule L of Model Concession Agreement 
(MCA): 
i) Six laning of Krishnagiri – Walajahpet section of NH -46 from km 0.00 to 
km 148.30 in the St ate of Tamil Nadu under NHDP Phase -V to be 
executed as BOT (Toll) project on DBFO basis. 
ii) Four laning of Tirupati – Tiruthani – Chennai section of NH -205 from km 
274.800 to km 341.600 in the State of Andhra Pradesh and km 0.00 to km 
59.600 in the state of Tamil Nadu under NHDP Phase-IIIA on BOT basis. 
iii) Two laning of Trichy – Karaikudi section of NH -210 (km 10.00 to km 
94.00) and Tirchy bypass on NH -67 (km 110.016 to km 135.930) in the 
state of Tamil Nadu under NHDP Phase -III on Design, Build, Finance , 
Operate and Transfer (DBFOT) basis. 

iv) Two laning with Paved shoulder of Dingigul – Theni section from km 
2.750 to km 73.400 of NH -45 (extn) and Theni – Kumli section from km 
215.500 to km 272.600 of NH-220 in the state of Tamil Nadu under NHDP 
Phase-III on Design, Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer (DBFOT) 
basis. 
v) Six laning of NH -7 from Hosur (km 33.130) to Krishnagiri (km 93.000) in 
the state of Tamil Nadu under NHDP Phase -V as BOT (Toll) on DBFO 
basis. 
vi) Six laning from km 102.035 to km 144.680  on Chengapalli to start of 
Coimbatore bypass and four laning from km 170.880 to km 183.010 on 
End of Coimbatore bypass to TN/Kerala border section of NH -47 in the 
state of Tamil Nadu under NHDP Phase -II on DBFOT (Till) basis 
(Package No. NS-II/BOT/TN-08). 
vii) Six laning of Chennai – Tada section of NH -5 from km 11.00 to km 54.40 
in the state of Tamil Nadu under NHDP Phase-V. 
 
As regards road safety at Kutteripattu junction on NH 45 approval has been 
given for provision of a foot overbridge at the junction  at an estimated cost of Rs. 1.5 
crore as a change of scope under Concession Agreement for Tindivanam -Ulundurpet 
Project during O&M period. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.20) 
 
 An important reason, which the Committee note for causing delays in several 
Highway projects is the delay in obtaining necessary clearance under the Forest 
Conservation Act, 1980 and local laws for cutting of trees and diversion of forest areas 
as well as the wildlife clearance – all being time consuming processes. The Committee 
have been informed by Ministry that as regards environmental clearance, they are 
depositing the compensatory aforestation amount for trees being cut for a highway with 
the Ministry of Environment. The Committee also takes note of the argument put forth 
by the Ministry that planting trees close to the road is no longer relevant in the absence 
of bullock carts now and thus is only a major traffic hazard and that on this point there is 
a difference in viewpoints of both the Ministries. The Committee are of the view tha t 
central nodal institutions like Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and NHAI, being 
mandated to construct, develop and maintain the National Highways throughout the 
country can certainly play a more proactive role and therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Ministry, in coordination with Ministry of Environment and Forest, should devise a 
mutually agreed formula for time -bound clearances of the highway projects. The 
Committee also desire that Ministry should pursue with the Ministry of Environment and 
Forest vigorously to get preferential treatment for the National highways, similar to 
certain coal-mining projects, keeping in mind their significance for the progress of the 
nation. The Committee further counsels the Ministry that the process of obtaining  
environmental clearances should be initiated at the earliest possible stage and 
clearances should be obtained before finalizing the cost or awarding the project and not 
vice-versa.  
 
The Committee also came across a peculiar case concerning the highway 
project of NH -24 i.e. Hapur to Garmukteshwar (total length 35 km), where the Ministry 
of Environment and Forest has not been able to give environmental clearances 
because they are lookin g forward for the recommendation of State  Wildlife Board. And 
since, State Wildlife Board has not yet been constituted; the project is lying in doldrums. 

Similarly, a project in Gwalior is being held -up for the last eight years due to non -
cooperation of th e Army to hand -over one acre of land. The Committee strongly 
believes that procedures entangled in the bureaucratic cow -web are not going to help 
the issue and therefore, recommend that all concerned parties should follow a 
pragmatic approach towards solvi ng issues of this nature. They suggest that the  
Ministry should take up the matter with the Ministry of Defence, the concerned State 
Governments as well as the Ministry of Environment & Forest urgently to ensure 
clearance and timely completion of this highway project. 
 
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
NHAI is having a close coordination with the Ministry of Environment and Forest 
(MoEF). In so far as the environmental clearance is concerned no project is held 
up/pending for want of environmental clearance. The Environmental Appraisal 
Committee of the MoEF is holding meeting regularly every month of the infrastructure 
projects including highways. It is further to add that priorities are given to the highway 
projects and these are getting cleared expeditiously MoEF. It is also submitted that 
NHAI initiate Environmental clearance proposals immediately after the feasibility 
reports. By the time the projects are in the stage of award, the environmental clearance 
are obtained.  
 
However, problems are encountered in getting the wildlife/forest cleracne where 
the projects are to be routed through State Forest Department/State Governments. In 
case of wildlife proposals, the procedure involves examination of proposal by State 
Forest Department, recommendation by State Wildlife Advisory Board (Chaired by 
Hon‟ble Chief Minister of the State), National Board of Wildlife (NBWL)/MoEF and 
approval by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India. In each case of wildlife, this procedure 
is to be followed twice first for carrying out survey and demarcation and subsequently 
for final clearance. Similarly, forest proposals are also been examined by the State 
Forest Depa rtment and subsequently by the Ministry of Environment and Forest at 
regional level and at central level. NHAI has strengthened the coordination mechanism 
to speed up the forest/wildlife proposals through the States by constituting the High 
Powered Committ ee under the Chief Secretary. Most of the cases get cleared but 
wherever there are issues of some disagreement, the proposals take long time.  
 
The wildlife proposal of Hapur -Garmukteswar was held up due to non 
constitution of the State Wildlife Advisory B oard in the State of Uttar Pradesh. The 
committee could not be constituted for almost for a period of 3 years. On the insistence 
of NHAI/Ministry the Committee could be constituted in the month of May 2010 and 
subsequently a meeting was held and the propos al was recommended by the State 
Wildlife Advisory Board to the National Board of Wildlife. The National Board of Wildlife 
(NBWL) had cleared the proposal in its meeting held on 24 th January 2011. Now the 
project is submitted in the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India for final approval. 
 
 
Recommendation ( Para No.21) 
 
 The Committee note with distress that development and completion of some of 
the Port Connectivity Projects are not getting due attention. Mormugao Port 
Connectivity project, Chennai -Ennore Port Connectivity project as well as Haldia Port 
Connectivity project have been getting delayed on one account or the other. In respect 

of Mormugao Port Connectivity project, the Committee are constrained to note that due 
to certain issues such as acquisition of Government land (presently 1.18 km stretch of 
road is still to be acquired) and due to encroachment problems, Mormugao Port Trust 
(MPT) and Government of Goa are at loggerheads and project is suffering. The 
Committee, during their visit to Goa, were pained to note that several areas of 
disagreement existed between MPT and Government of Goa. The matter is sub -judice 
currently. The Committee hope  that the matter would be resolved soon. With regard to 
connectivity project involving the Chennai & Ennore Ports, the Committee is disturbed 
to note that bidding for the same  is being held up due to lack of clear commitment from 
all stakeholders for equity/debt -contribution as well as shifting of 1800 PAPs (Project 
Affected Parties) from Ennore Expressway. Th e Committee, therefore, suggest  that 
Ministry should make concerted e fforts through all channels possible and ensure 
cooperation among all stakeholders in order to expedite implementation of these Port 
Connectivity Projects. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The present status of Port Connectivity Projects specifically mentioned by the 
Committee is as under: 
 
Mormugao Port Connectivity Project: 
 
i) The Project of Mormugao Port road Connectivity in Goa for a length of 13.10 Km 
has been completed by Border Roads Organization (BRO) out of the total length of 
18.30Km and thr own open for traffic in May, 2004. The balance 5.20Km from 
Varunapuri junction (13.10 Km) to Sada Junction (18.30Km) could not be completed 
due to non eviction of encroachers by Govt. of Goa from the acquired land of Govt. of 
Goa way back in 1972. 
 
ii) The Port traffic is currently using NH -17A which is passing through the densely 
populated towns of Vasco -da-Gama, Chicalirn, Dabolim and Cortalim by which the 
citizens of these regions are opposing stating that pollution is being increased day by 
day due to m ovement of heavy coal & iron ore loaded traffic of the Port along these 
stretches, which is a bottleneck for the movement of traffic. 
 
iii) As there was no other alternative, the Mormugao Port Users Association & 
Others had filed the Writ Petition No.470/2 006 before the Hon‟ble High Court of 
Bombay at Goa requesting to complete the balance 5.20 Km road connecting to 
Mormugao Port so that the Port related heavy traffic will bypass these towns without 
causing any disturbance to the people staying around. 
 
iv) The Hon‟ble High Court has issued an order dated 21.08.2008 on State Govt. 
stating that free encumbrance land should be made available to NHAI for completion of 
the balance 5.20Km by 30.09.2009. As per the above High Court Order, Govt. of Goa 
has handed over 402Km to NHAI on 18.07.2008 and on 24.072008. 
 
v) The Assembly, Govt. of Goa has passed unanimous resolution on 22.08.2008 on 
the very next day of the issue of above said order by the Hon‟ble High Court 
dated 21.08.2008 stating that the construction of  the road should not be taken up from 
Ravindra Bhavan junction (Km15.10) to Sada junction (18.30Km) for length of 3.20Km 
as it will displace hundreds of people (encroachers). Further, the Govt. of Goa had filed 

Miscellaneous Civil Application on 23.09.2009  before the High Court for modifications 
of orders issued by the High Court. 
 
vi) The matter was heard again on 04.05.2011 and the Hon‟ble High Court of 
Bombay at Goa vide its order has directed the State Government to hand over the 
possession of the land by 30.06.2011 so as to enable NHAI to c onstruct the road from 
13.10 Km  to 18.30Kms. Then the NHAI has to complete the balance work by 
31.12.2011. 
 
vii) The remaining stretch of 1.18Km  which exists in three different stretches has 
been occupied by encroachers for which 256 housing units have been already 
constructed to shift these PAPs with Port‟s funds through Goa State Rehabilitation 
Board. 42 housing units also have been constructed by the Port itself exclusively for 
shifting of PAPs fishermen community. 
 
Chennai - Ennore port connectivity Project: 
 
After receipt of firm commitment on equity/loan from Chennai Port Trust in 
October 2010, fresh bids were invited with bid due date as on 25th Nov. 2010. Based on 
the evaluation of financial bids, M/S COASTAL -SPL (JV) was found the lowest bidder 
and LOA to award the work was issued to the contractor on 24 th December 2010. 
Agreement has been signed on 7 th February 2011 and in compliance to Mi nistry‟s letter 
no.NH37010/2/2010-PIC dated 5 th May 2011, letter to commence the work has been 
issued on the same day, i.e. 5th May 2011. 
 
Out of 1824 Project Affected Persons (PAPs), 1783 have already been shifted. 
The remaining PAPs could not be shifted due to the election process in the state. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.22) 
 
 The Committee note  that the development of roads and highways in the North -
Eastern region is not at par with the rest of the country, because progress achieved in 
respect of awarded NHDP projects in the region is rather dismal. For instance, in 
respect of the projects in As sam under East -West corridor (NHDP phase -II), “zero” 
progress has been shown in 8 projects as on 31.08.2010 . The Committee find  that the 
situation is more alarming because most of these projects have already crossed the 
date of completion as per original c ontracts. Even the inception of new programme viz. 
Special Accelerated Road Development Programme for North -Eastern Region 
(SARDP-NE) has not led to any substantial progress. The examination of Budget 
Estimates and Expenditure for the year 2008-2009, 2009-2010, 2010-2011 furnished by 
the Ministry, revealed a sorry picture of actual expenditure too. To cite an example, in 
the current year i.e. 2010 -11, out of the Budget Estimates of Rs. 1500 cr. for SARDP -
NE, only Rs. 553.36 cr. have been utilized upto 28 th February, 2011. Apart from the 
adverse law and order situation, the Committee also notes that in certain States, where 
the process of land acquisition is rather slow, the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways is mulling over a proposal to leave those Sta tes out of the “road -building 
loop‟. The Committee feel that such an approach will only add to the already 
imbalanced development of roads and highways in NE States. The Committee is of 
view that special situations/circumstances require special effort and endeavor, which is 
completely lacking on part of the Ministry and NHAI. The Committee, therefore, urge 
the Ministry to give due attention to Highway projects in NE region, as these National 

Highways play a vital role in providing Connectivity to these regi ons in the absence of 
proper rail and air connectivity and act as the lifeline of the people. The Committee also 
suggests that Ministry and NHAI should undertake a coherent and coordinated effort 
with active and effective cooperation of the Ministry of Hom e Affairs and the State 
Governments of NE region to remove bottlenecks in their Highway projects. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Implementation of the Special Accelerated Road Development Programme for 
North East (SARDP -NE) has brought a sudden surge in  the volume of road 
construction work to such an extent that the implementation agencies e.g. State Public 
Work Departments (PWD) and Border Roads Organization (BRO) with their existing 
capacities are not above to cope with the situation.  Further, the con tracting industry in 
the Region has not fully developed to take up the sudden increase in the volume of 
work without capacity building.  This also resulted in tremendous pressure on the 
supply of construction materials and impacted the availability of mate rial like stone 
aggregates, sand etc.  Therefore, there had been shortfalls in the implementation of the 
programme during the preceding years. 
 
 In order to speed up the implementation of the programme, the Ministry, during 
2010-11, has started sanction of bigger size road project/packages to attract bigger 
Contractors from outside the Region in order to expedite the pace of execution during 
the li mited working seasons and in view of this, the total expenditure incurred under 
SARDP-NE during Financial Year.2010-11 reached Rs. 1067.28 crore as compared to  
the expenditure of Rs.676.00 crores in the financial year 2009-10. 
 
 The Government is very much aware of the importance of road connectivity in 
NER and is fully committed in providing good roads in the Region.  There is no such 
proposal for leaving out the State, where land acquisition process has been slow, from 
the road development programme.  The Government has also directed all the State 
Government of NER, to set up a State Level Monitoring Committee, headed by the 
concerned Chief Secretary of the State, to monitor the progress of SARDP -NE works 
on a monthly basis so th at all the bottlenecks and inter -departmental issues between 
various State Govt. Departments are sorted out.  At Cabinet Secretariat also regular 
meetings are held to review SARDP -NE, in which various Central Government 
Ministries/Departments and Chief Sec retaries of the concerned State Government of 
NE Region participate.  Follow up meetings are also regularly held in the Ministry to 
expedite the pace of SARDP-NE. 
 
Total 670 Km length in Assam had been taken for 4 -laning under East West 
Corridor Phase II a nd 4 laning completed in about 295 Km length. Most of the projects 
are under implementation and likely to be completed by March, 2012.  The average 
progress for the contract packages is 60.7%, except for 5 Projects in NC hills District 
having a length of 1 16Km which are underway of re -award. Two packages awarded in 
December, 2010 one package in May, 11 and for the remaining two packages bids 
received which are under evaluation and likely to be awarded by June, 2011. These re -
awarded projects of N C Hills di strict are likely to be completed up to December, 2013.  
As suggested by the Committee special emphasis is being given by NHAI for 
completion of the projects in North East Region.   
 

Total 394 Km length has been entrusted to NHAI under SARDP -NE projects, 
112 km length awarded (i.e. Jorbat -Barapani & Shilong Bypass) and works started in 
Jan,2011. Three new projects along NH -37 having a length of 178 Km i.e. 
Numaligarah-Jorhat-Demow-Dibrugarah are under bidding process and likely to be 
awarded up to Aug, 2011 and will be completed by Feb, 2014. 
 
 
Recommendation ( Para No.23) 
 
 The Committee note  that Government has formulated a scheme to improve the 
road connectivity in the Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas covering 33 districts 
in eight S tates. However, the Committee are  dismayed to find that funds allocated for 
this purpose are grossly underutilized. During the year 2009 -2010, out of Budget 
Estimates of Rs. 500 cr and Revised Estimates for Rs. 125 cr, only Rs. 5 cr could be 
utilized. Even for th e year 2010 -11, out of Budget Estimates of Rs.1000 cr; only Rs. 
578.21 cr have been utilized upto 28 th February, 2011, which is quite unsatisfactory. 
The Ministry has attributed such underutilization to late awarding of projects. 
Considering the importance of this scheme for economic development of LWE affected 
areas, reducing economic isolation and strengthening political cohesion, the Committee 
desire that a high level group comprising of representatives of Ministries of Home, 
Urban Development, Development of North Eastern Region (DONER) and the Ministry 
of Road Transport & Highways (MORTH) and National Highways Authority of India 
(NHAI) should be formed, who should be entrusted with the responsibility to 
supervise/monitor the programme on a regular basis  to ensure that funds are utilized 
prudently and required infrastructure is created for the common good. The Committee 
would particularly emphasize upon the fact that the Ministry needs to coordinate 
effectively with the Ministry of Home Affairs and concer ned State Governments to 
tackle the disruption of works by extremists and for successful implementation of this 
project. 
 
The Committee further note  that Left Wing Extremism is, to a large extent, 
funded out of the extortion/concession, which the extremist s get from many 
Government contractors. All this make the entire development strategy counter -
productive and self-defeating. The Committee, therefore, recommend that credentials of 
contractors of LWE affected areas should be verified with help from Ministr y of Home 
Affairs and concerned State Governments in order to stop the diversion of funds in the 
hands of unscrupulous elements. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The programme was approved by the cabinet on 26.02.2009.  The pre -
construction activities for a road project take considerable time going through a phase 
of detailed survey, preparation of detailed project report, sanction of the estimate by the 
Ministry, tendering etc.  Moreover, most of the road stretches are lying in very difficult 
and inaccessible areas, making it difficult to carry out detailed survey of the roads.  The 
sanction of the detailed estimates for individual stretches could start from Octobe r, 
2009 only and most of the works have been sanctioned and awarded during the year 
2010-11.  Moreover, there has been poor response to the works especially in Gadchiroli 
in Maharashtra, Bastar in Chhattisgarh and in some parts of Jharkhand leading to dela y 
in starting the work.  The construction period varies from 12 months to 36 months 
depending upon the nature of work and size of the project.  These works are in initial 

stage of implementation.  Therefore only Rs. 5 crore could be spent during 2009 -10 
only.  However, out of Rs. 750 crore allocated for LWE roads during 2010 -11, Rs. 719 
crore have been utilized.  During 2011 -12, out of an allocation of Rs. 1200 crore, Rs. 
326 crore have been utilized up to August, 2011. 
 
 The projects are being monitored at various levels in the Ministry, in which 
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs are also invited and also by the respective 
State Govts regularly.  The issues in implementation are being addressed 
expeditiously. 
 
 The details of the contractors working on LWE roads were sent to Ministry of 
Home affairs for verification of credentials.  Based on the intelligent input received from 
Ministry of Home Affairs, the State Government s have been asked to take appropriate 
action in to the matter. 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER - III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT‟S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
 
 Land acquisition for development, maintenance, management and Operation of 
National Highways is a complex process, which is administered by section 3 of the 
National Highways Act, 1956. However, the Committee have  observed certain 
differences between Natio nal Highways Act, 1956 and the Land acquisition Act, 1894, 
due to which the Government has frequently encountered resistance and agitation by 
the PAPs (Project Affected Parties). There is a provision in the LA Act to provide for 
payment of an interest amount calculated at the rate of twelve per cent, over and above 
the market value of the land for the period commencing on and from the date of 
publication of the notification under sub -section (1) of section 4, in respect of such land 
to the date of award of the competent authority or the date of taking possession of the 
land, whichever is earlier, subject however to the condition that in computing such 
period, any period or periods during which the proceedings for the acquisition of the 
land were held up on account of any stay or injunction by the order of any court shall be 
excluded. In addition, a provision also exists for awarding a sum of 30% as solatium 
amount, over and above the market  value of the land in consideration of the 
compulsory nature of the acquisition. Consequently, the land owner, from whom land is 
acquired under the National Highways Act, is in a disadvantageous position as 
compared to the one whose land is acquired under the Land Acquisition Act. From the 
deposition of the Ministry , the Com mittee further observe  that the National Highways 
Act does not provide for any time -limit for making an application by the aggrieved party 
to the arbitrator. As a result, the land owners approach the arbitrator even after 2 -3 
years from the date of determi nation of award and these cases remain unsettled for 
long, leading to inordinate delay in complete procedure. 
 
Although Ministry has submitted a proposal for the necessary amendments to 
NH Act, the Committee fails to understand as to why the Ministry took so long to 
propose amendments to NH Act 1956 despite more than 15 years of experiencing 
hurdles under NHDP. Besides, such a proposal is not being pursued vigorously in order 
to facilitate smoother acquisition of land for future projects under various phase s of 
NHDP. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to streamline the Land 
Acquisition process and, therefore, recommend that Ministry should take necessary 
steps to amend the existing NH Act, 1956 in order to incorporate firstly, provision of 
compensation as per provisions of Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and second, provision of 
timeframes for declaration of awards by Competent Authority for Land Acquisition 
(CALA), disbursement of compensation and initiation/completion of arbitration. The 
Committee d esire to be apprised of the status of the proposal submitted for making 
amendment in the NH Act, 1956. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The National Highways Act was amended in 1997 (Act 16 of 1997) to provide for 
expeditious acquisition of land for NH projects.  The provisions to acquire land 
expeditiously for National Highways purpose, were incorporated vide Sections 3A to 3J 

to facilita te speedier acquisition of land for development and construction of National 
Highways.   
 
 A special Act like NH Act has proved to be very useful for in the construction of 
infrastructure such as national highways in view of comparatively less legal hurdle s 
faced by the acquisition done under the Act due to provisions contained in NH Act 
regarding barring of jurisdiction of courts of law in determination of compensation. A 
provision also exists under NH act to provide redressal of grievances of land owners 
through Arbitrators. NH Act, 1956, is also quite reasonable.  The competent authority to 
declare compensation under Section 3G of the Act, is invariably a State Government 
functionary, who takes into account all considerations including damages, cost of 
shifting, etc.  
 
There is at present, no proposal under consideration of the Government to 
amend the National Highways Act, 1956 to align it with the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER - IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 The Committee observe that Highway sector has a large shelf of projects, which 
can be readily offered to private players, including those which had a serious setback in 
the year 2009 -2010 due to global financial meltdown. Since the financial crisis is now 
over, the Committee suggests the Ministry to take concerted efforts to attract private 
players in this sector. Apart from an enabling fiscal environment, development of mutual 
trust is the fundamental pre -requisite to encourage entry of private investors. 
Organization of “Business conclaves ‟  periodically with active cooperation of FICCI, CII 
and other corporate bodies may also lead to a positive response. In respect of pending 
Highway projects due to non -response/low response of private investors, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to explore various possibilities to attract bidders by way of 
revising the project cost, providing funds on concessional  interest rates and providing 
updated & authentic traffic data flexibility in the Concessional Agreement too. 
 
From the deposition of the Ministry made before them, the Committee also note 
that one of the fundamental problems faced by the private investor is experiments of 
Government policy with many formats with varying degrees of success. Changes in the 
policy guidelines as well as project documents such as MCA (Model Concession 
Agreement), RFQ (Request for Qualification) and RFP (Request for proposal) ha ve 
caused severe disruption of the award process in the past. The Committee feel that 
private investment flow into the Highway sector will purely depend on the consistent, 
adoption of long term policies and their adherence by the Government and therefore, 
there is an urgent need to standardize project documents and streamline policy 
guidelines vis -à-vis Public Private Partnership (PPP). The Committee also suggests 
that a comprehensive review of project documents and policy guidelines keeping in 
mind the needs of foreseeable future should be undertaken urgently. In this context, the 
Ministry may involve experts/ specialized institutions and study best practices so as to 
facilitate an investor -friendly environment for NHDP. It has come to the notice of the 
Committee that there have been instances where collection of toll was stated to have 
been started even before the construction of road commenced/was completed. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that a financial and technical review of all Model 
Concession Agreements (MCA) should be carried out by an independent Committee of 
outside experts and their findings submitted to this Committee at the earliest. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
NHAI undertakes restructuring of projects to make them viable.  This process 
may involve restructuring of the cost of the project also.  Traffic study is conducted 
during the DPR/Feasibility stage and projections are based on such studies.  The policy 
documents pertaining to Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects, e.g. Request for 
Qualification (RFQ), Request for Proposal (RFP), Model Concession Agreement (MCA) 
etc. have already been standardized to avoid any misunderstanding or disputes with 
the stakeho lders to the extent possible. Comprehensive and regular review of the 
project documents and policy guidelines are also undertaken to make it in tune with the 
changing times and to meet the needs of the public in the foreseeable future. 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 The Committee are distressed to note that flagship project of NHDP i.e. North -
South – East-West (NS-EW) corridor has been crippled with inordinate delays. All NS -
EW c orridor projects, which are under -implementation, have well passed the date of 
completion as per the contracts, which reveal a sorry state of affairs. The project was 
earlier scheduled to be completed by December, 2009 after several extensions, but 
later on the Committee was informed about yet another extension as December, 2010. 
The project is still incomplete as 444 km of the same is yet to be awarded as on date. 
The deposition of the Ministry that “actual date of completion can be estimated only 
after all projects of NS -EW corridor are awarded” is in f act fallacious. The Committee 
are also not convinced with the reasons submitted by Ministry for such enormous 
delays. The Committee, therefore, recommend  that all earnest efforts should be made 
for expeditious completion of NS-EW corridor project, balance work should be awarded 
without any further delay and a High level group, such as the NHAI Board, should be 
entrusted with the responsibility to supervise/monitor the progress of this project 
fortnightly, so that appropriate action could be taken to avert any further delay. The 
Committee are convinced that setting unrealistic targets due to poor planning is the 
reason for repeated extensions of the target date for completion of this project. 
Constant delays no t only projects the Ministry in a bad light but also leads to cost 
overruns, hence the Committee suggest that Ministry should adopt a realistic approach 
in respect of fixing targets for the NS-EW corridor project and adhere to it. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The NS -EW corridor projects are being monitored closely.  Significant 
completion is anticipated by March 2012. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
 
Recommendation ( Para No. 9) 
 
 The Committee feel that provisions of collection of fee/toll in perpetuity is 
fundamentally wrong and thus needs to be reviewed in the light of gained experiences. 
During the examination of the subject, the Committee also came across some 
disturbing instances such as toll collection from the areas, where condition of roads are 
very poor, exorbitant increase/hike in toll rates, toll plazas being set up in close 
proximity with each other etc. The Committee are  also not satisfied with the financial 
model of NH AI to indicate the benchmark Internal Rate of Return (IRR), which 
determines the optimum concession period within which the concessionaire would 
recover the capital cost of the project and other project related expenditure besides 

earning a reasonable retu rn. The Committee, therefore,  would suggest the Ministry to 
review and revisit the Rules and Regulations regarding collection of toll, so that it does 
not become an instrument of malpractice and unjust profiteering by unscrupulous 
elements to harass the ge neral public. The Committee further recommend  that a just 
and comprehensive methodology should be evolved for computing the concession 
period based on sound financial evaluations. 
 
The Committee also note that the Highway projects are highly dependent on t he 
traffic volume/assessment Report not only for the fixation of toll rates but also for 
fixation of concession period. Unavailability of updated and accurate traffic volume 
data/Report often leads to incorrect forecasts and wrong estimation of concession 
period. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that there is an urgent need to strengthen 
instrument of traffic volume data/Report in order to address the problems of current 
system. In this connection, the Committee are aware  that  of  late  the  Government ,  
particularly  the  Ministry  of  Urban Development,  has  been  encouraging  projects  to  
introduce  the ”Intelligent Transport System” (ITS) for collecting real time data for 
effective traffic management. An Inter -Ministerial Core Group on ITS has als o been set 
up by the Government to establish a National framework for ITS. Th e Committee 
therefore recommend that the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways may coordinate 
with their counterparts in relevant sectors so that the positive benefits of the accu rate 
traffic data could be utilized  to work out standard provisions for toll collection on the 
National Highways. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
Action has already been taken to reduce the rate of user fee after recovery of the 
cost of construction or c ompletion of concession period.  As per amendment to the 
National Highways (NH) Fee Rules published under GSR 15(E) dated 12.01.2011, 
provides that after the concession period is over, the fee shall be collected by the 
Central Government /executing authori ty at a reduced rate of 40% of the fee being 
charged on the date of transfer of such section, to be revised annually in accordance 
with these rules.  Further, the said NH fee rules also provide that after the recovery of 
capital cost through user fee reali zed in respect of a public funded projects, the fee 
leviable would be reduced to 40% of the user fee for such section, to be revised 
annually in accordance with these rules. 
  
Regarding establishment of toll plazas within close proximity, it is submitted t hat 
as far as possible, NHAI is fixing the toll plazas as per the provisions of National 
Highways Fee Rules.  As per NH Fee Rules, 2008, the executing authority or the 
concessionaire, as the case may be, shall establish a toll plaza beyond a distance of 
ten kilometers from a municipal or local town area limit.  Provided that the executing 
authority may, for reasons recorded in writing, locate or allow the concessionaire to 
locate a toll plaza within a distance of ten kilometers of such municipal/ local town  area, 
but in no case within five kilometers of such municipal/local town area.  Rule further 
provides that where a section of the National Highway, permanent bridge, bypass or 
tunnel, as the case may be, is constructed within the municipal or town area li mit or 
within 5 kms from such limits, primarily for use of residents of such municipal or town 
area, the toll plaza may be established within the municipal/town area limit or within a 
distance of 5 km from such limits. Rule 8 (2) stipulate that any other t oll plaza on the 
same section of National Highway and in the same direction, shall not be established 
within a distance of 60 km provided where the executing authority deems necessary, it 

may for reasons to be recorded in writing, establish /allow the conc essionaire, to 
establish another toll plaza within a distance of 60 km: provided such toll plaza is for 
collection of fee for a permanent bridge, bypass or tunnel.  
 
As regards estimation of concession period it is submitted that the traffic survey 
is conducted during preparation of Feasibility Report.  Based on the traffic survey data  
and its projected value, the estimated cost of the project, user fee rate and financial 
modeling of the project, the period of concession is fixed.   
 
Traffic data of NHDP s ections under tolling are with NHAI.  Regarding using Intelligent 
Transport System (ITS) on National Highways, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
would take up the above issues in the light of recommendations of Expert Committee 
headed by Shri Nandan Nilekani, Chairman, UIDAI. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
 
Recommendation ( Para No. 12) 
 
 The Committee observe  that the issue of land acquisition in general and 
compensation in particular is extremely sensitive. The Competent Authority for Land 
Acquisition (CALA), who is generally officers of Local Revenue Departments, are 
empowered to fix the compensation. Howeve r, the Committee came across 
innumerable complaints of inadequate compensation from PAPs (Project Affected 
Parties) and consequent long drawn arbitrations, which seriously affect the progress of 
NHDP. The Committee would like to particularly mention States  like Kerala and Goa. In 
these States, several stretches of National Highways are hemmed in by dense 
residential and commercial structures, which are under constant fear of demolition 
owing to Highway Projects. As a result in these States, the process of l and acquisition 
has been severe ly affected. The Committee feel  that land acquisition and 
displacement/rehabilitation of people for NHDP needs a very careful and proactive role 
of the nodal Ministry. Before commencement of the project, the concerned State 
Government as well as Local Administration/ representatives should be effectively 
consulted to ensure smooth acquisition of land or rehabilitation of displaced persons. 
Association with the local people‟s representatives, MPs and MLAs, can also prove to 
be quite effective. All rehabilitation processes should be in place before undertaking 
any such project. The Committee concurs with the views of the Ministry that the Chief 
Secretaries should be made Nodal Officers by the State Governments for land 
acquisition, as they are in a better position to coordinate with various agencies involved 
in the process in their States. Though only few States have done so, the Committee 
desire the Ministry to pursue this with other State Governments, vigorously. 
 
The Committee further observe  that the State Governments/District Collectors 
have been extremely conservative in awarding compensation and it is the sole reason 
for landowners to keep litigating for decades in the hope of better compensation and 
therefore, suggest that there is an urgent need to sensitize State 
Governments/CALAs/Arbitrators to take into account future development potential of 
the land for its owner, while awarding th e compensation. The Committee are of the firm 

view that the Ministry of Road Transport an d Highways, being the nodal Ministry for 
Highway construction, development & maintenance, can play a pivotal role in this 
regard. 
 
The Committee further observe  that in respect of Kerala and Goa, the 
Ministry/NHAI and respective State Governments have been  stuck with the issue of 35 
meters/ 45 meters/ 60 meters of highway width and unprecedented delay encountered 
in the completion of projects are likely to make those redundant in the light of ever 
increasing vehicular traffic. The C ommittee note the Ministry‟s suggestion that in these 
cases, “expressways” with completely new alignment and avoiding all human 
habitation, can provide the ideal solution. The Committee do understand that the 
quantum of investment required for these green -field projects would be v ery high, but 
considering the benefits, not only at present but in future as well, the Government 
should give a serious thought to it without further dela y. The Committee also 
recommend that the Expressway Authority of India., as envisaged and prioritized in the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan document should be constituted as ear ly as possible. The 
Committee are also of the view that in cases similar to Kerala & Goa, where widening of 
Highways can leads to displacement of local people or have an adverse effect on their 
livelihoods, the construction of “expressways ‟  should be considered from the initial 
stage itself. They hope that these suggestions would be suitably incorporated in the XII 
Five Year Plan; otherwise certain crucial National Highway Projects may not see the 
light of the day at all.                      
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 So far as payment of compensation is concerned, Competent Authority for Land 
Acquisition (CALA) is determining/making payments as per provision of Section 3G of 
the National Highways Act, 1956,  The NH Act, is also quite reasonable.  The 
competent authority to declare compensation under Section 3G of the Act, is invariably 
a State Government functi onary, who takes into account all considerations including 
damages, cost of shifting, etc.  Thus provisions are in -built in the NH Act for adequate 
compensation.   
 
Regarding development of Expressways it is submitted that the Government has 
taken initiative for construction of 1000 Km. of Expressways in the country under NHDP 
phase VI. Additionally, about 18600 km of Expressways have been identified by the 
Government under formulation of a master plan for National Expressways for the 
horizon year 2012 -2022, i.e. to be completed by the end of 13 th Five Year Plan, under 
phased manner.  For development of such a huge net work of expressways an 
independent authority may be needed to be set up.  In this regard the Government is 
exploring the possibility of setting up of an Expressway Authority of India.   
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 The Committee note  that many concessionaires of highway projects have been 
appointing sub-contractors on Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) basis 

despite lack of experience and technical qualifications on their part, which not only 
affects the quality and safet y aspects of National Highways but also jeopardizes timely 
completion of pr ojects. The Committee also note  certain complaints that policies 
followed by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways tend to favour large 
contractors, who eventually sub -contract the project. The Committee, even while 
acknowledging the fact that experience of Ministry has not been very good with 
small/medium level contractors, are not convinced with the merit of Ministry‟s approach 
and feel that promotion and encouragement of “Me dium level” contractors will not only 
strengthen our capacity vis -à-vis road construction but also provide much needed 
exposure to our nascent construction industry. Moreover, the present contractors are, 
anyway, sub-contracting the major portion either with or without the consent of Ministry. 
Hence an initiative to involve medium level contractors will bring them under direct 
control of Ministry and NHAI and make them mo re accountable. The Committee are  
aware of certain changes introduced in the RFQ & RFP documents to curtail 
subcontracting, but feel that complete procedure need to be further streamlined and 
regularized with the provision of strict supervision, so that the project works do not 
suffer due to the appointment of substandard EPC contractors. 
 
The Committee further observe  that during 2008 -09, when low response of 
market was witnessed, certain changes were introduced in the RFQ/RFP and MCA on 
the recommendations of B.K. Chaturvedi Committee. However, now when market is 
buoyant and giving good re sponses to the bidding process, the Ministry has been 
arguing about probability of suboptimal bids being tendered. The Committee find such 
an approach completely confusing. The Committee strongly urges the Ministry to desist 
from such knee -jerk reactions a nd seek expert opinion so as to adopt a long -term 
consistent policy. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The policy matters with regard to PPP projects are always decided after 
obtaining expert opinion from Planning Commission and Department of Economic 
Affairs. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER - V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF WHICH REPLY OF GOVERNMENT  
STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 The Committee, while reviewing the financial plan of NHDP, note that the 
quantum of financial resources required for implementation of Highway projects is 
significantly high. An estimated expenditure of Rs. 200 crore is required everyday for 
these projects  for a period of 15 -20 years. As the Government resources are not 
enough for such capital intensive activity, an efficient financing plan mobilizing all 
sources needs to be worked out to ensure steady flow of funds for the various highway 
projects. Moreove r, Highway projects awarded on Public -Private Partnership (PPP) 
mode, which has now emerged as the primary mode of Highway construction in the 
present scenario are characterized by back -ended cash flows and require term loans 
for longer periods i.e. 10 to 20 years with back -ended repayment structure. In other 
words, Highway concessions have tenures extending upto 30 years and they need loan 
facilities for upto 75 -80% of such tenure. Since both the capital market and institutional 
mechanisms appear to have c onstraints in providing long term structured sources of 
funds, private investors pick the project selectively as they find it difficult to access 
capital. The Committee observe that Ministry of Finance is already pursuing the 
recommendation of several High  level Committees such as the Deepak Parekh 
Committee, Patil Committee, Percy S. Mistry Committee and Raghuram Rajan 
Committee on the subject of “Availability of long term debt”. The Committee also 
appreciates that in order to discuss and evolve consensus on issues relating to 
infrastructure financing, a High level Standing Committee on Infrastructure Finance has 
also been set up under the chairmanship of the Finance Secretary, with representation 
from various stakeholder groups. 
 
 
In this regard, the Commi ttee are of the firm opinion that the Government 
intervention is not only desired but also indispensable to enable faster capital inflows 
and resource mobilization in this infrastructure sector. Th e Committee, therefore, 
suggest that in the current environ ment, when the economy is coming out of recession, 
it is none but imperative that the issue of availability of long term debt with back -ended 
repayment structure is pursued at the highest level in order to provide an institutional 
mechanism for specialized  infrastructure financin g. The Committee further desire  that 
the creation of this institutional mechanism should be done within a stipulated time 
frame to avoid any project delay due to financial c runch. The Committee also agree  
with the suggestions made in the World Bank Report on Financing Infrastructure, which 
stress upon the need for specialized infrastructure institutions such as Infrastructure 
Leasing and Financial Services (IL & FS) and Infrastructure Development Finance 
Corporation (IDFC) to participate at the design stage/ DPR stage of a project in order to 
make it easier for project developers to obtain finances as well as to provide the 
developer with the opportunity to use the expertise of such institutions in project 
designing & financial struct uring. The Committee also note  that the Ministry of Power 
has reportedly set up an „Inter -Institutional Group (IIG)‟, consisting of infrastructure 
developers and senior representatives from banks and financial institutions, which has 
proved to be of substa ntive help in resolving any outstanding issues or disputes 
between the developers and various funding agencies. The Committee suggest that the 

Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should emulate such models with a view to 
removing bottlenecks and increa sing investment in NHDP, while taking adequate care 
of conflicts of interests, if any, arising between the institutions and the Government. 
 
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee to emulate the model, being followed by 
Ministry of Power is under examination in this Ministry. 
 
 
Recommendation ( Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee observe that an undesirable consequence of the expansion in 
road network and accompanying motorization in the country is the increase in the road 
related accidents and fatalities. From its examination of the matter, the Committee get 
the impression that issue of safety is not being given the attention it deserves. The 
Government is yet to come up with a “National Road Safety Policy”. In spite of the  fact 
that “National Road Safety and Traffic Management Bill, 2010” has already been 
introduced in Lok Sabha and examined by a Parliamentary Committee, it is learnt that 
such a policy is still under consideratio n. The Committee firmly believe  that the poli cy 
representing Government‟s commitment as it does, should take precedence over any 
other measures, legal or executive, and therefore call upon the Government to expedite 
the formulation of National Road Safety Policy. The Committee further desire the Road  
safety should be accorded utmost priority with adequate budgetary provisions and 
uncluttered decisive commitment towards the cause. The Committee also note that 
Ministry has proposed to create a “Board for Road Safety and Traffic Management” 
through Road Safety Bill, 2010. In this connection, the Committee is aware that the 
Parliamentary Committee on Transport, in their 160 th Report presented in July, 2010, 
has recommended for withdrawal of the said  bill. The Committee also agree  with their 
view that the major problem in the existing framework vis -à-vis Road Safety is the 
existence of a large number of agencies both at the Centre and State level and lack of 
coordination amongs t them. The Committee also feel  that the proposed Board  is not 
going to do away with any of the existing agencies and in the name of having an 
integrated mechanism, the proposal of the Ministry is, in fact, creating yet another 
institution adding to the existing ones. F urthermore, the Committee learn  that the 
proposed Board is merely advisory in nature and it has not been provided with any 
explicit statutory role of effecting coordination amongst the different agencies. The 
Committee, therefore, emphasize that what is required first is a National Road Safety 
Policy to bring about synergy and better coordination among the already existing 
Government agencies/ research organizations and making the system effective, rather 
than creating another one. The Committee therefore feel that the Government needs to 
assess the present situation in a holistic manner. 
 
As regards road safety, the Committee also observe that availability of suitable 
width of land is required to make a highway safe for commuters and that some States 
Governments are not cooperating on the issue. In the opinion of the Committee, holistic 
perspective that addresses  the entire gamut of road safety is the need of the hour. In 
their view, convening of regular meetings between the Chairman, NHAI and the Chief 
Ministers/Chief Secretaries of the States con cerned, on the significance of requisite 
land for highways to avoid loss of lives, could remove bottlenecks and hurdles in the 
implementation of NHDP. 

 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Standing Committee on the previously proposed  
“the National Road Safety & Traffic Management Bill 2010”, were examined by the 
Government and the matter is presently under consideration of this Ministry.  The 
progress of the aforementioned Bill is also being monitored by the Cabinet Secretariat.  
It was observed that some of the recommendations of the Committee have relevance to 
amendment in Motor Vehicle Act, as such to have the holistic approach it is essential 
that this Ministry‟s proposal for Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill is passed by the 
Cabinet and introduced in the Parliament, as  approved by Hon‟ble Minister (RTH) on 
8.4.2011. 
 
 The comments from apprising agencies on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 
2007 have since been obtained and the matter has been referred to Ministry of Law & 
Justice for their clearance.  The Ministry proposes to o btain approval of the Cabinet .  
Thereafter, the bill will be introduced in the Parliament for passage of the Bill. 
 
 In view of the above, any progress in the National Road Safety and Traffic 
Management Board Bil l can be made only after the Passage of the Motor Vehicle 
(Amendment) Bill. 
 
 Further to give necessary impetus to road safety in highways, a Road Safety Cell 
has been created within NHAI.  One Safety Officer has been designated in each 
Regional Office of NHAI to oversee the safety measures during construction and O&M 
of project reaches. These measures are directed at addressing road safety issues from 
holistic perspective.  As regard bottlenecks and hurdles in land acquisition necessary 
institutional mechanisms are already in place to remove such irritants. However, where 
a political dimension exists to land acquisition issues like in Kerala and Goa the issues 
required to be tackled at higher political levels. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
 During their on -the-spot visits to various NH projects in some States, the 
Committee observed that in several cases, once a stretch of road was being taken up 
for development, there was a sufficient time gap between the handing over of the road 
and the actual commencement of the project, and thus, the road remained neglected in 
the interregnum. They feel that the issue requires serious attention. Further, the 
Committee note that prior to entrustment of National Highway stretches, Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways is solely responsible for the maintenance and repair of 
these stretches. Same is being carried out through State PWDs and Ministry releases 
the funds for this purpose. On similar lines, prior to award of civil works for 
development, NHAI is carrying out the maintenance & repair work through State PWDs 
from the funds allocated/released by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 
However, the financial position of State PWDs is weak in several States and shortage 
of funds leaves no room for road maintenance, hence incessant complaints have been 
received about the poor condition of National Highways. The Committee, therefore, feel 
that the situation warrants a direct role and intervention on the part of Ministry. The 
Committee notes that NHAI has n ow decided to formulate a “Standard Maintenance 
Manual” for improving the maintenance & repair of highways, which is currently under 

examination. The Committee feels that such a manual should have been in place much 
earlier. They would emphasize that earne st effort should be made for preventive 
maintenance rather than conventional reactive maintenance of roads and highways.  
 
The Committee further feel  that the Ministry should tighten its supervisory/ 
monitoring mechanism vis -à-vis not only PPP projects but  also EPC projects. The 
Committee are also of the view that provision of the “Damages for breach of 
maintenance obligation”, as recommended by B.K. Chaturvedi Committee, wherein the 
authority shall be entitled to recover damages, until the breach is repair ed, should be 
adhered to religiously. The Committee are of the view that in respect of EPC contracts, 
DLP(Defect Liability Period), which was just one year till recent times, was utterly 
insufficient. Though, the Ministry has amended it to three years, sti ll the Committee feel 
that incorporation of 5 years inbuilt maintenance clause in all construction contracts, on 
the lines of Pradhan  Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna (PMGSY), is essential for the efficiency 
of Highway projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend s that the Ministry should 
now initiate efforts in this regard at the earliest after consulting the Ministry of Finance, 
for the projects due to be undertaken in the 12th Plan period. The Committee are also of 
the opinion that since the responsibility of m aintenance under PPP is that of the 
concessionaire and the period can vary from 12 to 30 years, more projects under PPP 
should be encouraged as this will not only reduce the financial burden on the 
Government but will also be in public interest. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
The allocations that are available annually for Maintenance & Repair (M&R) of 
National Highways (NHs) are of the order of about 40% of the actual requirements as 
per the Ministry‟s stipulated norms based on the Report of the Commit tee (2001) (i.e. 
available allocations are of the order of about Rs. 1.000 crore as against the estimated 
fund requirement of Rs. 2,800 crore as per the Ministry‟s Norms for Maintenance of 
NHs). 
 
 Further, NH (O) allocations provided to the Ministry are al so generally not 
commensurate to the projected fund requirement.  It is pertinent to mention that during 
the current financial year 2011 -12, the projected fund requirement under NH (O) was 
Rs. 6198 crore, as against of which only Rs. 4,651.33 crore has bee n provided to the 
Ministry under NH (O); which also includes Rs. 1,161.87 crore out of the total 
earmarked cess dedicated for NHs as per the CRF Act, 2000 amended by the Finance 
Act, 2005 (which is generally fully earmarked under NHAI (Investment) for NHDP). 
 
 The non-availability of sufficient funds both under M&R and NH (O) may lead to 
self accumulation of deficiencies in general in large stretches of NH networks which 
may eventually result into necessity for taking up of their premature rehabilitation at  a 
much higher level of investments.  Under such current prevailing scenario of 
constrained allocation of funds for development of non -NHDP NHs and also for M&R of 
NHs, there is compulsion to resort to reactive maintenance works mostly as it is not 
practically possible to do preventive maintenance works. 
 
 It is, therefore, suggested that funds for M&R and as well as for development of 
non-NHDP NHs  under NH (O) are required to be provided commensurate to their 
requirements, so as to enable taking up of preventative maintenance works on NHs. 
 

 Further, it is also essential that GBS under Annual Plan of the Ministry is decided 
without taking into consideration Toll remittances and the dedicated cess earmarked for 
NHs (as per the provisions of the CRF Act, 2000 amended by Finance Act, 2005) (as 
these are Pass through) as otherwise there is large -scale variations and uncertainties 
regarding the allocatio ns consequentially earmarked for development of non -NHDP 
NHs under NH (O). 
 
NHAI has switched to PPP as the predominant mode of execution of projects.  In 
BOT (Toll/Annuity) projects the responsibility for maintenance of highway during the 
entire concession period (excluding development period) is with the concessionaire.  As 
far as EPC projects are concerned, after completion of the project maintenance is 
outsourced to O&M contractor/OMT concessionaire.  NHAI has now decided to switch 
the maintenance/tolling activities to OMT concession mode.  Thus the maintenance of 
the highways would be largely undertaken by private concessionaires/contractors. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
24th April, 2012              
Vaisakha  4,1934 (Saka) 
 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA, 
  CHAIRMAN, 
COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF FIFTEENTH SITTING OF COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2011-2012) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10th April, 2012 from 1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    Shri Franscisco  Sardinha - Chairman 
           MEMBERS 
2. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
3. Shri Dhruvanarayana 
4. Shri T. K. S. Elangovan 
5. Shri Ninong Ering 
6. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Datta Meghe 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
11. Shri S. Semmalai 
12. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
13. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
14. Shri Jagadanand Singh 
15. Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
16. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
         17. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.    Shri P. K. Grover  - Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri S. C. Chaudhary  - Director 
3.    Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Additional Director 
4.    Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration  following Draft Report s for 
consideration and adoption 
(i) *** *** *** ***  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the recomm endations contained in 
 their Eleventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „National Highways 
 Development  Project including implementation of Golden 

 Quadrilateral pertaining to the Ministry of Road  Transport and National 
 Highways 
4. The Committee adopted the draft Report s at *** and (ii) above with some  
modifications suggested by the Members of the Committee as per Annexure. 
 5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports in the light 
of modifications suggested *** and present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Annexure 
 
Modification carried out in the Draft Action Taken Report on the Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on  the subject „National Highways 
Development Project including Implementation of Golden Quadrilateral‟ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Road Transport and National Highways 
 
1. On Page No. 10, Para No. 1.14: Before the last line of the second paragraph  
 the following line may be added: - 
 “… …They further observe that instances of toll collection at certain 
 stretches even prior to the completion of six -laning of National Highways 
 must be probed seriously so as to prevent their recurrence. Further … …” 
 
2.      On Page No. 17 Para No. 1.20:  At the end of the second paragraph the following 
line may be added:- 
“… … The Committee also feel that till the time sub -contracting is completely 
eliminated, the Ministry should ensure that the agreement between a contractor 
and a sub-contractor remains strictly on the lines of a Government contract with 
appropriate clause for encashment of bank guarantee in cases of under -
performance so that the chances of supplying of sub -standard material or 
inferior performance by the sub -contractors could be completely ruled out under 
any circumstances.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX – II 
 
(vide introduction to Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH REPORT OF THE 
 COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i)  Total number of recommendations/observations    23 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been  
 accepted by the Government: 
(Sl. Nos. 1,3,5,6,8,10,13,14,15,17, 20,21,22 & 23– Total 14) 
 
Percentage              60.87% 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s reply: 
(Sl. No. 11 – Total 1) 
 
Percentage              4.35% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
Government‟s replies have not been accepted by the  
Committee: 
(Sl. Nos. 4, 7,9,12 & 19   – Total 5) 
 
Percentage              21.74% 
      
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
final replies of Government are still awaited: 
(Para Nos.  2, 16 & 18   – Total 3) 
 
Percentage              13.04% 
 
 
 
 
 