 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY 
MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
TWENTY 
_____________________________________________ 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE 
MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2013-2014) 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT  
 
_____________________________________________ 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 28 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY 
MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA  
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]  
 
_____________________________________________  

 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
MEDICAL COUNCIL OF 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 December, 2013 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
     December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935(S) 
________________________________________________________ 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT  
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
MEDICAL COUNCIL OF  INDIA 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
_______ 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 December, 2013 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935(S) 
________________________________________________________ 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE  
INDIA  
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 December, 2013  
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935(S) 
________________________________________________________  

 
 
 
 
EC No.1475 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Gove rnment of India Press, Minto Road, New 
Delhi. 

ii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
PAGE NO. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14) (iii)  
INTRODUCTION (v)  
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
9 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
 
17  
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
23  
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect o f which final replies 
of Government are still awaited 
 
32  
 APPENDICES   
I Minutes of the sitting of the Study Group of the Co mmittee on 
Estimates held on 09 December, 2013 
 
33  
II  Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Committee o n Estimates 
(2013-14) held on 09 December, 2013 
35  
III  Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on t he 
recommendations/observations contained in the Eight h Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
37  
 
 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2013-14) 
 
Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
4 Shri Harish Chaudhary 
5 Shri Khagen Das 
6 Shri Pralhad Joshi 
7 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
8 Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
9 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
10 Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
11 Kum. Meenakshi Natrajan 
12 Shri Prabodh Panda 
13 Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu” 
14 Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
15 Shri R. Sambasiva Rao 
16 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
17 Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
18 Shri S. Semmalai 
19 Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
20 Shri M.I. Shanavas 
21 Shri Adhi Sankar  
22 Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
23 Shri Ganesh Singh 
24 Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
25 Shri Jagada Nand Singh 
26 Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
27 Smt. Annu Tandon 
28 Shri Mukul Wasnik 
29 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 1.        Shri A. Louis Martin    -         Joint Secretary   
 2.        Smt. Anita B. Panda           -         Director  
 3. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Ms. Savdha Kalia    - Committee Officer   
  
 

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2013-14 ) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, pr esent this Twenty Eighth Report on action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations cont ained in the Eighth Report of the 
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Me dical Council of India’ pertaining to 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  
2. The Eighth Report of the Committee on Estimates (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 29 April, 2005. The Gover nment furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on 
28 October, 2013. The draft report was considered a nd approved on 9 December, 2013 by the 
Study Group of the Committee on Estimates, constitu ted to consider the action taken replies 
furnished by the Government. Thereafter, the Report  was adopted by the Committee on the 
same day. 
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on  the recommendations contained in the 
Second Report of Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix III. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
11 December, 2013              
Agrahayana 20, 1935 (Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action  taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on Estimates 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Medical Coun cil of India’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
 
1.2 The Committee’s Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok S abha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 29.04.2005.  It contained 20 Recommendatio ns/Observations.  Updated 
Action Taken Replies in respect of all the Recommen dations/Observations were 
received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on 28.10.2013. 
 
1.3 Replies to the Recommendations/Observations con tained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been ac cepted by the 
Government: 
 Sl. Nos. 1, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 (Tota l 09) 
        (Chapter – II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Commit tee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 Sl. Nos. 2, 6 and12      (Total 03) 
        (Chapter – III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich the Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 18, 19 and 20        (Tota l 08) 
            (Chapter – IV) 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
     Sl. Nos. NIL                           (Total NIL) 
           (Chapter – V) 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that response to comments contained in Chapter-I of 
this Report should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on some of 
their Recommendations.  
 
A. Need for an independent study to review the qual itative and quantitative 
 growth of education  
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
  
1.6 The Committee, in their original report, had inter alia desired that since there is a 
need to review the qualitative and quantitative gro wth of medical education in the 
country, and MCI has limited time and infrastructure to carry out a comprehensive review 
of the medical education scenario in the country, a  study should be got done by the 
Government on the same by engaging an independent professional institution. 
 
1.7 The Government’s action taken reply does not co ntain any specific 
response to the aforesaid recommendation of the Com mittee.  The Committee 
would await an explanation from them as to why this issue has not been dealt with 
in their action taken reply. The Committee reiterat e that an independent study 
should be got done by the Government in a time boun d manner on the qualitative 
and quantitative growth of medical education in the country.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
B. Study Group for ensuring transparency and accoun tability in admission 
 process 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
1.8 While inviting attention of the Medical Council  of India (MCI) to the need of 
ensuring transparency and accountability in the pro cess of admission to various 
colleges, the Committee, in their original report h ad desired that they be apprised of the 
major recommendations of the final report scheduled  to be submitted in March, 2005 by 
the Study Group constituted for the purpose, and th eir consequent follow up action by 
MCI. 
 
1.9 In response, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the action taken reply 
dated 10 October, 2013 has submitted that the recom mendations of the Study Group, 
once finalized and approved by competent authority,  would be forwarded to the Central 
Government for requisite action. 
 
1.10 The Committee are aghast that the Study Group which was expected to 
submit its final Report by March, 2005, is yet to f inalize its report. It is not clear 
why despite a lapse of more than 8 years, the Study  Group could not submit its 
report. The Committee would like to know the compos ition and terms of reference 
of the Study Group and the reasons for inordinate d elay in submission of its 
report. 
 
 C. Need for mandatory accreditation of courses of medical colleges  
 
                                Observation/ Recommendation (Sl.  No. 5)  
 
1.11 As MCI could not complete the process of accre ditation of courses conducted by 
medical colleges even after several decades of its existence and as a committee 
constituted by MCI was still in the process of prep aring modalities for accreditation of 
courses conducted by the medical colleges, the Comm ittee  had in their original report, 
observed that grading and accreditation of courses by medical colleges will go a long 
way in promoting healthy competition among the inst itutions. They, therefore, 

4 
 
recommended for mandatory accreditation in a phased manner to ensure that all medical 
colleges come upto minimum standards of medical education in the country.    
 
1.12 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in t heir action taken reply have 
responded by stating that the present IMC Act does not envisage accreditation of 
medical colleges. Till the amendments in the Act ar e made , the accreditation process 
can not be made mandatory.  
 
1.13. The Government’s reply is silent as to why no  action has been initiated to 
amend the IMC Act to enable accreditation of medica l colleges The Committee 
would await an explanation in this regard and reite rate that necessary steps 
should be taken to ensure accreditation of medical colleges.  
 
D.   Streamlining of working and filling of vacancies in MCI 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 7&8) 
 
1.14 While expressing serious displeasure against g laring instances of misuse of office 
by the President of MCI, the Committee had urged th e Government to take steps for 
streamlining the working of MCI. Besides, the Committee had also stressed that steps be 
taken to fill up vacancies in the Council and holdi ng elections for the offices of President 
and Vice-President of the Council without delay. 
 
1.15 
The Ministry, in its action taken reply, has stated  that the Council has been 
superseded by the Board of Governors and its term i s expiring on 10 November, 2013. 
Also election to the posts of President and Vice Pr esidents is being organized. As 
regards vacancies, it has been stated that the role  of MCI is limited only to intimating the 
Government about vacancies and the function to fill  the same lies under purview of the 
Central Government.  
 
 The Committee have also been apprised that nominee s/intimation of elected 
representatives from 12 constituencies have been re ceived by the Council and intimated 
to the Central Government, which are pending at the ir level for want of issue of 
notification. 

5 
 
1.16 The Committee observe from the action taken re ply that no concrete 
progress has been made in streamlining the function ing of MCI. Superceding the 
Council by the Board of Governors cannot be the per manent solution to the 
problem. The Government should take immediate steps to restore the Council with 
full strength and ensure that it performs its duly assigned role effectively and 
efficiently.  
 
E.  Need for formulating regulations on inspections by MCI  
 
Observation /Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
  
1.17 While observing an ample scope for resorting t o corrupt practices and nepotism in 
the process of inspections  conducted by MCI  prior  to granting permission for new 
medical colleges , renewal of permission,  starting  new courses , etc,  the Committee 
had recommended that the entire procedure for inspe ction should be clearly laid down in 
the form of a regulation and a panel of inspectors known for their integrity should be 
drawn up for  a specified period of time and they be deputed for inspection by rotation. 
 
1.18. In their response, the Ministry have inter al ia submitted that inspection team of 3 
members, consisting of Professors and above rank ex perts, selected from Data Bank 
through randomization process has been drawn up, thus ensuring more transparency. 
  
1.19 The Committee had recommended that entire proc edure for inspection 
should be clearly laid down in the form of regulati on. The reply of the Government 
is silent on this point. The Committee would like t o be provided a copy of the 
procedure laid down in this regard for their information.  
 
                                      
 F.   Setting up of Medical Universities in all the States.  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
  
 1.20 Observing that only for 6 states had so far s et up medical universities as per the 
proposal of MCI that requires setting up of a medic al university by every State, the 

6 
 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry and MCI  should follow up with the 
individual States to ensure that all the States set up medical universities.     
 
1.21 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that presently there are 12 
Universities of Health Sciences functioning in the country and have enclosed the list. 
Besides, MCIs being requested to pursue setting up of Health Universities in the 
remaining States. 
  
1.22  The Committee had expected the MCI proposal t hat every State should set 
up a medical university be followed up with individ ual States. It is observed from 
the information furnished in the reply that only 12  states have so far set up 
medical universities. The Committee expect the Mini stry of Health and Family 
Welfare to take up the matter at the highest level with the remaining State 
Governments and ensure that medical universities are set up in each state.    
  
 
G. Regional Imbalances in number of Medical College s 
 
Observation/recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 
1.23 The Committee, had inter-alia , desired that concrete steps be taken by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, to address the  problem of regional imbalances in 
the number of medical colleges in different parts o f the country. Moreover, they had 
desired that the Ministry should ask each State to formulate a perspective plan on 
medical education and health care, on the basis of which a National Perspective Plan on 
Medical Education could be formulated. Further, the  Committee had urged that steps be 
taken to ensure better avenues for admissions in Po st-Graduate courses for those 
medical graduates who volunteer to work in rural ar eas so that medical services may be 
available to the rural masses. 
 
1.24 The Ministry, in its action taken reply, has 
indicated that various amendments to 
MCI’s Establishment of Medical College Regulations,  1999 have been notified to relax 
the criteria for a period of five years for establi shing medical colleges in the States of 
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odi sha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, 

7 
 
and West Bengal where the number of medical college s is less as compared to the 
Southern and Western parts of the country. 
 
1.25 The Committee are constrained to note that the  action taken reply is 
completely silent on their recommendations regardin g efforts on the part of the 
Government to urge each State to formulate a perspe ctive plan on medical 
education and health care, based on which a Nationa l Perspective Plan could be 
formulated. The action taken reply has also not add ressed the issue of offering 
better opportunities for admission in post-graduate  courses to those graduates 
who volunteer for medical practice in rural areas. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire t o be apprised of the precise 
action taken on the two issues. 
 
H.  Tackling of Malpractices in medical profession 
 
Observation/ Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
  
1.26 Observing a constant increase in the complaint s against the Registered Medical 
Practitioners (RMPs) as well as large number of pen ding litigation cases relating to 
registration, fee structure, admissions, etc., the Committee had suggested that MCI 
needs to be vigilant about the complaints being rec orded against RMPs, check 
malpractices in the medical profession and initiate  stringent action against fraudulent 
ones. The Committee had also recommended that effor ts should be made to minimize 
litigation and also for early settlement of pending cases.  
 
1.27 The Ministry, in their action taken reply, hav e stated that all efforts are being made 
to bring down the litigation in various courts. As on date, 2014 cases were pending in 
Hon’ble Supreme Court and various High Courts of different States where prayer of relief 
was sought against MCI or where MCI was involved as a direct party. 
 
1.28 Nothing has been mentioned in the reply as to what action has been taken 
to check malpractices in the medical profession and  specific steps taken to 
minimize litigations and for early settlement of pe nding cases. The Committee 
would await Governments’ precise response in this regard.   

8 
 
(I) Exorbitant Capitation/ Tuition Fee 
 
Observation/recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 
1.29 The Committee, while expressing their concern over exorbitant capitation/tuition 
fee being charged by some of the privately owned me dical colleges in the country and 
taking note of the Hon’ble Supreme Court direction “that Government/appropriate 
authorities should consider framing appropriate reg ulations, if not already framed, where 
under if it is found that an institution is chargin g capitation fees or profiteering, that 
institution can be appropriately penalized and also  face the prospect of losing its 
recognition/affiliation…”, had desired that regulat ions should be framed authorizing MCI 
to take penal action against institutions which are  flouting the norms under fee structure 
finalized by the Fee Committee in each State. The C ommittee also noted the MCI view 
that the Council should be empowered to take disciplinary action in such matters. 
 
1.30 
The Ministry, in its action taken reply has stated that no provision exists in the 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 authorizing the MC I to take any penal action against 
institutions that flout the norms under fee structu re finalized by the Fee Committee in the 
States. 
 
1.31 From the action taken reply submitted by the M inistry, it appears that 
though charging of capitation fee is an extremely s erious matter, no progress has 
been made in the direction of streamlining the syst em so far. The reply merely 
mentions absence of any provision in MCI Act, 1956 authorizing MCI to take penal 
action in such cases. It is not clear what prevents  the Government to initiate steps 
to suitably amend MCI Act to enable MCI to take pen al action. The Committee 
would expect appropriate action in this regard without any further delay.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The Medical Council of India was constituted in Fe bruary 1934 as a statutory body 
under an Act of Parliament. With the increase in th e number of medical colleges, the Act 
was repealed and a new Act called the Indian Medica l Council Act, 1956 was enacted to 
meet the challenges posed by the very fast developm ent and progress of medical 
education in the country. As envisaged in the Act, the mandate of maintaining uniform 
standards of medical education both for undergradua te and postgraduate courses for 
new colleges and continuance of already recognized courses vests with the Medical 
Council of India. After going into the working of M CI, the Committee are of the view that 
there is sufficient scope for improvement in severa l spheres of its working. These 
aspects have been dealt with by the Committee in detail in the subsequent paragraphs. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
No action required to be taken by the Council. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 9) 
 
  The total sanctioned manpower strength of MCI was  112 out of which 18 posts 
were lying vacant when the Committee called for the information. However, subsequently 
they were informed that 11 of the vacant posts were  filled up through the normal process 
of selection. Seven posts including that of the Add itional Secretary and the Law Officer 
were still lying vacant. The Committee specifically enquired about the vacant post of Law 
Officer against whom a retainer advocate was engage d to look after day to day legal 
matters in MCI. It is surprising to find that despi te advertising and holding interviews for 
the post twice, no candidate was found sunable for the post. The post seems to have 
been kept vacant for extraneous reasons which are i ncomprehensible. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the post should be advertise d and filled up within a period of three 

10 
 
months and the Committee be apprised of the same. T he Committee also desire that the 
20 newly created posts including that of one Deputy  Secretary and Two Assistant 
Secretaries should also be filled up expeditiously. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 The post of Law Officer is now filled up on regula r basis.  
 
 The post of Additional Secretary has been filled b y an in-house candidate Dr. P. 
Prasanna Raj.  
 
 Three posts of Assistant Secretary are now lying v acant due to stay granted by 
Hon’ble CAT, New Delhi on 13.05.2013 in OA No. 4218 /2012 filed by Shri Bhagwan Das 
v/s MCI & others. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 10) 
 
 It is pertinent to note that there is no vigilance  section or post of a Chief Vigilance 
Officer in an organization like MCI that is engaged  in granting of approval to courses in 
medical colleges and monitoring of medical educatio n in the country where there are 
sample opportunities of red tapism, corruption and favoritism.  It is astonishing to note 
that even a Public Grievances Redressal Cell does n ot exist in MCI. A person who has a 
grievance has no proper channel to get it redressed. Moreover, there was no mechanism 
for an ongoing surveillance on the functioning of o fficials of MCI. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a post of Chief Vigilance  Officer should be created in MCI 
who will report directly to the President of the Co uncil and the post be filled up 
expeditiously. A Public Grievances Redressal Cell s hould also be set up in MCI which 
should function under the Chief Vigilance Officer, who should be a person belonging to 
an organized service, like the Indian Police Servic e. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken for implementation of these recommendations.  
 
 
 
 

11 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
A public grievance redressal cell is functioning in the Council. 
 
 A post of CVO has since been created and filled up  by Shri H.K. Jethip, a 
candidate selected and appointed by the Central Gov ernment (DOPT) on the basis of 
recommendation of CVC. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 11) 
 
 The grant-in-aid under the Plan Scheme was `73 lakh in 1999.00 `35 lakh in 
2000.01, `90.58 lakh in 2002.01 and `75 lakh in 2003-04. In the year 2001-02 
Government did not release the grant as unspent amount of previous year was available. 
During the 8 th  Five Year Plan, grant-in-aid was provided by Gover nment only to meet the 
expenditure for Continuing Medical Education Scheme  (CME) and the Council used to 
release grant of ` 50,000/- to the hosting institutions conducting th e CME Programme. 
During the Ninth Plan period, the grant form MCI wa s increased to ` One lakh for CME 
programmes involving foreign faculty and further th e scheme was extended to CME 
progreammes involving Indian faculty for which the financial assistance provided was ` 
50,000/- per programme. This scheme started in 1985 , in intended to utilize the services 
of Indian physicians settled in USA, UK and Canada in continuing medical education and 
patient care in India. The Committee note with sati sfaction that MCI has been made a 
nodal agency for conducting CME programmes with the  objective of updating the 
knowledge and skills of registered medical practiti oners. During the last 3 years i.e. 
2002,2003 and 2004, grant of Rs. 70.15 lakh, ` 66.98 lakh and ` 52.73 lakh  respectively 
were given to various hosting institutions and the member of participants who attended 
the programmes  during these years were 22,957, 24, 662 and 11,189 respectively. The 
Committee feel that with lakhs of doctors registere d with MCI and the present trend of 
participation, it with take 15 to 20 years to cover  all the registered medical practitioners. 
The Committee also regret to note that although sum s amounting to ` 78 lakhs and ` 2:9 
lakhs were allocated to MCI for CME programme durin g 8 th  and 9 th  Five Years Plan 
respectively, the actual utilization was only ` 41.93 lakh and ` 180.65 lakh respectively. 
No reasons for underutilization have been furnished  to the Committee. The Committee,   
therefore, emphasize that specific steps should be taken by MCI for gearing up the 

12 
 
machinery for proper and optimum utilization of fun ds. The CME Scheme should be 
encouraged as the medical practitioners need contin uous updating of knowledge and 
skills since medical service is under constant evol ution with new trends and practices 
emerging every day and many of the doctors due to various reasons are not able to keep 
pace with the latest developments.  
 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 All the eligible proposals received for holding of  CME Programmes during the last 
3 years have been sanctioned by the Council from time to time. 
 
 It may be noted that in the last 3 years, 594 Cont inuing Medical Education 
programmes have been sanctioned. The expenditure in curred on CME during 2012-13 
was 
` 80,31,801/- 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 13) 
 
 MCI had received an allocation of ` 13 lakh for setting up a Library, which has 
remained unutilized. The reason for non-utilisation  of the amount is that the space in the 
old building is not sufficient for setting up the L ibrary. The Library, therefore, is to be set 
up in the new office building of MCI. The Committee  fail to understand as to why an 
allocation for establishing a new Library was sough t from the Government when there 
was no space available for setting it up in the pre sent office building. The Committee 
deprecate such bad planning and lack of vision on t he part of MCI. However, the 
Committee trust that the Library will now be set up  on the ground floor of the new office 
building as assured by MCI. The civil work for the new office building for MCI was 
awarded to M/s L&T Ltd. On January 28, 2000 for com pletion within nine months. On 
account of a number of factors, there was undue del ay and the civil work was completed 
only in August, 2004. Even after seven months of ha nding over of the building by the 
contractor, clearance from various agencies for wat er connection, sewer connection, fire 
fighting, etc. is still awaited. The casual approac h on the part of MCI in getting the office 
project completed is quite evident. The Committee c annot but condemn such apathy on 

13 
 
the part of MCI and desire that the council should obtain the completion Certificate and 
shift its office to the new building without any further delay. 
 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 The clearance from various agencies for water conn ection, sewer connection, 
firefighting etc. have already been obtained in res pect of new building at Dwarka. After 
obtaining necessary clearances from all concerned a gencies, the MCI is now housed in 
the new building at Dwarka w.e.f. March, 2006. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 14) 
 
 As per regulations notified by MCI under the IMC A ct, 1956, it is mandatory for all 
medical colleges/institutions in the country includ ing private organizations to take 
approval of MCI to start new medical colleges/insti tutions and also new medical courses. 
To ensure that all the requirements are fulfilled, MCI carries out inspection of the 
colleges at the time of application and thereafter,  every year till the degree awarded by 
the college is recognized. The Committee wanted to know specifically how much time is 
taken between the application submitted by the coll ege stating that it has satisfactorily 
provided all the minimum standard requirements and the final communication issued by 
MCI granting permission for the course. MCI merely informed the Committee that the 
time gap between the intimation received by the col lege and the intimation sent by MCI 
is kept to a minimum. However, keeping in view the feedbacks the Committee received 
from various sources, they have arrived at the conc lusion that is important that a specific 
time-frame is fixed for various stages of considera tion of applications received by MCI to 
make the process smooth and time-bound. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 The Schedule for receipt of applications for estab lishment of new medical colleges 
and process of the applications by the Central Govt . and the MCI has already been 
prescribed under the Establishment of Medical Colle ge Regulation, 1999. As per this 
Schedule the date of receipt of applications by the  Central Govt. has been prescribed as 

14 
 
1-31 st  August of any year and the receipt of applications  by the MCI from the Central 
Govt. has been prescribed as 30 th  September of any year. The last date for the 
recommendation of MCI to the Central Govt. for issu e of Letter of Permission has been 
prescribed as 15 th  June. The Council has been superseded by the Board  of Governors 
w.e.f. 14.05.2010. All the powers under Section 10A  of the IMC Act, 1956 for grant of 
permission to the medical colleges have been delegated to the BOGs. All the inspections 
to be carried out annually have been carried out, a s per the time schedule laid down in 
the Regulations. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 15) 
 
 The Committee note that on an average, MCI has bee n conduction about 400 
inspections per year for granting permission for ne w medical colleges, renewal of 
permission, starting new courses, etc. As the entir e process of approval depends on the 
report of the inspection team, the inspection turns  out to be of much significance for the 
institution inspected. It goes without saying that in the process there is ample scope for 
resorting corrupt practices and nepotism. It is, th erefore, appropriate that the entire 
procedure for inspection should be clearly laid dow n in the form of a regulation and a 
panel of inspectors know for their integrity should  be drawn up for a specified period of 
time and they be deputed for inspection by rotation. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 The inspections are carried out with a view to ass ess the infrastructure, teaching, 
hospital, clinical material and other facilities as  prescribed under the minimum Standard 
Requirements for 50/100/150/200/250 admissions (as the case may be). The Inspection 
team of three members consist of Professors and abo ve rank experts in their own 
specialization, selected from the Data Bank through  randomization process, thus 
ensuring more transparency in the matter of appoint ment of assessors through 
randomization of names. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter No. 1) 
 

15 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 16) 
 
 The Committee note that MCI has proposed that ever y State should set up a 
Medical University. However, according to the Counc il only 5 or 6 States have so far 
implemented the proposal and set up Medical Univers ities. The Committee expect the 
Ministry and the MCI to follow up the proposal with  individual States that all States may 
initiate action for setting up Medical Universities. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 As per information available, presently there are 12 Universities of Health 
Sciences in function in the country. A list of the Health Universities is Annexed. The MCI 
is being requested to pursue setting up of Health Universities in the remaining States. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter No. 1) 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 17) 
 
 According to MCI, the prescribed teacher-student r atio varies from 1:10 to 1:15 in 
each subject for undergraduate courses and is 1:1 i n postgraduate courses. When 
enquired by the Committee whether MCI has conducted  any evaluation of teaching/non-
teaching faculty in various recognized institutions  in the country and their level of 
expertise in the respective fields, the Council adm itted that no such evaluation has been 
undertaken. However, the Council maintained that st rict adherence is ensured by the 
Council as far as fulfillment of the minimum requir ements prescribed through the 
regulations pertaining to infrastructural facilitie s and teaching and non-teaching 
personnel by the colleges is concerned. The Council  also admitted that there is acute 
shortage of qualified teaching staff in the country . This is also one reason why names of 
the same Professors are found on the pay rolls of m ore than one college at a time. 
Taking a serious note of this, MCI has taken the de cision to remove the names of such 

16 
 
Professors from the IMR maintained by the Council. On the basis of three regional and 
one national workshops organized for experts in the  field of medical education, 
recommendations were drawn up for reduction of teaching faculty in the medical colleges 
to the extent of 10 to 15% in each department. Amen dments to the existing Regulations 
in this regard duly approved by the Executive Commi ttee and the General Body of the 
Council have been submitted to the Government for a pproval. In view of the shortage of 
teaching staff in the medical colleges, a suggestio n emerged that their retirement age 
should be increased. The Committee suggest that Gov ernment should weigh the pros 
and cons of enhancing the retirement age of teachin g staff in the medical colleges and 
take a decision in this regard in consultation with UGC. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 It may be noted that the amendments in the Graduat ed Medical Education 
Regulations, Regulations on Postgraduate Medical Ed ucation, Regulations on Teachers 
Eligibility Qualifications and Minimum Standard Req uirements for 50/100/150/200/250 
Admissions have already been notified. The ratio of  PG courses with reference to 
teacher student ratio has been amended from 1:1 to 1:2 and now 1:3 (selected subjects). 
So far as the enhancement of retirement age of teac hing staff in the medical colleges is 
concerned, the Medical Council of India, with the p rior approval of the Central 
Government, amended “Minimum Qualifications for Tea chers in Medical Institutions 
Regulations, 1998” thereby enhancing age limit for appointment/extension/re-
employment in-service against posts of teachers/dea n/principal/director in medical 
colleges from 65 to 70 years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 2) 
 
 The Medical Council of India (MCI) has both regula tory and advisory roles to play 
for improving the standards of medical education in  the country. As part of its regulatory 
functions, the MCI has issued 14 Statutory Regulati ons for regulating medical education 
in the country, prescribing minimum qualifications for teaching staff in medical colleges, 
procedure for conducting screening test for Indian citizens possessing medical degrees 
awarded by foreign institutions, etc. With the ruli ng of the Supreme Court that the 
Regulations prescribed by the Council under Section 33 of the IMC Act, 1956 are binding 
and mandatory in character, the functions of the Co uncil seem to have become more 
regulatory in nature rather than advisory. Although  according to the IMC Act, MCI is 
expected to render advice to the Government, univer sities, etc. in the matter of securing 
uniform standards for graduate and postgraduate med ical education throughout India, 
the Committee have gathered an impression that the Council has not done much to 
achieve its advisory role. They, therefore, suggest  that MCI should take corrective 
measures and discharge both regulatory and advisory  roles in the sphere of medical 
education in the country. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 The MCI has been and is dispensing its advisory ro le effectively as is 
contemplated u/s. 10A of the IMC Act, 1956. Further , it has also been rendering timely 
advice to all the Universities, Medical Colleges an d Medical Institutions all over the 
country on all such matters which have a bearing on  the standards of medical education 
routinely. The opinion/advice is also rendered to t he Govt. of India, State Govt., 
Universities and Medical Institutions as and when it is sought. 
 
 
 

18 
 
 It is worthwhile to note that the Council’s advice /assistance has also been sought 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court and various High Courts on several vital issues which has 
been promptly rendered and the same has been acknowledged. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 6) 
 
 Although the IMC Act, 1956 has made adequate provi sions for autonomy and at 
the same time accountability of the MCI to Governme nt, there are reports about soured 
relationship between the ministry and the MCI. Despite the denial by the Ministry and the 
MCI, the Committee have gathered an impression that  there is much more than meets 
the eye. An effort seems to have been made to cover  up the strained relationship 
between the Ministry and the MCI before the Committ ee. The candid admission of the 
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (D epartment of Health) before the 
Committee: “We have some perceptions about how to i mprove our interaction with the 
Medical Council. Some amendments are on the way” co nfirms that view. While enjoying 
the autonomy as envisaged in the IMC Act, 1956, the  Council, no doubt, is accountable 
to the Government and to the Parliament. Whatever c omes in the way of a health 
balance between autonomy and accountability needs t o be rectified. The Committee 
would expect the Ministry to apprise them of the st eps taken by Government in this 
direction. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 It may please be noted that as per Section 3 regar ding Constitution and 
composition of the Council, it is the Central Govt.  who shall cause to constitute the 
Council in which under Section 3(1)(e) eight member s are to be nominated by the 
Central Govt. 
 
 Section 4 concerning ‘Mode of election’, the sub-s ection 4(2) reads as under:- 
 
 4(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any electi on to the Council, it shall be 
referred to the Central Government whose decision shall be final. 
 
 

19 
 
 As per Section 10A concerning Permission for estab lishment of new medical 
college or new course of study, ‘No person shall es tablish a medical college or no 
medical college shall open a new or higher course o f study or training or increase its 
admission capacity in any course of study or training except with the previous permission 
of the Central Govt. obtained in accordance with the provisions of this Section’.  
 
 Section 11 concerning Recognition of medical quali fications granted by 
Universities or medical institutions in India, vide Sub clause (2) brings out that –  
 
 11(2) Any University or medical institution in Ind ia which grants a medical 
qualification not included in the First Schedule ma y apply to the Central Govt. to have 
such qualification recognized, and the Central Gove rnment, after consulting the Council, 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, ament  the First Schedule so as to include 
such qualification therein, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be 
made in the last column of the First Schedule again st such medical qualification 
declaring that it shall be a recognized medical qua lification only when granted after a 
specified date. 
 Section 12 deals with recognition of medical quali fication granted by medical 
institutions in countries with which there is a sch eme of reciprocity. Sub-Sections 12(2) & 
(3) thereof read as under:- 
 
 12(2) The Council may enter into negotiations with  the Authority in any country 
outside India which by the law of such country is e ntrusted with the maintenance of a 
register of medical practitioners, for the settling  of a scheme of reciprocity for the 
recognition of medical qualifications, and in pursu ance of any such scheme, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gaz ette, amend the Second Schedule so 
as to include therein the medical qualification whi ch the Council has decided should be 
recognized, and any such notification may also dire ct that an entry shall be made in the 
last column of the Second Schedule against such med ical qualification declaring that is 
shall be a recognized medical qualification only when granted after a specified date. 
 
 12(3) The Central Government, after consultation w ith the Council, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule by direction that an entry 

20 
 
be made therein in respect of any medical qualifica tion declaring that it shall be 
recognized medical qualification only when granted before a specified date. 
 
 Section 19 governs Withdrawal of recognition. Sub- Section 19(2) and Section 
19(4) thereof read as under:- 
 
 19(2) After considering such representation, the C entral Government may sent it 
to the State Government of the State in which the U niversity or medical institution is 
situated and the State Government shall forward it along with such remarks as it may 
choose to make to the University or medical institu tion, with an intimation of the period 
within which the University or medical institution may submit its explanation to the State 
Government. 
 
 19(4) The Central Government, after making such fu rther inquiry, if any, as it may 
think fit may, by notification in the Official Gaze tte, direct that an entry shall be made in 
the appropriate Schedule against the said medical qualification declaring that it shall be a 
recognized medical qualification only when granted before a specified date (or that the 
said medical qualification if granted to students o f a specified date or, as the case may 
be, that the said medical qualification shall be a recognized medical qualification in 
relation to a specified college or institution affi liated to any University only when granted 
after a specified date) 
 
 Section 24 governs Removal of names from the India n medical Register. Sub-
Section 24(2) thereof reads as under:- 
 
 24(2) Where the name of any person has been remove d from a State Medical 
Register (on the ground of professional misconduct or any other ground except that he is 
not possessed of the requisite medical qualificatio n) or where any application made by 
the said person for restoration of his name to the State Medical Register has been 
rejected, he may appeal in the prescribed manner an d subject to such conditions 
including conditions as to the payment of a fee as may be laid down in rules made by the 
Central Government in this behalf, to the Central G overnment, whose decision, which 
shall be given after consulting the Council, shall be binding on the State Government and 
on the authorities concerned with the preparation of the State Medical Register. 

21 
 
 
 Section 30 governs Commissions of Inquiry; Sub-sec tion 30(1) thereof reads as 
under:- 
 
 30(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Central  Government that the Council 
is not complying with any of the provisions of this  Act, the Central Government may refer 
the particulars of the complaint to a Commission of  Inquiry consisting of three persons, 
two of whom shall be appointed by the Central Government, one being a Judge of a High 
court, and one by the Council, and such Commission shall proceed to inquire in a 
summary manner and to report to the Central Governm ent as to the truth of the matters 
charged in the complaint, and in case of any charge  of default or of improper action 
being found by the Commission to have been establis hed, the Commission shall 
recommend the remedies, if any, which are in its opinion necessary. 
 
 Section 32 governs Power to make rules; Sub-sectio n 32(1) thereof reads as 
under:- 
 
 32(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
 
 Section 33 governs Power to make regulations, wher eby the Council may, with 
the previous sanction of the Central Government, make regulations generally to carry out 
the purposes of this Act. 
 
 From the above, it is evident that adequate provis ions exist in the present Act to 
ensure the accountability of the Council towards the Central Government. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 12) 
 
 The Committee note that one of the important funct ions of MCI is the maintenance 
of IMR. Regulation 63 of MCI provides that suppleme nts to the Indian Medical (IMR) 
shall be published every year and the IMR shall be revised and published every five 
years. According to MCI, the IMR has been printed upto the year 2002 and notified in the 
Gazette upto the year 1993 and the reason for the i nordinate delay is stated to be 

22 
 
financial constraint for which MCI has written to t he Government several times for 
additional grant. MCI further stated that ` 500 lakh is immediately required for printing 
and publication of IMR in the Gazette. The Committe e trust IMR for the years 2003 and 
2004 would be printed without any further delay. As  the publication of IMR for the year 
1994 to 2004 in the Gazette has been pending for a long time, the Committee 
recommend that Government should release the grant required for its publication as 
early as possible. They also stress that MCI should  ensure that there is no lapse on its 
part in printing and publication of IMR which being  a Statutory requirement, viz. 
supplements to the IMR to be published every year a nd revision and publication of the 
Register to be undertaken once in five years. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
MCI has discontinued printing of IMR since 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 3) 
 
 There are as many as 229 Medical Colleges in the c ountry of which 125 are in the 
Government Sector and 104 in the Private Sector. Ab out 21,000 graduates and 10,000 
postgraduate pass out every year from these college s. According to MCI, the standards 
of undergraduate and postgraduate medical courses i ncluding the syllabi, curricula, 
system of assessment and examination are periodical ly evaluated by the Council 
through its inspectors who are required to be repor ting on these aspects in required 
details. Although MCI has made loud claims that uni form standards of medical education 
in all the institutions in the country is ensured t hrough an effective system of monitoring 
by regular and periodic inspections, including surp rise inspections from time to time, it is 
not fully convincing to the Committee. The Commit6t ee not to their dismay that there are 
only three sanctioned posts of Inspectors in MCI of  which one posts has been lying 
vacant. Moreover it has emerged that MCI conducts i nspection mostly once in five years 
for renewal of recognition for the degree courses. With the manifold increase in the 
number of medical colleges in the country, there is  a need to review the qualitative and 
quantitative growth of medical education in the cou ntry. However, MCI has limited time 
and infrastructure to carry out a comprehensive review of the medical education scenario 
in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a study should be got done by 
the Government on the status of medical education i n the country both in qualitative and 
quantitative terms by engaging an independent profe ssional institution. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the follow up action t aken by Government in this regard and 
the findings of such a review. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 As on date, there are now 379 medical colleges und er the ambit of Medical 
Council of India out of which 173 are in Govt. sector and 206 in private sector. 
 

24 
 
In the past, several cases have been filed by CBI o n the functioning of the Whole time 
inspectors of MCI. In view of this, the Council has  abolished the system of Whole Time 
Inspections and Zonal Inspectors. In its place, in consultation with the Directors of 
premier institutions like AIIMS, PGI, Chandigarh, J IPMER, SGPCI, AFMC and other 
Government institutions, an alternate system of pro viding Professors and above rank 
experts in their own specialization, were resorted to for the purpose of developing a very 
robust Data bank of Assessors. Accordingly, the Cou ncil now avails the services of 
senior Professors, Deans, Principals of the Govt. r un medical institutions and also the 
Vice Chancellors of the Universities and Directors of Medical Education of various States 
for inspections through randomization of names. 
 
 For each undergraduate institution u/s 10A, the nu mber of inspections to be 
carried out are 6 in a span of 5 years of which fir st is for starting and 4 are for annual 
renewals and the last one for the purpose of recogn ition/approval u/s 11(2) of the Act, 
when the first batch of students appears for the fi nal MBBS exam conducted by the 
affiliating university. 
 
 For the postgraduate degree course u/s 10A of the Act, there are 2 inspections 
required to be carried out by the Council of which one is for starting and the other is for 
recognition at the end of 3 years i.e. when the fir st batch of students appears for the final 
examination conducted by the affiliating university  resulting in conferment of the degree. 
In case of postgraduate diploma the first inspectio n is for starting and the final inspection 
is carried out at the end of 2 years when the first  batch of students appears for the final 
exam conducted by the affiliating university. 
 
 In between, the Council is also required to carry out the inspection for verification 
of compliance furnished by the applicant institutio ns in regard to the deficiencies which 
are pointed out by the Council Inspectors vis-à-vis  fulfillment of the minimum prescribed 
requirements under the governing regulations of the  Council. Failure of the compliance 
by the applicant institution results in non-grant o f the permission for admitting students 
prospectively. 
 
 The inspections for renewal of recognition in case  of undergraduate courses are 
done at the end of 5 years to assess and ascertain whether the institution has 

25 
 
maintained required minimum infrastructure, teachin g and paramedical staff and other 
facilities as per Regulations for continuance of recognition. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter No. 1) 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 4) 
 
 A Study Group was constituted by MCI to go into ad mission process, including 
conduction of entrance examinations, mechanism adop ted for filling up various quotas, 
etc. with a view to ensuring the required transpare ncy and accountability in the entire 
process. The Study Group was expected to submit its  final report by March 2005. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the major re commendations of the Study Group 
and the follow up action taken by the Council on the recommendations. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 On finalization of the recommendation of the Study  Group and approval thereof by 
the competent authorities the same would be sent to  the Central Govt. for its appropriate 
action. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter No. 1) 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 5) 
 
 To a specific query made by the Committee, MCI inf ormed that the Council has 
undertaken the process of accreditation of courses conducted by medical colleges. A 
Committee has been constituted to prepare the modal ities for accreditation and request 
has been sent to all the medical colleges in the co untry to participate in it on voluntary 
basis. It is surprising to note that even after sev eral decades of its existence, MCI had 
not introduced the system of accreditation of cours es by medical colleges with a view to 

26 
 
encouraging higher standards of medical education i n the country. The Council is still in 
the initial stages of working out the modalities of  accreditation. The Committee are of the 
view that grading and accreditation of courses by m edical colleges will go a long way in 
promoting healthy competition among the institution s. They also stress that instead of 
making the accreditation process a voluntary one, i t should be made mandatory in a 
phased manner to ensure that all the medical colleg es in the country come upto 
minimum standards of medical education. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 It may be noted that the present I.M.C. Act does n ot envisage accreditation of 
medical colleges. Till the amendments in the Act ar e made, the accreditation process 
cannot be made mandatory. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter No. 1) 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 7) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that the Vic e-president of MCI has been 
functioning as the Action President of the Council since November, 2002 as per the 
orders of the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court also  appointed an Ad-hoc Committee 
consisting of four eminent doctors to supervise the  functioning of the Council. The 
Committee are surprised to note that the President of the MCI was removed by Delhi 
High Court on corruption charges and MCI went in ap peal to the Supreme Court against 
the orders of Delhi High Court. The Supreme Court o rdered that the Vice-President be 
the Acting President of MCI since then. The Committ ee note that the High Court of Delhi 
had pointed out several irregularities in the style of functioning of the President of MCI, in 
the manner in which inspectors were appointed, deci sions were taken and approvals 
were given to colleges. There were also corruption charges against him. The Committee 
are distressed to note the state of affairs in MCI.  They also note with concern that even 
after such glaring instances of misuse of office by the President of the Council have been 
bought out, no steps have been taken by Government to streamline the working of MCI 
and to put the house in order. While expressing the ir serious displeasure, the Committee 

27 
 
desire that Government should take corrective measu res to ensure that there is more 
transparency in the functioning of the Council and the President of the Council does not 
assume all powers and misuse his position for veste d interest. The Committee are 
constrained to note that although the Delhi High Co urt had directed the Government on 
23 November, 2001 to take necessary action 3 of the  IMC Act and hold selection to the 
Offices of President and Vice-Present of the Counci l, no follow-up action has been taken 
in this regard. They, therefore, stress that steps should be taken for filling up the 
vacancies in the Council and holding election to th e Offices of President and Vice-
President of the Council without any further delay. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 The Council has been superseded by the Board of Go vernors in terms of IMC 
(Amendment) Act, 2010. The present terms of BOGs is  expiring on November 10, 2013, 
vide Government of India (Ministry of Health & Fami ly Welfare)’s Notification No. 
V.11011/1/2013 dated 23.05.2013.  
 
 It may further be noted that the election to the p ost of President and Vice-
President is being organized by the MoHF&W. 
 
 It may also be noted that as per Section 3(1) it i s primarily the function of the 
Central Govt. to constitute the Council comprising of various members from different 
constituencies like nominees of State Governments, elected representatives from the 
universities and medical faculty, Medical Register is maintained, representatives from 
doctors holding the medical qualification included in Part-I of the 3 
rd  Schedule and 
nominees of Central Govt. 
 
 It may further be noted that the Council does not have any role to play after 
intimating about the vacancy likely to arise in the respective constituency. 
 
 It may further be noted that even vide its letter dated 19.10.2005, the Council has 
intimated to the Central Govt. about the 12 constit uencies from where 
nominees/intimation of elected representatives have  been received but which are 
pending at the level of the Central Govt. for want of issue of notification. 
 

28 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter No. 1) 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 8) 
 
 It is distressing to note that out of the total st rength of 118 members in the Medical 
Council, only 71 were in position as on 4 th  November, 2004 and there were as many as 
47 vacancies. The Committee were informed that abou t 28 vacancies on the Council 
were of representatives on different Universities. The Secretary, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare (Department of Health) informed the Committee that in view of the 
difficulties experienced in getting the representat ives of Universities elected by the 
Senate, the provision in the Act are being amended to deal with the situation more 
effectively. It is also proposed to have one combined representative of all the Universities 
in a particular State to be represented on the Council in future. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the action taken and the results achieved in this regard.   
 
Reply by the Government 
 
No action is required by the Council. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter No. 1) 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 18) 
 
 The Committee find that there is much regional imb alance in the number of 
medical colleges set up in the country which has an  impact on the availability of 
registered medical practitioners in different regio ns. There is a high concentration of 
medical colleges in the Western and Southern parts of the country whereas the North 
and Eastern regions are lagging behind. According t o the State Medical Register, there 
were 90,855 doctors in Maharashtra and 65,789 in Ka rnataka, but only 135 in 
Jharkhand, 213 in Chhattisgarh and 1,326 in Haryana . Although Jharkhand, and 

29 
 
Chhattisgarh are newly formed States, the disparity between the States is quite alarming. 
The MCI admitted that its role was limited as far a s starting of new medical colleges is 
concerned as it depends on new applications coming from a State. This being a wider 
issue, the Committee feel that it needs to be addre ssed by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare (Department of Health).Each State sh ould be asked to formulate a 
perspective plan on medical education and health ca re. On the basis of the plans drawn 
up by the States, a National Perspective Plan on Me dical Education should be 
formulated and regions which are lagging behind sho uld be encouraged to come up with 
plans for starting new medical colleges and strengt hening the existing ones. Another 
disturbing trend noticed in certain States like Ori ssa, West Bengal and Assam is that 
freshers have ample opportunities to get admission in postgraduate medical courses, but 
they go abroad in search of better prospects. On th e other hand, those who are already 
working in rural areas do not have the avenues to j oin postgraduate courses. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that steps should b e taken to correct this trend in 
order that medical graduates who volunteer to work in rural areas get sufficient 
opportunities for doing postgraduate courses so tha t services may be available to the 
rural masses. 
Reply by the Government 
 
 Though there is regional imbalance in the number o f medical colleges established 
in the country, the Central Government, in consulta tion with MCI, notified various 
amendments to MCI’s Establishment of Medical Colleg es Regulations, 1999 relaxing the 
criteria for establishment of medical colleges on t wo pieces of land comprising minimum 
of 20 (twenty) acres of land for a period of five y ears in the states of Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar  Pradesh and West Bengal, 
establishment of medical college where the number o f medical colleges is less in 
comparison with the Southern and Western parts of the country. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of Chapter No. 1) 
 
 
 

30 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 19) 
 
 MCI has notified Professional Conduct, Etiquette a nd Ethics Regulations, 2002 in 
the Gazette of India to regulate the practice of me dical practitioners. Under the 
regulations, anyone can register a complaint agains t a delinquent medical practitioner. 
From 2002 to 2004, 1164 cases were lodged with MCI against medical practitioners of 
which 1,099 cases have been disposed off and 65 cas es are pending. The Ethics Sub-
Committee of the Council conducts enquiry into the complaints and the action taken 
against delinquent medical practitioners is notifie d to be State Medical Councils, 
Universities, etc. The Committee take a serious not e of the complaints lodged against 
medical practitioners which rose from 262 in 2002 t o 373 in 2003 and 529 in 2004. MCI 
needs to be vigilant about the complaints being rec orded against registered medical 
practitioners check malpractices in the medical pro fession and initiate stringent action 
against fraudulent ones. The Committee also express  their concern about as many as 
1.548 cases of litigation relating to registration,  fee structure, admission, etc. pending 
against MCI which, of course, were brought down to 749 in January, 2005. The 
Committee urge that efforts should be made to minim ize litigations and also for early 
settlement of pending cases. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 All efforts are being made to bring down the litig ations in various courts. However, 
it may be noted that as on date 2014 cases were pen ding in Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
various High Courts of different Sates where prayer  of relief was sought against MCI or 
where MCI was involved as a direct Party. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.28 of Chapter No. 1) 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 20) 
 
 During evidence of the representatives of Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare 
(Department of Health), the Committee expressed the ir concern about exorbitant 
capitation fee/tuition fee being charged by some of  the privately owned medical colleges 
in the country. The MCI stated that on the basis of  landmark judgment of the Supreme 
Court of India on October 31, 2002 fee structure of  unaided institutions in the country is 
regulated and monitored by the Fee Committee appoin ted by each State Government 
headed by a retired High Court Judge. All the compl aints in this regard are referred to 
the Fee Committee and it is for the State Governmen t to look into the matter. MCI held 
out firmly that under the scheme of things charging  of capitation fee for admission in 
medical colleges is not permitted. However, it is a  matter of common knowledge that 
private medical colleges charge huge funds for admission, especially in the management 
quota. The Committee note that in this regard the S upreme Court had directed that “that 
Government/appropriate authorities should consider framing appropriate regulations, if 
not already framed, where under if it is found that  an institution is charging capitation 
fees or profiteering that institution can be approp riately penalized and also face the 
prospect of losing its recognition/affiliation……” T he MCI has also expressed the view 
that the Council should be empowered to take discip linary action in such matters for 
streamlining the system. The Committee, therefore d esire that regulations should be 
framed authorizing MCI to take penal action against  institutions which are flouting the 
norms under fee structure finalized by the Fee Comm ittee in each State. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 does not have  any such provision to 
authorize MCI to take penal action against institut ions that flout the norms under fee 
structure finalized by the Fee Committee in the States. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.31 of Chapter No. 1) 

32 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
11 December, 2013              
Agrahayana 20,1935 (Saka) 
FRANCISCO SARDINHA,  
  CHAIRMAN,  
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES.  
 
 
 
 

33 
 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STUDY GROUP OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON ESTIMATES (2013-2014)  
 
 
The Study Group of the Committee on Estimates sat o n Monday, the 9
th  
December, 2013 from 1545 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Room No. 52-B, (Chairman’s 
Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
          Shri Subodh Kant Sahai – Convener  
 
Members 
 
2. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
3. Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
4. Shri Prabodh Panda 
5. Smt. Annu Tandon 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
       1.   Smt. Anita B. Panda    - Director   
 
       2.   Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar    - Deputy Secre tary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Convener welcomed the Members  of the Study Group of the 
Committee on Estimates to the first sitting. The St udy Group took up for consideration 
the following Memorandum and draft Chapter-I of Action Taken Reports. 
 (i) Memorandum No. 2 and draft Chapter-I of Action  Taken Report of 
Committee on Estimates (15 
th  Lok Sabha) on the recommendations 
contained in Eighth Report of the Committee on Esti mates (2004-05) on 
‘Medical Council of India’ pertaining to the Minist ry of Health and Family 
Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare) 

34 
 
(ii) *****   *****       *****               ***** 
3. The Study Group approved the categorization of r eplies as shown in the 
Memorandum and also approved the draft Reports without any modification.  
 
 
The Study Group then adjourned . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
APPENDIX II 
MINUTES OF TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES         
(2013-2014)  
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 9 th  December, 2013 from 1600 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Room No. 52-B, (Chairman’s Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
          Shri Francisco Sardinha – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3 Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
4 Dr. Thokchom Meinya 
5 Shri Prabodh Panda 
6 Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey “Vinnu 
” 
7 Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
8 Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
9 Shri Jagada Nand Singh 
10 Smt. Annu Tandon 
11 Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
       1   Smt. Anita B. Panda    -  Director 
       2   Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar    - Deputy Secret ary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the 
Committee. Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
(i) *****   *****       *****               *****  

36 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report on the Recommendations con tained in the Eighth Report of 
the Committee on Estimates (2004-05) on ‘Medical Co uncil of India’ pertaining to 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as approved b y the Study Group of 
Committee on Estimates; 
(iii)  *****   *****       *****               **** * 
3. The Committee adopted the abovementioned Reports  without any modification. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalise the above reports after 
factual verification by the Ministries concerned and present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
APPENDIX III 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 20  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Sl. Nos. 1,9,10,11,13, 14, 15, 16 and 17) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
9 
 
 
 
45% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committe e do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply  
(Sl. Nos. 2, 6 and 12) 
  
Percentage of total recommendations 
3 
 
 
 
15% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
(Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 18, 19 and 20)  
  
Percentage of total recommendations 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
40% 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final 
replies of Government is still awaited. 
 
(Sl. No. Nil) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
0 
 
 
 
 
0% 
 
 
 