MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES,
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA
REJUVENATION

GANGA REJUVENATION

oe ae a + eee

ie MITTEE ONESTIMATES

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA



FIFTEENTH REPORT

COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2016-2017)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND
GANGA REJUVENATION

(GANGA REJUVENATION)

Presented to Lok Sabha on \ ith May, 2016

2

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

May, 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka)


E.C. No, 1500

Price: % 238,00

©2016 By Lok Saaria Seeretaniar

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed
by the General Manager, Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Dethi-110 002,


Cuarren t

Cyarten I

Carrer UL

Initiatives taken in the past and

PIAS eens

Project किक पर
State of Pollution in River Ganga ...

Delay in land
Status of STPs in

100% coverage of sewage infrastructure
Acquisition of land for setting up of STPs

acquisition ...
GAP 1 &1L

current programmes

Pace
)
(vii)

&xi)

Benn ma ५३५७ ५४ जय ७ ७ ९७-+ PHN

— BRRBNRYSBBRBBBRBSSSSSIAS


Charter V

CHArtia VE Maintenance of Environmental Flows in Ganga

(ii)

+  Wentification of GPIs and action taken rerdstesecinstoett
Time bound plan for elimination of industrial pollution
Financial incentives to become 21.0) ७७1५५ .............
Development of technologies for recycling/waste water treatment
Monitoring of industrial potlution .......................... oe
Measures to deal with open defecation along River Ganga
Use of fertilizers—impact of pollution in Ganga ....,.:
Solid waste—impact of pollution in Gunga .......
Impact of initiatives taken on reduction of pollution in Ganga
Impact of pollution level
Shift in the strategy...
Critical assessment of GAP 14 |,
Allocation of fines for Ganga Rejuvenation oF
+ Funds allocated and spent in past

~ Establishment Expenditure

+ Funding pattem ...

+ Projects sanction under NGRBA

~ Physical and Financial performance:

~ External Assistance for NGRBA ...

+ Funds allocation for 'Namami Ganga’ programme

~ Provision of funds on the basis of tender cost ..

Pk १:३७ Bow Hla

~ Definition of Environmental Flows
~ Measurements of E flows.
» Peak and lean flows...
+ Lack of data about lean & peak flows
+ Changes in lean & peak flows in Ganga
~ Discharge in Ganga...

: Monitoring water flow in Ganga

- Inadequate flow diversion of water from Ganga

~ Reasons for inadequate flow
~ Shrinking of Ganga ....

- Dams and HEPPs on river Ganga
+ Status of Migration

- Dams and HEPPs being bu or planned

- Impact of dams on flow of water in Ganga

- Dams and HEPPs on Ganga and Environmental Impact

water
Nirmal Dhara, Aviral Dhara & connected issues
Water quality in River Ganga
Water quality monitoring system for Ganga
Historical agreement on flow of water in

Impact of activities of M/o Shipping on Ganga flow...

aaa BIRRALLAALS SERRE RELEEEbEERE & # & SeYRKR KER ४४ ४ ४४।७।४ ५ ee


(ii)

Pace
= Dams and the movement of fish sss.» ni)
= Community participation and public awareness wn
~ Erosion in Ganga and Afforestation 1
= COO IMATION ...........*०--*+-+ न 2
- Need for comprehensive legislation n
= Presence of arsenic in River Ganga 7
= Ecological battalions...........-.- B
= Adequancy or otherwise of enforcement RB
= Ganga knowledge centre rR ens है. ।

Pant tl
Observations/Recommendations ...... oe my B
Paar ill
ANNEXURES

1. Activities undertaken under GAP | & I ®
Ui, Ongoing projects—NGRBA डर
I. Activities undertaken—NGRB भ्र
1४ STPsCreated, GAP-I, Il, NGRBA, 109४0 bd
Budgetary allocation —Namami Gange क्र
जा. Project STP sanctioned ......... 4
जा STP set up during GAP- 1&1 . 101
Vill, Pollution Abatement measures. - 106
IX. Strategy for Kanpur-Varanasi 107
XXL & 01. Status of drains, 5175, Varanasi, 108, 109, 110
जा. & XIV, ills
xv 18
XVL Operational 120
XVII, Small hydro being/proposal ........ 12
XVI Environment clearance of State Uttarakhand i i2

XIX. HPP-Lipper reaches of Ganga (with photographs showing impact on neighbourhood and
river life) se 13
XX. 137
XXI- 140
XxXiL. 143
ज्णा. M5
XXIV. 1%
XXV. Ww
XXVL “9

APPENDICES.

1. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.05.2015 .... 1
IL Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 13.07.2015 162
TIL Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 13.07.2015 164
IV. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 24.08.2015 166
V. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 19.01.2016 168
VL Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 20,01 2016 170
VIL Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 16.02.2016 m
vu. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 16.02.2016 4
TX. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 06.05.2016 ..... m7



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2015-2016)

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MeMaers

Shri Sultan Ahmed

‘Shri Kirti Azad

Shri Kalyan Banerjee
Shri Anil Shirole

Shri Om Birla

‘Shri Ashok Chavan

Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary

Col, Sonaram Choudhary

11, Shri Ramen Deka

12, Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo
13, Shri Sanjay Dhotre

14, Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar

15, Shri Sudheer Gupta

16. Dr, Sanjay Jaiswal

17. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
18, Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla

19. Shri Vinod Khanna

20. Shri P. Kumar

21, Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal

‘Shri K.H, Muniyappa

Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
Shri K.N. Ramachandran न्
Shri J.C, Divakar Reddy ,
Md. Salim

‘Shri Arvind Sawant

Shri Ganesh Singh

‘Shri Rajesh Verma

Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav

Seenadeun

SRRRRREBH

——— eee anny cued by the death OF Shri Dicey Singh
TEhecied vale Lok Sabha Bulletin Parti No. 2181 dated 31.7.2015. Consequent upon vacancy caused by the death of Shri Dileep
Bhuria, MP on 24 June, 2015,

(vy)


i 9 पके ॥+ १५

5

9.

BRBRSRREBBEBSE

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2016-2017)

Dr, Murli Manohar Joshi —- Chairperson
Meiers

Shri Sultan Ahmed

Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
Shri George Baker

Shri Kalyan Banerjee

Shri Dushyant Chautala

Shri Ashok Sharkarrao Chavan
Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
Col. Sonaram Choudhary
Shei Ramen Deka

Shri Sanjay Dhotre

Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar

Shri Sudheer Gupta

Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntta
Shri P. Kumar

Smt. Poonam Mahajan

Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Shri ६. 11. Muniyappa

Shri Rajesh Pandey

| Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey

Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil
Shri Konakalia Narayan Rao
1४४. Salim

Shei Arvind Ganpat Sawant
‘Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat
Shri Anil Shirole

Additional Secretary

Under Secretary

3. Shri SrinivasuluGunda — Additional Director
— Se Committee Assistant


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the Committee 10 submit the Report on
their behalf, do present this Fifteenth Report on ‘Ganga Rejuvenation’,

2. The Ganga. revered by millions of people, is the lifeline of the populous gangetic plains sustaining 43 per cent of
Indian population, The Ganga, traversing a distance of 2525 kim. from her source in the Himalayas to the sew, bears no
comparison with any river of the world because of its highest point of origin, steep gradient, kinetic energy and widely
acchaimed water quality. However, indiscriminate anthropogenic interventions like construction of HPPs in the seismically
active and fragile Himalayas, diversion of 80 to 90 per cent of water, discharge of extremely hazardous affluents by 144
drains and dumping of solid waste has converted the Ganga into one of the ten most polluted rivers of the world. Alarmed
by the drying-polluted Gangs and taking note of the solemn resolve of the Prime Minister to rejuvenate the Ganga, the
Committee decided to select the subject for in depth examination and report with a view to accelerate the work of Ganga
rejuvenation,

3, The Government of India launched Gangs Action Plan (GAP) in 1985, The main objective of GAP was to improve the
water quality of the Ganga to acceptable standards by preventing the pollution 1080 reaching the river. Since the GAP-I
could not mitigate the pollution loed of the Ganga fully, the Ganga Action गिक्रा (5471-11 was launched in stages between
1993-1996, GAP-IL while contiquing the ongoing programmes of GAP-t. also included the works on tributaries, namely,
Yornuna. Damodar and Gomti. Not satisfied with the outocrne of GAP-I & H and seriously concerned over the burgeoning
pollution levels, the Government set up in 2009, the National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) for conservation of the
Ganga and maintenance of environmental flows through comprehensive river basin approach. All these effors created
additional infrastructure 10 tackle the pollution menace yet the infrastructure so created proved far from adequate to control
pollution and to maintain the e-flows. .

4. Since earlier attempts of cleaning the Ganga did not briny the desired results. the Government of India taunched the
‘imegrated Ganga Conservation Mission’ on May 13.2015 called "Namami Gange’ with a budget outlay of ¥ 20,000 crores for
the next 5 years. This isa significant fourfold increase over the expenditure of last 30 vears. The Mission approaches Ganga
rejuvenation by consolidating the existing ongoing efforts and enhance the size and scope of various interventions based
on expert advice.

5. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development
and Ganga Rejuvenation on 29 May, 2015. 13 July. 2015 and 16 February, 2016, The Commitee also took oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Environment. Forests & Climate Change on 13 July, 2015 and 16 February, 2016; Minksiry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and (Department of Economic Affairs) on 13 July, 2015; Ministry of Power and
Ministry of Shipping on 24 August. 2015 and 16 February. 2016: Central Water Commission. Central Ground Water Board,
Centrat Pollution Controt Board, Ministry of Urban Development on 16 February. 2016. The Committee also sought information
and suggestions from the State Governments and Union Territories through which the river Ganga flows. Besides, the
‘Committee ulse invited suggestions from the domain experts and reputed hydrologists on Ganga rejuvenation.

6, The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 6th May, 2016,

7. The Commitice wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the various Ministries/Departments for
tendering evidence before them and for furnishing requisite material in connection with the examination of the subject. The
‘Committee also place on record their sincere thanks to S/Shri U.K. Chaudhary. Anupam Mishra, Anil Kumar Gupta, Professor
Vinod Tare, Dr. Anin Kumar, Professor A.A, Kazmi, Dr. Sudipta Sarkar, Ms, Mallika Bhanot, Shri Hemant Dhyani and
Shri Govind Pokhriyal, who appeared before the Committee besides furnishing written Memoranda as desired by the
Commitee. The Committee also thank the organization and individuals who submitied their suggestions to the Committee,

“8. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations observations of the Committee have been printed
in Bold in Part-I! of the Report. "The Committee ardently hope that the Government would give their earnest consideration
to the recommendation of the Committee'so that the Gangs és rejuvenated and restored to its pristine form by July, 2018,

New जि कट ‘ DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI.
5 May. 2016 Chairperson,

15 Fiisabhra, 1938 (Sahin Committee an Estinustes,

(iy


888 88786

रहुंहुदुं ३88958885

B
छ

ABBREVIATIONS

‘Alakananda Hydro Power Company Limited
Biological Oxygen Demand

Border Road Organisation

Carrying Capacity and Cumulative Impact Studies
‘Common EMuent Treatment Plant

Central Leather Research Institute

‘Central Project Support Unit

Central Ground Water Board

Chemical Oxygen Demand

(जजों Public Health and Environment Engineering Organization
Central Pollution Control Board

Centre for Science & Environment

Central Water Commission

Central Water and Power Research Station
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
Daily News and Analysis

Detailed Project Report

Dissolved Oxygen

Drinking Water & Sanitation

Drinking Water and Sanitation Department
Executing Agencies

Expert Appraisal Committee

Externally Aided Project

Environment Clearance

Expenditure Finance Committee
Environment Impact Assessment
Environment Management Plan
Environment (Protection) Act

Empowered Steering Committee

Effluent Treatment Plant

Fecal Colifor Count

Ganga Action Plan

Ganga Knowledge Centre

Government of India

Grossly Polluting Industries

Ganga River Basin Management Plan
Ganga Task Force

Hydro Electric Project

Hydro Electric Power Plants

High Level Task Fore

Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna

Himachal Pradesh

Interception and Diversion ,

(xi)


NGRBA

३३६३8 है ६

है१३११॥६ ges

q

,

Individual House Hold Latrine

Indian Institutes of Technology

Intermediate Levet Outlet

Integrated National ‘Waterways Transport Grid
Inland Waterways Authority of India

Inland Water Transport

Japan Internationa! Cooperation Ageney
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
Jaiprakash Power Ventures Limited

Joint Secretary

Kilo Litres per Day

Least Available Depth

Low Cost Sanitation

Million Cubic Meters

Minimum Draw Down Level

Million Litres of Water a Day

Mahamana Malviya Institute of Technology
Ministry of Environment. Forests & Climate Change
Ministry of Urban Development

Ministry of Water Resources. River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation
Madhya Pradesh

Mega Watt

National Environment Appellate Authority

National Environmental Engineering Research Institute
Non-Government Organisation

National Ganga River Basin Authority

National Mission for Clean Ganga

National River Conservation Directorate

" Operation & Management

Open Defecation Free
Potlution, Inventorization, Assessment & Surveillance
Public Private Partnership

Run-of-the-River

River Regulation Zone

State Ganga River Conservation Authorities

Special Leave Petition

‘State Pollution Control Boards

Three Gorges Dam Project

Tehri Hydro Development Corporation India Limited

Tail Race Tunnel .

Urban Development Department

Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns
Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Lid.


BgS55*

be
g

Unarakhand

Urban Local Bodies

Uttar Pradesh

West Bengal

Water Quality Monitoring System for River Ganga
Milgram per Litre

World Wildlife Fund

Zero Liquid Discharge


Hee

PARTI
REPORT
CHAPTER I
Introductory

‘The Bhagirathi originating ftom the Gangotr glacier at "Gaumukh" and the Alaknanda originating from the Satopanth
glacier in the Himalayas confluence at Devprayag in Uttarakhand and form the Ganga. In hydrology, the Alaknanda is
considered the source stream of the Ganga on account of its greater length and discharge but in mythology and popular
belief the Bhagirathi is considered its main source also known as the Bhayirathi Ganga, According to legend, the Ganga
was brought down to earth by Bhagirath, son of King Sagara. after long penance for solvation of his siblings. The earliest
reference to the river occurs in Rig Veda (3.5-8.6) which says that “Your ancient home, your auspicious friendship,
O Heroes, your wealth 8 on the banks of the Jahnayi” (River Ganga), Further, in the Bhagwad Gita, Lord Krishna says "OF
purifiers | am the wind; of the wielders of weapons I am Rama: of fishes I um the shark; and of flowing rivers | am the
Ganges (10.31)", The head waters of the Alaknanda, the Saraswati and the Dhauli, emerge from the Bhagirathi Kharak
(east of the Gangotri glacier) and the Bamak glaciers, At Haridwar, the Ganga descends to the plains after cutting across the
Siwalik ranges,

The Ganga receives many tributaries including the Ramganga, the Gomti, the Ghaghra, the Gandak and the Kosi
from the north and the Yamuna and the Son from the south. The Gomti and the Son are two major tributaries of the Ganga
River which have non-Himalayan sources. The Gomti is a rain fed river with its entire drainage in the Ganga plain. It
originates from the reservoir Madho-Tandain in the Pilibhit district, Umar Pradesh located 50 km. south of the foothills of
the Himalaya. The Yamuna is the largest tributary of the Ganga in terms of drainage area and accounts for nearly 40% of the
Ganga Basin. It originates from the Yamunotri glacier in the Himalaya and descends to the Ganga plain at Dak Pathar, after
merging with a number of tributaries in the Himalaya, The Chambal. the Sind, the Betwa and the Ken are the major
tributaries of the Yamuna, all of which originate in and flow almost entirely through Peninsular India. All these tributaries
join the Yamuna in the gangetic plain before its confluence with the Ganga at Allahabad. The Son is another tributary of
Ganga River with its drainage predominantly in the Peninsular India. A part of its basin prior to its confluence with the
Ganga is in the Ganga Plain. The Son originates from the Amarkantak in the Bundelkhand plateau and merges with the
Ganga River upstream Patna. The Kosi (Sapta Kosi), the Ganditk (Narayani) and the Ghaghra (Karnali) are major rivers of
the Ganga system all of them originating from glaciers and snow-fed lakes of the Nepal Himalaya. The Kosi river system
consists of the Arun, the Sunkosi and the Tamakosi rivers. Flowing through a narrow gorge before entering the plains and
called the Saptakosi and enters into the Indian territory as the Kosi, the Kosi river bas the second largest drainage area
among the tributaries of the Ganga after the Yamuna. It is joined by the tributaries like the Bagmati and the Kamala rivers
before it merges with the Ganga. The Gandaki river system in central Nepal consists of the Kaligandaki, Budhigandaki,
Marsyandi, Trishuli and Seti rivers. The Kaligandaki and the Trishuli are the main tributaries of this system. The Kaligandaki
converges with the Trishuli and is called the Narayani which meets the Ganga Rivers as the Gandak near Hazipur. The
Ghaghra river system originates from the western Nepal. It consists of the Kali, the Karnali, the Seti and the Bheri rivers
and has the highest water discharge among the tributaries of the Ganga system. The Ghaghra merges with the Ganga near
Revilganj.

1.2 The Ganga river traverses [around 2500 kms. through] the States of Unarakhand [450 kms.}, Uttar Pradesh
[1000 kms. }, Bihar (405 km. }, Jharkhand [40 km,} and West Bengal [520 km.] finally draining into the Bay of Bengal through
‘Sundarbans Delta. It passes through some of the most heavily populated regions of the northern plains of India, The major
cities located on the bank are Srinagar, Rishikesh, Haridwar, Roorkee (in Uttarakhand), Bijnor, Kanpur, Allahabad, Varanasi
(in Unar Pradesh), Patna, Bhagalpur (Bihar) and Kolkata (West Bengal). The Ganga river basin in the largest river basin in
India, covering a landmass of 8,61 ,404 sq. km, / ¢ more than a quarter of country's land area; and sustaining about 43% of
India's population. The Ganga, apart from providing water for drinking and irrigation, has great economic, environmental,
cultural and religious significance. The Ganga, along with her many tributaries, has been the source of physical and spiritual
sustenance of Indian civilization for


2

वि The dying and decaying river

1.3 Rivers have a self-cleansing ability, which allows for assimilation and treatment of biological waste. But when
withdrawal from the river for drinking, irrigation, industrial and power generation purposes is high and dangerous bffluents
are discharged into the depleted river, inevitably the quality of warer in the river goes down and gets affected adversely, So
has been the case with Ganga. The Ganga is now no more the life-giving, life-supporting river that as it was. It has
degenerated into a big sewer, one of ten—the dirtiest of all rivers.

Diversion of water and pollution discharge

1.4 According to KS. Valdiya, having been dammed at Tehri in western Uttarakhand. the Ganga descends onto the
plains, only to be robbed of its water by huge diversions through the Upper Ganga Canal at Haridwar, which reduces its
discharge to mere 15 billion m'/yr, and then by the Lower Ganga Canal near Aligarh, ‘That leaves so tittle water in the Ganga
that the dry-season discharge at Kanpur is merely 90 w 386m'/second, at Allahabad 279 to 997 m’/second, and at Varanasi
278 to 1160m"/second. Despite being joined by a number of tributaries, the Ganga is progressively polluted due to heavy
discharges at the rate of 3000 million litres per day from towns and cities, despite of sewage treatment plants varying from
13.5% in small cities to 27.8 to 50.4% in big cities—329 million kilolitres. Nearly 50% of waste waters are discharged
Untreated into this lifeline of the central Indo-Gangetic Plain. Over |.3 billion litres of sewage, 260 million litres of industrial
waste, runoff from 6 million tonnes of fertilizers and 9000 tonnes of | pesticides used in agriculture, and very Large quantities
of solid waste are daily released into the Ganga. ‘Taking into consideration these facts of pollution, the Ganga water can no
longer be described as life-giving and holy, On the contrary, the Ganga has been declared as one of the ten most polluted
rivers of the world by WWF International, Switzerland

1S Asurvey by the Centre for Science & Einvironment (CSE) (2012) identified State-wise problems of the river Ganga
being—Uttarakband: numerous Hydel projects, decreased environmental flows: Uttar Pradesh: Growing cities, polluting
industries, very high pollution levels between Kanpur & Varanasi: Bihar & West Bengal: decreased assismilative capacity
and growing pollution. The issues affecting the river are thus myriad and complex, The river supports livelihoods of millions
in the basin and their drinking water needs.

1.6 The CPCB report (2012) states that in the upper reaches of the river, where oxygenating abilities of the river are the
highest, there are growing signs of contamination, which Suggests that even here, water withdrawal for hydro-electricity is
endangering the health of the Ganga, As the river reaches the plains, the water withdrawal peaks for irrigation and drinking
water. In the stretch of the river—from Rishikesh to Allahabad, during winter and summer months, there is almost no water
and the river becomes almost dead over long stretches until waste water, affluents and sewers fall in the dry basin, The
pollution is being caused by several factors ranging from untreated and inadequately treated/untreated municipal sewage,
flow of untreated industrial waste including chemicals, inappropriate solid waste management, pollution on account of non-
point source like use of chemical pesticides and fertilizers from agricultural fiekis, open area defecation along the river
banks/along nallah-tributaries as also drains, ete,

Earlier attempts to check pollution in the Ganga

1,7 Alerted by the immense damage caused to the purity of the river Ganga due to flow of untreated municipal sewage
and also industrial effluents into the river, the Government of India launched Ganga Action Plan (GAP) in 1985. The main
objective of GAP was to improve the water quality of the Ganga to acceptable standards by preventing the pollution load
reaching the river. Since the GAP-1 did not cover the pollution load of Ganga fully, the Ganga Action Plan (GAP)-1I was
launched in stages between 1993-1996, GAP Il, while continuing the ongoing programmes of GAP-I also included the works
on tributaries, namely. Yamuna, Damodar, 00911. Not satisfied with the outcome of GAP-1 & Il and seriously concemed over
the burgeoning pollution levels, the Government set up in 2009, National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) conservation
of the Ganga and maintenance of environmental flows through comprehensive river basin approach, However. all these
efforts created additional infrastructure to tackle the pollution menace yet the infrastructure was far from adequate to yield
the desired results in view of ever increasing pollution.

1.8 The Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) in their 8th Report on Water Pollution had expressed distress that the
Ganga has become one of the five most polluted rivers in the world, despite launching of the ‘Ganga Action Plan’ and the
"Mission Clean Ganga’ (2009) by the NGRBA. They also noted that despite the far reaching recommendations of the PAC
[2003-04], made in their 62nd Report of 13th Lok Sabha on ‘Ganga Action Plan’, for creation of Sewage Treatment Plants,
Industrial EMvent Treatment Plants, Toilet Complexes, Electric ‘Crematoria, I ement of Bathing Ghats, river front
*Enviroeenental Geokigy 29 Edition 2013. » 492-393

ment those



3

1.9 Since earlier attempts of cleaning the Ganga did not bring the desired results, the Government of India initiated the
‘Integrated Ganga Conservation Mission called 'Namami Gange’ and a sum of Rs. 2.037 crores has been set aside for this
purpose in the budget for the year 2014-15. The Mission approaches Ganga Rejuvenation by consolidating the existing
ongoing efforts and planning for a concrete action plan for future. The interventions at Ghats and River fronts will facilitate
better citizen connect and set the tone for river centric urban planning process.

1.10 During evidence before the Committee on February 16, 2016, Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, apprised
the Committee that Namami Gange has obtained 8 comprehensive Cabinet approval with initial focus on cleaning the River
Ganga. When asked to clarify whether it would be feasible to clean the Ganga and restore its purity, the Secretary, MoWR
admitted;

“You are right, unless there is water in the river, what will be cleaned.”

1.11 Asked again whether ‘purity’ or ‘nirmalta' would take care of the ecological flow which has many dimensions,
once the ecology is destroyed, considering the fact that river has its own ambience and ecological functions. Secretary,
testified,

“Nirmaita alone will not help in sustaining the river to perform its ecological functions. Both have 10 complement

each other, adequate flow and cleantiness. But if the flow comes and we continue to dirty the river then the aquatic

life will not survive and therefore the Government has adopted a comprehensive approach,”

1.12 On being enquired whether the Government had adopted any city specific approach where the people congregate
from fir off places so that the people witness the pollution elimination and purity drive and take back home positive
message, the witness said:-—

"We have detailed project reports for cities like Devprayag, Rishikesh, Haridwar, Garhmukteswar, Vthur, Kanpur,
Allahabad and Banaras.”

1.13 On being suggested to include cities on the bank of the Yamuna as well, the witness agreed to do so and assured
that in a few months there will be visible improvement in the situation.

1.14 To address all these issues, the Committee decided to have comprehensive examination of the Subject,


CHAPTERIL
POLLUTION IN RIVER GANGA—TYPES AND MAGNITUDE

The water of streams had along been acclaimed from the ancierit times for being sustainer of life, There are hymns in
the Atharva Veda in praise of streams. For exampe:

start गत्त्यध्वभि्जामयौ अध्यरीयतांम।
Serie पय:।। (han)
“As mothers always bring happiness to their children, in the same manner, The streams. nourishers of mankind. flow
incessantly, adding milk and honey to their waters all the way.”
अप्स्थन्तरमृतंमप्सु भेषजम्‌।
अपामुत प्रशस्तिभिरश्वा भवथ वाजिनो गायों were वाजिवो: (1.-4.4)

“O learned persons, may you know that there is ambrosia in the waters; there is healing balm in them, and there are
medicinal herebs, know this, and by their proper use become vigorous like horses and kine.”

शिवैन सा चक्षुषा प्श्यताप: शिवया तनवोपस्पृशत त्वचं मे।
OCG: YG या: पावकास्ता न आप: रूँ Pi भवन्तु॥। (1.-33.4)

“O elemental waters. may you behold me with an auspicious vlunce, may you touch my skin with the body, Dripping
luster, glittering here and that are purifying, may those elemental waters be gracious and pleasing to us.”

थे क्रिमय: पर्वतेषु वनेष्वोषधीषु पशुष्तप्स्यन्तः
3 अस्मांक तन्वमाबिविशु: सर्व तद्धान्मि जनिम क्रिमीणाम्‌॥। (॥1.-35,5)

“The worms, that are found in the hilly regions, in the forests. inside the “animals and in waters, and that have
entered’ our bodies, | hereby destroy their entire generation.”

PH आप: प्र भरास्ययक्ष्मा यक्ष्मनालनो: |
गृहानुप प्र सोदाष्यमृतेन सहास्निता।। (11 -12,9)

“I bring here these waters, free from wasteful disease. (consumption}—and destroyers of the wasteful disesase
lenter these houses with the— never-dying fire.”

Its life-giving and healing qualities are evident from the following description in Rajanirghanta (300 AD) "The
dualities of Ganga water are: Coolness, sweetness, transparency, high tonic property, wholesomeness, portability,
ability 48 remove evils, ability to resuscitate from swoon caused by dehydration, digestive property and ability te
retain wisdom".

अस्या FRU pT IA, म्मादुत्तम, स्वशत्थन, SVE, पथतत्वयू, GT,
पापहारित्वम्‌, तृष्णास्टेडप्व॑स्त्वम्‌ tom wmetrere. इकि cafaeior.
‘Scriptures cautioned against misusing the Ganga river, For instance. thineen types of human actions; (1) defecation,
(2) gargling. (3) throwing of used Moral offerings, (4) rubbing of filth, (5) flowing bodies (human or animaf),
(6) frolicking, (7) acceptance of donations, (8) obscenity, (9) considering other shrines to be superior. (10) praising
other shrines, (11) discarding garments, (12) bathing and (13) making noise were prohibited,

22 The river Ganga is revered as incarnation of the goddess herself by millions of devouts within the country and
beyond who believe that a holy dip in its water enables to attain salvation, In the words of Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru ‘
Ganga, above all the rivers of India, has held Indin's-heurt captive and drawn uncounted millions to her banks since the
dawn of history. The story of the Ganges. from her source to sea, from old times to new, is the story of India's civilization
and ९५१०३, of the rise and fall of empires, of great and proud cities of the adventure of man and the quest of the mind which
has so occupied India’s thinkers, of the richness and fulfilment of life as well as its denial and renunciation, of ups and

4


5

downs of growth and decay, of life and death. This is evident from the mass gatherings and social assemblies taking place
on the holy bank of the River Ganga.”

2.3 However, with urbanisation and industrialisation, the water quality of thé Ganga has been significantly affected
by disposal of anthropogenic wastes into the rivers which has caused enormous harm to river biota and the ecosystem.

Fact Sheet on Ganga River Basin

2.4 The basic physical data on Ganga River basin as furnished by the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development
& Ganga Rejuvenation in their Presentation made to the Corimitiee on 13.7.2016 is as given under Table 2.4:—

Table 2.4: Fact Sheet on Ganga
Total length 2525 Kms.
Unarakhand 450Kms.
Uniar Pradesh 1000 Kms,
Sharing length UP— Bihar 110Kms.
Bihar 405 Kms.
Jharkhand 40 Kms,
West Bengal 220Kms.
Catchment Area $.61.404 Kim?
Population in Basin 46% of India’s total
Main Tributaries Ram Ganga, Kali-East,
‘Yarnuna, Gomti, Ghaghare,
Gandak, Kosi & Damodar

2.5 The details on the main stem as furnished by M/o WR, RD & GR are as given under Table 2.5:-—
| Table 2.5: Setthements and Drains on the Main Stem

Details Untarakhand Uttar Bitar Jharkhand West Total
Pradesh

Number of districts oe Fy is |] ॥ rd

Number of Towns is 3 % fe a“ 18

Number of Gram Panchayats 152 Ln] “we 3 Patt 1649

Number of drains 4 st 5 - sa 4

2.6 There are a total number of 11 States in Ganga basin. On main stem 05 States, other States being 06 (HP, Haryana,
छलका, Rajasthan, MP, Chhanisgarh),

‘Types of Pollution
2.7 The details of various kinds of potlutions — Industrial/Chemical, sewage, open defecation, pothution due to

excessive fertilizer use in agriculture, garbage disposal, dumping of carcasses, uncremated dead bodies, leftover materials

of religious functions, etc. (segment wise) effecting adversely the Ganga, as furnished by M/o WR, RD & GR inter alia are
as follows:

"The pollution in the Ganga River is caused by both point sources such as domestic & industrial waste water and
non-point sources such as agricultural runoff, solid waste dumping, open defecation, left over religious material, etc.


The domestic sewage contributes to 70% of the Pollution load while industrial waste water contribute to 20% of the
‘overall pollution load, Remaining 10% of the pollution is due 10 ‘non-point sources as mentioned above."

2.8 The assessment made by CPCB on various sources of pollution in the River Ganga is as given in Table 2.8:-—

Table 2,8: Pollution Assessment by CPCB

a ट छू +5+++-+ A Description
Municipal Sewage As per CPCB, about 2723.3 mld of sewage is disposed in river Ganga from 36 Class 1& 14
Class If towns, against which a treatment capacity of about 1208.8 mld has been created.
Industrial Pollution 301 mld of industrial waste water is being discharged into river Ganga from the 764 Grossly

Potluting Industries (GP) along with main stem of the river.

The main industrial sectors responsible for pollution in Ganga are Sugar, Distillery, Pulp
and Paper, Tannery. etc.

Open Defecation As per 2011 census, 33.64 lac households in the five main States do not have an access to
toilet facilities and out of these 28.91 lac households defecate openty and 4.72 have an
access to Community toilets.

Use of Fertilizers Eleven Ganga Basin States consume 10 million tans of chemical fertilizers per year, which

Constitutes 45% of the total chemical fertilizer consumption of the country leading to
disposal of high levels of nitrogen and phosphorus,

As per estimates, run off from arable lands contains up to 7081 of nitrogen and phosphorus
ranging from 0.05-1.1 mgyl, with potential to raise the nutrient level to a considerable
degree in stream waters,

Solid Waste About 14000 metric tons per day of Municipal Solid Waste has been estimated to be
generated from Class-I and Ctass-{I cities‘towns situated on the main stem of ——_______Steraied from Class} and Class citiestowns situated on the main stem of Ganga.

2.9 Prof. U.K. Chaudhury, a well known hydrologist who appeared before the Committee stated that during the
Kumbh Mela between 4 to 5 crore devotees congregate at Allahabad, they attend their day-to day activities there itself but
River Ganga does not get polluted there. He deposed: —

“The reason behind this is that there is a sand bed of the Ganga system available there which is bearing the total load,
Thave given a three slope methodology here and forwarded five theories to Centrat Water Commission but so far not
received any response. Singapore International Institute have also placed three slopes system — sand bed in North,
South and East of Banaras, this is seven kilometer long and 1 and a half kilometer wide, both sides have gradients
one side is Assai river, second is Varna river which has dug complete North to West side of Banaras. {-—-}. If we
move scientifically, use sand bed we will find out the pollution problem of Ganga, Pollutant should be located,
where, at what location and in how much quantity the pollutants should be fed in the river system, The flow of surface
water, groundwater, their location, their importance and design of sites, we should not think how much quantity we
discharge/release. STPs are set up at various locations, f just mention here that unless and until STP is not attached
to the sand bed, you cannot solve the problem of river pollution. Therefore, you have to have the idea of river
geomorphology,”

Pollution Load on the Ganga

2.10 The Mio Environment, Forests and Climate Change, admitting to the ever growing pollution in river Ganga, in
their background note submitted to the Committee stated as follows:—

“Pollution loads in river Ganga has been increasing over the years due to rapid urbanisation, industrialization and

increase in population. Extraction of water for irrigation, industrial, drinking purposes, etc. leading to inadequate

flows which is compounding the problem, There is a large gap between the quantum of sewage being discharged into

the river and the available treatment capacity. Besides open defecation, cattle-wallowing, garbage disposal, carcass-

dumping further aggravates the problem of pollution.”


7

2.11 The Secretary, Mo E, F & CC appearing before the Committee on 13th July, 2015 on the pollution levels in Ganga
testified as follows; —

"Sir, the level of pollution in the river has gone up. Nobody is disputing that. That is why, the Government is thinking
of taking new measures and looking at what could be done so that individual polluters which means industries or the
public systems which are the sewers or random pollution which take place in the form of leaving the refuge of the
cremation grounds.”

Pollution levels at various stretches of River Ganga

2.12 Stating that the ievet of pollution in Ganga is not the same across the entire stretch, a representative of the
Mio WR. RD & GR testified —

“Basically, this ७ to highlight that if you look at the pollution level in river Ganga the problem really begins Naroda
downstream and the problem continues up to Varanasi. After Varanasi there is addition of flow to the river and,
therefore, you will find that the pollution levels come down."

Pollution in River Ganga — Contribution from its Tributaries

2.13 With regurd to the contribution of tributaries to the sewage and/or industrial pollution in river Ganga and the
initiatives taken to assess the quantum of such pollution being added by the tributaries, the M/o WR, RD & GR, despite
adequate notice period, were unable to furnish the information.

2.14 The Committee sought the action initiated till date regarding cleaning of polluted tributaries of river Ganga, The
reply is awaited from the M/o WR, RD and GR despite granting several extensions.

Pollution Inventorisation, Assessment and Surveillance (PIAS) on Ganga

2.15 One of the projects vis. ‘the Pollution, Inventorization, Assessment & Surveillance on River Ganga (PIAS) is
being executed by Central Pollution Contro! Board (CPCB) under NGRBA. The project is funded by the Ministry of
Environment & Forests and was sanctioned for Rs. 34.77 crore on 29th March, 2011, The objective of the project is to
inventorize the pollution sources, both point and non-point and to assess the pollution load being discharged into the River
Ganga directly or indirectly through tributaries, namely Ramganga and Kali-East.

2.16 The project involves in-depth monitoring of GPI (on yearly basis), Sewage Treatment Plants (STP) (on half
yearly basis}, Common EMuent Treatment Plant (CETP) (on quarterly basis) and Polluted Stretches of ‘the Ganga and its
tributaries Ramganga and Kali-East, besides monitoring of the drains falling into the river and its tributaries,

2.17 Chart 2,17 shows the State of pollution in the Ganga.

5 ans

{oat :


CHAPTERI
INITIATIVES TAKEN IN THE PAST AND CURRENT PROGRAMMES

‘Ganga Action Plan (GAP) —1& II

The Mo WR, RD & GR in their status notes submitted that the Ganga Action Plan-I (GAP-1) was launched in the year
[286 in 25 selected towns located alongside the river in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal (Statce of
Uttarakhand and Jharkhand came into being subsequently). Subsequently, Ganga Action Plan Phase-Il (58 7-11) was launched
in the year 1993, while continuing with the ongoing Programmes, it included works on four tributaries of the river—Yamuna,
Gomati, Damodar and Mahananda. Annexure-I indicates the activities undertaken under GAP-I and GAP-II.

National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA)

3.2 In 2009 the NGRBA was launched as a collaborative Centre-State effort, under the Chairmanship of
Prime Minister, for conservation river Ganga and maintenance of environmental flows through comprehensive river basin
approach, The river was given the status of National River. The key difference from GAP-I & II and this new approach was
the recognition that the entire river basin has to be the basis for planning and implementation. Yet another key difference
was in the recognition that the plan for pollution control Must take into account the need for adequate water in the river—
its ecological flow.

National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG)

3.3 NMCG was created as a registered Society in 2011 as an implementation arm of NGRBA, The five NGRBA
Programme States of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal have notified the State Ganga River
Conservation Authorities (SGRCAs) thereby defining the apex policy and decision making structure at the State level. The
implementation structure of NGRBA consists of —

() Policy making Apex Council headed by the Prime Minister;
(ii) Standing Committee under Finance Minister to regularly oversee implementation;

(iii) Empowered Steering Committee (ESC) to facilitate coordination with the Central and the State Government
departments, and prioritise and sanction projects on a fast track basis;

{iv) A Mission Directorate, te, NMCG with a core team of professionals responsible for implementing the work
Programme of the Authority and to perform its day-to-day operations;

(v) State River Conservation Authorities under the Chief Ministers to coordinate and implement river
conservation activities at the State level; and

(vi) Implementation of projects by the States through State Programme Management Groups (SPMGs) and
urban local bodies.

The NGRBA Program has developed dedicated functional-leve institutions for planning, managing and implementing
the programme at national and state level. The NMCG at national level and 51005 in Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar
Tharkhand (through a dedicated NGRBA Cell) and West Bengal have been established as registered societies for implementing
the programme, as tabulated below: —

‘Table 3.3: Statement Management Groups on Clean Ganga

SL. Organization Dute of Regswatio’ ~———~—~SRemats _"3प-५5/ऋज--+5 of Registration/ Remarks
No. Establishment

1. NMOG 12/08/2011 Registered in South Delhi (596/2011)

2, SPMG Unarakhand — 19/03/2011 Regn. No. 492/2010-11 |

3, SPMG, Uttar Pradesh 07/03/2011 Regn. No. 3326/2010-11

4... SPMG, Bihar 30/03/2012 Regn, No. 3640

5.

57040 Jharkhand 04/11/2011 Established as NGRBA Cell under UD department considering small
stretch of the river Ganga (main stem) passing through the State

6. SPMG West Bengal 17/02/2011 a Ls | rrr 77929/2010-11
eee


9

3.4 The status of ongoing Projects under NGRBA is at Anpexure-H,

Supplementing further, the M/o WR, RD & GR in their background note submitted that the area of operation of NMCG
is the Ganga River Basin, including the States through which Ganga flows, as well as the National Capital Territory of Delhi,
The Mission Director of NMCG isa Joint Secretary (JS) in Government of India, For effective implementation of the projects

under the overall supervision of NMCG, the State Level Program Management Groups (SPMGs) is. also headed by senior
officers of the concerned States.

3,5 Furnishing details of the purpose of the investments and the summary of activities of NGRBA, Mio WR, RD & GR
submitted as under-—

"The infrastructure investments under NGRBA Programme included laying of sewerage system, sewage treatment
plants, solid waste management. and common effluent treatment plant for controlling industrial pollution, river front
management, crematoria, etc.”

3.6 The Ministry also furnished the summary of activities of NGRBA as under: —

“Till date the Apex Committee of NGRBA chaired by Hon'ble Prime Minister has met on three occasions: on 5.10.2009,
1,11,2010 and 17.4.2012. A summary of activities undertaken so farby NGRBA is at Annexure-II] and a summary
of STPs created under various programmes viz. GAP-1, GAP-I, NGRBA, JNNURM & at Annexure-IV, The NGRBA
initiative also resulted of discontinuation of three hydro-electric projects—Loharinag Pala (4x150-600 MW).
Bhaironghati (381 MW) and Pala Maneri (480 MW). located on river Bhagirathi. Subsequently, a fourth hydro-
electric project, namely Kotli-Behl 1-8 on river Alaknanda (320 MW) was discontinued following the orders. of
National Environment Appellate Authority (NEAA),”

3.7 With regard to preparation of Ganga River Basin Management Plan (GRBMP), the Mio WR, RD & GR submitted
that 8 consortium of seven Indian Institutes of Technology (1115) is working On preparing a Ganga River Basin Management
Plan, The objective of GRBMP is the maintenance and restoration of wholesomeness of the Ganga system and improvement
of its ecological health, The Ministry also noted that:-—

“The draft GRBMP under preparation by consortium of IITs has taken into consideration various major issues, like
maintenance of e-fow, tackling point sources of pollution, recycling and reuse, sustainable agriculture in the basin,
floral and faunal diversity in the Rivers, etc. The interim report of GRBMP was given in September, 2013 and so far
36 draft thematic reports on various missions have also been shared by them, which also cover the modelling for
working out the estimates of environmental flow of Uttarakhand, These have also been circulated to various
stakeholders, Final report is expected later this year."

3.8 On the question of maintaining the continuous flow of water in the river (Aviral Dhara), the Ministry submitted:—

"cc it is evident that one of the important factors governing the quality of river water is the quantum of river flow.
Aviral Dhara (Continons flow of water) ts particularly relevant for upper reaches in Uttarakhand, where a number of
hydro-electric projects have been constructed, are under construction and are being envisaged, which has an impact
upon the environmental flow in the river. The e-flows have to be river-specific, based upon its size, climate, season
and many other parameters. The concept of Nirmal Dhara (Clean Water) is significant in middle and lower reaches
where large amount of pollutant from various sources are pumped into the river."

3.9 In response 10 a query of the Committee, the M/o WR, RD & GR submitted that a draft GRBMP report has been
submitted by IT Consortium and is being examined by the Ministry. The Salient recommendations of the said report are as
follows:—

Objectives of GRBMP

"The main objectives are identified as the following: —

* — Maintaining Environmental Flows in all rivers and tributaries of the Ganga River System to fulfil their geological,

ecological, socio-economic and cultural functions;

+ — Water quality in all rivers and tributaries of the Ganga River System shall be consistent with their governing

geological, ecological, socio-economic and Cultural functions, and

+ Water and other aquatic resources of the Ganga River System shall be used judiciously to enable sustainable

development in the entire NRGB."


Mission I—Aviral Dhara
* Both longitudinal connectivity and adequate flows in rivers are essential to maintain Aviral Dhara.
* Adequate river flows depends on the basin’s overall water status
Recommended Actions
* — Determination of NGRB's hydrological status more accurately and in greater detail,

* — Preparation of water resources plan for NGRB’s with emphasis on wetlands, forests and distributed groundwater
and surfiuce Water storages rather than large reservoirs storages.

* — Increase in anthropogenic water use efficiency through: (i) realistic pricing of fresh water: (ii) incentives, technical
assistance. and allocation of water rights and entitlements to consumers: and (11) reuse and recyling of water.

* — Ensuring longitudinal river Connectivity and ¢-Flows at dams, barrages and other man-made interferences, and
adoption of new criteria for approving such Projects.

Mission 2—Nirmal Dhara
To check river pollution in the Ganga River Network, it is necessary to prohibit major pollutant ingresses into rivers
by:—

* Discharge of sewage (either treated or untreated from Class 1 & Class ॥1 towns),

* Discharge of industria! effluents (either treated or untreated frotn any large, medium or cluster of small industries);

* — Disposal of un-burnt und partially burnt corpses and animal car cases in rivers:

° Open defecation and dumping of municipal industria! solid wastes or sludge in any river or its active flood plain;
and

* — Construction of new residential, commercial or industrial structures, in river floodplains.
Recommended Action

Management of Solid and Liquid Wastes Generated from Domestic Commercial Industrial Sources: —

* — Riverfront Development. Floodptain Management and Rejuvenation of Water Bodies:

* Management of Polluted Agricultural Runoff,

Effective co-ordination of these activities is envisaged through a high-level constitutional body tentatively named
the "National River Ganga Basin Management Cominission” (NRGBMC)

Mission }—Ecological Restoration

Factors affecting the habitat of aquatic species of National River Ganga and causing loss of her biodiversity were
identified are as follows:>—

(i) ‘Habitat Fragmentation by dams and ‘barrages,
(ii) Habitat Shrinkage due to.increased water diversions from tivers:

(a) Habitat Alterations by gravel and sand mining from river beds and construction of embankments, levees,
guide walls, etc;

(iv) Habitat Pollution by influx of municipal, industrial and agricuftural wastes:
(२) Habitat Invasion by alien river species;
(vi), Habitat Encroachment by constructions in floodplains and river bed farming:


"W

Recommended Actions
Given the above threat factors, the measures recommended are:
+ Restoration of longitudinal/ateral connectivity and unpolluted river flows
+ Restrictions on river bed farming. sand-mining from river beds.
+ Control of alien species invasions, overfishing and fishing during spawning seasons.
+ River nutrient assessment and release of sediments trapped behind dams.barrages into downstream river reaches,
* Long-term bio-monitoring of the Ganga river network
Mission 4—Sustainable Agriculture

Intensive conventional agricultural practices with abundant use of water, agro-chemicals. soil tillage, and mono-
cropping practices have increased soil erosion and degradation, depleted soil nutrients and soil biodiversity, dwindled the
basin’s waters, and polluted its eco-systems. :

Recommended Actions
+ Adoption of Conservation Agriculture, especially in degrading lands 10 enhance long-term soil fertility and
agriculture! output.
* Promotion of Organic Farming.

+ Economically beneficial improvements in water and nutrient application,
* — Infusing experimentation, adaptability and flexibility in NRGB's agricultural practices to synthesize traditional
knowledge with on going and future scientific discoveries,
Mission S—Geological Safeguarding
The geological vulnerabilities of NRGB include disruptive underground activities such as excavations, explosions,
tunneling, mining, fracking, and over-withdrawal of groundwater from confined and semi-confined aquifers.
Recommended Actions

+ Control/restriction of geologically hazardous activities including deep groundwater withdrawals, underground
excavations, explosions, tunnelling, mining. fracking and operation of large reservoirs.

+ Drainage improvement of low-lying areas and stabilization of disturbed areas,

+ Mapping river migration zones and continuous geological monitoring of NGRBA.

Mission 6—Basin Protection against Disasters

NRGB is prone to catastrophic natural disasters that can significantly harm the basin's ecosystems and such disasters

have been highly accentuated by moder anthropogenic activities. The major natural disasters of real concern for the

basin's ecosystems are few, viz: Extreme Floods. Extreme Droughts, Forest Fires, Tropical Cyclones, Landslides, and

Epidemics and Biological Invasions.

Recommended Actions

+ To withstand catastrophic disasters, ecosystems need strengthening by preserving wetlands, promoting mixed
indigenous forests and vegetation, and curbing land-use disturbances and encroachments by humans.

* NRGB's ecosystems have evolved over time against certain fire and biological regimes: hence the ecology of
Forest Fire and Epidemics & Biological Invasions in NRGB’s ecosystems needs to be studied extensively, Until
then, active interventions to counter sch events should be limited to checking harmful anthropogenic activities,

+ Landslides in the Upper Ganga Basin and other hilly regions are aggravated by deforestation, road and building
constructions and unsafe debris disposal, which need to be strongly checked,

Mission 7—River Hazards Management
Several rivers-related disasters in India bear witness to the fact that human disturbances have increased the intensity
of these disaster and vulnerability of communities towards these issues. Hence, it is necessary to identify hazards related 10
anthropogenic disturbances on rivers and to formulate suitable means to reduce the risk.


12

Recommended Actions
* Basin scale flood-risk maps should be prepared based on scientific data and reasoning,
* — Drainage improvement and land reclamation in low-lying areas should be taken up systematically,
* — Assessment of soil salinity and its mitigation Strategy are important.
° Alternatives to embankments for flood mariagement with emphasis on ‘living with the floods’ concepts must be
emphasized:
* — Research needed on sediment dynamics and its application in river management projects for designing sustainable
river management strategies
Mission 8—Environmental Knowledge—Building and Sensitization
Basin planning and management combine diverse natural resources (water resources, land resources, biological
resources. etc.) and processes (river dynamics. geological phenomena. atmospheric processes, etc.) with traditionat wisdom

and grassroots knowledge. Hence it is necessary to build a comprehensive data bank to enable meaningfiul analyses and
obtain quantitative indicators of NRGB's status.

Recommended Actions

* Establishment of comprehensive Data Bank by continuous collection, Processing and storage of information on
the basin’s natural resources. anthropogenic activities, and environmental monitoring of basin,

* Preparation of secondary results (representative parameters, charts, tables, etc.) based on primary data.
* — Preparation of documents and materials for easy understanding by non-specialized people,
* — Keeping all the above information in the Open domain for easy access by interested individuals and institutions,

* Conducting educational workshops and campaigns with stakeholders aid interested citizens 10 enable their
sensitization and comprehensive understanding of basin processes,

3.10 Responding to a query Whether the Government have accepted all the recommendations contained in the
reports. the details thereof etc, the Mio WR, RD & GR submitted that the report submitted so far are onty draft in nature
hence the recommendations may be incorporated after the final ‘submission is made and the draft reports are under
examination.

Latest Initiatives/Namami Gange

3.11 As indicated elsewhere in the report the Government have formulated an integrated Ganga Conservation Mission
“Namami Gange' with the purpose Of rejuvenating Ganga by consolidating the existing ongoing efforts and planning for a
concrete action plan for future. st

3.12 The Committee were informed that fecognizing the multi-sectoral, multi-dimensional and multi-stakeholder
nature of the Ganga Rejuvenation challenge. the key Ministries comprising of (a) WR, RD & GR, (b) Environment, Forests
& Climate Change, (९) Shipping, (d) Tourism, (०) Urban Development, (f) Drinking Water and Sanitation and Rural
Development have been working together since June, 2014 to arrive at an action plan. To quote,

“The concemed Ministers have nominated a Group of Sectetaries to develop a draft action plan and have held
Periodical meetings to review'the progress and provide guidance. The Group of Secretaries submitted its initial
Feport on 215 July, 2014 and after taking into account the feedback received from the Hon'ble Ministers, the final
report has been submitted on 28th August, 2014."


13

Fegtures of ‘Namami Gange’ Programme

3.14 The Government of India approved the flagship "Namami Gange” Programme on May 13,2015 which integrates
the efforts to clean and protect the Ganga river in a comprehensive manner. The programme has ३ budget outlay of Rs. 20,000
crores for the next $ year. This & a significant four-fold increase over the expenditure in the past 30 years (Government of
India incurred an overall expenditure of approximately Rs. 4000 crores on this task since 1985).

This comprehensive propasal on the integrated Ganga Conservation Mission “Namami Gange' intends to introduce
convergence of various schemes under Govt. of India relevant for Ganga Rejuvenation, enhance the size and scope of
interventions under overall framework and other initiatives arising out of recommendations of GRBMP prepared by the
Consortium of 115, through imensive coordination with other Ministries. The scheme announced in budget speech
2014-15 for development of ghats at identified places will also be undertaken as a part of Namami Gange Programme
along with other river front management activities, The main features of design are:—

(i) Convergence of existing schemes in operation both domestically and externally supported and introduction
of new interventions; rationst augmentation and enhancement of size and scope of conventional interventions;
strengthening public participation through communication, public outreach in an institutionalized manner
to sustain initiatives, interventions on all tributaries and sub-tributaries of Ganga, including Yamuna, in a
phased manner and approach Ganga Rejuvenation ina manner so as to set a model for rejuvenation of other
rivers in India,

(ii) The nature of the programme has been changed from centrally sponsored scheme to central sector
scheme (for “Component 'B': New Initiatives", projects under “Component ‘A’; Existing Programmes’
to continue under their approved mechanism) for achieving better synergy between Central and State
Governments for expediting the work on Ganga Rejuvenation. In addition, programmes will be
strengthened and the measures for the same include [--]:

{a} Constitution ofa High Level Task Force (HLTF) Chaired by Cabinet Secretary (vide order no, 771/4/
2/2014-Cab. 11 dated 6102/2015) for programme monitoring. ensuring, synergy and avoid duplication’
overlapping of efforts.

{b) Appointment of Minister for Water Resources, River Development & Ganga, Rejuvenation as
Vice Chairman of NGRBA enabling fast decision making and necessary Policy and framework course
correction wherever necessary.

(c) Interventions on all tributaries of Ganga including Yamuna.

(d) Immediate focus on pollution abatement through interventions on STP | ETP rehabilitation, /nsitw
treatment of waste water in drains using appropriate innovative technologies.

{e) Active involvement of NMCG in Ganga Rejuvenation programme especially in areas of selection of
Executing Agencies (EA), monitoring, Detailed Project Reports (OPRs) preparation, direct procurement
for fast tracking of projects, ete.

(0)... State’s responsibility include providing land for the projects, O&M expenditure post contract period
and facilitating programme implementation etc. as per MoU.

(g) Amendment in NGRBA Programme Framework, execution mechanism etc. for cutting time on
procedures and expediting the Ganga Rejuvenation,

Design and istroduction of a set of incentives and disincentives by regulators have been introduced to ensure strict
compliance of standards amongst polluting industries, Regulators are also to ensure detailed mapping of polluting industries
on the basis of geographical distribution and type of industries etc.

Focus on pollution abatement interventions

3.15 The Committee were informed that in consideration of immediate priority for pollution control interventions,
also emphasized by EFC, the mission Namami Gange’ will focus on pollution abatement interventions namely Interception,
diversion and treatment of waste water flowing through open drains through bio-remediation/appropriate insitw treatment!
use of innovative technologies‘STPs/EfMluent Treatment Plant (ETPs), rehabilitation and augmentation of existing STPs
and immediate short term measures for arresting pollution at exit points on river front to prevent inflow of sewage etc. in


4

river; CETF for major industrial clusters and Operation and Maintenance (O&M) fora definite period etc. Apart from these,
projects/interventions on rural sanitation, river front development'management, solid waste/pious refuse management,
Sewerage network, national ganga monitoring centre, capacity building, research’pilot studies, non-point pollution mitigation,
GIS mapping/applications, restoration of special Properties of Ganga, sand mining, biodiversity conservation, habitat
improvement, institutional development, river flow improvement, Ganga task force, Ganga Vahini, communication and
public outreach activities and other activities/pitot projects included in NGRBA Programme Framework and the ones
arising from GRBMP aiming at Ganga Rejuvenation will also be undertaken,

Work coordination between Ministries

3.16 Itwas stated that Major infrastructure investments which fall under the original mandate of other ministries, viz
Urban Development (UD), Drinking Water & Sanitation (DWS), Environment, Forests & Climate Change (EF&CC) ete.,
will normally be undertaken under their own budgets and programmes and role of Mio WR. RD & GR would be of
coordination and prioritization. However, in areas of critical importance for Gangs Rejuvenation, certain investments, as
indicated in the proposal, may be undertaken directly by Mio WR, RD & GR and also through these ministries/departments 4

The projects will be prepared as per NGRBA programme framework available st www.nmcg,nic.in) as amended from
time to time and the State Governments will ensure compliance of all environmentab regulatory and other applicable laws,
rules and regulations for achievement of the objectives of Namami Gange Programme The Project will be implemented as
per provision of EFC and also as per decision approved by the Cabinet on this project

Mode of Execution of NGRBA Programme

3.17 The programme will be executed in accordance with NGRBA Programme Framework through (a) States in
conventional mode, /.c in the implementation arrangement (with current and other appropriate implementing agencies)
and /or (b) Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode and/or {c) Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) mode (with up to 100 per cent
capital infusion by Government) and/or (0) Central Pubtic Sector Undertakings ‘Central Government Departments and/or
(९) Academic Institutes/‘Research Institutes! Autonomous Bodies or any other appropriate mode for executing the activities
of this proposal. The engagement of these agencies by NMCG or States will be either as EA or on nomination basis or as
deposit work by these agencies NMCG may also directly procure DPR preparation and works Pertaining 10 pollution
abatement as mentioned above to support the States for Ganga Rejuvenation, In addition to above. NMCO may enter into
rate contract for equipment or works related terms,

Projects to be executed State-wise

3.18 For the purpose of various interventions initiatives, the entire stretch of the river will be divided State Wise into
tnultiple project stretches. Action plans for these stretches will be approved by the ESC, including the mode of execution
Of these projects through State level agencies ० PPP mode or SPV mode or CPSU mode or through any other mode
deemed appropriate

The responsibility of structure and design PPP/SPV process in identified stretches will he assigned through a transparent
and competitive bidding process. Support of professional transaction advisors, to guide the PPP/SPY process, may be

To ensure satisfactory O&M activities and regular maintenance a dedicated SPV may also be created and memo for
EFC/Cabinet note would be prepared Separately, PPP/SPV process will be undertaken on the basis of life cycle cost
inclusive of capital and O&M cost, preferably for 8 period of 15 years, The role of the State Governments/local bodies PPP
vehicle/SPV concemed will be clearly delineated in relevant agreements’ MoUs vis-a-vis land contribution, O&M expenses,
transfer of existing assets and other antecedent expenses for running and upkeep of assets.

Total indicative cost

3.19 The total indicative cost of the proposal for new initiatives and remaining central liability of ongoing schemes,
5 recommended by EFC, is ₹ 20,000 crores (Rupees Twenty Thousand Crores only) to be incisrred till 2020. The allocations
‘within the indicative cost have been revised in line with the recommendations of the EFC towards need for higher allocations
towards pollution control for cleaning of river Ganga being the top most priority, Accordingly, the allocation towards
infrastructure development for pollution abatement has been revised upwards to ₹ 11,050 crore. However, the revised
allocation between components and sub-components and year-wise phasing of expenditure is indicative and further
reallocations/re-phasing can be made by the MoWR, RDE&GR for optimum utilization of funds and achievement of
Programme objectives to be in consonance with pace of implementation and expenditure,


15

Cost भा account of Central liability under Component-A on existing programmes (alreadly approved, now being
converged under Namami Gange)— २ 7,272 crores. These ongoiny programmes will continue to be funded as per their
earlier approved mechanism.

Indicative cost on account of Component-B on new initiatives— हैं 12,728 crores. In accordance with EFC
recommendations, these initiatives will be funded as "Central Sector Scheme" with "100% central funding" and includes
Pre-investment activities like statutory clearances and other preparatory activities. The State Governments shall bear the
responsibility and costs towards procurement of land and making it available for projects. The O&M cost will be built into
the project contract for a defined period and assets shall be transferred to the State Government‘ULB immediately upon
completion of the project, O&M within the contract period may be paid by the Central Government,

This being an ongoing programme, funding of O&M of projects sanctioned earlier especially under WB project
would be continued under this arrangement and sanctioned separately for the period beyond WB funded project.

3.20 Regarding existence of stipulations for timely implementation of various Seginents of "Namami Gange' project
especially in the light of the fact that many sewage projects could not take off even after five to six yenrs of sanctioning of
the project. the M/o WR, RD & GR submitted that sector-wise and year-wise budgetary allocation and timetines have been
fixed as approved by Cabinet for implementation of various segments of Namami Gange’ as may be seen from Annexure-V_

3.21 An expert, Prof. Vinod Tare (of IIT Kanpur), in his evidence before the Committee deposed as under;—

“We have submitted first Ganga Basin Managment Plan to the Government in 2015, It has been stated in the plan
about National Ganga River Basin and its entire geographical conditions. tt has also been stated in the plan about its
current status about which | will tell you in brief. 1 admit that our first work should be as to what the Ganga conservation
is. We will have to work if we want to bring the Ganga in its present condition, Once upon a time when the condition
of all rivers of the world used to be the same, be it Thames, Rhine, Murrary Darling or the small river of Singapore.
Atime of many years has been taken to see to them at least 30-40 years Alotof money has been spent on them, A lot
of efforts has been made and laws have also been enacted. One point is most imperutive that whenever we talk about
clean Ganga, it cannot be without thinking of clean India. Whatever efforts we are to make is that we will have to
make the Ganga clean. If we will do this, the Ganga will be automatically clean. The biggest issue is that what kind
of thinking we have towards this, be it a thinking of an individual, be it a thinking of people collectively, be it a
thinking of factory or an industry. But the major issuc is that how to clean the Ganga and how to manage all this. The
Ganga would not be clean unless there is unabated flow of water therein.”

3.22 About the purity and incessant flow of the river, Prof. Tare said,

“I we don't call river a river, we cannot even think of its cleanliness particularly the river like Ganga, There should
be current und flow of water therein. The most of expenditure and estimate about which we are talking here that fs
about cleansing and purging our filthiness, and if we stop pouring our filth in the river, it will become clean automatically.
Whatever expenditure js being incurred that is beiny incurred to purge the filthiness of ours in the name of India.”


CHAPTERIV
STRATEGY FOR TACKLING VARIOUS TYPES OF POLLUTION
‘Strategies adopted to deal with pollution

With regard to the strategies adopted to deal with pollution under Ganga Action Plan 1 & 1, the M/o WR. RD & GR
stated as follows;—

“The major interventions planned under GAP | & If were Interception & Diversion (1&D) works to divert the sewage

to treatment plants constructed for the purpose. But operation and maintenance of the treatment plants was not

covered under the programme and hence the assets could not be sustained in the long tenn. The major works undertaken

under GAP are as under Table 4.1;—

Table 4.1: Pollution intervention under GAP—1 & 11

Pollution Type ~ Description

Municipal Sewage Under both phases of GAP, a total of 83 STPs have been sanctioned for undertaking pollution
abatement activities in the identified polluted stretches of the river Ganga, of which
69 treatment plants with a capacity to treat 1098 million litres per day (mld)-GAP-1: 869 mid,
GAP-II: 229 mid have been established,

Industrial Pollution 20 mld CETP was created under GAP-11 at a leather cluster in Kolkata,

Open defecation Total of 43 schemes were sanctioned under GAP-1 for providing facilities of Low Cost
Sanitation,

Total of 26 schemes were sanctioned under GAP-Il for Low Cost Sanitation,

Solid waste Under GAP-1, Solid Waste Management Schemes were taken up for Haridwar. Kanpur,
Mirzapur, and Varanasi, Under GAP-II, 2 Solid Waste Management Schemes were sanctioned
for Kanpur.”

St ee

4.2 Furnishing further details of Ganga Action Plan (GAP) Phase-l & 1, the M/o Environment, Forests & Climate

Change (MoEF&CC) in their background note submitted that "the Ganga Action Plan (GAP) Phase-l, the first attempt of
Government to clean the river Ganga was taken up during 1985—2000 as a centrally sponsored project for abatement of
Pollution of the river through implementation of various pollution abatement works in towns along the river, as under—

“(i) Interception and Diversion works to capnure the raw sewage flowing into the river through open drains and
divert them for treatment, (1&0)

(ii), Sewage Treatment Ptants for treating the diverted sewage. (STP)
(tii) Low Cost Sanitation works to prevent open defecation on river banks, (LCS)

(iv) Electric Crematoria and improved Wood Crematoria to conserve the use of wood and help in ensuring
Proper cremation of bodies brought to the burning ghats. (EC&IWC)} z

(v) River Front Development works such as improvement of bathing ghats etc, (RFD)
{vi} Other measures like plantation, public awareness, etc.

Under Ganga Action Plan (GAP) Phase-1, 260 pollution abatement schemes in 25 towns in the States of
Unar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal were undertaken at an expenditure of Rs. 433 crore. GAP Phase-I was
declared completed in March, 2000,

Phase-l! of GAP was taken-up in stages from 1993 onwards and ७ under implementation. Under GAP Phase-Il, 314
pollution abatement schemes in 59 towns in the States of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar (including two projects

16


7 ‘

now falling with the State of Jharkhand) and West Bengal were undertaken, Projects amounting to Rs. 591 crore were
sanctioned, out of which Rs. 522 crore has been released to the implementing agencies till July, 2014."

4.3 Under these two phases of GAP, a total sewage treatment capacity of 109! million litres per day (mid) has been
created as per details given under Table 4.3:—

‘Table 4.3: State-wise Sewage Treatment Capacities Created

Sl.No, States

STP capucity
created Million
Litres per Day
«(MLD)*
i. Utiarakhand 7367
2. Untar Pradesh 410.72
x Bihar : 122,00
4 Sharkland 0
5 West Bengal 491.61
Toral a आय जिया जिदकाा उमा आ न. नमन नि नल नमक...

4.4 The Secretary, MoEF & CC apprising the Committee of the increase in pollution fead in Ganga on 13.07.2015
stated inter alia as follows:

“Out of the total measurable point sources of pollution. around 75 per cent is on account of untreated munictpa!
sewage and the remaining 25 per cent is on account of industrial effluents.”

4.5 In written reply to a query as to what per cent of above mentioned measurable sources of untreated

municipal sewage could be plugged (by establishing STPs, etc.) in Ganga Action Plan (GAP) | & 11, the Mio WR,
RD and GR submitted that:

“As per CPCB, 36 Class | towns and 14 Class 1 Towns located along Gangs generates 2723.3 Million Litres of
sewage per day. The capacity created under GAP-I & GAP-1 can treat 1098.31 Million Litres of sewage per day
which is approximately 40% of the estimated sewage generation.”

Sewage Generation—GAPS in Treatment Capacity
4.6 The data on estimated sewage generation, available treatment capacity and the gap in treatment capacity
in Ganga main stem was furnished by MoEF&CC in a Presentation made to the Committee on 13.07.15 as
follows;— (Table 4.6)
Table 4.6: Sewage Generated, Treatment Capacity and GAPS

See
State Estimated Available ‘Under Tonal GAP(MLD)

sewage Capacity Construction capacity
Generation (MLD) (Approval
(MLD) (MLD)
1 2 3 4 $ + 6
Col.(3+4) Col.(2>
Gr)
Uttarakhand 252 2 x wz 130
Umar Pradesh 34 1363 ball pa) 1330
Bihar 6 Bs 320 338 S68
Jharkhand 652 0 ए 12 6
West Bengal 1957 35 a 638 1319.
Total 122 21 1188 BM 3987 ©


18
4.7 The Comminee sought the dewits of the action plan prepared by the Government to fill the zap in sewage
treatment capacity in ganga main stem. However the reply is awaited from the Ministry despite several reminders.

4.8 According to estimation by consortium of IITs. toral sewage generation in Gangs basin States is 12051 MLD;
corresponding gap in treatment is 6334 MLD.

Status of STPs

4,9 The status of National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD) funded 51 STPs among the 63 STPs located in
the main stem of Ganga in the 5 States (Table 4,9), being monitored by CPCB as fumished by them in the background note
On the subject given at Table 4.9:—

Table 4.9: Status of NRCD funded STPs

 “अइआाछ -<-उ “फरार ज फरछाल ised Nos of SP Unlized No, of STPs STPs

of Capacity Capacity STPs Not Exceeding Exceeding

STPs (MLD) (MLD) In BOD* cop”

Operation Limits Limits
i iienits
‘Uttar Pradesh 8 358 287 1 4 0
Uttarakhand 4 M4 . 0 1 1

West Bengal 34 457 2M 13 3 0
Bihar 5 158 100 1 1 0

Total 5। 1009 ७02 15 9 1

“Boologaal (05८७ Demand Chemical 4055 gen Demand

‘The above table indicates 15 STPs were found non functional during monitoring and 9 were not meeting the BOD
norins. The utilization capacity of these STPs is close to 60% Comparing the Table 4.39 A and table 4.404, it is evident
that a large volume (more than 6000MLD) of domestic sewaye is being carried through these drains having undesirable
characteristics and eventually meeting river Ganga directly responsible for river water quality, In the circumstances, it is
understood that the conventional treatment is certainly required to be in place in working form however, before such
situation arise non-conventional treatment like “In-situ bioremediation technology” be attempted in the drains.

4.10 The Committee requested the M’o WR._RD & GR to furnish the data and status of DPRs prepared and submitted
for upgradation of Sewage treatment plant and the total No. of treatment plants in the country that need to be upgraded.
However, despite reminders. the data could not be provided by the Ministry.

4.11 Mo WR, RD and GR ina presentation made 10 the Committee on 29h May, 2015, on the status of NORBA
submitted that '80 projects sanctioned in 50 towns for 1७431 expenditure of Rs. 1027 crore with total sewage treatment
capacity of 638 Million litres Per day (MLD) were to be created and sewer network of 33 15 Kms tobe Inid. 25 projects had
been completed that created 123 MLD treatment capacities and laid 600 kms'. The details such as the year of sanctioning.
the year of completion and operational nature of these Projects, approved projects, names of the towns where these projects
were to be built (project wise) tentative year of completion as furnished by Mo WR.RD&GR may be seen at Annexure-VIL

4.12 The Committee requested ull the States through which river Ganga flows to furnish detailed status paper regarding
cleantiness of the river Ganga in each of the districts through which the river flows, the problems being faced by the local
bodies in cleaning and checking pollution in the Ganga, status of Sewage Treatment Plants, the measures being taken to
address the problems and views’suggestions of the State government for rejuvenating the Ganga. While the states of Uttar
Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand have furnished information the state Governments of Uttarakhand and West Bengal were yet
to furnish the same.

4.13 The State Government of U.P. furnished the following status of STPs in Umar Pradesh:—

“In Uttar Pradesh, $$ towns, along the river ganga and its tributaries have been identified. Domestic sewage generation
in year 2025 is estimated to be 4360.99 MLD in these towns, In these towns STPs have been constructed under
different programmes such as GAP, JNNURM, UIDSSMT, State Sector, and NGRBA. Some of these STPs have


19

been constructed by different authorities, The present sewage treatment capacity of 2289,07 MLD is available and
948.55 mid STP works are under execution. After execution of these projects. total sewage treatment capacity will be
3237.62 MLD in Utar Pradesh.”

‘Study visit to Kanpur

4.14 During the study visit of the Committee at Kanpur, the local administrative authorities informed that under
Ganga Action Plan Phase 1, STP and CETP were established to treat 162 MLD domestic sewage and 9 mid tannery
waste water at Jajmau, The plants constructed during 1989, 1994 and 1999 and the treated effluent of these plants is
being used for agricultural purpose through irrigation channel being maintained by Kanpur Nagar Nigam. Out of
20 drains flowing into river Ganga, 17 drains were tapped by U.P. Jal Nigam and 3 drains were tapped by Kanpur
Development Authority. The works like renovation of existing sewer & pumping stations, relieving sewer, intermediate
sewer pumping stations and tapping of Halva Khanda and Ganda Nala, etc. were executed under Ganga Action Plan
Phase 11. ॥ was further stated that the State Government has also completed and commissioned trunk sewer line along
COD. drain and the work of intercepting and diverting the flow of COD drain to STP. The works of laying of trunk
sewers and sewer networks, construction of four number Sewage Treatment Plants with 310 MLD and renovation of
old and construction of new sewage pumping stations are going on for the City,

4.15 The State Government of Jharkhand in their Memorandum submined 10 the Committee on ‘Ganga Rejuvenation’
stated that in the "Namami Gange’ Programme Urban Development Department (LIDD) of Sharkhand is implementing body
for urban waste management, River Ganga has urban and rural stretch of $3 Kms in Jharkhand. It passes through Sahibgunj
district covering two towns ie Sahibgunj and Rajmahal, The urban and rural population of Sahibgunj is 159666 and
990901 respectively. Currently, both these towns do not have any STPs, Under Namami Gange program, UDD is
implementing sewage projects at Sahibgunj and Rajmahal and furnished the details of the two projects under implementation
as under-—

"Municipal waste water, Sahibgun}; Government has approved the project for Rs. 99.36 crore. The award of project
is in the final stage. This will create 3 capacity of 12 MLD STP capacity and 55 km long sewage network,

Municipal waste water Rajmahal: A DPR amounting to Rs. 51.09 crore bas been prepared with sewerage and STP
provision which will create a capacity of 3 MLD STP capacity and 33Km long sewerage network. DPR is under
serutiny for final approval by NMCG."
Detay in land acquisition
4.16 Inwritten reply to ७ query as to why only 25 out of 80 projects and 600 kms. out of 3315Kms. network of sewer
lines were built, the Méo WR, RD&GR stated that— ‘

“The delay in the construction of STPs is mainly due to delay in land Acquisition and dispute over land, Laying of
sewer network in densely populated towns is delayed, mainly duc to narrow streets and issues in road cutting.
Despite such constrains, 25 out of 80 projects and 600 kms. out of 3315 Kms, network of sewer lines were built.”

+ 4.17 Inreply १0 a question of the Committee whether the sewage network coverage is 100% in all the 50 towns, the M/
o WR, RD & GR submitted that:—

“In some of the towns such as Varanasi, Allahabad, etc. 100% coverage of sewerage network will be achieved as the
project progresses. The same will be extended to other towns in due course. However, in Phase 1 of the "Namarni
Gange’ Programme, the focus is to create treatment infrastructure for the existing sewage outflows into the river.”

Status of STPs set up during GAP-1& 1
4.18 The status of STPS set up during GAP I & ॥ as furnished by M/o WR, RD & GR may be seen at Annexure-VIL.
100% coverage of Sewage Infrastructure till 2020

4.19 The M/o WR, RD & GR in their presentation made to the Committee submitted that all 118 towns on the main
stern of Ganga river will be completely tendered for sewage treatment facilities by June. 2016 and will be completed by
June, 2019. Further, the Ministry have also stated that DPRs will be prepared for all the 118 priority towns by
December, 2015. Pollution Abatement measures—Timetines for preparation of DPRs received from states may be seen at
Annexure-Vill,


20

Acquisition of !and for setting up of STPs

4.20 In written response to a cencern as to whether the acquisition of land for setting up of STPs is an issue and if so,
how the ministry propose to address the sare, the Méo WR, RD & GR stated as follows: —

"In some STP projects land acquisition is becoming an issue. As per existing NGRBA framework, cost of land
acquisition is to be borne by State Governments States have been, requested to identify and acquire suitable land
without any legal issues in all approved projects for faster implementation of the projects.”

STPs with long term view

421 In reply 10 a question whether the population growth of the areas and the consequent increase in sewage generation
for the coming $0-60 years is taken into consideration while setting up 5175, the Mo WR, RD & GR stated that:-—

"The population growth of the areas and the consequent increase in sewage generation for the coming 30 years is
taken itito consideration while setting up of STPs as per the guidelines of Central Public Health and Environment
Engineering Organisation (CPHEEQ),”

Delay in setting up of STPs

4.22 The STPs it Badrinath and Karanprayag and Rudraprayag though sanctioned in 2008/2009. construction of the
same could not be commenced and not even a single rupee was spent even after a lapse of about six and half years due to
adverse weather conditions, natural disasters, dispute over lands. ete, The M/o WR, RD & GR further informed that:-—

“Considering the previous natural disaster im 2013 and lack of avaiability of suitable land in Badrinath, Karanprayay
and Rudrapruyag, instead of centralized STPs, decentralized’modular STPs are being planned in these towns. The
revised project proposals for this purpose are already under Preparation by State Government, for consideration
under Namami Gange Programme.”

4.23 With regard to the cost escalation, if any, due to delay in commencement of the above mentioned Projects. the
Mio WR, RD & GR stated that the variation in the cost will be assessed only after receiving the revised ‘new proposal from
State Government.

4.24 Asked about the time frame given for completion of the projects, the M/o WR. RD & GR stated that all the
projects under "Namami Gange Programme’ are targeted for completion by 2020,
Delay in Sewage Interception and Diversion (1&D) Projects

4.25 The projects for Interception and Diversion (1&D) of the sewage at Badrinath, Deoprayag. Karanprayag,
Rudraprayag, Joshimath, were sanctioned in 2008/2009/2010 respectively. However, the physical progress of these projects
range from 1 3-40% only even after completion of 7 years due to delay in obtaining permission from Border Road Organization
(81२0), natural calamities, delay in tand acquisition, ete, ॥ is now proposed to be completed 2016-17. About cost escalation
in these projects and the likely time taken for completion of the same, M/o. WR. RD & GR submitted as under-—

“Project of Badrinath, Rudraprayag and Karanprayag are being reframed. However, projects of Devprayay and
Joshimath are proposed to be completed in 2016-17

Revised proposals for the Badrinath, Karanpriyag, and Rudraprayag are likely to be submitted soon by the State. For
Devprayag one project under Restoration and Reconstruction due to disaster in 2013 has been sanctioned. Revised
target for completion of this project ts July 2016.”

Delay in JICA assisted Sewer projects

4.26 Japan International Cooperation Agency (JCA) assisted Ganga Action Plan Phase-II project at Varanasi.though
sanctioned on 14.07.2010, could not be completed even after about five years (the physical progress of the project is 22%
only as at end March, 2015). Similarly the project—Sewage System & STP Works (Phase-II) at Kannuaj, though was
sanctioned on 24.02.2011, has seen physical Progress of 22% only even after four years. As no reasons were given for the
tardy progress of the project, the Ministry were requested to furnish the details of the project including the reasons for
delay. The Mo, WR, RD& GR accordingly, furnished the following: —

“JICA assisted GAP-II project original date of completion-3 1/07/2015. For sewerage system & STP works at Kannauj
original date of Completion-3 1/08/2012. Additional cost if any will be borne by Government of Littar Pradesh. The
revised date of completion of JICA assisted project is 31.07.2018 and for Kannauj sewage project it is 31.03.2016."


21

Delay in World Bank Funded Sewer Projects

4.27 A project for Sewer network, SPS and STP, funded by World Bank, at Begusarai was sanctioned as Externally Aided
Project (EAP) on 08.03.2010. However, even after 5 years the physical progress of project is 30% as at the end of March, 2015,
Despite tardy progress so far, the project is proposed to be completed during 2015-16. Responding to the request to provide
the details of the project including the reasons for the delay and the cost escalation, if any and the acceptance or otherwise of
the lender (World Bank) to fund the cost escalation, etc,, the M/o WR, RD & GR submitted thar—

“(i The main reason for delay in the Begusarai project is the delay in acquisition of suitable land by the State
Government duc to various reasons like court cases and introduction of new land acquisition bill and thereby change
of compensation eligibility of tand owners. (ii) Additional cost if any will be borne by Government of Bihar.”

Strategy for most critical stretch

4.28 The strategy for most criti¢al stretch (Kanpur-Varanasi) (at Annexure-IX), the status of drains and STPs at
Varanasi, Allahabad and Kanpur under ‘Namami Gange' as furnished by the M/o WR, RD& GR to the Committee at their
sitting held on 13.07.2015 is placed at Annexures-X, XI & XIL

STPs—Performance eyaluation/Assessment by third party-agencies

4.29 Responding to 4 question whether any third party/independent assessment of the operations of these sewage
freatment plants were carried out, the M/o WR, RD & GR stated that 'CPCB' has carried out the performance evaluation of
sewage treatment plants under catchment of Ganga river. STPs installed under catchment of Ganga river are 64 whereas
MoEF has sanctioned 51 STPs. Total installed capacity of 51 5175 is 1009 MLD and actual utilization is 602 MLD which
#5 59%, 9 STPs are violating BOD limit and 1 STP exceed the COD limit for discharge. 14 5195 are found non-operational,
State-wise performance evaluation of STPs are as follows:—

@ "Uttarakhand
+ Installed capacity of 4 STPs is S4MLD.
+ [STPexceeds the BOD and COD limits.

(ii) Uttar Pradesh
+ Installed capacxity of है STPs is 358 MLD out of which 287 MLD is utilized.
+ 4STPsexceed the BOD limit i
+ STP was found non-operational.
(ii) Bihar
+ — Installed capacity of 5 is 140 MLD whereas actual utilization is 100 MLD,
+ | STP was found non-operational,
+ [STP exceeds the BOD limits.
« All STP mcetthe COD limits.
(iv) West Bengal
+ Instelled capacity of 34 STPs is 457 MLD whereas actual utilization is only 214 MLD which is 49%.
+ 3STPs exceeded the BOD limit whereas COD limit of all STPs is under the prescribed limit,
+ 13 STPs found non-operational.

Under Narnami Gange programme all the non-functional and under-utilized STPs will be renovated and upgraded as
per the requirement."
Impact of usage of water discharged from STPs on crops
4.30 The Committee were informed that in some areas along the river Ganga STP discharged water is being used for
irrigation purposes. The M/o WR, RD & GR were requested to provide the details of those areas, the study. if any, conducted

by ICAR to assess the impact of usage of such water on the soil and crops, etc. However, the Ministry is yet to respond to
the committee's query despite several reminders.


»

Namami Gange Sewage Infrastrocture

431 The details of Sewage Infrastructure proposed to be created under "Namamt Gange’ as furnished by the
Mio WR, RD& GR to the Committee at their sitting held on 29.05.2015 is as follows -

"- Interception, Diversion & Treatment of waste water flowing through the open drains—appropriate in-situ
treatment/use of innovative technologies,

— Rehabilitation & augmentation of existing 5195.
— Creation of Sewage Treatment Plants-t000 MLDs.
-- CETP for major industrial clusters and Operation and maintenance (C&M) for a definite Period. ete.”

432 On the specific initiatives taken up for creating sewerage infrastructure under Namami Gange, the Mo WR.
RD & GR submitted to the Committee as follows —

“= Projects 09 going in $0 towns (Rs. 3900 crore)

~ Last Mile Projects (100 town coverage of Sewage treament taken up/ongoing) : Allahabad, Varanasi. Haridwar.
Garhmukteswar, Paina, Sahibganj, Bhatpara, Kalyani, Gayespur, Halishar,

- Kanpar-Strategy being finalized

— Notice issued to all Municipalities (11 8ULBs\/687 Grossty Polluting Industries Follow up launched on aetion
Plans,

— Projects formulated fortackling Ghat and River surface pollution Aerators trash shimmers, solid waste collection,

Project sponsoring facility launched with Ministry of Overseas Lndian Affairs CSR funding to incubate innovation
and expedite projects,

— Bidders Conference held with domestic’ international sewage treatment industry —- 268 participants.
— Conferences scheduled with District Magistrates of districts along Ganga main stem in June.~
Problems being faced by Implementing Agencies

4.33 The Stagte Government of Uttar Pradesh has nominated UP Jal Nigam, (U.P (50७. Undertaking) as Implementing
Agency for pollution control works on behalf of Urbun Local bodies (ULBs). The U.P. Government concluded that —

“Financial condition of ULBs as well as Knowledge of Latest treatment technologies ete., is also not available with
personnel, Strengthening of ULBs and training of personnel is required. ULBs do not have sufficient funds for
operation & maintenance of assets created for pollution control works. Implementing Ageticy (LP. Jal Nivam) ७
also facing acute financial stress due to non payment of admissible departmental cemage to Jal Nigam for works
already undertaken,”

4.34 The State Government of U.P. expressed their difficulty; —

"to produce the actual expenditure of brochures for project preparation of DPR. As these organizations are also
engaged for other Jot of works regarding planning. ०९... of the central as well as State Govt

It was therefore stated that:

“So it is advisable to reimburse the DPR preparation fee and supervision charges to them (Govt. Organisations) on
producing the bill for the same amount, as sanctioned in the DPRs."

4.35 Measures taken to solve the above problems by Government of Unar Pradesh are as follows —

“Under Ganga Action Plan Phase-fl ‘Yamuna Component 16 55741 # project for strengthening of 8 Local bodies.
‘costing Rs, 12.21 crore was undertaken and strengthening of Local bodies of है cities achieved, Institutional development
component of World Bank aided NGRBA project for pollution control & conservation of river ganga contains
(i) build functional capacity of NGRBA’s operational institutions at both central and state levels; and (ii) provide


3B

Support to associated institutions for implementing the NGRBA programme. These activities financed under this
component are grouped under the following sub components:—

(2) NGRBA operationalization and Programme management
(0) Technical assistance for ULB
(९) Technical Assistance for Environmental regulators”

4.36 The Government of UP, in their communication stressed that it is necessary to take the works of all rivers
(tributaries of Ganga) of Ganga river basin 16. Yamuna, Gomti, Ramganga cto,, without taking of these rivers, we can't
achieve our goal to clean Ganga.

4.37 Measures for enhancing Sewage Treatment capacity. The Government of U.P. further submitted that the Sewage
Treatment capacity of 335.90 MLD és being generated by constructing 14 nos Sewage treatment plants. Now Under
Namami Gange only 1&D drains & construction of STPs are to be taken up. The following 23 projects costing t 4089.84 crore
for Interception & Diversion of drains and construction of STPs and 13 Projects of non sewerage works (Low cost
sanitation, Cremaoria, River front development, etc.) have been submitted 10 NMCG, Gol for approval, Amount २ 235.16
crore (५०९ Table 4.37), Since last six months no projects has been sanctioned yet—

Table 4.37: Sewage Treatment Projects Propased in U.P.

A. T&D STP (Sewerage Works)
————— सन +-++--न--------न--न-नन-ननननननननननन-न-नन++--ननन---नन---न--नननननन-+-+++-न मन +++++++++++---+-न-+----ना-नननमनन बन.

SLNo. Potential Project Town Total
1 2 3 4
eC
' 1&0 works & STP of Jhunsi Area Allahabad सजा
२... 1&0 works & STP of Fafamau Area न Allahabad 184,88
3 1&D works & STP of Distt, G of Naini Area Allahabad 29745
4, Sewer Network in Sewerage Dist. E of Allahabad 6202
Allahabad Part-2 (Additional sewer network)
5... Renovation and up-gradation of Mathura Mathura 185.21
STP:SPS & appurtenant works (O&M 5 yrs.)
6... Renovation and up-gradation of Vrindavan Vrindavan 35.08
STP’SPS & appurtenant works (O&M 5 yrs.)
7... Estimates for Lip-gradation of 130 MLD & $ MLD Kanpur e 245.91
STP at Jajmau, Kanpur
8, Sewerage Treatment Plant Assi-Bhu Sewerage Varanasi 156.62
District, Varanasi (O&M $ Yrs.)
%. Prevention of Pollution of River Kali by 1&D of Bulandshahr 313.10
drains of Bulandshahr with STP and other
appurtenant works,
10, Prevention of Pollution of River Kali by L&D of Meerut 748.07
drains of Meerut with STP and other appurtenant
works.
Hh. Pollution Abatement of River Gomti, Lucknow Lucknow 456,66
{O&M 1 Yr)
12. L&D of drains of Anupshahr Anupshabr nD
13. L&D of Sisammau drain of Kanpur (G&M 10 Yrs.) Kanpur 8245
14... L&D and STP works of Ram Nagar ‘Varanasi 95.13
1S. DPR for L&D & Treatment works of Chunar १1 ‘Varanasi 536

_—— ee _॒ ंाई..........................2.....3ैै3#3


हट

16 Rehabilitation & Upgradation of Existing STP of Varanasi M.A
Mirzapur
17, — Sewerage works in Jajmau area Sewerage Kanpur a9
Distnct-t
18 Upgradation of Deenapur STP & Bhagwanpur Varanasi 131.89
STP(S Yrs) है
19... PFR for Upgradation of Saharanpur STP Saharanpur 57.55
2 1&0 & STP works of Hastinapur Hastinapar 89.15
21, 160 of Drains and STP Works of Unnao Unnao 10243
22... 25 MLD Primary Treatment unit for Tannery Kanpur 29955
waste water at CETP Jajmau
33, —_ Estimate for 5 years O&M of Sewerage und Ne Allahabad Haas
Sewerage and Non Sewerage Scheme of
Allahabad.
Sub Total 4089.84
B Non-Sewerage Works
1. Const. of improved wood based crematoria Allahabad $20
under Allahabad Nagar Nigam
2. Construction of Bithoor River Front Kanpur Li
Development Project
3. Construction of 75 No, Community/Public Kanpur 13.61
Toilets and Dhobi Ghat under KNN
4 Const, of 22 No, Comm.’Public Toilets and 5 No. Bulandshabar 1.58
Dhobi Ghat under NPP Bulandshahar
$. Const. of 11 No. Community Toilets under Nagar Hapur 218
Palika Parishad
6. Construction of 20 No. Community/Public Mirzapur 5.60
Toilets and 10 No. Dhobi Ghat under Nagar
Patika Parishad
7. Const. of 05 No. Sulabh Toilets under Nagar Unaao 110
Palika Parishad
है... Const. of 20 No. Comm./Public Toilets and Kashganj 897
01 No. Dhobi Ghat under Nagar Palika Parishad
9... RED Works upstream of Kanpur Barrage Kanpur 50.00
10... शण्फए for Ghat development (Arail Ghat) PFR Allahabad 42,75
11... Capacity building project for Nagar Nigam, Kanpur 16.50
Kanpur
12, Capacity building project for Nagar Nigam, Allahabad 6.12
Allahabad
13, RFD Works for Dalmau town District-Rachareily Racbareily 80.41
‘Sub Total 235.16

Total

4325.00



25

Sewage Treatment Plants of U.P. not approved
4,38 The Government of U.P. submitted that: —

“After execution of these schemes Sewage treatment capacity of 464,50 MLD will be zenerated by constructing 10
nos. Sewage Treatment Plants and upgradation of existing STPs having treatment capacity of 236.09 MLD will be
achieved. However, the projects submitted have not been approved by Gol till date. Gol is planning for these projects
implementation through PPP mode which seems to be a remote possibility in State of Uttar Pradesh.”

4.39 The Government of U.P. submitted to the Committee that:—

“Abatement of pollution in river Ganga can only be properly achieved after implementation of comprehensive sewage
achemes 1९ including sewage network in all main towns, Simultaneously, provision for upgradation of existing
treatment units is essential as parameters for discharge of treated effluent have been upgraded by Gol but under
‘Namami Gange’ plan projects including only | 1&D of drains and STPs are being taken up which is not a proper
solution for sbatement of pollution in Ganga,”

Manpower Requirements

4.40 Responding to the serious concern expressed by the Committee about the lack of technical and semi-skilled
trained manpower and equipment to monitor the levels of pollution and water quality, the Secretary, MoEF&CC ipptaring
before the Committee on 13.07.2015 submited as follows:

“It Tam allowed to submit, you hit the nail on the head. Right now the Ministry of Environment has requested the

Department of Expenditure to carry out a study of the available manpower within the Ministry, whether it is adequate

to handle the enlarging respensibility. Ay far as the Central Pollution Board is concemed. there has been a situation

where there are a number of vacancies of the posts which are already sanctioned. So, right now we have advertised
and we are in the process of conducting interviews of technical and scientific manpower Unfortunately, dhe response
which We get is not very enthusiastic’ for whatever reasons.

4.41 The Committee also asked the Ministry whether they intend to make the positions vacant to make more attractive
३७ as to ensure the recruitment of right talent, the Ministry was yet to reply.

4.42 Asked whether the Ministries concerned with implementation of ‘Namami Gange" project have adequate trained:
experienced manpower and if so, the details thercof and if not, the steps taken’ proposed to be taken to address the shonage
of the trained manpower. the Ministry submitted as follows: —

“Nanonal Mission for Clean Ganga hired 17 trained/experienced professionals under various sectors such as

Economics. Finance, Environment, Engineering. Solid Waste Management, Geographical Information System (GES).

Information Technology (IT) etc. to support implementation of ‘Namami Gange’ project, Apart from these protessionals,

scientists and directors from other related line Departments of Ministry of Water Resources. River Development &

Ganga Rejuvenation such as Central Water Commission (CWC), Central Groundwater Board (CGWB) are deputed at

NMCG to support project implementation.”

है Magnitude of Flow of Industrial Pollutants into Ganga

4.43 Asa part of Pollution Inventorisation, Assessment & Surveillance (PIAS) on river Ganga, CPCB has inventorised
764 GPI is defined as industry which is discharging waste water more than 100 KLD and/or hazardous chemicals used by the
industry as apecified in the Schedule |, part {! of The Manufacture. Storage and Import of hazardous chemical Rules of 1989
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

4.44 The State-wise status of GP! afong with their water consumption and waste water generation furnished by CPCB
is given in Table: 4.44(A) and the sector-wise status is given in Table 4 ,44(8 ):--

Table 4.44(A): State-wise status of GPI, water consumption and waste water generation

State CPt ‘Water consumption Waste Water Generation

(MLD) (MLD)
Uttarakhand a2 m™ 7
Uttar Pradesh eT ७3 Pi
Bihar B wn 7
Jharkhand 0 00 oo
West Bengal 2 16 डा

TOTAL Tot 123 Bl



26
Table 4.44(8): Status of sector specific industrial water consumption and waste water generation

Type of Industry क्र ncn We Wier

$$ Generation att)
Chemical ec] 2109 8
Distillery 3 788 370
Food. Dairy & Beverage 2 112 65
Pulp & Paper 6 3063 »4
Sugar a 3048 960
‘Textile. Bleaching & Dyeing 6 141 Wa
‘Tannery पर 44 87 m1
Others 4 168.3 286
नि आआएएएएछएछ:- ः SO

eee
4.43 Monitoring by CPCB of waste water discharged into the Ganga: CPCB in their Background note further informed
in this tggard as follows:

“About 632 vut of 764 601 (7 in UK, 390 in UP. 13 in Bihar and 22 in WB) are discharging 200 MLD of waste water
directly into river Ganga through drains. River Kali-east is also carrying 71 MLD) of industrial waste water from 53
GPL The River Ramganga which is confluencing with into River Ginga at Kanoauj. UP and carries 106 MLD of
Waste water from Uttar Pradesh making a total of about 230 MLD from 79 GPI (44 in TIP and 35 in UK),

CPCB has monitored 144 drains carrying 661-4 MLD of waste water (domestic and industrial) into River Ganga from
50 Class-l and Class-I] towny and from 690 GPI. Only 4 drains ae falling into river Ramyanga and 9 into river Kali-east
and carrying 833MLD of waste waster, Details of drains are given inthe Table 4 4A) & 4.45181॥:--

Table 4.45 (५): Drains Discharging Waste Water into River Ganga

a: a हिदिदि
State . No.of Drains Flow(MLD) BOD Load
fone Dy)
O_o Day)
Utarakhand u 442 a8
Uttar Pradesh 4) उहाउ क्ह0ा
Bihar के १2 8 950
West Bengal x 17789 95.53
tal gee 42584
a न <-०......0त...... पक

‘Table 4.45 (8); Drains Discharging Waste Water through Tributaries
जा Nameof Tributary ....... छत्रत्बकक व DOL (MLD) BOD Load
eee ttorine stay)
:
1, Ramganga 4 2583 B

4.46 The CPCB further observed from the above Table that focus needs to be wiven on tributaries for improvement in
water quality in terms of industrial waste water discharge and drains on the main stem involving the local authorities for


27
improvement in domesiic waste water quality, Further. the large no, of tanneries (440) are operating in the main stream and
discharging about 22 MLD of waste water directly into river ‘Ganga:-—

“Although the efftuent trom tannery is a major concem since toxic. chemical like Chromium (Cr6+) is being discharged
in the effluents. The Chromium (Cr6*) has been associated with birth defects und carcinogenic and becoming a cause
of concem. Although quantity of effluent is less but number of industries are more making the issues more complicated.”

4.47 The data on the contribution of key sectors to the industrial pollution in Ganga as contained in the presentation
made to the Committee on 13.07.2016 by the MoEF & CC 48.45 given in Table 4.47;—

Table 4.47; Industrial Pollution Discharged into the Ganga

SL. Sectors No.of Effluent Average BoD* Organic
No, units generation Discharged Pollution Load
1, Pulp & Paper हा 2 380 ऋजाब
2 Distillery 38 x” 600 22210
3. Sugar 6 % 13 12484
4 Textiles a ty * a
5 Tanneries a2 2 २0 6.404
Total om xT _ 118068

out of total

ee

*Hito-Chemical Ouygen Demund
Identification of GPls and action taken
4.48 Mio WR, RD & GR fumished the following details on the identification of polluting industries along the River
Ganga and the action taken against such industrial units for releasing industrial pollutants in River Ganga:—

+ “Under NGRBA programme, 764 GPIs have been identified and the Central Pollution Control Board has completed
006 round of inspections of 704 industries and has issued suitable directions, Actions have been taken against 165
non-complying industries under the Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986. Closure notices have been issued to 48 (57215.

The CPCB has issued direction to all the 11 basin State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) on Sth February, 2014 to
censure that the (1715 shall install real-time efflucnt monitoring system for effective compliance through self-regulatory
mechanism before discharging effluents outside their premises.” |

449 As a part of Pollution Inventorisation. Assessment & Surveillance on River Ganga (PIAS), the CPCB has
inventorised 764 GPIs operating in the main stream of river Ganga. On the action taken against such GPIs, a representative
of the M/o WR. RD and GR appearing before the Committee on 29.05.2015 stated as undet:—

“First time we have issued 9 notice to 764 grossly polluting industries. ‘have given them a notice saying that within
15 days they have to give their action plan; roadmap of how they will move from polluting today to a zero liquid
discharge tomorrow.”

‘Time bound plan for climination of industrial pollution

4.50 Apprising the Committee of the existence of time bound action plan and the targets for pollution abatement, the
Tepresemative of MoEF&CC deposed on 13.07.2015 as under, about the main components of Action Plan:—

(i) Zero Liquid Discharge (21.10) in three sectors: textiles, tanneries and distilleries;
(fi) Increasing water use efficiency & recycling and Irrigation Standard Discharge to be achieved in two sectors:
Sugar and Pulp & Paper;
(iii) Online realtime 24x7 monitoring of effluent/emission from polluting industries; and
(iv) Realtime monitoring of water quality at 113 locations on main stem,


28

34.51 The representative alse presemed the following (Table 4.51) Action Plany—
हु ‘Tuble 4.51: Action शिक्षा for Pollution Abatement

S.No, Sectors 11000 Overall Target

1 Pulp& Paper(67} March, 2017 Irrigation Standard efMuent and no discharge into tributaries and
drains

3. Sugar (671 December. 2016 irrigation Standard eMuent and no discharge into tributaries and
drains

3, Distilleries (35) September, 2016 Zero Liquid discharge (21.10)

4, Textiles (63) December 2016 Zero Liquid discharge (21.0)

5. Tanneries (442) 2 years from DPR Zeeo Liquid discharge (21.10)

prepared (July. 2015)
Total 674 764 These sectors cover 367 MLD out of 501 MLD (73%)

4.52 With regard to the expected outcomes through the CPCB Directions, the representative of MoEF&CC. submitted
the following information: —

9

“Immediate
9) No black liquor discharge from Pulp & paper sector
(8) No discharge of spent wash from distilleries
(ii) Improved Water Quality especially in terms of colour in drains. tributaries and river
tiv) Enhanced water flow in drains and tributaries duc to recycling in industry and reusing in irrigation
Improvement in land environment
Compliance through transparent mechanism
Long term
(i) Significant reduction in pollution toad discharge into water and land environment

(i) Conservation of surface and groundwater with optimal design of water cycle in three sectorial purposes wiz.,
Industrial. irrigation and-domestic

(ii) Recharge of groundwater and effective exchange of influx and out flux between groundwater and surface
water
(iv) Use of innovative technology in overall improved environment
(९) Restriction of malpractices to frustrate the aw”

4.53 With regard to the roadmap indicating the time schedule (Table 4.53) 10 eliminate pollution from Grossly
Polluting Industries (GPIs} the Mo WR. RD & GR stated that CPCB has issued sector-wise time bound directions to
eliminate the pollution from GPIs as follows: —

Table 4.53: Time Schedule for Elimination of GPis
ee

(v
(vt

SLNo. Setup Deadline
1 Real time monitoring meters 30th June. 2015
2 Distilleries 21.0 March, 2016
3 Pulp & Paper ZLD March, 2017
4 Tannery ZLD March, 2017
ऊँ Textile 2.0 March 2017
6 Sugar-nio ZLD. instead, reduction in waste from 100 tons to 40 tons December, 2015

per ton of cane crushed

ee


29

Financial incentives to become Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) units

4.34 Inreply 10 a query whether the Ministry has carried out any assessment of the capacity/financial wherewithal of
these industrial units to invest required amounts to become zero discharge companies and if so, the detaits thereof and if
not, how the Government propose to ensure that these GPls become zero discharge units, M/o WR, RD & GR stated that
etailed consultations were taken up with Industries by CPCB at regular intervals from October 2014 to March 2015 for
assessment of the capacity’financial wherewithal of these industrial units to invest required amounts to become zero
discharge companies, Based on the consultations, the industries that lacked finance and capacity for achieving zero
discharge are provided with appropriate technical and financial assistance to achieve the zero discharge, the details of
which are given below: —

“Distilleries and sugar mills being large and medium industries in 3 financially viable position and have already

started putting up ZLD units,

Smal scale industries like tanneries, for them implementation will be a constraint however financial support will be

provided to setup CETP in clusters by MoEFACC. For 6 Textile clusters are also being supported by NMCG for

setting up CETPs for 21.0."

4.55 The M’o WR. RD and GR in response to a question whether there is any proposal to extend financial incentives-
tax and/or non-tax incentives, soft loans, financial assistance, लए... to enable these industries to adopt ciean technologies!
treat the effluents generated by them stated ‘that offering suitable incentives such as interest subvention, viability gap
funding for CETPs ete, are under consideration.”

4.56 Asked about the clean technologies made available to GPIs to reduce, eliminate of to treat the effluents, M/o WR,
RD & GR submitted that the following initiatives have been taken up for making clean technologies available to GPIs to
reduce, eliminate or to treat the effluents:

@ “Tanneries: Cleaner technology being suggested by (1.1९ Chennai to reduce pollution at source.
@ Suyar Mills & Distilleries’ Operating on continuous batch process best available technology.
@ Paper Mills; Already a charter to reduce water intake and waste water production is under implementation ina
phased manner as per directions issued by CPCB.
Development of technologies for recycting/waste water treatment x
4.57 The Mlo WR, RD & GR were requested to fumish the initiatives taken to develop technologies for recycling

waste water and the details such as cost effectiveness, impact of such technologies. However, the Committee are yet to
receive the reply from the Ministry,

4.58 With regard to the proposals for setting up of CETPs catering to the requirements of the polluting industries in
these areas to ensure financial viability of these industries, the M’o WR. RD & GR submitted that the following proposals
have been initiated to set up CETPs:-—

“Tanneries: DPR for CETP at Jajmau cluster received from CLRI and it is under examination by NMCG_
Textiles: Institutes identified by NMCG to prepare DPRs for 6 textile Clusters for ZLD based CETPs.”

4.59 During evidence held on 16 February, 2016, the Committee asked the representatives of the Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation regarding the status of Memorandum received by the Committee
during the study visit to Kanpur on setting up of common effluent treatment plant and what is the experience of tanneries
in Calcutta alongwith the pollution norms for industrial department. The Secretary informed the Committee that-—

“Almost four hundred units are operating in the Kanpur Jajmau area today. Out of them some are illegal also. In this

connection a detail study was conducted, First study was conducted by Central Leather Institute. The same study is being

got conducted again by Tamil Nadu Water Corporation as the Common Effluent Treatment Plant of zero liquid discharge is
in Tamil Nadu and its four units are operating in Tamil Nadu. This common effluent plant is meant for tanneries,”

“The presentation is to be made on [8th in my presence regarding this detailed study report. The preliminary report
in this connection was at first sent to the Chief Secretary U.P. One paint is coming up from the report as to what size
of & common effluent treatment plant should be. Today whatever effluent is being discharged by every tannery that is
almost 25-30 million per day. It is all happening when 100 kilo litre water is being used out of per kilo hide whereas
there is @ norm of Central Pollution Control Board that it should not be about 25, if we admit it as 40, it should be
15 million litre per day. We are preparing a detailed project report on common effluent treatment plant and there is a


उ0

mention of 20 million litre per day therein, if wnits quantity consent is Kept in mind, it should be hundred litre per kilo
as whatever hide is being used, it should be about 11 million {itre according to the bide, We have talked of making it
double, The entire cost will be borne by Government of India and Government of Uttar Pradesh collectively, But we
also want that tanners should also be the equity holders therein,”

“At Present norms of Industrial Department, Government of India we have, there is 40 per cent of Government of
> India, 40 per ceint of State Government and there is 20 per cent of tanners. We don't want as much from them but we
want that same Contribution of theirs must be there so that their involvement could be made therein.”

"This particular plant will treat the water and they will be able to use it in their tanning process, We demand from
them that we will invest the same but you will have 10 purchase the water, If you purchase this water. you will have
to shoulder the liabilities. Whatever liabilities we have fixed, we have fixed on finished products not thut on hide. It
costs nine rupees per pair of shoes. Horse saddle costs rupees 15 and a belt costs 90 paise. Here only these three
things are being manufactured. ॥ is not 2 heavy kind of liability. Government of India is bearing 80-90 per cent cost
thereof. IF it purchases the water, it will continue to complete the O&M cost thereof otherwise OAM cost would not
be available.”

4,60 Chairman, CPCB further added that: —

१५८८ we had 4 meeting last week with the tannery industry as well as with the technical organizations like ९1.३1 and
others. They were willing to look at this option, They have developed @ mixture which will allow them to use lesser
water. They were claiming about 20 per cent to 30 per cent lesser water, which can be used,"”

461 While clarifying the query of the Committee as to whether the residual salt will remain in the river Ganga, what
happens to that, the Secretary, Water Resources stated as under;—

“A lot of salt is mixed with the hide to keep it preserved. If we shake off hide an first. salt Will not remain clung to the
hide and thus, we will need of tess water. There is 70 per cent recovery of salt in treatment of water. Two types of salt
are mined, one is sodium sulphate which has a market and the second is sodium chloride which is mined 09.9 percent
pure. At least industrial salt could he sold always. Recovery of 70 per cent salt could be made but we are still not in
4 position to make # recovery of 30 per cent. But technology of 21.0 has been in the existence for the last ten years,
There is zero per cent recovery of salt in Tamil Nadu. Today, we are ina position afer 10 years that we can recover
70 per cent, We hope that we will be able to recover 100 per cent salt within 3-4 years and this recovered salt will be
sold. 1 understand that this problem is not that much serious, hence the association will have to come forward in this.
connection,”

Monitoring of Industrial Pollution

4,62 Under Pollution Inventorisation, Assessment & Surveillance (PAIS) Project, CPCB is also implementing Compliance
verifications of Standard of the GPI and inspected 727 units and action taken status as on 10th November, 2014 as fumished
by MoEF&CC in their background note is as follows: (Table 4.59).—

Table 4.59: Monitoring of 727 units by CPCB

.- =>. .— Une Gl woo West Toral

No, Pradesh Pre gt

1, Direction under section 5 of Environment m 3 2 3 ™
(Protection) Act, 1986

2 Direction under section 18(1)(b) of Water in 0 0 1 178
Act, 1974

३. Letter issued for ensuring compliance 48 ? 1 6 a

4... Compliance with standards श्र 0 1 $ प्र

5. Action taken for reinspection revalidation 3B 3 1 7 a

& Industry found closed/not traceable "7 1 0 0 18

7. Action under process n 0 0 a a ९ ०७ 2- »
Total 664 ne ee a

४
q


31

aU) Based on the above observation CPCB is taking sector specific action plan and already implemented charter
for pulp & paper sector. Self regulatory monitoring mechanisms through real time effluent monitoring
system in the identified GP! are also being implemented with the help of respective SPCBs.

(ii) CPCB is in the process of implementing Zero Liquid Discharge concept in the important industrial sectors of

Ganga Basin which is as follows: —

(a) Zero liquid discharge in respect of distillery and sugar sector is already in progress. The spent wash
from the distillery is to be utilized in making the compost following the CPCB protocol or to be
incinerated employing the evaporation and concentration techniques:

(>) The effluent from the Sugar Mills is required to be recycled completely in the manufacturing process
following a territory level of effluent treatment adopting reverse osmosis and sand filtration process.

(c) The concept of zero liquid discharge in the tannery has been tried successfully in southern part of
India and therefore, is required to be adopted likewise in Kanpur region.

(d) To minimize the water consumption and waste water discharge from the Pulp and Paper sector, CPCB
\s in the process of developing protocols in consultation with technical experts and other stakeholders.
Series of interaction meetings are proposed to be held with all stakeholders so as to minimize or to
achieve zero liquid discharge from this sector."

Measures to Deal with Open Defecation in Areas Along the River Ganga

4.63 The Ministry of WR. RD & GR in their presentation made to the Committee on 13th July, 2015 submitted the
following action 'ptans proposals under "Namami Gange Programme’ to tackle the open defecation in villagestowns/cities
on the banks of Ganga as under:

“Letter of Authority issued to Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation fir the budget requirement of Rs. 263 crore

for 2015-16 for comprehensive sanitation coverage for 1657 Gram Panchayats situated along the River Ganga.

Amrutumandamayi trust came forward to fund Rs. 100 crore for construction of toilets in Jharkhand.

Letter written to District Magistrates for identification of 3-4 villages to be developed as ‘Ganga Grams’. The criteria
for selection of ‘Ganga Grams’ is as mentioned below:

Village having historical and cultural importance.

Villages where large congregations are normally organized for specific events.
Villages of tourist importance,

Villages which are promjnent from cultural/heritage point of view.”

4.64 With regard to the efforts being made by Govt. of Jharkhand in keeping river Ganga clean, in a memorandum
submitted 10 the Committee, the following desails were furnished:

“The total rural population of 6 blocks, 78 Villages and 33 Panchayats in Suhibguni District are covered in Namami
Gange project. Drinking Water and Sanitation Department (DWSD) has 5 mandate to make the area 100% ODF by
providing community toilets, IHHL and Bio-Diestible toilets including solid and liquid waste Projects
too. In rural areas there is a target of constructing 34120 nos, of Individual House Hold Latrine (IHL), Total 12698
nos, Of [HHL have already been constructed by DWSD as on date. Construction of balance HHL is in pipeline.”

4.65 Explaming the need for change in the design of the toilets presently being undertaken under Swachh Bharat
Abhiyan to ensure that people really use them, Dr, Sudipta Sarkar, Asst, Prof. IIT, Roorkee, on 20 January, 2016 submitted:

“Lrecommend that 100 per cent village sanitation should be required. When we decide on the tachnologies, it should
not be top down approach....As a designer, 1 should ask myself — can 1 go there and use the toilet? 111 cannot, |
should not tell the people to use this toilet, The toilets that are being constructed now lack the minimum amount of
Privacy and comfort to the user, Incase these basic lacunae are not addressed people will start going to field again,”
(interacted with some people from villages on the issue Those people actually have toilets in their homes but they
are going to open field, | asked them the reason for going to the open field. The answer | got, in almost all the cases,
was — stinking smells and lack of privacy. Lack of privacy is there in open areas also. But stinking smell is the main
reason which is causing people to go in open for defecation. So, this is some hard reality which we have to admit.


22

AS you mentioned that technologies have been developed in other countries. For your kind information | wish to say
that we in our laboratories are trying to develop the technology which requires tess amount of water for flushing. You
were also mentioning abount covering it with dust. We are trying to develop the technology which will actually try to
extract some commercia! value out of it so thut carbon can be sequested in the food chain again.”

Use of Fertilizers — Impact of Pollution in Ganga

4.66 Need for alternate agriculture practices: In response 10 3 query whether the Mio WR, RD & GR agree with the
view that conventional irrigation techniques require 4 great deal of water. much of which is lost in evaporation causing over
extraction of the water needed to sustain life elsewhere and the concrete long term action taken of proposed to be taken to
encourage water saving techniques, altemative farming techniques such as organic farming and setting up of solar power
plants on canals 10 prevent evaporation of water, etc., the Ministry submitted as follows: —

“Yes, the cabinet note for Namami Gange Programme states that, “While efforts will be made to recycle reuse the
treated water so that extraction of fresh water is reduced". In the imputs received from Ministry of Agriculture on the
draft cabinet’. Note for Namami Gange Programme it is stated that Department of Avriculture and Co-operation
(DAC), Ministry of Agriculture is promoting — Rail water conservation, Rain water harvesting, reduction of runoff of
silt, promotion of organic farming, ensuring balanced use of fertilizer etc. in the nation.

For promoting research on estimation of non-point pollution loud in River Ganga, a research study on estimation of
pon-point pollution at small watersheds in Ganga Basin has been planned in collaboration with NEERI."

4.67 When the Committee asked the Ministry to submit the details of the alternative modes of irrigation being
developed, their reply of the Ministry was awaited,

4,68 The Committee enquired from Prof. U.K, Choudhury. Founder & Director. MMIT. for Ganga Manayement. about
the changes required to be made in the irrigation technologies. He deposed before the Committee on 19 January, 2016 35
under;

“Why shall we not change our irrigation methodology? There is sprinkle method of irrigation, other methods of
irrigation, groundwater enrichment irrigation and all, The quantum of water required for irrigation from western Ganga
canal could be reduced to ३ largte extent, Why can't we have a technical dialogue to devise # methodology? We can
have a technical dialogue with U.P. Government, Central Government and other stakeholders in this regard,”

Solid Waste — Impact on Pollution in Ganga

4.69 Solid Waste Management in towns and cities along the river Ganga! Sharing the concem of the Committee over
lack of proper planning to deal with the problem of solid waste, Secretary Mio WR. RD&GR deposed:

“In fact, solid waste management is also very important because as 8 result of the filth that'one sees conveys the
impression that this river is dirty because of the solid waste that is floating”

4.70A representative of the Mio WR, RD&GR added as follows:—

“One is to remove the river surface silt, Namami Gange will take that over and they will take over the removal and
disposal of the solid waste, Drain water goes into rivers and other material relating to pujas and religious customs is
thrown into rivers too.”

4.71 A representative of the Ministry further added as under:—

“Sir, that part we have left to the MoUD. We are as of now collecting the trash and we want to give ले to them for
disposal, re-cycling and reused,"

4.72 Asked whether the solid waste management in towns and cities along the river Ganga is also part of Ganga
Fejuvenation. and if so, whether the ministries have any concrete plan 10 ensure collection, processing, recycling and
reusing the solid waste generated to prevent its being dumped into river Ganga in these cities. the Mio WR. RD & GR
submitted that:—

“As per the Cabinet note for Namami Gange Programme the component of Solid waste management in townsghats
and disposal of flowers and other puja materials, river surface solution abatement and improved methods of lust rites
on the river bank, have been included in the overall programme.

For class | & 11 towns the Solid Waste Management works will be taken up by Ministry of Urban Development
(MoUD).”


33

4,73 On the specific measures/steps taken to deal with the solid waste floating in river Ganga, the M/o WR, RD&GR
submitted>—

“NMCG is preparing atender document for River surface pollution abatement and Ghats cleaning in certain priority

towns in main stem of river Ganga, The detailed components of scope of work are being finalized."

4.74 Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules of 2011 framed under the Environment (Protection) Att, 1986
bans the usage of plastic bags. However, it is reported in the press that its contined usage in the riparian states is causing
threats to its ecosystem. Asked whether MoEF&CC were aware of the contined usage of the plastic carry bags in the
Tiparian States and the resultant threat to Ganga and its ecosystem, the ministry replied that:—

“Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 framed under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 prohibit
usage of plastic bags below 40 microns, not all the plastic bags. Accordingly, the continued usage of plastic bags of
more than 40 microns is permissible under the Rules and they are found everywhere. However, it is a fact that if
plastic bags are not disposed in environmentally sound manner it can choke drainage system and create unhygienic
conditions; animals ingest plastic bags with the discarded food leading to their illness and sometimes death; the
plastic waste when disposed of on soil reduces recharging of groundwater aquifers; recycled plastic bags and containers
contaminate packaged food; plastic waste when disposed of in landfill sites causes ieaching of metals and additives
into the soil and groundwater; and uncollected plastic waste litters the surroundings.”

4.75 With regard to the measures proposed to be taken to deal with the problem of Solid Waste Management, the
Mio WR, RD and GR. in a presentation made to the Committee submitted the following:—

“Arresting the entry of all floating solid waste into river at all inlet points; Cleaning of floating trash from river

surface and surveillance through public address system; Cleaning of ghats, Installation of adequate dustbins; Disposal

cremation ghat waste; Creation of toilet facilities to ensure open free defecation ghats/river banks; Collection of
waste from 100 m wide corridor along the bank through vehicles fitted with public address systems.”

4.76 The State Government of Jharkhand submitted to the Committee that 3 DPR, amounting to Rs 70.50 crore to
cater 1,10,080 current population of Sahibyanj and Rajmahal and future growth for next 30 years. (DPR), is udner scrutiny
for final approval.

Impact of the initiatives taken on reduction of pollution in Ganga

4.77 The Secretary, MoEF&CC apprising the Committee of the increase in pollution load in Ganga on 13.07.2015
stated that the pollution load in Ganga has been increasing over the years due to rapid urbanization, industrialization,
increase in population, ete. In response to a query as to whether this could mean that approx. Rs. 5000 crore spent under
GAP-I & IT have not had any positive Impact on reducing pollution in Ganga and hence can be termed infructuous
expenditure, the Ministry submitted as under:—

“(i) Under both phases of GAP, three phases of Yamuna Action Plan, Nationa! River Conservation Plan, Gomti Action

Pian, Damodar Action Plan, Mahananda Action Plan, and NGRBA, total of 927 schemes have been completed. A

capacity to treat approximately 2620 MLD has been established, details of which are given in the table below—

In an assessment done by CPCB, STPs instatled Ganga river basin are 64, Out of these 51 STPs of 1009 MLD are

monitored by CPCB and actual utilization in these STPs is 602 which is 9%. 9 STPs are violating Biological

Oxygen Demand (BOD) limit and | STP exceeds the Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) limit for discharge. 14 STPs

are found non-operational,”

4.78 The data on the money spent under GAP, and other river rejuvenation programmes were implemented through
MoEF&CC as furnished by M/o WR, RD &GR is as contained in Table 4.78:-—

‘Table 4.78: Schemes, Expenditure and Capacities created under GAP

Detail hemes incr i
is Se Expenditure (in cr) कैफ
GAPI&0 Ext) %61 1098.31
YAP-1, 11 & 1 अब 15264 94225
Haryana (Yamuna) under NRCP 0 गा 0
Gomti Action Plan 9 4722 mm
Damodar Action Plan 4 429 m7
Mahananda Action Plan 1 O54 »
NGRBA 3B 1032.51 m3
Grand Total श्र 1७.4168.55 2618.73


4

Impact of Pollution Levels

4,79 With regard to the impact of money spent in the past on reduction of the pollution levels in Ganga, in a writen
reply, the M/o WR, RD & GR Jnter alia stated as under:—

“The Money spent under the GAP-I & I have positive impact on reducing pollution in Ganga. A report titled “Report
on Utilisation of Funds and Assets Created through Ganga Action Plan in States’ published by Ministry of Environment
& Forests on May, 2009 states: Though a considerable sum of money has been spent on the programme and the
impact of GAP and NRCP has been positive, it has been less than desired.”

Shift in the Strategy

4.80 Asked whether there will a shift in the stragety to deal with pollution vis-a-vis the earlier strategy adopted during
GAP—1 &fl under ‘Namami Gange, M/o WR, RD & GR submitted as under; —
“One of the major shift in the strategy for NGRBA/Namami Gange Programme was to approach the river rejuvenation
in a holistic manner, This includes not only creation of treatment infrastructure for domestic/industrial waste water
but also ensuring adequate flow in the river, conservation of biota, river front development, public outreach and
capacity building.”
4.81 The Ministry further explained the focus of the Namami Gange Mission —
"The mission ‘Namami Gange’ will focus on pollution abatement interventions namely interception, diversion &
treatment of waste water flowing thtough the open drains through bio-remediation/appropriate insitw treatment/use
of innovative technologies’STPs/effluent treatment plant (ETPs); rehabilitation and augmentation of existing STPs
and Immediate short term measures for arresting pollution of exit points on river front to prevent inflow of sewage:
CETP for major industrial clusters and Operation & Maintenance (O&M) for a definite period ete. Unlike GAP the
investment is made for the entire life cycle of the asset created by including the O & M cost as well as a period of
15 years. Apart from these, projects/interventions on rural sanitation, river front development/management, solid
waste/pious refuse management, sewerage network, national ganga monitoring centre, capacity building, research’pilot
studies, non-point pollution mitigation,GIS mapping’applications, restoration of special properties of Ganga, sand
mining, biodiversity conservation, habitat improvement, institutional development, river flow improvement, Gaga task
force, Ganga Vahini, communication & public outreach acitivities and other activities/pilot projects included in NGRBA
Programme Framework and the ones arising from GRBMP aiming at Ganga rejuvenation will also be undertaken."
4.82 About the nature of the programme, the Ministry submitted-—

“The nature of the programme has been changed from Centrally sponsored scheme to central sector scheme for
achieving better synergy between Central & State Governments for expediting the work on Ganga Rejuvenation. The
mission ‘Namami Gange’ would enable integration of different programmes on Ganga Rejuvenation and the ones
impacting Ganga and help in developing a comprehensive action plan, cutting across various stakeholders, sectors,
ministries, etc., for Ganga Rejuvenation. The mission will facilitate expeditious implementation of the interventions
needed for river Ganga rejuvenation and help accelerate the process of river water quality improvement, conservation
of biodiversity & aquatic life, health & livelihood improvements, etc., apart from providing improved sanitation
facilities, hygienic conditions and improved citizen-river interaction & connect."

Critical Assessment of Gangs Action Plans—I & 11
4.83 In reply to query whether any critical assessment of the Ganga Action Plan (GAP}-t & II was carried out by any

Ministry/any agency and the details thereof, the Mio WR, RD&GR stated as follows:-—

“As the part of GRBMP report prepared by consortium of IITs, a detailed analysis of the Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) on Ganga Action Plan (GAP) was carried out. Several issues such as delays in
implementation of the program, confusion over funding, technological issues, lack of support for operation and
maintenance of the assets have been identified as major factors for mixed results of the program. The report also
highlighted the slackness in program planning & implementation, monitoring & evaluation, lack of Centre-State
coordination & State — ULB coordination, etc. The conflicting/overlapping roles of multiple of institution especially
at the local level warranted development of suitabie institutional mechanisms for effective implementation. Inefficient
implementation and low levels of citizen's participation resulted in poor sustainability of the assets created.”
4,84 The Ministry also clarified that the preparation of GRBMP was funded by Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate under NGRBA Programme, The shortcomings under GAP were considered while planning for 'Namami Gange!


CHAPTERY
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FOR GANGA REJUVENATION
Funds allocated and spent in the past

‘With regard to the amount of money spent in the past (since 1985) and is proposed to be spent in the next five years

on Ganga Rejuvenation, a representative of the M/o WR, RD&GR appearing before the Committee on 29th May, 2015 stated
inter alia as under;—

“Totally money spent on Ganga from 1985 till now Rs. 25,000 crore out of which Rs. 12,500 crore is programmes which
Were identified earlier, Rs. 12,500 crore is programmes which will be identified in the next five years. Out of Rs. 12,500 crore
of earlier programmes, Rs. 5000 roughly have been committed. Rs. 7000 roughly is what we are putting in this, so this Rs.
7000 crore and the new Rs. 12000 comes to around Rs, 20000 crore, That is the gist of it. That is the ballpart figure.

5.2 The GAP and other rejuvenation programmes were implemented through MoEF&CC, The details of the money
‘spent on the programme for Ganga cleaning as furnished by the M/o WR, RD & GR are as contained in table 5.2:—

‘Table 5.2: Expenditure incurred and Capacities created for Ganga Rejuvenation

Details Schemes Expenditure Capacity

(incr) Created (MLD)
GAP4& It 24 न] 1098.31
YAP+1, दा 304 15264 942.25
Haryana (Yamuna) under NRCP 0 121.54 0
Gomti Action Plan ) 4722 m
Damodar Action Plan 14 429 1.17
Mahananda Action Plan 1 $054 : ci)
NGRBA 2 1032.51 15
Grand Total Oa 4168.55 2618.73

5.3 Furnishing the details of assets created out of Rs. 4168 crore (approx.) spent on Ganga rejuvenation including
inter alia nature of assets created, the maintenance or otherwise of these assets, the contribution of these assets in
stopping'preventing pollution in Ganga and the extent of improvement in its water quality, the M/o WR, RD&GR in 8 post
evidence reply stated as follows:-—

"(i) Under both phases of GAP, three phases of Yamuna Action Plan, National River Conservation Plan, Gomti Action

Plan, Darnodar Action Plan, Mahanands Action Plan, and NGRBA, total of 927 schemes have been completed. A

capacity to treat approximately 2620 MLD have been established.

In an assessment done by CPCB, STPs installed Ganga river basin are 64. Out of these 51 STPs of 1009 MLD are

monitored by CPCB and actual utilization in these STPs is 602 MLD which is 59%, 9 STPs are violating BOD limit and

1 STP exceed the COD limit for discharge. 14 STPs are found non-operational,

Establishment Expenditure

5.4 Responding to a query as to the amount of money spent on ‘establishment’ out of the total money spent on
cleaning River Ganga during GAP-1411, a representative of the M/o WR, RD&GR at the Committee's sitting held on 29 May,
2015 submitted as follows:—

"The establishment expenditure is different from Rs. 4,168 crore which is the expenditure made on assets that have

been created. The establishment expenditure of the Mission is definitely not included in this. The establishment

expenditure of the executing agencies is also not included in this, But they do take which is called centage administrative
cost of executing a project... That is the only establishment cost which is there in this arpount of Rs. 4,168 crore, It
differs from place to place, but under NGRBA framework, there is a ceiling of 8 per cent.”

35


36

Funding Pattern >
5.5 The NGRBA was launched in 2009 as a collaborative effort for conservation of the river Ganga and maintenance
of environmental flows through comprehensive river basin approach. Furnishing the funding pattern of NGRBA in their
status on the subject, M/o WR, RD & GR stated as follows:-—

“The funding pattern for the NGRBA programme consists of Direct Funding by Government of India, as well as
Externally Aided Funding. The earlier initiative consisting of GAP-1 and GAP-II to the tune of Rs. 1560 crore, as well
as the recent initiative under “Namami Gange" consisting of Rs. 2037 crore and additional Rs, 100 crore for "Ghat
development’, are being funded directly by Government of India,

Further, & project in Varanasi with estimated cost of Rs, 469.9 crore is being funded by Japanese International
Co-operation Agency (JICA), Also, World Bank is providing technical assistance and financing of Rs. 7000 crore (US
$ | billion assistance} for NGRBA.

Infrastructure projects (except Industrial Potlution Control sub-project on 50:25:25 basis) and Institutional Development
Component are being shared between Centre and State Governments on 70:30 cost sharing basis. Projects sanctioned
carlier from Government's own resources for Rs. 576.32 crores have been taken up for retro-active financing by the
World Bank.

Also, there is direct Govt, funding out af the 12th Plan outiny of Rs. 2200 crore earmarked for NGRBA programme. So
far, projects have been approved for Rs. 1560 crore from Government's own resources, cost of which are also being
shared between Centre and State Governments on 70:30 cost sharing basis,”

Projects sanctioned under NGRBA

5.6 As per details furnished by the M’o WR, RD & GR the NGRBA has 50 far sanctioned a total 93 projects in 53 towns
in Ganga States costing Rs. 7350.38 crore under NGRBA program including EAP component with the assistance of Japan
International Co-operation Agency (JICA) and the World Bank. These include projects of Rs. 2406.96 crore in Uttar
Pradesh, of Rs, 2155.62 crore in Bihar, of Rs, 99.36 crore in Jharkhand, of Rs. 1352.51 crore in West Bengal and of Rs. 378.29
crore in Uttarakhand for laying of sewage networks, treatment plants, development of river fronts, ete. These sanctioned

jects also include three CPCB projects worth Rs. 198.48 crore on Pollution Inventorization, ‘Assessment and Surveiltance
(PIAS) on river Ganga, Strengthening of Environmental Regulator (SER) - CPCB and a project of setting up the Ganga
Knowledge Centre (GKC) in NMCG (Rs. 84.54 crore). Further, for projects related to biodiversity conservation, afforestation,
assessment of special properties of Ganga and communication & awareness for Dolphin conservation Rs. 11.24 crore have
been sanctioned. An amount of Rs. 1414.54 crore (ias on 31st March 2015) has been released by both Centre and the States
for implementation of the sanctioned projects.

5.7 On the sharing of cash and funding mechanism between the Centre and the States, the Ministry submitted-—

“The investments required to create the necessary treatment and sewerage infrastructure would be shared between
Centre and State Governments on 70:30 basis. The State Governments would be required to motivate ULBs for
resource recovery and revenue generation, Also, the cost of Operations and Maintenance (O&M) for the initial five
years in NGRBA projects would be shared between Centre and States in the ratio of 70:30 with a periodical
review,”

Physical and Financia! Performance

5.8 The Financial and Physical Performance during 2९1 and XII Five Year Plans as furnished by M/o WR, RD & GR
vide their status report on the subject is as under-—

“The NGRBA Programme is being implemented using a variety of financing sources, as approved by the Government
of India from time to time; and may include public-private partnerships. So far, only government financing Le,
Externally Aided Program (EAP} and Government's own resources (Non-EAP) has been considered,

Xt Plan Target: The X! Plan Target has been made for Rs. 1250 crore inchating Scheduled Caste Sub-Ptan allocations.
During XI Plan period, the budget allocations and expenditures are as under:—

XH Plan: Budget allocation - Rs, $16.16 crore; Expenditure Rs. 792.41 crore.


37

XU Plan Target: The 21 Pian Target has been made for Rs, 2200 crore, During XII Plan period, the budget allocations
and expenditures so far are as under-—

(Rs. in crore)
Year - Expendisure Budget Outlay (as Expenditure (as per
reported by per Demands for Demands for Grants of
States Grants of MoEF&CC)
MoEF&CC)
2011-12 2648 21661 19258
2012-13 329.99 193.50 191.52
13-14 187.4 31092 3.95"
Currem year $82) 355.0 Nil
(ill June, (Budget outlay
2014) transferred to
é MoWR, ६० & GR)
Total 4252 1076.03 688.05

*Provisional

The Committee in a post evidence questionnaire asked the Ministry to furnish details of Budget Estimates proposed
by the Ministry during 2015-16 and 2016-17, details of previous ongoing projects for which funds have been allocated
and utilised ‘to be utilised out of the allocation for 2015-16 and 2016-17 and the details of the plan prepared by the *
Ministry for utilisation of 3/4 remaining funds ie. Rs. 15,000 crore over the remaining period of Namami Gange
Project. The reply of the Ministry was awaited.

5.9 The volume of work and details of schemes/projects and the Status of mstitutional & infrastructure investment

components under NGRBA as given by M’o WR, RD and GR in their status notes are as follows:—

"The works under NGRBA Programme sanctioned to 5 basin States of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand
and West Bengal since the financial year of 2008-09 include laying of sewerage system, sewage treatment plants,
solid waste management, common effluent treatment plant for contro!ling industrial pollution, river front management,
crematoria, etc. So far, 70 investment projects in 48 towns in five Ganga States, $ institutional development and
| implementation support projects including Automatic Water Quality Monitoring and Ganga Knowledge Center
have been sanctioned at a total cost of Rs. 4974.79 crore under the programme, An amount of Rs. 1232.87 crore has
been released from centre and State, of which Central Government's share is Rs. 915.52 crore and State Governments
share Rs. 317.35 crore. Treatment capacity of 659.93 Million Litres per Day (MLD) shall be created on implementation
of these projects, of which a treatment capacity of 110.50 MLD has been created so far.”

External Assistance under NGRBA
4.10 The MoEF&CC in their background note on the subject furnished infer alia the following details of the external

assistance to NGRBA programme:-—

“A World Bank assisted NGRBA project for abatement of pollution of river Ganga is under implementation at an
estimated cost of Rs. 7000 crore, The World Bank is providing technical assistance and financing US $ | billion
(approx. Rs. 4600 crore) for the project. The share of Government of India in the project is Rs. 5100 crore and that of
the State Governments of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal will be Rs. 1900 crore.
Implementation of the Project will be spread over a period of है years. The principal objective of the project is to set up
institutional structure at Centre and States and fund priority infrastructure investments for conservation and restoration
of the water quality of the river Ganga.

A pollution abatement project for river Ganga at Varanasi is under implementation at an estimated cost of
Rs. 496.90 crores, with loan assistance of 11,184 billion Yen from the Govt. of Japan. The project comprises of schemes
pertaining to sewerage, pumping stations, construction of 140 million liters per day (mid) Sewage Treatment Plant, .
community toilet complexes, construction of dhobi ghats, improvement of bathing ghats, public awareness and
participation and institutional development & capacity building of the local body.


8

Since inception of the NGRBA programme, 73 schemes (67 infrastructure investment, 5 institutional development and
| implementation support) in 48 towns in Ganga States have been sanctioned at a total cost of Rs, 4683.61 crore.
Against this, Rs. 945,60 crore has been released by the Centre including the matching share of the States so far and
a total expenditure of Rs, 910.57 crore has been incurred till June, 2014 for implementation of the projects,”

2, ऊना Implementation of pollution abatement works in towns along the river is being done by the concemed agencies
of the State Govts. The expenditure incurred on both phases of GAP & NGRBA programme till June, 2014 as furnished by
MoEF&CC are as under:—

‘Table 5.11: Expenditure incurred under GAP-I & GAP-II

SLNo. State Total expenditure till 31.06.2014 Total
Rimes) ऋ#ऋ#|॥|॥|॥ऑआऑआ Expenditure
: GAP-I GAP-I NGRBA

1. Uttarakhand 0 5479 | 64.73 11952
2 Uttar Pradesh 194.45 18999 56039 944.83
3 Bihar 27 305 76.49 132.26
4 Jharkhand 0 025 0 025
s West Bengal 186,13 25723 20531 648.67
Institutional 365 3.65
Toral 433.30 50531 91057 >>: अल... ————, 1

— ee ee ER
5.12 MoEF&CC has also stated that ongoing works of GAP-II and NGRBA are being handled by NMCG/M/o WR, RD
& GR from 01/08/2014 onwards,

Funds allocation for Namami Gange Programme

5.13 Appearing before the Committee on 13.07.2015 submitted the following details of the funding aspects of "Namami
Gange’ Programme:—

"Duration —- OS years 2015-16 to 2019-20

Cost — 2014-15 to 2018-19 ; Rs. 20,000 crores and includes two major components; —

aa Rs, 7272 crores {remaining Government of India Liability under already approved ongoing
sel )

B. New Initiatives — Rs, 12.728 crore to strengthen Namami Gange programme,

A significant fourfold increase over the expenditure in the past 30 years.

Primary focus on pollution abatement,

Government of India incurred an overall expenditure of approximately Rs. 4,168.55 crore on this task since 1985"

5.14 The indicative budgetary outlays and allocation for Component A — Existing programmes & Component
B— New Initiatives, (ii) Budget allocation for Component B along with targets, (iii) Year-wise break up of new initiatives,
(iv) Budget outlays 2015-16 at Annexures XINI-XIV, पु

5.15 The key features of 'Namami Gange’ as furnished by the representative of the Ministry at the sitting of the
Committee held on 13.07.2015 are as under>—

Marking a major shift in implementation

Improved inter ministerial and Centre State co-ordination
Strengthening Public Participation

Measures for expediting implementation

Centre takeover 100% funding — Central Sector Scheme
Public Private Participation (PPP) / SPV


approach for pollution hot spots
Establish four battalion Ganga Eco Task Force
Developing performance outcomes and indicators.

‘Three tier mechanism; HLTF chaired by Cabinet Secretary; State level Commitee chaired by Chief Secretary:
District level Committee chaired by District Magistrate.

5.16 With regard to the problems (Table: 5.16) being addressed in "Namarni Gange’, the Ministry of WR, RD & GR
submitted as under;—

‘Table 5.16: Issues and Solution proposed under Namami Gange

issues Proposed solutions

Huge gap in sewage treatment capacity Creation of sewage treatment plants
144 major drains discharging pollution in river Ganga Tapping of the drains
Open Defecation 100% sanitation coverage for 1657 Gram Panchayats
‘Small Industrial units discharging toxic effluents Financial incentives for pollution abatement to industries
Ineffective inter-Ministerial & Centre-State Three tier monitoring mechanism
Coordination
Delay in execution and implementation Execution by PPP/SPV
Insuffictent funds with States for giving its share Centre takes over 100%6 funding
Inefficient operation and Maintenance Provide for O&M of the assets fora minimum of 10 year period
Inadequate Public participation Involving ex-servicemen living on the banks of river Ganga

5.17 The expected year-wise fund release has been grouped under three phases as given below:— _
Year Amount (Rs. in crore)
2015-16" 2.750
2016-17 3,955
2017-20 (Dec.) 13,295

“includes "Component "A'; Existing programmes” for 2014-16.

For channetising the voluntary contributions for Ganga clean up, the M/o WR, RD & GR informed that an account
‘Clean Ganga Fund’ was created and a website-www.cleangangafund.com was created. A trust deed has been approved and


CHAPTER YI
MAINTENANCE OF ENVIRONMENTAL FLOWS IN GANGA
Definition of Environmental Flows
Environmental flows ('E-Flows'} are the flow regimes needed to maintain the ecological integrity of a river and the

goods and services provided by it. It is computed by the Building (bigger) Block method or other standard holistic methods.

Measurement of E-flows
62 The Ministry of Power in their presentation made to the Committee stated that e-flow is still an evolving concept

as evident from recommendations (Table: 6.2) of different Committees given below-—

SNo.

2
3
4
5.

Table 6.2: E-flow according to different Committees

Reports‘Committees E-flow Recommendations
“Lean Season ——_—‘Non-lean Season

1 “1 जा आए: शएछ-- चआऋरूणणए

20% 20-30%
WLL, Dehradun (70 projects) 30% 2006
Inter ministerial Group (IMG) under Shri 8.6. Chaturvedi 30% 29%
Prof. Ravi Chopra Committee (on adhoc basis) 50% 10%
CWC (on adhoc basis} 20७

6.3 The M/o WR, RD & GR in the status note regarding the flow in Ganga submitted as under:—

“The NGRBA set up an Inter-Ministerial Group (Chaturvedi Committee), which recommended about 30% flow during
monsoon season und about 20% in the non-monsoon season with 20-30% during non-lean and non-monsoon period,
based on a 90% river flow dependability fnctor. However, this got overtaken by the events of 16.6.2013 in the aftermath
of tragedy in Uttarakhand, which led to setting up of a high Powered Committee by Ministry of Environment & Forests
0n directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court (Ravi Chopra Committee), whose report submitted already in April, 2014, is
under consideration of the Supreme Court. No directions have so far been given by the Apex Court in the matter.”

6.4 With regard to maintenance of adequate flow in river Ganga, the Ministry of Power in their Presentation to the

Committee submited as under:—

"Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) prescribes a minimum and continuous flow of
water 16. e-flow while clearing and Hydro Electric Power Projects.

Water withdraw! for power generation is subjected to release of prescribed and mandatory e-flow. For example,
Tehri project ensures adequate flow in the river throughout the year.”
6.5 The minimum amount of water flow required for maintaining adequate flow in the Ganga and its tributaries and

water actually provided throughout the year, as furnished by the Ministry of Power, in the backzround note on the subject,
is as under:—

“According to CWC, apart from aquatic ecosystem requirements, river provides various eco-services to the society
such as cultural, spiritual, livelihood, fluvial geomorphology etc, The assessment of requisite flows (minimurn) for
these services of the river are very subjective and are difficult to be quantified. Such allocation needs to be decided
holistically keeping a fine balance between development and ecological nceds, Looking at the limited water resources
availability particularly during lean period, a trade-off between water resources development and river maintenance
in healthy or reasonable condition is inevitable. CWC further recommends that for allocation of water to meet
ecological needs, a comprehensive basin study is required. Till outcome of such basin study is known, CWC
recommends 20% of the natural flow as e-flow. Minimum prescribed e-flow would be followed for all hydroelectric
projects under construction or to be constructed.

The EAC has been generalty recommending a minimum stretch of 1-2 kim of free flow of river in between two
Sonsecutive projects in a cascade development of projects in a riverine system, so that the natural/ original flow and

40


4

Tejuvenate capacity will not be losvhampered permanently. However, where steep slope is involved this may not be

recommended because of very high velocity/gush of flow.”

6.6 Government of Bihar vide their letter no, BGCM/2015/13/01-193 UD&HD dated 21.04.2016, inter alia emphasizing
the need for maintenance of free flow of Ganga submitted thar—

“(i) Maintaining continuous free flow of the Ganga should be accorded high priority. The Water Resources Department,
Govt. of Bihar has earlier suggested that a study should be conducted by CWPRS, Pune to ensure the continuous
and free flow of the River Ganga, which is yet to be conducted. Along with "Nirmalta® ( ) of river Ganga, equal
ifnot more importance should be accorded to “Aviralta" (——).
{it) Only 16% of the catchment area of the river falls in Bihar, but the tributaries in Bihar contributes almost 314th of
flow available at the Farakka barrage during the lean season of February to April, Approximately 400 cumecs of flow
is estimated at the border of Bihar, while, as per the Farakka agreement, 1500 cumecs flow is to be ensured at the
barrage, which becomes possible only due to contribution by the rivers of Bihar. In reality, even 400 cumees of flow
is not received at the border during lean season. In this context, the intervention by the Central Government ix
required to ensure the contribution of upper co-basin States in the continuous flow of Ganga, so that a minimum
environmental flow is ensured throughout the entire length of river Ganga and the burden of ensuring requisite
quantity at the Farakka barrage does not become the responsibility of only Bihar. Further, Bihar can utilize the water
of rivers in Bihar for its development projects. At present, whereas the upper riparian States utilize more wuter than
their share, objection are put on even miniscule use of Ganga water by Bihar.”
Peak and Lean Flows
6.7 Responding to a specific query as to whether the peak flow in Ganga ts reducing rapidly than the lean flow if
compared with flows during the last 40/50 years, ४५0, the reasons therefor and the measures taken or proposed to be taken
to arrest, the Ministry of Power submitted as follows: —
"In order to assess the above aspects, the flow data of river Ganga has been analysed at Karnaprayag, Rudraprayag,
Devprayag, Haridwar, Kanpur, Allahabad, Patna, Huthidah (Bihar), Azamabad (Bihar) and Farakka (West Bengal). The
flow data of river Ganga ot Hathidah (Bihar), Azamabed (Bihar) and Farakka (West Bengal) where runoff contribution
of almost all the tributaries of river Ganga is coming into the river is enclosed as Chart 6.7,
‘The Lean flow at all the above locations has not shown any declining trend in the last 40/50 years, Regarding peak
flow, no dectining trend has been observed at Kamnaprayag and Rudraprayag. In case of Devprayag and Rishikesh,
some decrease in peak flow and increase in lean flow after the year 2005 took place duc to storage of monsoon water
in Tehri reservoir and subsequent controlled release during lean period, At Kanpur, Patna, Hathidah and Azamabad
ulso there is no trend of rapid reduction of peak flow. In case of Allahabad there is reduction in peak flow, which is due
to less contribution from Chambal and other tributaries of Yamuna resulting into less contribution from Yamuna at
Allahabad. Charnbal is a relatively parched sub basin and has variability of rainfall. The growth of agriculture and
other development in the ares needs additional water for maintaining the livelihood. The water resources development
in Chambal and other tributaries of Yamuna may be the reason of less contribution from these rivers in Yamuna and
ultimately in Ganga. From Patna up to Azamabad the absence of any trend is duc to significant contribution of flow
into Ganga from Ghaghra, Gandak and Kosi river systems, At Farakka there is some decrease in peak flow, which may
be due to withdrawal of river water through pumping from some intermediate points for consumptive uses,
‘Thus the reduction in peak flows in Ganga at some locations is a consequence of water resources development in
basin us well as sub-basins. At present Ganga basin with « population of about 540 million is a water scarce basin,
where per capita water availability in ७ year is less than 1000 cubic meter (Falkenmark Water Scarcity Index says when
availability in a basin falls below 1700 cubic meter per person per year the busin is water stressed and when it falls
below 1000 cubic meter per person per year than the basin is water scarce), However, the intensity of scarcity is more
pronounced on South bank of Ganga and adjoining part compared to North bank of Ganga, Considering the increase
in surface water demand to meet the requirement for increasing population, the following measures may be necessary
to keep the river in ॥ healthy state:—

1. River interfinking programme.
2 Storage of monsoon (Flood) water at appropriate locations requiring less land occupancy for storage.
3... Increase in irrigution efficiency.
4... Implementing efficient recycle and reuse measures for water,
(Source; CWC)”



YAMUNAGAR (HARYANA)

SESS 9 9 OS oo pols

Monsoon Non-monsoon —— Annual Flow



43

DETAILS OF WATER FLOW IN RIVER GANGA AND YAMUNA
(Monsoon; June to October, Non-monsoon: November to May)

= SITE (UTTARAKHAND)

= =

ees =

Monsoon Non-morsoon — Acmust

MM

Monsoon ——— Non mnonsoon—— Anmeal Flow



&856285522:%6:6/%67%



ELITE a MG LE



| 4A
a oh ]
॥ 1 हो हो a |
10011 1 7 |
8188 18 11111 181 18 11111 11

आता 0७000 Nononsoon = —— Antrual Flow

AGRA SITE (UP)

P|

“TAA _ kh Aa
Call SAV AVA SPV POAT 8९,
NY

हक कह टी की कक डी दी ह डी SG ८9%

जता Monsoon Non-monsoon =~ Arewal Fiow



47

DETAILS OF WATER FLOW IN RIVER GANGA AND YAMUNA
(Monsoon: June te October, Non-monsoon: November to May)

“TE

EMME ES


48

Lack of data about lean flows and peak flows

6.8 Asked to furnish the lean flow and peak flow decadal data from 1951 to till 2011 at the major towns and cities in the
Ganga basin from Karanprayag down to Farakka, the CWC, Ministry of Water Resources stated that they do not have the
decadal data before 1961. The Committee also desired that the duta relating, to lean and peak flows may be furnished to them
in statistical form rather than in the graphical form. Despite reminders, the Ministry was yet to furnish the data,

‘Changes in peak and lean flows in Ganga

6,9 In view of the prevailing situntion the Ministry of Shipping were asked shat steps were taken. The Ministry of
Shipping were in agreement with the view that not only peak flow but also fean flow was decreasing in Ganga making it
difficult to navigate and carry cargo in ships, the steps taken or proposed to be taken to address the lesser flows during lean
scuson. The Ministry replied as under:—

“Ministry of Shipping, Inland Waterways Authority of India are generally in agreement that both the peak as well as
the lean flows may be decreasing in Ganga river, making it more difficult for navigation by bigger cargo vessels and
thus making navigation thereon, particularly on upper regions of river Ganga progressively less viable compared to
road and rail...

Navigation is done in residual water in a river. The other usage of water such us irrigation, drinking water, thermal
power plants, etc., use significant amounts of water which adversely effocts navigation particularly during lean flow
season. Since withdrawal of water for these users is consistently increasing over the years the discharge available in
the river for navigation in the lean season appears to be decreasing.

Development of infrastructure is at a nascent stage in the country and therefore, no steps can be taken by [WAL
Ministry of Shipping to increase the lesser flows during lean season. Under Jal Marg Vikas Project which is aided by
the World Bank, consultancy agency is undertaking a detailed technical study with the objective of increasing Least
Available Depth (LAD) in River Ganga between Haldia-Allahabad with the available flow therein,”

Discharge in the Ganga

6.10 With regard to the data on the flow, the discharge, that is natural flow coming from the source in the Ganga during
peak and lean seasons of the years during the last 20 years, State-wise and year-wise, (for example Karnaprayag, Rudraprayag,
Devprayag, Haridwar, Kanpur, Allahabad, Patna on the river Ganga Yanwnanagar, Delhi and Agra on Yarnuna), the Ministry
of Power in their post evidence replies submitted as follows:—

“The details of flow in the form of graph at Karnaprayag, Rudraprayag, Devprayag, Haridwar, Kanpur, Allahabad,
Patna on the river Ganga, Yamunanagur, Delhi and Agra on river Yamuna, during monsoon (June to October-Peak
season), non-monsoon (November to May—Lean season) and annual average is enclosed (at Chart 6.10.1),

Daily discharge data for monsoon und lean period from 1964-65 to 2005-06 at Tehri site (pre-commissioning) is

enclosed (at Chart 6.10.2). Further, daily inflow and outflow data for monsoon and lean period from 2006-07 to 2014-
15 (after commissioning) at Tehri Project is also enclosed (at Chart 6.10.3) (Souree:CWC).”


49

“Oo +६01

PEOCHN TEOEBID OLLELINELEOFG OF TFOO CHSELL COBOL GLPLLL छाए BOTLEL 191960 SE TCOL OS FEOL LN SEES ORGISL PrOESs ८६६1६ WOW IM
eek

DOOIT OO'PSE OOEDE ODOR OO IU OO0ST OOSHE OO PTC OD TES १0८६ OOKSE ODOT 00192 00188 0055८ 906८ 0०016... #_य्य
OO'SL “OO'LEE OD'LDL OO'LPY GOEL 00% OOSIT OO'EZI OD'SHE 00951. 00867 GO'SSt 0000६ OO'STZ 0७६0८ ONS! 00581 Foenp
006८1. 600%॥ O'EPL ODT OOLR OO TIE 00281. 0008. 0060: 006६1 009६1 OOTHI 008८1 00561 00201 00६8. 00021. Mirko
90601. OO'RIT OOLEL 00६6८. 0069... 00802. 00%. 0016. 90२8 00001 0056. ODPTE OE! 00६1 0018 0046 OOIT
00६६1. 60021... 00251. OOLTZ 609#. 051 00%1.. 08501. 00600 00101 005६. O06 | 00501 00% ONZE ONT! 00601
१16... 0050. णारता ONT! 0088 00फ%। 00 DS! 0028. 00061 60088. 006. 00011 009/ 00911 OWES GOEL 00७:
ootol ०७0० 00६01 0७७9। OS 0006. 000६1 0०069 OOFTE 008८ ०८८ 0७0६8. 996६ 00८6 OIL oor 90911
00 95 60 te 0008 ont oor . ०७९६ 00601. 00579 ०0६0॥ COTS ७0७८६ cor, 00.69 0088 OLD 900 0८ 90601
OWLS COTE 0089 NSO! COTE USS 0001 0085. 0066. GOFP OOLF OOTL 00% OEE 00912 0069. 0089
00 LE 001६ 9009. 0०05%1 ०१1६ 00 65 09० 00 ८१ 908: 0009. 00160. 09069. 001८ 0068 ७0 ५9४। 0069 9099६
00 56 ouet 0019. ००८८ on'st 00 6F 0099. 0020. 00:69. OES 90 0५5 000८ 0059 ७0६6. 0७0४५ 90 89 oo re
Ow et 0067 00७09 0००४७  #्राढ ou Os ore 0015 9069. ७0 te ७0 ८0... 0७0 ०६ 0059 0018 0059 90०89 90 0$
0०६६ 00 ६६ 90 #$ 09097 O88f ७06 _ 00608 oor 90 9५ 00४29. Oo a 001६ 0069 00%: 8079 00८9. =e
00st 00 8+ 00 ८5 00७ oOsr . भाडर 06589 00% ७0८५४ 090६5. 0०08४. ००६८ 9069 006८. ०0८९9 00 89 bose
00909 छक्का 90 rs 90807. ७७५१४ op or 06 97 0% oor coors 0०0 ६५४ on 0099 0058. 9029 90 ६ 00७
Dore ७७६ 00 55 00६. OOF ODF 1095 009 0085 0015 OOPS COIL 0029 00६0 0099 00८9 00६६
00960. 00८६४. 00%. 0085४ 0015. 0060. 0085. 00% 00५9४. 0095 0065 00% 000८ 001॥ 00८9 «WIL 0099
0060. 00%7 . 008६ «OUTS «ONES 7019. 008. 0065. 0019 00:26. 00%. 00.69 0018 ORD 001८. 00+६
COTS 0000. 0025६. OOFS 0079. 0019. 0089. 0099. OOO 0016. 008६८. 0002. 00%॥ 00.69 00६ 006:
009 000. 0058. 0089. 00%. 0057. 001: 0089. 0066. 0018 0088. 002८ 009॥ 002८ 005४ 0018
006%0.. 0009. 00611 0096. OUR © ८6 0059. 001६. 00:09... 00%. 0006. 0080 . 009८ 0016 000£ 0054. 0086
90%. 0010... 00६2 00286. 0०08८. 00901 008८. 008: 019८. 009. 006. 00608. 001८ 0016 00६६ 00001. 0066
00छ&1.. GOLL  00'RTT 00601. 0018. O06T] 00 fs OVER O0'LR 0056. 90521 0046 008 00001 OOPS 0051. 00411
: 60184४ NVIT हि
६१ ४४६६ 0#040101 ६६४91$6 669659 629/%5 ८1 5555 ६६ LETH 2#5#८9 OHOSHR ६€1$८0५9 FO THOS TE SSIS 0 ८5०5 [OTRO9 9५ ६9५५ 609+#6<८६ 9६ BOTH
00191 00६21 OOSST 00601 OUPS ०0161 00601 OHO! 00901 00%11 0021 00601 0016 99401 ०0०४ 90726. OTH
OUTS! OORT 0066६ OO'SLE OSE! 00622 00091 00101 00861 00671 0056. 00651 MEH HOSEL DOTS 00901. 00051 ॥#-120

* 0060६ 0006६ ७0 ०05८ ७002८ ONTLT 0081 OLE 008४८1 00691 00601 00251 00051 0011 ०0८01 90६11 00 $रट rRo

९09८६ 00608 ००६५७ 00486 OUTCE ONTSE DO IIT OUST 005६४ 0056९ 00+%92 OO'SET OORT 0090६ OD ESI HOFFH 0001६ Hides,
009८0. OOFRF 00269 00619 OORIF OO 19S 096८८ OUFEF GOSH  00+%६8 OODIF 00६2४ OO DHE 0012६ 00८6९ 009८ 00 ere tedas,
0058S OOOR OORT! 00009. OUTRS 0091८. NOLRE 00509. 0016#. GO'SED GOOFS 00915 ७0६2६ HOTS ODOrY 00218 0०८५ Pes
O0'StS 00299 OOSSL DO'TTS ७00001 00860 00159. 00055. 0७999 00588 00६८21 00169 0019 0011: ग्रालकए

00 869

crore OO'FLL 00°90 00969. 0086८. 00890. 006८5 0095६. 00'0011 00990. ७0४66 00 1101 006८6 00086 009८01 trdoy
on 0611 90096. 005८9. OWE 00'0111 00059 00560 00911 00° 0096: 0०069 008८11 002101 OO Sos ०७८८८ btny
9० 0601 00८66 00८८८. ०0७८५ 00058 0056: 00967. 00659 10 00659 00619 OU FHL ०0911॥ COLES 0०0 108 using

005६. 00906. OO'FES DOIG 0062८. 00915. 00199. 0018॥ 0006# 00969 0089 00790 00६७ 00019. IKI
00918. 006021 0०७ 1१०1 ७०१८८ ००६८४ 00106 NOT 00255 009८६ DOSER 0010# KORY OO'SIF ON ESF ००१४६ 0089 00 ras thine
90 +२६ OV THI 00152 ०७६१६ 00 ६६६ ०0४८४ 06000 0016४ 0७० ४३४८ ७॥ 12६ 00981 00 POE Ord _ 0077६ OO'STE
ou #गाण MOU] OYE] NOUN, MOU, ज्ाएग.. बनाम «MOH, ब्याण ब्याण न्याण कलाण MOUS] अ्णाण Mayu] MOU
IS-ORGE 08-6८61 HL-BLGE #८-८८61 ८८-१८6। GL-SL61 SL-PLEL #८०६८७॥ ६८०२८७। ६६-1८७। 1८-0:61 OL-H9HI A9-ROGL 9८961 19-9961 99-$961 994961 BOA
(90-S008 © F961 F2MIS) dd 1४119. FO Supuoysspuatuoy-A4g)

VIVO OUVHOSIG dd PHBL



50

— OO

६ 68001 90 १#६8

19'629६ ८5516
01818 09 666
os 06 सह
06 9१६
ow eee
or eee
01461
0६७. णारडा
096८. 05651
४ 16... 06161
6:८9... 06851
0८0६. 6६४
poe 0० Ie
0618. OR TL
Ovex 0४1६
GT 901 OOS
08601. 07५8
॥#<01.. 011३
009+%11.. 0616
0दघ्टा.. 06२७1
00६६. 00001
006६1. 0६ ६6
0191. 01 ८७1
Orig! 0६ 9७1
16 6504 oF 01९5४
Ossie 08111
06+9. Os 6zt
00 Ist ns ६५1
orter 06६६६
0४८८४ 0850
Or ६६... 05%4+
OT hoo OF LOE
Or 6zH 00999
Oe stor 05 cee
OR OTL Qo tke
acces 0८0६५
OL eee 0८ sts
0०८०७. 016८६

1# 666६ EL 8८1८ 88 +9६0 ८७ ६६8५ TC TER
STLSLI OF ॥90८ TH 189: ८६ 0281 2७ १<४८

04 TPT OF PTR OR ELE OS 17 OO ESE
06 0०91 9६066 OF OSE Us' ERT
09 Fol 0६152 ०८०८7: Os ste
0616 OTSEE OF Ott
0s 00) 06151 Obit
ood 01081 00991
001६ 91 ६6 ori
0८ 85 oes 05 06
090 cP os tot 0दचदा
or ip 01 19 Wee
oF 99 asa? 0६ $५
boot 0619 00 19
05 09 9999 ono
oT 65 ots oxos
99 Rs ort orig
ores 98 65 99 ४५
0८ 09 क् एफ
0511 ws favor
05 06 ‘OTIS ७7७१
0८69. 09% 60
059८. ००७ ५८
veTR ७७०७
05 iol 0# 7०1
91 (+५5 PH ELIS 90 5199 OF ६10 OF ६6७५
06+%91 OF TOI OT ETI ७५11 ७७६॥॥
09 LTE OFSEL OF STI 06_ #%।1 ॥८ ५11
997८1 छा रहा OF FOL MEIKE OT LOL
0188६ OF GLE 060#८0 06197 OH RST
OURSE ON SOL 02 ## US OOF OH UTE
OWLEL 0६9०८ 95 709 OL ४8५9 HR 649
01089 OR OPO 0080८ 0679 00918
00006 0८ 865 0७0 %79 OF ८७७ OGG
05 19८ 00908 ७6६०७ OR OSS 096८७
087४9 011८9 OE STOL ७४४5५ # ८७
0६ 9६$ 0695६ 01698 09 $9# OL Te
0082# OF 96# 009#6 Nebr OV 00६
0692८ 060८1 06919 09 8८४ OO ६७५

86 ८899 PS २1४8६. ४9 #६11८ SO 7७३॥

६9 6891 ५5६ ७0ट7 OF TPIT ८६ ६1७1
4 OF $66 0$9फ OF Ore
91 141. OS tee 046८८ OF Per
98791. Ol Pet 06 ६8६८. 0610९
Of ETE Oo oet 99 88 ७७ दा
00% 00851 ७८४७ छल
091८. ort 0६561 0८७१
00. = .oL iol 0८८11 0170५
0६ ८६1 0०0+6 80८16. 01599
Oro 0६७६ 90911 0655
ores 0०६5१ orm «Ole
ores 01 95 0८ ८६. Of TF
wets owes GHit Ofer
0965. 06 SS ५8) OVE
0199. 0६15 छा 0७ 15
90589. ७6 ८5 099 of os
ots ass woe O89
moos 9६ 29 oor ore
09 OL 0८85 ones = Otro
0८697. 0६ 19 099 6# . 06 194
97697. #दक८ cosh OW
ono ates 0159. ७५३४
00२26. 0059 छाल 0:५३
७१201 0548 OF 10l 06 ६6
00 | 2 0 है. ६ 8॥
0६ ८66# BIECTS 67 1861 # 1789
oot uo 00 ६01. 06611
0८911 OR OR GUirt . ७४ 591
गर819 Os sel 1६1. छ eee
9760२ ७6४61 muse ७७ tes
ortor Os भर 06 ४४७. OFRIE
9१7१5. OF Lee 06 L89 Os bor
OORT OF S45 orroe ७ ८०४
0016४. #$१४$५४ 01 ७४१. 06 TROL
आ। 1९८६ OR ESE 0७9 Ler ७८ ८811
08599. 05 089 0६ Le 06 ETON
016८5 0४504. 0६6२५ 0८००४
01 ६४४. 0६ ees O6THE OF ७9७५5
OT Nie OF Ets OL roe obser
ORAd NOOSNOW

PSLESL TEMVEH OF LOSE Se PERS
LOLOIT 18 ESRI 076961 HE LOTT
ORTIET 0080६. ७0 IFe OORT
0095९ OOHLT OORSI 00661
00892 08101 00881. OO KEL
001४८ UOTZTE 0915८ WIL
0091६ 0850 00001 00८५
0२291 60011 ७०७5
ont oor 000०5
0४८६8 0७६८ था
०८६ 007७७. 0७६६
0८ 19 ote oot
0979 = 0068. 0067
cote = 0179 wore § 0082
onze = 0००८5 corr ७७ ६
90८8. ०8४४४ GOLE oO ७६
0066. 0105 ost एक
00९. 0७१०।॥५६ wth OLE
90% 0०:८४ mse MOOT
00 Tr = 0०0५5 09८0. 0००६६
oOLr 0065 0080 00 1#
0015. 00८5५ 99८5. OS
9099. 0019 908: 00 ०४
voto ०0०७६ 90101 0055
omc भार 09055 ७05५०
60 %659 90 ८3851
09 261... 00
00+%:८6 00८6
90516 0०0०७
Ouest 00 ००८
STs Ptr
P 00 169. Ores
00508 OUTER 09 688. 09 +95
00849 00७ 9॥८। 000८6. 001९७
OOS. 090 7८11 00 0६8. 00 564
0089॥ 00 9611 00 5८8. 00 ६४५
CONSE 00८001 ७०७००  0०011#
00 ६0७८. OSS REE 00 115
000८६ ७७५5४ 00७00 ००४७6

0009
00 15
00'6r
00 कक
Hse
009#
00 89
00 6+
0017
oor
५0 UP
0७8४
0055
0009
oor
O08
0016
७०६91

av 6655
0७ 911
कक ८91
90% 2
OO NTT
00 19
oo sey
00 1८
oo res
७00 1६६
04599
00 61#
00 6Lr
09२८६

10611: ६1 ४618

flow 0र: फ्राट

00 $४८. 06966
00८६६ ००३४७
00 $+८.._ 006८1
oof ०७खा
90 fat 090 ६81
00+%६. = OU GET
OoPch = Owe
900 $9 0061
90 89५ 00911
OOS nes
oo 15 oo 94
00 1# 00 ६६
ower 09 fF
oory 00 8
0064 908
क्ण्लछा ove
oo sr 00 1#
0०0६५ 09 ६+
9० 0 Gost
90 ६5 00 6#
09७11 00 2५
00० $<1 0086
00071 vote
S8R6FF EO 1609

00 ४॥1

ral

40 ६81
00002 0०८६६
00 1७ once
00 05६. ड़
OO REE 09०१८
00829... OO be
00166. ७॥ स्का
00652 oo oes
00945 90 91५
0062+#. With
000८६... 09616

mops = Moye} oye mou

9075861 58-1861 FR-ENOT EN-TROI 7#"1861

अगाण.. नगाण

अगाण ४०७ MOY, MOM MOY) बम

mous] — MODE

ब्माष

6678661 $6-८661 ८6-9661 96-5661 56-#661 #6"166।1 ६6"८661 26-1661 16-0661

eee

wou! “oyu,

Oh O86! GRRE SH-L¥Ol ८1-7961
A मनन बन मनन “नमन ननननननभझदमऊद83तन3नननिननननततनन्‍ननीनमम+म-मन+-+++-+-+

opel


51

का 5018 ६$+%019 97 9S ol pole 35 00६ tr 689 oe CETL

59652 #6 ४9४1 140 0] 89001: ee Eoet 9६061 Lg Oret
orest दर 261 rated ts T6C ८0७६ धाश #0100
tevez irsot 6s! eres ६05८८ wee aeree
wee 89°96 reget ६111९ २001९ oo'siz as ore
ontez ster 6६511 count 6 r8z ard $0 एफ
grein ere we 56 06 pe OLE won ove
Lozar tose ६8%: 0६ £0) हद 189 8६६11
६6$£ 950६ 6909 68 06 era ar &६# 001
611/ 1289 98 66 1008 06६6 न] 6928
res tree tros rats 90 ८6 900: torte
॥8 19 40TL 1004 1481 rose soir cars
96s 1529 है। 85 zo'se #9151 0८६ 82५5
60 €5 Tie 50 09 tees woe oer mor
19°69 $6 39 ory 0215 09 69% tour 05 $5
rr ७9 wo &# 19 STOP ress rose 0८15
ite oss sete once wets bros oer
oreo toes ites 05 or 1965 59 6# 09971
rood 90 Rs Oris #6 55 ores ons Piz ig
८६1८ #009 10 ४9 ares i559 wis 01905
9८1८ 19°58 19Tt us e129 ares ores
880८ 95°85 1699 iis urer wis र 6016
ete suas 6014 0६ 6$ 61८2 ८८99 #876
tsi 9 3५४4 001३8 0018 ॥हक6 01८6
0546 ## 69 ३6 001 error 08:98 ड८101 9065
Oona NYE
65 08S पु of Lees 99%60#
बे 1] ;

26१६1

जा]

4165 wore

60८९५ Secor

20609 कफ

बद1595 £0'OrS

or Ore 08 219

96 Es 66919

1559 8655६

99 Lor दद 569

itty on ORF

69°P6E os cir

| 00038 NOOSNOW

saya ब्ग्प्रम moi wou कमा woe हा]

90-S007 50-1७०८ #0-0००८ ६०६००: 20"1002 19-0007



OP OROL OF TIOL ८०७२6 ट8 968 5968८: ESHER CC ISDS ET RUPR ॥॥ऋछछ
98 LETS YP LIGI PH'SIOF GO'OELI 1206## BP ८६6८ Ie sree 60 Boor

TVEL OI ०००८ SP EIOD $८1:89
ISL6Pl PT PEPE 6६ ६7७1

STREP ७7७
1 ८४७६ ST कहा

000६६ #२७०८ 00792 18३2६ OOIZE  &६६1८21 assis ६6 909 #%17 oe ert 00687 7४97
05016 ८८871 00661 (0102८ OSLIF 56६८6 GSE ४9691. OF fst OO set 90 #61 OS FEE १6७८:
9६9६८ SY POT $5601 BCRTI SEINE 216६2 IES! Ostet 0050# whirl 16 ७८ 11. 149 332
95562 66061 ७४३9८ HPLTI ७1दर 0६5६1 ०७0७६। ६0२०1. Ossi oo orl on toe OOerE 68661
00152 65% OO LIT SPI] OOTOT OF IH O8SHI IHL Os 6७१ 05 0st Os ort ७४1६1 5६111
0० ह्टट ८८६21 OF ERT THI9 0059 7676 rete 05 ire Os Rt ७४०८1 995०1
OOTZE FIT) ONSET 5985 08581 908८ cra) १ दार went 195 ONSET 1६8८

95502 00941 OF TIT 1855 90512 IPH १४0८... OS ELE OCT! EFor OF EDT ६८२५

TLR LOOP HOTH 60 05
4५0 7961 919६ 0७9४1 FO Rr

ais 1७०८६
ats Os Let

६६८61 L896 «PENT PETS $56ट८ 5089 -
05८61 sTE9 0060८ 1८७9 HOLT? ITH

90061 166॥  ॥561 ७676 ७०७८८ $६ ८८६ ol tr 40 682 90 ८61 Toor '0058॥ 8७०
$ट182 NRL 900 ६७ 0७0५५5। रद 1६$# 6951६ OO'SIT SEH 00७८६ 689
OOWET LIF 0058॥ TID ७0551 0०8 5७ teeter os हाट OOSIT SHbr HOOT vise
06100 TSH OOBEL STIS OSOEr cLstL Bile 90 २७1 05002 ॥॥6७ 090 0८2 Fide
६८८०८ 9१660 = RIELE 19७ ७०७४८ ## ४9 oor ६८ २11 SHSIZ {SOP SPolt ges
StSt OOOIT ट+४ OStst ४9% 80 Le os GONE €£er OF TIT TSBs
Cres 00७ ८1६ HGP HORE EH 95 sos 00's 00 90८ FES ७४४61. THIF
Stee 816७2 ८६८६5 Rh ese $$ 8४9 eens 405 $#१0:1। WES ८191 1८४86
595 «OE RSI $109 ०0181 ies 0०१४ OS irl #८2<9 OS EPL &9८#
८065 00601 ERTL ०0८४1 ow 00 ett 00 5#1 BOL 05 ४#॥1 LOSS
खत ७००६७४। 1060 O99 tere Os att 00 ६८1 191८ OOSTE २०३४४
८699 0086। 8518 OF STI 49 6८ OF MOT 90%11 2078 BUTI 61 99
071: 05601 Otol ००८11 ior oven OStit Tee0l ONE) BRte
Gonad
10'S60S CP LTZS ६८ 9१८१ Fh ००७८६ £1 1889. £9 ६060# ॥1 10६1 SO ROSE 50 (४9६ ॥$ 2955 Te 6८62 96 Lror
4968. ८ए 201 0८611  5#501 tooo ६८ tL SSO] 15601 $##6 Shh EL TEI ORES
TL COL 95081 SOR OS RIE oer 00 97६ 95 191 58671. owell
45६51 ७००2८: ध्ाश्य OwTEL 00 ७७।. 0$ ree 9560. #८८61 (ONT! 06 दा
0८61 05%51 ६0 ६#८ 00+#६ $7892 85792 10062. 05 TLE 9018. ##+#८1 OS LES ort

95% ER ITE 00951 POLET OS ESE LOLOE FI OLE 0018
OF LH SPHLE USHT OGTIE ००७४2 PETES BLM ETE
£6L8 OR LEE (8195 LeLeo GO'RTE BT EPS LOITH 0185
GS POL OF OFh 00155 STSTS 0७४ ७७७ 96६८9 150७6 GI 919
OSETE 15007 9560 SHPEN ७१६6८ CEWL hoes ००७८६
COI ४9550 SSOP CK OGL PE PTE ITHEF BE RED 06८69
Of! «OFSTH COREY OF PRL OV ORE OFLEH OF FLE OR SES
05501 0८८४८ ०0866 STTIO OW OSE 1181: 0595% OFLOS
05051 #1#ट ७००४६ ML Loy MOTE LIELE 98% ०८%:

६98५2. 00६1६ 891६ 0515 $159 05905. 59818. 005ट॥
007४६ 9४६७६ ७08८७ PLS 05119 ७१॥+६१ Gsibe ७०१६८ 0०० ७०३४
60% $110# ६४219 60$%99 ४#02८ IFEX 00099. St TRO ६६८८६
OF ILS 9789८ 00966 ## ६2८01 OORED #ह ट३फ OS IES ## ८४11 05 995
05995. 01६801 OS POL 062101 04:८0 ##686 0001४. 26188. 05917

+ ८८290 91116 5095 ०७59१८७॥ 60651 BETH SHOTS sree का
OF Lol $#%8८. 00515 POSH 056:1 WTOP OS Isr ०9689. 05 9EF
05661 LSTSE OF OFS 16% ON BL! 0607 MTP 90559. 051५1
16502 FRTOE OF REF OMESS OSETE HORSE ७४८४ट 9१२७४ ON LTT

OOMaAd NOOSNOW
01100. ७00७. ७४०४० #०॥० — MULTI ४01७. MOLINO MOM — MOUND कण. #00॥09 - WOM] — MORN MOY! MOYO  ७०॥०  MOIO MOYO)
aaa treet trier हा कक wrionr =~ solour ~ lowe

(SEP 107 थ L0-9000) dd H PHHAL JP Beqwosspuusos soy
PALFMAXANNE VIVO SOUVHOSIG उम्र MMH



53

Monitoring water flow in river Ganga

6.11 Keeping in view targe dams and HEPPs constructed on river Ganga, the Committee asked whether the water flow
was being monitored if not holistically but at least intermittently, a representative of Ministry of Power testified that-—

"The dicharge data is centrally pooled in the Central Water Commission. Individual developers also give data but

CWC has also installed stations in many points. They are maintaining all these data. They are maintaining it in the

data base of the Central Water Commission".

Inadequate flow in Ganga/Diversion of water from Ganga

6.12 Responding over the serious concern over shrinking of river Ganga and losing its vitality due to ever increasing
flow of pollutants into the river ganga and hence the need for setting timelines for its cleaning, Secretary, Ministry of water
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation deposed inter alia as under:-—

“We have actually indentified seven thrust areas and 21 action points which cover most of the points, ecological

points, bio diversity issues, plantation issues, and several of the things. We have tried to make it very Comprehensive

list, We have got a plan in which we will set timelines also,"

6,13 In reply to a question whether maintaining the minimum flow of water is one of the seven thrust areas and
21 actionable points, the M/o WR, RD and GR submitted that maintaining the minimum flow of water is one of the seven
thrust areas and 21 actionable points, The details as given by them are as follows:—

“Maintenances of Environmental-flow

A, Continuous and uninterrupted flow and river connectivity is the immediate priority for river Ganga. A river with

substantial flow only, can dilute the pollutants and sustain the ecological diversity, Numerous interventions like

hydroelectric projects and diversions in canal have significantly affected river flow, Therefore maintenance of
environmental flow in the River requires a Policy for environmental-flow regulation in river Ganga highlighting the

‘major issues like:

® Minimum flow discharge from all the physical barriers to be complied by all the established bydroelectric projects

and the upcoming projects.

#. 116 Inter Ministerial group headed by Shri B.K. Chaturvedi has given its adhoc recommendations regarding the
environmental flow til} the finalization of the report of the consortium of IITs. As pert of the preparation of the
Ganga River Basin Management Plan, the consortium of IITs have finalized the environmental flow for Uttarakhand
stretch of Ganga in their interim report, arriving at specific recommendations at specific points for different
seasons.

Policy decision has to be taken on the following matters;

Policy decision on environmental flow.

Provisioning of River Passes in all the established physical structures for free movement of aquatic life,
Mandatory inclusion of river passes in all the upcoming structures.

Considering to discontinue the intervening dams and power projects that are not yet commissioned based upon
this analysis while working out a compensation mechanism for state, investors and public,
Reduction in water abstraction

Mechanism for efficient water withdrawal and distribution from water diversion structures in River Ganga.
Renovation of damaged irrigation structures to prevant water wastage.

Encouraging water use efficiency in agriculture aiming to reduce water requirement and hence freeing some water
for the river.”

oeee >

# #७ ७ फए

Reasons for inadequate flow
6.14 With regard to inadequate flow in Ganga, Secretary, M/o Environment, Forests, and Climate Change (MoEF&CC):
“Water extraction for irrigation, industrial as well as drinking purposes is leading to inadequate water flow and that is
compounding the problem",
6.15 The Committee sought written information from M/o WR, RD & GR regarding impact of irrigation on e-flows,
However, the ministry could not furnish the sare despite reminders.


4

Shrinking of Ganga

6.16 When asked about the reported shrinking of the Ganga and the specific efforts made to arrest the trend, the M/
७ WR, RD & GR admitted-—

“Yes, The River is shrinking due to over extraction of river water, construction of Dams/Barrages, encroachment of
flood plain, degradation of wetlands etc..."

As regards the steps taken to arrest the shrinking trend, the representative submitted that: —

° “The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has constituted a committee (vide F. No. 27-1/2011-
SICOM (Vol. 1) dated 26th March, 2014) for formulation of guidelines for management of river fronts including
the flood plains for evolving a River Regulation Zone (RRZ) on both sides of the river.

| Under the Namami Ganga Programme, it has been proposed to regulate the sand mining through suitable
guidelines for protection of river banks.

o The Ganga River Basin Management Plan prepared by IIT Consortium, propsed/recommended for
9 Detailed mapping of the River Space, its active flood plain and valley margin at a scale less than 10,000 (using

high resolution satellite imagery and field verification)
© Delineation of RRZ.
© Notification for River Reguiatory Zones.

o Formulation of well-defined rules, regulations and policies pertaining to River Regulation Zones that has
been delineated. This should include defining prohibited and regulated activities for each of the RR Zone."

Dams and HEPPs on River Ganga

6.17 A representative of a Non-Government Organisation (Ganga Ahwaan, Ms. Mallika Bhanot) expressed their views
before the Committee on 20 January, 2016 as follows:—

“Basicaily, the larger issue in the State of Uttarakhand is the construction of hydro power projects. Around 450 big
and small hydro power projects have been proposed, Few are under construction and few already exist. Immediately
after the Maneri Bhali Reservoir, you see an absolute dry stretch of the river. You would see there is no water in the
river Gangotri.

This slide shows a typical design of run-of-the river project which is what has been recommended in the entire State
of Uttarakhand. These are bumper to bumper projects which means another headrest tunnel starts at the end point of
the power house of the first headrest tunnel. This is the status of Ganga after Maneri Bhali-1] reservoir. The river
Bhagirathi has an absolutely dry stretch after Maneri Bhali-II reservoir. Downstream further of Maneri Bhali-Il, you
see absolutely dry stretches of the river. Immediately after it is the Tehri take stretching up to 46 kms and after it is the
Kottshwar dam with 400 kilowatt power.

Because of these back to back dams, 53 per cent of River Bhagirathi is completely affected, impacted and gone. There
हू are different type of committees. We have been engaged in the research work for the last few years becauise we belong
to this very valley, We ourselves live 60 kilometers below the Gangotri in Uttarkashi where the natural shape of Ganga
is still in a conservative form. We are trying our level best to conserve it. can tell you that if Bhagirathi has changed
its course 33 per cent due to these four dams, then there are different type of committees, they say that there must not
be diversion of water more than 60 per cent. Sir, 53 per cent of the Bhagirathi, the original State of the Ganga, bas
already gone and you do not have any scope. Even then, the proposals and under construction projects continue till
date, That is our bigger challenge which we wanted to convey.
‘This is the condition of Mandakini and Alaknanda after Vishnu Prayag Hydro Power Proejet here. The same fate is
with the Alaknanda. It is absolute dry river bed. There is zero flow after Vishnu Prayag Hydro Power Project. We keep
on hearing all the scientists and their interesting aspects on environmental flows, ¢-flows and ecological flow. We
know that for them minimum ecological flow means maximum water extraction. That is what is actually there, Who is
defining this?

The major social impact point is that water is not available for us, not for the bath of Makarsakrant! and nor for any
rituals,"


55

6.18 The representative further added:— |

“There are some local impacts which have been exchided from Environment Impacts Assessments Report, I have
studied many EIS wherein broad points have been mooted, but local impacts are missing from there. Basically
point is that it is not 4 matter of flow of water only, but whenever any project is drawn up, all type of things such
45 cutting, crushing, blasting, tunneling, mining are incorporated. This is high landstide and high land subsidence
zone. It is an area belonging to seismic zone 4 and seismic zone 5. When Lohari Nath Pala, Pala Maneri, Bhairon
Ghati these three projects were being constructed in Gangotri area, I can only tell you about the first hand
experience of Lohari Nath Pala, Pala Maneri, | can also tell you that blasting was taking place there and cracks have
developed in nearby houses, The tunneling experts say about this that blasting should be done from that much of
hertz's but it is been noticed on ground that if blasting is being done from that much of hertz’s, then cracks are also
developing in our houses and thus the condition of our houses are becomming like pressure cookers there."

Status of Migration

6.19 The Committee asked the representative regarding the status of migration after the construction of dams. A
representative (Shri Govind Pokhriyal) of the organization (Ganga Ahwaan) replied as under-—

18 systematic study was to be conducted by the Government, but it could not be because Supreme Court had
taken a sve mofo cognizance after disuster in 2013 wherein it was stated that no clearance be given to all these
dams. It had given the direction to the State and Central Government and asked the Central Government to
constitute an expert body, That body will probe into the matter whether environment degradation hus caused the
Ganga basin due to these projects and whether these projects have played any role to aggravate this disaster and
this flood or not, The same study was concluded und submitted in April 2014 and when this study submitted the
Present Government filed an affidavit in the Supreme Court on $ December 2014 on the basis of all reports and
committee reports. You are also saying like that. | can given you some experts of the same. It bas directed which is
on page No. 58 of MOEF. "Opinion on environment degradation caused by hydro-electric projects.in Ganga,
Bhagirathi and Alaknanda basins.

Its next para reads it is clear from the report submitted by the Expert Body which is inclusive of the findings of many

researchers committees that with the construction of hydro power projects, the local ecology is certainly over-

burdened. There are clear sightings of irreversible damages of environment in terms of loss forest. degraded water
quality, geological social impact and that they enhance land slides and other disasters.”

6.20 With regard to particulars of existing dams and Hydro Electric Power Plants (HEPPs) on river Ganga, their
capacity in terms of water storage und electricity generation (project wise), the aree that these projects encircle, the
Ministry of Power in their post evidence replies submitted thet 7 Hydro electric Schemes on river Ganga and its tributaries
in Uttarakhand as under mentioned (Table 6.19) with an aggregate installed capacity of 2668MW are in operation:—

Tabie 6,20; Dams and HEPPs on the Ganga in Uttarakhand

51. Project River Installed Design ‘Type Live Submergence
No. Capacity Energy Area
४ (MW) (MU) (MM) (HA)
1, Tehni-ITHDCIL Bhagirathi 1000 m7 Storage 2615 4200
2 Koteshwar THDCIL Bhagirathi 400 155 ROR a1 290
3. Chilla USVNL Ganga 4 ms ROR 5 NA
4, Maneri Bhali-l USVNL Bhagirathi क्र 395 ROR 056 ®
Pondage
5. Maneri Bhali-f1UJVNL — Bhagirathi ms 1566 ROR 076 7
6 Vishnu Prayag JPVL Alaknanda 400 im ROR Barrage
Barrage
7. Shrinagar AHPCL Alaknanda 30 1382 ROR 8 224.1
Total 2668



56

Dams and HEPPs being built or Planned in the near future

6.21 With regard to the data on dams and Hydro Electric Power Projects (HEPPs) being built or are being planned in
the near future on river Ganga, their capacity in terms of water storage and electricity generation (project-wise), the area that
these projects encircle/likely to encircle, etc., the Ministry of Power furnished the following details: —

"14 Nos. of Hydro Electric Schemes with an aggregate installed capacity 4798 MW are under construction or

proposed to be taken up for construction on river Ganga (Bhagirathi and Alaknanda and its tributaries), Out of these

14 Hydro Electric Schemes, 6 Nos. of Hydro Electric Schemes with an aggregate installed capacity 2310 MW are under

construction, 6 Nos. of Hydro Electric Schemes with an aggregate installed capacity of 2077 MW are cleared & yet to

be taken up for construction. DPRs of 2 Nos, of Hydro Electric Schemes with an aggregate installed capacity 408 MW
are under examination in Central Electricity Authority/Central Water Commission/Geological Survey of India. Details

‘are given at Annexure-XV (Source: CEA),”

6.22 The Committee sought to know whether Central Water Commission (CWC) is consulted before the approvals are
given for construction of dams on the rivers in Ganga Basin, the Ministry is yet to provide the reply,

6.23 On the number of HEPPs having 1255 than 25 MW capacity presently under operation on river Ganga and its
tributaries along with their capacity (project wise) the Ministry of Power furnished that ‘there are 10 operational small hydro
power projects (<25 MW) on the tributaries of river Ganga, Details are given at Annexure-XVI.

6.24 The data on number of HEPPs having less than 25 MW capacity being built or are proposed to be built in the near
future on river Ganga and its tributaries along with their capacity is given below—

"There are 21 small hydro projects (< 25 MW) are being built or are proposed to be built in the near future on the

tributaries of river Ganga. Details are given at Annexure-XVIL"

6.25 With regard to the data on the number of Dams and Hydro Power Plants (HPPs) operating, under construction
and proposed on Ganga and its tributaries, their capacity, the quantum of water used/diverted for the purpose, the M/o WR,
RD & GR submitted the following information:—

“After 2006, 11 HEPs have been accorded Environmentat Clearance in the State of Uttarakhand (Annexure-XVIID).

However, as per record 70 HEPs have been allocated in upper reaches of Ganga and its tributaries (Annexure-X1X),”

Impact of Dams on flow of Water in Ganga

6.26 Responding to 2 query as to whether more damming of the river would be useful for controlling the pollution or
it will enhance the pollution or will reduce the capacity of the river itself to keep its own health, Secretary, MoEF&CC
appearing before the Committee on 13th July, 2015 candidly deposed:—

“Sir, 1 do not think | am in 9 position to give a definitive answer on this because much depends on the terrain, the
topography and the kind of ecology which exists. So, there are instances in the world where dams have been made.
Even in India, as you would know, that when the power policy was initially maxée it was said that India will have at least
40 per cent of hyde! power in the country but today, | think, we are not even 20 per cent. But certainly there has to be
a balance which will have to be established. In the Ministry of Environment, for example, we have undertaken river
basin studies to assess the cumulative impact of hydel power stations, or hydel power potential in these basins. We
have undertaken in the North-East same studies, we have undertaken some studies in the Himachal Pradesh. Some of
them have been empleted and some of them are undergoing.”

Dams and HEPPs on Ganga and Environmental Impact

6.27 About the availability or otherwise of an institutional mechanism’systemic arrangement to have constant watch
on the impact on cnvironment due to operations of HEPPs Ministry of Power submitted as under:—

“For the purpose of monitoring of impact of construction’setting up an operation of HPPs, the Regional Offices of the
Ministry of Envioronment, Forest & Climate Change are mandated to undertake periodic monitoring to the units’
entities to ensure compliance by themselves, maintain records and submit six monthly compliance reports to the
Ministry, The State Pollution Control Boards also undertake similar monitoring and they are the authorities to issue
Consent 10 operate to the Developers. Special Committees/Experts are also deputed to undertake such review and
monitoring if situation so demands. Thus, institutional mechanism for impact monitoring of HPPs exist at both Central
Government and State Government level.

Apart from above, post impoundment faunal survey, post floristic survey and water quality studies were conducted
through HNB Garhwal University (Central University), Sringar, Uttarakhand, Botonical Survey of India, Dehradun
and National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI), Nagpur respectively. All these reports indicate
that Tehri reservoir has no adverse impact on the ecology of surrounding area,”


57

6.28 Furnishing the impact of dams on the river Ganga, Ahwaan, A NGO working for preserving the natural and cultural
flow of Ganga, in a written representation submitted inter alia that:—

“Due to projects like Maneri dam and Tehri and Keteswar dams 115 kms of Ganga is diverted into tunnels and lakes.

People do not get even glimpse of the Ganga in her origin valley. To make matters worse, people have to plead to the

companies constructing these dams to release some water 50 that they can do the last rites of their deceased dear ones

of other religious ceremonies."

Wherever these dams have been constructed or being constructed, massive blasting for tunneling and other activities
are drying up the water resources in the surrounding areas. Incidents of landslides and land sinking in these areas are
bécoming more frequent and destructive every time. Due to the construction of Maneri Bhali, in dozens of villages
around the construction site the age old water resources have dried up and in the year 1991, when the earthquake hit
Uarkashi, Jamak village which is situated right above the tunne! for Maneri Bhali | experienced the maximum number of
casualties as tunneling weakened the very foundation of the village. One can easily see simikar impacts-dried water
resources landslides and land sinking, in all other areas where tunnel and reservoir projects are being built.”

6.29 With regard to the impact of dams and barrages on the fertility of Ganga basin, Ganga Ahwaan submitted as
under-— .

“Due to construction of these dams the immensely important silt being carried by ganga which makes the Ganga basin
the most fertile is being compromised with. While the sitt in Ganga is a boon for all the downstream path of Ganga the
same silt is the biggest hurdle for proper functioning of the already existing hydro power projects on the upstream path
of Ganga. As per the dats obtained from Maneri Bhali and Tehri, efficiency of these power plants is merely
30-40%. The RTI from Maneri Bhali | clearly states that due to the excessive silt, the turbines gets choked thereby
rechicing the production. As per study published in 2011 by NEERI, 90% of this fertile silt is de-silted/obstructed in Tehri
due to which the original quality of Ganga is being compromised. By tampering with the waters right at the source the
most important significant quality of the Ganga is being destroyed and therefore the Ganga Jal after Rishikesh is no
longer the same jal that we are consuming since centuries.”

6,30 The Committee has sent the study report received from an NGO (Gangs Ahwaan) which showed the obstruction
caused to flow of the river Ganga and reducing the river toa river of pebbles, The committee sought the comments of the
Ministry. However, the reply is awaited,

631 ‘The Mlo WR, RD & GR was requested to furnish their written comments on the points/issues raised in the
memorandum submitted by the NGO Ganga Ahwaan. The Minsitry wide their OM No. GKC/01/2015-16/1133/NMCG/ECLS
dated 17.02.2016 without giving the point wise reply simply stated as under:— i

“NMCG, which is mandated to fund and execute pollution abatement measures in river Ganga, does not directly deal with
the issues raised in the memorandum as it is mainly concemed with the decision of the Government on the construction
of dams on river Ganga."

6.32 With respect to the Environmental Impact Assessment (ELA) carried on all HEPPs on the Ganga und its tributaries
and adherence or otherwise to such stipulations‘requirements, the Ministry of Power stated that;—

study is conducted and an Environment Management Plan (EMP) is prepared to address and mitigate adverse
environmental impacts, if any. Public Hearings are conducted before finalizing E1A/EMP Reports for individual projects
as an integral component. Based on the ELA, EMP and Public Hearing Reports, the projects appraised and necessary
recommendations on granting EC are made to the Developers for strict compliance, The compliance and adherence of
the same is monitored through Regional Centers of this Ministry.”

6.33 In written reply to a post evidence query as to whether the study on impact of hydel power stations on Gangs river
basin has been completed, the findings thereon and the action taken or proposed to be taken on such findings, the
M/O WR, RD & GR submitted as under-—

"The Expert Body constituted in pursuance of the order of Hon'ble Supreme Court is in the process of assessing the
impact of hydroelectric power projects on river Ganga, However, the impact of hydroelectric power projects in upper
reaches of river Ganga hits been examined by IIT-Roorkee, Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun, Expert Body chaired by
Dr. Ravi Chopra. -


58

“A Cornmittee under the Chairmanship of Or. Murli Manohar Joshi wax constituted to inter-alia study the impact of

Tebri Dam on Seif Purification Quality of Ganga Jal. A copy af the Gow, order regarding constitution of the Commitee
ts place at Annexure-XNII.

In its recommendations, the Committee had concluded that the possibility of passing some Uninterrupted portion of
the fiir weather flow of the Bhagirathi river past Tehri Dam be investigated by an expert technical committee. Based
on this, an appropriate techno-economically feasible scheme may be designed and considered."

6.35 In accordance with the recommendations of the Committee headed by Dr, Murli Manohar Joshi, the Mio Power
Constituted an Expert Technical Committee headed by Member (D&R}, Central Water Commission, and having Member
(Hydro), Central Etectricity Authority, Additional Director General, Geological Survey of India and.an expert, ex-Managing
Director, Chukha Project asmembers. A copy of order dated 09.07.2002 in placed at Annexure-XXII.

The Expert Technica) Committee in its recommendations had concluded: —

() The findings of mathematical modeling study of hydrodynamics of Tehri Reservoir carried out by CWPRS,
Pune, have shown that the water in Tehri Reservoir remains in circulation, throughout the year. Therefore, the
water for uniterrupted flow could be drawn from the Tehri Reservoir, which has been established as flowing
water at all times.

(ai) An average discharge of the order of 35 cusecs (1 cumiec) ७ considered 10 be an appropriate quantum of
discharge for some uninterrupted Portion of fair weather flow of Bhagirathi Fiver past Tehri Dam.
Gili), Considering the technical merits, geological considerations and Satisfactory operation, alternative of providing
400 mm dio steel pipe within the lining of ILO is found suitable and is recommended. The Committee further
Tecommend that there shall be two intake points at different locations (say 2m apart, connected to the single
pipe). The Committee found that with this arrangement about 35 cusecs of water shall be released
uninterruptedly.
6.36 The recommendations of the Expert Technical Committee were accepted by the Govt, of India as per Office
Memorandum dated 22nd September. 2003 (Annexure-XXIV), stating that—

“Considering the technicat merits, geological considerations and satisfactory operation, alternative of providing

fb enm da steel pipe within the lining of ILO is found suitable andi recommended. The Committee inher reemee

that there shall be two intake points at different locations (say 2m apart, connected to the single pipe), The Committee

found that with this arrangement about 35 cusecs of water shall be released \ninterruptedly." Accordingly, 85

Tecommended by the Expert Technical Committee, a 400 mm dia pipe with discharge of 1 cumecs (35 Cusecs), offtaking

from Tehri reservoir has been provided by THDC for uniterrupted (free) Now of Ganga (Aviral Ganga)."

Expert body of environmental impact of HEPPs in Uttarakhand

6.37 Consequent upon the judgment dated 13th August, 2013 of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Civil Appea) No. 6736 of
2013 —SLP{C) No. 362 of 2012), with Appeal No, 6746-6747 of 2013 {arising out ० 51.2 (01४०. 5849-5830 of 2012}. and T.C.
(C) No. 55-57 of 2013, Ministry of Environment & forests constituted an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr.
Ravi Chopra, Member, NGRBA and Director, Peoptes' Science Institute, Dehradun, to make a detailed study as to whether
Hydroelectric Power projects existing and tnder construction in the river basins of Alkananda, Bhaginutht and their wibutaries


59

has contributed to environmental degradation and, if x0, to what extent and also whether they have contributed to the
tragedy that occurred at Ustarakhand in the month of June, 2013. The Committee has also examined the impact of the
Proposed 24 hydropower projects on the Biodiversity of Alaknanda and Bhagirathi river basins. The summary of
Recommendations for immediate and medium term actions are enclosed at Annexure-XXV.

6,38 The Committe received a written memorandum from an NGO Vic. Ganga Ahvan. The crux of the issues raised
there in is as follows:-—

“Point | covers various reasons for cancellation of dam projects on Himalayan region of Ganga,

Point 2 talks of the June 2013 disaster in the Himalayan Region and the Hon’ble Supreme Court directing Centre to
study the damage caused to the environment due to constructed/under construction dams on Ganga. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court had also stopped construction on 24 proposed dams,

Point 3 deals with the constitution of the Chopra Commitee by the MoEF&CC in October, 2013. The point 3 also says
that the Central Government, vide affidavit submitted in the Hon'ble Supreme Court on Sth December, 2014, has also
accepted the finding of the report that irredecmable damages has been caused due to dam projects in the Himalayan
regions of Ganga and that dam projects were directly/indirectly responsible for the June, 2013 disaster.

Point 4 speaks of a surprising change in the attitude of the MoEF&CC after filling the affidavit in December, 2014,
It points out the intervention of Prime Minister Office in the matter, A meeting held on 13th January, 2015 chaired by
PMO Chief Secretary and attended by all chief/other secretaries, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Environment,
representatives fo Uttarakhand Government. It goes further to say that it was decided that the Government
would lobby in favour of the power projects citing energy requirement of the country as a priority, putting aside the
aviralta-nirmalta aspect of Ganga rejuvenation sought more time from the Hon'ble Supreme Court.

Points 5 talks about the Hon'ble Supreme Court directing the Centre to decide on 6 dams (out of 24 proposed dam
projects recommended for closure/cancellation by the teams of experts),

Point 6 says that the Central Government's stance was exposed on 17 February, 2015, when the Attomey General's
made a statement to the Hon’ble Court that the Centre can go ahead with the construction of the 6 dams, quoting the
findings of another 4-member committee which was constituted in the end of December, 2014,

Point 7 says that the report referred above was leaked to the media before being presented before the Hon'ble Court,
and it was revealed that the members’scientists had discussed the damage caused by the 24 dams in the Ganga-
Himalayan region, and questioned the approval of the 6 dams.

Point 8 says that MoEF&CC sought time from the court t analyse the report and construction of the 6 dams.
Point 9 talks about MoEF&CC forming another Expert Group (DAS-Commitee) in June, 2015 to explore means to give
go-ahead to these E-dam projects ignoring prior studies and reports,

Point 10 deals with Dams-Committee submitting its report justifying the construction of these 6 dam projects, The

Centre submitted an affdavit to the Hon'ble Court in November, 2015 in favour of the report and submitted that inter-
ministrial group will soon decide on it,

Point 11 says that MoEF&CC submitted an affidavit giving the green signal for construction of dams on river Ganga
in January, 2016."

6.39 The M/o WR, RD &GR, in a written reply submitted that;—

“NMCG, which is mandated to fund and execute pollution abatement measures in river Ganga, does not directly deal
with the issues raised in che memorandum as it is mainly concemed with the decision of the Government on construction
of dams on river Ganga.”

Rubber Dams
6.40 The Ministry were requested to furnish the replies the following on rubber dams:—
(0 the details of study, if any, conducted on rubber dams,
(8) ॥०७ the rubber dams are different from conventional dams particularly in terms of safety, security and viabilty,
(हर) the extent to which maximum river flow will be maintained from these dams.


60

‘The Ministry have not responded to the queries several reminders.
Tehri Dam - Change in Hydrodynamics of Ganga

6.41 Asked whether the Tehri dam has resulted in change in the hydro dynamics of the Ganga and if $0, the details
including its impact on ecology of the region, Ministry of Power submitted as under:—

“Any seasonal/over the year storage across a river always modifies the flow characteristics of ३ given stream in terms

of its pattern and quamities. In order to assess the impact of Tehri reservoir on river Ganga downstream a comparision

of average monthly flow at Rishikesh in pre and post Tehri scenario has been made. The details of average monthly

statistics is given in the following Table-6.41,"

Table-6.41; Average monthly flow ratio

Moth SSSR aga Rie
36 years 7 years Post to Pre-
(1970-2005) (2006-12) Tehri flow
Pre-Tehri Post-Tehri Ratio
flow (cures) flow {cumec)
Jun. 8972 TI Os
Jal. 64d 1678.7 98
Aug. 2681.4 2369.7 09
Sep. 15246 1609.5 ०
Oct. 300.0 605.7 12
Nov. 2757 3334 13
Dec. 198.2 2703 la
Jan, 168.8 2549 5
Feb. 164.7 204 1s
March 1956 3387 17
April 257.1 406.2 16
May 4199 5024 12

6.42 Based on above analysis the Ministry has drawn the following conclusions:—

> “The average flows during the lean period has been augmented during all the lean months (Nov.-Apr:) which
reflects the special characteristics of storage type reservoir, It is worth mentioning that the minimum flow of
Ganga river have been augmented by §.2 times to 1.8 times at Rishikesh. "

> The typical lean period (Nov.-Apr.) flow augmentation shows the way how this type of reservoir may increase
the river flow during lean months ofa year.

> The attenuation of flow peaks during monsoon period simply indicates that Tehri reservoir is helping in reducing
the peak flood impacts in downstream reaches of river Bhagirathi and Ganga, A plot of actual flood
of June, 2013 flood and expected flood hydrograph at Haridwar in the absence of Tehri dam is shown, where it
can be seen that in the absence of Tehri dam the flood peak at Haridwar would have been about 21500 cumec in
the place of actual observed peak of about 14500 cumec. Hence, due to Tehri dam the flood at Haridwar was '
mitigated by about 7000 cumec." कै


6
Chart 6.43: Plot of actual inflow hydrograph and expected inflow hydrograph at Haridwar in the absence of Tehri Dam

Discharge ¢cumos)
1188 8 ६ ३६ ६ ६ ३8४8

6.43 ‘The Ministry also submitted that following hydrograph (chart 6.43) indicating the actual inflow and expected
inflow at Haridwar in the absence of Tehri Dam.

6.44 The Ministry also submitted that:-—

"Mathematical Model Studies to investigate hyxtrodynamics of the Tehri Reservoir was conducted through Central
Water and Power Research Station (CWPRS), Pune. The study revealed that, during the monsoon period the inflow
‘volume of water, nearly equal to the storage below. Minimum Draw Down Level (७०01), is added to reservoir in just
17 days thus replenishing the whole storage below MDDL in 17 days whereas, the gross storage volume is input into
reservoir within 67 days of active monsoon, Hence, Tehri reservoir completes the cycle of replenishment of storage

every year."
Hydrodynamics of the Ganga

645 The Committee inquired whether any study has been done of the hydrodynamics of the Ganga and its water vis-
a-vis the hydrodynamics of the water of other major rivers like Nile, Amazon, Thames, Mississippi, Danube, Brahmaputra,
Yangtze, Hwang Ho and if'so, the findings thereof. The Ministry replied as under:—

"The data of the above international rivers like Nile, Amazon, Thames, Mississippi, Danube, Yangtze and Hwang Ho

is not available with CWC. However, the average annual and non-monsoon (Nov.-Apr.) water availability of river

Ganga at Rishikesh hus been compared with some of the important tributaries of river Brahmaputra at their foothill

location. The findings are as under:—
Lohit at Dibang at ‘Subensiri at Ganga at
Demwe Dibang Subansiri Rishikesh
Lower Multipurpose Lower HEP
Location Project Location
(Catchment (Catchment (Catchment (Catchment
बाध्य area-11276 airea-21704
20174 sq.km.) sq.km) sq.km.)
sq.km.)
ee
Avg. annual 38980 26950 3490 24630
yield (MCM)
Avg, yield 9810 40 8370 3480
during Nov, to Apr, (MCM)
Avg. annual 1.93 239 1.65 1.13

yield per'sq.km, (MCM)

From the above finding it can be seen that the average annual yield in Himalayan Gunga is even fess than the average
‘Snnual yield of Dibang having the drainage area about 50% of river Ganga dreinage area at Rishikesh. This is because


62

of difference in average annual rainfall. The average annual rainfall in Himalayan Ganga is about 1600 mm, while the
same in the Eastern Himalayas of Brahmaputra basin is more than 3000 mm. Further, the average annual rainfall of
Ganga basin is about 1050 mm against the average rainfall of about 2600 mm for Brakmaputra basin, resulting per
sq.km. average annual yield of about 0.56 MCM for Ganga and about | MCM for Brahmaputra. (Source: CWC).”

Energy forms of Ganga
646 An expert (Prof. U.K. Choudhary) expressing his views on Ganga Rejuvenation before the Committee on 19
January, 2016 stated ay under-—

The origin point of Ganga is Gornukh which is the highest point of all rivers origin of the world that is why energy
potential of the Ganga river system is unique, This potential energy is converted into Kinetic energy. There is a
difference of approximately 75 kilometers between the origin points of river Ganga and Yamuna, the colour of Ganga
Jal is completely whitish and water of Yamuna is blue, It simply signifies that quality, quantity and dynamics of every
river body system as in the human body system is different. The major problem is that the works have been started
without any knowledge of anatomy, morphology, cross section of the river, etc, Ganga system is created by sedimentary
rocks, we should know the fundamental concept. Our Himalayan rocks are sedimentary and these are loose and have
deep slopes. For example the height of three Gorges Dam of China is 181 meter and our Tehri Dam is 260.5 meter, the
reservoir of TGP is 660 kilometer and Tehri is 44 km. This means that the slopes of our Himalayan mountains are
18 times more thin the TGP Dam. The slope defines the energy, the power generation of TGP dam is
18 thousand megawatt and Tehri is 750, 800 or 900 megawatt, Our problem is that we have deep reservoir, about
90 meter draw down is there, there are fill by soil post, rock post. All of a sudden, landslide is taking place. Due to
Kinetic energy of rivers, flood situation aggravated in Uttarakhand, Kashmir. 1t is simple that if you will not stop or
convert the Kinetic energy it will create flood. Our Kinetic energy is so high gradient due to which flood came in
Kedarjee, drag force has increased due to sedimentation, landslides, etc. The origin point of Ganga is from Himalayan
region, to control the development of pore pressure of river we should set up micro dam which have fourto five meter
of height.

On the rate of sedimentation und its impact on reservoir water quality, the witness deposed;—

“Due to this the Landstides will not intensify, rate of sedimentation of reservoir will be reduced. Due to sedimentation,
the density of water increases and changes the colour of water, reduces oxygen content which deteriorate river water
quality in the reservoir. This also induces self-induced seismicity,

We should fundamentally understand that our Himalaya, river Ganga are not suitable for large dams, we should
assess this, the quality of water has been deteriorating due to sedimentation loud, landslides, ete, You can draw
conclusion by assessing the drag forces which have been increasing in the cross section of rivers at different
places.”

6.47 With regard to the effects of dams and HEPPs on the ecological health of the river Ganga and its tributaries, the
Ministry of Power in their background stated as follows:~

"In case of hydroclectric projects there is no consumptive use of water. The water is diverted from the diversion site
of the project and after power generation the same is discharged in the river near its Tail Race Tunnel (TRT) outfall.
Hence, the affected river reach is generally between the diversion site and TRT outfall, where adequate flow needs to
be ensured as environmental flow release. This aspect is primarily being examined by MoEF&CC, Fora hydroelectric
Project, project specific ELA Study is carried out which inter-alia includes environmental flow studies and the same
is presented before EAC for Environmental Clearance of the project.

The projects proposed to be set up on the river Ganga are of Run of the River (ROR) type, involving minimal pondage

Just adequate for daily operation of these plants, Therefore, itis felt that after having complied with all the prescribed

environmental safeguards, development of these hydrociectric projects would have minimal effect on environmental!’

ecological health of the river. While according clearances to projects on the basis of Environmental Impact Assessment

(ELA) studies mitigation measures are prescribed in Environmental Management Plan (EMP). They are implemented

by the developers, so as to avoidl/minimize any adverse impact,”

6.48 When the attention of the Ministry of WR, RD & GR was drawn to the view that dams and barrages and draining
the tremendous, unsustainable amounts of water from Ganga causing parts of the riverbed to go dry, and whether in view
thereof Government propose to revisit the policy of allowing dams and barrages on Ganga and its tributaries with stipulations
such as allowing continuous flow of water, the Ministry submitted as fullows:—


63

>[०) Power is one of the most important inputs for the development and growth of the country. One of the sources of
power generation is through hydroelectricity which requires construction of dams. However, there is hydropower
generation in run of the river method that permanently does not allow impounding of the river water. The hydro power
generation is an integral part of the power system for years together inthis country. Ecologically when compared to
thermal power, hydro power does not cause any air pollution. However, the construction of dams for hydro power
geberation results in impounding and displacement of human settlements and having impact on flora & fauna. All the
proposals for construction of dams for hydro power generation are subjected to an exhaustive environment impact
study which takes into account tikely impounding. displacement, inundation of setderents and impact on flora &
fauna. An appropriate environmental mitigation plan is designed to minimise such impacts, The MoEF&CC has a
business allocation 10 consider and grant environment clearance and approval for the diversion of forestland in
accordance with the provisions laid down in Environmental Protection Act, 1986 and rules made thereunder. Of late,
concems have been raised on the problems likely ३0 be caused and caused by hydroelectric projects on downstream
flow and associated impact on sediment movement, biota movement and others, However, these issues are addressed
through the tools of minimum environmental flow in different seasons. MoEF&CC in pursuance of the orders of
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the subject matter of Alaknanda Hydro Power Ms. Anuj Joshi has constituted an Expert
Body in the past and currently another Expert Body is examining the impact of hydroelectric power projects in upper
reaches of river Ganga..."

Steps taken 10 maintain adequate flow in river Ganga

6.49 On the issue of steps to be taken/proposed to be taken to maintain adequate flow of water in the river Ganga, the
Ministry of Power made the following submission:—

“The Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change ensures a minimum flow of water, technically known as
Ecological Flow or Environmental Plow (E-fow) while clearing the Hydro Electric Projects. The concept of Environment
flow is foliowed for sustenance of aquatic tife and downstream user needs, Based on this, the EAC from time to time
has been recommending a site specific study to be carried out for establishisng the proper environmental flow during
monsoon, non-monsoon and lean months. Water withdrawal for power generation is regulated subject to release of
prescribed environmental flow,

As mentioned above, continuons flow in the form of environment flow as recommended by MoEF&CC is maintained
in a hydro electric project to provide required flows during different seasons and to mitigate impact on biodiversity,
cultural and beritage values of river. The developer is under obligation to release the environmental flow mandated by
MoEF&CC for different seasons.

A project is designed for certain installed capacity and expected production of energy subject to prescribed e-flow. If

the norms of e-flow are revised after clearances or revised ¢-flow is to be applied retrospectively, then the projects

suffer heavily because of consequent change in design and energy, which may render projects unviable,”

6.50 Government of Bihar wide their लाल dated 21.04.2016, is maintaining that better silt management in Ganga results
in ‘Avirita’ and 'Nirmalta’ of the river submined as under; —

“The Government of Bihar of continuously raising the issue of developing ३ National Silt Management Policy. On the
one hand, intensive deforestation in the catchment area of Ganga resulting in increased inflow of silt, on the other
hand, the adverse impact on outflow of silt due to Farakka barrage has resulted in rise of bed 16५2, reduction in
carrying capacity, rise of meandering and breading tendencies and formation of shoals in the Ganga. The then
Minister of Water Resources, Shri Pawan Bansal had undertaken an serial survey of the Ganga from Chausa to
Farakka and realising the precarious situation had assured the study of the adverse impact by the Central institution
CWPRS, but no concrete steps have been taken at the level of the Government of India. The change in morphology
of the Ganga due to Farakka barrage and deposition of silt in the upstream has also resulted in increase of flood fury
in North Bihar, Hence, it is essential to develop an effective Silt Management Policy at the national level, which will
help in silt management of not only the Ganga bat also other rivers and shall contribute towards. maintenance of
*Aviralta® and *Nirmalta’ of the rivers.”

6.51 Maintaining that rejuvenation of large Ganga basin with limited water availability especially during lean season
requires comprehensive integrated management approach, Spring Professior al Services Pvt. Lad., Delhi , in a written
memorandum submitted as under;—


64

"NRGB is the largest river basin of India, covering more than 26% of her geographical area with $2Skm1'year capacity,
‘Our experience has been that about 50% of the water during monsoon drains out of the Bay of Bengal. The water
storage can be created using different methods in a comprehensively integrated time based schedule manner by
deploying different engineering mechanisms using the following concepts;—

(1) Increasing the canal network and using the canal network also for storage of water, All canals must have
regulators for storage and regulated release of water.

@) Small scale reservoirs shall be created,

G) Desilting or dredging or Canal Systems ¢ g. The Upper Ganga Canal system is about 7000 km. long and is
reportedly silted by to 2 m. By desilting and putting the material on the sides of the canals to increase its
capacity, By this the storage capacity of the canals will increase by 30-40%,

(4) Using infatable barrages in the Gangs basin, tritsutaries after the peak flow.

(5) Rejuvenating the ox bow, secondary channels, and dormant back water and holding water in them by using
inflatable barrages or flaps or temporary weirs.

(6) Creating levies using the desilted or dredged material parallel to existing bank to act a5 double flood barriers.

{7) Construction of temporary or movable weirs can be used to store the data.

(8), Interlinking of different canal systems.

(9) Creating additional sewage and flood water drain channels next to existing sewage drains for use during flood period.
Aviral Dhara

‘To maintain Aviral Dhara in the river it is required that the water so stored in the canals and reservoirs is released tn
a planned manner A management agency toxnanage the release water from the reservoirs, canals ina planned manner
is required for co-ordinating with all the agencies working in the State and Central Government on the use of Ganga
Water, The water flow shall be regulated to maintain the minimum sustainable flow.

Aviral dhara will improve the least Available Depth in the Ganga Basin and National Waterway-! hence facilitating
transporting of cargo through Inland Water Transport mode. [WT mode is efficient. economical and environment
friendly,

Nirmal Dhara

The additional reservoir created will improve the quitlity of water in the Ganga Basin as the overall capacity has
increased, thus diluting the pollution. Moreover if the canals are used for storage of water then the canals will not be
used for duping solid wastes in them that pollutes the Ganges when water gets released in it. This in addition to the
other methods of reducing pollution in the river through prevention, treatment and reuse of treated water,

Movement of barges/Inland Vessels for Inland water transport through the canals and rivers improve the BOD by
agitation of the water. And the paddle wheel boats as tourist boats will further improve the BOD by churning!
oxygenation of the water.”

Nirma! Dhara, Aviral Dhara & Connected Issues

6.52 One of the man features of GRBMP, being prepared by consortia of seven IIT is to suggest comprehensive
measures for restoration of the wholesomeness of the Ganga river system and improving its ecological health taking into
account the issue of competing water uses in the river basin. The plan shall be the besis for taking up all future projects
under the programme for rejuvenation of river Ganga.

‘Water Quality in River Ganga

6.53 Furnishing the impact of the money spend on GAP 1 & II on the quality of water in Ganga, the M/o WR, RD &
GR ina written reply submitted as under; —

“Water quality monitoring done by reputed independent institutions indicates some improvement in the water

quality over pre-GAP period. The water quality analysis of samples collected at 16 stations on River Ganga during

1986 and 2008 shows improvement in DO levels at 4 locations namely up and downstreams of Allahabad and Varanasi,

All the 16 stations except Patna downstream and Rajmaha! show reduction in BOD values. The BOD level show

marked reduction in Allahabad and Varanasi indicating improvement in the water quality over pre-GAP period

(Table 4.48). However, at 7 of these 16 sites, BOD level does not meet standard for bathing water, The situation is


65

much better for DO for which at only one site the bathing standard és not met. On the other hund, in terms of total
coliform count only at one place the bathing standard is met.”

‘Table 6.53: Water Quality Data for River Ganga (Summer Average Le, March to June)
ee ammeter inne Je SNP ae ee

Stations DO(MGIL) BOD (MG!) Total Coliform

1986 2008 1986 2008 2002/2003 308
Rishikesh Bl 1 7 12 HS ZB
Haridwar 05 gl 79 18 i“ 400 1600"
Garmukteshwar 78 18 22 19 8s) TsO"
Kannauj Lys 72 65 35° 29 9° 75000°
Kannauj DS NA 62 NA x 1478* T5000"
Kanpur 1175 72 a 12९ 3a° 1089* sa000*
Kanpur 05 67 6 86" ale 491i" 240000"
Allahabad (1/५ 64 8A 114 1200 9000*
Allahabad DiS 86 F 15.5९ 326 1607 17000*
Varanasi (1०5 56 75 10.1९ 22 12417 NA
Varanasi DIS 59 73 106+ ay 148333 NA
Patna 175 हे 6 3 पा 1589 30000"
Patna 05 at $9 2 24 mg 90000"
Rajmahal 78 62 18 2 1480 NA
Palta NA 69 NA 22 SAS 220000"
Ulaberia NA 53 NA 3.6* 0333 500000+*

*Quabty not sumable for ऐनआइ.
‘Water Quality Monitoring System for Ganga

6.54 The CPCB has been exeeuting a project, Water Quality Monitoring System for River Gisnga (WQM) funded by
World Bonk and co-ordinated by NMCG. The objectives and other details of the project furnished by CPCB are as follaws:—

() "The World Bank funded project was sanctioned on |9th July, 2013 and has been alloted an amount of
Rs, 94.45 crores, One of the component under this program is development of a Real Time Water Quality
Monitoring network of 113 stations in the Ganga States. The network would be developed on data purchase
concept where monitoring system will be installed, commissioned and operated by vendors and CPCB would
purchase data of water quality,

(ii) The network has been designed in a manner that once it gets operational; it would help to identify the sources
of the pollution and their impact on the river water quality through online system.

(क्र) 10 addition to this, the project involves Bio-monitoring at all 113 locations besides 28 ७ parameters
being monitored online which will show the impact on the aquatic life of the river. This would reflect the true
‘water quatity and health of the river,
(४) The projects also envisages the concept of community monitoring which will be carried out with the involvement
of the ongunizations, institutions, schools, colleges and universities and other reputed activists, Through this
Program organizations will be trained and make them fee! responsible for water quatity monitoring."
6.55 An expert (Shri Subhajyothi Das) in a written submission, on the deteriorating water quality of river Ganga stated
as under—
“The Ganga River is famous for its purity and its unique capacity for self purification due to high dissolved oxygen
contents and radioactive radon reported in the river water by some workers, The river also supports a large population


66

of macrophages parasites, which according to some, multiply exponentially by attacking bacteria, But reduced flows
of the Ganga and Yamuna with diminished dissolved oxygen, discharge of untreated industrial and municipal waste
and effluents into the river, as also agricultural runoffs have much to do with degraded Ganga’s self cleaning capacity
and river water quality. There is technology to clean water, but the technology is ineffective if the riverine ecosystem
is vandalized,

DO, Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), COD, Fecal Colifor Count (FCC) are some of the determinants of the river
‘water quality, Sewage and Industrial wastes containing oxidisable organic matter exert a demand on dissolved
oxygen, thereby reducing DO content of the river, BOD indicates biochemically degradable organic content at the
expense of DO. COD indicates total organic content of water. Adequate reserve of Oxygen (DO) in the river water
Supports biochemical oxidation, white lack of its triggers anaerobic breakdown of organic matter and septic condition
of the river."(p. 127 Subhojyothi Das)

Historical agreement on flow of water in Ganga

6,56 Asked about historical agreement of 1916 henween the provincial Gavernment of Banarus { Varanasi) and the then
British Government to maintain minimum water flow in tiver Gunga. the M/o WR, RD & GR stated as follows:—

“(i} Apprehensive of the possibility of the British completely damming the flow of Ganga ot Bhimguada in Haridwar,

Mahamana Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya raised a massive public protest against the damming of river Ganga. Asa

Tesult in 1916 an agreement was entered into with the British Government so that:—

© In future, the uninterrupted flow of Ganga will never be stopped (the 1916 Agreement, clause 32, para-l)

© Nocecision on Ganga will be taken without the consent of the Hindu community, (the 1916 Agreement, clause 32, para-2)

Under Mahamana's teadership the Lala Sukhbir Singh, the Genera! Secretary of Hindu Mahasabha, signed this

agreement, This agreement is even today preserved under Article 363 of the Indian Constitution. (Source: website of

Ganga Mahasabha-hitp:/‘gangamahasabha.org’).”

6.57 The Complete text of the agreement referred to above is reproduced and marked as Annexure XXVI,

Impact of activities of M/o Shipping on Ganga's flow

6.58 In written response to a querry as to whether the extant activities of the Ministry of Shipping are helpful or
neutral or hirmfill for rejuvenation of the Ganga especially for improving uninterrupted flow of water, the Ministry of
Shipping ina written reply submitted as follows:—

“As mentioned above. navigation is a non-consumptive use of water. Therefore, activities of (WA/Ministry of Shipping
for developing and using Ganga for navigation are neither helpful nor harmful for rejuvenation of Ganga. It does not
have any significant impact on the flow of water. Hence, 1७७1५ activities are neutral to rejuvenation of Ganga River.”
6.59 Shri U.K. Chaudhury, a domain expert and Founder and Director, MMIT for Management of Ganga expressing
his views on navigation in river Ganga stated as follows: —
“In regard to navigation, | haye to mention here that river will immediately react and fill the gap which you will create
by removing mud in the corner of sedimentation of river. So you cannot navigate ship if we fill out groundwater
Teservoir the river Ganga will become rich and thereafter you can navigate ship. It is very simple to fill the Ganga basin,
Thave seen areas where farmers” have created four to five feet heights of their fields due to which water of the field
remains in the field, this concept can be implemented in the Ganga basin. For fertility of land it is necessary to check
sediment erosion, we have to increase groundwater reservoir capacity, in Banaras all the ghats are facing erosion
problem because there is 12 feet sand bank high have developed. 1 have analysed chat a large part of Banaras will be
eroded by 2025, Sand bed is the nucleus of geology,”

6.60 Shri Anupam Mishra, Gandhi Peace Foundation, Delhi, furnishing his comments to the Committee on 19 January,
2016 on navigation in Ganga, stated that:—

“If there will no flow in the river because there is no depth, the silt of the river will increase if forest are not there. The

silt have also reduced the life of our existing dams. To check the increase of silt in our rivers we have to develop our

forests. Only after developing forests we will be abe to check the silt in rivers and thereafter we can think to navigate

ship in river Ganga."

6.61 Government of Bihar vide their eter dated 21.04.2016, apprehending the adverse impact of the proposed
barrages for making stretch for Allahabad, Haldia navigable, submitted as follows: —


67

“The Government of India bad declared the reach of Haldia to Allahabad as National Waterways-1 in the year 1986,
Recently, it has been widely published in print and electronic media that the Central Government is planning to
construct a series of barrages between Allahabad and Haldia for navigation purpose. It is important to mention that
Bihar és already facing the adverse impact of the construction of Farakka barrage. In this background, construction of
barrazes shall obstruct the continuous flow of the Ganga, as a result of which, this pious river shall be converted into
series of large ponds, which will destruct the environmental and coological balance. Any such plan of construction
of barrages must not be thought of without undertaking detailed impact study on the continuity, "aviralta” and
“nirmalta" of the Ganga. Bihar believes that under the “integrated National Waterways Transportation Grid (INIWTG)",
the required draft may be achieved mainly by deepening and dredging of River bed."

Dredging in Ganga

6.62 About the need for dredging certain stretches of the Ganga to enable navigation for the purposes of cargo
movement, the input output analysis done Ministry of Shipping submitted that:—

“Between Haldia (Sagar) and Nabadweep (280 km.) river is tidal and more than targeted LAD of 3 m is always
available in this stretch naturally. Hence, IWAI does not require to do any dredging in this sector,

In Nabadweep and Farakka Stretch (280 km.) also, because of controlled flow from Farakka barrage, the river is quite
stable and shoals (Shallow patches) crop up only at a few places during lean season, In these places, the extent of
dredging done by [WAL in nominal /.¢., 200-300 m in length, 30-40 m width and depth of cut well below 1.0 m, The
dredged sand is thrown back to the river at a suitable place between Farakka and Patna (460 km.}. the targeted LAD
is reduced to 2.5 m. In this region, because of the alluvial nature of the river a lot of silt is eroded and deposited
naturally, However, more number of shoals crop up in lean season from time to time. On these shoals, |WAL undertakes
maintenance dredging during Jean season only for maintaining target LAD thereon, The average length of each
shoals is 200-300 m, width of dredging 30-40 mm and depth of cut about | ता, It may, however, be noted that 1 WAI does
dredging on these shoals only in a width of 30-40 m whereas the total width of the river even in the Jean season in
generally 2-3 km. and the river is highly braided (multiple channels.) Further, the main aim of [WAL isto increase depth
in the main navigation channel which generally reduces because of braiding of channels (formation of multiple
channels). 1७७1 tries that even such a nominal extraction of sand by dredging is put back into the river in one of the
secondary channels which aids nominal increase of flow in the main channel inducing increase in velocity in the main
channel which also induces erosion therein resulting in increase of depth. Thus, in typical !WAT's dredging it tried to
use natural conditions of water 10 improve navigability parameters of the river. [WAI, in effect, does not do any large
scale capital dredging on the river. All its dredging is basically of maintenance dredging type.

In short, maintenance dredging undertaken by [WAI of navigation purpose in totality does not effect significantly
the hydro morphological parameters on the river.

IWAL also use an age old indigenous nature friendly technique called bandalling using bamboo panes and bumboo
mats to induce more flow in the main navigation channel. This technique is totally in tune with thé nature.”

6.63 The Committee in a written questionnaire asked the Ministry regarding proposals, if any, for making Ganga
navigable especially for the stretch between Varanasi to Haldia, The Ministry could not furnish the replies to the Committee,

6.64 In reply to 3 query whether any scientific has been done on the desirability or otherwise of dredging of the
Ganga, the Ministry of Shipping stated as under:—

“In the upstream stretches of Gunga of NW-1 é., Patna-Allahabad (600 km.) stretches, [WAI does not undertake any
dredging mainly because the number of shoals, average length of each shoal and average depth of cut required on
shoals of maintaining to 2,$ m LAD increase manifolds of which IWAI does not have adequate dredging capacity.
{—}. They have however, suggested 4 barrages between Buxar and Allahabad (400 km.) for maintaining 3m LAD all
around the year, However, considering other ecological, environmental, sociological and hydro morphological issue
associated with construction of barrages on river like Ganga, it is felt that it may not be desirable to construct these
barrages. Accordingly, as mentioned earlier, a technical Consultant under World Bank aided Jal Marg Vikas Project is
exploring other feasible means for increasing the depth for more viable navigation. [...]. The details of technical
interventions needed for developing reliable navigable channe! for navigation by more commercially viable cargo
vessels will be decided and acted upon based on the outcome of the study, which is likely to be available by mid 2016,"


68

Need for restoration of water bodics in Ganga region
6.65 Explaining the need for recharge of ground water in Gangs basin, Shri U.K. Chaudbury, stated:—

"During 1915 Mahatana Madan Mohan Malviya had invited all Kings and raised the issue of creation of Bhimgoda
barrage and all Kings have discarded the proposals. Today one Blue flow (dhara) which is releasing 600 cubic fect per
second water from the gate, This is the efforts of Malviya jee otherwise all water would have been finished. Ganga
river basin has approximately 10 thousand kilometer, Reduce the Ganga water level to 20 meter at Haridwar from there
all basin in ging to downstream, you may be irrigating 1 lakh square kilometer, you have reduced the ground water
level of 9 lakh square kilometer. You have provided water only to Uttar Pradesh but remaining four States have
because dry zone.”

6.66 Another expert (Shri Anupam Mishra) expressing his views before the Committee on 20 January, 2016, on the role
of ponds and other water bodies in making river flow perennially stated as follows:—

"The country had 25 to 30 lakh ponds before British came to India, During that era there was no enginecring college
as well as no engineers but the society had developed pond system and created big ponds which were used for
irrigation, drinking and all other purposes. Now, in the modern era we have changed the concept of ponds and using
Tiver water for our needs, after using that water for irrigation, drinking, industry, etc,, we return the used contaminated
water to the river, The system which we have adopted will not be able to clean the river Ganga even after incurring
huge expenditure,” 2

6.67 The expert further referred to the ancient systems of ‘tals’ and ‘khats’ in the Himalayas, thus:—

“It is not only that river will get pure water only from rain water, it is recharged by various form like Ponds, Jheels,
Khals etc., situated in the upper catchment through ground water. We have heard about word, Tal like Nainital and
Khal, there was thousands of tals, khals in the Himalayan region. Now we have forgotten these words. These water
bodies played important role not only to provide water for our day-to-day needs but contributed to checking the
floods, Now these days the rivers are not being recharged from such water bodies and we are thinking to clean the
river Ganga and also make it ‘aviral.’ A large number of small rivers have dried.”

‘The witness also gave example of ॥ Pauri Garhwal district of Uttarakhand where due to restoration of water bodies a
dead rivulet was revived after 70-80 years. He deposed: —

“We should concentrate on this and start work on creating the things which we have lost over a period of time. There
is 4 palce in Pauri Garhwal where one can find 30 thousand 'chals' and ‘khals’ due to that a dense forest has been
developed around those chals and khals, these chals and khals reserve 0 much water due 10 which flood situation
in the area are also controlled. This system slowly releases water to rivers, there was a place named Sukharola. The
fame of the village is Gardkarak, after developing these chals and khals that river has became alive after 70-80 years
which merges on river Ganga the people have named it Gadganga. Like this other new rivers will rejuvenate Ganga
without rolling back to our previous system we would not be able to rejuvenate river Ganga, we should released the
pressure on rivers in the country. We have to develop a mechanism under which the water available in a particular
place is used there itself, We have been diverting water of Himalaya to Punjab and Jaisalmer, etc., all this will became
a big challenge for us in future.”

6,68 Prof, Vinod Ture, IFT Kanpur, appearing before the Committee on 20 January, 2016 submitted as follows:—

“When we talk about the Ganga, we will have to add the mainstreams to the Ganga. As the Ganga is called
‘Tripadthgamini, Vishnu Aluknanda, Mandakini enumerated from matted hair of lord Shiva and percolated down the
Kamandal of Brahma—these are three mainstreams but the rest are also with them such as Mandakini, Dhauli Ganga
and Panch Prayag and Maha Prayag are called in Atlahabad being associated with it. tis called a holistic Ganga there.
When we talk of Ganga, the entire water catchment of Ganga is called Ganga basin and Ganga basin is generally
witnessed in three parts. First part we can say that it is Haridwar where it traverses through the hills. Its challenges
and conditions are somewhat different there. As soon as Ganges percolate down to the Haridiwar, there are different
circumstances from Haridwar to Varanasi or just downwards Varanasi because the circumstances of there two places
are different in today's perspective and when you go down from Varanasi, the entire basin, catchment area is divide
into three parts and all these three parts have their own circumstances and problems. Basically, it traverses through


69

the mountains in the upper areas and the biggest challenge of today is potential of hydro power as the Hon’ble
Chairman has 3150 upheld the same.”

The witness admitted that the biggest challenge was how to keep the Ganga flowing. He submitted that-—

“Today, the biggest challenge is as to how the Ganga be kept ever flowing and whether ever flowing of Ganga and
hydro power can go hand in hand. | do admit that a considerable change is needed in the construction of dam and
projects in today’s circumstances. In today’s circumstances what we are doing that will certainly affect the ever
flowing of Ganga. For example, we take the project of Tehri Dam. You please see that Ganga divides into two parts from
here, There has been no connection between the Ganga flowing upwards and flowing downwards. If anyone is to
move from upwards to downwards, it is all impossible even today. There are fishers like snow trout and we cannot
think that these fishes can swim across from Haridwar to Uttarkashi. We are to certainly bring about changes in their
planning and designing and there have been a lot of such projects, As long as we don’t bring about sea change
therein, there will be no flow of water in the Ganga. | admit that these two can go hand in hand. But we will have to take
care of this thing that ever flow of Ganga be maintained. It is my imagination and | have also been told and | have also
Jearnt from people that whenever our Hon'ble President or Prime Minister has 10 go somewhere, a safe route is
searched for them, similarly we will have to search a way for it because as long as we don't take out a safe course to
the Ganga, there will be no flow of Ganga."

6.69 He further clarified>—

“Ladmit that we should certainly make the structure of anything, but the course of Ganga should be left as it is. After
that, whatever excess water is available be diverted and dammed somewhere. We will have to take out the mainstream
of the Ganga in a most protective way like the way or route searched for the Prime Minister and President. As tong as
we don't make an arrangement for the same, we won't be able to do the sarne whatever river projects we have. In my
own opinion, it is possible today and we can do it, The second point ts about percolating down of Ganga from
Haridwar. Bhimgoda barrage to Varanasi are the biggest challenges there and this work has been going on more than
hundred years and even itis going on from the time of Britishers that almost 80-90 per cent water of the Ganga is taken
‘out from Ganga canal for irrigation, Thus, there is always paucity of water in te mainstream of the Ganga."

6.70 The Committee when desired to know his expert opinion regarding co-retation between the okt ponds and rivers
and the extent to which that system was effective for recharging of water and also how the system can be revived, Prof. Tare
submitted:—

"I do amdit that whatever rivers we have, they all are connected to the tanks and rivers. The water of river is not any

separate water, If we are to restore the Ganga, we will have to restore all the rivers and nallahs associated with it. Our

efforts should be started from here. Today known as nallahs are actually tributaries of the rivers. Today when a nallah
is talked about, a picture of dirty drain comes up in our mind. But this is very important nallah because we have made
it a dirty drain today, It is our inherent tendency to cover it, After covering the same, either an encroachment is made
or something other is done there, We have mentioned all these issues in the Ganga basin management plan ‘in an
adequate way. Today whetever rivers we have, sewerage is dumped into them. This is the condition of all the rivers,

You won't view even the water if you view above from Okhla barrage in Dethi, you will view only water hyacinth all

around, When water hyacinth is-visible, it means we have chocked the river. When a little rain falls, there is 3 water

Jogging problem in our cities and one more problem regarding urban flooding which was not a problem earlier, has

become a problem and due to which there 8 flood in our cities. Whatever nallahs we have, they all fall into the rivers,

there must be # carrying capacity gradually and due to which the water which should have flowed down from cities
to villages is not flowing. Thus, water gets accumulated and a new problem takes birth by name of urban flooding.”

6.71 The Committee sought a written reply from the M/o WR, RD &GR as to whether there is any proposal to
rejuvenate pands, lakes, rivulets, etc. to improve the entire aqua system of Ganga. However, the reply is awaited from the
Ministry despite several reminders.

6.72 The Committee sought from the M/o WR, RD &GR the impact of water guzzling crops on the groundwater table
in the Ganga basin, The Ministry are yet to submit the reply in this regard despite granting several extensions,


CHAPTER VII
OTHER ISSUES
Impact of Flora and Fauna

Asked sbout the overall impact of the rise in pollution on the riverine ecology indirectly its flora and fauna,
Secretary, MOEF&CC, submitted: —

"Sir, basically the river must have water which keeps flowing and the quality of that water has to be acceptable both
for the ecological health of the river as well as for the human activity which is dependent on the river.”

7.2 The M’o WR, RD & GR also informed the Committee about the steps taken to conserve the flors and fauna
in Ganga river basin as follows:—

“NMCG has initiated or in the process of initiating the following projects immediately.—

5

3.

A Programme to Conserve Ganga River Dolphin (Platanistagangetica-gangetica) in Ganga and its
tributaries in Uttar Pradesh.

Proposal of Revival activities for Gharial and Turtle Breeding programmes and for strengthening the
protection mechanism of the biodiversity of Ganga.

Proposal of Conservation of Biodiversity programme in Vikramshila Gangetic Dolphin Sanctuary under
NMCG NGRBA programme.

A Programme to Conserve Ganga River Dolphin (Platatistagangetica-gungetica) in Ganga and its
tributaries in the state of West Bengal.

National Dolphin Survey 2014-Outline Work Plan for Bihar.
Assessment of fish and fisheries of the Ganga river system for developing suitable conservation and
restoration plan,
Preparation of DPR for Forestry Interventions for Ganga Rejuvenation.”
Sand Mining Policy

73 Government of Bihar vide their letter suggested that Sand Mining Policy for the River Ganga and its
tributaries should be clearly defined and effectively enforced. Current practices of sand mining in the River Ganga and
its tributaries are seriously damaging aquatic flora and fauna.

Dams and the Movement of fish

7.4 The existing dams have created hurdles/obstacles on the movement of fish from downstream to upstream due
to which ecological imbalances is stated to have been created. The Ministry were asked to furnish the names of the
species extinct due to such imbalances. However, the Ministry are yet to respond to the query.

Community participation/Public Awareness

7.5 In response to a query as to whether the communities living along Ganga were involved in GAP I & [1 and
the impact of such community involvement in cleaning Ganga and also the strategies adopted for involving Communities
in keeping Ganga clean, the Mio WR, RD & GR submitted as follows:—

“Yes, the communities living along Gangs were involved in GAP I & 1. The impact was in the form of improved

awareness and sense of belongingness for the river Ganga along with better cremation, dhobighat facilities. A

_ comprehensive communication and public outreach component has been included in Namami Gange Project for

रह Qfeater awareness creation and people participation. Ganga Task Force—a battalion of Territorial Army will also

be involved in awareness and afforestation activities and it is envisaged that bocal communities will be motivated
enough to contribute and act as responsible citizens in clean Ganga programme.”

7.6 The M/o WR, RD & GR also apprised the Committee that:—

“..wevents like Ganga Manthan, Nirmal Ganga Sahbhagita, have been organized in the recent past for involvement
of ULBs, NGOs, religious leaders ctc., Apart from this Namami Gange Pavilion were set up at Pravasi Bharatiya

70


7

Divas, Vibrant Gujarat and Indin Water week for raising awareness among the ULBs, Elected representatives,
academicians and public etc. As the mission proceeds, more such initiatives are likely to be taken up.”
Erosion in Ganga and Afforestation

7.7 Assuring the Committee of the steps being taken to deal with the problem of erosion in the Ganga Basin, the
Mio WR, RD & GR submitted as follows:—

“Afforestation programmes were taken up at the cost of ₹ 94.8 lakhs under various programmes to resolve the

problem of erosion in Ganga, the details of which are as follows:—

(1) GAP-1 : ₹ 34.28 lakhs;
© 11,02 lakhs for Watershed Management & Afforestation of Mansadevi Hills; and
. 24.26 lakhs for soil conservation scheme for Baag Rao & Sukh Rao in Haridwar,
(2) GAP-I1 : २ 53.25 lakhs for West Bengal.
(3) Gomati Action Plan : & 2.27 lakhs,

Under 'Namami Gange’ Programme, a massive afforestation drive is planned, Forest Research Institute has been

entrusted with the work of preparation of a DPR and 96 lakhs has been sanctioned for the parpose.”

7.8 In view of the soil crosion in river Ganga, the M/o WR, RD and GR was requested to state as to whether any
study‘projection of the same soit erosion in Ganga was made and the details thereof including the protection measures
taken in this regard. However, the reply of the Ministry is awaited despite multiple written and verbal reminders,

7.9 The Committee have asked the Ministry of Water Resources to furnish the measures taken for Flood Management
System and study/projection of soil erosion problem in the river Ganga, reply of the Ministry was awaited.

Coordination

7.10 Referring 10 various aspects of Ganga Rejuvenation falling under the jurisdiction of different Ministries of
Central Government and also the State Governments concemed. the Committee sought to know the existence or
otherwise of any Coordination mechanism, The Secretary, Mio WR, RD & GR, responding to the committee's query
submited as under-—

“Actually, we have a coordination mechanism not only with Urban Development but with several other Ministries

also which include Agriculture, Drinking Water, Sanitation, etc.”

7.11 In response to a query M/o WR, RD & GR submitted that recognizing the multi-sectoral, multidimensional
and multi-stakeholder nature of the Ganga Rejuvenation challenge, the key Ministries comprising of (a) WR, RD & GR,
(0) Environment, Forests & Climate Change, (०) Shipping, (५) Tourism, (०) Urban Development, (f) Drinking Water and
Sanitation and Rural Development worked together through Group of Secretaries to arrive at an action plan, the final
report of which was submitted on 28th August, 2014, Apart from development of action plan, the implementation of
‘Namami Gange’ is slso done through various Ministries with their roles and key mandates given below:—

Industrial Pollution Abatement through Central and State Pollution Control
Boards

Development of sewer networks and solid waste management
Provision of sanitation facilities to rural areas for prevention of pollution
through open defecation
Promotion of organic farming
Development of tourism facilities at major ghats and management of
major congregations
7.12 In reply to the query whether there is any proposal to set up a ‘Tennessee Valley Authority, USA’, type set up
with statutory backing for the purpose and if so, the details thereof and the legal status of Ganga River Basin Authority
(NGRBA), M/o WR, RD & GR stated that-—
"NGRBA was constituted on 20th February, 2009 under Section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 as
an apex policy and decision-making authority. The Prime Minister is ex-officio Chairperson of the Authority and it

Ministry of Agriculture
Ministry of Tourism


72

has as its members, the Union Ministers Concerned and the Chief Ministers of States through which Ganga flows,
viz. Uttarakhand, Uttar Pridesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal, among others. The objective of the Authority
is to ensure effective sbatement of pollution and conservation of the river Gunga by adopting a holistic approach
with the river basin us the unit of planning. NMCG is the implementation wing of NGRBA under the Ministry of
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (M/o WR, RD & GR).”

7.13 The Committee were further informed that a High Level Task Force headed by Cabinet Secretary was constituted
vide Cabinet Secretariat to achieve synergy amongst Ministrics’Departments and State Governments to ensure effective
coordination for achieving the final objective of clean Ganga,

Need for comprehensive legislation for management of NGRMP

7.14 A consortium of seven ITs was given the responsibility of preparing the GRBMP. The consortium in their Main Plan
Document, on the need for comprehensive legislation for management of National Ganga River Basin (NGRB), stated that-—

“Indian has failed to develop its water resources through integrated river basin developments, and inter-State conflicts
over rivers have become common. But the Constitution has provisions enabling the Union to regulate inter-State
rivers in public interest. The Constitution gives full control over waters of a river to a State (List Il entry 17), but the
State's rights are subject to any Jaw made by Parliament for the regulation and development of inter-State rivers to
the extent the contro! of the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in public interest (List | entry
56), This means that Parliament can make a law taking over the regulation, development and management of an
inter-State river for the common benefit of the States in national interest. The prevailing condition of national river
‘Ganga warrants the immediate attention of law-makers for such a law.

For enacting the proposed law, it is important to locate subject matters in List [I which may be seen as being in
conflict with entry 56 of List L Article 246 (1) confers exclusive jurisdiction on the entre to enact laws on subject
matters enlisted in List 1, whereas clause 2 of Article 246 grants such exclusivity to the States to enact law on
subject matters enlisted in List I]. Now Entry 56 List | provides for “regulation and development of inter-State river
and river valleys to the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interests”, Thus, the matter of regulation and development of inter-
State rivers may not be in conflict with the legislative power of the State as the law refrains from impinging on
matters within the competence of State legislatures.

The provisions of various existing legislation (enacted by the Union and the States) indirectly affecting rivers and river
basins relate to subject on water, sanitation, irrigation, agriculture, pollution, fishing, ecology and biodiversity,
environment, ete. Under most of these legislations, Authorities perform the necessary functions stated under the law,
but interestingly no authorities are entitled to play a role in prevention of river pollution. In fact, no concerted effort
has been made till date on the legislative front against exploitation of river in various ways. Many issues concerning
river management do not fall within the present legislative frame, such ७ maintenance of environmental flows, protection
of a river basin's ecology and biodiversity, maintenance of groundwater table, consolidated plans for diversions of
river waters in different stretches, discharge of sewage, obstructions to river flows and loss of connectivity, use of
floodplains and active floodplains, etc. It is desirable, therefore, to adopt an integrated river basin management plan
approach that focuses on maintenance and restoration of wholesomeness of river of the Ganga Basin, Accordingly, the
proposed Ganga River Basin Management Act should aim to prohibit and regulate activities that affect the
wholesomeness of river and establish authorities or institutions to regulate the activities thereon.”

Presence of Arsenic in river Ganga

7.15 The Secretary, M/o EF&CC during the evidence held on 29.05.2015 admitted that the entire stretch of Ganga
from Kanpur to Bangladesh is completely polluted by Arsenic. मर

During evidence the Committee desired to know the source of arsenic in Ganga basin and results of scientific study,
if any. An expert Prof. Vinod Tare Stated as under-—

"To the best of my understanding, arsenic is a part of sediment in the entire basin of the Ganga and when we change
the environment there, it gets anoxic being it an oxygenated arca when waste is dumped there from above. Arsenic
is seated silently there is anoxic condition and it gets reduced and after being reduced its mobility enhances, creeps
in water and water keeps on flowing. [---]

Itis proven that arsenic is more or less part of sediments. It is ॥ part of entire alluvial portion of Ganga basin.”


B

7.16 He further added:—

“You will find it only in groundwater and generally in 2 litthe deeper water, The concern is obviously geomorphic
but the geomorphic processes get enhanced by anthropogenic actions. This is what | tried to put. When you
said the effluent actually changes the geochemistry, it gets into water because of anthropogenic actions. That
is the point. We would be able to give some evidence.”

7.17 The Mio WR, RD & GR were asked to furnish the information on the following-—

(i) has any research been done by Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)/Indian Council of
Medical Research (JCMR) to identify the areas affected by arsenic contamination in the entire stretch of
river Ganga:

(ii) has any study been conducted on the mutual correlation and interdependence between groundwater level and
river flow and the impact, if any, of polluted rivers on the groundwater and the decadal data in support of
data for the last thiny years;

(iii) whether any study has been done to find out the sources of arsenic, the reasons (geomorphic and homomorphic)
and the steps required to be taken to tackle the arsenic problem,

The Ministry could not furnish the reply despite getting several extensions,

7.18 The ministry were requested to furnish as to whether any study on the possible linkage or otherwise between
urbanization and lethal & widespread arsenic problem in the Ganga basin or elsewhere especially in the light of the fact
that 7 crore people are adversely affected in the Ganga basin alone apart from affecting the entire food chain drinking
water and fisheries. However, the Ministry is yet to respond to the point despite several extensions granted.

Ecological Battalions: Daily News and Analysis

7.19 The print media (DNA dated 9 July, 2015) reported that the Government of India proposes 10 raise three
ecological battalions inter alia to clean the Ganga at designated places, Furnishing the veracity of the contents of the
aforementioned press report, the M/o WR, RD & GR submitted as under;—

(0) Asa part of ‘Namami Gange’ Programme, Eco Task force has been proposed. Following activities have been
taken up:—

# Raising of 4 Battalions for ‘Namami Gange’ Programme of Ganga Task Force (GTF) has been approved
in-principle by Ministry of Defence vide letter dated 12th December, 2014.

© Initially, for a year, one existing Battalion with three companies to be posted in Kanpur, Allahabad and
‘Varanasi. Letter of commitment given by NMCG vide letter dated 8th July, 2015,

(ii) Mandate of the GTF is to carry afforestation, Pollution watch and Public awareness.

Fund requirement for raising and recurring expenditure have been approved on 13th May, 2015 in Cabinet
approval of ‘Namami Gange’ Programme,
Adequacy or otherwise of Enforcement Provisions

7.20 Asked to apprise the Committee about the difficulties faced, if any, in controlling the pollution in rivers, the
Secretary, M/o EF&CC testified: —

"One is the existing law of pollution control, whether it is water Act or the Air Act or Environment Protection Act,
one of the features of these Acts is that the enforcement provisions are a little weak. In the case of polluting
industries or polluting entities or those who violate the norms, there is a provision for prosecution, there is a
provision for closure and there is a provision of penalty which can be imposed after prosecution.”

7.21 The Secretary further submitted:-—

“One of the thinking and several suzgestions which we have received are to make the penal provisions mote
stringent. The Ministry is working on what penal provisions can be provided for and what should be the
enforcement mechanism for those penal provisions, whether it is necessary to only deal with these offences
by criminalising these offences or there should be very stringent financial penalty on violators. This is an area
which we are working on."


74

7,22 In reply to # query the Mio WR, RD & GR referred to the Acts of Parliament dealing with all kinds of
pollutions;—

“The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Act, 1981 and the Environment (Protection) (EP) Act, 1986 have adequate provisions to deal with industrial
pollution control, The Water and Air Act empowered State Pollution Control Boards to take the actions
against erring industries which includes closure of their production processes by stopping of electricity and
water supply. The Central Pollution Control Board has been delegated with the powers under Section 5 of the
Environment (Protection) Act for prohibiting industries for operation if they found violating the stipulated
standards, Processes have been laid down for their sample collection and analysis to verify complete stipulated
standards.”

7.23 The Ministry further submitted that;-—

“The industries are granted with the consent to operate which is governed strictly by the standards notified
under the (EP) Act. Every State Pollution Control Board is mandated with responsibility to ensure compliance
by the industries and this required to be done by devising monitoring mechanism. However, with regard to
imposition of financial penalties, under the existing status and to be determined by the courts. It is contemplated
in the amendment to empower regulating authority to impose financial penalty also, Imposition of penalty
would be governed by laying down appropriate norms and eliminating any subjectivity.”

Ganga Knowledge Centre

7.24 The works sanctioned under NGRBA programme include setting up of Ganga Knowledge Centre. However,
the details were yet to be furnished to the Committee,


PART I
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS,

1, Introductory: The Committee note that two main source tributaries, the Bhagirathi, originating from the Gangotri
Glacier at "Gaumukh”, and the Alaknanda, originating from the Satopanth glacier in the Himalayas confluence at Devprayag
in Uttarakhand and form the Ganga. The Ganga, covering a legnth of 2525 km. traverses through the States of Uttarakhand,
Untar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal passing through 918 towns and 1649 Gram Panchayats taking the
pollutants of all human settlements and 144 drains. The Yamuna is the largest tributary of the Ganga in terms of drainage
area and accounts for 46% of the Ganga basin. The Ganga river basin inclusive of its all tributaries, is the largest river
basin in India covering a landmass of 8,61,404 sq.km. and sustaining 43 per cent of India's population, besides being the
river of eternal faith from time immemorial for the people, Apart from providing water for drinking and irrigation, it has
had great environmental, economic, cultural and religious significance for its water quality hailed as ambrosia and life
sustainer. "The story of the Gangs, from her source to sea, from old times to new, is indeed ‘the story of India's Civilization’.
However, with the growing uncontrolled urbanization, topsided industrialization, environmental degradation, overdrawl
of water from the river and draining of polluting domestic sewage, dangerous industrial effluents and other hazardous
anthropogenic interventions have rendered the Ganga as one of the top ten most polluted rivers of the world fuelling the
apprehension that if urgent and strong prophylactic and preventive measures are not taken, it may become a dry-dead
river in times not very far off.

The Committee also note that concemed about the health of the river, the Government of India launched, Ganga
Action Plan | (GAP 1) in 1985, To make up the shortcomings of GAP I, GAP Tl was launched in 1993, together incurring
an expenditure of Rs, 4168 crore. Seriously concerned over the burgeoning pollution levels, Government of India set up
the NGRBA in 2009 for conservation of the Ganga and the maintenance of environmental flows through a comprehensive
river basin approach, which again proved far from adequate. The Government of India therefore constituted an Integrated
Ganga Conservation Mission, called the Namami Gange in 2014 with the resolute will to arrest the pollutants entering
into the Ganga with component programmes of rehabilitation and upgradation of the existing STPs and interceptions and
diversion of the drains falling into the river, The flagship programme, Namami Gange was approved on May 13, 2015
with & budget of Rs, 20,000 crores for the next 5 years, a significant four-fold increase compared to the entire expenditure
of Rs. 4168 crore right from the launching of GAP t in 1985, The Namami Gange Programme, with a multi-layered and
multi-Ministerial monitoring mechanism, is a convergence of all existing schemes and pew interventions and includes its
all tributaries including the Yamuna for Ganga rejuvenation. The repreated assertion of the Government to rejuvenate the
Ganga by July, 2018*, gives a message of hope. The Committee now proceed with examination of the ongoing programmes
and interventions to rejuvenate the Ganga.

2, Creation of an overarching and empowered authority for Ganga rejuvenation; The representative of Ministry
of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (M/o EF & CC) admitted that pollution load in river Ganga has been
increasing over the years due to rapid urbanization, industrialization and increase in population. Extraction of water for
irrigation, industrial, drinking purpose, etc. leading to inadequate flows is further compounding the problem, There is
huge gap in sewage treatment capacity not only on the Ganga main stem but alse in the entire Ganga basin covering 11
States. The total estimated sewage generation in five States (Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West
Bengal) on the Ganga main stem is 7301 Million Litres per Day (MLD) where as the available treatment capacity is only
2126 MLD. Treatment capacity of 1188 MLD is under construction or at approval stage, leaving a gap of 3987 MLD.
The consortium of Seven ITTs which prepared Ganga River basin management Plan estimated that total sewage generation
of 11 States 512051 MLD as against the available treatment capacity of 5717 MLD leaving a gap of 6334 MLD. There
are 764 GPls such as tanneries, pulp & paper, sugar, textiles, chemicals, etc., generating 501 MLD of waste water,
substantial part of which is being allowed to flow into the Ganga untreated. Eleven Ganga Basin States account for 45%
of the total chemical fertilizer consumption amounting to 10 million tons per year. Such high consumption lends to
disposal of high levels of nitrogen and phosphorus which eventually drains into surface and subsurface water which is
part of the Ganga river system. As per estimates, run off from arable lands contains upto 70 mg/l of nitrogen and
Phosphorus ranging from 05-1. mg/l, with potential to raise the nutrient level to a considerable degree in stream waters.
As per 2011 census, 33.64 Lacs households in the five main states do not have an access to toilet facilities and out of these
28.91 lacs households defecate openly and 4.72 lacs have an access to community toilets. In addition, an estimated

* Assurance in reply ४७ supplementaries 4 SC) No. 61 in Lok Sabha on 23.04.2016,
75


76

14,000 metric tons per day of Municipal Solid Waste generated from Class-1 and Class-I cities‘towns situated on the
main stem of Ganga out of which substantial part was being dumped into the Ganga until the recent past.

Deeply concerned and worried thut the Ganga has become one of the top ten most polluted rivers of the
world owing to uncontrolled urbanisation, lopsided industriatisation over withdraw! of water from the river and
discharge of extremely hazardous industrial pollutants and domestic sewage, airmed duc to the incalculable
damage being caused to the 'Nirmalta' and ‘Aviralta’ of the river; taking note of the multiplicity of authorities
both at the Union and States level, and having regard to lack of effective synergy between the stakeholders, the
Committee recommend that an overarching and fully empowered authority, comprising of the representatives of
all the concerned Union Ministries and State Governments be set up for securing the ‘nirmalta' and ‘aviralta’ of
the Gangu by July, 2018, The Committee are quite sanguine that as assured by the Minister for WR, RDA&GR in
Parliament and solemnly affirmed by the Prime Minister, the Ganga will be rejuvenated and restored to its
prestine form by July, 2018.

3. Consultation with Statey about mode of execution and speedy approvals: The Commitiee observe that the
objective of Namami Gsnge' Programme is to arrest the pollution entering into and to rejuvenate the Ganga. In order to
achieve the objective, the programme proposes to undertake activities such as rehabilitation and upgradation of existing
STPs; Interception & Diversion of all 114 drains falling into the river through 5 basin states (Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Jharkhand & West Bengal) and creation of additional treatment capacity. The Committee also note that the
Programme will be executed in accordance with NGRBA Programme Framework through (a) the States in conventional
mode, ie. in the implementation arrangement (with current and other appropriate implementing agencies) and/or (0) PPP
mode and/or (c) SPV mode (with upto 100 per cent capital infusion by Government) and/or (d) Central Public Sector
Undertakings/Central Government Departments and/or (०) Academic Inatitutes/Research Institutes‘Autonomous Bodies
or any other appropriate mode for executing the activities of this proposal. On being enquired by the Committee, the State
Government of Uttar Pradesh, vide their letter dated 26.11.2015, referring to their 23 project proposals sent to the
‘National Mission for Clean Ganga’ (NMCG), submitted that the proposals which have been sent to the Gol were yet to
be approved even after a lapse of six months. The State Government apprehended that Government of India was planning
to implement these projects through PPP Mode which seems to be a remote possibility in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
Further, State Government felt that abatement of pollution in river Ganga can be achieved with implementation of
upgraded parameters for treatment of sewage schemes ( ९ including sewage network in all main towns and with simultaneous
upgradation of existing sewage treatment units under "Namami Gange’.

The Committee are concerned to note that State Governments’ views have, apparently, not been taken into
consideration before finalizing the mode of execution of sewage projects wnder ‘Namami Gange' as one of the major
States (Uttar Pradesh) is not in favour of execution of the projects through PPP Mode, Since the rehabilitation, upgradation
and construction of additional sewage treatment projects under ‘Namami Gange' is a time bound programme, and the
Ganga has to be rejuvinated by July, 2018, the Committee recommend that the views of the State Governments may be
taken on board before deciding on the mode of execution of a sewage treatment project with the sole objective of
commissioning of the projects ay expeditiously as possible. Further, the proposals submitted by the State Governments
may be approved with due dispatch and without further loss of time, Besides, simultaneous upgradation of the existing
sewage works and provision of comprehensive sewage schemes including sewage networks in all major towns may be
given urgent consideration by the Government of India and urgent and necessary policy corrections made under intimation
to the Committee within six months of presentation of this report to the House.

4, Delay in setting up STPs; The Committee observe that the setting up of STPs at Badrinath and Karanprayag with
4 capacity of 3.0 and 1.4 MLD was sanctioned on 22.08.2008 and 24.12.2008 with an outiay of Rs, 4.62 and Rs. 3.49
crore respectively. However, construction of the same could not be commenced and not even a single rupee was spent
even after a lapse of about seven years reportedly duc to adverse weather conditions, natural disasters, dispute over lands,
etc. Similarly, the projects for 1&D of the sewage at Badrinath, Deoprayad, Karanprayag, Rudraparyag, Joshimath, were
sanctioned in 2008/2009/2010, the physical progress of these projects range from 13-40% only even after about
7 years due to delay in obtaining permission from the Border Road Organization (BRO), natural calamities, delay in land
acquisition, etc. Even EAP such as JICA assisted Ganga Action Plan Phase-II project at Varanasi, witnessed massive
delays. The project, though sanctioned on 14.07.2010, could not be completed even after about five years. Surprisingly,
the physical progress of the project was 22% only as at the end June, 2015 and no further progress was reported to the
Committee. Similarly, the project—Sewage System & STP Works (Phase-I1} at Kannauj, though sanctioned on 24.02.2011,
has seen physical progress of 22% only even after four years. Asked to furnish the reasons for the extremely tardy


7

progress of these projects, the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, merely stated
that original date of completion of JICA assisted Varanasi project and the sewerage system & STP works at Kannauj were
31.07.2015 and 31.03.2016 respectively and the cost escalation, if any, due to delay would be borne by the Government
of Unar Pradesh without intinating the Committee about the latest progress in the matter, Further, the projects for Sewer
network, Sewage Pumping Stations (SPS) and STP, funded by World Bank, at Begusarai, Buxar, Hajipur, Munger despite
getting the sanction in 2010 as EAPs, could not be completed even after 5 years. Disturbingly, the physical progress of
the projects range from 21-45%. Despite such # slow progress, the Mio WR, RD & GR assured that these projects are
likely to be completed during 2015-16 and 2016-17. The Ministry attributed the delays due to delays in land acquisition,
Court cases, introduction of new land acquisition bill and thereby changes of compensation eligibility of land owners, etc.
‘The additional cost, if any, due to delay would be borne by the State Government,

‘The Committee note that without assessing the ground realities in acquiring the land for setting up of
sewernge projects, sanctions/approvals were given and funds allocated and allowed to lapse. Unfortunately, this
is not confined to one/two projects but across the States such as Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. The
Committee are deeply concerned to note that for want of approval from BRO, a sewer project got delayed badly.
Such avoidable delays, the Committee believe, are due to absence of close coordinaton in keeping with the salutary
principle of cooperative federatism and want of regular interventions by the authorities concerned, (/
had there been effective coordination and synergy between the multiple authorities, delays in completion of the projects
could have been wwoided or overcome. Further, the Committee were informed that many projects are scheduled 10 be
completedhave been completed during 2013-16. The Committee would like to be apprived of the status of these projects
within next six months, State-wise, STP-wise indicating clearly the cost and time overruns along wath the reaxons for
delays, the revised timelines for their completion and the authorities which would bear such escalated costs,

5, Cast escalation in setting up STPs: The Committee deplore that unconscionable inordinate delays in completion
of the sewer projects resulted in continued emptying of untreated hazardous sewer into river Gangs, Further, the cost of
the projects might have gone up manifold increasing the financial burden of the States already reeling under financial
crunch. For instance, the State Government of Uttar Pradesh informed the Committee that implementing body (UP Jal
Nigam) is already facing financial stress. Hence, the Committee are of the considered view that States may not be able
19 meet the cast of escalation of the projects thereby casting shadow on the completion of these projects. Some of these
ongoing works fall under Component ‘A’ of the "Namami Gange Programme’ and are funded as Central Sector Scheme
with contribution of Gol and States in the ratio of 70:30. The Committee note that in order to ensure that the ‘nirmalta‘and
the ‘nirantarto’ or ‘aviralta’of the Ganga is attained by July, 2018, the Gol have made the Ganga Rejuvenation a
Hundred Per cent Central Sector Scheme as stated in reply to a supplementary to SQ.No. 61 in Lak Sabha on 28.04.2016.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that M/o WR, RD & GR may explore the possibility of treating the uncompleted
projects ax new initiatives and fund them entirely as Central Sector scheme under Component 'B'of the ‘Namami Gange’
for the success of the Programme. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the expenditure incurred so far
and to be incurred year-wise and State-wise during the years 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-20 (December),

6, Gap between installed and actual wilization capacity of STPs: The Committee observe that in the State of West
Bengal STPs were set up at 31 Jocations in the citics/towns situated along the River Ganga with a capacity to treat 355
Million Litres per day (MLD) under Ganga Action Plan-I &If Out of these 31 STPs, two 5175 with a capacity of 11.86
MLD are operating at 100%, 13 are operating at 50%, 4 ure operating at less than 50% of the installed capacity, Five 5175
use not commissioned at all and one STP has stopped functioning. As a result, out of 35SMLD installed treatment capacity,
operational/working ‘ity is 166 MLD (approx.) In other words, the operational capacity is less than 50% of the
installed capacity, The inescapable conclusion is that more than 50% of sewage, which the STPs are supposed to treat, is
being allowed to flow into Ganga due to less than optimal functioning of these STPs, Similarly, in Bihar, the five STPs
established at Beur, Saidpar, Pahari, Karmalichak and Bhagalpur under GAP | & ॥ with an installed capacity of 120 MLD
are operating at 65MLD (approx. 50%) of the installed capacity. The Central Pollution Control Board carried out third
party assessment of 51 STPs sanctioned by Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC),in
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal. The Committee note that the axvessment by CPCB revealed that ()) as
against the installed capacity of 1009 MLD, the actual capacity utilization is 602 MLD which is 59% (ii) STPs are
violating BOD parameters, 1 STP exceeded the COD for discharge and 14 STPs are found non-operational, Surprisingly,
the assessment is conspicuously silent ax to the reasons for substantial underutilization of installed capacities, exceeding
the COD and BOD limits and non operationalisation of 14 STPs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the specific
reasons for sub optimal performance of these STPs may be ascertained and the problems rectified and the action taken in
this regard may be intimated to the Committee within six months af the presentation of this Report.


8

7. Optimum operation of STPs: The Committee note that due to huge gap between the installed capacity and
actual sub-optimal operation of the STPs in the riparian States of the Ganga, the quantum of sewage which the STPs are
supposed to have treated, is being allowed to flow into river Ganga untreated. Further, the constantly increasing
demographic pressure and expanding, industrial and commercial activities continue to exacerbate the pollution levels as
more sewage is allowed to be emptied into the river Ganga untreated. Taking note of the huge gap between the installed
capacity and actual operational capacities of the STPs and deeply concerned over the aggravated pollution levels and
the shrinking of the river, the Committee recommend that:—

(Q specific reasons may be ascertained for the STPs operating at sub-optimal capacities and since how long
STP-wise and State-wise and the measures being taking to bridge the gaps;

(4) responsibility be fixed for sub-optimal utilisation of STPs;

(U0 the capacities of existing STPs, SPSs and sewage networks may be suitably enhanced or new ones set wp to
cater 10 the increasing demographic pressure, expanding urbanisation, industrialisation and the shrinking
river with a clear perspective plan for next two decades.

(iy) the approximate fund requirement to make the STPs operational at optimal levels and to set up new ones be
worked out taking into account the rising pollution of at least for next two decades; and

fv) penalties be imposed for violating the COD and BOD limits by the polluting indusiries/citles,

The Committee should like to be apprised of the tangible action taken in the matter within six months of the
presentation of this Report.

8. Setting up of STPs in all 118 towns, periodic testing of treated water and setting up of river hydrology institute:
‘The Committee note that Government have planned that the work of sewage treatment facilities in all 118 towns on the
main stem of the Ganga will be tendered by June, 2016 and completed by 2019. It was also submitted that DPRs will be
prepared for all the 118 priority towns by December, 2015. During field visit, it was brought to the notice of the
Committee that there is a serious apprehension about the quality of agricultural products from the fields irrigated by
treated industrial waste water, There have also been reports of the people in certain areas of the riparian States prone to
specific life-threatening diseases. The experts who deposed before the Committee also underlined the need for setting
up institutions of river hydrology and dynamics. Taking more of the fact that the work of sewage treatment facilities in
118 towns on the main stems of the Ganga are to be tendered by June, 2016 and completed by 2019 and having regard
to the assurance of the Minister for WR, RD&GR, the Committee would like the work of construction of sewage treatment
projects to be expedited well before the deadline of June, 2018. The Committee also recommend that the treated waste
water be tested periodically so as to allay the fear of farmers and citizens about the fitness of the treated water for
agricultural uses. The results of such tests should be available in public domain. Further, taking cognizance of the fact
that there is no exclusive institution for river hydrology and river dynamics in the country, the Committee recommend
that a national institute of ivdrology be set up in the Ganga basin and the works being done in this regard in BHU and
the Mahamana Institute of River Hydrology, may be replicated or suitably financed by the Government to help understand
river anatomy, river morphology, dynamics, biota and other allied aspects for speedy rejuvenation of the Ganga and
other rivers of the country.

9. STPs in Bihar; The Commitiee note that CPCB assessment shows that there are 5 STPs in Bihar with an
installed capacity of 140 Million Liters Per Day (MLD) and the actual utilization is 100 MLDs. However, the data
furnished by the Mo WR, RD & GR on the status of STPs established under GAP 1&1 (Annexure-VII) shows that there
are five STPs in Bihar with installed capacity of 120 MLD only as against 140 MLD stated by CPCB in their assessment.
The Committee, therefore, ask the MoEF & CC and M/o WR, RD and GR to reconcile the data and furnish the same to
the Committee along with reasons for such discrepancies and the mechanism established to obviate such statistical
mismatches which are critical to formulation of pollution control strategy.

10. O& M of STPs: Many leading hydrologists and other domain exerts, who tendered their valuable testimony to
Committee, felt that the reasons for sub-optimal performance of STPs and Sewage Pumping Stations (SPs) include non
availability of funds for Operations & Maintenance (O&M) of sewage works, Poor supply of electricity, unavailability
of technical course material and lack of motivation for O&M staff, Further, the experts informed that postings to O&M
Plants are seen as punishment. They also admitted that there was dearth of funds for O&M of assets created for pollution
control works. The representatives of M/o EF & CC conceded shortages of manpower and their inability to attract


79

qualified human resource despite advertisement of the posts due to unattractive pay packages. Since, the O&M services
are crucial for ensuring optimal performance of STPs and SPSs, the Committee recommend that—

0) suitable provisions may be made to ensure that it is legally binding on the distributor of electricity to supply
uninterrupted supply of electricity 10० STPs;

(ii) alternative energy options, such as wind and solar, may be explored for running STPs especially in those areas
where there are frequent outages;

(ili) selected parameters need to be monitored through automatic monitoring instruments. Such instruments can be
online to enable round the clock monitoring;

(iv) funds crunch should not be allowed to come in the way of O&M of sewage works; and

(v) to perk up the morale of O&M staff and officers und to attract new recruits to the posts, suitable attractive pay
structure and adequate posts mity be created for running the STPs efficiently and round the clock.

11, deat location for STPs; The experts who depased before the Committee suggested that STPs must be located on
the sand bed site of the river only as this is the only site where inorganic, organic, & microbiological loads will be managed
integrally at minimum cost on sustainable basis. The potential of the sand bed must be assessed taking example of Gangs
‘Yamuna confluence site at Allahabad, where during the Kumbh Mela, pollutant load of more than 10 million people at a
time is managed by the sand bed, Taking note of the fact that sand ts the nucleus of geology, the Committee recommend
that due consideration be given to the location and use of sand beds in setting up of the STPs, The committee further
recommend that the feasibility of involving the corporate sector in setting up, operating and maintaining the sewage
treatment plants and sewage networks on long term basis may also be explored so as to bring greater professionalism and
efficiency to the working of STPs,

12. Lack of scientific and technical resources; The Committee note that the responsibility of Operations & Maintenance
(0 & M) of Sewage works set up in connection with Ganga Rejuvenation rests with the State Governments, The Government
of Uttar Pradesh admitted that there was contamination of water bodies and that there was an urgent need for setting up
state-of-the-art STPs and labs. The Committee also observe that the number of sanctioned posts for technical and scientific
personnel are lying vacant in Central Pollution Control Board. Asked about the environmental research being carried out
by the universities in the context of depleting sub-surface and surface water resources, rising pollutants and contamination
of water bodies, the Secretary, Environment observed that the Committee had ‘hit the nail on the head’ and conceded the
need for such studies given the ‘enlarging responsibility’ of the M/o EF & CC. The Committee further note that
Mio EF & CC requested the Department of Expenditure for carrying out a study to assess the adequacy or otherwise of the
extant manpower of CPCB in view of its enlarging responsibilities. The Committee were also apprised that despite
advertisements for filling up of the posts in CPCB, there is no enthusiastic response probably due to the reason that the
posts are far from attractive for the talents required for recruitment.

The Committee expresses their xerious concern over lack of sufficient technical and scientific manpower in the
Central pollution Control Board and in the State Pollution Control Boards entrusted with the responsibility of pollution
control, water quality testing, etc. Further, it is still a matter of far greater worry and concern that the posts are lying
vacant as the talent sought to be recruited find the pay and perquisites attached to the posts far from attractive. Considering
the level of rising pollution and contamination of water bodies and the need for setting up state-of-the-art STPs and labs
the Committee recommend that—

(a) the parameters and pay and perks for the manpower especially technical for STPs and Labs may be revisited
to attract right talents;

(6) the Department of Expenditure should expedite the study to assess the manpower requirements of CPCB in
view of its enlarging responsibilities and complete the same with in specified time and conclusive action be
taken for filling up the posts without delay;

(c) suitable measures may be taken to ensure availability of appropriately qualified and suitably rained manpower
in requisite numbers for surveys and investigation, project preparation, implementation, Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) of sewage works, financial, organisational, legal, regulatory implementation and
monitoring strategies of the projects; and

(a) the parameters so established may also be shared with the States so that the SPCB also benefit from the
action taken by the Union Government.


13. Timeline for securing ZLD by industrial units; The Committee observe that apart from 144 drains spread across
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal discharging 6614 Million Litres Per Day (MLD) of waste water into
river Ganga, there are 13 drains discharging 853 MLD of waste water into tributaries of river Ganga viz, Ramganga and
Kali-East, Further, hundreds of Pulp & Paper industries, Distilleries, Sugar, Textile plants and Tanneries are emptying
untreated industrial effluents into Ganga. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that 440 tanneries operating in the
main stem of Ganga are discharging about 22 MLD of waste water, containing toxic chemical like Chromium (Cr6+),
associated with birth defects, and carcinogenic into the river Ganga, As a part of the drive to identify the industries
discharging untreated industrial effluents in the Ganga, the Committee observe that under NGRBA programme, 764 (115
have been identified and the Central Pollution Control Board has completed one round of inspections of 704 industries
and has issued suitable directions, Reportedly, action has been taken against 165 non-complying industries under The
Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. Closure notices have
been issued 10 48 GPls, Further, the Committee note that CPCB has issued direction to all the 11 basin SPCBs on
Sth February, 2014 to ensure that the GPIs install real-time effluent monitoring system for effective compliance through
self-regulatory mechanism before discharging effluents outside their premises.

The M/o EF & CC in their presentation 10 the Committee submitted that distilleries and textile units discharging
untreated effluents into river Ganga will be made Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) units by September and December, 2016
respectively, However, furnishing a different set of targeted dates for the same purpose, M/o WR, RD & GR in a written
reply submitted that distilleries and textiie units will be made ZLD units by March, 2016 and March, 2017 respectively.
Similarly, as per the action plan furnished by M/o EF & CC, tanneries are proposed to be made ZLD units within 2 years
from DPR preparation (July, 2015) which is different from the targeted date (March, 2017) furnished by Mlo WR, RD
& GR. In respect of polluting pulp and paper units, both the Ministries stated that by March, 2017 these will be made
ZLD units.

‘The Committee also observe that the work on making the polluting units ZLD units is in incipient stage as the
Ministries are still considering and evaluating the proposals received for CETPs and identifying the institutes for preparing
DPRs for the purpose. Further, to minimize the water conusmption and waste water discharge from the Pulp and Paper
sector and to muke them ZLD units, CPCB is still in the process of developing protocols in consultation with techitical
experts. [he Committee find the deadlines prescribed for the grossly polluting wnits ta become ZLD units rather unrealistic
and far from practical. The Committee, therefore, recommend that—

(i) both the Ministries of EF&COC & WR RD & GR should jointly have a relook at the targets set far completion
of the said works and ensure that both the industries become ZLD by March, 2017; and

(il) the evaluation of the projects be done on regular basis and position of the review reflected in the Repart of
the Ministry laid in Parliament annwally.

The Committee be apprised of the actual progress of the projects within six months of submission of this
report to Parliament.

14. Incentives to Small Scale Industries for ZLD: The Committee observe that many of the GPls are small scale
in nature but employing subs‘antial number of people put together. The Government is yet te dispel the apprehension that
these units may be using obsolete technology in their production processes which may not be treating the effluents
resulting in their being discharged into the river Ganga or its tributaries, The Committee are apprehensive that if hefly
penalties are imposed on these small scale wnits or the units are closed down, many people will lose their employment
and source of livelihood, The Committee, therefore, recommend thar—

() tax and non-tax incentives may be offered to the units which are adopting new technologies with considerable
amount of investments to become Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) wnits;

(li) the availability of easy finance may be ensured at affordable rates from the banks and/or Interest Subvention
and Viability Gap Funding (VGF) may be gtven expeditiously; and

(iii) these units may be provided technical knowhow from Government owned academe and research institutes
at subsidised rates so that they become ZLDs.


15, Funding of STPs and O&Ms: The Committee note that sewage infrastructure projects such as STPs, L&D, sewage
pumping stations, etc., are awarded on the basis of competitive tenders under 'Namami Gange’ programme. However, as
stated by Government of Bihar, the Union Government provided funds for these projects on the basis of project approval
cost, Further, the Committee note that U,P. Jal Nigam, the Implementing Agency for all pollution control works on behalf’
of Urban Local Bodies in UP. do not have sufficient funds for Operation & Maintenance (O&M) of pollution control works.
Similarly, the Government of Bihar stated that purchase of land for STPs and other sewage infrastructure works is creating
a heavy burden on the State Government, Since the 5175 and 1&D projects are awarded on the basis of open competitive
biddings, the Committee recommend that the project proposals may be considered based on tendering cost by the Government
of India, As any delay in creating required sewage infrastructure will result in delay in completion of ‘Namami Gange
Programme’, the Committee recommend that stable remedial action may be taken by the Government of India to address the
financial constraints faced by the State Governments concerned at the earliest so that the laudable objective of the “Namami
Gange Programme” are attained within the stipulated timveline, that is by July, 2018.

16. Great rural-urban water divide and the need for biodigesters: The Committee note the testimony of experts that
the toilets being built under Swachh/Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan are not being used by the beneficiaries as they lack privacy,
comfort and generate stinking smell forcing the family members to defecate in the open fields thereby defeating the very
Purpose of provision of the toilets at their homes, Further, lack of availability of water in sufficient qunntitics also seems to
be one of the reasons for their abandoning the toilets at home and opting for open field defecations. The Committee were
informed of the availability of biodigester toilets which are environmental friendly, long lasting maintenance free and low
cost. The experts who testified before the Committee suggested for provision of biodigester toilets in the towns'villages
along the river Ganga to ensure that the people in these areas do not defecate in the open and thereby save Ganga from
pollution. Further and notably, as admitted by the experts, the human excreta if thrown in the soil it becomes manure and
if discharged in water, it poisons the water, Toilets need more water to flush the excreta and the Mushed excreta pollutes that
water in a big way and it involves a huge and recurring cost to covert the polluted water into pure or semi-pure water,
Further, mass scale urbanization in the name of modernization has brought its own attendant problems which are likely to
assume yawning proportions in the next few years as India may become water scarce country. The nation can ill-afford the
luxury of water import, water being heavier than crude 01, The pace of uncontrolled urbanization has already created a
situation where some people, especially poor people and rural folks do not get drinking water whereas people living in
luxurious urban houses use excessive water for flushing, eventually contaminating the water bodies where it is discharged.
Such a differential treatment and deprivation in the name of urbanization and modernization is not acceptable, Bearing in
mind the expert testimony that human excreta if burried in soil, converts into manure and if discharged in the water poisons
the water; taking note of the fact that toilets need water to flush and the flushed excreta pollutes the water in a big way and
considering the fact that it invalves Inege recurring cost to convert the pulluted water into pure or semi-pure water and
mindful of the alarming rural-urban disparity in water supply, the Committee reconumend that suitable provision may be
incorporated under 'Namamt Gange’ to provide biodigester toilets in all the villages and towns on the banks of Ganga wea
its tributaries in a time bound manner. Further, futuristic technologies be developed which can process all waste on site
within hours at the household, colony, village levels with a view to eliminate or minimize the need for laying expensive trunk
lines, STPs, and other cost prohibitive pollution control infrastructure, The Committee should like to be apprised of the
outcome within xix months af the presentation of this Report

17. Use of bio-fertilizers, organic and less water consuming crops: The Committee note that conventional irrigation
techniques need huge amount of water, much of which is lost to evaporation, causing over extraction of the water needed
10 sustain life elsewhere. The representatives of the Government also conceded that the runoff from chemical pesticides and
fertilizers into rivers/uquifers is exceedingly detrimental to human health and to the already threatened
ecosystem. The Committee, therefore, recommend that—

(0 farmers may be encouraged to avoid cultivation of water guzzling variety of crops and incentivized to switch
over to less water intensive methods of irrigation and less water consuming crops;

(ii) the farmers may be encouraged and incentivised by the Mo Agriculture and State Governments for erecting
dikes so that rain water is conserved in the fields;

(iii) optimal use of fertilizers and pesticides should be promoted by M’o Agriculture in consultation with the JCAR
and excessive use uvolded;

(iv) irrigation subsidies may be gradually eliminated to prevent use of water intensive agricultural practices and
water saving techniques such as drip irrigation, ete. be propagated and incentivised;


fv) organic and less water consuming crops should be propagated and grown in order to help ensure that more
water it left in the Ganga and other key aquifers;

(vi) all farms located within specific distance of the Ganga and other important aquifers should become mandated
organic farming zones. Producers should be incemivized suitably and also be educated about the advantages
of organic farming in the long run;

(vii) special subsidies, lending assistance and help in securing access to markets, domestic and foreign, which have
special interest in organic goods may be given to the farmers who switch aver to organic farming and use drip
irrigation or similar non-water intensive irrigation technology; and

(viti) the benefits of organic fertilizers and the incentives being given to organic agriculture be effectively publicised
So that farmers turn to organic agriculture in a big way

18. Cost Effective Solid Waste Management and donations for Ganga cleaning: The Committee note that effective

solid waste management is becoming a stupendously challenging task in cities and towns. The Solid Waste, if not disposed
of and treated properly, enters the water bodies and the rivers, There is, therefore, a paramount need for segregating the
metallic, plastic and biodegradable waste for their environment friendly disposal and re-use. The solid city waste and its
harmful residue that enters the Ganga and its tributaries polhites and chokes the rivers threatening the aquatic life. The
Committee note that solid waste management has become a stupendousty challenging task in mega towns, which for want
of proper segregation and disposal, eventually enters, chokes and pollutes the rivers. The Committee, therefore, are of the
considered view that treating pollution at source is a long term and enduring solution to combat and control the pollution
in the Ganga. The Committee accordingly recommend that» —

(a) segregation and proper treatment of household and institutional waste water/sewage and solid waste at source
may be enforced strictly, if need be, by offering subsidy on effective waste management technology; >
(b) natural cleaning/treatment systems like bioremediation for drains flowing into rivers may also be tried out;

(c) the crucial task of solid waste management may be taken up on Mini Mission Mode so as 10 ensure that rivers
and water bodies to not become city waste dumping places; and

(d) donations for the purpose af Ganga cleaning or setting up of Clean Ganga Fund’ may be treated as permissible
activity for Corporates under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) to ensure receipt of sizable sums for the
purpose.

Suitable action in consultation with M’o Corporate Affairs (MoCA) may be taken at the earliest and the Committee

apprised.

19. Environmental Flows: The Committee observe that the environmental flow is a water regime needed to maintain
the ecological integrity of a river and is essential for survival of river biota from onslaught of human interference or river
engineering. It helps in self-purification of the river, sustains aquatic life and vegetation, recharges ground water and
supports livelihood. Flows, the Committee note, are the soul of the river. A river and its biota become extinct if there is no
flow, no current, Notably, as carly as 1916, the Britishers were compelled by Pt. Mahamana Madan Mohan Malviya
to secure release of 100 cusec feet per second water continuously at Haridwar to ensure "Aviral Ganga’ (Annexure-XXV1).
The river regime—its environment and its ecosystem—is solely dependent on its flow in different seasons. The Committee
also observe that the concept of e-flow is still evolving and there is no universally acceptable norm for estimation of
environmental flow, Different institutions(Committees have suggested different quantities of e-flows during lean and non-kean
seasons for river Ganga without any finality by the Government. For instance, IIT Roorkee, Wild Life Institute of India (WII),
Inter Ministerial Group (IMG), Prof. Ravi Chopra Committee and CWC have recommended 20%, 30%, 30%, 50% & 20%
during lean season and 20-30%, 20%, 25%, 30% & 20% during non-lean season respectively in river Ganga. However,
neither the M/o WR, RD&GR nor the M/o Power nor M/o EF&CC have specified the e-flow which is being followed
currently. The Committee are distressed to note that many species of aquatic life have vanished or are on the verge of
extinction, The dolphins, turtles, rout and gold fish and other vital species have disappeared from large parts of the river
due to life threatening pollution and obstruction in free aquatic movement caused by dams on the river. Notably, the dams
have adversely affected the spawning in fishes of certain pipes leading to their disappearance. The hydrologists and experts
who deposed before the Committee stressed the need for free aquatic movement as a barometer of the health of the river
The Committee, therefore, recommend that:—

(a) e-flows be fixed for each river and for each place where damsireservoirs/irrigation canals are built taking into
consideration the mean figures of the last 50 years of the water flow during lean and nor-lean season;


83

(b) the new dams be so constructed as to facilitate unhindered aquatic movement;

(c) the approved e-flows be measured by the CWC during lean and non-lean seasons at all stations including the
places where the rivers have been dammed or where water is diverted and the reports submitted to Parliament
as part of the annual report of the Mo WR;

(d) a detailed report be submitted to the Committee about the presence of each riverine species like dolphine,
turtles, gold fish, trout and others every six months; and

fe) a third Party assessment of e-flows may also be considered pertodically,

20, Implementation and status of IMG recommendations on seven rivers: The Committee observe that the Inter
Ministerial Group (IMG) constituted in July, 2012 to study environmental flow of Ganga, noticed that the implementation
of all the Hydro Electric Power Projects (HEPPs) on the Bhagirathi and Alaknanda will lead to 81% of River Bhagirathi
and 65% of River Alaknanda getting affected with extensive implications for other needs of the society and the river
itself, The expert Committee also noticed that there are a large number of projects which have very small distances
between them leaving little space for river to regenerate and revive. They, therefore, had recommended that seven rivers,
including Nayar, Bal Ganga river, Rishi Ganga, Assi Ganga, Dhauli Ganga (upper reaches), Birari Gand Bhyunde Ganga
should be kept in pristine form, no further hydro power developments should take place in this region, and environmental
Upgradation should be taken up in these basins extensively. The Committee would like to be apprised af the:—

() acceptance or otherwise of the IMG's recommendations by the Government af India;

(ii) specific steps taken to upgrade the environment in the said basins and the impact of these measures on the
environment; and

(iti) approvals granted for hydro power projects, if any, contrary to the recommendations of IMG along with the
specific reasons for such approvals. ?']

21. Nirmalta and Aviraita of the river: The Committee note that in pursuance of Hon'ble Supreme Court's judgement
dated 13.08.2013, MoEF&CC constituted an Expert body under the Chairmanship of Dr. Ravi Chopra, member, NGRBA
and Director, Peoples’ Science Institute, Dehradun (i) to make a detailed study as to whether Hydro Electric Power
Projects (HEPPs), existing and under construction, have caused environmental degradation and if so, to what extent,
(ji) also whether such projects have comributed to the tragedy which occurred in the month of June, 2013 in Uttarakhand,
and (iii) to examine the impact of the proposed 24 HEPPs on the bio diversity in Alaknanda and Bhagirathi river basins
as identified by Wild Life Institute of India (WII). The Committee note that having been dammed at Tehri in western
Uttarakhand, the Ganga descends onto the plains, only to be robbed of its water by huge diversions through the Upper
Ganga Canal at Haridwar, which reduces its discharge to mere 15 million m'/yr. and then by the Lower Ganga Canal near
Aligarh. That leaves so little water in the Ganga that the dry-season discharge at Kanpur is merely 90 to 386 m’'/second,
at Allahabad 279 to 997 m'/second, and at Varanasi 278 to 1160 m’/second. Despite being joined by a number of
tributaries, the Ganga is progressively polluted duc to heavy discharges at the rate of 3000 million litres per day trom
towns and cities, despite of sewage treatment plants varying from 13.5% in small cities to 27,8 to 50.4% in big cities —
329 million kilolitres, Nearly 50% of waste waters are discharged untreated into this lifeline of the central Indo-Gangetic
Plain. Over 1.3 billion litres of sewage, 260 million litres of industrial waste, runoff from 6 million tonnes of fertilizers
and 9000 tonnes of pesticides used in agriculture, and very large quantities of solid waste are daily released in to the
Ganga. Taking into consideration these facts of pollution, the Ganga water can no longer be described as life-giving and
holy. On the contrary, the Ganga has been declared as one of the ten most polluted rivers of the world by WWF
international, Switzerland. Notably, Secretary Water Resources candidly admitted the connect between ‘nirmalia and
aviralta’ and stated that there could be no ‘nirmalta' without ‘aviralta’. Surprisingly, asked whether damming of the river
would be useful for controlling pollution or it will help aggravate pollution, Secretary, Environment was not in a position
to give a definitive answer as he felt that it would depend on multiple factors. Further, the Government could not furnish
the decadal data of the lean and non-lean season flows in the Ganga right from 1951. The Committee are of the
considered view that the Government in the CWC must collect and compile the data about the decadal flow, both of tean
and non-lean period, at each station/city including the spots from where the water is diverted'impounded. To a pointed
question whether the human athes pollute the river, expert hydrologist made it emphatically clear that the burnt aman
ashes instead purify the river. The Committee note that the expert body, appointed under the direction of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, has since submitted its report with regard to the impact of HEPP existing and under construction and
their impact on environment including landslides and biodiversity, they would like to be informed of the action taken or


Proposed to be taken on each of the recommendations and the impact of acceptance and implementation on the Nirmalta
and also Aviralta of the Ganga within six months of presentation of this report. Further, the Committee may be furnished
the decadal data of the lean and non-lean season flows in the Ganga right from 1951 from points of origins to major
towns and sites right up to Haldia.

22. Decision of Government on construction of new Dams in Untarakhand: The Committee take a serious note of
the casual and evasive reply furnished by the M/o WR, RD & GR to the following important points contained in the
memorandum submitted by the NGO Ganga Aahvan:—

(i) acceptance vide the affidavit submitted to Supreme Court of the findings of Ravi Chopra Committee that
irredeemable damages has been caused due to dam projects in the Himalayan regions of Ganga and that dam
Projects were directly/indirectly responsible for the June, 2013 disaster;

(ii) surprising change in the attitude of the MoEF&CC after filing the affidavit in December, 2014. It points out
the intervention of Prime Minister Office in the matter. A meeting held on 13th January, 2015 chaired by
PMO Chief Secretary and attended by all chieflother secretaries, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Environment,
representatives of Uttarakhand Government. It goes further to say that it was decided that the Government
would lobby in favour of the power projects citing energy requirement of the country as a priority, putting
aside the aviralta-nirmalta aspect of Ganga Rejuvenation, sought more time from the Hon'ble Supreme Court,

(iil) Hon'ble SC directing the Centre to decide on 6 dams (out of 24 Proposed dam projects recommended for
closure/cancellation by the teams of experts):

(iv) Central Government's stance was exposed on 17 February, 2015, when the Attorney General made a statement
to the Hon'ble Court that the Centre can go ahead with the construction of the 6 dams, quoting the findings
of another 4-member Committee which was constituted in the end of December, 2014:

(४) Decision of the MoEF&CC forming another Expert Group (DAS-Committee) in June, 2015 to explore means
to give go-ahead to these ¢-dam projects ignoring prior studies and reports;

{vi) Committee submitting its report justifying the construction of these 6 dam projects. The Centre submitted an
affidavit to the Hon'ble Court in November. 2015 in favour of the report and submitted that inter-ministerial
group will soon decide on it; and

(vil) MoEF&CC submitted an affidavit giving the green signal for construction of dams on river Ganga in January,
2016,

The Committee are anguished to note that the reply submitted by the Ministry to the Committee, simply stated that
NMCG; which is mandated to fund and execute pollution abatement measures in river Ganga, does not directly deal with
the isswes raised in the memorandum as it ts mainly concerned with the decision of the Government on construction of
dams on river Ganga. Deprecating the casual reply, the Commitee ask the Ministry to submit point-wise replies, is
necessary by collecting the information, to them within six manths of the presentation of this report.

23. Preservation and construction of water bodies in the catchment areas: The Committee observe that water
bodies such as lakes, ponds, tanks and streams, play an important role in rejuvenating the rivers. These water bodies
accumulate rain water, recharge the ground water and the ground water in turn charges the river in lean months. A
renowned activist (Shri Anupam Mishra) working in the field of water management and rejuvenation of water bodies
testified that there were 25 to 30 lakh ponds before the British came to India. The Indian irrigation system was based on
sound traditional water management techniques as there were no engineering colleges or certified hydro-engineers those
७७८ has depleted the flow of rivers and has also contaminated the rivers us all used/polluted water is discharged into the
rivers. It was asserted that a lopsided, recurringly cost prohibitive system can’t clean the rivers, The experts emphasized
that the pure rain water must be stored into lakes, ponds and local water bodies, known variously in different parts of the
sountry. An expert especially referred to the ancient system of water preservation in ‘tals’, ‘khals’ and ‘chals’ etc. in the
Himalayan regions which collected rainwater, met local needs round the year, created forest cover and charged the ground
‘water and, were a steady source of water 10 the tributaries of the Ganga. The expert also referred to examples of community
work to revive these traditional water bodies of Pauri Garhwal district of Uttarakhand which revived the ‘Gad Ganga’
which was extinet for 70-80 years. Prof, Tare, ITT Kanpur, « renowned hydrologist was also of the considered view that


8S

all tanks, lakes and water bodies are an integral part of a perennial source of water supply to the river. These water bodies
must be restored and conserved as all water bodies in the entire catchment basin are closely inter-linked and rejuvenate
the river especially during the lean period. Besides, these water bodies serve the drinking water and irrigational needs of
the surrounding towns and villages and also help controlling the effects of the floods. Having regard to the fact that the
traditional time texted methods of water conservation like the lakes, ponds, taals, zheels, baolis, wetlands and flood plains
have been abandoned or encroached wpon; mindful of the fact that the Government's focus mostly remains on managing
the droughts and floods, and considering the fact that the surface and subsurface water are an integral part of the
hydrological cycle, the Committee recommend that:—

(a) all big and small water bodies in the catchement areas of the rivers including the Ganga must be
restored and new water bodies constructed with a view to harvesting water;

(b) all such water bodies must be inventorised district-wise as part of integral national strategy to conserve
and augment water supply on perennial basis to local settlements, environment, aguifers and the
rivers; and

fo) @ massive programme of rejuvenation of water bodles and aquifers be undertaken afier consulting the
premier national organisations like CWC, CGWB, National Institute of Hydrology and also the district
gatetfeers about the ancient ponds, lakes, taais and baotis so that all the traditional water bodies are
rejuvenated in a mission mode with the help of schemes like MNREGA ar such or similar schemes.

They further stress that suitable measure may be taken urgently to protect and restore water re! sted eco-nystems
including the forests, wetlands, lakes, ponds, taals, zheels, etc. in the Ganga catchment basin as this will contribute in
a big way to the perennial rejuvenation of the Ganga and the ground water which is an imegral subsurface and surface
part of the hydrological eyele. Further, a massive programme of rejuvenation of water bodies and aquifers be undertaken
after consulting the district gazettvers and even schemes like MNREGA should be in mission mode.

24. Impact of navigation on, and navigability of, the Ganga; On being enquired, the Committee were apprised by
the Ministry of Shipping that navigation is @ non-consumptive use of water and therefore navigation would neither be
helpful nor harmful for rejuvenation of the Ganga. The Ministry also stated that maintenance dredging undertaken by
IWAL for navigation purpose in totality does not affect significantly the hydro-morphological parameters of the Ganga.
Asked whether the Government would be able to make Ganga navigable in the stretch between Varanasi and Haldia, the
representative of the Ministry could not give any definitive answer but informed that the World Bank aided Jal Marg
Vikas Project, a consultancy, is exploring the feasibility of developing reliable navigation channel for commercially
viable cargo vessels and the outcome of the study would be available by mid 2016, According to one memorandum
submitted to the Committee by an NGO, the movement of barges/inland vessels in the rivers improves the BOD. by
agitation of the water. The Committee would like the definitive reply of the Ministry of Shipping ax to the stretches of the
Ganga they wish to make navigable throughout the year and time frame thereof and the water draft that would be meeded
and the assurance that the spillage would not affect the water quality or the biota adversely. The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the navigaonable stretch of the Ganga prior to independence.

25, River front development and check on sand mining: The Government of Bihar stated that the current practices
of sand mining in the river Ganga and its tributaries are seriously damaging the aquatic fora and fauna. Accordingly, they
suggested that sand mining policy for Ganga and its tributaries should be clearly defined and effectively enforced. The
Committee note that MoUD has a program=:e for river front development and beautification. An apprehension was raised
about the possible aspect of cemented tong embankrnent of the river,

‘The representative of IIT, Kanpur (Prof. Vinod Tare) when asked his view for channelizing of river Ganga, stated
that there was no programme to channelize the river Ganga, He opined that the Ganga should flow in its natural form and
as far as possible we should channefize Ganga in short spans. He further clarified that channelizing means plastering of
river Ganga, you can plaster small section of the river but it will not good for the health of river to plaster its banks:
completely. The Committee were further informed that channelization will not be able to maintain natural flow of the, '
river helps in natural purification when the flowing water comes in touch with natural sand and gravel embankments. .

Keeping in view the considered advice of experts based on empirical studies that natural sand and gravel
embankments help cleanse the river, the Committee wish to caution and counsel the Government especially the Ministries,
of Urban Development, Tourtsm and the municipal authorities to ensure that the natural sand embankments and the
flood plains are not altered, damaged or encroached upon. The protection of flood plains from any encroachment, sand


extraction and channelisation of the river must be prohibited at all cost to safeguard the natural cleansing and rejuvenation
of the river,

section of the river, etc, The Committee note that the Himalayan rocks are sedimentary, fragile and the region has steep
slopes. For example, the height of the Three Gorges Dam (TGD) in China is 181 meters and the पक्का Dam is 260.5
meters but the reservoir of TGD is 660 kms and of Tehri Dam-44 Kins, Statedly, the Himalayan slopes are 18 times more
steep than the slopes of TGD. According to domain experts, slope defines energy but due to high degree of sedimentation
and landslides in the Himalayas, the energy generation is mich less that is 800 Megawatt in Tehri as against 1800
Megawatt in 100, The Committee were informed that the recurring landslides and the bigh rate of sedimentation reduce
the storage capacity of the reservoir very fast, Besides, the Committee were apprised that due to sedimentation of the dam
reservoir, the density of water increases, it changes the colour of the water and reduces, more markedly, its oxygen
content deteriorating the water quality-—the ‘nirmalts’ of the Ganga it was known for and revered from hoary past, Also,
creation of huge water bodies in active seismic zone of the Himalaya further induces seismicity, posing threat to the
Structure as well as to the human settlements both upstream and downstream,

Another closely related issue of serious worry is about the proposed construction of 450 big and small hydro power
Projects in the State of Uttarakhand, # matter of constant concern in Parliament, ‘The representative of non-governmental
organization, namely Ganga Ahwaan, in their presentation before the Committee Pointed construction of bumper to
bumper hydro projects and long dry stretch of the river bed due to water diversion, It was claimed that 53 per cent of river
Bhagirathi is completely affected, impacted and gone despite the assurance of ecological flow and ‘aviralta’ (continuity)
of the Ganga. The representatives expressed grave anxiety and trepidation due to ongoing cutting, crushing, blasting,
tunneling, mining in the senstitive-fragile Himalayas doing incalculable and irretrievabled damaye to the Himalayan
ecology and sending shivers down the spine of local residents whose houses have developed crucks or have been
pulverized by blasting of the Lobarinath-Pala-Maneri and Bhairon (कमा Projects. Besides, due to blasting, the water
springs have disappeared. aggravating water scarcity in the hills, The witness also quoted from the affidavit filed in the
Supreme Court by the Government containing the findings of an expert Committee appointed by the Union Government
under the direction of the Supreme Court. It was submitted that, according to such findings, ‘the construction of hydro
Power projects in ‘Ganga, Bhagirathi and Alaknanda basins has overburdened the local ecology’ and that there are ‘clear
sightings of irreversible damages of environment in terms of loss of forest, degraded water quality, geological and social
impact’ and that these “hydro power projects’ enhance landslides and other disasters’, Further, in the context of the
imperative need to maintain the 'nirmsalta' contingent upon the ‘aviralta’ of the Ganga, the Committee were shocked to learn
from the testimony of the NGO who deposed before them that 115 kms of the Ganga has been diverted into tunnels and
lakes, depriving the people of the glimpse of the Ganga over such stretches. It was also their lament that people have to
Plead with the construction companies to release some water $o that they could perform the last rites of their deceased
dear ones or perform other sacred religious ceremonies. They also submitted that by tampering with the waters right at
the source, the most important, significant quality of the Ganga is being destrayed and therefore the Ganga jal after
Rishikesh is no longer the same jal that we were consuming since centuries. However, the Ministry of Power submitted
10 the Committee that survey conducted by HNB Garhwal University, Botanical Survey of India and NEERI indicate that
Tehri reservoir as no adverse impact on the ecology of the surrounding area. Having regard to the testimony of experts
«and the views of the local people and the submissions made by the Gavernment representatives, the Committee recommend

(a) construction of new hydro projects in the Himalayas may be halted, given the holocaust of Kedarnath, till
the judgement of the Supreme Court and the entire hydro policy with respect 10 construction of Inydro
projects in the seismicaily active Himalayan zone be revisited:

fh) in order that the Ganga flows incessantly and eternally, every dam must release water at least in the same
ratio ax enshrined in the agreement of 1916 between Pt. Mahamana Madan Mahan Matviva and the Britishers.

The Gol must abide by the agreement of 1916 which guarantees uninterrypied flow of Ganga. an agreement
still in force in view of Article 363 of the Constitution;


87

(co) the flow of river must be measured during lean and non-lean seasons at all stations where the Ganga water
(nctuding its tributaries is impounded or diverted, before and after such incidence and reported to Parliament
annually by the MoWR, RD&GR;

(d) the water quality must be monitored during lean and non-lean season at all such locations before and after
impounding and diversion; and

(@) the pollution caused in the cities and towns must also be measured city/town-wise before and after draining
of sewer/affluent and the statistics placed in Parliament annually and the monitoring being done on regular
basis for preventing pollution of the river:

27. Need for framing Silt Management Policy: The Government of Bibar stated that on the one hand, intensive
deforestation in the catchment area of Ganga has resulted in increased inflow of silt, on the other hand, the adverse impact
on outflow of silt duc to Farakka barrage has resulted in rise of bed level, reduction in carrying capacity, rise of meandering
and breading tendencies and formation of shoals in the Ganga. The change in morphology of the Ganga due to Farakka
barrage and deposition of silt in the upstream has also resulted in increase of flood fury in North Bihar, Hence, they
suggested to develop an effective Silt Management Policy at the national level, which will help in silt management of not
only of the Ganga but also of other rivers which would contribute towards maintenance of “Aviralta" and "Ninmaita" of the
rivers. The Government of Bihar have alsa informed that despite their raising the issue for so many years, the Government
of India are yet to frame such 3 policy, The Committee are in concurrence with the views of the Bihar Government and
accordingly recommend that Government of India frame suitable National Silt Management Policy for the Ganga.

28. Community participation and publicity campaign: The Committee find tack of effective and sustained community
participation as one of the main reasons for not so encouraging success of GAP-I&II. Community participation enhances
the long term sustainability of a mission and enables people to feel connected and motivated towards working for the
common goals, The experts who testified before the Committee also emphasized the importance of community participation
on & sustained basis for the success of the massive and long term Programme of Ganga Rejuvenation. The Secretary, WR
conceded that effective and sustained participation of the community leaders and the representatives of the people was a
sine qua non for the success of the programme. Considering the importance of mass scale participation of the community
in Ganga Rejuvenation, the Committee recommend that an effective awareness generation programme for stakeholders
be devised and duly publicised The awareness generation should be efficactous enough to sensitise the officials in the
towns and cities covered under NGRBA programme such as sarpanches of the Panchayats, City mayors, councilors,
eorporators, municipal offivers, Town planners, officials of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and associations of citizens. The
objective of such a programme should be creation of public awareness and an infarmed civil society, in particular active
involvement of the political leadership and the bureaucracy in the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), that will participate in
and own the rejivenation programmes, aware of the objectives of National Mission for Clean Ganga and new developments
in technology that can be used efficiently and effectively:

29. Formation of GPS; The Committee also recommend that the Government consider forming Ganga Protection
Societies (GPS) at the ward level in urban areas and the gram sabha level in rural areas involving participation of men
and women and students with specific functions assigned to them, Besides suitable and catchy advertisement campaigns
in local languages in print and viswal media, may be launched. Jingles for broadcasting in All India radio and FM radio
may also be done. Further, publicly accessible and well publicized time tables and a daily updated website, featuring
videos, photos, and peoples own stories regarding the revitalization of the ganga River system may be formulated and
given regular publicity with the objective of Ganga refuvenation as a test case.

30. Need for legislative framework for integrated river basin management: The Committee observe that as mentioned
elsewhere in the report, there were inordinate delays in setting up of STPs, laying of sewage lines, putting up of sewage
pumping stations, etc. at many places in the basin states along the river Ganga under Ganga Action Plan-I and 1, which
resulted in huge cost escalation, The reasons stated for delay include delay in acquisition of land, obtaining statutory
approvals, adverse climatic conditions, ete. These problems could have been well addressed had there been a robust
coordination mechanism having representation from all the stakeholders. Realizing the need for such a body, the Committee
observe that Government of India created National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) on 20 February, 2009 under
section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 with a mandate for planning, financing, monitoring and coordinating
with the Centre and State Governments in connection with Ganga rejuvenation. However, even after the formation of
NGRBA, the delay in the aforementioned sewage works continued, putting a question mark on the efficacy ofthe NGRBA
for Ganga rejuvenation, The Committee also observe that many activities of Ganga rejuvenation fall under the domain of


not only different Ministries’Departments of the Central Government but also under the domain of state Governments, Further,
and more important, many vital aspects of river management, the paramount need for securing the purity of river water, its
continuous environmental flow, definition of environmental flow, protection of river biota and its unhindered movement in
the length and breadth of the river including construction of river passes, protection of river ecology, maintenance of ground
water table and its connect with the river water, regulation of water withdrawal for industrial, agricultural and human use,
imposition of fines on the polluters, imponding of river water, navigation protection of flood plains, etc. need to be regulated
by law by Parliament in exercise of the legistative power conferred by article 246 read with entry 56, list | of the Seventh

_ Schedule to the Constitution. The Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change admitted that the existing laws of
pollution control, whether it is the Water (Prevention of Control Pollution) Act, 1974 and the Air (Prevention of Control
Pollution) Act, 1981 of the EP Act, 1986, they are a little weak with regard to enforcement provisions. However, the M/o
‘Water Resources, River Development and Ganga rejuvenation furnishing a different view stated that the aforementioned
enactments have adequate provisions to deal with industrial pollution control, Further, the Committee also note that MoEF&CC
are working to make the penal provisions of the aforementioned acts more stringent by way of criminalization of violation and
also imposition of deterrent financial penalties. Mindful of the fact that the gargantuan task of Ganga rejuvenation, being a
problem of life and development, cannot be accomplished through 2 piecemeal fragmented approach, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Mio WR, RD & GR take appropriate action expeditiously so that a strong, comprehensive
and credible legislative framework is put in place envisaging, among others, the creation of an empowered overarching
authority to deal with all aspects of the Ganga for ensuring that the Ganga remains ‘nirmal' and flows incessantly. The
Committee should like to be approsed of the outcome within next six months of the presentation of this report.

31. Arsenic in Ganga basin: The Committee in their Ist report (16th Lok Sabha) on Occurrence of High Arsenic
Content in Ground Water pertaining to M/o WR, RD & GR, expressing concem over presence of arsenic in ground water
in the Ganga, Brahmaputra plain, had recommended that a time bound programme be implemented for identifying the
causes and to find effective remedies in arsenic release, The M/o WR, RD & GR in their interim action taken reply
submitted that Inter Ministerial group (IMG) has directed the National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee to take up a
study on the genesis of arsenic occurrence in Ganga-Brahmaputra Basin. The Cammitree would like to be apprised of time
frame within which the study by NIH, Roorkee regarding the genesis of arsenic occurrence in Ganga-Brahmaputra Basin
would be completed. In the interim, the measures taken by the Gol to warn the people in the affected belts of the presence
of arsenic in water and the precautions which should be taken to help minimise or avoid health hazards be given wide
publicity.

In conclusion, having regard to the enormity of the challenges and taking note of the repeated solemn assertions of
the Prime Minister to rejuvenate the Ganga and to make a Swacch Bharat, the Committee reiterate the imperative need for
setting up an overarching and all empowered apex authority/body tasked exclusively with the responsibility of rejuvenation
of the Ganga so as 10 restore its pristine form as expeditiously as possible, Ganga, around which grew Indian civilisation
and legend, continues to be the lifeline of 43 per cent of India's population and a river of faith to millions of devouts within
and beyond the shores of India. The raising demographic pressure, growing untamed urbanization and industrialization,
continue to aggravate pollution in the Ganga rendering the Ganga not only non-potable, unfit for bathing purposes but also
extremely hazardous over long stretches. The impounding of river water obstructing its flow, diversion of water for drinking,
agricultural and industrial purposes and the pullutant load has rendered the Ganga dry and parch, and a sewer over long.
stretches in the up-stream areas. Renowned hydrologists and experts on river dynamics and water management testified
before the Commitice that the Ganga bears no comparison with any river of the world because of its highest point of origin,
steep gradient, kinetic energy and water quality. Indiscriminate anthropogenic interventions including indiscriminate
construction of HPPs in the upper reaches of the highly fragile Himalayas coupled with 80 to 90 per cent of water diversion
and discharge of affluents by 144 drains and entry of solid waste from non-point sources have only aggravated the pollutant
load of the Ganga. The Committee ardently hope that the Government would give earnest consideration to their
recommendations and implement them expeditiously for rejuvenation of the Ganga, the life line of millions around which
India civilization and culture grew, by July, 2018 without further time and cost escalation.

‘New Deut; DR, MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
9 May, 2016 Chairperson,
19 Vaisatha, 1938 (Saka) Committee on Estimates.


Parr Ill

ANNEXURE - 1
(Vide para No. 3.1 of the Report)

F. No, Z-17012/3/2014-Ganga (Pt.)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Movistny oF Warer Resources, River DevELorMent AND
Ganon Resuvenarion

The activities undertaken under Ganga Action Plan GAP-1 and GAP-II

Ganga Action Plan-I
* Launched in 1985.
* 260 Schemes completed,
. Covered 25 Class | Towns: 6 in UP, 4 in Bibur and 15 in West Bengal.
* Capacity of 869 million titres per day (MLD) of Sewage Treatment commissioned.

Gangs Action Plan-II
© Extended from GAP-1 in 1993,
* 264 Schemes completed.
* = Covered 59 Class-1 Towns,
* Capacity of 229 million litres per day (MLD) of Sewage Treatment commissioned,


ANNEXURE - IT
(Vide para No. 3.4 of the Report)

Status of Ongoing Projects

Rs. in Crores

93 projects sanctioned in 55 towns for total expenditure of 1414.54 crores with total sewage treatment capacity of 858
MLD to be created and sewer network of 3623.10 km to be laid.

29 projects completed that created 123 MLD treatment capacity and laid 666.69 km.


ANNEXURE - fit
(Vide para No. 3.6 of the Report)

F. No, Z-17012/3/2014-Ganga (Pt)
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Moasray of Warn Resources, River DEveLorment ano Gano REWUVENATION

Summary of activities undertaken so far by NGRBA

. 76 sanctioned schemes including 6 institutional development schemes, consisting of 49 schemes directly
funded by Govt. of India, 26 schemes funded by World Bank and 1 scheme funded by JICA.

* Sewage Treatment Plant Capacity of 659.23 million litres per day (mid) sanctioned, out of which 110.5 mld
has been created,

* Sewer Network of 2469.33 km has been sanctioned,
Major Decisions taken in meetings of NGRBA
+ Gangetic Dolphin declared as National Acquatic Animal (2010),

* Discontinued 3 hydro-electric projects namely Loharinag Pala, Bhaironghati and Pala Maneri
(1461 MW-2010).

+ Declared a stretch from Gaumukh to Uttarakashi as Eco-sensitive zone (2012).

9


ANNEXURE - 17
(Vide part No. 3.6 of the Report)
#. 1३०. Z-17012/3/2014-Ganga (Pt)
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Mpastiy oF Warex Resources, Riven DevELopMENT AND GANGA RERIVENATION

Summary of Sewage Treatmem Plants (STPs) created under various programmes viz GAP-1, GAP-II,
NGRBA, JNNURM

‘Treatment capacity created for towns on Main stem of River Ganga

1. ‘Total Sewage Generated for Towns on main stem of 5000 million litres per day
River Ganga (10 km. buffer on main stem of (MLD)—all classes
river Ganga) of towns
2 Capacity Created In MLD
a. a Sanctioned: 882
Created: 869
pH Sanctioned; 308.41
Created: 229.31
NGRBA Sanctioned: 659.23
Created: 110.50
Total of GAP & NGRBA Sanctioned: 1869.64
;
Approval Process)
3, Shortfall—
Against Sanctioned Capacity 2640,36 MLD
Against Created Capacity 3321.19 MLD


Z
i
|

ANNEXURE - V
(Vide para No. 3.20 of the Report)

Outlay and targets to be achieved wader 'Namami Gange'

‘Tasgets
Addressing the gap of 2500 MLD; Tapping of 144 drains;
Construction of critical sewerage infrastructure
100% Sanitation coverage for 1657 Gram Panchayats

River Front Management at 7 identified locations: Kedarnath,
Haridwar, Allahabad, Varanasi, Kanpur, Patna and Delhi
along with other locations

Common Effluent Treatment Plant at Jajmau and Keshipur under
PPPYSPV mode: Financial incentive for industries to
abate pollution

Maintenance related waste management activities at all major
ghats along Ganga Main stem

e-flow assessment and other critical activities required for
maintenance of c-flow

Institutional development at Districts and formation of Ganga PIUs
at 118 01.85 Support for preparation of DPRs and
. other related activites

Spatial Data creation for entire Ganga Basin, Assessment of
Special Properties of Ganga Water, Special guidelines
for sand mining in Ganga, etc.

Provision of public amenities at Char Dham Yatra and
Ganga Sagar, Management of pious refuse


© 1६02. ७४% pur ७०॥४७३४७1७॥ me हाए 4६७५४२७०७ Oo
(0 | 1) Hopton
+ 77८८ ue vondssiauy i Namannysor
(das)
ued 1ए३क्रा1०291:
o € wenas 606077 ov Becesdespny, #
> (0 ¥ 1) ००७७४
(eran) fr 69 0... PUR ४0497 646७ टर ToL Tasusdeapry ‘
(¢10z रूप है (aus)
@) aaseep es yeep ermal
9c) ८1-916; ६8७७ wr खाक 60 LOTT we Sekesdooc, क्र
(691 orang
oor St, a st 9... ९५४ ४०(॥४9०+ग्ा 60६0-05 tes = Mekeadoemy 5
fa # P vos
tus Pr 19६ 0... par ४०१॥४००+चण 60 ८9३80 rag ४6४३4 ००८1
(dis)
TE]. ॥990918391.
( 0 ri siaaag 80 (1 tT 6+ ६... Seeadueey t
18102 "sung
ड़ एज. अफमाऊफ OL 10 |) ००७०७ ०
a) ८1-91०८ € घ्टट OES 0. ple wonedtaoasany 800191 ore gresupeg 5
(ais)

’
o t ademas 80 ४0 टट wer फ्णकथ्त
५७ 597८2 t 2300व१७२०५ ३ perey (49 #६'$1 + २>बपह स्ब्यद् 42 Ze SE per pre
a 11 or 6 a & 9 क्र के € t '
—_— फकफ%ऋ फलफरफड,फफस््ऑ.......... +=) cc

ms for) CC भा
dls

७०))4७००० Jo eos yon yowsau — Missede> won &॥0#%.+ SOM jo stoned ON ता

el cs खन्‍्एड alg gy 4३5 200७0 SUEY peatidey ४०1 puts B
(210० sy)
(S107 रण पत्राए ००५५) (VERON) GuOGnY USN 49474 KUED feHOPEN s9pUN ६ ०जव्प्त peaouddy jo snyeyg 3
(doy ay1Jo 11% ON ered apis) है
Pouoysuns ७ ॥51>अग्जत
1A-FUONINNY


# wu Ary JO
॥४911970घ- UOT IOd
Joy स्मणणमपुड *
EEIANIG-BON
sf | se ¥ Sunes 01 509 96661 जब्वण्फााए
४७ SO'OSR : २३४०/१७२४ ६३ [ROL (49 0:'ऋट + २/०धड्ठ BHI ७० 61819 : २२७३६ 1४५1७२:३-२४०रव 8७73) ४०४३३ AED
9% 65. ## 91 al 8 86 91952 Fey, ९७७
{Rus uh ERP
OF आए sages
sasMog JO
छजा३जाय50००+ है
91-510: pee nor 5190 ५८ sro yeiieep
Sadwadaag wl setup
OF 2p auras
atasam2g 70
छ०1 5४००
OI-S10T pee ७ज१९+ण>>ह 1'90°S) Fohedaag
Orrg PRON,
ava) मण्ण्पण्पत
ae 11 EY ।ए.
ALS Pom ousoyos शस्बपण्पत
1८102 शक or oy 9 ध्मा
४०५0 'यण्वैणम्छ
(102 ‘sung 493 415
sie OF pue uapsts
ong) (1-910₹ एक steams १३4 ay potueD
NPE, TEES
1493] 0 mds pum 81
paiaydu03 00 ३० ७०३७०) हट कट sBMPUEHY
अत FO
_ Mao andhageng
ate, GUY
क गाज ५
aT aieramag iro vere MPU
wage uvaodey
40) 1.5 Pum gL)
ro mimes aPuamog, ree weaodey,
9155105 yp puoAeey
sways
w temas £08 Cas


&1-910< क्र rt ALS MB HL NEVILLE

(£1-910T न AV) ॥#०००००५


315 PSF Sas (qepeen)

Zz क०७७०३ २३७०६ oreo Re tec ancy

(apeonsymmeg aance

PHOM-dVa> wane 4urR

416 ॥७७ Sas ला

€ है... 16% ैकएव्यमर Bag 11908 /] प6+%६ sox

(ean eon ७/॥००8 faans

pLom-dva) wen yu

41.5 Pure Sus #॥7०/६-व४ज)

91-$105 ze 3 $08 1. ०७५० 3225 01 ६0 80 reo fuses.

1
39 GY SHE : aaupuadeg 1६०1, (49 FHSS २४७४७ AVIS ७० 8५971 १२०७ब५ [₹4०२:३-२७७) २३ Pung) ANU
102000५9%0() FILES &व एम/०3५ aq ०; 324 pause

ssaudoud |४०1४४५४ 361५० क yume pyroy २५३1 6५ FuroueMy २९॥३०७७१३३४ JapuN ( ON 15 18 Hofoad जज Jo 10 अका+>ए११७०७ AYN Paford ayy Jo ७णुऋ10॥॥५ Mm InP ३00७॥३ ATI ०1७०/७७ 4#॥५५
Ieee 895: stl SOF ose 10%ऋषद्र Frey ang
Bcpebanyed (yur
a) ॥0७120 peom-dva)
ves ga (g vous)
&1-8105 Berit च्यज४४$ nS titi oe 98595 Peqeyeiy
(weg pROM-ava)

मफर्पजएणण्का
cmyeqs 4000 ७.
BERS $ 0७४०७ aiemes #1$0 61 OL st zeqeys 00४५
(ques PROM-dVa)
saymespunjng] "EOE
Cental
huang, #1 कह कछ Lire अफफकण्मण्त
‘Curd ॥9०१७
॥1-<19: ava) peameiry
jo WADERS

BUMS UY

छोर yom sieamag rr toot #6॥#८ peqeyeny
° (yee pum Ave)
(if) "आर andowy

(ALS Pum aurayes आक्रा५ अर

HH


कानडातट

BI-L10T

#1-5105

BELIOZ

#5 96 vanes उयोड13% ५.

#८६ 6८1 ७25७ MIMS

svn - anes

४5) VAL जण्ण्ट)
प्रणएुथह we 3७०:चू०ढ
69 48 tunes,

rT Or

#ा 1 Of

ricost

#1 ८० 51

+#1 720०८

13039 (|

हारा

हा ग्राछा

91500:

tener

tiger

धार

cara

at ee

eral

(weg
Puom-aVa)
‘pruayouaee ५)
rue

छण्य PHOM
"शत
(मात) eu,

(queg

PHOM-dva)
Creuoeuase yy)
euied

(yer,


|
|
g
| 1111 1 11111]

orto t 1
33 69%86 :२४५१७०२४४७३ (MOL (43 09५01 JENS 2161६ ७3 SE'9PT ३५७५६ 1६५॥४७:३-२४४३।३३४ #७॥4) RAUB HAL
z or 66 घर, ans

८1-910: 6 6 203 strug ह1ढ1 फट 9966 fuuiqnees; a
मसेब्मममलम ८ 48६०1 (५३ YT :३३+थ५ ख्रछाह 3० 9६% :२+६७६ |#41७३-)-२४६३/२ 9७०५) 7०७क१)०प/

+9 ez 18०1 ans:

a Jeu singe

#1-810: stl sang andres, sro ६9#9८ ones) phd

seer] “eum 205 Cura

POM:
09. Pee 4३६ andpres si pole ६6 कड़ा! एयर न


oor
oor
oot

tetre

Filet

65161

#6 फटेंट

हद 869
£$'€6

# दा

#6 ८०१1

eto st

treo

Heol

Hees

trots

iw

Iw

cote

गाज

0190 6;

0190 67

0190 re

01 90 +#<
9169869

9 &टछ% एंट्रा +9 9976119

॥1'ख्श

seven, pur)
Moy, १०5

(Ging ppowdva)

TET 3००4 पब्छ

86 5%1 8pagzipng
byez td ANTS HEH
143 144 eedegg
awus fuediey
8७७4०
596 eredveny)
६9891 आशवफरण0
13 आल. «७७७
99का उच्यष्णाण।
80 ६1 MEsMEUIY APO G]
165 aefiowue
999 as
856 णरफज्पच्क
an ३ म
tes Ae
met eye
gett सष्फाष्ण्व
ore mus

© t


i i

|

HEH की.

कि के Halallle की का!

E


| ।
| i Stes sttt58438
2 F LEE के के हे ERS SKE ED
Gg
2 oi | . 8 ५३ 3 ?
फ् & = है 3 के के SF | wo # BRS HER FB

4892 92 4442 42 1६ ig 18 15 fs ig dn ds
Hllimliadt  phanent । | |

DIO


103

34 (ASB)
27 (ASB)
9 (Oni.

|]
100फ.
Pond)
225 (Oxi
Pant
‘78(UASB)
14(UASB)
40 (ASB)
10.45 (Oni.

$j

18 18 18 1६ 18 18 18 18 18 18 18 18 16 18 $ ६ $ ६
GE

j 5 ii. 3 tiled 11

is

ये है 8 © मे हे हे # मे 4 मे R HF KR REST SF F


‘considered
कं
Net commdered

1111 | |

रड़्डे

Not considered

Aria by 5 a332 dn 3
1111॥1111 111 HUTT
हई ॥$ई है ई ह ६ 44. § § §
fidddlanagdal
हैं. oF «6 है है. है | है ¢ रह
ging | मई | ; 5
ef af ah a a है ai af 3? a oad
18115 1811 STEN Ester ein

00 MLD
200) MLD



| $ 1 HLHELLLL ELE,
1॥ 11111 ||, lad ॥

॥ | | 11111] dts

funcoom!:

| | | 11911 111 Pa 11 ३ |

है है है Gh EER EGE ॥ 8 ॥1॥ 8

fe है है| 3 ।।। [11 हि है है।


owuped "Fesedpuen: cnimucry “eceduspny
Wehednusey “aque: “YEMEN “ypmuAysar IETeULS '॥॥४७४६०००३)



STRATE
CRITICAL STRETCH

Fi
3 .
i



108

pesnpoijut aq OF

iw #101 * 67००४ )
yuo

की 1921. अपण|४५१
7998॥119॥# 7०७०1032५0०05

DOVES UNDG sty ws
SIN ण एच्ण० WN, woe
“NP AO ate 8
eres ety ७0०५४ oo"
ERRAND 10 pum og
wy 999 Apamemat OF"

#१॥#«७७००._ 007

(#०4०३ पा 4० डद+ ON tam! %९।)
N° बचाए

sujesg peddeyun

Sd_LS pur sures Jo smeig — Iseuere


Allahabad — Status of Drains and STPs
— ge

EE
Hable

(4 / |) अह
3
i

I



110

कतार 1६1 : &###४४४)

7099172.4 |, जूधृण[ए<«९

1७9 IS ४0७७६) Beta HOURS) 75 पश्ष णएा

१०७>७ pansy गैपारि॥ए॥]7>510 $एाुएण) ६7

७९७७४४७१७ १19
piu 012 pesodosd
We poyerip eq oF

(0०७३ De 1० Te ON TE PLA
UN ~ EOIN

SA_LS pue sureiq Jo snye}g — induey


mW

PLOT TENE ME SOwREIAL puny Jor) ७० 9००७३ w ॥७७०५७। 6/फकन JOD.

ut ieee as
foe tw On आऊका। porte enter cert (voummaatogy Reentry ,y, ॥०००४७००)) ony
time te Om stor अरणा ‘ eee क्रम HC # 220०५ 1849 PameeY प्रजा,
(३4 ६<: $6 ole's6 हु ६६ on 51 $8 ७9७ dare, 88 |9०00५॥ [VO PRNSEY VIET
(ere Aye POs O01 or wosdes ७३॥॥७/२७ुप॑ध्य Hob
svtoet = THURS 19869 rem Phew oro 90% अरएसछ२०ण Smo
४३ pet) ava moi) 1०७ S001 on असाएंणुा ५२६] [१७एफ्रथाऋ७|
#0+०१७ प65कक ealnay erteg sary eheen pomery कमाए PF
4293) eye Tati
10" root st ट्श् मु oo {soURAUL SYP) परउसण्र amREmiisE ye! aTELmaS
ore orre ic ree orm ow, PUTT A का बह००५आ३1 २॥ ४1226:%4 Am YE TEU IS
or aw छा... भकछा झष्क suse #4 65: HOR womry flere) sper 3200038 241३2॥(फरक्ा ates = >
rungs way 2०) 100
७४ 0६ २६ ४००+०५७ YO ned
4906 wor nn काप्फ उस LOOT I 1०० SOR) 8 ug efueg sapen misofoxd ausnureyy aBsswos
कट & क्र ee FO S00 oroe seated OH
PO १६३०1 * meefand
वश्णमशाष्यका। “OTOL
i or overt quan en tpsbal senonaee gy ## १८ सरम 0 ([०७०फ्रफाान॥ ॥/0एत[2७) arenes ४०३
oris oe 011 orm कट (lueg) ४३१७३५५५ २10७० क्र yey atean2g
Cava HON) ERNE HerPAD
2G SIL wor
pir: or on wo peeney (ares (105) weepuns N
10७७ 0३0४६ amuipundey — sanerpusdeg Pusey puny 0D tamu 912क्‍048 wo) mL १०७४ omy,

sopesoyy क 4०.०0 AaeieEpag 2aquaypuy
NOLYNAANISY VONVD ३ 41२3/४१013#30 ४३७४४ 'इउ38110538 ४3170 JO ABLSININ
(uoday ays उ० #15 “ON wuud apie)
AUX + आजा


ammypuadxa कु vorrmusussjdua) Jo 3301 YIM soURUOEUOD ७] 3५ OF ५२१8२ SwRI Jo WREIIG pu¥ span) Jo BorEZY| WnwRdo
ता $9 Aa re am eee piachssievnyce cane to डर कर कक के अर अलिकर ऋषकन ps teay mare



SHUIINAH Si} WF ध्ीणण) ०१9 Jo syERY ay ००. 19203%0:/पण. 4ध|वगणूक

06 oc or ost जाग ost (Sano MgO / IRL Uy some oqgnd Jy umg YONTy wager परष्शश्ण्ण्ण्ड

SUOTEPUDUBOSN AWAD ३ ६11 JO ध॥190800०
३० Hodes [0७१] ७४०७] Feyows #७0110ल्‍५3०:०|



ANNEXURE - XIV
(Vide para No, 5.14 of the Report)

Budget Allocution for Component B—New Initiatives

TR

Targets

RR erorssy 3 ४ ££££££_£ऑ_ऑ+०००६€5८६ crores)

Sector Est. Budget
Sewerage Infrastructure 8000,
Sanitation 1750
River Front Management 250
Industrial Pollution 1000
Solid Waste Management 50
Aviral Ganga 100
Institutional Development = 250
Research & Development S00
Habitat improvement 150
Bio Diversity Conservation 150
Awareness Creation 128
Ganga Task Force 400

Addressing the gap of 2500 MLD; Tapping of 144 drains; Construction of critical
sewerage infrastructure

100% Sanitation coverage for 1657 Gram Panchayats

River Front Management at 7 identified locations: Kedamath, Haridwar, Allahabad,
Varanasi, Kanpur, Patna and Delhi along with other locations

Common Effluent Treatment Plant at Jajmau and Kashipur under PPP/SPV mode;
Financial incentive for industries to abate pollution

Maintenance related waste management activities at all major ghats along Ganga
Mainstream

e-flow assessment and other critical activities required for maintenance of e-flow

Institutional development at Districts and formation of Ganga PIUs at 118 ULBs;
Support for preparation of DPRs; and other related activities

Spatial Datu creation for entire Ganga Basin, Assessment of Special Properties of
Ganga Water, Special guidelines for sand mining in Ganga, etc,

Provision of public amenities at Char Dham Yatea and Ganga Sager; Management
of pious refuse

Conservation of Aquatic life-special attention on Dolphin, Turtles and Ghariyals;
Plantation of medicinal plants along 2525 km long Ganga River, DPR preparation
by Forest Research Institute

Community and Public Outreach Activities to be taken up in 118 ULBs targeting
population of 26 millions

Raising 4 battalions of Ganga task force-involving ex-servicemen located along
the ghats

a धनिया

4


15



३३104 YE] €औ ७७७ Wontar) 000/03५

pray war ७९४१४ BISEM PHOS

SOAIpMIRTHY Mau 405 :
=n STL‘L 9० ० St aBEH r uawaReuey) 1004 | >>

a@ungonupsesjul क#९४३/७०५

tre | 20७०५ कम], wun)
WONT.) #$शा्काछ 2

WOTBAIISNO,) ANSIOAIG OFF]

Tanamancudaly सका

17&0090|>५०] J YUUBIs]Y

juxndojsoq pouonmnse

6L0 इकएछ POA
oro 190] गज ॥ PHOS
एठफ़पाण्व णम्रजजफ़ा]
10ल्‍1270फए[५ 19013 201

ORES
SUNANASeUy DTANOS

son Steg 11h ePeeS

- egy ORT weRaecg gun

act exe 0
(32७३0. SSR ४३००० Ome — rpomiutagseag क पर/३+९०

(७०००० 3 UI sanyea ITV) 07-6107 II ABO [eIoUBULY :saAnENIUT MON

SOANVIIUT MON, — ARNO [eloueUly


Budget Outlay 2015-16
‘Total Budget (2015-16): Rs, 2650 Crores + Rs. 100 Crores (Ghat works)

National Ganga Pian Non-EAP Grant-in-aid General

Ghat works Noo-EAP (Grant-in-aid General

Ww


ANNEXURE - XV
(Vide para No, 6.21 of the Report)

List of HEPs' on River Ganga and its tributaries in Uttarakhand
(Under Construction, Cleared & yet to be taken up for construction and Under Examination)

डा... Project River Installed = Design = Type Live Submergence Remarks
No. Capacity Energy Storage Area
(MW) (MU) (MCM) __(HA)
1 2 3 a 5 6 7 8 9
A, Under Construction
1... Tapevan Dhauligangs 500 255836 ROR 053 ti]
Vishnugad
NTPC
2 ~=Late Tapovan = Dhauliganga WI 86849 = - ROR O58 » The project is included
NTPC in 24 projects referred in
the Hon'ble Supreme
Court order dated
13.08.2013 which is under
review,
3... Tehri- Bhagirathi 1000 14822" PSS Nonew reservoir shall be
प्राण, created for the Tehri PSP.
(PSS) The existing Reservoir
ereated by the Tehri Dam
would function as the
upstream reservoir and
Reservoir created by
Koteshwar Dam will serve
as the downstream
reservoir for the PSP,
4... Vishnugad Alaknanda a4 1840 ROR 37 24.50
Pipalkott
THDCIL
5. Phata Byung Mandakini 76 338.35 ROR 0.04 4
Mis Lanew
6... Singoli Mandakini 99 472.18 ROR 650 250m
Bhatwan (Length)
L&T UHPL
Total 2301
8. Cleared & yet to be taken up for construction
1, Kotlibhel-TA Bhagirathi 195 1025.5 Dam 0.00 217.247 १ The project is included
NHPC Toe ih 24 projects referred
2. Kotlibhel-B —Alaknanda «320, «1278.3 Dam 0,00 $02,347 | inthe Howie Supreme
NHPC Toe sgh:
13.08.2013 which is
3, Kottlibhel-1 Ganga 530 2001. Dam 0.00... 606.140 | under review,
NHPC Toe
4, Aloknanda Alaknanda 300 1199 ROR 0.00 0.52
GMR

118


119

et Se, 2 Ws Ses Sear pace pee जज 3 4 5 6 7 8 8
5S. Pala Maneri Bhagirathi 480 199. ROR 225 B

The project has been
UJVNL discontinued in
January 2011 on the
basis of recommen-
dations of National
Ganga River Basin
Authority (NGRBA) in
its meeting held on
01.11.2010,

6... Devsari Pindar 252 969. ROR 321 70080. Forest Clearance was
SJVNL linked with vacation of

‘stay imposed by Hon'ble

Supreme court vide

order dated 13.08.2013,

However, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in its
order dated 12.8.2014
have clarified that the
judgement would not be
applicable to projects
other than 24 projects
listed in petition. This

project is not included in
Sth list f 24 projects.
Total 2077

eee

C, Under Examination
1, Jelam Tamak  Dhauliganga 108 505.12 ROR 322 37.92 The project is inchated
THDCIL in 24 projects
referred in the Hon'ble
Supreme Court order
dated 13.08.2013 which

is under review,
2. BowalaNand  Alaknanda 300 1340.1 ROR 1.20 7.0 Appraisal —_ process
Prayag USVNIL. completed. However, the
appraisal by the
Authority is held due to

instructions issued to
CWC by Secretary
(MoWR, RD & GR)
vide DO letter dated
25.08.2015 to stop

approval of any dam or
barrage ज any structure
till the report on ¢-flow
is finalised.
—_—. rr
——<$<$<<<$_____ =
SS el ne $$
aoe Grand Total 4795

“Design energy tmcheding 200 MU conventional energy. Energy required for pumping waer in upper resesvolr is 1735.3 MU.


ANNEXURE - XVI
(Vide para No. 6.23 of the Report)

List of Hydro Projects<25 MW in operation on River Ganga & its tributaries in Uttarakhand

Sl Project Installed District River Tributary/Sub = =NameofCompany
No, Capacity Valley tributary!
(MW) Gadera

1. Pilangad 225 Untarkashi Bhagirathi Pilangad UIVNL,

2. Bhilangana-II! 24.00 Tebri Bhagirathi Bhilangana Polypex Corporation
3. Bhilangana 2290 Uttarkashi Bhagirathi Bhilangana ‘Swasti Power

4 Agunda Thati 3H पक्का Bhagirathi Bualganga ‘Gunsola Hydro

5... Rishi Ganga 13.20 Chamoli Alaknanda Rishi Ganga Rishi Ganga Power

Corpn. Lid.

6 Unam 300 Chamoli Alaknanda Kalpganga UIVNL

7. Vinala 1500 Chamoli Alaknanda Nandakini Him Urja

है. एड bhakti 3७0 Chamoli Alaknanda Nandakini Him Una

9. Birahi Ganga 1 Chamoli Alaknanda —-Birehigangs ——_Birahi Ganga Hydro
10. Debal 500 Chamoli Alaknanda Pindar! Chamoli Const.

Kailganga
Total 98.75



ANNEXURE - XVI
(Vide para No. 6.24 of the Report)

List of Hydro Projects<25 MW at various stages on River Ganga & its tributaries in Uttarakhand

SL Project Installed District River Tributary/Sub Name of Company
No. Capacity Valley tributary!
(Mw) Gadera

“>> जजनकक०७फ) फ:ऑफकसि-इ-स्‍बबननफकज डअफजन कफ _ैह...081[ह.

(A) Projects under Construction

1. Assiganga-t 4.50 Uttarkashi Bhagirathi Assiganga UJVNL
32... Assiganga-It 4.50 Untarkashi Bhagirathi Assiganga UJVNIL,
3, Kaldigad 9.00 Uttarkashi Bhagirathi Kaldigad UJVNL
4. Sawari Gad 2.00 Uttarkashi Bhagirathi Sawari Gad USVNL
5... Limchi Gad 3.50 Uttarkashi Bhagirathi Limchi Gad UJVNL
6... Bhuindhar Ganga 24.30 Chamoli Alaknanda Bhyundar Super hy:iro P. Ltd,
Ganga
7... Kali Ganga-t 4.00 Rudaraprayag Alaknanda Mandakini/ UJVYNL
Kaliganga
8. Kali Ganga-il 6.00 Rudaraprayag = Alaknanda Mandakini! UJVNL
Kaliganga
9... Madmaheshwar 15.00 Rudarapesyag — Alaknanda Mandakini/ UJVNL
Madmaheshwar
‘Total (A) 72.80
(B) Projects proposed (DPR Approved, Clearances Obtained/Under Process)
1. Kakoragad 1250 Untarkashi Bhagirathi Kakoragad Harsil Hydro P. Ltd,
2... Jalandhari Gad 24.00 Uttarkashi Bhagirathi Jalandhari Gad Harsil Hydro P. Ltd.
3... Syangad 11.50 Uttarkashi Bhagirathi Syangad Harsil Hydro P. Ltd.
4... Assiganga-IIl 9.00 Uttarkashi Bhagirathi Assiganga UJVNL
5... Bhilangana-IlA 24.00 Tehri Bhagirathi Bhilangana UJVNL
6 Kot Buda Kedar 600 Tehri Bhagirathi Bal ganga Gunsola Hydro
7... Shalakoti 12.50 Tebsi Bhagirathi aan. Gunsola Hydro
8... Khirao Ganga 4.00 Uttarkashi Bhagirathi Khirao Ganga Super Hydro ९. Lad.
9... Devali 13.00 Chamoli Alaknanda Nandakini Him Urja
10. Birahi Ganga-1 24.00 Chamoli Alaknanda Birahi ganga PES Engineering
व, Melkhet 24.30 Chamoli Alaknanda Pindar Malkhet Power
12. Kailganga 5.00 Chamoli Alaknanda Pindar! Chamoti Const.
Kailganga
Total (B) 169.80
Grand Total 242.60

121


ANNEXURE - XVIII
(Vide para No. 6.25 of the Report)

List of Hydroelectric Projects granted Environmental Clearance (EC) from 2006 to 2015

. (till date) in the State of Uttarakhand
i. | ——ae ©. Ee Name of the Projects Date of
No, & ae Clearance
i St <M. ee 23 3
oo eee

2006

(Nil)

2007
1. Lata Tapovan Hydro Electric Project (171 MW) in Chamoli
District by ४७ NTPC Ltd. 21/2/2007
2. Kotlibhiel Hydro Electric Project Stage-1A (195 MW) in Tebri
Garhwal District by M/s NHPC 9/5/2007
“3. Kotlibhel 5७8०-18 HEP (320 MW) in Districts Pauri a Tehri
by M/s NHPC 14/8/2007
4. Vishnugad Pipalkoti HEP (444 MW) in Helong village
by M’s NHPC 22/8/2007
5... Kotlibhe! Stage-If HEP (530 MW) in Districts Pauri & Tehri
+ by M/s NHPC 23/8/2007
6. Singoli-Batwari HEP (99 MW) in District Rudraprayag,
Uttarakhand by M/s L&T Uttaranchal Hydropower Ltd. 24/8/2007
7 ‘Vyasi I HEP Project (120 MW) in District: Dehradun by M/s NHPC T9207
| 2008
i Phata Byuang HEP (76 MW) project in District: Rudraprayag,
Untarakhand by M/s Lanco Hydro Energy Pvt. Ltd 19/2/2008
2... Alaknanda HEP (300 MW) project in District: Chamoli,
Uttarakhand by M/s GMR Energy Pvt. Ltd, 12/3/2008
3. Hanol Tuni HEP (60 MW) project in District: Dehradun,
Uttarakhand by M/s Sunflag Power Ltd. 9/6/2008
2009

1, Rupsiabagar Khasiabara HEP Project 261 MW (3 x 87 MW)
project in District: Pithorgarh, Ustarukhand M/s National दि
‘Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, 26/3/2009

2010-2013
Nil

“National Environment Appellate Authority (NEAA) has quashed the environmental clearmnce dated 14,8.2007. vide their ceder daicd 15.9 2010.
Thesefore, Ministry withdraws the EC issued to Kotlibbhet HEP Stage-IB by NHPC on 22.11 2010

122


ANNEXURE - XIX

(Vide para No. 6.25 of the Report)
‘Status of Grant of Forest Clearance to Hydro Power Projects in Alaknanda and Bhagirathi Basins =
ञ. Neme of = Capacity Proponent Project Stmus of Forest Ciearce

No. Project’ (MW) (Name) Type oe. — Stage Forest Clenrance __ Stage-ll Forest Clearance 7
ion

Site Ares Yes/No Date
Diver- Diver-
ted (ha) ‘ted (ha)
OOOO न __ततऔ..े.े.............3.........
? ड़ 9 10 वा 12
a 0 3
Not NA, NA NA NA NA.
Reguired-
Proect
is pre-
1980
2 Maneri Bhali-f = 304 UIVNL KOR — Commissioned Ye 2861982 562 Yes 277,92 263
3. Koteshwar 400 THDC Storage Commusssoned Yes 2412000 338.932 Yes 25.10.2002 338.932
4. Tehri-l 1000 THDC Storage Commissioned Yes 64,1987 25829 Yes 64.1987 2582.9
5. Vithouprayag 400 JAYPEE ROR — Commmiasioned Yes 101.1996 80 Yes 15.10.1996 50
6. Birahi Ganga 4a Berahi Ganga ROR = Commissioned Yes 04.07.2005 4.65% Yes 168.2005 4658
Hydro Power
Lad.
7. Bhilungae Pd oe ROR Commissioned Yes 7L122006 33 Ves 43.2007) 8.35
Power
है. Bhilanganeil = 24 Bbilankgens ROR — Commissioned 21.12.2006 Yes 143.2007
Hydro Power
Lad.
9. Ungam 3 WIVNL ROR Commissioned Yes 44.89 0921 Yes SAL og21
10. Badrinath-lt 125 UIVNE ROR Commissioned ‘Yes 18.07.2000 0.092 Yes 187.2000 = 0.092
11, Pilang Gad 225 UIVNL ROR —- Commissioned Yes 167.1999 O9R62 Yes 16.7.1999 0.9862
प्र. Detal $ ‘Chamolt ROR = Commissioned Yes 2342006 286 = Yes 23.2005) = 2.४७
Hydro Bowes:
Pvt. Led.
13. Agunda Thati 3 ‘Curso ROR —_ Comméssioned Ye 186.2004 23328 Yes 132005 = 23328
Hydro Power
Generation
Pvt Lid,
14, Jummaged 2 UJVNL ROR = Commissioned Yes 34191 0419 Yes 34.1991 0419
15, Rajwakeri a6 Hin Uga ROR Commissioned Yes 20.05.1999 380 Yes 61199 3834
Pvt Lad
16, Vanale is Him Uga ROR = Commissioned ‘Yes 1522005 683. Yes 213.2005 6.83
m™ Lt
17, Kot Budha Kedar 6 Gunsola ROR — Commissioned Yes 16.8.2004 059% Yes 168.2008 0.594
Hydro Power
‘Generation
Pvt. Led
18. Asiganget 45 UWVNIL ROR Yes 2662000 0923 Yes 266.2000 999 4
49. Asigange-ti as WIVNL ROR Yes 296.2000 G72 Yes 2960७. 077



24,

25

26.

27.

28

40.

a

43.
43.

है। है 1]

Kali Gad

320

1000

‘Madh Maheshwar 10

Phata Bhyung,

Lohart Nagpain

. Kail Ganga

Kail Gange-|

. Keil Ganga-it

Asignage-tll
Pola Manert

Bhyunder Ganga

. Lata Tapovan

Urgam-tt
Dewalt

Khiront Ganga

Veshnugad-
Pipalkot
Kattibhel-tA

76

600

aan
2
125
140
a8
13

195
300
15

4 EI 6
Lat Storage Under
Construction
NTPC ROR = Under
Consteetion
Rishigenga ROR Under
Power Construction
Corporation
lid
GvK Storage Under
Constraction
काएट Stornge Under
‘Construction
WYNL ROR = Under
Construction
UIVNL ROR Under
Construction
LANCO Storage Under
Construction
NTPC ROR = Under
Construction
WNL ROR = Under
Construction
UIVNE ROR Under
Constrection
UIVNL ROR Under
‘Construction
WVNL ROR = Proposed
WIVNL Storage Proposed
SHEPL. ROR — Proposed
NTPC ROR — Proposed
THDC Storage Propemed
UNI, ROR Proposed
Ham Unja ROR = Proposed
Pvt. Ltd.
Gansola ROR = Proposed
Hydro Power
Generation
Pvt. Lad
‘Super Hydro ROR = Propased
Pet, Lid
THDC ‘Storage Proposed
NHPC Storage Proposed
GMR ROR — Proposed
Melkher ROR = Proposed

fre gf F

8 9
25.48.2008 34.341

$.8.2005 80,705

06.09.1999 2.9158

15.04.1987 338.86

64.1987 Area
inchoded
in Tehri
‘Stage-T

18.7.2007 1.69

131.2006 4.999

243.2008 16.37

96.2005 143.681

13.2006 2.879

13.14.2006 4.1

13.1.2006 3.129

94.2000 0.921
SK2O0S 53 5318
27.09.1999 2719
17.10. 2006 75.809
6.10.2008 0.1596
22.06 1998 1.1284
20.8 2004. 2.21

18.6,2004 2.219

10.1.2010 2615
3.62011 $0.507

13.102011 258.737
$.11.201॥ 60,613
14.2.2007 6.614

Yes

‘Yes

es ff Fees fF fF F F F F F

Fe¢t ¢ ff

nu R

16,1.2009 34.341
133.2006 80.705

33.2000 2.915%

15.04.1987 338.86
GA E9T Area
secluded
in Tehri
‘Stage-l
84.2008 1.69
36.2007 4,909

25.2008 1637

25.2005 143.681

66,2006 2.879
13.35.2007 4.1
36.2007 3.129
94.2000 (0.921
66,2006 $3.5315

18.10.2001 2.719
304.2007 75.809
291.2009 0.1596
198.1998 1.1284
2222005 221

710.2006 2219

16.12.2010 2.615

23.05.2013 NA.

NA NA
912012 60.615
NA. RA



45.

46.

47.

बह

3.

$2.

53.

56.

57. Bieahi Ganga-t

Kotlibbhet 8
Kotlibhol-ft
Tamak Late

Matari Jbelam

Jhelem Tamak

Rishi Gunga

Rishi Ganga4

Devsart

|

Gohana Tat

Bhairon Ghat

३00

195

250

i4

480

35

35

200

aa

NHPC

THDC

(WVNL

THDC

$ 6 7

‘Storage Proposed Rejected on
772001

Stompe Proposed Rejected on
77.2018

ROR Proposed = Chased on
25.7.2018

ROR — Proposed —_Aplication
seeking Stage-]
FC not received

by MOEF

ROR = Proposed = Apptication
secking Stage-t
FC to project
has been veccived.
Decision ie
deferred due 10.
ban imposed by
Supreme Court,

Storage Propesed Application
secking Stage
PC nos received
by MoEF

Stornge Proposed Application
seeking Stage-!
FC not reestved
by MoEF.

Storage Proposed  Apptication
seeking Stage-l
FC ७ project has
heen received.
Deesion is
Geferred duc
1 ban imposed
by Supreme

8
NA.

NA.

NA

NA

NA,

NA

NA

NA

NA.

NA.

NA.

NA.

NA

NA

NA,

NA.

NA.

NAL

NA

NA,

NA.

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA,

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

1४.७.

NA.

NA

NA.

NA.

NA.

NA,

NA.

NA

NA,

NA,

NA

NAL

NA,

“MA.

NA

KA.

NA,

NA

NA,

NAL

NA


59,

63

65

67.

. Birahi Gange-tl

Jadh Ganga

Suvi Gad

. Pilang Gad It

Balganga-tt

}. Bhilangana-ll B

“4

50

कू

3.5

4

24

2

UIVNL, ROR

UIVNL = =—- ROR

i

i

i

fiiiitl

NA

NA

NA

RA

NA

NA,

NA

NA.

NA.

NA.

NA.

NA.

NA

NA

NA

NAL

NA

NAL

NAL

NA.

NA

NA.

NA

NA

NA

0

NAL

NA

NA

NA

NA,

NA.

NA

NA

NA

NA.

NA

NA

NA

NA.

NA

NA

NA

NAL

NA.

RA.

NA

NA,

NA.

NA.

NA,

NA.

NA,

NA.

NA

NA.

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA.

NA


128



130



GI



132



133



134



135



136



ANNEXURE - X¥
(Vide para No. 6,33 of the Report)

Gist of MoEF & CC affidavit filed in Hon'ble Supreme Court on $.12.2014

A Sindy regarding envionment flow of Ganga was singed to Iter Mintel Gro (IMG) in uly 2012 which
i the implementation of all

Disaster of Junc-2013 in the Himalayan basin of Ganga:

Action taken by MOEF since the Supreme Court order dated 13.08.2013 in respect of various HEPs in Uttarakhand
(in Chronological order)

(the Hon'ble Supreme court vide its judgement dated 13.8.2013 in the SLP Civil Appeal No. 6736 of 2013 (SLP
(C) No, 36? of 2012) in Alaknands Hyuro Power Company Limited versus Anuj Joshi & Others, dieeted the
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF & CC) infer alia, to Constitute an Expert Body

(ii) The Ministry of Environment, Forests nd Climate Change (MoEF & CC) had according constituted an Expert
Body (FB) under the Chairmanship of Dr. Ravi Chopra on 15.10.2013. The Expert Body had submitted its

Brief recommendations of various Committees

wil Report Proposed 24 HEPs will have significant impact on biodiversity (Terrestrial & Aquate) in the region ona
Cumulative basis and therefore recommended not to take-up.

furher study, They supported W Il report and did not agree that Tebri dam has saved downstream town of Harte a
Rishikesh.

Additional damage can be taken care of by the developers, Tehri dam has saved the downstream towns from flooding as it
wee sition water, biodiversity impact has also been taken care in the ELA study ofthe individual projects (though
Bot on cumulative basis)

TIT Consortiam

@ ITC report mentioned that there is no conclusive evidence to show that these HEPs had contributed to the
tragedy of June, 2013 in Uttarakhand

137


138

(i) INTC finds the findings of W Il report on impact on biodiversity by these projects ॥ substantive one and
recommended for re-appraisal of the projects

@w IITC report recommended these HEPs to undergo design modifications especially to ensure longitudinal
connectivity, release of adequate--flow and reappraisal of biodiversity impact in case government desires to
take-up these projects,

CAG Report

Pre-feasibility (PFR) study based on ground survey of the river basin its topography and hydrology was to be carried by
Uttarakhand Jal Vidhyut Nigam Limited (UJVNL) the nodal agency for accurate evaluation of the hydro-power patential
ofa river'stream, However, significant alterations ranging from 22 per cent to 329 per cent in the capacity of 85 per cent
of projects raised serious doubts on the credibility of PFR studies.

Disaster Management and Mitigation Centre (DMMC)

‘The stipulated norms and conditions for such highly fragile and eco-sensitive zones are being ignored and violated for
the various developmental projects. Even hydro power projects for obtaining project clearances have ignored the cco
sensitivity and previous studies and recommendations. The observations by DMMC have noticed that how the mountain
aquifer was damaged due to tunneling in declared sensitive and fragile hilly area of Joshimath in Alaknanda valley,

Planning Commission

The cumulative impact of multiple hydro-power projects along the same river basin and the threat of a cascading chain
of catastrophes in case of structural failures or even from purely natural causes suggest the urgent need for a region or
entire basin based Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) rather than individual project oriented environmental irspact
assessments (ELA) than neglect the summation effect. The Task Force supports the MoEF's decision on busin based
assessments for projects, .

Italso seems logical and essential to demarcate zones in the higher Himalayan region that are naturally unstable in these
areas no hydro-power projects should be allowed to be developed.

Hon'ble Supreme Court's directions given on 9.10.2014 and $.11.2014,

‘That in compliance of the directions of this Hon'ble Court issued vide dated 09.10.2014 and 5.112014 the MoEF&CC
convened meetings with Hon'ble SC nominated members various stakeholders experts and representatives of NTPC, NHPC
& THDC wherein their Hydro-power projects namely, Lata Tapovan HEP, Kotilbet (Stage-1) HEP and Jhelam Tarmak HEP
were discussed, As directed by the Court design modifications and compliance were sought in respect of (a) a proper
longitudinal connectivity in the dam/barrage to ensure smooth biota movement and non-disruptive sediment transportation,
(9) adequate e-flow release through dam/barrage, and (०) Conservation and mitigation measures to contain and lessen
impacts on bio-diversity as reported by W II. Similar meeting was held with the GMR Energy & Super Hydro Electric Private
Limited on 20.11.2014 to discuss their projects namely: Alaknanda HEP and Bhyunder Ganga & Khirao Ganga respectively.

‘The measures proposed’suggested by the Developers were not found adequate by the Ministry.
Prayers made in the affidavit

@ ‘The Government is very concerned at the disaster of Uttarakhand. Its a great cause of pain anguish and outrage
that so many lives have beet lost and properties damaged. Any decision on developmental projects especially
hydro-power peojects should therefore be an very strong and sound footings with scientific back up. Government
recognizes the pressing need for rejuvenation of Ganga which is on the top most agenda of the Prime Minister
and the Union Government. To maintain aviral dhara in the form of environmental flow is sacrosanct to
ensure its ecological integrity and wholesomeness, Further damage to the river and surrounding bio-diversity
will be detrimental in reviving and rejuvenating the Ganga River. In view of this Hon'ble Court's directives to
review the HEPs this Ministry has undertaken the exercise and had a series of meetings with the developers. But,
the suggested changes have not been found to be adequate,

@ ‘Three months time allotted to the EB was not found adequate. The EB with some additional members may carry

out a cumulative impact assessment and carrying capacity study of these rivers to optimally work out and
suggest as to how many HEPs at which locations their design and with what capacity could be allowed in a


139

(iii) 4n order to have a thorough comprehensive study and critical examination of the HEPs this Group may be allowed
atime period of at least 12 months. A comprehensive ToR would be prepared for this and this Hon'ble Court will
bbe kept informed about the progress on biomonthly basis.

tiv) For examining 6 HEP projects 3 months time may be allowed,

© Apreliminary meeting of EB was held on 16.6.2015 at MOEF & CC and a 2nd meeting was held during 912th July, 2015
at Wildlife Institute of India Dehradun,

* The matter was last heard on 12.53.2015 and MOEF filed ३ comprehensive affidavit. On 12.5.2015 Hon'ble SC mentioned
that the matter is adjourned 1029.7.201 to enable Union of India to file an affidavit with regard to peousess made in
this regard.

. Tre MOEF&-CC filed an affidavit on29,7.2015 regarding progress made so far and filed the outcome ofthe meetings
of EB held on 16.6.2015 and 9-12th July, 2015.


ANNEXURE - XX1
(Vide para No. 6.38 of the Report)

Status of river basin-wise Carrying Capacity and Cumulative Impact Studies (CC & CIS)in Arunachal Pradesh,
Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim & West Bengal

SL Basin Status Recommendations’ Findings!
No. likely date of completion.
1 2 3 4
1 Bichom Study carried-out by MoEF & CC through Out of 10 proposed projects in the basin, 6
River Basin WAPCOS has been completed Projects have been recommended for granting EC.
Out of these, Nafra & Gongri have been granted
EC, while for remaining 4 proposals, proposals
for EC have not yet received in MoEF & CC.
E-flow of 20%, 25% and 30% in 3 different
seasons recommended,
‘The recommendations of Bichon study have been
communicated to Government of Arunachal
Pradesh.
2 ~~ Lohit Study carried-out by MoRF& CC through —-Fresh TOR for including tributaries has been
River Basin WAPCOS. The Interim Report wasexamined —_ issued on 12.2.2015, 12 months time is required
by the EAC. The WAPCOS has been asked to complete the study and accordingly, to be
by the EAC to entarge the scope by including completed by February, 2016,
iis tributaries also in the study and
submit a fresh TOR for consideration. The
revised TOR was considered and approved
by EAC in November, 2014,
WAPCOS has reported to be facing non-
cooperation from Assam Government in
collecting data and conducting the study in
Assam. Secretary (EF&CC) has taken-up this
issue with Chief Secretary, Assam has wide
letter di. 1.6.2015 Chief Secretary, Assam
vide letter dated 29,6.2015 has assured all
necessary help to WAPCOS in this regard,
CMD, WAPCOS has been requested by
Joint Secretary, MoEF & CC on 7.7. 2015
to contact Assam Government for necessary
assistance and complete the study,
3. Subansiri Subansiri river basin study has been awarded The réport being accordingly modifted. The study
River Basin to M/s. IRG Systems Lid. by CWC, MoWR. _ is likely to be completed by September, 2015.
‘The interim report has been examined by the
EAC in September, 2013. EAC found a
number of shortcomings/deficiencies and

sought a modified report. The modified
report has been received in January 2015.
EAC noted that even modified report is not
complete, as HEPs below 25 MW capacities
have not found considered in the study,
The consultants are now revising the report
by incorporating all HEPs in the basin.

140


a eS eee तर बडा
4 = Siang Siang river basin study was awarded to ‘The report has been approved by MoEF & CC

Fp Fay

bi?

M/s. RS Envirolink Technologies L.td. by
CWC. MoWR State Government has
expressed their reservations on
recommendations for dropping 15 projects
and on reduction of FRL of 3 projects.
Recently, State Government has
requested for reconsideration of
4 smaller HEPs.

MoEF & CC issued ToR for the study in
November 2013 to CWC, MoWR.
MoBF & CC has taken over the study and
awarded to WAPCOS in March 2015.

MoEF & CC issued ToR for the study in ~

November, 2013 to CWC, MoWR.
MOoEF & CC has taken over the study
and awarded 10 M/s RS Envirolink
‘Technologies Ltd. in March 2015.

Study Report has been submitted NEHU
to Gavernment of Arunachal Pradesh on
29.06. 2015, a copy was endorsed to MoEF &
CC also which was received on 07.07.2015.
‘This was discussed in a review meeting by
JS(MoEF&CC) on 07.07.2015 where NEHU
Professor and Chief Engineer, Government
of Arunachal Pradesh were present
Government of Arunachal Pradesh was
requested to formally submit the report of
MoEF & CC. The report has been received
from Arunachal Pradesh Government.

In the Sikkim portion. The study was
conducted by Dethi University and
completed in 2007,

‘on 13.3.2015. Policy recommendations have
been communicated to State Government MOP
& MOWR for further action.

However, additionally, ॥ fresh study for main
stem siang river has been awarded, Proposal
of MoWR, RD & GR to construct a single dam
of 10,000 MW capacity and with storage of
10 BCM of water in place of earlier proposed two
HEPs in being examined in detail by the consultant
in this study,

And, also on request of Government of Arunachal
Pradesh, reassessment of actual progress of works
in respect of 4 HEPs is being carried-out,
6 months time is needed to complete these
remaining studies.

12 months time is required to complete the
Study from date of award. Likely date of completion
of the study is March, 2016,

12 months time is required to complete the study
from date of award. Likely date of completion of
the study is March, 2016.

The proposal is being placed before EAC in
its meeting scheduled during 24-25th August,
2015. The study is likely to be completed/
accepted by September, 2015, if'so recommended
by EAC.

Two HEPs ie. Teesta-I and Teesta-tI planned in
upper reaches have been abandoned as concerns
have been expressed for environmental damage
Report comprises some other concerns of
Protecting local tribal population from adverse
impact ete. on project to project basis and these
have been factored into while granting EC on
Teesta,

9. Satluj River ICFRE is conducting for about past one year. —$— eames Raber pestionie yews. Reportawalted नि मिस


142

1 2 3 4
10. Chenab Recently awarded to B.S, Envirolink by Report awaited.

River Himachal Government,
11, Teesta From Sikkim Border ‘Teesta Barrage in Recently started.
Riverin Jalpaiguri District, Gajoldoba. By WAPCOS
Sikkim & und Delhi University.
West Bengal
12, Bens River Recently awarded to B.S, Envirotink by Recently awarded,

Himachal Government. Letter to be Issued.



ANNEXURE - XXII

(Vide para No. 6.34 of the Report)
NO, 7/995-HYDEL-II (VOL. V)
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF POWER
Shram Shakti Bhawan, Rafi

New Delhi, the 10th April, 2001

Subject ; Constitution of Committee to go into the concerns raised regarding seismic safety of Tehri Damm inthe light
of Bhuj earthquake ete.

he Government had considered indepth the seismic safety of the Tehri Damm and the detailed seismotogy studies
cine et कि Geological Survey af India, Department of Earthquake Engincering of Roorkee University and Russian

2. However, inthe wake of Bhuj carthquake of January, 2001, the need for review of seismic safety of Tehri Dam ७ felt
Pen inthe concer has also been expressed about the possible impact of Tehri Dam on the self-purification quality
of Ganga Jal. has accordingly been decided to constitute a Committee to go into the concerns regarding: —

(a) Seismic safety of Tehri Dam in the light of Bhuj earthquake of January, 2001; and
(b) impact of Tehri Dam on seif-purification quality of Ganga Jal, etc.

3. The Committe will comprise the following:

(0). De. Murti Manohar Joshi, Minister of Human Resource Development and Chairman
Science & Technology

(2) Dr. R.A, Mashelkar, Director General, CSIR & Secretary, Deptt. of Scientific Member
& Industrial Research

@G) Dr. C.D. Thatte, Former Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources Member

(४). Chairman, Central Water Commission Member

(5) Director General, Geological Survey of India Member

6) Chairman, Cerstral Pollution Control Board Member

(7) __ Director, National Environmental Engineering Research Institute Member

(8) Prof. K.S. Valdia Bhatnagar, Research Professor, Jawahar Lal Nehru Centre Member

for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore

प्ण Prof. T. Shivaji Rao, Director, Centre for Environmental Studies,
Geetam College of Engineering, Vishukhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh

Member
(10) Shri U.K. Chowdhury, B-36/21, C-6, Brahmanand Extension-f, Member
Durga Kund, Varanasi

Member

(11) Shri Guru Das Agarwal, Vridda Sews Sadan, Pramodvan, Chitrakoot (Satna),
Madhya Pradesh

143


M4

4, Ministry of Power will service the Committee,
5. The non-official members of the Committee will be entitled to TA/DA. Non-official members would also be entitled

to.an honorarium of Rs. 1000/- per day, All expenditure in this regard shall be met by the THDC,

To

#० कर कफ फ क# एन के हू

ह््क

10,
॥,
Copy

ee इन कस ह+

6. The Committee may submit its report within 4 weeks to the Government for its consideration,

Sd
(AJAY SHANKAR)
Jt Secretary to the Government of India.

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi, Minister of Human Resource Development and Science & Technology.
Dr. R.A. Mashetkar, Director General, CSIR & Secretary, Deptt. of Scientific & Industrial Research,
Dr. C.D. Thatte, Former Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources.
Chairman, Central Water Commission.

Director General, Geological Survey of India.

Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board,

Director, National Environmental Engineering Research Institute,

Prof, K.S, Valdia Bhatagar, Research Professor, Jawahar Lal Nehna Centre for Advanced Seicrlitic Research, Jakkur,
Bangalore,

Prof. T, Shivaji Rao, Director, Centre for Environmental Studies, Gectam College of Engineering, Vishakhapatnam,
Andhra Pradesh.

Shri U.K. Chowdhury, B-36/21, C-6, Brahmanand Extension-1, Durga Kund, Varanasi.

Shri Guru Das Agarwal, Vridda Sewa Sadan, Pramodvan, Chitrakoot (Satna), Madhya Pradesh,
for information to:

‘The Cabinet Secretary, Cabinet Sectt_, New Delhi.

Secretary, Ministry of Power, New Dethi,

The Chief Secretary, Govt. of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow,

The Chief Secretary, Govt, of Uttaranchal, Dehradun.

The Chairman & Managing Director, THDC.

Shri Jamail Singh, Jt. Secretary, PMO, New Delhi,

PSto HRD Minister,

PS to Minister of Power.

PS to Minister of State for Power.

Sd-

(AJAY SHANKAR)
Jt. Secretary to the Government of India


ANNEXURE - XXII
(Vide para No, 6.35 of the Report)
1४0. 7995-11

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF POWER

New Delhi, dated the 9th July, 2002

Subject: Pern of east Technical Commitee 1 examine the posibily of passing some unieterupted

a
2s

PNA WA BH ६5

%

Portion of fair weather flow of Bhagirathi past Tehri Dam.

feasible scheme may be designed and considered,
The Expert Technical Committee will comprise the following:
1. Member (0७1२), Central Water Commission, Chairman
2 Member (Hydro), Central Electricity Authority. Member
3 Add. Director General, 65.1. (posted in Northern Region). Member
4... ShriGN. Ruo, Ex. MD, Chukha Hydro Project. Member

‘The Commies wil submit its report within a period of two months tothe Ministry of Power forts consideration.
‘This issues with the approval of Minister of Power.
Sd
(Rajeev Sharma)
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India

Member (D&R), Central Water Commission, Sewa Bhavan, New Delhi.
Member (Hydro), Central Electricity Authority, Sewa Bhavan, New Dethi.
Addl, Director General, Geological Survey of India,

Shri GIN. Rao, Ex, MD, Chukha Hydro Project.
Chairman, CWC, New Delhi.

‘Chairman, CEA, New Dethi,

Director General, (15.1. Calcutta.

CMD. "TH.D.C NOIDA.

Secretary (P), Govt. of Uttaranchal, Dehradun,

10. ‘Secretary (P), Govt. of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow.
Tk PS to Minister for Science and Technology & OD.

145


ANNEXURE - XXIV
(Vide para No. 6.36 of the Report)

NO, 7/995-H-1
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF POWER

‘Shram Shakti Bhawan, Rafi Marg,
New Delhi, the 22nd September, 2003

OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Expert Technical Committee to examine the possibility of passing some uninterrupted portion of fair weather

flow in the Bhagirathi past Tehri Dam-reg.

The undersigned is directed to say that on the recommendation of the Committee set up under the Chairmanship of
Dr, Murti Manohar Joshi, Minister of HRD and Science & Technology an Expert Technical Committee was constituted
vide this Ministry’s order No. 7/9/95-11-1 dated 09.07.2002 and 20.01.2003 to examine the possibility of passing some
uninterrupted portion of fair weather flow of Bhagirathi past Tehri Dam so that an appropriate techno-cconomically feasible
scheme may be designed and considered

2. The Expert Technical Conunittce has concluded that “Considering the technical merits, geological considerations
and satisfactory operation, alternative of providing 400 mm dia steel pipe with on the lining of HO ५ | und suitabl > and is
recommended. The Committee further recommend that there shull be two intake points at different locations (say 2m apart
connected to the single pipe}. The Committee found that with this arrangement about 35 cusecs of water shall be released
uninterrupiedly”.

3. It has been decided by the Government to accept the above recommendation of the Expert Technical Committee,

4. THDS is requested to take necessary action on the above recommendation under intimation to this Ministry.

Sal

- (Rajecy Sharma)
Dy, Secretary to the Government of India

To

CMD, THDC, NOIDA, alongwith a copy of the Report
Secretary (P), Govt of Untaranchal, Dehradun
Secretary (P), Govt. of U.P, Lucknow

‘Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, New Delhi
Chairman CEA, New Dethi
Chairman CWA, New Delhi

Director General, GS, Calcutta

PS to Minister of HRD and Science & Technology

Sx awe pe

146


ANNEXURE - XXV
(Vide para No. 6.37 of the Report)

Summarizing Expert Body Committee Report a
Recommendations for Immediate Action हर

1. Cancellation of 23 out of 24 Projects recommended for review by WII: The Expert Body concluded that all the
24 HEPs identified by WII would have significant bio-diversity impacts. The EB recommended that 23 HEPs out of
the 24 (other than Kotli Bhel 1A) may be rejected,

2 Ensure Environmental Flows: Till such time as a final decision is taken on the ¢-flows recommendations of the
N1Ts-consortium, e-flows of 50% during the lean season and 30% during the remaining non-monsoon months
should be ensured. Sustaining the integrity of Uttarakhand’s rivers and their eco-systems is not negotiable.

3. No Dams in the Paragiacial Zone: Leamting from the June 2013 event, the EB believes that the enhanced sediment
availability from and in paraglacial zones is a serious problem for the Ganga river system, ‘Therefore the terrain
above the MCT in general and above the winter snow line in particular (~2200-2500 ता) shoukl be kept free from
hydro-power imerventions in Uttarakhand.

4. Evo-Sensitive Zones: |_egislation needs to be enacted to (i) designate Eco-Sensitive Zones for important rivers of
the Ganga river system: (i) Protect small but significant rivers in the Ganga river system as pristine rivers (as done
in Himachal Pradesh and also recommended by the IMG for Uttarakhand),

5. Review ELA Procedure: Establish an independent authority 10 commission EIA Reports for the Ganga river
system. thereby insulating the 814 agency from the project developers. Alternatively establish a roster of capable
institutions organizations that have a proven track record of credible scientific work. Project developers: must
deposit the EVA agency's fee with the Ministry so that the agency is paid by the Ministry and not the project
developer.

6, Fresh Clearances for Old Projects: As per the EIA notification 14 September, 2006, the valictity of approved EC is
10 years. It has been noticed that in a number of cases the validity of EC is 5 years only. The validity should not
be extended, unless fresh appraisal is done. Clearances to start work granted recently to the Lakhwar
(300 MW) and Vyasi (120 MW) projects should be cancelled. These projects were approved more than 25 years
ago, They do not have any E1A/EMP/DMP studies that are mandatory today.

7. Project Clearances: All projects 2 2 MW in the Ganga river system, shall require prior Environmental Clearances
(EC) from MoEF and where necessary from the NBWL_

& CEIA/RETAISIA: Cumulative Environmental Impact Assessment (CELA), including Regional Environmental Impact
(REI) and Strategic Impact Analysis (SLA), should be done by MoEF for all rivers in the Ganga river system,

% River Water Quality: The existing practices of muck management are inadequate to protect the terrain and the
people from an eventuality like the June 2013 flood. A serious review is required towards evolving technically
better and ecologically sustainable methods for muck disposal and rehabilitation at HEP construction sites. It is
necessary to strengthen MoEF's personnel and procedures for post-sanction monitoring of environmental
conditionalities. A mechanism has to be set up immediately 10 ensure compliance with existing rules of muck
Management. The nation should be informed annually about the environmental health of the Ganga. An independent
body should be set up for this.

10. Bumper-to-Bumper Dams: Scientific studies by subject experts should be conducted for establishing baseline
data on river parameters, diversity and populations of floral and faunal species in different rivers of the Ganga river
system at different elevation zones. Such studies should be used for deciding upon the minimum distances
between two consecutive HEPs. Until such scientific studies are completed, no new HEPs (in S&I stage) should
be cleared on these rivers within ॥ distance that may tater be revoked. Minimum distances for projects in the
clearance stage should be significantly revised upward from the current consideration of | km.

147


148

11, Restoration: The river bed profiles at Phata-Byung, Singoli-Bhatwari, Vishnuprayag and Srinagar HEPs have
changed significantly, This required at fresh analysis of the project hydrology and redesigning them if necessary.
All projects must undertake river restoration works after prior clearance ftom MoEF, Till then none of the projects
should begin power production.

Recommendations for Medium Term Action

12. Catchment Area Treatment: Community-based CA and CAT plan execution must be done by the State Forest
Department within the construction period of the project, This is to be monitored by a committee comprising of
representatives from local communities and renowned environmentalists among others.

13. Redesigning Dams: Learning lessons from the 2013 calamity, it is important to design HEPs taking note of the
heavy sediment loads in the Ganga river system during floods. It will be useful to carry out model studies of
structures across the rivers to develop a prior understanding of river behaviour after construction and particularly
during massive floods.

14. Issue River Regulation Zone (RRZ) guidelines: Civil works along the banks of River Ganga and encroachments
in its flood plains must be avoided. Guidelines to these effects must be issued and their execution must be
monitored regularly.

15. Enforce a Total Ban on River Bed Sand Mining: This is required for the main stem of the river and its major
tributaries.

16. Assessing Cultural Impacts of HEPs on the Ganga: The impacts of HEPs on age-old traditions associated with
the flow of Ganga, impacts on holy sites, historical places and related socio-cultural degradation need to be
assessed to holistically understand the impacts of developmental activities. A comprehensive study of the cultural
impacts of HEPs in the spiritually rich State of Unarakhand is required.


ANNEXURE - XXVI
(Vide para No, 6.57 of the Report)

Agreement of 1916

In 1840 Cautley proposed construction of Ganges Canal at Bhimgoda Haridwar on the name of irrigation, This project
was sanctioned in 1841, but the work was not begum till 1843, and even then Cautley found himself hampered in its
execution by the opposition of Lord Ellenborough. Digging of the canal began in April 1842. He was opposed by Hindu
religious leaders in the leadership of Madam Maban Malaviya who founded Ganga Mahasabha in 1905 to protect Ganges
for future obstructions who felt that the waters of the holy river Ganges would be imprisoned but Cautley pacified them by
agreeing to leave a gap in the dam from where the water could flow unchecked, They agreed on an agreement which is
known a3 Agreement of 1916.

Contents
® | History =
© 2 List of Hindu Representatives & Rulers of different States
@ 2.1 Chiefs
® 220fficials
© 2.3 Private Members
© 3 Minutes of Agreement of 1916
© 3.1 1.H, The Licutenant-Governor
3.2 The Hon'ble Maharaja of Kasim Buzar
3.3 the Hon'ble Maharaja of Darbhanga
3.4 The Hon'ble Madam Mohan Malaviya -
3.5 The Hon'ble Lala Sukhbir Singh
3.6 Thakur Monan Chand
3.7 The Hon'ble Rai Ram Saran Das Bahadur
3.8 Rai Salig Ram Thakur Sahib
3.9 The Hon'ble Raja Rampal Singh
3.10RaiGirrajSingh
3.11 Sardar Indraj Singh
@ 3.11.1 SurjiBaba
@ 3.11.2LalaRam Prasad
@ 3.11.3 Mahant Lachhman Das
3.114 Rai Kanhaiya Lal Bahadur
3.11.SRai Sri Rum Bahadur
3,116 The Hon’bie Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya
3.11.7 The Hon'ble Lala Sukhbir Singh
3.11 3 The Maharaja Bahadur

149


150

History

the Sth day of November 1914, British Rule admitted and compromised that the Uninterrupted flow of Holy River Ganges is
the rudimentary right of Hindu Believers, The day 5 November 1914 were graven as a Aviral Ganga Samjhauta Divas
(Uninterrupted Ganga Agreement Day) in golden words in the History of India and World but this agreement came into
existence on 18-19 December 1916 and GO. is ordered in 1917,

List of Hindu Representatives & Rules of different States
Chiefs

His Highness the Maharaja of Gwaliar. His Highness the Maharajadhiraj of Jaipur. His Highness the Maharaja of Bikaner,
His Highness the Maharajadhiraj of Patinta. His Highness the Maharaja of Alwar. His Highness the Maharaja of Banaras,
Official

‘The Hon'ble Maharaja Bahadur of Darbhanga, Member of Council, Behar. The Hon'ble MR. ROSE Secretary of the Government
of India, Public Works Department. The Hon'ble MR. BARLOW, CLE. Chief Engineer. United Provinces. Mr STANDLEY.
Superintending Engineer. Irrigation Branch, U.P. MR_COOPER, Executive Engineer, Irriation Branch United Provinces,
The Howble MR, R. BURN, Chief Secretary to Government, U.P,

Private Members

The Hon'ble Maharaja of Kasimbazar, President of Hindu Mahasabha, The Hon'ble LALA SUKHBIR SINGH, General
Secretary Hindu Sabha, The Hon'ble Pt. Madan Mohan Malaviya. The Hon'ble RAJA SIR RAMPAL SINGH. K.C.LE of
Kuri, Sudausli, U.P. RAJ GIRRAJ SINGH of Kuchessr, United Provinces. LALA RAM PRASAD. Hardwar, United Provinces.
SARDAR INDRAJ SINGH, Hardwar, United Provinces. 5101 BABA. Hardwar, United Provinces. RAI SALIG RAM
THAKUR SAHIB. Hardwar and Lucknow. United Provinces. MAHANT LACHHMAN DAS. Dehradun, United Provinees.
THAKUR MOHAN CHAND, Amritsar, Punjab. RAL KANHALYA LAL BAHADUR. Executive Engineer (retired), Punjab.
The धरा छाल RALRAM SARAN DAS BAHADUR, Lahore,

BABU GOBARDHAN DAS, Deputy Magistrate, Kamal, Punjab, MR. ६ PURVES, Chief Engineer (retired). Punjab on behalf
of the Ruling Chiefs,

PANDIT DIN DAYAL SHARMA of Jhajjar, who had accepted the invitation to attend was prevented from coming by
sickness. CHAUDHRI RAGHUBIR NARAYAN SINGH of Asona was unable to come

MR. ANTHONY, Late Chief Engineer. trrigation Branch, United Provinces attended and gave valuable assistance.

In the first place the model which had been prepared by the irrigation branch was inspected. The party then proceeded to
the site of the actual works and made a thorough examination on the spo, all features being explained by the officers of the
Irrigation Department. The conference then reassembled at Bhimgoda and the following discussion took place.
Minutes of Agreement of 1916

HH, The Lieutenant-Governor

opened the conference and said" Your Highness, you have put me under a very great debt of obligation by coming to assist
in the settlement today of a question which closely affects the Hindu religion. With your Highness permission, in order that
we may come 10 9 speedy understanding, I propose that each of the gentlemen who is here should be invited in turn to
express his views, his dissatisfaction, if he has dissatisfaction, with the works now in progress; and then to make such
suggestions as he has to remove any discontent in his mind or in the mind of the community he represents. After that your
Highness will probably call me to place the whole matter before you and have the benefit of your advice”,

Each of the Hindu representatives present then spoke in turn, in Hindustani.

‘The Hon'ble Maharaja of Kasim Bazar

said that ~The Gunga was the mother of all Hindus. Its water was used in all domestic purposes from Hardwar to Saugor
Island. In Haridwar there were three channels. One channel washes the holy ghats; another channel serves the Mayapur

canal and the third would now be closed up by the new works. We want a free channel so that pure water may flow through
it, We have framed this memorial 10 the Government asking that three should be only one channel to enable a free flow of


151

said that “He wanted the flow of the Ganges to be unfettered for the whole twelve months, If there was any secret difficulty
in this, he would like to know",

‘The Ho: ble Madam Mohan Makaviya

begun by saying that "Those who were present at the Conference of 1914 misunderstood the decision that was come to
then. There was no suspicion in their minds that Government was not carrying out its promises The point simply was that
they had misunderstood the decision. Two points had given cause for doubt, The first was that in the new channel to be
Opened there was to be no appearance of & canal, The canal went for a 1000 miles, but there were no ghats uny where an it,
People incurred large expenses in order to go to the Ganges. From the communique. that was issued by the Government he
had understood that there would be an opening in the weir. He discovered that the opening will be in the shutter which itself
be placed above the water. They did not abject tothe canal, they did not object to a little more water being taken for the canal
but in the weir, there should be an opening to allow enough water to pass through unfettered forall theie needs. He need not
say how deep the feeling was all over India. People from Bikaner, Jaisalmer and all parts of the country come to Allahabad,
They relied on the fact that the Ganges was free and Pure. He said the opening should be a natural one and there should be

the course of the river. The opening must be so wide that all places below it receive pure water. People seem to be
dissatisfied with the regulator. Possibly there was a misunderstanding both on the part of thase who were Present in 1914
and the outside public. It is important to remove this dissatisfaction in view of the holiness of the river. Even if some extra
cost is incurred the feeling of the people should be soothed. {t is said that the agriculturists will suffer if the volume of water

and his religion. In his opinion a 5 feet opening was not enouwh. 5-10 lakhs of bathers come to thiraths, They come from
great distances and undergo great discomforts. But they will stand any trouble because it is a matter of faith. Even if the cost
were 1 lakh ०० 2 lakhs that should not matter when it was a question of belief with the people. This must be borne in mind.
They believe that the Ganges makes people pure and removes sin, He hoped that something would be done.” Questioned
by His Honour about the regulator he said “He did not object to the regulator if it was open like a bridge built on piers. He
did not want any gates oF sluices and he would prefer not to have a farash,”

‘The Hon'ble Lala Sukhbir Singh

said that “He was present at the 1914 Conference and understood that “Channel No, 1 would remain as at present, That had
been done and was satisfactory. He said that through the weir enough water should flow to enable them to burn their dead
and for their other religious requirements. He did not think an opening of 5 feet is enough. Moreover, he objected to the
opening being no lower than the top of the weir. Further he had understood that the new supply channel should be so made
that it would appear as a natural cut and would have no gates or sluices. As the head works were now constructed it would
‘not be the water of the Ganges that would flow down to the sea but that of the canal. He also said that the people did not
want canal water at the ghats. “His Honour interposed to ask "How much water he wanted to flow through unimpeded”,
Lala Sukhbir Singh replied that "He could not specify the volume in cubic Feet. In the memorial submited by the Hindu
Sabha an opening of 30 feet was asked for.* His Honour inquired” If the 30 feet had been based on any calculation”,
Lala Subkbbir Singh admitted that "No calculation had been made. The figure was selected st random,”

‘Thakur Monan Chand

did not want the water to be held up. The masonry of the regulator should be level with the ground. He objected to the
appearance of ॥ canal which was caused by the regulator,

‘The Hon'ble Rai Ram Saran Das Bahadur

wanted the decision arrived at the 1914 Conference to be carried out. He associated himself with what had been said by the
Maharaja of Kasimbazar, the Hon'ble Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya and Thakur Mohan Chand. They seemed to have


132

misunderstood the position in 1914, they make no complaint but rely on government to support their religion, He did not
understand that there would be gates. He thought there would be a clear opening as provided in channe! No. 1.

Rai Salig Ram Thakur Sahib

said that “from the 1914 Conference he understood that there would be no restriction to the free flow of the water as in
channel No. 1, That people relied on the Government for protection of their religion”.

The Hon'ble Raja Rampal Singh

Sitid he was not at the Conference of 1914 but saw the communique that was subsequently issued. He had forgotten what
that communique said. He wanted the opening free and enough water to allow through. though with the other speakers he
could give no opinion as to what the volume of the flow should be. He did not object 10 a masonry foundation but it should
be 1९७९1 with the ground. He did not want any gate,

Rai Girraj Singh

said that “If bess water was allowed into the canals the agriculturist would suffer. He could see no harm in the work".
Sardar Indraj Singh

said that "The new channel should have a free opening. He had no objection 1 a farash of masonry flooring on bed level”.
Surji Baba

said there should be no gate or raised foundation. There should be no, gate in No.1 channel, Since the new headwords have
been made, the whole river has become a canal and none of the ghats between Bhimgoda and Haridwar were able to get the
pure Ganges water, Wherever there is a gate, there must be a canal, call it by whatever name you wish. He quoted recent

examples of people bringing bones from the Punjab and elsewhere to throw into the river when they saw the works at
Hardwar took them on to Rishikesh.

Lala Ram Prasad
did not want the canal
Mahant Lachhmnan Das

wanted the Nildhara dam to be opened so as to ensure a sufficiently free flow of water. He could not say what he understood
by a sufficient flow. He also understood that the new channel would be a free opening like channel No. |.

Rai Kanhaiya Lal Bahadur

said * he was prepared to answer any question Government might put. In 1914 no-official gentlemen, who attended, asked
him about the regulators, He knew there would be a regulator. He did not tell them. He recognized the sanctity of tiraths and
of the Ganges water, He agreed that the channel had no appearance of a canal. He said we Hindus number crores and our
feeling must be respected. He thought that wider opening could be left in the dam, He still thought so. The Ganges whould
adjust its own level. He then went into technical details and finished up by saying that there was no need to have gates or
fegulators, The bed would be 5 or 6 feet above the gap. The gap might be widened to 30 feet. He wound up by saying that
Hindus were very anxious for their religious faith.

Rai Sri Ram Bahadur

said “He had 40 years’ government service. The Hindus did not want the Ganges to be stopped, They did not want gates
or regulators and there was no need to have them, Ifthere were no gates the Har-ki-Pairi would not suffer from pollution. In
the first palce he would have only a bed of boulders below the regulators. If that cut up 109 much, he could see no objection

to its being made pakka. He thought a 5 feet gap was not enough. Without calculations he could not say how wide the gap
should be.”

‘The Hon'ble Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya

pointed out that “there was no water at the Daksh in Kankhal and people were distressed about that. He said that the
original calculations for Mayapur escape were designed to give water at Kankhal and it had been found that a mistake was
made. He hoped that in view of the possibility of error the engineers. to be on the safe side, would keave an ample margin”


133

‘The Hon'ble Lala Sukbbir Singh
said “There were many vhats below Haridwar and Kankbal and he hoped they would get sufficient water”,

1 पी हि then entered ito an informal discussion withthe Engineers of the diferent suggestions that ad been put
का, by S Ofclock it seemed possible that an agreement would be arrived-t. and tree altemative noted belong none
Feduced to writing and communicated to those present: —

ck लाला channet should be diverted so as to un parallel othe river fom the new regulator down to Mayapor:
BM the same time a small supplementary channel would be taken out of the bund which could be closed by planks so ac
to a» sid its silting up entirely. This channel would help to supply water to the Har-ki-Pairi. 11 ‘was pointed out in the
Agreement arrived at in 1914 that if No, 1 channel is not reyulated at. all as was agreed 10, it would tend to shoal and
might be without water for some time in every year.

(3) That the regulator should remuin as designed but that some bays in it should be perrtanentls opened, while some
should have regulators, In addition to this. Kachcha bunk would be required annually 10 keep No 1 channel open.

‘The Conference then adjourned till the next day: but private discussion between certain of the Chiefs. the Engineers, and
8 few of the Hindu representatives, continued until a late hour.

19 December 1916

The gentlemen who had attended on the 18th were again present with the exception of Mr. Anthony and the Hor’ble
Maharaja of Kasim Bazar who had been obliged to leave and Lala Ram Prasad who was unwell. The following five gentlemen
were also present ut the request of the General Secretary of the Sabha as they were signatories to the memorial:—SWAMI
MANGAL NATH ॥ of Rishikhesh, RAI BAHADUR LALA HARJIMAL KHANNA of Peshawar, RAL BAHADUR LALA
HARI CHAND of Multan, RAL SAHIB LALA PANNA LAL of Ambata, and DR. PARAS RAM SHARMA of Ferozpur.

The Conference re-assembled at Bhimgoda at || a.m. on the 19th and proceeded to discuss still further the alternatives
which had been suggested and certain other which were now put forward. His Honour arrived at 1 Oelock, the gentlemen
who had attended on the 18th were again present with the exception of Mr. Anthony and the Hon'ble Maharaja of Kasim
Bazar who had been obliged to leave and Lala Ram Prasad who was unwell. It then appeared that a fourth suggestion had
been made, namely,

(1) That the new regulator should remain permanently open: and

(2) That a Kachcha bund as at present constructed should be made at supply channel No. 1 So as 10 ensure the supply:
of 1,000 cusees down it whenever the supply failed to reach that amount. This suggestion wits discussed of ereat
length and was finally put before the Conference by the Hon’ble Maharaja Bahadur of Darbhanga, at 4 pan

‘The Maharaja Bahadur

said, "Your Honour—We have considered the question very carefully and have decided to put the following proposals
before your Honour's Government, They are as follows:—
A

(1) In order to guarantee the uninterrupted flow of the Ganges passing over the Har-Ki-Pairi and other ghats a Hardwar,

a kachcha bund should be made every year as at present at the head channel No. | guaranteeing ॥ minimum supply of
1,000 cusees,

(2) Regulator under construction, the reinforced concrete face-wall below the road way and between the piers should
be completely removed and there should be no regulation of the water in any way,


154

(3) The sill of the reautation also should be removed to the floor level of the stuices in order that the flow of the Ganges
may remain unobstructed.

(4) The triangular portion of earth bank below the regulator on the upstream side of the supply channel should be
removed in order that there may’ be no appearance of a canal below the bridge.

(1) The free opening left in die weir should go down to the top of foundation level.

(2) The opening of the weir should be sufficiently wide to ensure that the supply of water for places below Haridwar
shail be sufficient in accordance with our Shastras.

(3) We have been advised that a minimum discharge of 1,000 cusecs would meet the requirement. but if this is
considered impracticable, will the Government be pleased to state what amount will, in their opinion, meet the purpose.

(4) For this purpose a monthly discharge will have to be taken and kept on record.

(1) That suitable arrangements should be made for a free supply of water to Kankhal ghats.
DBD

(1) An opening corresponding to the one at Haridwar should be made in the weir at Narora also.”

The meeting was adjourned to enable the Government Engineers to consider these proposals. On the members of the
Conference re-assembting His Honour said:— | am much obliged to those gentlemen of the sabha and their associates who
have so clearly put before us the proposals that they have decided to recommend for the consideration of Government. |
have in the interval put those proposals before our engineers who naturally wish to throw what they recommend to
Government intoa little more technical form, They have, accordingly, worded what they propose to advise in their own way
and | will ask the Chief Engineer to read out his proposal, ut | think | can assure you what be is going to read fs for all
practical purposes, not only on grounds of business but of sentiment identical with what you have put before us.~

Mr. BARLOW then read out the following statement:-—

(i) In order to guarantee an uninterrupted 105 of the Gunges through the Har-Ki-Pairi and past the other Ghats of
Haridwar, a Kachcha bund will be made at the head of channel No. | when necessary. A minimum supply of 1,000 cusecs
in that channel being guaranteed, except at periods when clearing of the shoaling in channel No. 1 is in progress.

(ii) The irrigation branch, however, reserves to itself the right of reducing at any time and at any point the size of
channel No. 1 on the understanding that any reduction will be carried out in accordance with existing conditions. For
instance, it may be found necessary to reduce the width of the entrance into the channel and in such a case a reduction
will be carried out by means of masonry walls similar to the existing masonry walls. The irrigation branch also reserves
to itself the right of lowering the bed of supply channel No, | at any point ifit may be found advisable, but in all cases
the continuous thread of the stream will not be interfered with.

(ili) The head of the new supply channel will not be fitted with gates. Some bays will be completely closed up with
masonry and earth banks, some bays will be completely open. All bays, whether opened or clased will have a foot
bridge. The floor on the Haridwar side will be level with the sill and with the bed of the supply channel. The irrigation
branch reserves to itself the right of keeping open or closed by masonry as many of the bays 4s experience from time
to time shows may be necessary for the purpose of feeding the canal which stalls at Mayapur and also in the interest
of the safety of the town of Haridwar and the existing canal works, but such bays as are kept open will be completely
‘open as described above and whatever bays ure closed will be kept completely closed with masonry and earth banks
as mentioned above, The existing grooves will be left in what is now called the head or the supply channel. These
grooves will never be used except in cases of some impending calamity or of actual accident to Haridwar or the existing
canal works, when it is of vital importance to close completely the openings by means of wooden planks for a short
period.

{iv) A free opening will be left in the weir which will go down to floor level. The opening will be so constructed that it
will give, according to the calculations of the irrigation branch, a discharge of 400 cusecs in the cold weather.


155

(v) At the Mayapur regulator an opening will be made, calculated to provide a permanent flow of 200 ८४७०७: for the

services of the Kankhal ghats. है
His Honour continues:— "Now, gentlemen, | am very unwilling to take advantage of any apparent technicalities in these
Proposals, and if any gentlemen wants to ask any question or to suggest any interpretation of any phrase. | should like to
have his suggestions now." A brief discussion then took place, followed by 4 short adjournment while the terms of
settlement were finally drawn up. On the members re-aisembling. His Honour said:— "Your Highness and gentlemen, I
want to read to you what | now understand to be common ground both to the representatives of British India and to the
engineers who are responsible for the conduct and maintenance of these works:—

(0 In order to guarantee an uninterrupted flow of the Ganges through the Har-Ki-Pairi and past the other ghats of
Haridwar, a Kachcha bund will be made at the head of channel No. | when necessary. A minimum supply of 1000 cusecs
in that channel being guaranteed except at periods when clearing of the shoaling in channel No. | is in progress; the
irrigation branch undertaking that this work shail be carried through as expeditiously as possible in order to ensure a
flow from this channel into the Har-Ki-Pairi
(ii) The opening to supply channel No.1 will be left for the present exactly as it is. Should experience show that this is
dangerous, it may be necessary to curtail the width of the present opening and to take measures to prevent the
Tetrogression of the bed. But no steps beyond those will be taken without prior consultation with the Hind community,
(ili) The head of the new supply channel will not be fitted with gates. Some bays contiguous to each other will be
Completely closed up with masonry and earth banks, some bays will be completely open. All bays, whether opened or
losed will have a foot bridge, The floor on the Haridwar side will be level with the sill and with the bed of the supply
Shannel, The irrigation branch reserves to itself the right of keeping open or closed by masonry as many of the bays as
experience from time to time shows may be necessary for the purpose of feeding the canal which starts at Mayapar and
also in the interest of the safety of the town of Haridwar and the existing canal works, but such bays as are kept open
will be completely open as described above and whatever bays ire closed will be kept completely closed with masonry
and carth banks as mentioned above. The existing grooves will be left in what is now called the head of the supply
channel. These grooves will never be used except in cases of some impending calamity or of actual accident to
Haridwar or the existing canal works, when it is of vital importance to close completely the openings by means of
wooden planks for a short period.
(iv) A free opening will be left in the weir which will go down to floor level. The opening will be so constructed that it
will give, according to the calculations of the irrigation branch, a minimum discharge of 400 cusecs at the cold weather
Jow level of the river. For this purpose a record of gauges will be kept by the irrigation branch,
(¥) At the Mayapur regulator a free opening, going down to the upstream bed level will be made calculated to provide
4 permanent flow of 200 cusecs for the service of the Kankhal ghats, which after leaving Kankhal will ultimately flow
into the Ganges. Now before I take the last step and place this proposed settlement before. Your Highness who have
so kindly and patiently taken part in this conference, I want to explain only two small matters. I want to say that if your
Highness are able to advise and if with your advise, Lcan accept this solution, I shall record formally and publicly that
this understanding is to be taken as supplementary to the agreement of 1914 which remnins in force in so far as it is
consistent with the provisions of today's settlement, I wish to bring to your notice that all reference to Narora has been
‘omitted from this settlement, the reason being that the question of Narpra has passed out of my hands and gone into
those of the Government of India. But I will undertake that the wishes of the Sabha are placed before the Government
of India for the consideration. And now your Highness. I have to ask your whether, after all you have heard, you feel
yourselves disclosed to say that this paper contains what you advise to be a reasonable settlement.

‘The Chiefs considered among themselves and gave an answer in affirmative. His Honour then said>-—

“Gentlemen.—| have great pleasure in informing you that His Highness the Maharaja of Alwar gives a general acceptance
‘and that all the other ruling Chiefs present accept these proposals and recommend them as a reasonable settlement in
consonance with Hindu sentiment." "And now, gentlemen, before we part, I want to express my own deep indebtedness to
every one who has taken pan in this conference:— in the first place to the representatives of the All-India Hindu Sabha and
of British India generally, for the clear, full and intelligent manner in which they have discussed the whole of these
complicated problems and for the temperate and definite method in which they have put their wishes before us. I wish next
to express my very great indebtedness to the representatives of the Irrigation Branch, Mr. Barlow, the Chief Engineer, and
his assistants, for the prompt and friendly manner in which they have dealt with the problems which caffie before them in
somewhat unfamiliar term, To their unofficial colleague, Mr. Egerton Purvers, who has come as technical adviser to the


156

Ruling Chiefs, ! tender my thanks for the sound advice and ready assistance that he has given to us all in these long
technical discussions, | wish next in a very special manner to acknowledge our obligations to Mr. Rose, the Secretary to the
Government of India in the Public Works Department, for his most admirable and valuable help and for the perfect temper
and kindness with which he has received all the manifold propositions that were placed before him. And, lastly, it is difficult
for me to find words to thank Your Highnesses for the great trouble you have taken, the time and comfort you have
sacrificed and he perfect courtesy you have displaced, in advising me in this matter, | am perfectly sure that the lasting
gratitude of the whole Hindu community will be your best reward,”

‘The Hon'ble Maharaja of Darbhanga in proposing ३ vole of thanks to His Honour said:—" We want to express our most
heartfelt thanks to Sir James Meston for the very kind way in which he has listened to our grievances and for the very
Satisfactory setthement reached through his kindness and his care,” His Highness the Maharaja of Bikaner in seconding the
vote of thanks to His Honour said:—"Your Honour and gentlemen, on behalf of their Highness the Ruling Princes present
here as well as on my own, | rise to second the vote of thanks proposed by the Maharaja of Darbhanga to His Honour for
the very satisfactory manner in which, considering the very great difficulties and the circumstances, a reasonable solution
of the difficulties has been arrived at by which the legitimate fears, anxieties and even grievances of the Hindu Community
of India are in a fair way of being removed. There has never been any question, | fee! sure, on the part of any one in India
of there being a breach of faith on the part of the Local Government of the irrigation officers, but unfortunately through a
series of circumstances some contretemps and misunderstandings had arisen, and the very tactful and patient way in which
the settlement has gradually been arrived at is a matter for rejoicing, We, who come from outside the limits of British India
Proper, have found ita very great pleasure not only to be associated with His Honour and his Government but with our
brethren in British India, and to-find how reasonable and earnest they have been in their desire to come to satisfactory
settlement. I feel therefore that I am voicing the feelings not only of my brother princes but also of the people of British India
and especially of the representatives who ure present here today when we convey at the same time our sincere thanks to the
officers of the Irrigation Department and especially to Mr. Barlow, for the manner in which they have tried to meet our
Fequests and our demands. It has been a happy augury in the past that the relations between the United Provinces Irrigation
Department and the people of Haridwar have been most cordial and I think that the settlement will help to maintain but will
vastly increase those feelings of friendship between the people and the Irrigation Department, And finally on behalf of
ourselves as well as the people of British India we wish to offer our special thanks to the Hon'ble Mr. Rose for the manner
in which he has tried to assist us in coming 10 a satisfactory conclusion. | would again express our united thanks and
second the vote with great pleasure.”

The Hon'ble Lata Sukhbir Singh then on behalf of the All India Hindu Sabha expressed satisfaction at the agreement that
had been come to,

His Highness the Maharaja of Alwar then said:—"Your Honour and friends, | will not tax your patience on this occasion at
any length but I feel that | should be going away from Haridwar without having performed my duty if did not add my own
Sentiments to those which have been already expressed generally by His Highness the Maharaja of Bikaner at the great
Pleasure we have bad in being associated with our Hindu Brothers in an affair of so much importance and also in being
associated with my old friend Mr. Barlow and the officers of the Public Works Department in the agreement which has been
arrived at, I would also like above all things to add my personal thanks to His Honour, for the patience and tact with which
he has managed the proceedings as a result of which a satisfactory conclusion has been arrived at today. The sacredness
of our Mother Ganges is known throughout the world, Our object in assembling here was to advise a solution which would
remove the difficulties that arose with regard to certain works that were started some time ago. There is no doubt that if the
reasonability of those works had been considered before the actual construction was taken in hand, many of the difficulties
that we have labored through today would have been avoided. But the works were started, even before your Honour’s
period of office, and therefore it was our duty to come to a conclusion that would not anly be acceptable to the gentlemen
present but would satisfy the wants and the feelings of a much wider arca throughout India. With that aim we have taken
up Your Honour's time and we have admired your patience and tact, and the promptitude with which the various complicated
and intricate questions have been dealt with by the officers of the Irrigation Department. It is our ultimate hope that the
solutions we have arrived of the various questions at issue will in time justify themselves and satisfy the public mind as
regards the uninterrupted flow of our Mother Ganges past the sacred ghats. This of course is a matter which can only be
Proved by time but our hopes at present are that the solutions may be found in keeping with the feelings and religious
sentiments of the genera] Hindu Public. | have only to Thank Your Honour once more for your kindness in inviting us to do


157

our best service for our Mother Ganges. Our thanks are also due to his Excellency the Viceroy for having been good enough
in stuygesting and deciding oa ४ Conference of Princes to be associated with our brethren of British India and we have every
hope that the conclusion that Your Honour has read out will now meet with all requirements."

The Conference then dissolved, after the agreement in paragraph 32 above had been signed by the Hindu representatives
present Sd. R. Bur Chief Secretary Copy of a letter No. 2728/1I1-495 Dated Naini Tal, the 26th September, 1917, from
Hon'ble Mr. R. Burn, C.S,1,,1.C.S., Chief Secretary to Government, United Provinces, to the Hon’ble Lala Sukhbir Singh,
General Secretary, All India Hindu Sabha,

1. Lam directed to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, dated the Sth, December, 1916, submitting the memorial of the

council of the All India Hindu Sabha regarding the Ganges canal works at Haridwar, The council of the sabha ask the
. Lieutenant Governor—

(a) to abandon the construction of the regulator, gates, masonry work and other accessories of the canal head works
under construction at the head of the new supply above Har-ki-Pairi;

(b) to leave an opening of at least 30 feet in the weir at Haridwar which would go down to the natural bed of the river
and to make a simitar opening in the weir at Narora.

2. The question whether the works now under construction at Haridwar were likely to reduce the sanctity of that place and
of the river Gunges in the eyes of Hindus was carefully considered by the Lieutenant Governor in 1914. On the
Sth November in that year the Lieutenant Governor visited Haridwar and held a conference attended by His Highness the
Maharaja of Jaipur and a number of gentlemen who were thoroughly representative of Hindu opinion, At that conference
three requests were put forward on bebalf of the Hindu community as representing the conditions necessary to secure that
the virtue of the Ganges, would not be impaired by the new works:—

(a) that a free flow of water should be provided through what is known as the present supply channel No, (i) to the
ghats at Haridwar;

(b) that a free flow of water should be passed over the new weir into the main channel of the Ganges which flows
towards the sacred places at Allahabad, Banares and elsewhere;

(०) that the channe! which leads water to the ghats at Haridwar should not be lined with masonry, so as to be regarded
asacanal,

3. These points were thoroughly discussed both on the site of the works and at the conference, and after consultation with
the canal officers the Lieutenant Governor announced the following decisions: —

(i) The opening in supply channel No. Miadairloplatny, dopa iyen iui deena nein dente cate
which had been designed. It was, however, pointed out that thi might become dangerous and other measures might
thus be required, but an undertaken was given that no steps beyond curtailment of the width and measures to prevent
the retrogression of the bed will be taken without prior consultation with the Hindu community. The Irrigation Department
undertook to provide a sufficient supply of water at the Haridwar ghats for the use of bathers but it was pointed out
that the retention of free opening in this channel would entail a considerable amount of shoalings as at present which
3 sluice would prevent and that pending the annuni clearance of the channel the ghat might for a lime remain short of
water as to present,

(ii) A free opening never to be closed and providing water sufficient for the use of the bathers was to be left in the weir.

(iii) The new supply channel was not to be lined with masonry but would be a natural cut through Laljiwala Island.
‘These decisions were accepted by the gentlemen attending the conference as a satisfactory settlement of the difficulties
of the Hindu community in regard to the effect of the new works.

4. No question has been raised regarding the first of the conclusions quoted above but misconceptions appear to have
arisen regarding the meaning of the other two and | am to state for the information of the sabha what appears to the
Licutenant Governor to be the clear meaning of those conclusions as judged by their origin and as understood by the
officers of Goverument and by any one genuinely desirous of appreciating what was being done to meet the Hindu
Sentiment and the same time to provide for the well-being of the great masses dependent on the efficient service of the
canal. As regard the second decision the question as put to the Licutenant Governor on the spot was provision of constant


158

flow of water over the weir sufficient for the use of bathers, which could not be controlled or stoped by human agency. The
intention was that this should be provided by leaving an opening in the shutters which are to be erected itlong the crest of
the remaining portion of weir. The supply thus left free and uncontrotied would also satisfy the feelings of Hindus regarding
the supply of pure Ganges water to places below Haridwar. The decision was complied with by leaving an opening on the
same level as the rest of the weir at a point where the crest of the weir is actually below the existing bed of the Ganges.

5, The third decision had also been complied with by refraining from lining with masonry the cut through Laijiwala Island
opposite the regulator just above the Har-ki-Pairi. The channel thus had a perfectly natural appearance and was actually 08
the same footing as the whole channel from Bhimgods to Mayapur passing the ghat, which as explained in Sir Probey
Cautley’s report was also excavated.

6. As a fresh settlement has now been reached His Honour does not puruse this phase of the question nor does he desire
to indulge in controverting those passages in the memorial, which he can't accept as correct, The Hindu representative who
came to Haridwar on December, the 18th and 19th 1916, specificall¥tisclaimed my suggestion of bad faith by the Government
of the Irrigation Officers. The Lieutenant Governor in tum accepts their contention that the purport of the settlement arrived
at in 1914 was not precisely understood by some of them. The necessity for further discussion has been averted by the
result of the further conference held by his honour’s invitation at Haridwar in December last. Attached to this letter is a list
of the chiefs, officials and private gentlemen, who were present at Haridwar, It will be seen by a reference to that list that the
gathering was thoroughly representative of Hindu opinion. It comprised a number of ruling chiefs and private gentlemen
representative of the Hindu community, including the President and General Secretary of the All India Hindu Sabha and
officials connected with the works. The ruling chiefs are advised by Mr. Egerton Purves, an engineer especially engaged by
them on this behalf, and the Government of India were represented by the Secretary in the Public Works Department. The
discussion of the committee were greatly facilitated by the preparation of a model of the river channel and the works. In
addition to the study of this mode! which was explained in great deal by the engineers present the members of the
conference visited the whole of the works which had reached a stage admitting of no further misconceptions.

7. Lam now quote for your information the conclusions which were reached at that discussion:—

(i) In order to guarantee an uninterrupted flow of the Ganges through the Har-ki-Pairi and past the other ghats of
Haridwar, a Kachcha bund will be made at the head of channel necessary; a minimum supply of 1,000 cusecs in that
channel being guaranteed, except at period when clearing of the shoaling in channel No. | is in progress; the Irrigation
Branch undertaken that this work shall be carried through as expeditiously as possible in order to ensure a flow from
(ii) The opening to supply channel No. | will be Jeft for the present exactly as it is should experience show that this is
dangerous, it may be necessary to curtail the width of the present opening and to take measures to prevent the
retrogression of the bed. But no steps beyond those will be taken without prior consultation with the Hindu community.

(iii) The head of the new supply channel will not be fitted with gates, Some bays contiguous to cach other will be
completely closed up with masonry and earth banks; some bays will be completely open. All bays, whether opened or
closed, will have a foot-bridge. The floor on the Haridwar side will be level with the sill and with the bed of the supply
channel. The Irrigation Branch reserves to itself the right of keeping open or closed by masonry as many of the bays
as experience from time to time shows may be necessary for the purpose of feeding the canal which starts as Mayapur
and also in the interests of the safety of the town of Haridwar and the existing canal works, but such bays as are kept
open will be completely open as described above and whatever bays are closed will be kept completely closed with
masonry and earth banks as mentioned above, The existing grooves will be left in what is now called the head of the
supply channel. The grooves will never be used except in cases of commending calamity or of actual accident to ©
Haridwar or the existing canal works when it is of vital importance to close completely the opening by means of wooden
planks for a short period.

(iv) A free opening will be वी in the weir which will go down to floor level. The opening will be constructed that it will
give, according to the calculations of the Lrrigation branch, a minimum discharge of 400 cusecs at the cold weather low
level of the river. For this purpose a record of gauges will be kept by the Irrigation Branch.

(२) At the Mayapur regulator 3 free opening going down to the upstream bed level will be made calculated to provide
a permanent flow of 200 cusecs for the service of Kankhal ghats, which after leaving Kankhal will ultimately flow into
the Ganges.


159

] आग to explain that the understanding quoted above is to be taken as supplementary to the agreement of 1914 which remains
in force in so fur as it is consistent with these provisions. | am also to point out that from an engineering point of view the
arrangements are risky in their abrogation of control. The purpose of the gates in the new regulator was to prevent danger
to Haridwar from floods. The absence of gates is also unsatisfactory through the danger of shoaling in the new supply
channel. It is, thus, possible that during monsoon when the river is in flood the use of wooden planks for the purpose of
adequately protecting Haridwar and preventing undue shoaling of the channel may have to be more freely resorted to than
is indicated at the end of paragraph 7 (IIT) above or that open head of the new channel may have to be replaced by a
regulator discharged into a channel which will be taken down by a separate route to Mayapur and not allowed to mingle
with the stream flowing past the Haridwar ghats and Government reserves to itself the option of adopting these alternatives
in lieu of he air-if-ments detailed in paragraph 7 above, should it in their opinion be considered necessary. Thus however
would not in any way diminish the accepted liability of Government to provide an adequate supply of water at the ghats
measured as nearly as may be by 1000 cusecs in No. 1 Channel.

{am to add that question of Narora wats expressly left out of consideration at the conference and will be settled later.
Nomi: Special attention is drawn to para 8 of the letter.
COPY OF THEAGREEMENT OF STH NOVEMBER, 1914 HARIDWAR

1. The opening of supply channel No. | will be left for the present exactly as it is, should experience show that this is
dangerous, it may be necessary to curtail the width of the present opening and to take measures to prevent the retrogression
of the bed.

2, But no steps beyond those will be taken without prior consultation with the Hindu community. The Irrigation
Department will undertake that sufficient supply of water will be provided at the Haridwar ghats for the use of bathers. It
must be born in mind that the retention of the free opening in supply channel No.1, will entail a considerable amount of
shoating as at present, which a sluice would prevent. It will therefore, have to be understood that it will, pending the annual
clearance, for a time remain short of water as at present.

3. A free opening, which will never be closed and which will provide water sufficient for the use of bathers, will be left
in the weir. According to the calculations of the Engineers this will mean a constant unfettered flow of water at all seasons
of the year.

4. The new supply channel will not be lined with masonry. It will be a natural cut through Laljiwala Island. It is not
expected that any extension of the lining of the supply channel No. | will be necessary there will not be either the name or
the appearance of a canal in cither of the channels which feed the Haridwar ghats. 5

Retrieved from “https://en. wikipedia.org/w/index.php title= Agreement_of 1916 &oldid=708372797"


APPENDIX - I
MINUTES OF SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)

The Committee sat on Friday, the 29th May, 2015 from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House,
New Delhi,

. PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2 Shri Dileep Singh Bhuria
3. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
4, Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo
6. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
7. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
है, Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla
9, Shri P. Kumar
10. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
1. Shri KH. Muniyappa
12 Shri K.N. Ramachandran
13, Shei J.C. Divakar Reddy
14. -Md. Salim
15, Shri Arvind Sawant
16, Shri Ganesh Singh
© 17. Shri Rajesh Verma
18. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
‘SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh = Additional Secretary
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Marthy _ Joint Secretary
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda _- Additional Director
4. Shri 0.2, Bharadwaj _ Deputy Secretary
S. Shri R.S. Negi = Under Secretary
है Winesses
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation
1. Shri Anuj Kumar Bishnoi - Secretary (WR, RD & GR)
2 Shri Sunil Kumar Kohli ता Joint Secretary & FA
3, Shi T.V.S.N, Prasad - Joint Secretary & MD (NMCG)
4, Shri Chamanial - Addl. M.D. (NMCG)
5. ShriN.K. Mathur _ ‘Commissioner (FM)
6 Shri Puskal Upadhyay = AMD & Director (NMCG)

160


4. The Committee also decided to seek the views of other allied Ministries for holistic examination of the subject.
5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.


APPENDIX - I
MINUTES OF FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)

‘The Committee sat on Monday, the 13th July, 2015 from 1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs, in Room No. 53, Parliament House,
New Delhi.

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
Mawiens
2 ‘Shri Om Birla
3. Shri Ashok Chavan
4. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
5. Shei Ram Tahal Choudhary
6. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
7. Shri Ramen Deka
& Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo
9. ShriP.C. Gaddigoudar
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
11. SbriP. Kumar
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
13. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
14, Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15, Md, Salim
16. Shri Arvind Sawant
17. Shri Rajesh Verma
18 Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
‘SecrarraRiat
1, Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
2 Shri Vipin Kumar _ Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director
4. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj — Deputy Secretary
Wiinesses
Ministry of Enviroument, Forests and Climate Change
1, Shri Ashok Lavasa = Sceretary
2 Shei Susheel Kumar = ‘Addl. Secretary
3. ShriA.K. Mehta — Joint Secretary & Chairman,
cece
4. Dr Rashid Hasan = Advisor

5. Dr. AB, Akolkar - Member Secretary, CPCB

162


163 .
Ministry of Financial (Department of | Expenditure)

1. Shri ALN. Jha ~~ Additional Secretary (Exp.
2 Mrs, Saheli Ghosh Roy ~—— Joint Secretary
3. Mrs. Sigy Thomas Vaidhyan = — Director (Budget)

Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation
Shri Jagmoban Gupta Joint Secretary & FA

{The representatives enter]

3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives ofthe Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and drew their attention to Direction 5501) of Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.

4. The Committee enquired about the steps taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to
mitigate the increasing pollution load in Ganga river, the need Sugmenting treatment capacity of the existing Sewage
Treatment Plants (5110) and setting up of new STPs in the critical stretches ofthe river Ganga, evolve a proper coerdination

5. The representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) replied to some ofthe aforesaid points raised by the Members of the Committee. The Commitice
also desired that the written replies to the unanswered points/queries be sent to the Committee Secretariat,

6, The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned,


APPENDIX - Itt
MINUTES OF FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)

The Committee sat on Monday, the 13th July, 2015 from 1430 hrs. to 1620 hrs, in Room No. 53, Parliament House,
New Delhi,

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEsaiexs
2 Shri Kalyan Banerjee
2 ShriOm Birla
4 Shri Ashok Chavan
5. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
6 Col. Sonaram Choudhary
7. Shri Ramen Deka
& Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo
9. Shri Sanjay 00०7९
10. Shri PC. Gaddigoudar हु
. 11. Smt, Darshana Vikram Jardosh
12 Shei P. Kumar.
1. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
14, Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15, Md. Salim
16, Shri Arvind Sawant
17, Shri Rajesh Verma
‘SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh = Additional Secretary
2 * Shri Vipin Kumar _ Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Additional Director
4. ShriU.C. Bharadwaj डक Deputy Secretary
4 ‘Wrmesses
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
1, Shri Rajiv Mehrishi — Finance Secretary
2 Shri Dinesh Sharma न Addl, Secretary
3. Shri Rajat Bhargava - Joint Secretary
4. Shri. Selvakumar — Joint Secretary

164


165
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation

1, Shri Shashi Shekhar _ Secretary

2 Shri .V.SNN, Prasad _ Joint Secretary & MD (NMCG)
3. Shri Jagmohan Gupta -- Joint Secretary & 7५ (फरार)

4. Shei N.K. Mathur ज- Commissioner (FM)

[The representatives enter]

signe Chairperson welcomed the representatives ofthe Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and
the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Gangs Rejuvenation and drew their attention to Direction $5(1) of
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality ofthe proceedings of the Committee

5. The representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Gangn Rejuvenation and the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affuirs) elucidated the Committee on the aforesaid issues, The Committes
also desired thatthe written replics to the unanswered points/queries by sent to the Committee Secretariat within « week
time.

6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record,

The Commitee then adjourned.


APPENDIX - IV
MINUTES OF SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)

The Committee sat on Monday, the 24th August, 2015 from 1500 hrs. to 1715 hes. in Committee Room No, 'D’,
Partiament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
Memers
2 Shri Sultan Ahined
3, ShriKirti Azad
4, Shri Kalyan Banerjee
5. Shri Anil Shirole
6 Col. Sonaram Choudhary
7. Shri Ramen Deka
& Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo
9 Shri Sanjay Dhotre
10. Shri P. Kumar
11, Smt. KHL Muniyappa
12 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
13. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
14. ShriJ.C. Divakar Reddy
15. Md Salim
16. Shri Arvind Sawant
‘SECRETARIAT
1, Shri Devender Singh न Additional Secretary
2 Shri Vipin Kumar — Director न
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda = Additional Director
4. Shri UC. Bharadwaj = Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES:
. Ministry of Power
1, Shri PK, Pujari _ Secretary
2. ShriB.P. Pandey _ Addl, Secretary
3. Shri A.K, Verma = Joint Secretary
4. Shri Gyanesh Bharti न Director
Shri S.D_ Dubey न Member (Hydro), CEA
6 Shri PC Jiloha = Chief Engineer, CEA
7 Shri R.S.T. Sai ae CMD, THDC & NHPC


167
Ministry of Shipping

1. Shri Rajive Kumar - Secretary

2 Dr Alok Srivastava =, Additional Secretary

3. Shri Amitabh Verma _ Chairman (IWAI)

4. Shri RP. Khare = Member (Technical, 19७1)

5. Shri PK. Srivastava न Hydrographic Chief, WAL

2. 1 the outset, the Chaitperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. He then directed that the

Tepresentatives of the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Shipping be called in.
3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Shipping and drew

{hei attention to Direction $5(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabba’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of '
the Committee.

5. The representatives of the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Shipping elucidated the Committee on the
aforesaid issues. The Committee also desired that the written replies to the unanswered points/queries be sent to the
Committee Secretariat within ॥ week.

6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record,

The Committee then adjourned.


APPENDIX - V
MINUTES OF TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)

The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th January, 2016 from 1500 hes. to 1715 hrs. in Room '8', Parliament House Annexe,
New Dethi.

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MaMBers
2 Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
3. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
4, Col, Sonaram Choudhary
5, Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri ९८, Gaddigoudar
7. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
8. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
9. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
10. Shri Arvind Sawant
11, Shri Rajesh Verma
‘SecRetaRiar
1. Shri Devender Singh = Additional Secretary
2 Shri Vipin Kumar _ Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda _ Additional Director
WITNESSES
Shri U.K, Chaudhary _ Ex. Prof. & Head Civil Engineer, ता BHU

1.

2. Shri Anupam Mishra - Environmentalist, Gandhi Peace Foundation
3. Shri Anil Kumar Gupta _ Directér, Wadia Institute of Himalyan Geology
2. Atthe outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Main Committee,
3.
4.

oeeeee seeeee seenee eeeeee

totes oeenee #+०+++ #+$#$ $

5. The Committee then took evidence of experts on the subject ‘Ganga Rejuvenation’. The Chairperson welcomed the
experts/witnesses and drew their attention to 55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality of the
proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction was over, the Chairperson directed the experts to brief the
Committee on the subject ‘Ganga Rejuventation’.

6. The experts briefed the Committee on various issues related to the subject like need to check flow of untreated
sewages and industrial waste leading to presence of high levels of Foecal Coliform in Ganga; need to regulate the flow of


169

fertilizers and pesticides as agricultural run off into the river, need to check low flows of Ganga in the critically polluted
Stretches; need to control flow of high amount of sedimentation as a result of construction of dams and bridges; need to
study reasons for glacial retreat; decreasing ice mass; early snow melt lending to climate change effecting the Ganga river
system, amongst others. The Members also raised several queries and sought clarification from the experts to which the
experts duly responded.

7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.

The Committee then adjourned.


0 ए -२ 9 ४ # ६४० ७

BES

। ee आ

3.
a
x
6
7
2.

‘was over the

Rejuvenstion’

APPENDIX - VI

MINUTES OF THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)

‘The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 20th January, 2016 from 1100 hrs. to 1420 hrs. in Committee Room (०, Parliament
House Annexe, New Dethi.

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Charrperson

Shri Sultan Ahmed.

Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
Shri Ramen Deka

‘Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
Shri ९ Kumar

Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Shri KH. Muniyapps

Shri K.N. Ramachandran

. Shri Arvind Sawant

Shri Rajesh Verma

1. Shri Devender Singh
2. Shri Vipin Kumar
3, Shri Srinivasulu Gunda

Prof. Vinod Tare
Dr. Arun Kumar

Prof A.A. Kazmi

Dr. Sudipta Sarkar
Ms. Malika Bhanot
Shri Hemant Dhyani
Shri Govind Pokhriyal

PRESENT

MEMBERS.

‘SHCRETARIAT
Additional Secretary
Director
Additional Director
Wrrnesses
IET, Kanpur
Chair Professor & , Alternate Hydro Energy Centre,
TIT, Roorkee

Civil Engineering Department, IIT, Roorkee

Asstt. Professor, Civil Engineering Department, ITT, Roorkee
‘(Ganga Abvaan

Ganga Ahvaan

Ganga Abvaan

Pr At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee and briefed them about the
ions held on the subject matter during the previous sitting. He then directed that the experts be called in,

[The experts enter]

3. The Chairperson welcomed the experts/witnesses and drew their attention to the Direction 55(1) of "Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction

Chairperson directed the experts to brief and apprise the Committee of their views on the subject ‘Ganga

170


6-A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned


APPENDIX - शा
MINUTES OF FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)

The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16th February, 2016 from 1100 hrs, to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room 'D',
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi,

cent hm we न

= 5

Bn

है. ०9 कफ ९ «

PRESENT
Dr. Murti Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
Mimpens
Shri Sultan Ahmed
Shri Anil Shirole
| Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
Shri Ramen Deka
. Shri Sudheer Gupta
Shri P Kumar
‘Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
|. Shri KH. Muniyappa
Shei LC, Divakar Reddy
. Shri Arvind Sawant
Shri Rajesh Verma
SPCRETAKIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh नर Additional Secretary
2 Shri Vipin Kumar - Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director
Witnesses
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation
Shri Shashi Shekhar a Secretary
Dr. Amarjit Singh नर Special Secretary
Dr. B. Rajender = Joint Secretary
Shri Pushkal Upadhayay _ AMD,NMCG
Central Water Commission
|. 501 55. Sha - Chairman
Shri Nandkumaran P. _ Regional Director
Central Ground Water Board
|. Shri K.B, Biswas _ Chairman
Shri Sujit Kumar Sinha =< Scientist'D’


73 ५

Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (Central Pollution Cobtro! Board)
1 Shri ALK. Mehta न Jt, 5०८५ and Chairman ४
2. 9: Rashid Hasan ~ Advisor मु
2. At the outset, the Chaiperson welcomed the Members othe siting and briefed thé abot the agenda, He then
directed that the witnesses be ushered in.
[The representatives enter}

attention to Direction $5(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the
Committee.

4, The Ministry made a powerpoint presentation on the subject. During the presentation, the members sought
Clarifications on the points relating to decadal flow data in river Ganga from 1951-2011, 1916 agreement on release of water
iat Haridwar, the importance of maintaining ‘aviral flow in Ganga so as 10 make it'nirmal, status of sewage treatment plants,
Quantum of industrial and municipal sewage flow in the Ganga river and measure taken by the Ministry to control the rising
Pollution levels therein. The Committee also desired to knaw whether the Ministry has any action plan to counter the impact
of mass scale urbanisation near the Ganga River Basin

3, The representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, Central
Water Commission, Central Ground Water Board, Central Pollution Control Board Elucidated the Committee on the aforesaid
issues, The Committee also desired that the written replies to the unanswered points'queries be sent 10 the Committee
Secretariat at the earliest.

6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Commitee were kept on record,

The Committee then adjourned.


APPENDIX - शा
MINUTES OF FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)

The Commitee sat on Tuesday, the 16th February, 2016 from 1430 hrs. to 1800 hrs, in Committee Room 'D’,
Partiament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
Meneaenes
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri Anil Shirole
4 Shri Om Birla
5 Shti Ashwini Kurnar Choubey
% Shri Ramen Deka
7. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
है. Shri Sudheer Gupta
9. Shri P, Kumar
10. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
12 50111. Divakar Reddy
13. Shri Mohd. Salim
14 Shri Arvind Sawant
15. Shri Rajesh Verma
Seereraiar
1. Shri Devender Singh ~~ Adiitional Secretary
« २ Shri Vipin Kumar = Director
3, Shri Srinivasuia Gunda ae Additional Director
Witnesses:
Ministry of Shipping
1, Shri Rajive Kumar ~ Secretary
2. Shri Amitabh Verma _ Chairman (IWAI)
उ. Shri Rajat Sachar ~ Advisor (E)
Ministry of Urban Development
|, Dr. Nandita Chatterjee = Secretary
2 Shri Durga Shankar Mishra — Addl. Secretary
3. Shri Neeraj Mandloi न Jt, Secretary (AMRUT)

4, Shri Praveen Prakash _ Jt. Secretary (SBM)

174


175

Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change

|. Shri Ashok Lavasa न Secretary
2 Dr.M.M. Kutty ~ Additional Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Mehta -- Jt. Secretary
4. Shri Bishwanath Sinha ~ Jt. Secretary
5. Dr. Rashid Hasan = Advisor
6 DrM. Hom _ Advisor
7. Shri Brijesh Sikka - Advisor
Ministry of Power
1 Shei PK. Pujari _ Secretary
2 Shri B.P. Pandey _ Addl. Secretary
3. Shri Aniruddha Kumar ~ Joint Secretary (Hydro)
4 Smt. Varsha Joshi — Joint Secretary (MNRE)
Central Electricity Authority
Shri 5.0. Dubey - Member (Hydro)
THDC/INHPC/SIVNL
1. ShriR.S.T. Sai -- CMD, THDC
2. Shri K.M. Singh a CMD, NHPC
3. Shri RN. Mishra तू CMD, SJVNL

2 At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee He then directed that the
Fepresentatives of the Ministry of Shipping and Ministry of Urban Development be called in,

{The representatives enter]

3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Shipping and Ministry of Urban Development
Proceeding of he cn 0 Direction 550) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha! regarding confidennalin or an
Proceedings of the Committee, *

5. The representatives of the Ministries elucidated the Committee on the aforesaid issues, The Committee also
‘csired that the written replies tothe unanswered points/queres ७९ sent to the Commitee Secretariat atthe wns

[The witnesses withdrew].

6. The Chairman, thereafter, directed that the representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change and Ministry of Power be called in.

7. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
Minis of Power, Central Electricity Authority, THDC/NHPC/SIVNL and drew their attention io Direction 551) 10
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee

5. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change gave a power point presentation on the subject During
whe Presentation the members sought clarification reerding the nature ofthe Ganga rive basin importance of maintaining


176

environmental flow in river Ganga, the measures proposed by the Ministry to conserve water, new means for sewage
treatment in mega towns, impact of industrial and municipal sewage flow in the ganga river and measure taken by the
Ministry to control the raising pollution levels therein, rising arsenic content in Ganga basin, impact of hydro projects in
Untarakhand and viability of use of alternative energy resources in Himalayan range.

9. The representatives of the Ministries elucidated the Committee on the aforesaid issues. The Committee also
desired that the written replies 1 the unanswered points’queries be sent to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest.

[The witnesses then withdrew].
10, The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee were kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.


APPENDIX - 1X
MINUTES OF FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2016-17)

wee Friday, the 06th May, 2016 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Room No, 62, Parliament House,

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson

Mineres

:
{
F

Shri Dushyant Chautala
Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
Col. Sonaram Choudhary
Shri Sudheer Gupta
Shrimati Kavitha Kalvakuntla
Shrimati Poonam Mahajan

). Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Shri Rajesh Pandey

. ShriMd. Salim

‘Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
Shei Gajendra Singh Shekhawat
15, Shri Anil Shirole

16. Shei Rajesh Verma

=~ Berpnsp pew

EaR

‘SecneTAniAT
1. Shri Devender Singh = Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar <= Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda = Additional Director

2-At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members tothe first sitting of the Committee and congratulated them
on their election to the "7
3, teeee teens teense sees
4, e000 eeee ##++७ ###०+%
5. The Committee, thereafter, consider the draft Report on the subject Ganga Rejuvenation’ pertaining to the Ministry
of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, The Committee adopted the above Report without any
modification and authorized the Chairperson to finalise the report and present the same to Lok Sabha.

The Committee then adjourned.

WW
GMGIPMRND—1190L S—24-01-2017—150 Copies.