MINISTRY OF  AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE &
COOPERATION)
NATIONAL PROJECT ON ORGANIC FARMING
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
2015-2016
NINTH REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
9

NINTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
MINISTRY  OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE &
COOPERATION)
NATIONAL  PROJECT ON ORGANIC FARMING
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.08.2015
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)

E.C. No. 1494
Price:  ` 125.00
© 2015  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMITTEE ...................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. (vii)
PART-I
REPORT
CHAPTER I Organic Farming—Introduction ................................................ 1
Definitions ................................................................................. 1
Advantages of Organic Farming ............................................... 1
Policy Framework for Promotion of Organic Farming................ 10
CHAPTER II National Project on Organic Farming ....... .................................. 14
Components/Schemes/Programmes .......................................... 15
Availability of bio-inputs and other related matters .................. 16
Status on demand and supply of bio-pesticides ....................... 16
Cost Benefit Analysis of Inputs ................................................ 18
Shortfall in Bio-fertilizers and organic manures......................... 19
Assistance in marketing of bio inputs ....................................... 20
Institutional/organizational Issues ............................................ 20
Coordination among various Ministries and also within the
M/o Agriculture..................................................................... 20
Information dissemination/coordination mechanism................. 22
Need or otherwise of separate Department for Organic
Agriculture ............................................................................ 22
Involvement of Panchayats to promote organic farming........... 23
Capacity Building...................................................................... 23
Publicity and Awareness Campaign........................................... 26
CHAPTER III Organic Farming—Financial Performance ................................. 30
Budgetary Allocations and Utilization under NPOF .................. 30
Subsidies/Financial Assistance ................................................. 31
Financial Assistance to Farmers ................................................ 33
Fund Flow Mechanism.............................................................. 33
C
HAPTER IV Organic Farming—Physical Performance .................................. 37
Area under Organic Farming ..................................................... 40
CHAPTER V Soil Health and Integrated Nutrients Management ................... 42
Soil Health Management (SHM)................................................ 42

Soil Health Cards....................................................................... 43
Soil Erosion—Suitable Incentives............................................. 46
Deterioration of Soil Health and Nutrients ................................ 46
Policy Framework for Promotion of Integrated Nutri ents
Management .......................................................................... 48
Pest Management ...................................................................... 48
Outcome of Integrated Pest Management (IPM)....................... 49
Need for Patenting of Microbiological Processes and Micro
Organisms.............................................................................. 50
CHAPTER VI Trade and Certification Related Issues ...................................... 51
Market for Organic Produce ...................................................... 51
Export Growth Potential............................................................. 52
Organic Standards ..................................................................... 52
Testing and Certification for Organic Produce .......................... 53
Infrastructural support for Testing and Certification of Organic
produce .................................................................................. 56
Fake Organic Produce................................................................ 57
PART-II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS................................ 58
PART-III
APPENDICES
I. The infrastructure support regarding promotion of organic
farming certification, production units for organic inputs, storage,
transportation and processing available under Mission for
Integrated Horticulture Development (MIHD) .......................... 70
II. Component wise patter of assistance available under SHM of
NMSA for promotion is of organic farming............................... 73
III. State-wise details of total number of Compost production unit
and Biofertilizer production units set up under NPOF
through NABARD and total production capacity generated
(in MT) by these units sanctioned during October, 2004 till
March, 2014............................................................................... 74
(ii)
PAGE

IV . Funds released for Organic Farming under RKVY during last
5 years ....................................................................................... 75
V. Details of financial assistance provided during each of the last
four years, State-wise for adoption of organic farming under
National Horticulture Mission (NHM) ...................................... 76
VI. Funds released for Organic Farming under Horticulture Mission
for North East and Himalayan States (HMNEH)....................... 77
VII. Soil Health Cards issued during 2009-10 to 2013-14.................. 78
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 01.01.2015 ...... 80
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 20.01.2015 ...... 82
III. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 09.02.2015 ...... 85
IV . Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 10.02.2015 ...... 88
V. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee eld on 10.03.2015 ........ 90
VI. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 10.08.2015 ...... 92
PAGE
(iii)

(v)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2015-16)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri Kirti Azad
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
5. *Shri Anil Shirole
6. Shri Om Birla
7. Shri Ashok Chavan
8. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
9. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
10. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo
13. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
14. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
15. Shri Sudheer Gupta
16. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
17. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
18. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla
19. Shri Vinod Khanna
20. Shri P. Kumar
21. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
22. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
23. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
25. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy
26. Md. Salim
27. Shri Arvind Sawant
28. Shri Ganesh Singh
29. Shri Rajesh Verma
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
* Elected vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II No. 2181 dated 31.07.2015. Consequent upon vacancy
 caused by the death of Shri Dileep Singh Bhuria, MP on 24 June, 2015.

(vi)
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar — Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Additional Director
4. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj — Deputy Secretary

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of Committee on Estimates (2015-16) having been authorized by
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 9th Report on
'National Project on Organic Farming' pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture & Cooperation).
2. With the significant shift towards minerals-based farming in late sixties, India
ushered into the Green Revolution, which initially paid rich dividends in terms of
higher productivity and pulled the country out of the fear psychosis of food insecurity
for the burgeoning Indian population. However, in the long run, it brought in its wake
a very negative cascading impact on our ecological plateau to wit, degradation of soil
health, gradual low yields, emergence of new pests/diseases, wiping out of eco-friendly
micro organisms and percolation of toxic chemicals into our food chain threatening the
very existence of our biosphere. Taking note of the adverse consequences of chemical
based farming, Government of India launched a National Project on Organic Farming
(NPOF) with an outlay of Rs. 57.05 crores as a Pilot project with effect from 01.01.2004
(X Plan) and continued it during XI Plan with an outlay of Rs. 101 crore. Later on, in the
middle of XII Plan, this scheme was made a sub-component of  ‘Soil Health Mission’
which itself is a component of 'National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)
with a paltry outlay of Rs. 293 crore for the remaining period of XII Plan.
3. Further, in absence of clear cut demarcation of responsibilities between the
Ministries of Agriculture and Commerce and Industry with respect to promotion of
organic farming scheme, no-one seemed to take the overall responsibility for effective
implementation of the scheme. Further, lack of integration and coordination among
concerned Ministries/Departments/ICAR/Agriculture Universities/Krishi Vigyan
Kendras and other allied agencies, the promotion of organic farming could not receive
the desired impetus. A holistic approach with a comprehensive National Policy on
Organic Farming was yet to be evolved. The organic farming has the potential to
increase 30 per cent employment by way of resource recycling, certification process,
product marketing and packaging. Besides, organic farming would have immense
unquantifiable benefits for human health and the entire eco system.
4. In the above backdrop, the Committee selected this subject for indepth
examination and Report.
5. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and Department of Agricultural
Research and Education) and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry on 20.01.2015.
The Committee also examined the Memoranda on the subject sought and received
from the public and experts and heard the views of some renowned agricultural scientists/
experts/farmers at their sittings held on 01.01.2015, 20.01.2015, 09.02.2015, 10.02.2015
and 10.03.2015.

6. The draft Report on the subject was considered and adopted by the Committee
at their sitting held on 10.08.2015.
7. The Committee wish to express their sincere thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and Department
of Agricultural Research and Education) and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
who appeared before them and placed their considered views on the subject and for
furnishing information required in connection with examination of the subject. The
Committee also place on record their sincere thanks to those who furnished their views
to the Committee including Dr. M.S. Swaminathan and the domain experts namely,
Dr. Mangala Rai, Shri G.N. Raju Yadav, Dr. Vandana Shiva, Dr. K.K. Tomar,
Dr. S.P.S. Sirohi, Shri Sunil Mansinghka, who appeared before the Committee and
shared their invaluable views and expert knowledge.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in Bold in Part-II of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
10 August, 2015 Chairperson,
19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Estimates.
(viii)

PART  I
REPORT
CHAPTER  I
ORGANIC FARMING—INTRODUCTION
Organic farming — Definitions
According to International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movement
(IFOAM), ‘organic agriculture’ is a production system that sustains the health of soils,
eco systems and people. It relies on ecological processes, bio-diversity and cycles
adapted to local conditions, rather than the use of inputs with adverse effects. Organic
agriculture combines tradition, innovation and science to benefit the shared
environment and promote fair relationships and a good quality of life for all involved.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) defines organic farming as a holistic
production management system which promotes and enhances agro-ecosystem health,
including biodiversity, biological cycles, and soil biological activity. This is
accomplished by using, wherever possible, agronomic, biological and mechanical
methods, as opposed to using synthetic materials, to fulfil any specific function within
the system.
1.2 According to the Handbook of Agriculture, brought out by the ICAR, Organic
farming involves the use of renewable resources and recycling, returning to the soil
the nutrients found in waste products. Organic farming respects the environment's
own system for controlling pests and diseases in raising crops and livestock without
the use of synthetic pesticides, herbicides, chemical fertilizers, growth hormones,
antibiotics or gene manipulation. Also meat and poultry production is regulated with
particular concern for animal welfare and by using natural foodstuffs. Thus, organic
farming differs from modern intensive farming systems as in organic farming farmers
use a range of techniques that help sustain ecosystems and reduce pollution.
1.3 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation)
further added as follows:—
"As per the National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP), Ministry of
Commerce, organic agriculture is defined as Organic agriculture is a system of
farm design and management to create eco system, which can achieve
sustainable productivity without the use of artificial external inputs such as
chemicals, fertilizers and pesticides."
Advantages of Organic Farming
1.4 The major advantages of organic farming vis-a-vis the chemical farming as
submitted by the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation)
are as under:—
• Maintains environmental health by reducing pollution;
• Reduces human and animal hazards by lowering the level of chemical residues
in the products;

2
• Keeps agricultural production sustainable;
• Reduces the cost of agricultural production by relying on internal sources
for nutrient, pest and disease management;
• Improves soil health;
• Ensures the optimum utilization of natural resources;
• Improves soil physical properties such as granulation, tilth, aeration, and
facilitates easy plant root penetration and improves water-holding capacity;
• Improves supply and retention of soil nutrients, and promotes favourable
chemical reactions in the soil;
• promotes job creation and provides 30% more jobs than chemical farming by
way of resource recycling, certification, product marketing and packaging.
The Ministry also highlighted the special incentives being extended to
chemical farming:
• Huge financial subsidy to chemical fertilizer producing factories while no
subsidy is given to individual farmers/groups who are producing organic
manures/pesticides etc.
• Funding for research, extension and development are more focussed towards
chemical farming. V ery few institutions or centres carry out research and
promotion of organic farming while >90% funds are provided towards
agriculture supported with chemicals.
• The Agricultural Education system is predominantly oriented towards
chemical farming and as on date no State Agricultural University is offering
degrees on organic /traditional farming systems.
• Chemical fertilizers and pesticides are promoted through Fertilizer Corporation
and pesticide manufactures. However, such undertakings for promotion of
organic sources as nutrient and pest/disease management seldom exist.
1.5 Apprising the Committee of the need to switchover to organic farming, a
representative of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation),
deposed:—
"There are human health problems because many of these chemicals and the
pesticides which we use, find their way into food and that leads to a demand for
setting up the maximum residual limit. In fact, in India, that is how the organic
farming was given an impetus by the Government under the National Programme
of Organic Production which is being monitored by the Commerce Ministry.
When our food products started getting rejected by the US and the European
markets, then the Government of India came out with the NPOP, the National
Programme for Organic Production in the year 2000."

3
1.6 Citing the importance of organic farming, an agricultural expert submitted:—
"Organic agriculture aims at the human welfare without any harm to the
environment, which is the foundation of human life itself. The relatively high
success of organic farming in some countries are due to the high awareness of
the health problems caused by the consumption of contaminated food products,
the ill effects of environment degradation, appropriate support by the
Government and organizations like the European Union and International
Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM). In India, also, the
necessity of having an alternative agriculture method which can function in a
friendly ecosystem while sustaining and increasing the crop productivity is
realized. Organic farming is recognized as the best known alternative to the
modern inputs based agriculture. The progress of organic agriculture in India is
though very slow but steady. India has the potential to become a major organic
producing country given the international demand for our diversified farm
products from different agro climatic regions, the size of the domestic market
and above all the long tradition of environment friendly farming and living.
Indian agriculture in a way may be regarded as organic because majority of its
cultivated area is under rainfed cultivation and only about 38% of cultivated
land is under irrigation and in rainfed areas, there is little use of fertilizers and
other agriculture chemicals on account of risks associated, resources poor
farmers and smaller land holdings."
1.7 Explaining the benefits of organic farming to the Committee, Dr. Vandana
Shiva from Research Foundation for Science, Technology and Ecology, New Delhi,
testified that:—
"The first benefit of organic farming is the fact that it always allows you to get
rid of the high cost of external inputs. Agriculture has been done for 10,000
years. It is only in India in the last 50 years and globally in the last century that
chemicals entered farming ...
Chemical fertilizers have destroyed the original sources of soil fertility which
are the micro organisms in the soil. This is the year of soil declared by the
United Nations. Every where the contribution of earthworms, soil organisms is
coming out. They produce far more than any other external input could ever
give you. Most importantly, most of the fertilizers have been based on Nitrogen,
Potassium, and Phospate where as soils need micronutrients and trace elements.
Our body needs micronutrients and trace elements and our body needs
micronutrients and trace elements. So, NPK system creates deficient soils and
deficient plants."
1.8 Refuting the argument that India needs chemical farming to free itself from
hunger, is false for three reasons, Dr. V andana Shiva submitted as under:—
"It is false because all we have grown since the chemical farming was introduced
through the Green Revolution is rice and wheat as if we did not need the pulses
for protein, as if we did not need the oilseeds for oil which allows our body to
absorb nutrients, as if we did not need the grains and the vegetables. So, we
actually have lost a lot of nutrition in the process and the wheat and the rice is

4
rotting in the FCI godowns. Millets which are the most nutritious like the Ragi
in the South and Mandwa in the hills, Jhangora, Corny, Amaranth, Buckwheat
these are miracle crops because their nutrition is so high. Ragi has more Calcium
than any other food plant. Jhangora which is called barnyard millet has more
minerals than any other crop plants. These were defined as inferior grains.
They were defined as backward crops. And, part of the reason they became
orphan crops was because the West did not work on them. They worked on
rice, wheat and corn initially. So, those crops were pushed for pushing chemical
fertilizers. First, in terms of nutrition, our nutrition basket came down which is
why every fourth Indian today is hungry and every second child as the National
Family Health Survey has shown is wasted which in effect means half of India's
future is not going to grow to its full mental and physical potential which,
I believe, is a very serious crisis. So, in terms of nutrition, chemical farming is
not producing more; in terms of productivity too, chemical farming has not
produced more. What is usually measured is yields of individual crops and not
biodiversity of eco-system and what is measured usually are the yields in
experimental farms which has all the water, all the chemicals to put in, not the
yields in the field of a farmer who cannot get water and who does not have the
money to buy the inputs.
The United Nations had said that to call these varieties bred for chemicals high
yielding varieties is wrong because they should be called high response varieties.
They have been bred to respond to large chemical inputs. When I travel in the
country if there is a drought, our drought tolerant varieties and organic farms
have production and there is zero production for those who are waiting to grow
their chemical rice or the chemical wheat.
There is a third reason why this argument of organic not being able to provide
us food security is not true, in the last year, 2014, which was the United Nation's
year of the family farm, the UN put out a lot of material. UNCTAD which is the
trade body, UNEP which is the environment body, FAO which is the Food and
Agriculture Organisation all put out data that organic farms can double
production. In fact, if we have to address food security, the only way we can do
it is through organic farming...."
1.9 In a written reply submitted to the Committee, Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) submitted that organic farming is
advantageous particularly for the resource poor small and marginal farmers of rainfed
areas where the use of costly chemical fertilizers is lower than national average. Total
area under organic farming is reported as 7.2 lakh hectares and is miniscule as compared
to the net sown area of 140 million hectares in the country. The potential for organic
farming is in the niche market that commands premium price for these products. Keeping
in view the potential demand, attention needs to be focused on areas which are under
natural farming and also in rainfed areas where majority of the farmers are small and
marginal and are constrained to practice intensive conventional farming. In these
areas, high value crops that fetch premium price to the farmers have to be grown under
organic conditions.

5
1.10 While allaying the apprehension about the affordability of small and marginal
farmers to switch over to organic farming from chemical farming which requires them to
keep their agricultural land vacant at least for three years, a representative of Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) deposed before the
Committee as under:—
"The small and marginal farmers who are having less than two hectares of land,
they are resource poor. They generally cannot afford expensive chemicals,
pesticides or fertilisers. As it is, their consumption is very low on that account.
They are not able to afford irrigation also because it is not practical. Secondly,
we have a system of providing subsidy for the conversion period. We have the
details in this book. It is about Rs. 20,000 per hectare that is provided to the
farmer for going organic."
1.11 A representative of Alliance for Sustainable & Holistic Agriculture (ASHA)
underlined the importance of the quality of organic soil for better water absorbing and
harvesting capacity as under:—
"Organic farming is also associated with decreased irrigation needs by about
30- 50%. This becomes an important part of adaptation in drought conditions.
The better drainage and water holding capacity of organic soils reduces the risk
of drought and soil erosion, for instance. Organic farming practices are in a
good position to maintain productivity in the event of drought, irregular rainfall
events and rising temperatures, notes a recent technical paper from International
Trade Center (WTO) and FiBL. This paper notes that soils under organic
management retain significantly more rainwater, thanks to the "sponge
properties" of organic matter. Water percolation is 15-20% more in organic
systems. Water capture in organic plots was twice as high as conventional
plots during torrential rains, which in turn reduces the risk of floods. Given both
the mitigation and adaptation potential that organic farming presents in the
context of climate change, it becomes important that more emphasis is placed in
promoting such farming systems on a wider scale."
1.12 Emphasizing the ineffectiveness and adverse impact of unabated and
excessive use of chemical fertilizers, Dr. Mangala Rai, a former Secretary, Department
of Agriculture and Education/DARE and ex-DG , ICAR submitted before the Committee
as under:—
"For example, at the time of starting of green revolution in sixth decade, we used
to get 50 kilogram foodgrains by applying major nutrients of one kilogram
nitrogen, phosphorus and potash. Now by applying one kilogram nutrients,
the capacity of our products has decreased by five times.
Secondly, I would like to mention is that when our country got independence,
there was deficiency of only nitrogen in our land. Till the year 2007, deficiency
therein has increased to nine elements. Sulphur, Boron and Zink are included in
it. If I talk about Sulphur, Boron, Zink, around 50% land has deficiency thereof
when micro-nutrients and secondary nutrients are decreasing and you won't
get appropriate response even if keep on applying nitrogen, phosphorus and
potash.

6
I don't subscribe to the view that it is organic versus inorganic. There has been
adverse effect even after to the inorganic utilization. Therefore, it has become
essential to apply organic in the present scenario. Why it has became necessary.
There was 0.5% carbon content in lands in Punjab during the green revolution.
How, it has been reduced to half i.e. 0.25% when there is no carbon content in
the land then from where becteria will come? We are not concerned about the
becteria contents. Today, there are 1.5 million species of fungicible on the earth,
30 million species are of insects. There are around 50 million species in all. Out
of these we human being are homosapians. In a gram land, there are thousands
of species of micro-nutrients. There are engymes in permutation - combination,
which produce several things, when it becomes organic then an atmosphere is
created where productivity of nutrients and quality of productivity increases."
1.13 He further added that:—
“Not only the micro nutrients but you are even importing secondary nutrients.
How much and how long you will keep on importing them? I feel that the
nutritional imbalance in agriculture is resulting in constant deterioration of soil
health and in decrease its productivity 'soil-biota' is not proving to be effective
in the absence of organic. That's why soil is called living legend, there is a
mention of integrated farming that live-stock, horticulture, agriculture, fisheries,
poultry, piggery and goatery all are reinforcing. A composite approach and an
integrated management is required to be adopted. Science based integrated
approach is required, which forms part of agro-system as crop or commodity.
Agro system is required to be fitted into Eco system in order to make
Eco system so healthy wherein land, produce, human, animals and birds all
should be able to exist. In my view it is not organic versus inorganic.
I am not so concerned about organic-inorganic, but I am more pained to see the
imbalanced use of fertilizers or imbalanced use of nutrients. Nitrogen,
Phosphorus, Potash should be in the ratio of 4:2:1, but today it is close to 7:3:1
across the country. Mr. Chairman, Sir, I want to make a mention about Punjab,
wherein the N:P:K ratio has reached 39:9:1. In addition to this, we are creating
distortion through the burden of Rs. 70,000 croe subsidy. This is one aspect. In
case of organic, the root would have been much deeper and there would have
been 'porosity' also. Porosity would have helped in increasing 'microbial' activity.
The menifestation would have resulted in good quality produce after the
interaction of inorganic and organic but it is not happening.
Out of the total nitrogen applied in agriculture, more than 50 per cent of it is
fixed and produced by the atmosphere through the lightening or by the
'microbes'. Whether there is any system in the country today? It is a living
organism, Mr. Chairman, Sir, you have mentioned about the pest control, but
how they will be produced, stored, transported or applied in living form, parasites
and 'predators'. There is some space for development but whether parasites/
predator are being produced, stored, transported or applied appropriately
anywhere? It is living organism. They are not being transported in living form
or applied in fields in the country."

7
1.14 Dr. Swaminathan, retired Prof. & Ex-DG , ICAR in a note submitted to the
Committee highlighting the importance and challenges of organic farming stated as
under:—
"Organic farming has been both a way of life and a means to livelihood since
the birth of agriculture. It was only when mineral fertilizer was discovered by
Liebig and other chemists in the 19th century that the application of mineral
fertilizers started. The challenges in organic farming are (a) replenishment of
soil fertility, and (b) plant health management. Thus, both soil health and plant
health management requires interventions which will have to be tailored to the
cropping/farming system. Crop livestock integration makes organic farming
more effective.
Organic agriculture attends concurrently to the physics, chemistry and
microbiology of the soil, while mineral fertilizers only meet the nutrient needs of
the soil and not their properties in the area of hydraulic conductivity.
Unfortunately, the available organic manures are not adequate to achieve higher
productivity. Farm size is getting smaller and hence for small farmers, the organic
methods will be integrated nutrient supply and integrated pest management.
I hope the National Project on Organic Farming will take into account these
essential requirements for the spread of organic farming on a large scale. We
should not forget that land is a shrinking resource for agriculture and that
enhancement of productivity in perpetuity is the only method by which we can
meet the food requirements of our growing population. Organic farming requires
more scientific support than chemical farming."
1.15 The Ministry of Agriculture DAC furnished the following comments on the
above observation of Dr. Swaminathan:—
"Prof. has rightly indicated the need for replenishment of soil fertility (i.e. plant
nutrients) and management of plant health under organic farming. As far as
replenishment of nutrients is concerned, not only the production but quality of
different organic manures needs to be essentially improved so that even smaller
quantities of manures are able to supply nutrients in desired amount. Equally
important is R&D related to bio-pesticides and weed control. It is apparent that
focussed research support is very much needed to propagate organic farming
in a scientific manner, without compromising on productivity. Crop and livestock
integration as advised in the said letter is essentially required to adopt organic
farming successfully, particularly under small holders' conditions. ICAR system
needs to be sensitized for taking up the issues referred by Prof. Swaminathan
under the Network Project on Organic Farming and other on-going projects like
Integrated Farming Systems. However, as far as development part is concerned,
these issues are being taken up under the Soil Health Management (SHM)
component of National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) and more
particularly under recently approved Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY).
DAC has already proposed capacity building of farmers and also technology
transfer to individual farmers for production of different inputs. Over and above,
the major concern of domestic certification system will now be addressed

8
through Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) wherein certification will be done
by farmers' clusters. This is the big initiative taken by DAC to promote organic
farming at large scale across the country."
1.16 Responding to a query as to whether the conversion to organic agriculture
will have any adverse impact on the food security and also on nutrition aspect of
organic produce, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
submitted as under:—
"As per trial results of Network Project of ICAR, immediate conversion of
lands/soils to organic production system may lead to yield losses during the
initial 3 to 4 years. However, yield and income loss in the initial years can be
minimized by adopting a gradual approach "towards organic" implying
progressively increasing organics and reducing inorganics.
Furthermore, organic agriculture is usually compared with conventional
production systems which receive 100 % recommended quantity of major
nutrients. Ideally, organic agriculture yield should be compared with the yield
obtained under farmers' system of production. Nutrient application gaps between
farmers' practices and recommended package have been reported for major
food crops namely rice, wheat and maize. The farmers are resorting to under
application of nutrients due to various factors such as affordability, availability
and knowledge. Once, farmer resorts to application of organic manures and
recycling of residues, balanced supply of nutrients to crops can be ensured.
Studies clearly indicate that in case of paddy and maize, there will not be any
decrease in production due to moving towards organic farming but the
production will increase.
Higher content of antioxidants under organic management than conventionally
grown crops is possible due to the uptake of micronutrients with application of
sufficient quantities of organic manures. Despite lower crop yields during the
conversion phase, uptake of micro nutrients was higher under organic
management for most of the crops under Network Project on Organic Farming
(NPOF)."
1.17 Allaying the apprehension that productivity and cost of organic farming
may not compare favourably with those of inorganic farming Dr. V andana Shiva,
interacting with the Committee on 09 February, 2015 submitted as under:—
"We have also done the revenue difference based on that productivity. On an
average, there is a difference of 33,000 per acre of higher net income for organic
farmers. A lot of farmers go into for chemical farming because of the illusion of
the gross income....Net income is to subtract the cost of production from the
income you get. That is why, I said that we should not develop and that is why
the mission was incomplete because organic farming is not just about purchase
of bio fertilisers but building up the soil fertility through green manures which
a farmer can plant themselves through composting in the farm itself, through
intercropping with nitrogen fixing crops like pulses......Not only it is giving us
more nutrition, solving the problem of severe malnutrition and hunger, it is also

9
addressing the problems of rural poverty and negative incomes because of
cost being higher than what farmers can earn. On an average, I have noticed
that if the seeds are purchased and intensive chemicals are used, cost of
production is becoming ten times more. Usually cost of production is higher
than the MSP in most crops in most regions.......The chemical fertilisers subsidies
do not show up in the agriculture budget because they come up from the
Fertiliser Ministry. But that is nearly Rs. 75,000 crore. They had hit a Rs. 100,000
crore in 2008 when fertiliser prices went up. That is a huge amount of money to
ruin our soils and destroy our ability to deal with climate change which will
show up in increased occurrence of drought and therefore, not only do we need
our soils to be able to have climate insurance."
1.18 In response to a query regarding the impact of productivity due to switching
over to organic farming from inorganic farming, Dr. Mangala Rai, former Secretary,
Department of Agricultual Research and Education (DARE) and DG, ICAR while
appearing before the Committee on 10 March, 2015 submitted as under:—
"Hon'ble Chairman, Sir, you have raised very appropriate contemporary
questions. You have raised the first questions that people say that the production
is reduced in organic farming. As far as I know, the Sun is the only source of
energy and the plant converts this energy into various products through
photosynthesis, be it a vegetable, a fruit, a flower, wheat or paddy and this it is
a conversion of solar energy into chemical form of energy. Plant needs energy
in the form of Nitrogen, Phosphorus, Potash, micronutrient or secondary
nutrients to convert this energy and when the plant gets it, its capacity to
convert energy increases. Therefore as per my common sense, if a plant gets
everything in organic farming what it is needed to convert the energy, thus why
the production will reduce. I am unable to understand it. Experiments have been
conducted in this regard for many years."
1.19 Responding to the concern of the Committee that productivity of organic
and conventional farming in terms of yield per acre as a benchmark comparison is
misleading and the actual comparison lies in comparing quantities of different soil
nutrients produced by the two systems of farming, the Ministry of Agriculture in their
written reply stated as under:—
"Available information with DARE shows that the uptake of nutrients such as
N, P , K and micronutrients such as Fe, Cu, Zn and Mn by crops in the economic
produces were higher under organic farming practice than under conventional
system of production. The increase in uptake was more in micronutrients mainly
due to the increased supply of micronutrients when organic manures are applied.
However, study on comparison of organic farming crops was and conventional
farming crops based on nutrition produced per acre has not been done."
1.20 The Ministry in their written replies to a point regarding competitiveness of
organic farming submitted that Organic Agriculture needs to be promoted in areas with
crop diversification, supplementing the nutrients by on-farm wastes. To begin with,

10
strategically, organic farming can be focussed on the following three areas with
competitiveness:—
(a) Areas with crops of higher market potential when produced organically,
(b) Areas with already active organic farmers groups, especially small and
marginal farmers,
(c) Regions/Areas of high biodiversity and ecologically fragile regions.
1.21 The money spent on subsidies on chemical fertilizers as furnished by Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) is as follows:—
Y ear Total Subsidy on chemical
fertilisers (Rs. in crore)
2005-06 19389.64
2006-07 28019.55
2007-08 43319.16
2008-09 99494.71
2009-10 64032.29
2010-11 65836.68
2011-12 73790.94
2012-13 70592.10
2013-14 71280.16
2014-15 75067.31
1.22 Present policy of subsidy on fertilisers is focussed towards making available
chemical fertilisers to farmers on highly subsidized prices. This has led to inclination of
farmers towards more and more use of chemical fertilisers. Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation has been promoting balanced use of organic and inorganic fertilisers for
Soil Health Management. The Ministry admitted that there is a lot of debate and
discussion on the need to focus on both inorganic and organic fertilisers equally.
There is a need to move towards direct cash transfer to farmers on unit area basis so
that farmers are free to choose between chemical fertilisers and organic fertilisers.
Policy framework for promotion of organic farming
1.23 Suggesting that Government's policy making focus and investments on
organic agriculture should be more capital based rather than revenue based and
investment may be made to make the sector self reliant, debt free, zero government
support, a representative of Fort Williams Organic Farms Mumbai, submitted as under:—
"Organic Farmers should not have to depend on inputs from the corporate
sector or other suppliers in such a way which will keep them at the mercy of a
possible Oligopoly.

11
Any proposed policy intervention should lead to organic farmers becoming
eventually debt-free or at very low levels of debt, that too, from banks or state-
run FI's so as to prevent any burden on the fisc in future and also to prevent
bankruptcy, suicides, etc.
The proposed policy should ensure that there are no bail-outs, subsidies, etc.
for Organic Farmers as is in the case of chemical farmers, except in rare and
extreme circumstances, such as famine, etc.
Same or better yield, same or lower cost, better nutrition."
1.24 Explaining the strategy for implementation of the programmes for promotion
of organic farming, the representative stated as under:—
"This proposal, in order to achieve greater adoption of organic farming in the
country, envisages implementation first in experimental clusters and then an
expansion in the area covered under these clusters. Thus, a very organic method
of implementation.
• Devise and implement a Model Organic Conversion & Handholding
[MOCHA] Project based on organic farming experience already available in
this field.
• Identify geographic clusters & villages which are in need of rescue/revival
due to overuse of chemicals or any other reason, across diverse climatic and
soil zones.
• Create a Public - Private - NGO - Farmers' Co-operative [PPNC] partnership
where:
(A) A single player or a consortium of PNC [Private player, NGO,
Cooperative] comes to the government for declaration as a MOCHA
Cluster Project.
(B) If the government finds it suitable, based on parameters to be set up,
it can declare the Project as an Approved MOCHA Project.
(C) The Government shall then sanction a "Conversion Fund" for the
project based on the Project Report received by it from the
stakeholders. The "Conversion Fund" may be either Capital Subsidy
or an interest-free Loan or partly both.
(D) Within a fixed time-frame, the entire cluster has to achieve certain
financial, output and soil fertility parameters for the Project to be
considered successful. A successful project would result in the
NGO/Private player being awarded more such Projects."
1.25 Dr. Sirohi, Samaj Vikas Sansthan, Meerut submitted to the Committe the
following strategy for promoting organic farming:—
"Potential zones needs to be identified on the line of 'Special Economic Zone'
and be named 'Special organic farming system zone'. For example, potential
exists for creation of 'Organic Spice' zone in Kerala, 'Organic Coconut zone' in

12
Nicobar district of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 'Organic Basmati rice zone in
Uttarakhand, Haryana and Punjab, Hi-value vegetables in selected States, tuber
and special root crops in North Eastern Hilly (NEH) region and seed spice zone
in Rajasthan and Gujarat. These zones can also be made as Agro-eco tourism
centres for attracting the eco tourists. Tax holidays for private players who are
investing in the zone should be given. The zone should be planned such a way
that all the input required for organic farming are produced within the zone by
setting up the organic manure, bio-fertilizer, bio-pesticide production units etc.
Integrated organic farming system models should be developed in all the niche
areas, which should serve as research-cum-demonstration unit. Cluster of
villages can also be encouraged for organic farming depending upon the niche.
Organic farming package and its promotion for individual crops should be done
away with. The system approach should be adopted. Cropping and farming
system approach of providing required nutrient and other inputs are proved to
be successful. 'Model Organic Farm' in farming system mode for marginal and
small farmers should be developed in each district of identified States.
The approach of 'Towards Organic' should be adopted instead of immediately
switching over to organic from inorganic. This approach will reduce the immediate
heavy yield losses during the conversion period.
The budget for research and innovative organic input projects should be
enhanced to generate valuable information. This will also provide impetus in
organic farming research and documentation of ITKs, its testing, verification
and popularization.
Capacity building followed by arranging critical inputs, implementation-cum-
monitoring, linking with assured market using cluster approach will be a way
forward for success of organic farming."
1.26 In a written note while replying to the matter of absence/lack of policy on
organic agriculture asked by the Committee, Dr. Mangala Rai, retired agricultural scientist
and Secretary to DARE and DG, ICAR submitted as under:—
"We need enhanced productivity, quality and sustainability on a long term
sustainable basis, for some policy initiative we may like to see some elements of
'Save and Grow' — an FAO publication of 2011."
1.27 Dr. Mangala Rai further added:—
"A mass movement is essential for education, awareness generation, quality
organic input production and their storage, transportation and effective
application."
1.28 In the context of several countries today moving towards organic farming in
a big way the ministry were requested to furnish (i) the stated position of the Government
of India in this regard; and, (ii) whether the present Policy framework in India is

13
conducive for the purpose and the changes required, in a written reply, Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) stated that:—
"For promotion of Integrated Nutrient Management, DAC is focussing on
balance use of fertilizers both organic and inorganic nutrients, in accordance
with results of Long Term Fertilizer Experiments. Schemes of assistance are
under implementation in DAC to promote the production of organic and bio
inputs through State Governments, private entrepreneurs and on-farm
production by farmers. Along side certified organic farming is encouraged and
assisted through NMSA and NPOP . Several States have formulated policies to
support certified organic farming. Thus the present policy advocates balanced
use of nutrients for food production and provides assistance for organic and
inorganic input availability. It promotes both Conventional Farming and Organic
Farming through its scheme and research programmes to disseminate benefits
and issues that may arise in Conventional Farming and Organic Farming.
Present policy of subsidy on fertilisers is focussed towards making available
chemical fertilisers to farmers on highly subsidized prices. This has led to
inclination of farmers towards more and more use of chemical fertilisers.
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation has been promoting balanced use of
organic and inorganic fertilisers for Soil Health Management.
There is a lot of debate and discussion on the need to focus on both inorganic
and organic fertilizers equally. There is a need to move towards direct cash
transfer to farmers on unit area basis so that farmers are free to choose between
chemical fertilizers and organic fertilizers."
1.29 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation)
furnished the following mechanism for enabling promotion and facilitation of organic
farming:—
(i) Certification of organic process in the clusters through Participatory
Guarantee System for domestic purpose and under NPOP for export.
(ii) Formation and development of Farmer Producer Organization from clusters
of 50 acres with 50 or more farmers. Per farmer support shall be restricted
to maximum of one acre only.
(iii) Identification of crops and areas.
(iv) Training on organic farming to encourage and motivate the farmers, on
Organic Farming Techniques (giving emphasis on crop residues
management and enhancement of organic carbon), input production
techniques, Participatory Guarantee System and marketing of produce.
(v) Creation of vermicompost, vermi-hatcheries and traditional input
production units in cluster and agro-farm waste compost units for recycling
of farm waste and biofertilizer units to cater the cluster at District level.
(vi) Branding, Packing and labelling of certified organic produce.
(vii) Promoting marketing and awareness through exhibitions/fairs/Radio
Programmes, Kisan melas etc.

14
CHAPTER  II
NATIONAL PROJECT ON ORGANIC FARMING
Realizing the growing potential of organic farming in the country, Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) launched a National Project
on Organic Farming (NPOF) with an outlay of Rs. 57.05 crore as a pilot project with
effect from 01.10.2004 (X Plan). The project was continued in 11th Plan with an allocation
of Rs. 101.00 crores. During 12th Plan, Planning Commission took a decision to implement
only 7-8 missions, instead of separate schemes. Therefore, the National Project on
Organic Farming has been subsumed under 'National Mission on Sustainable
Agriculture' with the following aims and objectives:—
(i) To encourage production and use of organic and biological sources of
nutrients like biofertilizers, organic manure, compost for sustained soil
health and fertility and improving soil organic carbon. To promote
production and use of biopesticides, bio-control agents, etc. as
alternative inputs in organic farming.
(ii) To act as nodal agency for implementation of quality control regime for
biofertilizers and organic fertilizers, as per the requirement of FCO.
(iii) To formulate and define standards of other unregulated organic and
biological inputs and create database on their quality status, define/
upgrade standards and testing protocols and bring them under quality
control mechanism.
(iv) Develop, maintain, undertake regular efficacy testing and ensure steady
supply of mother cultures of biofertilizer and other beneficial
microorganisms for nutrient mobilization and plant protection to the
biological input production industry.
(v) To run short term certificate courses on organic system and on-farm
resource management.
(vi) To or ganize regular trainings and refresher courses for State
Governments' quality control analysts/inspectors associated with
implementation of FCO.
(vii) To impart trainers' training on certification systems, organic
management, input production and on other related aspects to
certification and inspection agencies, extension agencies, farmers,
industries and organizations engaged in the production, and promotion
of inputs and organic farming.
(viii) To initiate research on validation of established indigenous practices,
inputs and technologies leading to development of package of practices.

15
(ix) To initiate studies/ surveys on biological soil health assessment under
different farming systems, practices or states.
(x) To act as central information and data collection centre on all aspects
of organic farming and dissemination of information through print and
electronic media.
(xi) Publication of training literature, Quarterly Organic Farming Newsletter,
Half yearly Bio fertilizer Newsletter and validated and documented
indigenous practices.
(xii) T echnical support to existing certification systems in terms of standards
formulation, designing implementation protocols, evaluation and
surveillance. Policy, implementation and surveillance support to
alternative farmer's group centric low-cost certification system such as
PGS.
(xiii) A wareness creation through seminars/conferences/trade fairs and
publicity through print and electronic media.
(xiv) Support Central and State Governments in evaluation, and monitoring
of various organic agriculture schemes."
2.2 In written reply to queries on (i) the reasons for effecting these changes and
(ii) whether the restructuring affected the fund allocation for NPOF as compared to
when it was a standalone programme during the previous years, the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) submitted that:—
"During 12th Plan, Planning Commission took a decision to implement only 7-8
missions, instead of separate schemes. Therefore, the National Project on
Organic Farming has been subsumed under National Mission on Sustainable
Agriculture."
2.3 Furnishing views on subsumption of National Project on Organic Farming
(NPOF) under National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA), Dr. Mangala Rai,
Former Secretary, DARE and DG, ICAR , stated as under :—
"A mission has to be essentially an end to end event within specified time frame
and monitorable targets. This basic element is not given due consideration."
Components/Schemes/Programmes of Organic Farming
2.4 The Ministry of Agriculture promote various components of organic farming
through various programmes viz. National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA),
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), Rastriya Krishi Vikas
Yojana (RKVY) and 'Network Project on Organic Farming under ICAR'. However, the
Ministry admitted that these efforts have, so far been disjointed due to which we have
not yet managed to achieve the outcome envisioned when these schemes were
conceptualized. Therefore, the existing components of organic farming have been
proposed to be put together under a programme called 'Paramparagat Krishi Vikas
Yojana' to be implemented in a cluster mode.

16
Availability of Bio-inputs and other related matters
2.5 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
admitting the shortage of bio-fertilizers, in a written note stated as under:—
"The present requirement of bio-fertilizer is 4,26,000 metric tonne ( MT) against
which total supply is 65,528 metric tonne (MT) . For organic manures, the total
requirement is 710 million tonnes and supply is 105 million tonne. However,
production of bio-fertilizer has increased due to effective implementation of
capital investment subsidy scheme for establishment of production units for
bio-fertilizers during the last three years.
Actual production of bio-fertilizers in MT during years
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
40324.21 46836.82 65527.87
2.6 Asked whether the Government were taking required steps to ensure that the
supply of bio-inputs matches the demand for the same, the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) stated as follows:—
"To cater to the demand for bio-fertilizer/bio-pesticides, organic manure and
vermin compost units/organic input production, financial assistance is available
under MIDH and NMSA. The component-wise pattern of assistance is given in
Appendix - I & II.”
Status on demand and supply of bio-pesticides
2.7 The data on State-wise and year-wise consumption of bio-pesticides since
2010-11 as furnished by the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) is as under:—
Table 2.7: State-wise consumption of bio-pesticides
Sl. No. S tate/UTs 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
  1. Andhra Pradesh 27 22 1 77
  2. Bihar 153 203 222 243
  3. Chhattisgarh 50 80 129 182
  4. Goa 322 1 0.36 1
  5. Gujarat NA NA 1780 605
  6. Haryana NA 49 NA NA
  7. Himachal Pradesh 64 80 80 95
  8. Jammu & Kashmir NA NA NA 0.04
  9. Jharkhand 3 1 1 1
10. Karnataka NA 307 315 450
11. Kerala NA 136 481 626

17
12. Madhya Pradesh NA 194 187 160
13. Maharashtra 1156 1518 1033 1433
14. Odisha 365 312 277 277
15. Punjab 8 42 47 334
16. Rajasthan 70 88 78 61
17. Tamil Nadu 209 222 247 257
18. Uttar Pradesh 1325 20 38 41
19. Uttarakhand 37 27 21 20
20 West Bengal 665 550 720 650
Sub-Total 4453 3851 5657 5513
Eastern-North
21. Arunachal Pradesh NA NA NA NA
22. Assam 2 4 8 7 143 150
23. Manipur 1 2 2 1
24. Meghalaya 1 NA 18 23
25. Mizoram 12 12 12 12
26. Nagaland NA 9 NA 25
27. Sikkim NA NA NA NA
28. Tripura 11 163 78
Sub-Total 48 273 252 211
Union Territories
29. Andaman & Nicobar NA 405 750 NA
30. Chandigarh NA NA NA NA
31. Dadra & Nagar Haveli NA NA NA NA
32. Diu & Daman NA NA NA NA
33. Delhi 9 NA NA NA
34. Lakshadweep NA NA NA NA
35. Puducherry 642 642 19 10
Sub-Total 651 1047 769 10
Grand Total 5151 5171 6679 5734
2.8 On the adverse impact of shortage of bio- inputs on the growth of organic
farming, the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
submitted:—
"State Governments estimate the requirement of bio-fertilizers/organic manure
and prepare project proposals to be considered by Project Sanctioning
Committee (PSC) under NMSA. Organic farming is a production system that
relies primarily on local resources and on-farm inputs such as compost, manure
Sl.No. S tate/UTs 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14

18
and bio-pesticides, cultivation of legumes and biological waste control. In the
organic projects implemented by States on-farm production of organic inputs is
included along with available bio-fertilizer/bio-pesticides so that nutrient
availability is adequate."
Cost Benefit Analysis of inputs
2.9 In response to a query as to whether any study/analysis has been carried out
to ascertain the cost of inputs for organic agriculture and conventional agriculture as
well as the approximate value of the output per unit of land in a specific agro-climatic
zone and if so, the details thereof, the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture
and  Cooperation), stated as under:—
"Charyulu and Biswas (2010) undertook a study of cost of inputs and outputs
in organic and conventional agriculture in few selected States. The results
(after a conversion period of three years) indicate that in Punjab, the cost of
production per quintal of cotton under Organic Farming (OF) was Rs. 662 while
in case of Conventional Farming (CF) it was Rs. 1112. The cost of production
was almost 40% lower than CF. However, in another study on costs and returns
of paddy (basmati) cultivation in Uttar Pradesh, the average cost of production
per quintal of paddy (basmati) under OF was Rs. 870 while the same in CF was
Rs. 803. The cost of production per quintal under OF was 8% higher than CF,
owing to higher costs of manures and weeding, implying that costs of production
will be crop dependent. Details of the study may kindly be seen below:
Economics of Cotton Cultivation in Punjab (Rs.  per acre)
Items Organic Conventional
Farming Farming
12 3
Land preparation 967 850
Seed cost 125 1250
Sowing cost 150 125
Fertilizer/manure cost 333 2250
Inter-cultivation/Weeding 1332 650
Plant protection cost 33 4550
Irrigation cost 380 150
Harvesting cost 1967 2500
Threshing cost 0 0
Marketing cost 140 130
Other costs 0 0
Total cost of cultivation 5427 12455
Yield (kg.) 825 1125
Price (Rs.) 28 28.5
Fodder (Qtl.) 0 0
Price (Rs.) 0 0

19
Total revenue 23100 32063
Net returns 17673 19608
Cost of production (per Qtl.) 662 1112
Note: The costs and returns of cotton cultivation from sample organic as well as conventional
farmers were collected during the cropping year 2009-2010 in Punjab. Many of the
sample organic farmers were cultivating desi variety of cotton whereas conventional
farmers were growing Bt. cotton varieties.
Economics of Paddy Cultivation in Uttar Pradesh (Rs. per acre)
Items Organic Conventional
Farming Farming
Land preparation 3482 3444
Seed cost 501 511
Sowing cost 1136 1400
Fertilizer/manure cost 1082 930
Inter-cultivation/Weeding 622 375
Plant protection cost 350 521
Irrigation cost 2281 3300
Harvesting cost 2082 2214
Threshing cost 1555 1671
Marketing cost 140 80
Other costs 0 0
Total cost of cultivation 13231 14446
Yield (kg.) 1518 1807
Price (Rs.) 15.8 16.9
Fodder (Qtl.) 10.5 11.8
Price (Rs.) 70 93
Total revenue 24719 31636
Net returns 1 1488 17190
Cost of production (per Qtl.) 870 803”
Note:  The primary data on sample organic and conventional paddy cultivation was collected
from Uttar Pradesh pertains to the cropping year 2009-2010. Most of the sample
organic farmers are practicing the m ethod of 'Natural farming' or Zero-budgeting
concept in their farms. The most common basmati varieties growing in this region are
Pusa-1 and Pusa-1121.
Shortfall in Bio-fertilizers and Organic Manures
2.10 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and  Cooperation)
also stated that as on 10.12.2014 requirement of bio-fertilizer was 4,26,000 metric tonnes
as against which total supply was only 65,528 metric tonnes. For organic manures, the
total requirement is 710 million tonnes and the supply is only 105 million tonnes.
 In written reply to a query as to how the Government propose to meet the shortfall, the
Ministry stated as follows:—
"Under NMSA, there is a provision of subsidy for establishment of production
units of bio-fertilizers/bio-pesticides and fruit/vegetable market/agro-waste
compost production unit under Capital Investment Subsidy Scheme (CISS)
12 3

20
through NABARD, to increase production of organic inputs. In case of State
Governments, the assistance is hundred per cent. Apart from schemes of
assistance to States and private agencies, there is assistance for on-farm
production of organic inputs to farmers under NMSA, MIDH and National
Food Security Mission (NFSM) that can contribute to availability of inputs."
Assistance in marketing of Bio-inputs
2.11 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
furnishing their reply on the suggestion of a stakeholder that assistance in marketing
and distribution of bio-inputs through Government owned network of institutions
and/or Cooperative societies at village level will go a long way in promotion of organic
agriculture, stated as follows:—
"Some State Governments like Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand etc. are
implementing a marketing strategy for distribution of organic inputs (bio-
fertilizers/ bio-pesticides etc.) through the cooperative societies at village level
to stake-holders. The feasibility of introducing the strategy across all the States
will depend on the strength of the local cooperative societies. Conceptually,
the strategy has merits in reaching large number of farmers through existing
network of institutions."
Institutional/Organizational issues
2.12 Presently, organic farming is promoted through the following Ministries:—
Ministry of Commerce
(i) National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP).
(ii) National standards for organic products and processes &
accreditation of Certification Agencies.
Ministry of Agriculture
(i) National Project on Organic Farming (NPOF) (2004).
(ii) National Centre for Organic Farming (NCOF) along with Regional
Centres of Organic Farming under NPOF.
(iii) Network Project on Organic Farming (NePOF) under ICAR.
Coordination among various Ministries and also within the M/o Agriculture
2.13 In reply to a query as to whether there is any coordinating mechanism
among Ministries of (i) Agriculture (D&AC and DARE), (ii) Commerce & Industry,
(iii) Finance, various State Governments, etc. for promoting and for giving strategic
direction to growth of organic agriculture, the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) replied:—
"Bi-annual interface coordination between DAC and DARE provides the forum
for discussing research. Network Project on Organic Farming (NePOF).
Technology packages developed under NPOF are transmitted to DAC for
upscaling. Collaboration also exists between National Centre for Organic Farming
and ICAR-IIFSR for conducting the trainings and certificate courses.

21
Also, under the National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP), there is a
National Steering Committee which comprises of representatives from different
Ministries including DAC for effective implementation of NPOP."
2.14 With respect to the standing mechanism to secure coordination among
ICAR, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) and agricultural universities for promoting organic
agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) stated
as follows:—
"ICAR is promoting research and development on organic farming through a
Network Project on Organic Farming (NePOF) involving 11 State Agricultural
Universities, 8 ICAR institutes/centres and 1 deemed to be/special heritage
university, since 2004. The details of the network centres are given below:—
Table 2.14: The list of Network Centres established under Network Project
on Organic Farming (NePOF)
Sl.No. State University/Institute Location
  1. Chhattisgarh Indira Gandhi Krishi Vishwavidyalaya Raipur
  2. Gujarat Sardar Krushinagar Dantiwada S.K. Nagar
Agricultural, University
  3. Himachal CSK HPKVV  Hill Agri. Res. & Extn. Bajaura
Pradesh Centre
  4. Jharkhand Birsa Agricultural University Ranchi
  5. Kerala ICAR-Indian Institute of Spices Calicut
Research
  6. ICAR-Central Tuber Crops Research Trivandrum
Institute
  7. Karnataka University of Agricultural Sciences Dharwad
  8. Madhya Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Viswa Jabalpur
Pradesh V idyalaya
  9. ICAR-Indian Institute of Soil Science Bhopal
10. Maharashtra Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan Krishi Dapoli
Vidyapeeth
11. Meghalaya ICAR Research Complex for NEH RegionUmiam
12. Punjab Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana
Ludhiana
13. Rajasthan Maharana Pratap University of Udaipur
Agriculture & Technology, Udaipur
14. ICAR-National Research Centre on Seed Ajmer
Spices
{
{

22
15. Sikkim ICAR Regional Centre, Sikkim of ICARSikkim
Research Complex for North-Eastern
Hill Region
16. Tamil Nadu T amil Nadu Agricultural University Coimbatore
17. Uttarakhand G .B.P. University of Agriculture and Pantnagar
Technology
18. ICAR-Vivekananda Parvatiya Krishi Almora
Anusandhan Sansthan
19. Uttar ICAR-Project Directorate for Farming Modipuram
Pradesh Systems Research
20. West Bengal Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Narendrapur
University (RMVU)
The NPOF centres are also involved in promoting organic agriculture through
capacity building of stakeholders under different schemes such as Tribal Sub-
Plan. Also, collaboration exists between NPOF and Krishi Vigyan Kendras
(KVKs) to upscale the package of practices for organic production. Besides,
most of the KVKs are under the State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) and all
programmes including that on organic farming being taken up by the SAUs are
implemented in the KVKs also."
Information dissemination/ coordination mechanism
2.15 Furnishing details of the coordination mechanism between the stakeholders
like Central Agriculture Research bodies, State Agricultural Universities, Central
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in the Centre and State Departments of
Agriculture in States to share the research findings and facilitate the same to reach
farmers , Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) stated
as follows:—
"the ICAR discusses all agricultural related issues and technologies developed
including organic farming in Regional Committee meetings organized by the
council attended by both Central and State officials and SAUs. Besides, all
these aspects are discussed in DAC-ICAR interface meeting subsequently
with State officials during Rabi and Kharif conferences."
Need or otherwise of separate department for Organic Agriculture
2.16 With regard to the views of the Government on creation of a separate
Department for Organic Agriculture to give impetus to conversion to Organic agriculture,
the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) stated as
under:—
"In order to promote commercial organic farming in North-Eastern States,
Government has allocated special budgetary provision for DoNEAR with
intention that the Department will adequately focus on the development of
Sl.No. State University/Institute Location
{

23
organic farming in the region. Presently 14 States have formulated schemes/
policies to support organic farming in their states. Since the implementing
agencies are State Governments, there may not be any need for a separate
Department."
Involvement of  Panchayats to promote Organic farming
2.17 In written reply to a query as to whether any State Government(s) is/are
involving Panchayats for promoting Organic Agriculture, and if so, the details
incorporating inter-alia the impact of involvement of Panchayats on expansion of
organic agriculture, the incentives offered to Panchayats, if any, etc., the Ministry of
Agriculture submitted:—
"NCOF is organizing farmer's training and field demonstration programme in
total 593 villages during 2015-16 and 2016-17 in villages adopted by Members
of Parliament under Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY). The State Government
officials' /A TMA/ gram panchayats will also be involved in such programme."
2.18 While addressing the apprehension of the Committee about any possible
road blocks in the Government or in the ICAR or in the Ministry of Agriculture, which
may be hampering/preventing organic farming, Dr. T.C. Chaudhary, a retired agricultural
scientist deposed before the Committee as under:—
"Sir, lack of integration of the Government mechanisms, I consider, is one of the
flaws. Integration means, ICAR, KVKs, Agricultural Universities—everybody
is working on package development and formulation development of organic
produce. Linking them and translating those things in the name of transfer of
technology and through demonstration to the farmers are required. That area is
very much lagging. Individually, everybody is doing a very good job. They
have to be linked and translated with full responsibility and monitoring systems
at the grass root level. Otherwise, the farmers will not pick up and the message
will not go."
Capacity Building
2.19 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) in
their background note on the subject stated that for popularization of organic
agriculture, there is a need to establish separate departments under State Agricultural
Universities (SAUs) where diploma/degree courses on organic agriculture can be
conducted. For this purpose assistance as Grants —In Aid shall be provided to SAUs
against specific proposal from SAUs. It is proposed to establish 8 such departments in
various universities during 12th Plan period.
2.20 Asked about the action plan chalked out to set up separate Departments
under State Agriculture Universities to offer degree/ diploma course on organic farming,
the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) stated as
follows:—
"There is a Network Project on Organic Farming with 20 centres working on
organic agriculture in various agricultural universities/institutes. However, as

24
per Education Division of ICAR, presently, there is no specific proposal to set
up separate Departments under State Agricultural Universities to offer degree/
diploma course on organic farming."
2.21 In response to a query on the progress made on organic farming research
and its extension from lab to farmland/farmers in the country and the role played by
these research centres in this regard, the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) stated as follows:—
"Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) under Network Project
Programme on Organic Farming (NPOF) with the objective to develop package
of practices of different crops and cropping systems under organic farming in
different agro ecological regions of the country. Presently, the project is running
at 20 cooperation centres including SAUs. So far, package of practices for
18 crops/cropping systems have been developed and uploaded in website of
Project Directorate for farming Systems Research, Modipuram. Training and
FLDs are organized to educate farmers on various aspects of organic farming."
2.22 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
further added as under:—
"Presently, the project is running at 13 Cooperative centres including SAUs,
spread over 12 States. Organic farming packages of practices for 14 crops
namely basmati rice, rainfed wheat, maize, red gram, chickpea, soyabean,
groundnut, mustard, Isabgol, black pepper, ginger, tomato, cabbage and
cauliflower has been developed and uploads in Project Directorate for Cropping
Systems Research (PDCSR) website."
2.23 Regarding the collaboration with Research Centres abroad the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) stated that the collaboration
with research centres abroad is explored time to time under various work plans developed
with different countries.
2.24 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
detailed the following steps/efforts taken/being taken by NCOF and six RCOFs to
augment capacity building for organic farming:—
International Trainers' training/cooperation and liaison with international
bodies
This being an exclusively new field with practically little expertise in the country,
training of officers from DAC, NCOF, State agencies (involved with organic
agriculture implementation programme), certification agencies and scientists
from ICAR and SAUs (working for development of organic package of practices
since last 3 years) are required to be given an international exposure. This also
includes the need based visit of foreign experts to India and Indian executive
officers/technical experts to different countries to create awareness about Indian
organic produce, attend seminar/conferences, participate in exhibitions and
develop liaison with international bodies on organic agriculture. Visit by select
group of officers from DAC and NCOF to BioFach, Nuremberg and other such
events, can also be useful in learning international trends in organic agriculture.

25
Certificate Courses
Certificate Course on organic farming —To create first generation organic
agriculture extension workers and field workers in the field of organic farming
and to create a rural force of soil testing entrepreneurs through rapid soil testing
kits it is proposed to conduct one month certificate courses on organic
production practices, on farm input management, certification process (third
party and PGS both), documentation, post harvest processing, storage and
marketing. The course will be open for rural youth having Degree/Diploma in
Agriculture/Science with Biology, SAUs/Educational institutes can also sponsor
their undergraduate students for such courses.
Training/Refresher course on production and quality control of organic inputs —
To update the analytical skills, sample collection and handling requirements of
State Government officers/personnel from organic inputs production units on
quality analysis requirement as per FCO for biofertilizers and organic fertilizers
and to transfer appropriate production technology to personnels associated
with the production of organic and biological inputs, 10 days training/refresher
courses are proposed.
Trainers trainings —To create a cadre of organic agriculture trainers it is
proposed to organize five days customized trainers training courses for Fertilizer
inspectors, Senior level extension officers, KVK trainers, NGO trainers, PGS
Regional Council members and technical staff of production and quality control
units etc. on FCO, certification systems, PGS operational strategy, organic
management, production and quality control of organic inputs.
Training of Field Functionaries/Extension Officers on Organic Farming, PGS
India programme, soil health management and for input dealers on quality
control—As organic farming and sustainable soil health management practices
are primarily on-farm management practices, to disseminate appropriate
management protocols to field functionaries and extension officers, working in
both Government and NGO sector, two days training courses are proposed."
2.25 In response to a query as to whether any institution of Department of
Agricultural Research and Extension (DARE) or any Indian university/Institute
introduced a course on Organic Farming/ Agriculture as a part of efforts to provide
qualified manpower for Organic Agriculture in India, the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) stated as follows:—
"Yes, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi has a course on:
(i) Principles and Practices of Organic Farming (AG604) with 2+1 credit
hours at post graduate level.
(ii) Some of the State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) are also offering
courses on organic farming at post graduate level. In fact, three State
Agricultural Universities (SAUs) viz., CSKHPKVV , Palampur, UAS-
Dharwad and TNAU, Coimbatore are having separate departments for
carrying out research on organic farming and sustainable agriculture.

26
(iii) Indira Gandhi National Open University is offering a certificate course
on organic farming.
(iv) Amity Institute of Organic Agriculture (AIO) under Amity University,
Noida is offering MSc (Organic food production and certification) and
PhD (Organic Agriculture) degrees.
(v) National Centre for Organic Farming, Ghaziabad is conducting certificate
courses on organic agriculture on a regular basis.
APEDA has supported IGNOU for introducing a certificate course on organic
farming. This course has been implemented by IGNOU since 2009."
2.26.1 Appreciating the concern of the Committee about the current dearth of
extension services for spreading the organic farming, Dr. Mangala Rai, former Secretary,
DARE and Ex-DG, ICAR in a written note submitted as under:—
"Extension services are certainly poor. Many NGOs are also not better. Hence,
extension services in our country require a fresh look."
2.26.2 Referring to the stakeholders view that dearth of extension services is one
of the factors impeding the spread of the organic farming and accordingly suggestion
for enlarging the scope of work of the agricultural extension services by focussing on
organic agriculture through collaborative engagement with NGOs who are actively
working in the rural areas, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) were requested to furnish their views. They, accordingly, in a written
reply submitted as under:—
"Agricultural extension services play an important role in popularization of
organic agriculture and therefore, necessary arrangement for making visit of
successful organic farmers will motivate farmers. Further, the KVKs in the country
can document the successful organic growers' story and propagate through
outreach activities. Special focus will be given to extension activities to propagate
organic farming components under various missions."
2.26.3 Regarding the suggestion of the Committee to organize organic farmers
into producer collectives like Self Help Group for better planning and managing their
resources, value addition, marketing, etc., the witness stated as under:—
"Yes I agree. This would require a massive effort and support in technological
back stopping, skill development, input delivery system and output marketing
support."
Publicity and Awareness Campaign for Organic Farming
2.27.1 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation),
in a written reply to a query, stated that National Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF) at
Ghaziabad and six Regional Centres for Organic Farmings (RCOFs) organize various
programmes for awareness viz., literature distribution, arranging exhibitions, radio
talks in regional language, TV programmes and press releases.

27
2.27.2 The Ministry further explained the public campaign as under:—
"Awareness campaigns involving press, radio, television etc. should be made
for popularising the benefits of consuming organic foods. DD Kisan channel
can have dedicated time slots for organic growers.
A Media Plan aimed at spreading awareness about advantages of organic farming
among farmers across India with a focus on green revolution belt is proposed
as under:—
DURATION OF THE CAMPAIGN: ONE MONTH
Dissemination through media vehicle having extensive reach in area have to be
used for this purpose prominently like DD network, AIR network, FM channel,
Community Radio, C&S channel, Digital Cinema, SMS and regional and
vernacular print media.
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU (PIB)
It is proposed to mount a massive campaign through PIB network across the
country. PIB will release features in English, Hindi V ernacular press and press
releases may be issued time to time during the campaign period. In addition,
through Public Information Campaign (PIC) a focussed message will be spread
among the targeted audience about advantages of organic farming.
The publicity by PIB will be in complete coordination with the campaign to be
mounted through DA VP.
PRINT MEDIA
In the initial phase there needs to be given main thrust on the publicity through
regional vernacular press. Half page advertisement may be released on an interval
of 15 days.
ELECTRONIC MEDIA
It is proposed that the maximum of insertions (12) has to be pressed during
prime time and fewer insertions are required in the morning and day time. A total
of 12 insertions are to be pressed for DD National, DD Regional channels, DD
News, and C&S channels. In the C&S channels and DD National the best TRP
programme may be identified by DAVP and maximum insertions may be pressed
during the telecast of these popular programmes. Simultaneously, it is proposed
to press 12 to 15 insertions per day in radio FM and AIR channels. Here also the
channels can be identified on the basis of latest IRS survey. Now a days it is in
the fashion to listen FM by mobile services which is a very forceful and impactful
medium and the reach of the FM channel is almost in the radius of 50 KM and
almost covers all the villages of India.
DIGITAL CINEMA
Similarly it is proposed to utilize the network of digital cinema at State capital,
district centers, Tehsil and block levels. This medium is very forceful to be used
for the rural people.

28
VIDEO V ANS
It is also proposed to give publicity through interactive mobile display vans,
which will travel and have programmes from village to village educating the
farmers on advantages of organic farming. The programme may include display
of messages on the vans having interaction with farmers, running video and
documentaries/short films etc. Through this medium feedback may also be
gathered from the field, which may be utilized by the Government to improve
that programme. Side by side the services of DFP through its 207 field units
across the country, by way of publicity programme can be utilized.
EXHIBITION
The services of DA VP exhibition wing will also be utilized for spreading the
awareness messages through various exhibitions.
HOARDINGS
It is proposed to put up hoardings highlighting the essential message at Block/
Gram Panchayat level."
2.27.3 Responding to the concerns of the Committee as to how organic farming
can be popularized among the farmers, Dr. Vandana Shiva an expert submitted the
following:—
"As far as awareness is concerned, I am extremely disappointed that it is assumed
that training in organic will be a small activity left to a few NGOs and they have
even shut down the national centre on organic farming, which did not do
everything but it did a little bit. I would suggest that just as we have for every
item in the agriculture Budget we should have a table for everything that the
chemical farming needs, organic farming needs even more. University should
be having courses on this. Around the world there are courses, around the
world there are universities. They are dedicating training in organic farming.
We do not have single agricultural university that offers a degree.........  So,
basically we need to stop treating organic farming as an orphan and we need to
start treating it as an equal sioling. When it is given equal treatment, it will
actually outdo. Then we do not need this Rs. 7,000 crore subsidy which will go
up. It is only going up. In 1985, it used to Rs. 1,900 crore and in 2012, it was
Rs. 75,000 crore. So, it kept growing up. I think the country really needs to re-
think how much it is spending directly, but also how much it is spending
indirectly through the externalities, through the damage of our soil, our water or
air or climate and the health of our people."
2.27.4 Similarly, another agriculture expert (Dr. K.K. Tomar) appeared before the
Committee and made the following suggestions for promotion of organic farming in
the country:—
"Yes, sir, such programmes be made for radio or T.V . So that farmers from various
parts of the country could come and share their knowledge regarding organic
farming on T.V . or radio and could also extend the advantages of their knowledge

29
to the farmers all over the country through sharing the knowledge. The farmers
cultivating the organic farming be included in clusters and resources of irrigation,
cultivation, plantation be encouraged as a use of collective ownership. Clusters
of farmers cultivating the organic farming at village, block, panchayats and
district level be made in our co-operative system and the resources of cultivation,
plantation and irrigation be encouraged as a collective ownership. Farmers
drawing out water excessively from this ground through tube wells, hike be
made in their electricity bills because the water level is depleting rapidly and it
has gone almost 45-46 feet deep during the last fifty years. A library on organic
farming is to be set up in each block where all the related books, magazines,
periodicals, news papers, etc. should be made available so that farmers could
get the information by studying there. All the literature should be made available
free of cost. Organic farmer's groups should be constituted in the villages on
the lines of farmers' groups and women groups and the organic farming should
be popularized through these groups. There should be an arrangement to honour
the organic farmers. As you know that organic farmers think that their agricultural
produce get reduced during first and second year and how they will overcome
that loss, therefore, such farmers need to be honoured and encouraged so as to
popularize the organic farming and thus it will become a mass movement. For
this, Farmers' Field School should be established in each district where farmers
can attend the classes and there should be an arrangement for demonstration."
2.27.5 Referring to the significant move towards organic agriculture by many
countries in a big way, Shri Mangala Rai, former Secretary, DARE and DG ICAR,
submitted as under:—
"A mass Movement is essential for education, awareness generation, quality
organic input production and their storage, transportation and effective
application."
2.27.6 In response to a specific query as to the effectiveness of the extant
awareness programmes among farmers about the benefits of organic farming and the
ways to make it more effective , Dr. Mangala Rai submitted:—
"In the first place, rigorous training of trainers is essential. They must have a
system perspective with a system-wise approach. We need to understand that
neither crop, nor is cropping system or farming system but total production to
consumption system is essentially brought to bear."

CHAPTER III
ORGANIC FARMING—FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
Budgetary Allocations and Utilization under NPOF
The budgetary allocations, revised estimates and actual utilization under NPOF
during XI and XII Plan as provided by the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) are as under:—
XI Plan (Rs. in Lakh)
Financial Achievements under NPOF during 11th Five Year Plan Period
Sl.No. Head 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
B.E. R.E. Exp. B.E. R.E. Exp. B.E. R.E. Exp. B.E. R.E. Exp. B.E. R.E. Exp.
1. MH-2401
(i) Other than 274 339.9 302.23 300 405 344.56 500 521 431.84 514 620 468.15 660 605 495.57
Grants-in-Aid
(Admin.)
(ii) Grants-in-Aid 226 526 525.9 800 800 502.5625 685 609.3 21 171 130 0 120 60 8
(iii) GIA (Creation 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 150 150 120 60 0
of Capital Assests)
2401-789 Special
Component Plan
for SC (Minor Head)
(i) Other Administrative 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 20 6 0.81
Expenses
(ii) Grants-in-Aid 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 90 0 0
General
(iii) GIA (Creation 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 90 60 0
 of Capital Assests)
Total 500 865.9 828.13 1100 1205 847.12251185 1130.3 452.84 685 900 618.15 1100 791 504.38
2. MH-3601
Grant-in-Aid 1300 800 799.96 900 800 233.27 700 300 28.08 100 0 0 0 0 0
3. MH-3602
Grant-in-Aid 0 0 0 15 1 5 7.92 15 0 0 15 0 0 0 0 0
4. MH-2552
Grants-in-Aid to
N.E. States 600 470 468.95 600 600 136.86 600 491 0 300 300 0
(i) GIA-General 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 100 0 0
(Code No. 423)
(ii) GIA-General 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 100 0 0
(Code No. 796)
5. MH-4401
Capital Building 300 217.34 217.34 385 785 420.09 500 500 316.43 400 600 600 700 1000 950
Grand Total 2700 2353 2314 3000 3405 1645 3000 2421 797 1500 1800 1218 2000 1791 1454
.24 .38 .2625 .3 .35 .15 .38
XII Plan
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
B.E. R.E. Exp.* B.E. R.E. Exp.** B.E. Exp. B.E. B.E.
(as on (Proj- (Proj-
26.08.2014 ected) ected)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
MH-2401
(i) Admin. (Other than 770 610.00 590.19 1015.00 719.00 703.21 995.00 354.81 1200.00 1300.00
Grants-in-Aid)
30

31
(ii) Grants-in-Aid (General) 250.00 16.00 7.88 100.00 8.00 7.88 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
(iii) GIA (Creation of Capital 450.00 110.00 109.74 335.00 300.00 300.00 405.00 0.00 500.00 600.00
Assets)
Total 1470.00 736.00 707.81 1450.00 1027.00 1011.09 1400.00 354.81 1700.00 1900.00
MH-3601 Grants-in-Aid 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
MH-3602 Grants-in-Aid 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
MH-2552 Grants in-Aid to 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
UN—
N.E. States 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
(i) GIA-General (Code No. 423) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
(ii) GIA-General (Code No. 796) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
MH-4401 Capital (Building) 630.00 536.50 436.50 50.00 430.00 351.31 200.00 200.00 100.00 100.00
Grand Total 2100.00 1272.50 1144.31 1500.00 1457.00 1362.40 1600.00 554.81 1800.00 2000.00
*Shortfall in expenditure due to discontinuation of direct intervention scheme under GIA.
**Shortfall in expenditure due to CPWD, Bhubneshwar surrendered the amount under Capital Head.
Subsidies/Financial Assistance
3.2 Financial assistance for creation of infrastructure on account of subsidy/
financial assistance given under various missions for creation of infrastructure for
promoting organic farming as submitted by Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) is as under:—
Under Capital Investment subsidy scheme, (through NABARD) Government is
providing financial assistance for setting up of (Organic inputs) Fruit/Vegetable Market
Waste/Agro Waste Compost Units and Bio-fertilisers/Bio-pesticides units as back—
ended subsidy through NABARD to the tune of 33% restricted to Rs. 63.00 lakh for
setting up of Fruit/Vegetable Market Waste/AgroWaste Compost Units and 25%
restricted to 40.00 lakh for setting up of Bio-fertilisers production units/Bio-pesticides
production units.
Under National Horticulture Mission (NHM), subsidy is provided for adoption
of organic farming @ 50% of the maximum permissible cost limited to Rs. 10,000/ha. for
a maximum area of 4 ha. per beneficiary. The programme is linked with organic
certification. Subsidy under organic certification was project based, which is Rs. 5.00
lakh for a cluster of 50 ha. For setting up of vermi-compost units, assistance was
provided @ 50% of cost limited to Rs. 60,000/unit. For NE and Himalayan States, a
separate Horticulture Mission, namely, Horticulture Mission for NE and Himalayan
States (HMNEH) was in operation.
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) , a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme has been approved for implementation during XII Plan, w.e.f.
2014-15, for holistic growth of the horticulture sector covering fruits, vegetables, root
and tuber crops, mushrooms, spices, flowers, aromatic plants, coconut, cashew, cocoa
and bamboo. Under MIDH, for adopting organic farming for perennial and non-perennial
food crops, vegetables, aromatic plants, spices etc., assistance is given @ 50% of cost
limited to Rs. 10,000/- per hectare for a maximum area of 4 ha. per beneficiary, spread
over a period of 3 years. The programme is linked with organic certification. For organic
certification assistance is project based @ Rs. 5.00 lakh for a cluster of 50 ha. Assistance
for establishing vermi-compost units and HDPE Vermi beds is @ 50% cost subject to
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

32
the maximum of Rs. 50,000 per unit for a unit having a size of 30'X8'X2.5', for smaller
units assistance will be on prorata basis. For HDPE V ermi bed of 96 cft. size (12'X4'X2'),
the assistance is Rs. 8,000/- per bed.
3.3 The State-wise subsidy under Capital Investment Subsidy Scheme released
for Organic production units under National Project on Organic Farming (now subsumed
under NMSA) as furnished by Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) is as under:—
Sl. State Subsidy released (` in lakh)
No. 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
  1. Andhra Pradesh 8.907 10.000 23.252 20.000 20.000
  2. Arunachal Pradesh 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
  3. Assam 0.938 2.596 1.375 22.319 0.750
  4. Bihar 4.500 0.000 0.000 5.250 0.000
  5. Chhattisgarh 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
  6. Delhi 20.000 20.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
  7. Goa 4.630 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
  8. Gujarat 27.064 0.000 14.750 0.000 2.030
  9. Himachal Pradesh 0.083 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
10. Jammu & Kashmir 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
11. Jharkhand 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
12. Karnataka 12.184 6.183 73.309 0.000 0.000
13. Kerala 0.000 30.066 0.000 6.784 0.000
14. Madhya Pradesh 1.802 5.040 0.000 0.000 2.258
15. Maharashtra 17.144 38.458 13.750 43.084 23.005
16. Manipur 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
17. Meghalaya 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
18. Mizoram 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
19. Nagaland 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
20. Odisha 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
21. Punjab & Haryana 37.218 61.602 24.860 14.040 0.000
22. Rajasthan 11.392 55.610 30.450 21.335 0.000
23. Sikkim 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
24 Tamil Nadu 7.799 10.993 13.044 0.000 0.000
25 Tripura 0.000 0,000 0.000 20.000 0.000
26 Uttar Pradesh 77.126 9.750 25.687 3.300 0.000
27 Uttarakhand 9.810 8.945 8.750 0.000 0.000
28 West Bengal 7.469 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
Total 248.065 259.243 229.227 156.112 48.043

33
Financial Assistance to Farmers
3.4 Furnishing further details on the financial assistance given to farmers for
promotion of organic farming, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) submitted as under:—
/head2rightGovernment is providing financial assistance to farmers through State
Government for adoption of organic village for manure management
@ Rs. 10 lakhs/village for adoption of integrated manure management,
planting of fertilizer trees on bunds and promotion of legume intercropping
through groups/ SHGs, etc.
/head2rightUnder MIDH Government is providing financial assistance for adoption of
organic farming @ Rs. 10,000 (maximum) for 4 ha. (50% of total cost) while
Rs 300 per ha. upto 4 ha. (limited to 50% of cost) is provided for promotion of
use of liquid bio-fertilizers.
/head2rightPromotion of Organic Inputs on farmer's field (Manure, Vermi-compost, Bio-
Fertilizers Liquid / Solid, Waste compost, Herbal extracts, etc.)— 50 % of
cost subject to a limit of Rs. 5000/- per ha. and Rs. 10,000 per beneficiary.
Propose to cover 1 million ha. area.
Fund Flow Mechanism
3.5 The pattern of release of fund, i.e. fund flow mechanisms under various
missions NMSA, MIDA, NFSM by Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation) furnished as under:—
"(i) Fund flow mechanism in NMSA
Consequent to approval of AAP, funds will be released to State Nodal Department
or designated implementing agency notified by the State. State Level
Implementing Agency would ensure implementation in a time bound manner in
accordance with their approved AAP. Funds will be released in installments
based on physical & financial progress report, submission of utilization
certificates and other necessary documents as per provisions of General
Financial Rules, specific emergent need, etc.
(ii) Fund flow mechanisms in MIDH
Funds will be released to the State Governments. State Government will release
funds to the SHMs/State Level Implementing Agencies, who in turn would
make funds available to DMC/ District Implementing Agency. As far as possible,
efforts to make on-line payment to all Implementing Agencies would be ensured,
which in turn will make arrangements for making payment to beneficiaries
through electronic transfer, preferably to their respective bank accounts.
(iii) Mechanism of fund flow in NFSM
Funds for implementing the National Food Security Mission's programme will
be released to the State Governments with the approval of the NFSMEC. The
State Governments will release the funds to the State Level Agency. The State

34
Level Agency would make funds available to the District Level Agency in
accordance with approved programme of the district. Funds would be released
in instalments based on the progress reports and submission of utilization
certificate.
The funds for the implementation of the activities of the components will be
released by the State/District Level Agency to the nodal departments for the
procurement of the required inputs. The nodal departments will submit the
utilization certificate to the State/District Level Agency which, will be compiled
and a consolidated utilization certificate, duly authenticated by the DFSMEC
and SFSMEC will be submitted to the Ministry of Agriculture, Government of
India for further release of fund.
(iv) Mechanism of  Fund Flow in RKVY
50% of the RKVY annual allocation will be released as first instalment to have
State, upon the receipt of the minutes of State Level Selection Committee (SLSC)
approving implementation of new projects and/or continuation of ongoing
projects during current financial year along with lists of projects approved and
their entry in RKVY database (RDMIS).
In case total cost of approved project is less than annual outlay, funds to the
tune of 50% of approved project cost will be released.
Release of the second and final instalment would be considered on the fulfillment
of the following conditions:
(a) 100% Utilization Certificates (UCs) for the funds released upto previous
financial year Expenditure of at least 60% of funds released in
first installment during the current year.
(b) Submission of performances report in terms of physical and financial
achievements as well as outcome, on a quarterly basis, within the stipulated
time-frame in specified format."
3.6 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) in
a written note submitted on the financial assistance provided to State Governments
stated as follows:—
"Under Capital Investment subsidy scheme, Government is providing financial
assistance for setting up of Organic inputs Fruit/V egetable Market Waste/
Agro Waste Compost Units and Bio-fertilisers/Bio-pesticides units as back-
ended subsidy through NABARD to the tune of 33% restricted to Rs. 63.00
lakh for setting up of Fruit/Vegetable market Waste/Agro-Waste Compost Units
and 25% restricted to 40.00 lakh for setting up of Bio-fertilisers production
units/Bio-pesticides production units. State-wise details of total number of
Compost production units and Bio-fertilizer production units set up under NPOF
by NABARD and total production capacity generated (in MT) by these units
sanctioned during October 2004 till March 2014 is enclosed at Appendix- III.

35
Under RKVY the assistance approved for organic farming to the States during
previous five years is at Appendix - IV.
Under National Horticulture Mission (NHM), subsidy was provided for adoption
of organic farming @ 50% of the maximum permissible cost limited to Rs. 10,000/
hac. for a maximum area of 4 hac. per beneficiary. The programme is linked with
organic certification. Subsidy under organic certification was project based,
which is Rs. 5.00 lakh for a cluster of 50 hac. For setting up of vermi-compost
units, assistance was provided @ 50% of cost limited to Rs. 60,000/unit. Details
of State-wise financial assistance provided during each of the last four years is
given at Appendix - V .
For NE and Himalayan States, a separate Horticulture Mission, namely,
Horticulture Mission for NE and Himalayan States (HMNEH) was in operation.
Details of funds released for organic farming under HMNEH is at  Appendix -VI."
3.7 Highlighting the financial constraints of organic farming while appearing
before the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture submitted as under:—
"We are working on the constraints. Our Minister is extremely keen on organic
farming. This is a subject right up his heart. In fact, it is not only organic; it is
anything to do with the efficient use of resources including fertiliser resources
is not being looked at. We are continuing to subsidize urea. Today, the subsidy
on urea is to the extent of 75 per cent. We are continuing to subsidise urea. We
are not subsidising secondary nutrients or micro nutrients. We are not
subsidising soil carbon..........  We want either you have an income transfer
scheme to the farmers. I think the fertiliser subsidy regime has done the maximum
damage to Indian agriculture.....
vki ckfd;ksa ds fy, ,d yk[k djksM+ #i, ns jgs gSa] eq>s
vki 50 djksM+ ns jgs g®  for organic farming and then you are expecting me to
compete, it is not possible."
3.8 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and  Cooperation) in
a written reply to a query on the financial assistance available for creation of
infrastructure and availability of inputs, stated as under:—
"Setting up of Bio-fertilizer and Organic Fertilizer Testing/Quality Control
Laboratory (BOQCL) under FCO — For setting up of Bio-fertilizers/Organic
Fertilizers Testing/Quality Control Laboratories assistance as Grant-in-Aid shall
be provided to State Government.
Strengthening of existing Bio-fertilizer and Organic Fertilizer Testing/
Quality Control Laboratory (BOQCL) under FCO — For existing Bio-fertilizers/
Organic Fertilizers Testing/Quality Control Laboratories established by
State Government under FCO financial assistance @ Rs.45.00 lakh per unit shall
be provided as Grant-in-Aid for their strengthening in terms of equipments/
instruments etc. In all 8 such units are to be provided financial assistance
during 12th plan period with a total cost of Rs. 360.00 Lakh.
Support to PGS system for online data management and residue analysis —
Assistance shall be provided to State Government for assisting authorized

36
Regional Councils under PGS-India programme as Grant-in-aid for on data
management of group registered under each Regional Council and residue
analysis of soil from registered farmers under Local Group of Regional Council.
Organic Village adoption for manure management and biological nitrogen
harvesting — State Government shall be provided assistance as Grant-in-Aid
for adoption of organic villages against state specific project proposal for
adoption of organic village.
Support to research for development of organic package of practices specific
to state and cropping system — For development of organic package of practices
specific to cropping system and state-specific assistance as Grant-in-Aid to
eligible ICAR/SAUs/Other research institutions/State Government agencies
with research facilities shall be provided on specific proposal basis.
Setting up of separate Organic Agriculture Research and Teaching Department —
For proper popularization of organic agriculture, there is a need to establish
separate departments under State Agricultural Universities where diploma/degree
courses on organic agriculture can be conducted. For this purpose assistance
as Grant-in-Aid shall be provided to SAUs against specific proposal from SAUs.
It is proposed to establish 8 such department in various universities during
12th plan period.
Promotion of Organic Inputs on farmer's field (Manure, Vermi-compost,
Bio-Fertilizers Liquid/solid, Waste compost, Herbal extracts etc.) — For
promotion of organic inputs financial assistance @ 50 % of cost subject to a
limit of Rs. 5000/- per ha. and Rs. 10,000 per beneficiary will be provided.
1 million ha. area is proposed to be covered during 12th Plan period.
Adoption of organic farming through cluster approach under Participatory
Guarantee System (PGS) certification —For adoption of organic farming
through cluster approach under Participatory Guarantee System (PGS)
certification financial assistance of Rs. 20,000/- per ha. subject to maximum of
Rs. 40,000/- per beneficiary will be provided for 3 year term.
Field demonstrations-cum-field days — To demonstrate the organic farming
packages in PGS clusters/farmers' field, one practicing organic farmer shall be
selected for demonstration and field days shall be arranged. Entire organic
packages including multiple cropping, crop rotation, conversion, documentation
etc. shall be demonstrated."

CHAPTER IV
ORGANIC  FARMING—PHYSICAL  PERFORMANCE
Physical Performance during XI Plan as furnished by Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) is as under:—
Physical Targets and Achievements during 11th Five Year Plan Period (2007-08 to 2011-12)
Sl. Components 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11# 2011-12 T otal XI Plan
No. Targ. Achie. Targ. Achie. Targ. Achie. Targ. Achie. Targ. Achie. Targ. Achie.
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
A. Capacity 100 147 110 49 100 0 ---- 3 1 0 1 9 6
Building
through
Service
Providers
B. Organic Inputs Production Units
(i) Fruit/Veg. 10 11 11 1 10 0 - 2 - 3 31 17
Compost
unit
(ii) Bio-fertiliser 10 19 11 3 15 0 - 4 - 4 36 30
Production
Units
(iii) Vermi- 150 572 200 108 200 0 - 0 - - 550 680
culture
hatcheries
C. Training Programme
(i) Training 20 51 50 32 50 8 Component discontinued in 120 91
on Certi- favour of schemes like
fication RKVYand NHM
& Inspection
Agencies
(ii) Training on 90 61 70 53 70 8 Component discontinued in 230 122
Production favour of schemes like
& Quality RKVY and NHM
Control of
Organic
Inputs
(iii) Training of 70 171 76 147 76 22 Component discontinued in 222 340
Extension favour of schemes like
Staff/Field RKVY and NHM
Function-
aries
(iv) Training 150 2017 500 608 500 160 Component discontinued in 1150 2785
of Farmers favour of schemes like
on organic RKVY and NHM
Farming
(v) International 000100 ----- 1
Trainer
Training
Programme
37

38
(vi) Certificate ------ 101121
Courses on
Organic
Farming
(vii) Refresher ------ 8765 1 4 1 3
Course for
Analysts
(viii)Training ------ 2 9 2 9 4 2 3 9 7 1 7 1
for  Field
Functionaries
extension
Officer
(ix) Trainers ------ 2 1 2 1 3 1 3 0 5 2 5 2
Training of
Organic
Management
(x) Awareness ------ 3 3-- 3 3
Programme
(Workshops)
(xi) Workshop on -------- 5555
PGS
(xii) National -------- 1111
Seminar
D. Field Demonstrations
(i) Field 1000 1785 1100 779 1000 360 Component discontinued in 3100 2924
Demons- favour of schemes like
trations RKVYand NHM
On Org.
Inputs
(ii) Setting up 60 164 60 52 60 5 Component discontinued 180 221
of Model in favour of schemes like
Org. Farms RKVYand NHM
(iii) Field 70 169 70 108 70 0 Component discontinued 210 277
Demons-  in favour of schemes like
trations on RKVY and NHM
 enriched
Bio-gas slurry
E. Market Development and Promotion
Seminar 0 25 0 15 0 5 Component discontinued - 4 5
New Initiative 080000 i n  f a v o u r  o f  s c h e m e s  l i k e -8
International 030302 RKVY and NHM - 8
seminars/
exhibitions etc.
F. Biological Soil ------- Under Process
Health
Assessment
G. Publication of Newsletter
Biofertilizer 2222222222 1 0 1 0
Newsletter
Organic 4444444444 2 0 2 0
Farming
Newsletter
H. Capacity ------- Programme 20 Regional
Building for Launched councils
Participatory Appointed
Guarantee System (PGS)
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4

39
I. Publication ------ 4 7
of Literature
J. Quality Control
Bio-fertilizers 1907 1234 1927 1228 1601 7897
Organic 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 10000
Fertilizers 115 273 987 271 349* 1995
K. Maintenance of Strain and Supply
Total - 500 - 500 - 500 - 500 - 500 - 500
Strains
Maintained
No. of - 1024 - 865 - 954 - 1465 - 1188 - 5496
Slants Supplied
L. No. of ------- 3 8 5- 1 3 3- 5 1 8
Samples
Tested under
Study Project
*Including samples tested for study project.
# Mandates have been revised w.e.f. 2010-11.
4.2 Physical targets and Achievements during 2012-13, 2013-14 and projected
target for 12th Five Y ear Plan Period (2014-15 to 2016-17) as furnished by Ministry of
Agriculture Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
Sl. Component Quantifiable 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
No. scheme/ deliverables/physical Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target Target Target
programme outputs ment ment (Project- Project- (Project-
ed) ed) ed)
1 2               3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1. National Centre Fruit and Vegetable - 3 - 3
of Organic Market Waste
Farming, Compost unit
Ghaziabad. Bio-fertiliser Production Units - 4 - 4
Certificate Course on 2 2 3 3 3 3 3
Organic Farming
(30 days)
@ Rs. 2.345 lakh
Refreshers Course for 8 7 6 6 6 6 6
Analyst (10days)
@ Rs. 1.08 lakh
Trainers Training course 32 31 35 35 35 40 45
on Organic mgmt.
(5 days) @
Rs. 0.635 lakh
Training for Field 77 75 140 140 140 150 160
Functionaries/Ext. Off
@ Rs. 0.21 lakh (2 days)
National Seminar 2 2 - - - 2 3
Capacity Building - 20 RCs - PGS-India - - -
for Participatory appointed website
Guarantee System (PGS) / portal is
RCs appointed under
preparation
Publication of news letters
Bio-fertiliser News Letter 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Organic Fertiliser 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
News Letter
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
Under Capital Investment
Subsidy Scheme through
NABARD on requirement basis.

40
Quality Control
Bio-fertilizers 2000 1785 2000 1900 2000 2000 2000
Organic Fertilizers 291 503
Maintenance of strains and
supply
Total strains maintained - 408 - 408 - - -
No. of slants supplied - 625 - 1913 - - -
Area under Organic Farming
4.3 State-wise details of area (ha) under organic certification (including wild
harvest) in India for last five years are as under:—
States/UTs Net 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Area
sown
(000'
ha)
Andhra Pradesh 6686 44395.67 14350.72 47456.77 5909.13 12325.03
Arunachal Pradesh 213 1897.27 243 520.43 231.49 71.49
Assam 2811 6223.12 2047.33 2048.27 2299.21 2828.26
Andaman & Nicobar
Islands 15 0 334.68 0.00 321.28 321.28
Bihar 5259 1096.3 1303.62 188.60 9351.95 180.60
Chhattisgarh 4697 29084.97 8448.94 299970.60 1887.64 4113.25
Delhi ? 12734.36 265.82 100238.70 58.40 0.83
Goa 131 13175.72 13303.7 153684.60 8290.60 12853.94
Gujarat 10302 102488.4 48518.91 41978.94 45275.62 46863.89
Haryana 3518 21951.6 14763.61 17442.36 7532.62 3835.78
Himachal Pradesh 539 683697.85 631901.99 933798.20 3965.38 4686.05
Jammu & Kashmir 732 32687.11 776.48 26834.26 5121.14 10035.38
Jharkhand 1085 100 24300 29794.42 254.94 762.30
Karnataka 10523 121507.56 88728.64 118739.70 27191.27 30716.21
Kerala 2072 15372.62 6597.65 15790.49 10568.40 15020.23
Lakshadweep ? 0 12.13 891.93 350.68 895.91
Madhya Pradesh 15119 2829249 2866571.88 432129.50 144239.75 232887.36
Maharashtra 17406 35449.98 177345.48 245339.30 66504.92 85536.66
Manipur 348 10871.3 2792.03 1296.91 11.25 0.00
Meghalaya 284 2254.12 2419.67 288.23 1780.49 373.13
Mizoram 130 38674.62 12544.13 7023.97 1182.00 0.00
Nagaland 362 29715.28 1603.54 7762.60 2916.96 5168.16
Odisha 4682 92452.47 24417.55 43868.18 18186.40 49813.51
Puducherry ? 0.00 0.00 2.84
Punjab 4158 5264.23 6025.78 927.28 1601.47 1534.39
Rajasthan 18349 260827.88 217712.19 222319.10 38289.04 66020.35
Sikkim 77 7393.09 1726.34 25716.55 43107.74 60843.51
Tamil Nadu 4954 78442.9 34878.09 38554.33 3066.97 3640.07
Tripura 256 281.06 348.39 4.05 209.72 203.56
Uttar Pradesh 16593 26567.68 111644.83 2593821 32889.85 44670.10
Uttarakhand 723 33181.3 105465.98 122880.60 20563.75 24739.46
West Bengal 4991 14861.22 6125.72 19095.55 1279.41 2095.51
Total 141515 4551899 4427519 5550405 504439.47 723039.04
1 2               3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

41
Pointing out the increase of 150% in Andhra Pradesh and 200% in area under
organic farming within one year by States like Andhra Pradesh and Orissa, the Ministry
was requested to furnish as to how it could be possible that there was no specific reply
from the Ministry.

CHAPTER V
SOIL HEALTH AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS MANAGEMENT
Soil Health Management (SHM)
Soil Health Management (SHM) is one of the most important intervention under
NMSA aiming at promoting Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) through judicious
use of chemical fertilizers including secondary and micro nutrients in conjunction with
organic manures and bio-fertilizers for improving soil health and its productivity;
strengthening of soil and fertilizer testing facilities to provide soil test based
recommendations to farmers for improving soil fertility; ensuring quality control
requirements of fertilizers, bio-fertilizers and organic fertilizer under Fertilizer Control
Order , 1985; upgrading of skill and knowledge of soil testing laboratory staff, extension
staff and farmers through training and demonstrations; promoting organic farming
practices, etc.
5.2 The Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) & DG, ICAR appearing before the Committee on 20 January, 2015 on the
soil health stated as follows:—
"Over the years, soil health has deteriorated ...another problem is soil erosion.
What is happening, soil gets accumulated and formed. It is not simply sediments
just coming in or soil particles coming in ...We also have noticed across the
country that erosion is to the level of 5 tonnes to 30 tonnes per hectare per year.
It is unbelievable and shocking. Soil gets eroded. There is wind erosion, water
erosion or whatever it is. It goes up to 30 tonnes. This is a cause for reduced soil
health in many cases because even before the soil gets formed, it gets eroded..."
5.3 In view of above, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) were requested to furnish the corrective steps/measures taken or
proposed to be taken to ensure and maintain soil health, they in a written reply
stated as follows:—
"Land Degradation is one of the major issues of rainfed/dryland region of the
country. The Council through Central Soil and Water Conservation Research
and Training Institute, Dehradun and Central Arid Zone Research Institute,
Jodhpur conducts research on issues related to water & wind erosion
respectively. The Institutes suggested several location specific bio-engineering
measures of soil and water conservation to tackle soil erosion in the country.
The problems of salt affected and water logged soils are being addressed by
Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal through All India Coordinated
Research Project on Salt Affected Soils. The Institute has developed cost
effective reclamation measures and salt tolerant varieties in this regard. These
Institutes organize training for popularizing various control measures.
42

43
These measures coupled with site specific balanced & integrated nutrient
management and Resource Conservation Technologies (RCTs) are advocated
to improve soil health and crop productivity in the country.”
5.4 Furnishing a note on integrated management of nutrients including primary,
secondary and micro nutrients along with their possible replenishment mechanism, the
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) submitted that:—
"ICAR through Indian Institute of Soil Science and AICRPs on Soil Test Crop
Response (STCR), Micro and Secondary Nutrients and Pollutant Elements
(MSNP) in Soils and Plants, Long Term Fertilizer Experiments (LTFE) and Network
Project on Soil Biodiversity—Biofertilizers are addressing soil health and fertility
related problems in the country. The Council is advocating soil test based
balanced and Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) through conjunctive use
of both inorganic and organic sources of plant nutrients to sustain physical,
chemical and biological health of soils for higher crop productivity. The Council
organizes training & FLDs etc. to educate farmers in this regard. The Government
under the component of soil health management of National Mission for
Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) is promoting INM encompassing judicious
use of chemical fertilizers in conjunction with organic manures, compost,
biofertilizers etc. in the country. Recently, a National Mission on Soil Health
Card has been launched to provide soil tested based fertilizer recommendation
to all the farmers in the country."
Soil Health Cards
5.5 Furnishing detailed note on soil health cards covering inter-alia the objectives,
features, contents, number of such cards issued to the farmers (State-wise), year- wise
during the last five years and the target fixed for 2015-16 , the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) in a written reply stated that Central
Government provides assistance to State Governments for setting up Soil Testing
Laboratories (STLs) and Mobile Soil Testing Laboratories (MSTLs) through National
Mission for Sustainable Agriculture. In order to promote soil test based application of
fertilizers in respect of all the 14 crore holdings in country and to implement uniform
norms in sampling and testing of soil, a new scheme 'Soil Health Card' is launched in
2014-15. Under this scheme, Soil Health Cards will be issued periodically to farmers
across the country once in every three years.
The details of the scheme as submitted by the Ministry of Agriculture (Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation) are as follows:—
(a) Objectives of the scheme are as follows:
• To issue soil health cards every three years, to all farmers of the country,
so as to provide a basis to address nutrient deficiencies in fertilization
practices.
• To strengthen functioning of Soil Testing Laboratories (STLs) through
capacity building, involvement of agriculture students and effective
linkage with Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)/ State
Agriculture Universities (SAUs).

44
• To diagnose soil fertility related constraints with standardized
procedures for sampling uniformly across States and analysis and
design taluka/ block level fertilizer recommendations in targeted
districts.
• To develop and promote soil test based nutrient management in the
districts for enhancing nutrient use efficiency.
• To build capacities of district and State level staff and of progressive
farmers for promotion of nutrient management practices.
(b) Implementation plan for the scheme:
(i) Selection of Districts
To issue Soil Health Cards (SHCs) to all 14 crore holdings in the country,
about 2.48 lakh samples are to be analysed in 3 years cycle. This comes
to about 83 lakh samples per year. The number of samples per district
comes to approximate 13,000 samples per annum.
The State Governments will prepare yearly action plan indicating
(i) number of districts to be covered, (ii) number of irrigated holdings
and rainfed holdings in the selected districts, (iii) number of soil samples
to be drawn from the holdings and (iv) finally total number of samples
to be drawn and tested.
(ii) Agencies that may be involved for drawing samples from field
(a) Directly through Agriculture Department staff and soil test
laboratories.
(b) By involving Science Colleges and students and its soil test
laboratory staff.
(c) By State Agriculture Universities (SAUs) and its soil testing staff.
(iii)  Agencies that may be involved in testing
(a) By outsourcing the process of testing & reporting to private
agencies through tender.
(b) By outsourcing soil testing laboratories.
(c) By nominating Science Colleges and providing them equipment
to test the samples.
(d) Directly through soil testing laboratories.
(iv) Norms of soil sampling
The quality of soil testing and fertilizer recommendation depends upon
soil sampling. Following uniform norms are prescribed for sampling.
(i) In the irrigated areas, samples will be drawn in a grid of 2.5 ha.
(ii) In rainfed areas, sampling will be done in a 10 ha. grid.
( iii) In all, 248 lakh samples will be tested to generate 14 crore soil
health cards in three years period.

45
(v) Training for soil analysis
One-week hands-on orientation training to soil chemists, students/
JRFs for soil analysis and fertilizer recommendations in the batches of
20 participants will be organized by State Governments.
(vi) Soil Health Card
Soil health card is a report of soil fertility status and provides an advisory
on soil test based use of fertilizers and amendments.
(vii)  Details in a Soil Health Card
(i) Values on soil parameters such as pH, EC, N, P, K, S, Zn, B, Fe, Mn
& Cu.
(ii) Recommendation on appropriate dosage of fertilizer application
based on test values and requirement of Kharif, Rabi and Summer
crops.
(viii) Financial assistance for package of nutrient recommendations
In the target villages, financial assistance for soil test based nutrient
balancing will be provided to farmers. Willing farmers will be registered
for application of recommended doses to supplement organic and
inorganic nutrients.
(ix) Capacity building
States will be provided assistance for maintenance of Data Base and
promotion of ICT tools to map the soil fertility status from time to time.
Uniform software will be developed by NIC to input management
practices, soil test values and nutrient recommendations. Soil Health
Card will be generated from this data base.
(x) Budget
Implementation of this scheme will have direct benefits in terms of
avoiding indiscriminate use of fertilizers, improving soil health and
thus increasing fertilizer use efficiency. The total budget approved is
Rs. 568.54 crore during 12th Plan period.
(c)  Number of Cards issued to farmers:
Soil Health Card Scheme is being implemented for the first time. Earlier the States
were issuing soil health card and year-wise number of soil health cards issued during
last five years is at Appendix - VII, as reported by States.
(d) Target and Budget Estimate (BE) fixed for 2015-16:
Tentative target for number of soil samples to be analyzed in 2015-16 is Rs.81
lakhs. The BE 2015-16 for Soil Health Management is Rs. 200 crores (including the soil
health card component)."

46
Soil Erosion —Suitable Incentives
5.6 In written reply to a query on the stakeholder's suggestion that soil fertility
should be recognized as national property and Government should invest in building
it and suitable incentives should be given to encourage for increasing the soil organic
matter and soil conservation, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation ) stated as follows:—
"Soil erosion removes fertile top soils with loss of precious organic matter/
carbon and vital plant nutrients. Therefore, soil and water conservation measures
and use of organic manures/compost are essential not only to conserve soil
organic carbon and facilitate nutrient supply but also to check deterioration of
soil physical & biological health for improving crop productivity."
Deterioration of Soil Health and Nutrients
5.7 Dr. Mangala Rai, former Secretary, DARE and DG, ICAR who interacted with
the Committee in a note submitted highlighting the deteriorating soil health and nutrient
imbalances adversely affecting productivity and product quality stated as under:—
"A healthy soil ensures proper retention and release of water and nutrients,
promote and sustain root growth, maintain soil biotic habitat, and resist soil
degradation. Thus managing soil health is basic to agriculture to ensure enhanced
agricultural productivity, profitability and food, nutrition and environment
security. Quality soils also ensures storing and cycling nutrients and filtering &
buffering organic and inorganic compounds for providing potable groundwater.
Therefore, its management must be the core component of our strategy for
sustenance of ever-increasing population and development pressure. As
population expands and urbanization spreads, less soil and area per capita
would be available for cultivation. This happens in two ways: (a) removal of top
soil for brick making and for other construction activities, and (b) sealing of soil
for housing, road or other infrastructure. About 7 % of the geographical area,
for which land-use statistics is available, is used for non-agricultural purposes,
this area is estimated to be increasing at the rate of 0.3 million ha/year.
Degradation of soil health is increasing due to long-term imbalanced use of
fertilizers. The numbers of nutrient-elements deficient in Indian soils increases
from just one (nitrogen) in 1950 to nine in the year 2005-06 which is further
increasing by each year. Soil fertility studies bring out that available N, P and K
are low to medium respectively in 90%, 80 % and 50% of the Indian soils. About
half of the arable soils are deficient in available zinc. The extent of deficiency of
available iron, manganese and copper in Indian soils is 12%, 5% and 3%,
respectively. Continuous use of sulphur free fertilizers has increased the wide
spread occurrence of S deficiency in 41% soils. Boron deficiency is wide spread
in acid and calcareous soils. Although overall nutrient use (N: P2O5:K2O) of
4:2:1 is considered ideal for Indian soils, the present used ratio of 6.8:2.8:1 is far
off the mark. In State like Punjab it is 39:9:1. Thus the factor productivity of
fertilizers showed a declining trend from 48 kg foodgrains/kg NPK fertilizer in
1970-71 to 10kg foodgrains/kg NPK fertilizer in 2007-08 in the country.

47
Maintenance of soil biodiversity is essential for food production, nutrient
cycling, regulation of water flow, soil and sediment movement, detoxification of
xenobiotics and other pollutants etc. Erosion, salinization, land sealing and
pesticides and heavy metal contamination threaten soil biodiversity by
destroying the habitat of the soil biota. Management practices that reduce
organic matter in soils, or bypass biologically-mediated nutrient cycling also
adversely affect soil health."
5.8 Dr. Mangala Rai further added as under:—
"The NPK fertilizer consumption was 26.5 million tonnes in 2009-10. It was
estimated to be 34.9 million tonnes during 2013 and expected to be 36.6
million tonnes during 2017. There exists a negative balance of about 10
million tonnes in nutrient (NPK) removal by crops annually. The deficit does
not take into account the nutrient use efficiency of the externally added
fertilizer nutrients. Also inappropriate fertilizer application methods and
schedules often result in loss of nutrients through leaching, volatilization
and gaseous emissions. Current status of nutrient use efficiency is quite low
in case of P (10-20%), N (30-50%), Zn (2-5%), Fe and Cu (1-2%). The use
efficiency in case of micronutrients is extremely low (1 to 5%). Therefore,
research for improving the use efficiency of these nutrients must receive top
priority.
About 48.5 per cent of Indian soils are deficient in micronutrient zinc (Zn) (it
is expected to aggravate to 65 per cent by 2025), 33 per cent are deficient in
boron (B) and 12 per cent are deficient in iron (Fe). Zn deficiency is reported
to be the highest (40-86 per cent) in Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu,
followed by Assam and West Bengal (30-40 per cent). Further, most boron
(B) deficient soils (32-65per cent) are in Bihar, West Bengal and Karnataka.
Of all the micronutrients, Zn is most widely deficient in Indian soils and crop
response to Zn has been reported for almost all crops.
About 121 million ha (36 per cent of total geographical area) lands are at
various stages of degradation in the country. About 25 M ha of soils are
acidic and therefore deficient in calcium and magnesium and often possess
toxic levels of aluminium and iron. In addition, 6.7 M ha salt affected soils
still exist. Insufficient nutrient replacement especially in intensively cultivated
soils of north-west IG plains is leading to chemical soil degradation
(24.7 M ha). Large areas in peninsular India have vertisols which have poor
drainage and workability problems. Besides this, arable soils also suffer
from nutrient mining and pollution problems. All these soils are in need of
some soil and water conservation /reclamation measures for their
rehabilitation/resilience.
The deficiency of secondary and micronutrients can thus be overcome by
more and more use of organics and for fortification of the presently
manufactured N/P fertilizers to develop value-added/fortified fertilizers.

48
The fertilizers approved by the Government of  India (The Fertilizer Control
Order of 1985 amended up to January, 2011) are Boronated single
superphosphate, Zincated urea, Zincated phosphate (suspension), NPK
fertilizer fortified with B, DAP fortified with B, NPK fertilizer with Zn, and
Calcium nitrate with B. In an era of multiple nutrient deficiencies, single
nutrient approach can lower fertilizer use efficiency. Balanced nutrition implies
that there are no deficiencies, no excesses, no antagonism and no negative
interaction. All nutrients must be at an optimum by themselves and in relation
to each other enabling positive interactions to enhance agricultural
productivity. The process of approving, pricing and incorporation in Fertilizer
Control Order by Government of India for V alue Added Fertilizers needs to
be accelerated."
Policy Framework for Promotion of Integrated Nutrient Management
5.9 With regard to new initiatives taken to promote balance use of nutrients,
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) stated as under:—
"For promotion of Integrated Nutrient Management, DAC is focusing on
balance use of fertilizers both organic and inorganic nutrients, in accordance
with results of Long Term Fertilizer Experiments. Schemes of assistance are
under implementation in DAC to promote the production of organic and bio
inputs through State Governments, private entrepreneurs and on- farm
production by farmers. Alongside certified organic farming is encouraged
and assisted through NMSA and NPOP. Several States have formulated
policies to support certified organic farming. Thus the present policy
advocates balanced use of nutrients for food production and provides
assistance for organic and inorganic input availability. It promotes both
Conventional Farming and Organic Farming through its scheme and research
programmes to disseminate benefits and issues that may arise in Conventional
Farming and Organic Farming.
Present policy of subsidy on fertilisers is focused towards making available
chemical fertilisers to farmers on highly subsidized prices. This has led to
inclination of farmers towards more and more use of chemical fertilisers.
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has been promoting balanced
use of organic and inorganic fertilisers for Soil Health Management.
There is a lot of debate and discussion on the need to focus on both inorganic
and organic fertilisers equally. There is a need to move towards direct cash
transfer to farmers on unit area basis so that farmers are free to choose
between chemical fertilisers and organic fertilisers."
Pest Management
5.10 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture,
Government of India had launched a Scheme "Strengthening and Modernization of
Pest Management Approach in India" since 1991-92 for promoting Integrated Pest
Management (IPM) as cardinal principle and main plank of plant protection strategy in
overall crop production and protection programme. Under the ambit of IPM programme,

49
the Government of India has established 31 Central IPM Centres in 28 States and one
UT. The following activities are carried out under the scheme:—
/head2right"Popularization of IPM approach among farming community.
/head2rightConducting regular pest surveillance and monitoring to assess pest/disease
situation.
/head2rightRearing biological control agents for their use in the fields against enemy
pests.
/head2rightConservation of naturally occurring bio-control agents.
/head2rightPromotion of Bio-pesticides and neem based pesticides as alternative to
chemical pesticides.
/head2rightTo play a catalytic role in spread of innovative IPM skills to extension workers
and farmers equally to resource-poor and resource-rich States. Human
Resource Development in IPM by imparting training to master trainers,
extension workers and farmers through Farmers Field Schools (FFSs).
/head2rightOrganization of Farmers Field Schools (FFSs) through Krishi Vigyan Kendras/
State Agriculture Universities/ICAR institutes to develop the sufficient human
resource.
/head2rightUnder the Human Resource Development programme, organization of short
duration courses of two days and five days for pesticides dealers/NGOs/
Graduates/Post-graduates/Pvt. Entrepreneurs and progressive farmers.
/head2rightOrganization of Season Long Training (SLT) programmes on major
agricultural/horticultural crops for extension workers of the States
Governments."
Outcome of Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
5.11 Since inception of the Scheme; "Strengthening and Modernization of Pest
Management Approach in India during 1991-92 to 2014-15 (up to February, 2015)
various activities have conducted as submitted by Ministry of Agriculture (Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation) as follows:
/head2right"Farmers Field Schools (FFSs): 15,869.
/head2rightNumber of farmers trained: 4,77,068.
/head2rightNumber of Agriculture/Horticulture officers trained: 58,620.
/head2rightArea covered under Pest Monitoring: 255.42 lakh hectares.
/head2rightBio-control agents release in the fields for control of pests & diseases:
49,112.58 million.
/head2rightSeason Long Training Programmes conducted on different crops: 63 and
trained 2311 master trainers.

50
/head2rightSince 2005-06 conducted 784 two days and 80 five days Human Resource
Development Programmes. Trained 27,170 farmers in two days training
programme and in five days training programmes 2960 Agriculture Extension
Officers/Pesticides Dealers/NGOs/Progressive Farmers were trained and
sensitized about good agricultural practices and judicious use of chemical
pesticides.
/head2rightPackage of Practices in 77 numbers were developed on major crops for
management of pests & diseases."
5.12 On the impact of IPM programmes, the Ministry furnished information as
contained in the table below:—
Crop Cost Benefit No. of application Y ield Increase
Ratio of pesticides (in qtls/ha) in yield
IPM Non-IPM IPM Non-IPM IPM Non-IPM (%)
Cotton 1:2.7 1:2.0 3-5 13-16 3.21 3.0 7.0
Rice 1:2.2 1:1.8 0-1 5-6 22.0 21.0 7.0
Soybean 1:2.5 1:1.8 1-2 3-5 12.6 12.0 5.0
Gram 1:3.1 1:2.4 0-1 2-3 8.6 12.0 5.0
Wheat 1:1.9 1:1.6 0-2 2-3 27.8 26.2 6.0
Potato 1:2.3 1:2.1 1-2 3-5 199.8 185.0 8
Sugarcane 1:2.3 1:1.8 2-3 6-7 795.0 750.0 6
Need for Patenting of Microbiological Processes and Micro Organisms
5.13 In response to an apprehension of the Committee about the possible adverse
impact of patent regime as prescribed by WTO for living organisms, the former Secretary
and DG, ICAR submitted as under:—
"Mr. Chairman, Sir, excuse me, it seems to me that this question is more important
than one. There was no provision in Indian Patent Act, 1970. The Indian
Patent Act was amended during year 2000 and subsequently amended once
again also under the provision of WTA 1995. Microbiological processes and
micro organisms were patentable subjects. Fortunately or unfortunately, the
first patent of micro organism was also got conducted by Shri Anand
Chakravarti, an Indian and it was done in America. If anybody asks me that if
you patent micro organism, what is new in it, what is the inventive step. To
the best of my understanding, it should not be but there is something else in
the provision. In case of molecules, there is money in it in today's world be it
ayurveda or medicinal aromatic plants or pesticides. We either have no
molecules or we have a scarcity thereof. There is a need to invest in it and
there is a need to have molecules patent by research, only then, our medicinal
plants aromatics and pesticides will have the value otherwise we will not get
money as we can get."

CHAPTER  VI
TRADE AND CERTIFICATION RELATED ISSUES
Market for Organic Produce
Organic produce is increasingly preferred by developed countries and major
urban centres in India. The global trade is currently USD 60 billion (Rs. 3,60,000 crore)
and may touch USD 100 billion (Rs. 6,00,000 crore).Trade in India may reach Rs. 5000-
6000 crore, which is about 1% of the global trade. The Indian trade value of organic
commodities during the years 2008-09 to 2012-13 is as under:—
(In crores)
Kind of Trade 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
Food Export Growth 300 350 500 600 840
Growth % w.r.t. (16.6%) (42.8%) (20%) (40%)
previous year
Domestic Market Growth 75 100 150 300 600
Growth % w.r.t. (33.3%) (50%) (100%) (100%)
previous year
Textile Export Growth 0 0 0 525 1025
Growth % w.r.t. (95.23%)
previous year
6.2 Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority
(APEDA) with a mandate for promotion of exports of agriculture products under the
Ministry of Commerce provides financial assistance under Agriculture Export Promotion
Plan Schemes for Infrastructure, Quality and market development. These schemes are
applicable for organic products also.
6.3 Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority
(APEDA) under the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Government of India participates
in International trade fairs to provide a platform to their exporters including organic to
show case their products and explore new opportunities in the global market.
6.4 In reply to a query raised by the Committee regarding market assessibility
constraints for organic produce, an expert appeared before the Committee submitted
as under:—
“What I would suggest is the role of Government in ensuring that for
Government-run food security schemes, they start moving towards organic
with a clear transition plan. After all, for our mid-day meal schemes, women
cook locally. We could create organic zones of, say a hundred farmers in this
area will be able to supply organic. I call these food sheds. So, our mid-day meal
51

52
schemes and our Public Distribution System should start making a transition to
organic. Of course, it is not going to happen overnight. But they should begin
with saying in the first year ten per cent, in the next year twenty per cent, etc.
This has happened in countries where organic became bigger. Hospitals and
schools the first shift in marketing because the Government procurement is the
biggest chunk of bulk support...  As far as the market and distribution is
concerned, not only should villages have their own Haats with the facility, I
think most towns should have farmers' markets across the world again. It is
when spaces were given for farmers markets, farmers could come and sell organic
products. In farmers markets the costs are not higher. The costs are higher only
when you have to package, label, etc. But when you come with your fresh
vegetables, and the other side comes with their little bags, you can totally
compete with the prices of food."
6.5 Referring to the suggestion received from stakeholders, the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) were requested to furnish as
to enhance domestic organic agriculture market whether Government are initiating
steps towards promotion of organic food processing industries by providing subsidies,
the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and cooperation) in a written
reply stated as follows:—
“The demand for organic produce is in following products internationally viz.
soyameal, sugar, tea, pulses, lentil, dryfruits, medicinal herbs and basmati rice.
Since many of these are processed food products, it requires promotion of
processing industries.”
Export Growth Potential
6.6 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
citing the huge potential for growth in food export submitted that as per estimates,
Indian Organic Sector, though very nascent, is growing rapidly both in the domestic
and international markets. Rain fed agriculture which constitutes about 55% of net
shown area could be targeted for expansion of organic farming as the fertilizer use per
hectare in these areas is low compared to the national average. Agriculture in North-
East Region and Himalayan States is also by and large natural. High value crops are
most suitable for organic farming. The existing programmes for promotion of organic
farming can be upscaled in the following areas:—
(i) States of North-East Region, Jharkhand, Uttaranchal and Rajasthan are
mostly under mono crop and can be focused for conversion to organic
farming.
(ii) S tates of Odisha, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat and parts of Maharashtra and Karnataka have large
areas under rain fed farming. They can be targeted for conversion to
organic farming.
Organic Standards
6.7 With regard to the steps taken by the Government to introduce organic
standards to cover animal husbandary, food processing, labelling, storage etc.,

53
The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) in a written
note stated as under:—
"The NPOP standard was notified in 2001 for exports of organic products
covering standards only for crops and their processing, labelling, storage and
transport. Since, there is a good demand of organic livestock and aquaculture
products, standards for these products have been introduced in the seventh
edition of NPOP in November 2014.
Apart from above, as has been stated by the Ministry of Agriculture (DAC), the
Bureau of Indian Standard is in the process of formulating two voluntary
standards on the subject:
(a)  Organically produced food products, Part 1—Crop Based.
(b) Organically produced food products, Part 2—Animal Based.
The scopes of these standards are as under:
(a) For Part 1: "The standard covers the requirements for organic food products
that are crop based, through the process of crop production up to packaging
and transport of the final product."
(b) For Part 2: "The standard covers the requirements for organic food products
that are livestock based, through the process of livestock rearing up to
packaging and transport of the final product."
As per the version of the Ministry, the documents have completed the wide
circulation stage and the comments received on the documents have been
discussed and resolved in the last meeting of the panel of experts responsible
for formulating these standards. These documents will now be placed before
the "Agricultural Systems and Management Sectional Committee (FAD 22)" of
Food and Agricultural Division Council of BIS for approval. The meeting of this
Committee is being planned. Once approved by this Committee these documents
will be published and notified as voluntary Indian Standards."
Testing and Certification for Organic Produce
6.8 Apprising the Committee of two way as of accreditation and certifying
mechanism for organic produce, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation) in a written note submitted as under:—
“Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) is a quality assurance initiative that is
locally relevant, emphasize the participation of stakeholders, including producers
and consumers and operate outside the frame of third party certification. As per
International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM) definition”
Participatory Guarantee Systems are locally focused quality assurance systems.
PGS is a process in which people in similar situations (in case small holder
producers) assess, inspect and verify the production practices of each other
and collectively declare the entire holding of the group as organic. It is based
on participatory approach, a shared vision, transparency and trust.

54
Participatory Guarantee System (PGS-India) was developed for domestic trade.
They certify producers based on active participation of stakeholders and are
built on a foundation of trust, social networks and knowledge exchange. In this
system people in similar situation assess, inspect, and verify the production
practices of each other and declare the entire holding of group as organic. PGS
has number of basic elements which embrace a participatory approach, shared
vision, transparency and trust. Participation is an essential and dynamic part of
PGS. Key stakeholders are engaged in initial design and then in operation of
PGS, where they are involved in decision making and mechanics of PGS,
stakeholders particularly the producers are engaged in a structured ongoing
learning process. This process is facilitated by PGS group itself or in some
situations a supportive Government or Non-Government institution. The term
PGS embodies the active participation of producers and other stakeholders in
their organic guarantee process.
The PGS-India has some additional features which includes: (a) integrated with
well knit institutional network, (b) entire database is available online to
consumers for transparency, (c) random residue testing strengthens trust and
ensures consistent quality assurance, (d) gives certificate to in-conversion
crops also, and (d) provides a common platform to all groups across the country
to share their experiences for better implementation. The Government support
in bearing the cost of institutional networking, surveillance and monitoring,
data management and random residue testing not only makes it a low cost
intervention but also with the trust of Government system. The Ministry of
Agriculture, Government of India, National Centre of Organic Farming and FAO
have undertaken a technical cooperation programme for promotion of organic
agriculture."
6.9 Adding further, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) stated as under:—
"For PGS-India, NCOF acts as a secretariat and its RCOF as Zonal Councils. To
promote PGS-India system initially twenty regional councils at different States
of India were started. These 20 RCs comes under jurisdiction of different Zonal
Councils. Among the 20 RCs, the highest number (11) of RCs were present
under zonal council /RCOF, Bangalore followed by RCOF, Nagpur (5) and NCOF,
Ghaziabad (2). The highest numbers of 7 RCs are present in the State of Karnataka
followed by Maharashtra (5) and Tamil Nadu (3). Presently four hundred and
eight (408) numbers of groups, 5809 numbers of farmers covered with an area of
6064.14 ha. and production capacity of 23612.42 tonnes are covered under
twenty different RCs. There are 21 new proposals are under consideration for
RCs. A web portal on PGS is under development by National Informatics Centre
(N IC).
To provide a focused and well directed development of organic agriculture and
quality product National Programme on Organic Production (NPOP) was

55
launched under Foreign Trade Development  and Regulations Act (FTDR).
Regulatory body of NPOP under FTDR act is Agricultural and Processed Foods
Export Development Authority (APEDA) under Ministry of Commerce. For
quality assurance, the country has internationally acclaimed certification process
for organic produce in place for export, import and domestic markets. It is
referred as Third Party Certification involving an independent agency for
verification and certification of organic production processes."
6.10 With regard to the finanacial assistance made available to PGS, in a note
submitted, M/o Agriculture (Department of Agiculture and Cooperation) stated as
follows:—
"The main characteristic feature of this scheme is that the organic products
would be certified by farmers' groups themselves. Thus there will be no
expenditure liability on the farmers for certification. In addition, every farmer
will be given Rs. 20,000 per acre upto three years for adoption of organic farming.
In order to implement the Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana in the year 2015-16,
an amount of Rs. 300 crore has been allocated as a CSS with 50:50 share between
Government of India and State Governments."
6.11 On the need for certification, the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) added as under:—
"Organic certification is essentially a requirement for our products that are
exported as organic. So far as organic certification for domestic consumption is
concerned, we have a participatory scheme which allows for the community to
selfcertify because at the end of the day it is a question of credibility. I would
say, without taking any name, that the most famous supposedly organic product,
which is available in Delhi — I will not name the commercial establishments —
is not organic. It is the fastest selling product which people think is organic. So,
it is the credibility of the product that matters. The Certification is for Export
because it is the Credibility of the Certifiers."
6.12 Responding to a query as to why organic certification for exports is under
another Government entity i.e. Agricultural and Processed Foods Export Development
Authority (APEDA) under Ministry of Commerce when the PGS system and other
organic farming promoting schemes/programmes are under the Ministry of Agriculture,
Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture (DA&C) appearing before the Committee on
20 January, 2015 submitted as under:—
"Now, the role of the Department of Commerce or rather of APEDA is limited to
supporting organic production and organic certification for exports. That is
where now it is limited but it had started off with them. We are conceding the
point it should have started with us but it started off with them."
6.13 The infrastructure support regarding promotion of organic farming
certification, production units for organic inputs, storage, transportation and processing
are available under Mission for Integrated Horticulture Development (MIDH). The
assistance is available for all farmers/ stakeholders including those who are practicing
organic farming.

56
6.14 Suggesting a mechanism to ensure a sound mechanism for certifying organic
inputs including seeds, an agricultural expert Dr. Sirohi, who interacted with the
Committee on 09 February, 2015 submitted the following:—
"A Steering Committee can be appointed for a particular district under the
leadership of the concerned University Vice Chancellor. Under his domain he
will employ certain scientists working on this. We have so many Krishi Vigyan
Kendras and research scientists are also available who can work simultaneously
with the seed certification agency. So, the synergy between the seed certification
agency and the agriculture industry may do this work."
6.15 Proposing measures to tackle the reliability issue pertaining to the extant
certification process, a retired agricultural scientist and Secretary, DARE and Ex-DG in
a written note submitted as under:—
"The testing and certification system is far from satisfactory. Effective testing
facilities need to be extended at least initially as an incentive to producer and
consumer. Once, established and confidence is built up, it may be left to market
forces."
6.16 With regard to the number of assessing and certifying bodies for organic
produce, the Secretary, Ministry of agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) deposing before the Committee on 20 January, 2015 admitted that over all
their numbers are 25 and it is a barrier.
Infrastructural Support for Testing and Certification of Organic Produce
6.17 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
responding to shortcomings in the certification process such as lack of complete
reliability on the certification process, relying of certification process primarily on box
ticking and less on actual testing, lack of reliable chemical residue testing which are
hampering the growth of organic farming in India furnished by the stakeholders, in a
written reply submitted as follows:—
"Under NPOP, Organic certification is a process certification. Hence, only testing
the product for chemicals cannot ensure the organic genuineness of the product.
Stringent mandatory regime is required for implementation for the domestic
market (production standards and verification process). Mandatory standards
for compliance of the stakeholders will ensure the credibility of organic produce
to the consumers. Presently, there is regulatory regime mandatory for
implementation of organic standards for the export market. Further, there are
defined procedures for analysis and residue testing under NPOP Chapter 4,
section 4.3.1.4 for exports.
Besides, the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration
Laboratories (NABL) accreditated labs has facility for residual testing. However,
the DAC has already activated PGS-India programme through NCOF to provide
free of cost certification for low & marginal organic growers, so they can supply
organic produce for domestic market & get profit. Under PGS there is also
provision of incentives for residual testing as under:

57
Component 1st year 2nd year 3rd year
5.2.4 Soil sample collection and testing Rs.3990 Rs. 3990 Rs. 3990
(21 samples/year/cluster) @ Rs. 190
per sample for three years
Under RKVY too soil testing charges and product NABL testing is provided for
assistance under scheme."
Fake organic produce
6.18 On the extant institutional mechanism to detect fake organic produce/
products and to address complaints in this regard, the Ministry of Agriculture (DAC)
through a written reply stated as under:—
"One way of establishing a product as organic or not is by checking for pesticide
residues. However, to ensure that the product is truly organic, the operators
and the certification bodies have to follow the procedures given in NPOP
standard. APEDA has a mechanism for conducting annual audits and
unannounced inspections with the help of experts of the Evaluation Committee.
There are non compliances of major and minor nature. Where the organic integrity
is likely to be affected, the non compliances are considered as major. Major non
compliances on a continuous basis can affect the organic nature of the produce.
APEDA has received 25 complaints from 2012 to 2014 regarding detection of
pesticides in consignments exported from India or issues related to labeling
from the importing countries such as EU and USA. After receipt of such
complaints, APEDA investigates the complaints from the documents provided
by the certification body and the operators. Thereafter, the investigation reports
are placed before the National Accreditation Body (NAB) under NPOP for
decision. Several penalties based on the severity of the non compliances have
been imposed by NAB on the certification bodies and exporters. The penalties
includes pecuniary sanctions, ban on new registration, suspension of
accreditation, suspension of exports (in case of exporters) etc.
Thus the system of inspection audits is implemented to detect non-compliance
with NPOP standards."
6.19 The Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation):—
"Organic certification is process oriented. It is not based on laboratory research.
It is not based on the presence or absence of chemicals pesticide residue and
things. It is process oriented."
6.20 In response to a query as to what action is taken against the fake organic
producers/ produce the secretary stated that:—
"You are absolutely right. But I am not sure what action I can take because it is
a perception."

PART II
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Policy on Organic Farming: The Committee note that since 1970, the area
under cultivation in the country remained almost constant in the range of
140-142 million hectares out of the total area of 328 million hectare whereas the
population has approximately trippled during this intervening period. Notably,
India has approximately 17% of the world population but 2.3% of the total global
land area. To meet the challenges of food security in the early sixties, the focus
was shifted to chemical farming, which was propagated by the European chemists
like Liebig in the nineteenth century. With this shift towards minerals-based
farming and the chemical and technological advancements made in agriculture,
India ushered into the Green Revolution. No doubt, the chemical based agriculture
process paid rich dividends in terms of higher productivity and pulled the country
out of the fear psychosis of food insecurity for the burgeoning Indian population.
However, it brought a very negative cascading impact on our ecological plateau,
creating adverse intricacies viz, degradation of soil health, low yields, emergence
of new pests/diseases, wiping out of eco-friendly micro organisms and finally
percolation of toxic chemicals into our food chain threatening the very existence
of biosphere of our nation. Taking note of the adverse consequences of chemical
based farming, Government launched a National Project on Organic Farming
(NPOF) with an outlay of Rs. 57.05 crores as a Pilot project with effect from
01.01.2004 (Xth Plan) and the same was continued during XIth  Plan with an
outlay of Rs. 101 crores. However later on in the middle of XIIth Plan, this
scheme was merged with a Central Sector Scheme - 'National Mission on
Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)' with an outlay of Rs. 293 crores for the
remaining period of XIIth Plan. The Committee are surprised that the National
Project on Organic Farming has been made a sub-component of 'Soil Health
Mission' which itself is a component of NMSA. In this context, the Committee
would like to refer to the visit of a British scientist Sir Albert Howard, who was
sent to India by British Government in 1905 to study and suggest measures to
improve agriculture in India. Sir Albert Howard in his book 'The Agricultural
Testament' which is called the bible of modern organic farming, found the Indian
soil fertile without any pests in the agricultural fields. The Indian agriculture
system much before the dawn of chemical farming/Green Revolution was in
conformity with the natural principles of organic farming. However, realising
the adverse impact of mineral based fertilisers, the Government have launched a
new scheme 'Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY). with an outlay of
Rs. 300 crores in the budget 2015-16 in order to improve organic farming in the
country. Taking note of the candid admission of the representatives of Ministry
of Agriculture that the efforts to promote various components of organic farming
through various programmes have so far been disjointed and not able to achieve
58

59
the envisioned outcomes, the Committee recommend that the National Project on
Organic Farming be made a part of PKVY by suitably tempering with it farming
techniques so as to fulfil the aspirational objectives of organic farming. Further,
the Committee recommend that the Government bring out a comprehensive policy
on organic farming.
2. Definition of organic farming: The Committee note that the term 'Organic
Farming' has been variously defined by the Ministry of Agriculture (Department
of Agriculture & Cooperation) and ICAR, the International Federation of Organic
Agriculture Movement (IFOAM), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO),
and by the Ministry of Commerce for the purpose of trade and commerce under
National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP). Undoubtedly, there is an
imperative need to bring uniformity in the meaning and definition of 'organic
farming/organic farm produce' to avoid any legal hurdle in domestic consumption
and international trade promotion. The Committee further recommend that the
Government should come out with a comprehensive and well defined strategy on
organic farming addressing all the related viz, adequate availability of organic
inputs alongwith awareness, standards, financial support, research, education
and extension support, insurance, availability and well-defined markets, minimum
support price, economical certification process and grievance/complaints
redressal mechanism both for domestic and international market and above all
for sustained agricultural production.
3. Implementation through single nodal Ministry: The organic farming in the
country is being promoted through two Ministries i.e. Ministry of Agriculture
and Ministry of Commerce. The National Project on Organic Farming (NPOF)
and Network Project on Organic Farming (NePOF) are being administered by
the Ministry of Agriculture whereas the National Programme for Organic
Production (NPOP) is being implemented by the Ministry of Commerce wherein
the aspects pertaining to certification of export related agro-organic products
and legal framework for matters arising out of exports are addressed and
administered. However, the remaining aspects relating to production, ensuring
availability of organic inputs and their standards, education and research,
financial support, extension support, etc. fall under the domain of the Ministry of
Agriculture. Notably, 14 States have formulated schemes to support organic
farming. Further, the Committee note that due to want of proper demarcation of
responsibilities between the Ministries of Agriculture and Commerce and
Industry with respect to promotion of organic farming scheme no-one seems to
take the overall responsibility for effective implementation of the scheme. Sharing
the concern to the Committee, the representative of the Ministry of Agriculture
conceded that the Ministry of Agriculture being nodal Ministry must be entrusted
with the entire responsibility for promotion of organic farming including the
legal framework assigned to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry for export
purposes. Taking note of the testimony of an eminent agriculture scientist that
there was lack of integration of the Government Departments like ICAR, KVKs,
agricultural universities, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Agriculture be exclusively assigned the full responsibility for inter-departmental

60
integration and promotion of organic farming and export related legal aspects. They
also recommend that administrative set up in the Ministry of Agriculture be revisited
to strengthen the same and a robust inter-ministerial coordination mechanism be
put in place for regular and effective coordination with sister Department of
Agricultural Research and Education and synergy with other concerned Ministries
in this regard. Further, the Committee recommend that an Organic Finance &
Development Corporation for promoting organic farming be set up.
4.  Integration of all Schemes: Organic farming is being promoted in the country
through various schemes/programmes viz. the National Mission for Sustainable
Agriculture (NMSA), Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH),
National Horticulture Mission (NHM), Rastriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY),
Network Project on Organic Farming (NePOF), National Project on Organic
Farming (NPOF) under Ministry of Agriculture and National Programme for
Organic Production (NPOP) under the Ministry of Commerce. The Secretary,
Ministry of Agriculture conceded lack of synergy and integrated approach in the
implementation of various schemes run by the Ministry of Agriculture and
Ministry of Commerce. Taking note of lack of synchronous efforts in the
implementation of the above schemes/programme, the Committee, therefore,
recommend:
(i) the inter-related schemes be merged so that effective coordination
could be secured between the schemes/programmes run by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Commerce for promotion of
organic farming and achieving the desired goals;
(ii) all the implementing agencies like ICAR, KVKs Agriculture
Universities, etc. must have an integrated approach to facilitate transfer
of technology relating to organic farming to the real end user i.e. the
farmer.
5. Allocation of Funds: The Committee note that in order to promote organic
farming in the country, a sum of Rs. 57.05 crore was sanctioned in the year 2004
to implement the 'National Project on Organic Farming' during the X Plan
period. Subsequently, Rs. 101 crores were allocated during the XI Plan period.
Thereafter Rs. 293 crores were allocated for the same purpose in the middle of
XII Plan period. During the fiscal 2015-16, a special allocation of Rs. 300 crores
has been provisioned in the budget for the newly announced scheme -
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) to promote organic farming in the
country. The Committee note that given the enormity of the task to promote
organic farming throughout the country, the present level of allocation and
investment is far from adequate to give the much needed boost to organic farming.
Having regard to the testimony of the representative of the Ministry of Agriculture
that the allocations for organic farming were quite insufficient vis-a-vis
conventional farming which receives subsidy on chemical fertilizers usually in
the range of Rs. 70,000-1,00,000 crores each year, the Committee find that the
current level of allocation for organic farming does not provide a level playing
field for promotion of organic farming. Further, the financial assistance of
Rs. 20,000 per acre upto 3 years needs to be extended as soil treatment and

61
refurbishing takes 3 to 5 years and only after that the produce becomes profitable.
The Committee therefore recommend that the allocations for promotion of organic
farming be scaled up substantially to meet the intended objective of sustainable
agriculture which has the potential to increase 30 per cent more employment by
way of resource recycling, certification process, product marketing and
packaging.
6. Organic Area: The Committee observe that the State-wise details of area under
organic certification furnished by the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture) shows that the area under organic cultivation in 2013-14 has
increased massively in States like Andhra Pradesh (108%), Chhattisgarh
(117%), Jharkhand (200%), Orissa (173%) vis-a-vis the area under organic
cultivation in 2012-13. On the contrary, the area under organic cultivation has
declined significantly in Delhi (99%), Bihar (98%), Meghalaya (80%),
Arunachal Pradesh (65%), Haryana (50%) in 2013-14 vis-a-vis the area under
organic cultivation in 2012-13. The representative of the Ministry could not give
specific reply in this behalf. The Committee therefore recommend that they be
provided the specific reasons for wide fluctuation/variations in the data on organic
cultivation in different states in different years and also the source of the data on
organic farming State-wise and year-wise for the last five years.
7. Soil Health and Nutrients Management:  The soil of the earth due to its
constitutional characteristics enables the growth of millions of micro organisms
inside it. The very presence of carbonic content and other organic nutrients like
nitrogen, potasium, phosphate, sulphar, iron, zinc, boron, etc. in the soil enable
the life-sustaining process to facilitate the growth of plants and million species
of micro-organisms. The Committee note that till 1905 when Sir Albert Howard,
a Britisher who visited India to study the State of Indian Agriculture, there was
no nutrient deficiency in soil and no pest/disease was found. At the time of
independence only deficiency in nitrogenic content was noticed. However, as on
date, there is deficiency of nine elements of primary, secondary and micro
nutrients category. Obviously, the unabated and excessive use of chemical
fertilizers in an unscientific manner by farmers just to get higher yield led to
exhausting the available natural organic content in the soil to a great extent.
However, the Committee have reasons to believe that for the present predicament,
the peasantry alone cannot be held responsible. Besides, the Committee note that
erosion of soil due to floods and salinization of land have also affected adversely
the soil biodiversity by destroying the habitat of the soil biota. Notably, about 121
million hectares of (36 per cent of total geographical area of our country) land is
at various stages of degradation in the country. Apart from this, a large portion of
our agricultural land is adversely affected due to acidity, toxicity, vertisols, mining,
etc. The soil erosion due to floods also has taken its own toll. The Committee
however appreciate the initiatives to procure soil health cards to all land holders
within the coming three years, which would help in scientific use of nutrients in
the soil through application of organic and inorganic fertilizers in a balanced
way. They also notice that deficiency of secondary and micro nutrients can be
overcome by more and more use of organics and fortified N/P/K fertilizers.

62
The Committee further note that the representative of the Ministry of Agriculture
also admitted that the extant fertilizer subsidy regime has done the maximum
damage to the Indian agriculture. An eminent expert deposed before the Committee
that during the sixties before the Green Revolution, we got 50 kg. of grains from
1 kg. of Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassisum as of now we get only 10 kg. grain
from the same nutrients. The expert also testified that ideal Nitrogen, Phosphorus
and potassium ratio should be 4:2:1 but it has come to 7:3:1 all over the country
and shockingly to 39:9:1 in the Punjab. The expert therefore stressed the
importance of organic farming which while building the ecology increases
production and quality of the items produced. Having examined the adverse impact
of chemical fertilizers and subsidy thereon to their manufacturers, the Committee
come to the inescapable conclusion that the present incentive of fertilizer subsidy
needs to be revisited on urgent basis. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that:
(i) the subsidy on fertilizers to farmers be directly linked with their
income per acre per annum through Direct Transfer Benefit Scheme
either through Kisan Card or Aadhaar Card or through any other
credible mechanism and be kept with the farmers opting to either
procure organic or inorganic fertilizers as per their convenience and
requirement mentioned in the Soil Health Card;
(ii) Incentive be given to those farmers who have supplemented carbon
contents in the soil to the expected level; and
(iii) the farmers across the country be issued soil health cards and essential
advisories before each sowing season for right admixture/combination
of organic and other fertilisers for enhanced but sustainable
production.
8. Availability of Green Manure: Green manure plays a pivotal role in the organic
farming. However, there is a huge shortage of this manure as there are no big
commercial players to produce it on a mass scale. Presently, it is an in-house
production as per needs of the farmers. Since more than 80% are small and
marginal farmers, the affordability of producing green manure on a large scale
is considerably low and as a result there is huge shortage of green manure.
Moreover, the Committee find that there are no uniform standards of production
of manure resulting in lack of credibility which further lowers the demand of the
same. Besides, subsidy on chemical fertilizers also contributes towards lower
demand for organic manure.  Apparently,  unless green manure of standard
quality is produced in adequate quantity, the organic farmer will continue to
suffer. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government need to take
urgent steps to incentivise production of green manure of approved standards by
the farmers and the entrepreneurs. They also urge the Government to go for
management and production of organic manure from millions of tonnes of organic
solid waste being produced every day in urban and rural households and elsewhere
in the country.

63
9. Production of Bio-molecules and their Patenting: The Committee note that
production of bio-molecules which are living organisms is a very challenging
area particularly due to paucity of funds and other social and developmental
needs. The organic farming needs the availability and application of bio-molecules
to boost up organic production. The Committee are deeply concerned over the
huge deficiency of bio-molecules like parasite,  predators, etc. and more so, the
standards/guidelines to regulate the same for the purpose of their storage,
transport and use/application, etc. are yet to be developed. They further note that
as per the extant provisions of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), micro
biological processes and newly produced micro-organism are patentable. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that adequate investment be made
for production of bio-molecules and a regulatory regime for their production,
storage/transporation and application be set up within six months and the
Committee be apprised of the same.
10. Holistic approach towards organic farming: The Committee were informed
that approximately 121 million hectares out of the total land of 328 million
hectares was at various stages of degradation due to floods, salinisation, mining,
erosion and excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. Further, each
year 10 tonnes per hectare soil is eroded by floods resulting in overall 30% of
the soil being annually carried into the sea. One of the agricultural experts who
appeared before the Committee opined that harvesting of rainwater, its judicious
and effective use may herald a better prospect for organic farming. Presently
approximately 29% of the total rainwater is harvested in the country. He also
submitted that the allocations made under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) need to be used productively in
reclaiming the degraded and barren lands, which will not only create assets but
also bring livelihood security. Taking note of the decreasing land under
agriculture, the need for food security and the expert testimony on the beneficial
uses of organic farming, the Committee recommend that:
(i) A holistic and sustained approach for 3 to 4 years to realise the benefits
of organic farming should be adopted to promote organic farming as
organic agriculture attends concurrently with the physics, chemistry
and microbiology of the soil while mineral fertilizers only meet the
immediate nutrient needs;
(ii) Funds may be earmarked suitably under MGNREGS for reclaiming
the lands already declared not cultivable due to erosion, excessive use
of chemicals and fertilizers, salinisation, etc.;
(iii) the efforts of all the stakeholders be supplemented in the
implementation process of organic farming particularly for the initial
3-4 years enabling the agro-system fitting into the eco-system;
(iv) Rainwater harvesting and its judicious use, which is at present 15-
20% approximately, be accorded due priority and suitably incentivised;
and

64
(v) The rearing of domestic animals like cows, buffalows, goats, poultutry,
etc. must be made an integral part of the organic farming and
incentivised considering the fact that their excreta has all the organic
properties which help in enriching the soil by enhancing its porosity
and water retention capacity. Further crop-livestock integration would
make organic farming more effective and the small farms sustainable.
11. Certification of Organic Products: The Committee note that organic certification
is process oriented and not based on laboratory research. It is not based on the
presence or absence of chemical pesticides/toxic residues but on the process of
production. For organic produce there are two types of extant certifying
mechanisms namely, the Participatory Guarantee Scheme (PGS) and
Certification Mechanism. The PGS meant for domestic market allows the farming
community to self-certify their organic produce. The Certification Mechanism
is administrated under Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export
Development Authority (APEDA) for export purpose only. This is being done by
APEDA under the National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP),
administered by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. This certification is
again process based certification and not based on research which means that
though it is acceptable as per international parameters yet it does not solve the
question of credibility of organic quality of contents of the product. The NPOP
standard was notified in 2001 covering agro crops only. The Committee were
apprised by the Ministry of Agriculture that the Bureau of Indian Standards
(BIS) have formulated two voluntary standards—Part I crop based, and Part II
based on animal, and were awaiting the final approval. The Committee also note
the admission of the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation) that testing and certification system is far from
satisfactory and effective testing facilities need to be extended at least initially as
an incentive to the producer and the consumer by the Government instead of
leaving it to the private players. The Committee also note that there are only
25 laboratories for testing and certifying the organic farming processes and
also the organic produce which is grossly inadequate to service the 7.23 lakh
hectares of area under certified organic cultivation. It deprives a number of
farmers who intend to go the organic way in far flung areas or areas not covered
by the testing laboratories. The Committee also note that the process/cost of
certification is tedious besides far from fool proof to prevent adulteration. Keeping
in view the credibility of certification, the Committee are of the considered view
that lack of credibility adversely impacts the domestic demand despite availability
of organic products and purchasing power of the consumers.
Having regards to the need for establishing credible, affordable and easily
accessible certification facilities, the need for adequate testing labs, the
inadequacy of the extant certification system as conceded by the representative
of the Government and the imperative need for giving necessary stimulus to

65
organic farming and nutritional farm products, the Committee recommend that:
(i) the budget for research and innovative organic input projects should
be enhanced to provide impetus to organic farming, research and
documentation of Indigenous Technical Knowledges (ITKs), its testing,
verification and popularization;
(ii) the number of testing and assessing labs be adequately increased to
cover the expanding areas under existing organic farming;
(iii) steps to be taken for better and credible process of certification, more
frequent and reliable residue testing, training and dissemination of
know-how;
(iv) scientists from agricultural universities and Krishi Vigyan Kendras
be involved in evolving a sound and credible certification mechanism
for organic seeds and organic products for different climatic zones;
and
(v) a new mechanism be evolved to ensure quality content as organic, both
for crop and animal products not only for export market but for domestic
markets also.
12. Fake Organic Produce: One way of establishing a product is organic or not is by
checking for pesticide residues. However, to ensure that the product is truly
organic, the operators and the certification bodies have to follow the procedures
given in National Programme for the Organic Production (NPOP). The
Committee also note that APEDA has a mechanism for conducting annual audits
and unannounced inspections with the help of experts of the evaluation Committee.
They also note that there are non compliances of major and minor nature. Where
the organic integrity is likely to be affected, the non compliances are considered
as major set back. The Committee were also informed of receipt of 25 complaints
from 2012 to 2014 regarding detection of pesticides in consignments exported
from India or issues related to labeling from the importing countries such as EU
and USA. Agricultural and Processed Foods Export Development Agency (APEDA)
is empowered to deal with such complaints. The seriousness of the fake organic
produce flooding the market can be gauged from the Secretary's (Departments
of Agriculture & Cooperation) own admission that  the most famous supposedly
organic product, which is available in Delhi is not organic. The Committee are of
the strong view that fake organic produce will have far reaching adverse
implications for India's organic trade especially international trade. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that stringent punishment may be meted out
to such entities not only involved in making fake organic produce but also the
entities dealing by way of trading and exporting spurious organic products. If the
extant legal provisions are insufficient to punish them, suitable steps be taken to
empower the agency responsible for monitoring supervision of organic produce
or if required, appropriate legislation may be enacted.

66
13. Markets for Organic Products: The Committee observe that apart from credibility
of organic farm produce, creating demand for organic products is a matter which
needs to be addressed. Government, being the biggest spender of public money,
can liberate organic farmers from the present predicament by enabling eligible
consumers under Food Security Scheme to buy organic produce by getting food
subsidy through Direct Benefit Transfer. Apart from this, hospitals, army
cantonments, schools under Mid Day Meal Scheme and Railways can be persuaded
to procure organic products to create market demand for the same. Further, the
scope of villagers' market in towns needs to be explored where fresh agro-
organic products can be brought by organic farmers and sold out without any
levy being imposed by the Union Government/State Government/Local Authority.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should sponsor a
campaign for the awareness creation about the benefits of consumption of organic
products so as to create a sizeable demand. Government bodies should be
encouraged to procure organic products. The farmers of organic products may
be given subsidy through Direct Benefit Transfer. Simultaneously, in order to
guarantee the quality of organic produce, the products must be subjected to
periodic checks to inspire consumers' confidence and strict penal action taken
where the product is not found to be organic. The Committee also recommend
that proper incentives should be extended in terms of awareness generation,
marketing and branding with an Agmark like seal for sale in order to popularise
the organic products.
14. Education, Research and Extension: The Committee find that the present system
of agricultural education, research and extension to farm lands is predominantly
oriented towards conventional farming as a result more than 90% funds are
earmarked for chemical farming. There are a few institutions/centres which
are carrying out research and promotion of organic farming. Surprisingly, as of
now, there is not a single Central or State Agriculture University which offers a
degree on organic/traditional system of farming. An expert who deposed before
the Committee, pleaded that 'we need to stop treating organic farming as an
orphan' and it must be treated 'as an equal sibling'. Undoubtedly, the input
producing corporations/companies for chemical based agriculture, indirectly
contribute to promote conventional farming so as to have their own business
flourshing. The Committee also note that extension services are very poor and
below par to popularise the organic farming. Due to subsidy element/incentive
for conventional farming, the existing agricultural industry is reluctant to
undertake research in bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides and organic seeds. The
National Centre for Organic Farming (NCOF) and six other Regional Centres
for Organic Farming (RCOFs) engaged in research, training and replication of
organic farming are yet to give any tangible results. The Committee are dismayed
to observe that organic farming particularly in terms of its education, research
and extension reach is yet to make a mark. Surprisingly, there is not a single
Central/State Agriculture institute/university which imparts education and offers
research degree on organic farming. Keeping in view the great potential of
organic farming and the increasing focus on sustainable agriculture, the

67
Committee recommend that the budget for organic farming be enhanced
adequately and a policy framework be formulated with a view to giving much
needed thrust and fillip to education, research and extension to boost up organic
farming in the country. Further, the organic farmers must be honoured with
suitable awards and incentives to encourage organic farming which becomes
quite profitable after 3-4 years. The Committee should like to be apprised of the
action taken in this regard within the next six months after the presentation of
this Report to the Lok Sabha.
15. Awareness and Publicity: The Committee note the thumb rule of modern
management 'whatever is visible, is easier to be sold', in their considered view,
holds equally good for promotion of organic farming as well. Unless all the
stakeholders including producers, traders and consumers are enlightened about
the benefits of organic farming, it will not get the much desired boost. Though
the responsibility of awareness and publicity generation has been entrusted to
the National Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF) at national level and six other
Regional Centres of Organic Farming at regional levels, yet there is hardly any
worthwhile visible publicity. Given the apparent benefits of organic farming like
cost-effectiveness, soil-health building and preservation of soil bio-diversity,
sustainability, eco-friendliness and nutritional value and huge employment
generation potential and the diverse climatic-agro zones of the country, the
Committee recommend that a broad nation-wide strategy and sustained publicity
compaign must be launched to create the much desired awareness about the
apparent benefits of organic farming products. Further, the Committee also
urge the Government to organise organic farming fairs each year on a big scale
as organised elsewhere to popularise it and encourage organic farm products.
16. Setting up of Traditional Seed Bank: Traditional/organic seeds are one of the
most important inputs needed for promotion of organic farming. Traditional
seeds have certain resistance to drought, flood, pest, disease and have better
quality of nutritional value. The Committee note with concern that in the absence
of natural seeds with higher degree of regenerational feature, hybrid seeds are
largely being used in organic farming. They also note that the use of traditional
seeds leads to cost-effectiveness of the organic farmers as compared to costly
hybrid seeds monopolised by big multinational companies. In order to ensure
adequate availability of quality organic/natural seeds, the Committee recommend
that Organic Seeds Banks be set up in each agro-climatic zone so that their
regional biotic properties may be saved and utilised by new generations. The
Committee are optimistic that the setting up of Organic Seeds Bank would go a
long way in helping the farmers to become debt-free on the one hand and reducing
the humongous subsidy burden on the National Exchequer on the other and
therefore, Government must come out with a concrete plan for setting up of an
Organic Seeds Banks and apprise the Committee within six months of the
presentation of this report.
17. Training and Skill Development: The Committee observe that training of farmers
in organic farming techniques and skill development is being imparted by the

68
National Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF) at national level and at six Regional
Centres of Organic Farming (RCOFs). Statedly, the training consists of all
aspects of ploughing, sowing, irrigation, application of bio-fertilizers and
pesticides and post-harvest management of farm produce. The Committee note
that organic farming requires more scientific support than chemical farming
and therefore needs more interventions and proper management of resources,
time and energy. Moreover, organic farming involves production mechanism as
multi-cropping, mixed cropping, crop-rotation and recycling of post harvest
residues. Apart from this, the application of bio-fertilisers, pesticides and
production techniques require specialised training, skill development and
professional knowledge. The Committee also note that different practices of
organic farming are being adopted by farmers of different agro-climatic zones in
the country and their cross learning experience can enable farmers to pick up
various techniques and practices from each other improving their knowledge
and skills to get a better crop at a lower cost. Regretably, ignorant of the benefits
of post harvest residues left in the field, in many parts the farmers burn the
residue of the harvested crop particularly in case of wheat crop. The burning of
post harvest residues hampers the recycling of residues for the purpose of natural
manure and creates life threatening pollution. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Government should sponsor training programmes/workshops/
conferences conducted by NGOs/Organic Farmers' Association/Co-operatives
to stop such pollution. Simultaneously, all the agricultural universities, both
Central and of the States and regional centres of ICAR should organise intensive
and periodic training programmes for integrated crop-live stock training
programme for organic farmers and in-house training for agricultural
technocrats and scientists for enhancing and updating their knowledge and
skills with respect to the enormous benefits of organic farming.
18. Strategy to boost organic farming: The 'National Project on Organic Farming'
was launched as a Pilot project way back in 2004. The Committee feel that the
experimental phase is over and the project needs to be renewed. In the considered
view of the Committee, organic farming, with its multi-functional approach, is
quite capable to deal with the challenges of hunger, malnutrition, poverty of
small and marginal farmers, unemployment in rural areas, health related
problems, etc. Surely, replication of organic farming over the large areas will
lead to a huge fiscal savings on the national exchequer by way of phasing out of
chemical fertilizers and reducing investment on health related problems.
Indubitably, the organic farming has the potential to contribute considerably
towards economy, ecology and above all to the health of the nation. The Committee
note that Government of India provides financial assistance of Rs. 20,000 in the
form of inputs such as bio fertilizers, bio pesticides, bio seeds, etc. per hectare
for farmers who wish to convert to organic farming during the transition period
i.e. transition from using chemical fertilizers to farming using organic fertilizers.

69
Having regard to the multiple advantages and enormous benefits of organic
farming, especially the potential to meet the challenges of hunger, malnutrition
and unemployment in rural areas, soil degradation and considering the empirical
findings of the Ministry of Agriculture that organic farming provides 30%
more jobs as compared to chemical farming and the 2014 report of UNCTAD and
UNEP which states that organic farming can double the production, the Committee
recommend that:
(i) Special organic zones may be created across the country in the existing
agro-climatic zones on the lines of special economic zones;
(ii) Agro-eco tourism centres be opened to attract eco-tourists;
(iii) Clusters of farmers/villages be encouraged for organic farming; and
(iv) The financial assistance in the form of inputs be suitably enhanced
and given in cash through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) during the
period of transition of 3/4 years to set off any losses.
The Committee should like to be apprised of the action taken on each of their
recommendation within six months of the presentation of this report to Lok Sabha.
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
12 August, 2015 Chairperson,
21 Shravana, 1937(Saka) Committee on Estimates.

PART III
APPENDIX I
 (Para 2.6)
The infrastructure support regarding promotion of organic farming certification,
production units for organic inputs, storage, transportation and processing
available under Mission for Integrated Horticulture Development (MIHD).
A. Organic Farming
    1        2      3                              4
(i) Adoption of Rs. 20,000/ha. 50% of cost limi ted to Rs. 10 ,000/ha. for a
Organic Farming maximum area of 4 ha. per beneficiary, spread
over a period of 3 years involving an assistance of
Rs. 4000/- in first year and Rs. 3000/- each in
second & third year. The programme to be linked
with certification.
(ii) Organic Project based Rs. 5 lakh for a cluster of 50 ha. which will include
Certification Rs. 1.50 lakh in first year, Rs. 1.50 lakh in second
year and Rs. 2.00 lakh in third year.
(iii) Vermi compost Rs. 100,000/ unit for 50% of cost conforming to the size of the unit of
Units/organic permane nt structure 30'x8'x2.5' dimension of permanent structure to
input production) and Rs. 16,000/unit be administered on prorata basis. For HDPE
For HDPE V ermibed. 50% of cost conforming to the size
Vermibed. of 96  cft (12'x4'x2') and 1S I5907: 2010
t o be administered on pro-rata basis.
B. Integrated Post Harvest Management
B.1 Pack House Rs. 4.00 lakh/unit 50% of capital cost.
with size of 9Mx6M
B.2 Integrated pack Rs. 50.00 lakh per Credit linked back-ended subsidy @35% of the
house with unit with size of cost of project in general areas and 50% of cost in
facilities for 9Mx18M case of  Hilly & Scheduled areas for individual
conveyer belt, intrepreneurs.
sorting, grading
units, washing
drying and weighing.
B.3 Pre-cooling unit Rs. 25.00 lakh/unit Credit linked back-ended subsidy @35% of the
with capactiy of cost of  project in general areas and 50% of cost in
6 MT case Hilly &  Scheduled areas, per beneficiary.
B.4 Cold room Rs. 15.00 lakh/unit Cr edit linked back-ended subsidy @35% of the
(Staging) of 30 MT capacity cost of project in general areas and 50% of cost
in case of Hilly & Scheduled areas, per
beneficiary.
B. 5 Mobile pre- Rs. 25.00 lakh Credit linked back-ended subsidy @35% of the
cooling unit cost of project in general areas and 50% of cost in
case of Hilly & Scheduled areas, per beneficiary.
70

71
B. 6. Cold Storage
(Construction,
Expansion and
Modernisation)
(i) Cold Storage Rs. 8,000/MT (max. Credit linked back-ended subsidy @ 35% of the
Unit Type 1- 5,000 MT capacity) cost of project in general areas and 50% of cost in
basic mezzanine case of Hilly & Scheduled areas, per beneficiary.
structure with
large chamber
(of>250 MT) type
with single
temperature zone.
(ii) Cold Storag e Rs. 10,000/MT (max. Credit linked back-ended subsidy @35% of the
Unit Type 2-PEB 5,000 MT capacity) cost of project in general areas and 50% of cost in
structure for multiple case of Hilly &  Scheduled ar eas, per beneficiary.
temperature and
product use, more
than 6 chambers
(of >250 MT)
and basic material
handling equipment.
(iii) Cold Storage Additional Rs. 10,000/MTCredit linked back-ended subsidy @ 35% of the
Unit Type 2 with  for add on compo- cost of  project in general areas and 50% of cost in
add on technology nents of controlled case of Hilly & Scheduled areas, per beneficiary.
for Controlled atmosphere technology.
Atmosphere. Det ail area as per
Appendix-II
B. 7 Technology Max. Rs. 250.00 lakh Credit linked back-ended subsidy @ 35% of the
induction and for modernization cost of  project in general areas and 50% of cost in
modernisation of of PLC equipment case of Hilly & Scheduled areas, per beneficiary.
cold-chain. packaging line, dock
leveers, advanced
graders, alternate
technologies,
stacking systems,
modernization of
insulation and
refrigeration, etc.
Details are in
Appendix-II
B. 8 Refrigerate Rs. 26.00 lakh for 9 Credit linked back-ended subsidy @35% of the
Transport vehicles. MT (NHM & cost of project in general areas and 50% of cost in
HMNEH) and case of Hilly & Scheduled areas, per beneficiary.
prorate basis for
lesser capacity, but
not below 4 MT.
B. 9 Primary/Mobile/ Rs. 25.00 lakh/unit Credit linked back-ended subsidy @40% of the
Minimal capital cost of project in general areas and 55% of
processing Unit. cost in case of Hilly & Scheduled areas.
B. 10 Ripeing chamber . Rs. 1.00 lakh/MT Credit linked back-ended subsidy @35% of the capital
cost of project in general areas and 50% of cost in
case of Hilly & Scheduled areas, for a maximum of
300 MT per beneficiary.
B. 11 Evaporative/low Rs. 5,00 lakh/unit 50% of the total cost.
energy cool
chamber (8 MT).
 1        2      3                              4

72
B. 12 Preservation unit Rs. 2.00 lakh/unit 50% of the total cost.
(low cost) for new unit and
Rs. 1.00 lakh/unit for
upgradation
B.13 Low cost onion Rs. 1.75 lakh/unit 50% of the total cost.
storage structure
(25 MT)
B.14 Pusa Zero energy Rs. 4000 per unit 50% of the total cost.
cool chamber
(100 kg.)
B.15 Integrated Cold Project Based. Credit linked back-ended subsidy @ 35% of the
Chain Supply Project should cost of project in general areas and 50% of cost in
System comprise of case of Hilly and Scheduled areas, per beneficiary.
minimum two
components listed
under C.1 to C.13
below, with
maximum cost of
Rs. 600.00 lakh
C. Establishment of Marketing Infrastructure for Horticultural Produce in Govt./
Private/Cooperative Sector
C.1 Terminal markets Rs. 150.00 25% to 40% (limited to Rs. 50.00 crore) as Public-
crore/project Private Partnership mode though competitive
bidding, in accordance with operational guidelines
issued separately.
C.2 Wholesale Rs. 100.00 Credit linked back-ended subsidy @ 25% of the
markets crore/project capital cost of project in general areas and 33.33%
in case of Hilly & Scheduled areas, per  beneficiary.
C.3 Rural Rs. 25.00 Lakh Credit linked back-ended subsidy @ 40% of the
markets/Apni ca pital cost of the project in general areas and
mandies/Direct 55% in case of Hilly & Scheduled areas, per
markets beneficiary.
C.4 Retail markets/ Rs. 15.00 Credit linked back-ended subsidy @ 35% of the
outlets (en viron- lakh/unit capital cost of  project in general areas and 50% in
mentally controlled) case of Hilly & Scheduled a reas, per  beneficiary.
C.5 Static/Mobile Rs. 30,000/unit 50% of total cost.
V ending Cart/
Platform with
cool chamber.
C.6 Functional
Infrastructure for:
(i) Collection, Rs. 15.00 lakh Credit linked back-ended subsidy @ 40% of the
Sorting/grading, capital cost of  project in general areas and 55% in
packing units etc. case of Hilly & Scheduled a reas, per  beneficiary.
(ii) Quality Rs. 200.00 lakh 100% of the total cost to public sector and 50%
control/analysis of cost to private sector as credit linked back-
Lab. ended susbsidy.
C.7 Gravity operated Rs. 15.00 lakh/km. Credit lined back-ended subsidy @ 50% of capital
ropeway in hilly costs in Hilly areas.
areas
D. Food Processing
D.1 Food Processing Rs. 800 lakh/unit Cr edit linked back-ended capital investment
Units assistance  of 50% of cost in the States of J&K,
Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand.
 1        2      3                              4

APPENDIX II
(Para  2.6)
Component Wise pattern of assistance available under SHM of NMSA for
promotion is of organic farming
Component Pattern of assistance
1. Setting up of mechanized Fruit/ 100% Assistance of State Govt./Govt. Agencies upto
Vegetable market waste/Agro a maximum limit of Rs. 190.00 lakh/unit and 33% of
waste compost production unit. cost limited to Rs. 63 lakh/unit for individuals/private
agencies through NABARD as capital investment for
3000 TPA production capacity.
2. Setting up of State of art liquid/carrier 100% Assistance to State Govt./Govt. Agencies upto a
 based Bio-fertilizer/Bio-pesticide units maximum limit of Rs. 160.00 lakh/unit and 25% of
cost limited to Rs. 40 lakh/unit for individuals/private
agencies through NABARD as capital investment of
200 TPA production capacity.
3. Setting up of Bio-fertilizer and Assistance upto maximum limit of Rs. 85 lakh for
Organic fertilizer testing Quality new laboratory and upto a maximum limit of Rs. 45
Control Laboratory (BOQCL) or lakh for strengthening of existing infrastructure to
Strengthening of existing Laboratory State Government Laboratory under Agriculture or
under FCO. Horticulture Department.
4. Promotion of Organic Inputs on farmer's 50% of cost subject to a limit of Rs. 5000/- per ha. and
field (Manure, Vermi-compost, Bio- Rs. 10,000 per beneficiary. Propose to cover 1 million
Fertilizers Liquid/solid, Waste compost, ha. area.
Herbal extracts etc.)
5. Adoption of organic farming through Rs. 20,000/- per ha. subject to maximum of Rs. 40,000/-
Cluster approach under Participatory per beneficiary for 3 year term.
Guarantee System (PGS) certification.
6. Support to PGS system for online Rs. 200 per farmer subject to maximum of Rs. 5000/-
data management and residue analysis per group/year restricted to Rs. 1.00 lakh per Regional
Council. Upto Rs. 10,000/- per sample for residue
testing (Residue analysis to be done in NABL Labs.)
7. Organic Village adoption for manure Rs. 10 lakhs/village for adoption of integrated manure
management and biological nitrogen management, planting of fertilizer trees on bunds and
harvesting promotion of legume inter-cropping through groups/
SHGs etc. (Maximum 10 village per annum/State will
be supported).
Training and demonstration on Organic Capacity building of stakeholders on organic farming,
Farming Participatory Guarantee System (PGS), quality control
of organic input etc. Rs. 20,000/- per demonstration
for a group of 50 participants or more.
8. Support to research for development Against specific proposal.
of organic package of practices specific
to State and cropping system
9. Setting up of separate Organic Agriculture Against specific proposal.
Research and Teaching Department
73

APPENDIX III
(Para 3.6)
State-wise details of total number of Compost production units and Bio-fertilizer
production units set up under NPOF through NABARD and total production
capacity generated (in MT) by these units sanctioned during October, 2004
till March, 2014
Sl. State Fruit V eg Waste Subsidy Bio-fertilizer Subsidy
No. Comp. Unit released release
Number Capacity (Rs. Lakh) Number Capacity (Rs. Lakh)
1 . Andhra Pradesh 0 0.00 0.00 4 750 70.662
2 . Arunachal Pradesh 0 0.00 0.00 0 0 0.00
3 . Assam 2 6650 12.750 2 50 30.00
4 . Bihar 1 50.00 4.125 0 0 0.00
5. Chhattisgarh 0 0.00 0.00 0 0 0.00
6 . Delhi 1 100 20.00 0 0 0.00
7. Goa 1 300 11.600 1 1000 20.00
8 . Gujarat 1 6750 4.773 6 1490 123.984
9. Haryana 0 0.00 0.00 1 150 17.075
10. Himachal Pradesh 0 0.00 0.00 1 700 20.00
11. J&K 0 0.00 0.00 0 0 0.00
12. Jharkhand 0 0.00 0.00 0 0 0.00
13. Karnataka 5 26700 184.527 3 450 71.65
14. Kerala 2 13800 21.287 2 500 30.641
15. Madhya Pradesh 0 0.00 0.00 1 100 40.00
16. Maharashtra 1 150 35.712 10 2565 149.8965
17. Manipur 0 0.00 0.00 0 0 0
18. Meghalaya 0 0.00 0.00 1 358 5.668
19. Mizoram 0 0.00 0.00 0 0 0.00
20. Nagaland 0 0.00 0.00 0 0 0.00
21. Orissa 0 0.00 0.00 0 0 0.00
22. Punjab 0 0.00 0.00 4 1110 27.480
23. Rajasthan 0 0.00 0.00 1 150 8.250
24. Sikkim 0 0.00 0.00 0 0 0.00
25. Tamil Nadu 2 200 57.00 3 590 61.6746
26. Telangana 0 0.00 0.00 5 1400 87.515
27. Tripura 1 50 20.0 1 150 20.00
28. Uttar Pradesh 1 1200 19.187 0 0 0.00
29. Uttarakhand 0 0.00 0.00 2 300 27.005
30. West Bengal 1 7200 15.125 2 750 13.90
Total 19 63150 406.086 50 12563 825.401
Note: Units funded by NABARD till 31.03.2014.
74

APPENDIX  IV
(Para 3.6)
Funds released for Organic Farming under RKVY during last 5 years
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No      State 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
1 . Andhra Pradesh 25.00 0.12 0.71 0.00 15.00 9.50
2 . Arunachal Pradesh 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.00 2.99 0.00
3 . Assam 0.00 0.00 4.50 9.00 1 1.57 11.88
4 . Bihar 7.44 0.00 32.64 101.05 0.00 0.00
5. Chhattisgarh 3.60 2.30 12.00 0.00 1.96 0.00
6. Goa 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.18 0.00 0.00
7 . Gujarat 2.65 1.97 2.80 108.16 1 1.63 0.00
8. Haryana 0.82 1.55 0.00 1.51 3.38 2.00
9 . Himachal Pradesh 1.50 3.30 1 1.63 10.05 10.50 7.50
10. Jammu and Kashmir 0.00 0.87 3.31 0.79 2.37 1.64
11. Jharkhand 0.00 0.00 0.90 1.58 4.00 0.00
12. Karnataka 34.40 0.00 0.50 33.00 21.00 14.40
13. Kerala 0.37 0.02 0.00 1.23 1.44 0.00
14. Madhya Pradesh 6.44 3.80 11.26 4.40 5.69 3.00
15. Maharashtra 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
16. Manipur 0.00 0.00 0.35 2.82 0.75 0.29
17. Meghalaya 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
18. Mizoram 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
19. Nagaland 0.00 0.00 1.04 1.50 1.50 0.60
20. Orissa 1.03 4.42 1 1.15 0.00 0.00 0.00
21. Punjab 0.00 0.00 13.50 0.00 0.00 0.00
22. Rajasthan 0.00 22.35 6.75 3.67 0.00 0.00
23. Sikkim 0.00 1.96 0.00
2.50 1.20 0.00
24. Tamilnadu 17.25 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.60 0.00
25. Tripura 0.00 0.40 1.15 0.00 0.00 0.00
26. Uttar Pradesh 10.00 3.98 15.37 16.56 28.18 89.56
27. Uttarakhand 0.00 11.51 0.00 13.31 9.44 3.44
28. West Bengal 0.32 0.56 0.35 0.00 6.11 0.00
Total 110.82 59.16 129.91 311.31 145.31 143.8 1
75

APPENDIX  V
(Para 3.6)
Details of financial assistance provided during each of the last four years, State-wise
for adoption of organic farming under National Horticulture Mission (NHM)
(Rs. in lakh)
State Assistance Provided during
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Andhra Pradesh 40.86 00.00 00.00 00.00
Bihar 103.25 43.42 00.00 00.00
Chhattisgarh 103.60 79.50 00.00 00.00
Goa 03.07 00.00 00.00 00.00
Gujarat 240.00 60.00 00.00 20.00
Jharkhand 09.17 06.79 118.40 82.00
Kerala 19.23 59.50 06.40 00.00
Madhya Pradesh 00.11 00.00 00.00 00.00
Maharashtra 14.43 00.00 08.25 00.00
Odisha 00.00 32.86 258.23 200.00
Rajasthan 16.55 197.68 78.50 00.63
Tamil Nadu 16.00 00.00 00.00 34.00
West Bengal 00.00 54.58 00.00 00.00
Andaman & Nicobar Islands 00.00 00.00 1.40 00.00
Total 566.27 534.33 471.18 372.63
76

APPENDIX  VI
(Para 3.6)
Funds released for Organic Farming under Horticulture Mission for North East and
Himalayan States  (HMNEH)
(Rs. in lakh)
State 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
Arunachal Pradesh 99.00 131.00 25.80 123.48 170.00
Assam 66.00 172.10 28.60 35.60 73.65
Manipur 270.00 78.00 51.30 110.00 260.00
Meghalaya 52.50 0.00. 0.00 0.0 0.00
Mizoram 100.00 126.20 152.00 16.50 20.00
Nagaland 64.50 190.00 81.50 123.00 102.00
Sikkim 236.33 315.25 332.48 492.50 265.50
Tripura 93.00 141.00 130.40 79.40 52.00
Jammu & Kashmir 60.60 61.50 67.25 117.10 144.91
Himachal Pradesh 148.80 170.00 216.28 398.21 79.00
Uttarakhand 152.03 84.31 201.00 53.60 40.00
77

APPENDIX  VII
Soil Health Cards Issued during 2009-10 to 2013-14
(Number in lakhs)
Zone/ Soil Health Cards issued during
State 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
1 23456
South Zone
Andhra Pradesh 5.70 5.11 4.17 5.28 3.21
Karnataka 1.71 1.11 1.54 1.69 1.50
Kerala 2.10 1.03 1.66 1.74 1.35
Tamil Nadu 6.22 7.15 12.05 11.16 34.99
Puducherry 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.02 0.01
A&N Islands 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00
S Zone Total 15.76 14.44 19.46 19.89 41.05
West Zone
Gujarat 0.61 12.1 12.18 9.51 11.79
Madhya Pradesh 1.61 2.18 4.36 3.34 3.39
Maharashtra 2.78 2.95 8.54 9.87 8.86
Rajasthan 2.85 3.15 3.77 3.13 3.27
D&N Haveli 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Chhattisgarh 0.59 0.95 0.99 0.95 1.16
Goa 0.23 0.21 0.12 0.18 0.15
W Zone Total 8.67 21.54 29.96 26.98 28.62
North Zone
Haryana 3.34 3.64 3.59 4.43 2.36
Punjab 2.98 2.16 2.88 1.16 0.74
Uttarakhand 0.47 0.37 0.45 0.45 0.68
Uttar Pradesh 19.39 25.97 33.52 31.91 32.11
Himachal Pradesh 1.30 1.35 1.25 1.22 1.22
J&K 0.20 0.3 0.32 0.35 0.35
Delhi 0.01 0.006 0.01 0.0046 0.004
N Zone Total 27.69 33.769 42.02 39.5246 37.464
East Zone
Bihar 1.44 1.24 1.98 2.59 2.4
Jharkhand 0.10 0.07 0.04 0.073 0.1
Odisha 1.30 1.24 1.49 2.19 2.54
West Bengal 0.36 0.19 0.00 0.42 0.48
E Zone Total 3.20 2.74 3.51 5.273 5.52
78

79
North-East Zone
Assam 0.60 0.60 0.61 0.61 0.61
Tripura 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.17
Manipur 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.068
Meghalaya 0.08 0.02 0.10 0.08 0.026
Nagaland 0.11 0.12 0.12 0.14 0.14
Arunachal Pradesh 0.06 0.09 0.10 0.14 0.078
Sikkim 0.07 0.07 0.11 0.18 0.15
Mizoram 0.20 0.20 0.45 1.45 0.20
NE Zone Total 1.49 1.47 1.86 2.97 1.442
Grand Total 56.81 73.99 96.8066 94.6376 114.10
1 23456

ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2014-15)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the lst January, 2015 from 1145 to 1330 hrs. in
Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Kirti Azad
3. Shri Om Birla
4. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
5. Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo
6. Shri Md. Salim
7. Shri Arvind Sawant
8. Shri Sudheer Gupta
9. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Y adav
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.C. Koul — Director
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Additional Director
3. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
1. Dr. T.C. Chaudhari — Former Director (Research), Tea Board,
National Tea Research Foundation, Kolkata
2. Shri Ketan Dand — CEO, Fort Willis Organic Farms, Mumbai.
2. The sitting of the Committee could not be convened at the appointed hour i.e.
1100 hrs. due to lack of quorum. At around 1140 hours the Chairperson informed the
Members present that they were still short of quorum (10 Members) by one. Most of
the Members, however, stated that they had come to New Delhi from far flung
constituencies with the sole purpose of attending this Sitting to hear the witnesses on
a subject of immense significance for the country. The Chairperson also pointed out
that the two witnesses had also come to New Delhi from Kolkata and Mumbai
respectively to tender evidence. The Committee, therefore, decided to transact their
business of the day with nine Members.
80

81
3. The Chairperson then directed that the first witness be ushered in.
(At around 1145 hrs. Dr. T.C. Chaudhari took his seat).
4. The Chairperson welcomed the witness and drew his attention to
Direction 55(1) of 'Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha' regarding confidentiality of
the proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction was over, the
Chairperson directed the witness to brief the Committee on the subject 'National Project
on Organic Farming'. The Members raised several queries and sought clarification
from the witness. The Chairperson, thereafter, directed the witness to send to the
Committee Secretariat information on unanswered queries at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew.
5. The Chairperson then directed that the second witness be ushered in.
(At around 1245 hrs. Shri Ketan Dand took his seat).
6. The Chairperson welcomed the witness and drew his attention to
Direction 55(1) of 'Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha' regarding confidentiality of
the proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction was over the
Chairperson directed the witness to brief the Committee on the subject 'National Project
on Organic Farming'. The Members raised several queries and sought clarification
from the witness. The Chairperson, thereafter, directed the witness to send to the
Committee Secretariat information on unanswered queries at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.

ANNEXURE  II
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
ESTIMATES (2014-2015)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20th January, 2015 from 1100 to 1400 hrs. in
Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri Kirti Azad
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
5. Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo
6. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
7. Shri Sudheer Gupta
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shri P. Kumar
10. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
11. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
12. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy
13. Shri Md. Salim
14. Shri Arvind Sawant
15. Shri Ganesh Singh
16. Shri Rajesh Verma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P .V .L.N. Murthy — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Additional Director
3. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj — Deputy Secretary
82

83
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture
[Department of Agriculture and Co-operation]
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna — Secretary
2 Shri Avinash K. Srivastava — Additional Secretary
3. Smt. I. Rani Kumudini — Joint Secretary
4. Shri Uppal Kumar Singh — Joint Secretary (PP)
5. Shri A.K. Sikka — DDG , NRM, ICAR
6. Dr. P.P. Biswas — Principal Scientist, ICAR
7. Dr. S.N. Sushil — Plant Protection Adviser, PPQS, Faridabad
8. Dr. S. K. Choudhary — ADG(S & W), ICAR
9. Dr. Vandana Dwivedi — ADC(INM), DAC
10. Shri Sanjay Kr. Lohani — Joint Secretary, Department of Fertilizer
11. Dr. P.V.S.M. Gouri — Adviser,  APEDA
Ministry of Agriculture
[Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
[Indian Council of Agricultural Research]
1. Dr. S. Ayyappan — Se cretary (DARE) & DG(ICAR)
2. Dr. A.K. Sikka — Deputy Director General (NRM), ICAR
3. Dr. A.K. Singh — Deputy Director General (Extn.), ICAR
4. Dr. B. Mohan Kumar — Assistant Director General
(AAF&CC), ICAR
5. Dr. Suresh Kumar — Assistant Director General (S&WM), ICAR
Chaudhari
6. Dr. B. Gangwar — Director, Project Directorate for Farming
System Research
7. Dr. N. Ravi Shankar — Principal Scientist, Project Directorate for
Farming System
2. The proceedings commenced with the Chairperson welcoming the Members to
the Sitting. The Committee, thereafter, held internal deliberations for a while. The
Chairperson then directed that the witnesses be ushered in.
At around 1115 hrs. the witnesses took their seats.

84
3. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and drew their attention to
Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding confidentiality of
the proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction was over, Secretary,
DARE & Director General, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, made an audio-
visual presentation on the subject ‘National Project on Organic Farming’. The Members
raised several queries and sought clarifications from the witnesses. The Chairperson,
thereafter, directed the witnesses to furnish to the Committee Secretariat detailed replies
to the points to which they could not readily respond at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE  III
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
ESTIMATES
The Committee sat on Monday, the 9th February, 2015 from 1500 to 1730 hrs. in
Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri Kirti Azad
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
5. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
6. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
7. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
8. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
9. Shri K. N. Ramachandran
10. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P .V .L.N. Murthy — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P. C. Koul — Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Additional Director
WITNESSES
1. Shri G . N. Raju Yadav — Or ganic Farmer, Krishna District,
Andhra Pradesh
2. Dr. Vandana Shiva — Director, NAVDANYA, New Delhi
3. Samaj Vikas Sansthan, — (i) Dr. K.K. T omar, Director
Meerut (ii) Dr. S.P .S. Sirohi, Honorary Agricultural
Scientist
(iii) Ch. Rajpal Singh, Agriculturist
(iv) Shri Mahender Singh, Agriculturist
85

86
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to
the sitting and briefed them about the agenda. The Chairperson then directed that the
first witness be ushered in.
(At around 1520 hrs. Shri G.N. Raju Yadav took his seat.)
3 . The Chairperson welcomed the witness and drew his attention to
Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding confidentiality of
the proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction was over, the
Chairperson asked him to brief the Committee about his experience as a farmer involved
in organic farming and the challenges/constraints being faced in the promotion of
organic farming in the country. He also desired the witness to suggest viable solutions
to the difficulties being faced by organic farmers' community. The witness shared his
experience of organic farming and related issues in detail. He also submitted to the
Committee records pertaining to his achievements. The Members also raised several
queries and sought clarifications from the witness. The Chairperson, thereafter, asked
the witness to furnish in writing at the earliest to the Committee Secretariat detailed
replies to the points to which he could not readily respond.
The witnesses then withdrew.
4. The Chairperson then directed that the Second Witness be ushered in.
(At around 1600 hrs. Dr. Vandana Shiva took her seat.)
5 . The Chairperson welcomed the witness and drew her attention to
 Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding confidentiality of
the proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction was over, the
Chairperson asked Dr. Shiva to brief the Committee about the issues germane to organic
farming in the country, viz, the general perception about unviability of organic farming,
shortage of organic inputs and other inputs supply related constraints, standardization
and certification related matters, nutrition issues, etc. The witness presented her
perspective on all these aspects and related matters. The Members also raised several
queries and sought clarifications from the witness. The Chairperson, thereafter, asked
the witness to furnish to the Committee Secretariat detailed replies to the points to
which she could not readily respond to at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew.
6. The Chairperson then directed that the representatives of Samaj Vikas
Sansthan be ushered in.
(At around 1650 hrs. Dr. K.K. Tomar and his colleagues took their seats.)
7. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and drew their attention to
Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding confidentiality of
the proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction was over, the
Chairperson asked the Principal Witness to apprise the Committee about the activities
being undertaken by their organization and their suggestions for boosting organic
farming in India. The Principal Witness briefed the Committee about the various measures
being taken by their Organization for encouraging and supporting organic farming in

87
parts of Western Uttar Pradesh. The accompanying witnesses also shared their
experiences with the Committee. Some of the major suggestions given by them included
ensuring a marketing mechanism for organic produce, need to make certification more
farmer friendly and affordable, greater availability of relevant agricultural implements,
IT enabled mechanism for organic farmers to provide them an information and best
practices exchange platform, organization of cluster/cooperative/mandal level
communities for those involved in organic farming, taxation deterrence for environment
damaging farming practices, etc. The Members also raised several queries and sought
clarifications from the witnesses. The Chairperson, thereafter, asked the representatives
of Samaj Vikas Sansthan to furnish to the Committee Secretariat detailed replies to the
points to which they could not readily respond to at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew.
8. The Committee then adjourned to meet at 1100 hrs. on the next day.
The verbatim proceedings was kept on record.

ANNEXURE  IV
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2014-2015)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10th February, 2015 from 1430 to 1545 hrs. in
Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri Kirti Azad
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
5. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
6. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
7. Shri Ramen Deka
8. Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo
9. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
10. Shri Sudheer Gupta
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
12. Shri Vinod Khanna
13. Shri P. Kumar
14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
15. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
16. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy
17. Md. Salim
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .V .L.N. Murthy — Joint Secretary
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Director
88

89
WITNESSES
1. Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti Convener, Alliance for Sustainable and Holistic
Agriculture (ASHA), Hyderabad
2. Shri Vijaysinh Zala President, Mahatma Gandhi Pratishthan,  Godhra
2. The proceedings commenced with the Chairperson welcoming the Members
to the Sitting. The Committee, thereafter, held internal deliberations for a while on the
agenda of the day. The Chairperson then directed that the first witness be ushered in.
(At around 1430 hrs. Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti took her seat.)
3. The Chairperson welcomed the witness and drew her attention to Direction
55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding confidentiality of the
proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction, the witness with the
permission of the Chairperson briefed the Committee on the subject 'National Project
on Organic Farming'. The witness deposed about the farmers' incomes, environmental
sustainability, control of resources, support of urban consumers of agricultural produce,
comparative yields from intensive chemical farming and organic farming, gestation
period for transition from chemical farming to organic farming, need to shift focus from
exports oriented organic farming to domestic consumption approach, rationalizing
certification norms and expenditure thereupon, threat from chemical run off to organic
farming in some of the granary States, increase in outlay for organic farming as well as
RKVY , full subsidization of group certification of organic produce as being done in
Karnataka, standardization of cost norms for organic farming as different norms existed
under various schemes of the Central and State Governments, etc. The Members
raised several queries and sought clarifications from the witness. The Chairperson,
thereafter, asked the witness to furnish to the Committee Secretariat detailed replies to
the points to which she could not readily respond at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew.
4. The Chairperson then directed that the second Witness be ushered in.
(At around 1525 hrs. Shri Vijay Sinh Zala took his seat.)
5. The Chairperson welcomed the witness and drew his attention to Direction
55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding confidentiality of the
proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction was over, the
Chairperson asked the witness to brief the Committee about his grass root experience
of organic farming in the country. He also desired the witness to come up with some
viable solutions in regard to the constraints/difficulties being faced by organic farmers
in the country. The witness briefed the Committee about his NGO performing the role
of a producer organization in some areas of the States of Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh,
value addition in organic produce for improving its marketability and financial viability,
need for farmers Marketing Facilitation Centres, simultaneous dual cropping, etc. The
Members also raised several queries and sought clarifications from the witness. The
Chairperson, thereafter, asked the witness to furnish to the Committee Secretariat
detailed replies to the points to which he could not readily respond at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew.
6. The verbatim proceedings were kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE  V
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
ESTIMATES (2014-2015)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10th March, 2015 from 1515 hrs. to 1650 hrs.
in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
4. Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo
5. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
7. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla
8. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
9. Shri Vinod Khanna
10. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
11. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
12. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy
13. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P.C. Koul — Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Additional Director
WITNESSES
1. Dr. Mangala Rai Fo rmer Secretary, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education & Director General,
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
2. Shri Sunil Mansinghka Co ordinator, Gau Vigyan Anusandhan Kendra,
Nagpur
90

91
2. The proceedings commenced with the Chairperson welcoming the Members
to the Sitting. The Chairperson then directed that the witnesses be ushered in.
(At around 1515 hrs. the witnesses took their seats.)
3. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and drew their attention to Direction
55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding confidentiality of the
proceedings of the Committee. After the customary introduction was over, the
Chairperson asked the witness at Sl. No. (1) above to brief the Committee about the
critical issues like productivity of organic farming, impact of organic farming on food
security, availability or otherwise of organic manure, seeds and their standards,
secondary nutrients, pest management, pricing of organic products, phytosanitary
measures of WTO regulating import and export of organic agro products etc. The said
witness briefed the Committee about these issues and other challenges pertaining to
organic farming. He also explained to the Committee the importance of primary,
secondary and micro nutrients, the essentiality of carbon contents for soil health and
their return in terms of crop productivity, integration of farming leading to compatibility
between agro and eco systems. He also apprised the Committee of the need for
efficiency in usage of water for growing crops, need for a system for production of
parasite predators, their transportation and storing facilities, as also the need for a
judicious blend of farming practices for optimum results without upsetting the
ecological balances, etc.
4. Thereafter, the second witness briefed the Committee about the activities
being undertaken by their organization in promoting and carrying out organic farming,
the various initiatives taken by their organization for encouraging use of byproducts
of cow dung and cow urine in organic farming and various other endeavours, etc.
5. Before the sitting concluded the Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish
replies to the queries that remained unanswered or partially answered to the Committee
Secretariat within a fortnight. He also directed them to send detailed replies to the List
of Points being sent to them by 23 March, 2015. The witness assured to submit the
replies as desired.
The witnesses then withdrew.
6. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE  VI
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMA TES
(2015-16)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10 August, 2015 from 1520 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in
Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri Kirti Azad
4. Shri Anil Shirole
5. Shri Ashok Chavan
6. Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo
7. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
11. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy
12. Md. Salim
13. Shri Arvind Sawant
14. Shri Ganesh Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar — Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Additional Director
4. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the
Committee and introduced newly elected Member (Shri Anil Shirole) to the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject
'National Project on Organic Farming' pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture & Cooperation).
4. The Committee adopted the Report without any modifications and authorized
the Chairperson to finalize the Report and present the same to Lok Sabha.
The Committee then adjourned.
92
GMGIPMRND—2300LS—23-10-2015—250 Copies.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520 006
(AP).
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842 002. (Bihar).
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P.B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110 001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110 009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110 024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110 001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110 052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110 002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110 002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110 054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110 003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110 006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110 005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P.B. No. 708, New Delhi-110 001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110 059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service, C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110 034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462 003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P .B. No. 2671,
Mumbai-400 002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400 002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605 001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641 012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600 014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (UP).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226 001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.