27
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF EX
-
SERVICEMEN WELFARE)
 
 
 
EX
-
SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
(2017
-
18)
 
 
 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 

 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
(2017
-
18)
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF EX
-
SERVICEMEN WELFARE)
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
 
(Presented to Lok 
Sabha on 
19 March, 2018)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
March, 2018/Phalguna 1939 (Saka)
 
 
 

 
 
E.C. No. ________
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : 
₹ _____
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2018 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government 
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi 
–
 
110002.
 

CONTENTS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
PAGE
 
 
COMPOSITION OF 
THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2017
-
18)
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
Report
 
 
1
 
CHAPTER II
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by Government
 
 
13
 
CHAPTER III
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of
 
Government’s replies
 
 
23
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government’s replies have not been accepted 
by the Committee
 
 
25
 
CHAPTER V
 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited
 
 
ANNEXURES
 
 
(i) Medical facilities for in
-
patient treatment and post
-
operative follow
-
up treatment to ECHS beneficiaries
 
 
(ii)  DO Letters of Defence Ministry and Secretary, ESW to 
State Governments regarding 
non
-
availability of land 
for polyclinics located in non
-
military stations
 
 
(iii) Agreement between Contractually Engaged Person 
and Station Commander for rendering services to 
ECHS Polyclinics
 
 
(iv)  Regularization of ECHS Smart Card Rate w.e.f. Feb, 
2009
 
 
27
 
 
 
33
 
 
36
 
 
45
 
 
 
54
 
 

 
 
 
APPENDICES
 
 
(i)    Minutes of the Twenty Third Sitting of the Committee 
on held  20 February, 2018
 
                                 
 
(ii)   Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twentieth Report of the Committee  on Estimates 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject Ex
-
Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme'
 
 
 
62
 
 
63
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2017
-
18)
 
 
         
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
–
 
Chairperson 
 
 
Members
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2. 
 
Shri A. Arunmozhithevan 
 
 
 
 
  
3. 
 
Shri George Baker 
 
 
 
 
  
4. 
 
Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
 
 
 
            
*5.
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri
 
 
 
 
  
6. 
 
Shri Dushyant Chautala 
 
 
 
 
  
7. 
 
Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
 
 
 
 
  
8. 
 
Col. Sonaram Choudhary 
 
 
 
           
$9.
 
Dr. Ratna De (Nag)
 
 
 
           
10. 
 
Shri Ramen Deka 
 
 
 
        
&11.
 
Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo
 
 
 
 
12. 
 
Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
 
 
 
 
13. 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 
 
 
 
14. 
 
Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri 
 
 
 
 
15. 
 
Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntala 
 
 
 
 
16. 
 
Smt. Raksha Khadse 
 
 
 
 
17. 
 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 
 
 
 
18. 
 
Shri P. Kumar 
 
 
 
 
19. 
 
Shri Rajesh Pandey 
 
 
 
 
20. 
 
Shri Ravindra 
Kumar Pandey 
 
 
 
 
21. 
 
Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
 
 
 
 
22. 
 
Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
 
 
 
 
23. 
 
Shri Konakalla Narayan Rao 
 
 
 
 
24. 
 
Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy 
 
 
 
        
%25.
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
 
 
 
 
26. 
 
Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 
 
 
 
27. 
 
Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
 
 
 
 
28. 
 
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
 
 
 
 
29. 
 
Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
 
 
 
 
30.
 
Shri Jay Prakash Narayan Yadav
 
 
_______________________________________________________________
 
 
* Elected vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part 
–
 
II No. 6141 dated 22.12.2017 vice Shri Ashwini
 
Kumar   Choubey appointed as 
Minister
 
 
 
$  
Elected vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part 
–
 
II No. 6141 dated 22.12.2017 vice Shri Sultan Ahmed died 
 
& Elected vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part 
–
 
II No. 6141 dated 22.12.2017 vice Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat
 
appointed as 
Minister
 
 
%
 
Elected vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part 
–
 
II No. 6141 dated 22.12.2017 vice Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole resigned
 
 

                 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Smt. Sudesh Luthra
 
 
-
 
Additional Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri N.C. Gupta
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
3.
 
Shri Vipin Kumar
 
 
-
 
Director 
 
4.
 
Shri Santosh Kumar
 
 
-
 
 
Additional Director
 
5.
 
Shri Sujay Kumar
 
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
6.
 
Shri L. Shantikumar 
 
 
-
 
Executive Assistant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates 
(2017
-
18) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Twenty Seventh Report on action taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee (2016
-
17
) on the 
subject 'Ex
-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Defence (Department of Ex
-
Servicemen Welfare).
 
 
2.
 
The Twentieth Report of the Committee on Estimates was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 9 December, 2016.  Action Taken No
tes on observations/recommendations 
were received from the Ministry of Defence (Department of Ex
-
Servicemen Welfare) on 
03 May, 2017.  The draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at the 
sitting held on 20 February, 2018.
 
 
3.
 
An analysis of
 
action taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report of the Committee is given in 
Appendix II.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;
 
DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
 
01 February, 2018
 
12 Magha, 1939 (Saka)
 
CHAIRPERSON,
 
ESTIMATES 
COMMITTEE.
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER 
-
 
I
 
REPORT
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in the 20
th
 
Report (16
th
 
Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Estimates (2016
-
17) on the subject ‘Ex
-
Servi
cemen Contributory Health 
Scheme’ pertaining to the Ministry of Defence (Department of Ex
-
Servicemen Welfare).
 
1.2
 
Twentieth Report (16
th
 
Lok Sabha)  was presented to Lok Sabha
 
on 9 December, 
2016. It contained 14 Recommendations/Observations. Action Taken Notes in respect 
of all the Recommendations/Observations were received from the Ministry of Defence 
(Department of Ex
-
Servicemen Welfare) on 3 May, 2017 
 
1.3
 
Replies to the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:
-
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:
 
       
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 12 & 14                                              
              
Total = 7
 
 
(Chapter II)
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
 
 
 
       
Sl. No. 8                                                                                      
        
Total = 1
 
 
(Chapter III)
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee:
 
       
Sl. Nos.  9 & 13                                                                              
     
Total = 2
 
 
(Chapter IV)
 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:
 
       
Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 7 &  10                                                                           Total = 4 
 
                                                                                                              
(Chapter V)
 

1.4
 
The Committee desire that final replies to the Recommendation Nos. 4, 5, 7 
and 10 and response to comments contained in Chapter I 
of this Report should 
be furnished expeditiously.
 
1.5
 
The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on some of 
the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.
 
 
 
A.
 
 
Need for Greater Geographical Coverage
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. 
No. 1)
 
1.6
 
Taking exception to the limited geographical coverage under the Ex
-
Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS), along with inadequate number of Polyclinics and 
Regional Centres, the Committee had expressed concern that the scheme has so far 
cov
ered only a total of 339 districts thus restricting the geographical coverage to a mere 
51 percent and the total number of Polyclinics stand at only 426 out of which only 418 
were operational. The Committee had expressed serious dismay over the non
-
judicio
us 
distribution of Polyclinics in some States and had noted that due to excess load on 
already existing Polyclinics with respect to their designated capacity and inadequacy of 
resources, efficient medicare is not being provided to the Ex
-
Servicemen (ESM). 
Accordingly, the Committee had recommended that effective steps be taken to 
operationalise the 426 Polyclinics already sanctioned and measures be taken 
expeditiously to further increase geographical coverage of the Scheme by taking up the 
next phase of exp
ansion to 67 stations. The Committee had also recommended that the 
expenditure incurred on public transport by the remote area designated beneficiaries for 
visiting ECHS centres upto the rank of non
-
Junior Commissioned Officers (non
-
JCOs) be 
reimbursed til
l such designated remote geographical coverage of ECHS centres is 
completed. The Committee had further recommended that a precise plan be drawn up 
for subsequent expansion of the Polyclinics network providing thereby better 
geographical coverage of ECHS,  
considering the incremental increase in the number of 
beneficiaries and the mounting load on the existing Polyclinics. The Committee had 
requested to be apprised of the measures taken regarding this.
 

1.7
 
In their response, the Ministry has stated that 227 
Polyclinics were sanctioned in 
December 2002. Thereafter, the Scheme was expanded in 2010, when 199 additional 
Polyclinics were sanctioned which makes a total of 426 ECHS Polyclinics across the 
Country. As per information provided by the Ministry, presentl
y, out of 684 districts in 
the Country, 358 districts are covered by ECHS. These Polyclinics cover approx 52% 
districts in the Country. Out of 426 ECHS Polyclinics, 421 are operational and remaining 
five Polyclinics are to be made functional shortly. The o
pening of new ECHS Polyclinics 
is considered on the basis of the population of ESM, availability of Medical, Para
-
Medical Staff and also Empanelled Hospital. The case for opening of new Polyclinics is 
deliberated at Command Headquarters level and forwarded
 
to Central Organisation 
ECHS with recommendations for projection. The Ministry have further informed that the 
case for opening of 84 additional Polyclinics is under consideration. With these 84 
Polyclinics, coverage will be 59% of the Districts countrywid
e. It is stated that a 
graduated approach has been adopted to ensure that optimum utilization of resources/ 
Polyclinics sanctioned is ensured based on inputs from already operational Polyclinics 
in the proximity. The ultimate aim is that the places where t
he number of ESM residing 
in the area meets the requirement of number of ESM and other provisions of the 
scheme,  in such places, opening of polyclinic will be considered.   In case of ESM who 
do not have accessibility to Polyclinics or empanelled hospital
s, provision exists to avail 
facilities in any Government Hospital for which sanction has been issued vide Ministry of 
Defence (MoD) ID No 22D(09)/2013/US(WE)/D(Res) dated 26 July 2016. The Ministry 
has also apprised that, a case is under consideration to 
grant FMA to ESM residing in 
District not covered by ECHS Polyclinic. With regard to recommendation of the 
Committee to reimburse transport expenditure for remote area personnel upto non
-
JCO 
or below, the Committee have been apprised that it would be exami
ned. 
 
1.8
 
The Committee note from the action taken reply that pursuant to their 
recommendation, some of the steps have been by the Government to improve the 
health coverage and medical facil
ities to Ex
-
Servicemen viz (i) 
increase in the 
geographical covera
ge from 51% to 52% Districts in the country; (ii) increase in 
the number of  functional ECHS from 418 to 421 and the remaining  five ECHS 
stated to be made functional shortly; (iii) case for opening of 84 additional 

Polyclinics is under consideration  whic
h would increase the coverage to 59% of 
the Districts; (iv) issue of sanction on 26
 
 
July, 2016 for availing facility in 
Government Hospitals in case of ESM who do not have accessibility to 
Polyclinics or empanelled hospitals; and (v) a case is under consi
deration to 
grant FMA to ESM residing in District not covered by ECHS Polyclinic. The 
Committee appreciate the measures being taken for  increasing the coverage of 
the Polyclinics both geographically as well as numerically.  Such steps would go 
a long way 
in mitigating the problems 
relating to healthcare of ESM. 
The 
Committee feel that the system of increasing the number of Polyclinics needs to 
be institutionalized r
ather than undertaken as a knee
-
jerk reaction. Besides
,
 
early 
decision on the matters under 
consideration should be taken and Committee 
be 
apprised accordingly.    
 
As regards the issue of reimbursement of expenditure incurred on travel 
undertaken for medical purposes by officers upto below JCO level, the 
Committee have been apprised that the iss
ue would be examined. The Committee 
emphasize that an urgent and immediate decision needs to be taken in this 
regard so as to give relief to such eligible officers who do not have Polyclinics in 
their neighbourhood and they incur expenditure for tr
avelling
 
for medical 
purposes. The Committee trust 
that the issues related to ECHS would be 
considered with a positive mind and the Committee 
be 
apprised of the outcome in 
this regard without any delay. 
 
 
B.
 
Treatment  Provided
 
to Beneficiaries at Empanelled Facilities
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
 
1.9
 
Taking cognizance of the treatment meted out to the ECHS beneficiaries at the 
empanelled hospitals, refusal by private hospitals to honour ECHS patients despite 
signing o
f Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) with the Ministry and prescribing of 
‘branded medicines’ in place of generic medicines by doctors and resultant 
dissatisfaction amongst the beneficiaries, the Committee had recommended that a 
written clause to the effect of 
prescribing generic medicines be incorporated in the 

agreement at the time of empanelment with a provision for debarring of such a hospital 
and also for legal action against such doctors and hospitals who refuse to treat ECHS 
patients or delay their treatm
ent. 
 
1.10
 
In their response, the Ministry has stated that the MoA with Empanelled Hospitals 
is under revision in line with CGHS MoA and this clause of prescribing generic 
medicines and debarring hospitals and legal action will be suitably addressed. 
 
1.11
 
Pursuant to the recommendation of the Committee to incorporate, in the 
agreement at the time of empanelment, a clause of prescribing generic medicines 
and debarring hospitals as well as taking legal action against doctors and 
hospitals who refuse to treat
 
ECHS patients or delay their treatment, the Ministry 
in the action taken note has stated that the MoA with Empanelled Hospitals is 
under revision in line with CGHS MoA and the issues raised in the 
recommendation would be suitably addressed. While taking n
ote of the reply of 
the Ministry, the Committee stress for revision of MoA immediately which would 
help in providing quality and cost
-
effective  treatment to ECHS beneficiaries.  
 
 
C. 
 
Shortage of Manpower
  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.
 
5)
 
1.12
 
Taking note of the substantial existing vacancies among medical officers, 
medical superintendents and medical specialists in hospitals meant for ESM and also in 
Polyclinics, the Committee had questioned the need for sanctioning 1709 interim 
contractual vac
ancies when the existing vacancies are yet to be completely filled. The 
Committee had, accordingly, recommended that the proposed hike in remuneration for 
various grades of medical staff be made applicable without any further delay. In addition 
to the enha
ncement in 
financial remuneration package, 
the Committee had 
recommended further incentives for the medical staff in the form of special hardship 
allowance for those posted in remote areas. The Committee had further recommended 
that Medical Officers may be
 
allowed to continue with private practice for some hours 
after fulfilling of contractual commitments towards ECHS in far flung and remote districts 
in order to further compensate them.  
 

1.13
 
In their reply, the Ministry has stated that of five types of P
olyclinics, i.e. Type ‘A’, 
‘B’, ‘C’, ‘D’ and ‘E’ (Mobile), specialist are authorized in Type ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ Polyclinics 
only, thus total authorization of Specialists in 426 Polyclinics is 322 only. Majority of 
Polyclinic are Type ’D’ (270), where Medical
 
Specialists are not authorized. The reasons 
for vacancies of authorized Specialists and Doctors remaining vacant in remote areas 
have been cited as their non
-
availability. The Ministry further informed that in 2003, 
when the Scheme came into being, a tota
l of 5091 contractual employees were 
authorized. It is only after 1709 interim contractual posts were sanctioned in 2013 based 
on case taken up for authorizing additional staff, the strength became 6800. At present, 
760 Doctors and 168 Specialist Doctors a
re employed in ECHS. This is a dynamic 
figure due to ongoing hiring process, superannuation and Doctors resigning from 
emp
loyment due to various reasons. 
The Ministry has also informed that for 
incentivizing the contractual staff, case for enhancement of p
ay scale was taken up and 
upward revision of contractual fees (salary) was sanctioned w.e.f. September 2015. It 
has also been intimated that besides hike in pay, working hours of specialist is 30 hours 
in comparison to the Medical Officers (48 hours). The 
Ministry has assured that 
notwithstanding the same, a case for further incentivization for Medical Specialist and 
Doctors in remote area Polyclinics would be taken up with MoD. With reference to 
allowing private practice by the doctors, the Ministry clarif
ied that Doctors and Medical 
Specialists are not allowed private practice only during working hours as per 
Government of India letter No. 24(6)/03/US(WE)/D(Res)/Pt III dt 15 June 2006
. 
They 
have assured that the recommendation of special hardship allowance
 
will be examined.
 
1.14
 
The Committee had noted that the revision of contractual fee for the 
medical staff has been imp
lemented w.e.f. September 2015.
 
The Committee would 
like to reiterate that some form of financial incentives or otherwise for the medical
 
staff 
may
 
be seriously considered by the Ministry so that the attrition rate is 
brought down 
to the minimum extent possible.
 
The Committee feel that such 
measures are specially relevant for medical st
aff posted in the remote areas.
 
In 
the absence of any e
xtra financial incentive, it would be very difficult to the 
ECHS 
to retain such personnel. 
The Committee take note of the assurance of the 

Ministry 
regarding 
consideration of special hardship allowance and urge that they 
may be informed about the final dec
ision taken in this regard. 
 
 
D.
 
 
Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC)
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
 
1.15
 
The Committee noted the shortage of medical officers and medical specialists in 
the Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) as there has been no
 
periodic upward 
revision in sanctioned intake from AFMC, and had recommended that the intake from 
AFMC be suitably enhanced. The Committee had also urged the Government to look 
into the timely revision of manpower in the AFMS to overcome chronic shortages
.
 
1.16
 
In their reply, the Ministry has submitted that although annual intake from AFMC 
is 130 (105 boys and 25 girls), sanction for the intake of 140 exists since 1999. They 
have further informed that the requirement for infrastructure in a block of 100
-
1
50 
students is the same as per Medical Council of India (MCI) guidelines. They have 
intimated that the proposal for according concurrence to enhance the annual intake 
from AFMC to 150 is under consideration. With respect to the issue of overcoming 
chronic 
shortages in AFMS, the Ministry has stated that the Government of India, MoD 
after reviewing the requirement, has approved augmenting the manpower of AFMS by 
10590 in three phases. While augmentation of manpower of AFMS in two phases has 
already been carri
ed out, phase three of the augmentation is under process. They have 
further informed that an initial allocation of additional 557 posts for Medical Officers and 
Dental Officers for Army and Air Force have been sanctioned by the Government as 
part of Traini
ng Drafting and Leave Reserve (TDLR) and the remaining posts of TDLR, 
i.e.
, 704 medical officers and 45 dental officers will be sanctioned by the Government 
after filing up these posts. It has also been intimated that in order to overcome the 
deficiency in
 
AFMS, doctors are being recruited from the civil in addition to the intake 
from AFMC. Currently recruitment process for filing up the vacant posts is in progress.  
 
 
1.17
 
The Committee are constrained to note that despite shortage of Medical 
Officers and 
Medical Specialists in AFMS, there has been no periodic upward 

revision 
in sanctioned intake from AFMS.
 
Not only that the actual annual intake 
from AFMC is only 130 as against the sanctioned intake of 140 since 1999
. 
The 
Committee have been informed that t
he proposal for according concurrence to 
enhance the annual intake from AFMC to 150
 
is under consideration. 
The 
Committee stress for immediate decision in this rega
rd. 
As regards enhancement 
of manpower to address the issue of chronic shortage
,
 
the Committee note that 
the Government of India, Ministry of Defence has approved augmenti
ng the 
manpower of AFMS by 
10590 in three phases and phase three of the 
augmentation is under process. 
The Committee also note that in order to 
overcome the deficien
cy in AFMS, doctors are being recruited from the Civil in 
addition to the intake from AFMS
.
 
The Committee desire that necessary steps for 
recruitment be taken expeditiously to overcome the deficiency of manpower in 
AFMS. 
 
 
E.
 
Shortage of Medicines and Lack
 
of Medical Equipment at ECHS Polyclinics 
and Army Hospitals
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
 
1.18
 
Expressing serious concern over difficulties being faced by the ECHS 
beneficiaries due to non
-
availability of medicines and lack of medical equipments 
at the 
ECHS Polyclinics, the Committee had recommended immediate provision for 
reimbursement of medicines on the lines of CGHS for prescribed but unavailable 
medicines.  The Committee had further recommended that the supply of essential drugs 
listed by ECH
S and the common drug list be assured. Further, the number of Direct 
Demanding Officers be suitably increased to improve coverage alongwith a further 
increase in the financial powers of all Competent Financial Authorities (CFAs) for better 
inventory manage
ment of medicines. Also, the Committee had recommended that the 
concept of Authorized Local Chemists (ALCs) be introduced and made functional at the 
earliest in line with CGHS. The Committee had also desired that the existing system of 
budgeting, procureme
nt, stocking, distribution and disposal of medicines be analyzed 
and simplified for being made less time consuming and client
-
friendly. The Committee, 
noting that the Ministry have formed a Committee to minimize dissatisfaction over 

availability of medicin
es and for suggesting suitable measures in this behalf, had 
desired to be apprised of the suggestions made by the Committee appointed by the 
Government and the action taken within the timeframe given.
 
1.19
 
In their reply to the points raised by the Committ
ee, the Ministry responded that 
the Authorised Local Chemist (ALC) concept is being re
-
examined in view of  
introduction of DFPDS 2016 and DPM 2009 and CVC guidelines on the issue.  
 
 
1.20
 
The Committee had recommended for a comprehensive set of reforms wi
th 
the objective of ensuring that the system of dispensing medicines from the 
Polyclinics is streamlined in favour of beneficiaries so that they do not have to 
suffer due to lack of availability of medicines and equipments. The Committee are 
disappointed t
o note that 
the Ministry has responded to
 
just one of the issue
s
 
related to Authorised Local Chemist (ALC), in respect of which it is stated that 
ALC concept is being re
-
examined in view of introduction of DFPDS 2016 and 
DPM 2009 a
nd CVC guidelines on the 
issue.
 
On other important suggestions viz. 
(i) immediate provision for reimbursement of medicines on the lines of CGHS for 
prescribed but unavailable medicines; (ii)
 
assuring supply of essential drugs 
listed by ECHS and the common drug list; (iii) increase
 
in the number of Direct 
Demand Officers; and (iv) to analyse and simplify the existing system of 
budgeting, procurement, stocking, distribution and disposal of medicines so as 
to make it less time consuming and client
-
friendly, the Ministry has
 
chosen not
 
to 
respond at all. 
Not only that the Ministry has opted not to even apprise the 
Committee about the suggestions/action taken by the Committee appointed to 
minimize dissatisfaction over availability of medicines and for suggesting 
suitable measures
. 
The Co
mmittee take strong exception to the way their 
recommendation has b
een dealt with by the Ministry.
 
While reiterating their 
recommendation, the Committee would like the Ministry to take urgent and 
immediate steps on the suggestions made which would definite
ly improve        
the existing system of dispensing medicines 
in
 
Polyclinics and make the 
processes less cumbe
rsome and beneficiary friendly.
 
With regard to the issue of 

ALC, the Committee  would like the Ministry to take the decision immediately so 
as to 
help ECHS beneficiaries.  
 
 
 
F. 
 
Issue of Domiciliary Equipment
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
 
1.21
 
Noting the lack of timely availability of medical equipment for domiciliary use 
leading to delay in providing of such equipment to the beneficiarie
s, the Committee had 
recommended that the clause of five years for use of medical equipment be done away 
with, on production of a certificate regarding faultiness of the equipment outside of 
warranty period and the need for issue of a new or better equipme
nt. The Committee 
had also desired that procedural modalities be smoothened for early procurement and 
timely supply of medical equipment.
 
1.22
 
In their reply, the Ministry has stated that the life of medical equipments for 
domiciliary use like CPAP, BiPAP,
 
Oxygen Concentrator etc. have been fixed by 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as 5 years. There is provision as per existing 
orders to replace the said equipment on completion of life cycle. The Ministry has stated 
that it is in consonance with the Co
mmittee to formulate procedure for replacement 
before completion of life of equipment. They have informed that the logistics of declaring 
the equipment unserviceable and depositing/withdrawal of equipment is being worked 
out with concerned agencies. The Mi
nistry has further intimated that the procedure of 
procurement and supply of these items starts with Station Headquarters entering into a 
price agreement with vendors for the whole year and issuing supply orders as and when 
required. They have also communi
cated that though the procedures and provisions are 
in place but the delays occur when the beneficiaries wish to collect the equipment from 
Polyclinics other than their parent Polyclinics either due to ease of accessibility or due to 
non
-
availability of su
pplying vendors. In such a situation, the extra migrant workload is 
difficult to assess and leads to budgetary mismatch and resultant delays. This issue is 
being addressed by persuading veterans to collect the equipment from parent Polyclinic 

only.  Emerge
ncy requirement is being processed through treating hospitals from their 
medicine procurement budgets.
 
1.23
 
The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has taken cognizance of the 
problems being faced by the beneficiaries and has agreed to formulate procedu
re 
for replacement of medical equipments before completion of life i.e. five years.  
The Committee hope that logistics for declaring the equipment unserviceable and 
depositing/withdrawal of equipment would be worked out expeditiously thereby 
helping the EC
HS beneficiaries. 
 
With regard to
 
the issue of timely supply of medical equipment, the 
Committee understand the concerns expressed by the Ministry regarding 
'migrant workload' which leads to the estimates going haywire. However, a 
sympathetic view needs to
 
be taken in this regard, and the reasons for 
beneficiaries choosing a particular Polyclinic has to be properly understood in 
order to find an effective solution. The Committee, therefore, desire that the issue 
should be addressed in the true spirit of the
 
recommendation of the Committee 
and the outcome of the efforts being made in this regard 
be 
apprised to the 
Committee.  
 
 
G.
 
Overcharging for Health Smart Card
  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 13)
 
1.24
 
Noting that approximately 
`
50 Crore
 
has been collected from the beneficiaries of 
ECHS since 2004 until the expiry of the contract, whereas the Department of Ex
-
Servicemen Welfare (DESW) has claimed that the cost of health smart card is included 
in the IT backbone itself meaning thereby that
 
the firm might have included the cost of 
provision of smart card also in their price quoted for the contract, the Committee had 
desired to be apprised of the rationale for charging the beneficiaries of ECHS 
separately.
 

1.25
 
In their response, the Ministry
 
has stated that the ECHS has benefitted on the 
contract to the extent that a large number of IT assets deployed at Polyclinics have 
been provided by the firm supplying Smart Cards as part of the project and that the 
ECHS has not paid for any of these IT H
ardware since it was part of the contract. The 
Government has not paid the firm for the cost of card as the payment is made by the 
individuals. 
 
1.26
 
The Committee had categorically desired to know the reasons for charging 
the cost of Health Smart Cards fr
om the beneficiaries as the cost of these Cards 
was included in the
 
IT backbone itself. 
Even when the Ministry has acknowledged 
in the action taken note that a large number of IT assets deployed at Polyclinics 
have been provided by the firm supplying Smart
 
Cards as part of the project and 
that the ECHS has not paid for any of these IT Hardware being part of the 
contract, the Ministry has tried to avoid the specific concern of the Committee 
with regard to charging beneficiaries the cost of the Health Smart C
ards
. 
While 
expressing their strong displeasure at the way the Ministry has tried to side
-
track 
their recommendation, the Committee would like the categorical response in this 
regard. 
 
 
 

CHAPTER 
-
 
II
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED B
Y THE 
GOVERNMENT
 
 
Recommendation/Observation (Sl. No.
 
1)
 
 
Need for greater geographical coverage:
 
The Committee note that at the time of 
inception of the Ex
-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS), 227 polyclinics 
under 13 Regional Centres were sancti
oned to provide 'out patient care' to the 
beneficiaries. However, in 2010, 182 additional polyclinics under 15 more regional 
centres along with 17 mobile clinics were sanctioned, making a total of 426 ECHS 
polyclinics. The Committee are concerned to note t
hat the scheme has so far covered 
only a total of 339 districts out of 659 districts in the country restricting the geographical 
coverage to a mere 51 per cent. Further, the Committee also note that  out of total 426 
ECHS polyclinics, 418 are operational. 
Notably, any further expansion shall be 
undertaken only upon making the already sanctioned polyclinics operational, taking the 
coverage to 59 per cent instead of 51 per cent.  The Committee are dismayed to note 
the non
-
judicious distribution of polyclinics
 
in some States. Due to excess load on 
already existing polyclinics with respect to their designated capacity and inadequacy of 
resources, the Committee express their serious concern over the lack of efficient 
medicare being provided to ESM. The Committee 
therefore recommend that effective 
steps be taken to operationalize the 426 polyclinics already sanctioned and measures 
be taken expeditiously to further increase geographical coverage of the scheme by 
taking up the next phase of expansion to 67 stations. 
The Committee also recommend 
that the expenditure incurred on public transport by the remote area designated 
beneficiaries for visiting ECHS centres upto the rank of non
-
JCOs and below be 
reimbursed till such designated remote geographical coverage of ECHS
 
centres is 
completed. The Committee further recommend that a precise plan be drawn up for 
subsequent expansion of the polyclinics network and thereby better geographical 
coverage of ECHS considering the incremental increase in the number of beneficiaries 

and the mounting load on the existing polyclinics and the Committee be apprised of the 
same.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Government has sanctioned 227 Polyclinics in Dec 2002 and thereafter the 
Scheme was expanded in 2010, wherein 199 additional Polyclin
ics were sanctioned. 
This makes a total of 426 ECHS Polyclinics across the Country.  Presently, out of 684 
districts in the Country, 358 districts are covered by ECHS. These Polyclinics cover 
approx 52% districts in the Country.  Out of 426 ECHS Polyclinic
s, 421 are operational 
and remaining five Polyclinics will be made functional shortly. The opening of new 
ECHS Polyclinics is considered based on the population of ESM, availability of Medical, 
Para Medical Staff and also Empanelled Hospital.  The case is 
deliberated at Command 
Headquarters level and forwarded to Central Organisation ECHS with recommendations 
for projection. The case for opening of 84 additional Polyclinics is under consideration. 
With these 84 Polyc
linics, coverage will be 59
% of the Distr
icts countrywide. It is stated 
that a graduated approach has been adopted to ensure that optimum utilization of 
resources / Polyclinics sanctioned is ensured based on inputs from already operational 
Polyclinics in the proximity. The ultimate aim is that th
e places where the no. of Ex
-
servicemen residing in the area meets the requirement of no. of  ESM  and other 
provisions of the scheme,  in such places opening of polyclinic will be considered.   In 
case of ESMs who do not have accessibility to polyclinics 
or empanelled hospitals  
provision exists to avail facilities in any Govt Hospital for which sanction has been 
issued vide MoD ID No 22D(09)/2013/US(WE)/D(Res) dated 26 Jul 2016 (copy 
attached as 
Annexure
-
I
).  In addition, a case is under consideration to 
grant FMA to 
ESM residing in District not covered by ECHS Polyclinic.  The recommendation of the 
committee to reimburse transport expenditure for remote area personnel upto Non JCO 
or below would be examined.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
(
Please see para
 
no. 1.8 of Chapter 
-
 
I
)
 
 
 
 

Recommendation/Observation (Sl. No.
 
2)
 
 
Acquisition of land for polyclinics:
 
The Committee note
 
that of the total 409 
polyclinics sanctioned, land has been acquired for 221 locations and buildings have 
been constructed for 140 locations. Land is yet to be acquired for non
-
military clinics in 
case of 188 sites. The total non
-
military polyclinics stan
d at 297 of which only 109 are 
operating from permanent locations. The Committee are of the considered view that 
major difficulties are faced where land is to be acquired from State Governments or 
individuals. The Committee further note that even where lan
d is acquired, a 
considerable amount of time is taken at the end of the Ministry of Defence (DESW) to 
complete formalities and construct a permanent building as 68 locations are such where 
land has been acquired but a permanent building is yet awaited.  Th
e Committee also 
note that despite some efforts being made to coordinate with the States to expedite 
acquisition, there is inordinate delay in acquisition and consequently in construction of 
clinics. They, therefore, recommend that concerted efforts be mad
e to accelerate the 
process for acquisition of land and early construction of medical infrastructure for ESMs. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Presen
t status of acquisition of land
/cons
truction of polyclinics out of 182 
locations, where land was yet to be acquired, when the report was finalised is as 
follows:
-
 
 
 
(a)
 
Land Acquired
.
 
 
 
Status of Construction of Polyclinics
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
   
(i)
 
Amaravati(Maharashtra)
 
Acquisitioned on 4
th
 
May 2016.  Board of 
Officers for construction is under process.
 
(ii)
 
Villupuram (TamilNadu).
 
Land taken over from State Govt. on 8
th
 
March 
2016.  Board of Officers in  progress.
 
(iii)
 
Chittoor (Andhra 
Pradesh).
 
Land taken over by Deputy Executive Office
r 
(DEO).  Board  proceedings in progress for 

construction.
 
(iv)
 
Tambaram (Tamilnadu).
 
 
Land earmarked in Defence land and 
construction under Air Force Station, 
Tambaram.  Board of Officers is in progress.
 
(v)
 
Vijaywada (Andhra 
Pradesh). 
 
 
Land taken over by Deputy Executive Officer 
(DEO) in July 2016.  Further action is under 
process. 
 
(vi)
 
Karimnagar (Telangana).
 
Land taken over by Deputy Executive Officer.  
(DEO).  Board proceedings in progress for  
construction.
 
(vii)
 
Dungerpur. (Rajas
than )
 
Land taken over from civil administration.  
Convening order for construction is under 
process.
 
(viii)
 
Nagapattinam
 
(Tamil Nadu)
 
Land acquired in April, 2016.  Board of Officers 
is in progress.
 
 
(b)
 
Sanction Received
.
 
 
Status regarding acquisition 
of land
 
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
   
(i)
 
Tuticorin (TamilNadu).
 
Eight cent of land allotted by State Govt. in Oct. 
2016.  Further action in hand by Station 
Commander.
 
(ii)
 
Ananthpur (Andhra 
Pradesh).
 
Payment made to District Authority in Mar. 2017.  
Land acquisition is 
under process.
 
(iii)
 
Gulbarga (Karnataka).
 
Sanction received in Sep. 2016.  Action to take 
over land by Deputy Executive  Officer (DEO) in 
progress.
 
 
 
 
 

(c)
 
Case for Acquisition Under Progress
.
 
 
 
(i)
 
Sonipat (Haryana) with DDG (Lands)/MoD from 07 Jan 14.
 
(ii)
 
Etawah (Uttar Pradesh) with DGDE from 29 May 12. 
 
(iii)
 
Ghazipur (Utttar Pradesh) with US (WE) from 21 Mar 11.
 
(iv)
 
Angul (Odisha) with US (WE) from 15 Feb 16.
 
(v)
 
Dehra Gopipur (HP) with US (WE) from 04 May 16.
 
(vi)
 
Greater Noida (Delhi) with US (WE
) from 09 Jun 16.
 
(vii)
 
Cuddalore (Tamilnadu) with US (WE) from 02 Sep 16.
 
(viii)
 
Shimoga (Karnataka) with US (WE) from 15 Sep 16.
 
(ix)
 
Bijapur (Karnataka) with US (WE) from 21 Nov 16.
 
(x)
 
COD Kandivali (Mumbai) with QMG Branch from 14 Oct 16.
 
 
 
The proced
ure for acquisition of land for construction of buildings of ECHS 
Polyclinics is laid down vide MoD letter No 24(14)/03/US/(WE)/D(Res) dated 
 
31 January 05.  Efforts are being made to acquire land for construction of Polyclinic 
buildings at all the locatio
n where defence land is not available.  Towards acquisition of 
land of ECHS Polyclinics, Defence Minister and Secretary, ESW have written to all the 
Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries of the State Government respectively vide MoD 
ID No 24(14)/03/US(WE)/
D(Res)/4800
-
F/RM dated 21 Aug 07 and 22D (02)/12/US 
(WE)/D(Res) dated 28 Feb 2012 (copy attached as 
Annexure
-
II
) with a request to allot 
a piece of land for construction of building of ECHS Polyclinics as a welfare measure for 
Ex
-
Servicemen residing in the
 
State.  Regular liaison is carried out by formation HQs 
with Revenue authorities. The Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) has also been requested to 
assist in identifying the land for ECHS Polyclinics and the KSB raised the issue during 
30
th
 
Meeting of KSB held o
n 21 Jul 16 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi, which was 
Presided over by Hon’ble RM, which was attended by functionaries of State Govt.  
Specific case for integrated complex of Ex
-
servicemen Hostel, CSD Canteen and ECHS 

Polyclinic is also being explored so that
 
requirement of land and construction is reduced 
to some extent.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation (Sl. No.
 
3)
 
 
Empanelment of Hospitals:
 
The Committee note that a total of 1268 private 
hospitals have been empanelled under ECHS. The Committee further note that due to 
delayed clearance of bills, as many as 407 empanelled hospitals withdrew from the 
empanelment and despite the introduction of
 
online billing only 46 hospitals have 
rejoined ECHS. The Committee are dismayed to note that 71 polyclinics out of a total of 
418 functional polyclinics did not have any empanelled facility in its location. This 
reflects poorly on the reach of the scheme.
 
The mere 51 per cent geographical 
coverage of the scheme in the country and further non
-
availability of empanelled facility 
in another 71 polyclinics indicates lack of services and the resultant hardships being 
faced by the beneficiaries. Taking a serious
 
view of the hardships being faced by ex
-
servicemen, the Committee recommend that along with increasing the geographical 
coverage of the scheme, immediate steps be also taken to ensure that adequate 
hospitals are empanelled with every polyclinic. The conce
rns of private hospitals for not 
empanelling with ECHS be addressed at the earliest and station headquarters be 
directed to give wide publicity of the scheme to ensure that more hospitals volunteer to 
be empanelled with the ECHS. The Committee also recomme
nd that the existing CFA 
financial powers be adequately enhanced from time to time to ensure speedy settlement 
of bills. Taking note of excessive load of ECHS beneficiaries on polyclinics and army 
hospitals and the avoidable shuttling of ECHS beneficiaries
 
between polyclinics and 
hospitals especially at non
-
military stations, the Committee recommend that the referral 
procedure for going to an empanelled facility be simplified and made beneficiary 
friendly.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
860 hospitals have been empanelled with ECHS in last three years (Jan 2014 
–
 
Dec 2016) alongwith 53 Prosthetic
 
Centre (Endolite & Ottobock). 
Advertisement have 
been published in local news paper of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Eastern State 
of India in e
very district to cover all Polycli
nic with empanelled facilities.
 
The financial 

powers for online billing have been issue
d in 2011 and revised in 2014. 
The referral 
procedure will further be simplified once complete automation takes place.
 
 
Observation/Rec
ommendation (Sl. No. 6)
 
 
 
Shortage of Manpower in posts reserved for ESM:
 
The Committee note severe 
shortages of manpower to the tune of 78 per cent for medical staff, 72 per cent for 
paramedical staff and 70 per cent for non
-
medical staff in posts reserve
d for the ESM. 
The Committee believe that such a huge shortfall cannot be due to mere recent 
developments but due to prolonged neglect. In the first place, the posts reserved, if not 
filled, can be filled up by civilian candidates but only after an endorse
ment to such effect 
is issued by the General Officer Commanding (GOC) Area/Sub Area. The huge backlog 
reflects poorly on the performance  and flawed policies of the Ministry. Further, as for 
doctors, the shortage also exists in unreserved posts, but the sa
me is not true for 
paramedical and non
-
medical staff, which could have been filled well in time if opened 
for civilian candidates. The action plan of the Ministry merely talks of wide publicity and 
a proposal to increase the remuneration of medical staff. 
However, no proposal for 
revision of remuneration of paramedical and non
-
medical staff was brought to the notice 
of the Committee. Therefore, the Committee recommend that such posts be filled by 
available candidates at the earliest after receiving endorsem
ent from the concerned 
GOC's and the proposal to revise remuneration of medical staff be considered and 
adopted without any delay. An action plan to fill up these posts from available 
candidates, civilian or ex
-
servicemen, should be drafted considering the
 
need for 
introducing special incentives/allowances especially in remote areas. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
The posts reserved for the Ex
-
serviceman are being filled up by civilian 
can
didates after an endorsement to such effect issued by the General Officer 
Commanding (GOC) resulting in 5906 vacancies  out of 6800 i.e. 86% being filled up.
 

 
The consideration as mentioned in Para 5 & 6 for the need of introducing special 
incentives/allow
ances especially in remote areas for Med/Para/Non Med Staff is 
endorsed to fill up the vacancies. The recommendation would be examined. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
 
 
 
Provisioning of Smart Cards:
 
The Committee note that Smart Cards were 
provisioned to ECHS beneficiaries from the year 2003 and the contract for the same 
was provided to a private firm. Up till 31 May, 2015, the contract was operational with 
the firm. However, the Committee are pertur
bed to note that on culmination of the 
contract, no internal control system to weed out unaccounted cards and to check 
multiple enrolments of cards and beneficiaries is in place resulting in raising of fake bills 
in the name of ineligible persons with expi
red cards or with fraudulent membership. The 
Committee were further informed during evidence regarding instructions issued to 
Central Organization (CO), ECHS to check any misuse of smart cards that should have 
been ideally deactivated but in absence of any
 
mechanism continue to avail the 
facility/service. The Committee are anguished to note the inability of the Ministry for not 
contracting a new agency for supply of smart cards despite the expiry of contract in 
May, 2015.  Such delay on the part of the Mini
stry not only causes loss to the public 
exchequer due to raising of ineligible bills but also causes serious inconvenience to the 
beneficiaries. The Committee also take a strong view of the lack of adequate checks 
and balances to prevent multiple enrolment
s in the scheme and recommend immediate 
action to rectify the anomaly and ensure timely awarding of contracts for smooth 
functioning of the scheme.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
Action for finalising the new contract for making Smart Card has been taken.   
Te
chnical bid has been completed. Price bid has been opened. PNC  has been 
completed. 
The case is being processed for final approval of the CFA and 
MoD(Fin./Pen) before issue of letter of Acceptance of Tender.  Points/ concerns noticed 
by the Estimate Commit
tee are being paid due attention during the ensuing contract.
 

Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 12)
 
 
Unauthorised extensions:
 
The Committee observe
 
that CAG in the performance audit 
has found irregularities in renewal of the agreement for supply of smart cards with the 
same firm with increased cost without sanction of CFA. When asked as to the reasons 
for the same, DESW instead of furnishing the rati
onale, merely stated that the
 
extension 
was given by the then Competent Financial Authority (CFA), the Adjutant General and 
the ECHS was placed as an attached office of DESW only in October, 2009 for only 
executive role (policy formulation). Further, the D
epartment stated that AG’s Branch is 
still responsible for administrative and technical control.  Prior to that, the Committee 
were informed that AG’s Branch was authorised by the Ministry to enter into any 
agreement/renew or termination in respect to the 
Scheme.  Taking  serious note of the 
delay on the part of  DESW  to furnish specific reply, the Committee
, therefore, 
recommend that they be furnished the basis of renewal of the contract with the same 
firm with increased cost at the earliest but positivel
y within three months of the 
presentation of this Report.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
The basis for extension of the contract with the same firm was arrived at after 
analysing the proposal submitted by firm and various options suggested (copy attached 
as 
An
nexure IV
).  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)
 
 
 
Revamping of internal audit:
 
The Committee are surprised to find that there is no 
post audit mechanism in ECHS despite having budgetary allocations of 
`
2200 crore
 
approximately. There does not appear to be concurrent audit also. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a robust  audit module should be  put in place at the earliest 
to detect malpractices concurrently such as unauthorized use of ECHS, double payment 
of the bills, etc and the Committee be apprised. 
 
 

 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
Strengthening measures for curbing malpractices with multilayered auditing has 
been made possible with introduc
tion of online billing system. 
All Polyclinics and 
Regional Centres
 
pan India are online wef 1
st
 
April, 2015
 
(a)   
Internal Audit measures
 
       
(i)
 
Rate Integration Module
 
Hospitals cannot enter more than authorised 
 
amount for package rates.
 
(ii)
 
Multilayered Scrutiny of Bills
 
 
The
 
bills are scrutinized at three stages in 
Bill Processing Agency (BPA) levels, two stages at Competent Financial 
Authority (CFA) level with need were information facility to hospital at all 
stages.
 
(b)
 
External Audit
  
PCDA/CDAs have been doing post  audit 
of bills manually.  
Online audit module has been introduced to facilita
te post audit 
by 
PCDAs/CDAs online in a fixed time frame.
 
           
(c)
 
On a regular basis, CDAs, LAOs and PCDAs are carrying out performance 
audit, internal au
dit checks and special a
udits. 
These audits are being 
supplemented by audits by CAG.
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER
 
-
 
III
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
 
 
Retention of doctors passing out
 
from AFMC:
 
The Committee note that the 130 students 
admitted for the MBBS programme in AFMS are liable to serve in the medical services of 
the Armed Forces on successful completion of MBBS for at least seven years failing 
which the bond money amounting to
 
`
25 lakhs to 
`
30 Lakhs is forfeited. However, despite 
such deterrent measures to retain the passing out students and a substantial increase in 
bond money from 
`
15 
lakhs to 
`
25 lakhs
 
in academic session 2014, the percentage of 
MBBS doctors passing out of AFMC and opting to pay bond money has substantially 
increased. For instance, from 2006 to 2015, the percentage of MBBS doctors opting to 
pay bond money increased from 6 percent to 18 
percent respectively creating trouble for 
the scheme already struggling with deficiency of medical officers due to premature 
retirement and release/resignation after Short Service Commission. The Committee also 
note that though the bond amount has been rev
ised as students found it relatively 
convenient to pay a lesser amount to move to lucrative medical practices, the high stress 
and hazardous working environment involving service by MO's in remote areas, bad 
terrains and war zones at a pay lower than that 
being offered in private corporate 
hospitals and no further avenues of upgrading of education after MBBS for 7 years of 
services in case of Short Service Commission and 4 years in case of permanent 
commissioned cannot be overlooked as major deterrents for 
MBBS students to serve in 
the Armed Forces Medical Services. The Committee further observe that such a trend 
has the potential to affect the plans of AFMS to roll out trained candidates as doctors to 
serve in the Armed Forces Medical Services and hence nee
ds to be contained at the 
earliest. The scheme, therefore, calls for a revisit and the Committee recommend that a 
revision of the compulsory period of service expected from an MBBS pass out as Medical 
Officer and introduction of better incentives and oppor
tunities for further education be 

considered to contain the growing attrition rate. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of action taken in this regard.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
Ample opportunities are available for Post Graduation (specialization) for Short 
Service Commissioned officers in AFMS on completion of minimum mandatory service 
period as given below :
 
a)
 
Between 4
-
7 years of service eligible for applying for DNB course.
 
b)
 
Between 7
-
10 years services eligible for applying for MD/MS courses
 
c)
 
After completion of SSC tenure, an officer can  also apply for PG seats as an ex
-
               
 
            
SSC officer
 
 
 

CHAPTER
 
-
 
IV
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WH
ICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation
 
(Sl. No. 9)
 
 
 
Shortage of Medicines & Lack of Medical Equipment at ECHS Polyclinics and 
Army Hospitals:
 
The Committee are
 
dismayed to note that a major difficulty being faced 
by ECHS beneficiary is of non
-
availability of medicines at ECHS polyclinics leading to a 
dismal 60 percent level of satisfaction amongst the beneficiaries. Having regard to the 
fact that about 90 per ce
nt beneficiaries are treated at polyclinic level, non
-
availability of 
medicines affects the clientele hugely. The Committee are further perturbed to note that 
the medicines prescribed in OPD are not reimbursable as is the case with CGHS, 
leading to conside
rable inconvenience to veterans in absence of both lack of 
empanelled authorized local chemists and no provision for reimbursement. The 
Committee view such a serious lacunae in service provision as major hurdle for ECHS 
and therefore recommend immediate pr
ovision for reimbursement of medicines on the 
lines of CGHS for prescribed but unavailable medicines. Further, the Committee 
recommend that the supply of essential drugs listed by ECHS and the common drug list 
be assured. Further, the number of Direct Dema
nding Officers be suitably increased to 
improve coverage along with a further increase in the financial powers of all Competent 
Financial Authorities (CFAs) for better inventory management of medicines. Further, the 
concept of Authorized Local Chemists (AL
Cs) be introduced and made functional at the 
earliest in line with CGHS. The Committee desire that the existing system of budgeting, 
procurement, stocking, distribution and disposal of medicines be analyzed and 
simplified for being made less time consuming
 
and veteran friendly. The Committee 
also note that the Ministry formed a Committee to minimise dissatisfaction over 
availability of medicines and to suggest suitable measures in this behalf. They would 
like to be apprised of the suggestions made by the Co
mmittee appointed by the 
Government and the action taken to implement them within the timeframe given.
 
 

Reply of the Government
 
 
The Authorised  Local
 
Chemist (ALC) concept is being re
-
examined in view of  
introduction of DFPDS 2016 and DPM 2009 and CVC guidelines on the issue. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(
Please see para no. 1.20 of Chapter 
-
 
I
)
 
 
Observation/Recommendation
 
(Sl. No. 13)
 
 
Overcharging 
for health smart card:
 
The Committee note that approximately 
`
50 crore 
was collected from the beneficiaries of ECHS since 2004 until the expiry of the contract. 
On the one hand, DESW states that 
charging the beneficiaries for the card has not 
resulted in a
ny loss to the exchequer, on the other, it submits that ECHS has benefited 
in
 
terms of automation as the cost of card included the IT backbone to be provided by 
the vendor. The Committee are of the considered view that since the cost of card is 
stated to h
ave been included in the IT backbone itself, the firm might have included the 
cost of provision of smart card also in their price quoted for the contract.  They, 
therefore, may be apprised of the rationale for charging the beneficiaries of ECHS  
separately
 
since it is claimed that the cost of card is included in the IT backbone itself, 
which was paid for by ECHS. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
It is submitted that ECHS has benefitted on the contract to the extent that a large 
no of IT assets deployed at Polyclinics have been provided by the firm supplying Smart 
Cards as part of project.  ECHS has not paid for any of these IT Hardware since it wa
s 
part of  the contract.  The Government has not paid the firm for the cost of card as  the 
payment is made by  the individuals. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(
Please see para no. 1.26 of Chapter 
-
 
I
)
 
 

CHAPTER 
-
 
V
 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES ARE 
STILL AWAITED
 
 
Observation/Recommendation
 
(Sl. No. 4)
 
 
 
Treatment provided to beneficiaries at empanelled facilities:
 
The Committee note 
that the treatment meted out to the ECHS beneficiaries at the empanelled hospitals is the 
main cause of dissatisfaction amongst the beneficiaries. The representative of Ministry of 
Defence conceded before the Committee that many private
 
hospitals refuse to honour 
ECHS patients despite signing of MoA with the Ministry, thereby causing a lot of 
inconvenience to the beneficiaries. Further, the Committee also note that despite clear 
instructions at the time of empanelment, many doctors at pr
ivate facilities take to 
prescribing of 'branded medicines' in place of generic in the name of lack of time. Such a 
conduct on the part of private facilities and doctors causes further dissatisfaction amongst 
beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, recomm
end that a written clause to the effect of 
prescribing generic medicines be incorporated in the agreement at the time of 
empanelment with a provision for debarring of such a hospital and also for legal action 
against such doctors and hospitals who refuse t
o treat ECHS patients or delay their 
treatment.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
MoA with Empanelled Hospitals is under revision in line with CGHS MoA and this 
clause of prescribing generic medicines and debarring hospitals and legal action will be 
suitably addre
ssed.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(
Please see para no. 1.11 of Chapter 
-
 
I
)
 
 
 
 

Observation/Recommendation
 
(Sl. No. 5)
 
 
 
 
Shortage of Manpower:
 
The Committee note that the present strength of 760 
medical officers and 168 medical superintendents is against 953 and 322 authorized 
strength respectively. Further, the existing strength of 168 medical specialists for 418 
operational polyclinics indicat
es the apparent hardships being faced by the beneficiaries 
in the polyclinics, especially those 71 polyclinics which do not even have the facility of 
an empanelled hospital. The Committee seek reasons as to why 1709 interim 
contractual vacancies have been 
sanctioned in 2013 despite the already existing 6800 
contractual standing partially unfilled. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
proposed hike in remuneration be made applicable without any further delay. Further, 
the Committee also feel that the
 
hike from 
`
46,000 to 
`
60,000 and from 
`
60,000 to 
       
`
72,000 for Medical Officers and Medical Specialists respectively may not be adequate 
enough an incentive to retain the doctors. Further incentivization in the form of special 
hardship allowance may 
also  be considered for doctors and specialists posted in 
remote areas. Also on the lines of the provision for specialists, Medical Officers may 
also be allowed to continue with private practice for some hours after fulfilling of 
contractual commitments to
wards ECHS in far flung and remote districts. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
There are five types of Polyclinics, i.e. Type ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’, ‘D’ and ‘E’ (Mobile). 
Specialist are authorised in Type ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ Polyclinics only, thus total authorization 
of Sp
ecialists in 426 Polyclinics is 322 only. Majority of Polyclinic are Type ’D’ (270), 
which are not authorized Medical Specialist. The reasons for vacancies of authorised 
Specialists and Doctors remaining vacant in remote Area is their non availability. 
 
 
 
In 2003, when the Scheme came into being a total of 5091 contractual employ 
were authorised. It is only after 1709 interim contractual post was sanctioned in 2013 
based on case taken up for authorizing additional staff, the strength became 6800. At 
present
, 760 Doctors and 168 Specialist Doctors are employed in ECHS. This is a 

dynamic figure due to ongoing hiring process, superannuation and Doctors resigning 
from employment due to various reasons. 
 
To incentivize the contractual staff, case for enhancement 
of pay scale was taken 
up and upward revision of contractual fees (salary) was sanctioned wef Sep 2015.  It is 
intimated that the beside hike in pay working hours of specialist is 30 hours in 
comparison to the Medical Officers (48 hours).  Notwithstanding 
the same, a case for 
further incerntivization for Medical Specialist and Doctors in remote area Polyclinics will 
be taken up with MoD.  
 
 
It is clarified that Doctors and Medical Specialists are not allowed private practice 
only during working hours
 
as per
 
Govt of India letter No.
 
24(6)/03/US(WE)/D(Res)/Pt III  
dt 15 Jun 2006 (copy attached as 
Annexure III
). 
The recommendation of special 
hardship allowance will be examined.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
(
Please see para no. 1.14 of Chapter 
-
 
I
)
 
 
Observation/Recommendation
 
(Sl. No. 7)
 
 
Armed Forces Medical College:
 
The Committee note
 
that there is some shortage of 
medical officers and medical specialists in the Armed Forces Medical Services. The 
annual average intake is from the AFMC and rest from pan Indian Colleges. However, 
the Committee are surprised to note that the annual intake
 
of 120 students sanctioned 
in 1962 was revised only in 1999 to 130 students. Considering the shortage of medical 
officers in the various polyclinics, also around 4 percent shortage in AFMS and the 
rising number of beneficiaries, the Committee recommend th
at the intake of AFMC be 
suitably enhanced. Further, the Committee urge the Government to look into the timely 
revision of manpower in the AFMS to overcome chronic shortages.
 
 
 

Reply of the Government
 
a)
 
Armed Forces Medical College :
 
i)
 
AFMC Pune currentl
y has an annual intake of 135 students for MBBS 
 
every year.  Out of these 130 seats (105 boys and 25 girls) are for 
 
admission of eligible Indian citizens and 05  seats are earmarked for 
 
students from friendly foreign countries.
 
ii)
 
Sanction  exists  vid
e MCI letter No. MCI
-
6(107)/77
-
Med/278 dated 5
th
 
April, 1978  for annual intake of 140 students for MBBS course at AFMC 
Pune though vide MoD letter No.32572/DGAFMS/DG
-
ID/7801/99/D(Med) 
dated 10
th
 
May 1999, only  135 students  are being admitted.
 
iii)
 
Infrastructure requirements for admission in a block of 100 to 150 students 
remain same as per Medical Council of India.  Hence, for optimal 
utilization of the infrastructure and human resources available, the 
proposal for according concurrence to enhance 
the annual intake to 150 is 
under consideration.
 
b)        
Overcome Chronic Shortages
 
i)
 
The Govt. of India, MoD
 
on reviewing the requirement approved 
augmenting the manpower of AFMS by 10590 in three phases.  
Augmentation of manpower of AFMS in two phases has already been 
carried out.  Phase three of the augmentation is under process.  
 
ii)
 
An initial allocation of
 
additional 557 posts for Medical Officers and Dental 
Officers for Army and Air Force have been sanctioned by the Govt. as part 
of Training Drafting and Leave Reserve (TDLR)
. 
The remaining posts of 
TDLR i.e. 704 medical officers and 45 dental officers will
 
be sanctioned by 
the Govt. after filing up these posts. 
 
iii)
 
In order to overcome the deficiency in AFMS, doctors are being recruited 
from the civil in addition to the intake from AFMC.  Currently recruitment 
process for filing up the vacant posts is in 
progress.  
 

Comments of the Committee
 
(Please 
see para no. 1.17 of Chapter 
-
 
I
)
 
 
Observation/Recommendation
 
(Sl. No. 10)
 
 
 
Issue of domiciliary equipment: 
The Committee note
 
that lack of timely availability 
of medical equipment for domiciliary use is another area of concern for the veteran 
clientele. The Committee are dismayed to note that a major dichotomy exists in 
providing of medical equipment to the beneficiaries as not 
only the procedural 
impediments lead to delay in providing of such equipment but also the prescribed 
minimum period of five years for use of such equipment. The Committee recommend 
that the clause of five years for use of medical equipment be done away wit
h, on 
production of a certificate regarding faultiness of the equipment outside of warranty 
period and the need for issue of a new or better equipment. Further, the Committee also 
desire that procedural modalities be smoothened for early procurement and ti
mely 
supply of medical equipment.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Life of medical equipment for domiciliary use like CPAP, BiPAP, Oxygen 
Concentrator etc have b
een fixed by MoH&FW as 5 years.
 
There is provision as per 
existing orders to replace the said equipmen
t
 
on completion of life cycle. 
The Ministry is 
in consonance with the Committee to formulate procedure for replacement before 
co
mpletion of life of equipment. 
The logistics of declaring the equipment unserviceab
le 
and depositing/
withdrawal of equipment is b
eing worked out with concerned agencies.
 
 
 
The procedure of procurement and supply of these items usually starts with 
Station Headquarters entering into a price agreement with vendors for the whole year 
and issuing supply orders as and when required.
 
 
 
The procedures and provisions are all in place but the delays occur when 
veterans wish to collect the equipment from Polyclinics other than their parent 
Polyclinics either due to ease of accessibility or due to non availability of supplying 

vendors. 
Then t
he extra migrant workload is difficult to assess and leads to budgetary 
mismatch and resultant delays. This issue is being addressed by persuading veterans 
to collect the equipme
nt from parent Polyclinic only.
 
Emergency requirement is being 
processed throu
gh treating hospitals from their medicine procurement budgets.  
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
(
Please see para 1.23 of Chapter 
-
 
I
)
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;
 
DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
 
01 February, 2018
 
12 Magha, 1939 (Saka)
 
CHAIRPERSON,
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE.
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY
-
THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2017
-
18)
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20
th 
February, 2018 from 1130 hrs. to 1300 
hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
–
 
Chairperson
 
 
Members
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
 
1.
 
Smt. Sudesh Luthra
 
 
-
 
Additional Secretary
 
      
 
2.
 
Shri N.C. Gupta
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
3.
 
Shri Vipin
 
Kumar
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
4.
 
Shri Santosh Kumar
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
5.
 
Shri Sujay Kumar
 
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee
 
then
 
took up consideration
 
of
 
the following draft
 
Reports 
one by one.
 
(i)
 
Action Taken Report on the recommendations/observations contained in the 
 
20
th
 
Report (16
th
 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates (2016
-
17) on 
 
the 
2.
 
Shri George Baker
 
3.
 
Shri Kalyan Banerjee
 
4.
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri
 
5.
 
Dr. (Smt.) Ratne De (Nag)
 
6.
 
Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla
 
7.
 
Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
 
8.
 
Shri Konakalla Narayan Rao
 
9.
 
Shri Arvind 
Sawant
 
10.
 
Shri Janardan Singh Sirgriwal
 
11.
 
Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
 
12.
 
Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
 

 
subject Ex
-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme' pertainin
g to the Ministry 
 
of Defence (Department of Ex
-
Servicemen Welfare)
 
was deliberated and 
 
adopted without any modification
; and 
 
 
(ii)
 
***
 
The Committee
,
 
then
,
 
adjourned.
 
 
 

APPENDIX 
-
 
II
 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS C
ONTAINED IN THE FIFTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i)
 
Total number of recommendations/observations 
 
 
 
 
 
14
 
(ii)
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Sl. Nos. 
1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 12 & 14
           
 
 
Percentage of total recommendations
 
  
 
 
7
 
 
 
50.00
%
 
 
(iii)
 
Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply Percentage of total 
recommendations
 
 
Sl. No. 8
                                              
 
         
 
1
 
      
 
     
 
     
 
7.14%
 
 
(iv)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Sl. No
s
. 
9 & 13
 
 
Percentage of total recommendations
 
 
 
 
2
 
 
14.28
%
 
 
(v)
 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of 
Government is still awaited.  
 
Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 7 & 10
 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
 
 
4
 
 
28.57%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 