 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION  
 
REVIEW OF SANITATION PROGRAMME IN RURAL AREAS 
 
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the Eighth 
Report  (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]  
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2016-17) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 

 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2016-17) 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION 
 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in Eighth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2016) 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2016 /Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 
 

 
 
 
E.C. No. ________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : ₹ _____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2016 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha ( Sixteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government 
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi – 110002. 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
                 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)    
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which th e Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government’s replies have not been accepted 
by the Committee 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
  
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
(i)    Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee on   
       Estimates held on 29.07.2016...............................     
                                   
(ii)   Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government  
      on the Recommendations/Observations contained  
      in the Eighth Report of the Committee  on  
      Estimates (Sixteenth Lok Sabha).............................. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2016-17) 
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson  
 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
* Elected Vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II No. 3908 dated 28.07.2016 vice Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal appointed as 
Minister 
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed 
3. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan  
4. Shri George Baker  
5. Shri Kalyan Banerjee  
6. Shri Ashok Shankarrao Chavan  
7. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
8. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
9. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
10. Col. Sonaram Choudhary 
11. Shri Ramen Deka 
12. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
13. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
14. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
15. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla 
16. Shri P. Kumar  
17. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
18. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
19. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
20. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
21. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
*22 Shri Bhagirath Prasad 
23. Shri Konakalla Narayan Rao 
24. Md. Salim  
25. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant  
26. Shri Gajendra  Singh Shekhawat 
27. Shri Anil Shirole 
28. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
29. Shri Rajesh Verma  
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Vipin Kumar  - Director  
3.  Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director  
4. Shri R. S. Negi  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Se venteenth Report on 
action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report of Estimates Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘ Review of 
Sanitation Programme in Rural Areas' pertaining to the Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation.  
2.  The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2015. The Ministry 
of Drinking Water and Sanitation  furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighth Report on 1 8th December, 201 5. Th e Draft 
Report was considered and adopted by the Committee on Estimates (2016 -17) at their 
sitting held on 29th July, 2016. 
3.  An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Second Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix II.  
 
NEW DELHI;                   DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI                              
5 August, 2016                           Chairperson, 
Shravana 14, 1938 (Saka)                           Committee on Estimates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
     This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Review of Sanitation Programme in Rural Areas' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation. 
 
1.2 The Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 
29.04.2015. It contained 9 observations/recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all 
these observations/recommendations were received from the Ministry of  Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation on 18.12.2015. 
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Sl. Nos.    1, 4, 8  and 9                                                                                  (Total  4 ) 
     (Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of Government’s reply: 
Sl. Nos.        Nil             (Chapter-III)  
       
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s replies have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos.   2, 3, 5, 6 and 7                                            (Total  5) 
    (Chapter-IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of Government is still 
awaited: 
Sl. Nos.  Nil                   (Chapter-V)                                                                                                                                                      
  

 
 
1.4.  The Committee desire that response to the comments contained in Chapter I 
of this Report should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on  some of 
their recommendations. 
 
Sanitation in Schools 
 
 (Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
1.6   While examining the records of the year 2013 -14 in regard to Sanitation in 
Schools, the Committee noted that  there were 10,93,969 schools in the country. Out of 
these 94.45% schools had boys’ toilets and 84.63% schools had girls' toilets. Out of 
total boys' toilets, 92.67% were functional. Similarly, 91.62% girls' toilets were 
functional. The percentage of girls toilets in both the terms were low as compared to 
boys toilets in the country. As the veracity of the data was challenged, t he Committee 
sought further clarification from the Ministry . Subsequently, the Committee were 
informed that of the 11.22 lakh Government schools, 2.45 lakh schools do not have a 
toilet which translates to a gap of 4.19 lakh toilets if at least one toilet each is to be 
provided to girls and boys separately.  In view of the discrepancy in the data the 
Committee recommended the Ministry to rectify the same and also apprise them of 
steps bein g taken and the time line by which each school would have adequate but 
separate toilets for girls and boys.  
 
      
1.7 The Ministry in their Action Taken reply which they furnished in December, 2015 
has stated that a fter launch of Swachh Bharat Mission (G ramin) on 2 nd October, 2014, 
school toilets are to be provided by Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD). 
Under Swachh Vidyalaya Initiative which aimed to provide toilet blocks for girls and 
boys in each school, 417796 toilets were constructed in a p eriod of one year from 
15.8.2014 to 15.8.2015.  
 

 
 
1.8 The reply furnished by the Ministry of drinking water and Sanitation is 
conspicuously silent as to the discrepancy/ mismatch in the data provided on the 
provision of toilet facilities in schools. For a p olicy to achieve its objective, the 
Committee believe the quality and reliability of the data is a sine -qua non for 
formulating correct responses and interventions. The questionable quality of data 
might not result in achieving the objective of the policy.  Further, reply of the 
Ministry does not give any timeline by which all the schools in the country will 
have separate toilets for girls and boys. The Committee therefore, while 
reiterating their recommendation in this regard desire that suitable steps be taken 
to address the data quality and also urge the Ministry to take up the matter with 
Ministry of Human Resource Development for providing separate toilets for girls 
and boys in schools.  
[Action by Ministries of Drinking Water & Sanitation 
And Human Resource Development] 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
 
1.9 In view of low percent (22% national average, less than 1% in Bihar, Jharkhand 
and Uttar Pradesh and far below national average in Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, 
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Odisha, Rajastha n and West Bengal) of schools with toilets 
having water tap facility  and also  scarcity of water, the Committee recommended that  
(i) the matter needs to be taken up with the concerned States to ensure availability of 
tapped water in all the schools exped itiously; (ii) an action plan may be drawn up to 
provide the schools w ith running water ( tap water) in a time bound manner ,  and;  (iii) 
here is a need to identify expeditiously the schools which have non-functional toilets and 
the schools which have no t oilets at all in the country in consultation with the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development and the Ministry of Women and Child Development so 
that the non -functional toilets were made functional on priority basis and the school 
without toilets we re provi ded the facility and they be apprised of  the action plan 
including timeline for attainment of the above objectives. 
    

 
 
1.10 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply ha ve stated that after launch of Swachh 
Bharat Mission (Gramin) on 2 nd October, 2014, sch ool toilets are to be provided by 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD). Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation has instructed the States to provide water in the vicinity of school premises. 
1.11  The reply furnished by the Ministry of Drinking W ater and Sanitation shows 
that the Ministry have merely instructed the states to provide water in the vicinity 
of schools and remained silent on the Committee’s suggestion for (i) drawing up 
of an action plan for providing running water facilities (tap wat er) in  all the 
schools in a time bound manner , and; (ii) identifying  expeditiously  the  schools  
which have non -functional toilets and the schools which have no toilets at all in 
the country. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendat ion that 
the non -functional toilets be made functional on priority basis ,  the school 
without toilets be provided the facility  and the Committee be apprised of the 
action plan including the timeline for attainment of the above objectives within six 
months of presentation of this Report.   
 [Action by Ministries of Drinking Water & Sanitation 
And Human Resource Development] 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission 
(Recommendation  Para No. 5) 
 
1.12 As the Government have fixed the timeline for completion of the  Swachh Bharat  
Mission (Gramin) by the year 2019 even before finalization of the  proposed sources of 
funds for the Mission  (Contributions through the Swachh Bhart Kosh, commitments 
under Corporate Social responsibility (CSR), budgetary allocations in the years 2017 -18 
and 2018-19 , the Committee while observing that f ixing  timeline for accomplishing the 
mission, without identifying the resources,  may not only affect the target of completion 
of the Mission but also create an avoidable uncertainty   recommended that the  
Government must expeditiously explore the availability of funds needed for the Mission 
through various sources. The  Committee also recommended that they be apprised of 
the current status in the matter including a complete review of the NBA/TSC and steps 

 
 
needed to reformulate policy matters and estimates in the light of implementation of 
Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) /Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) within six months of 
presentation of this Report to Lok Sabha. 
 
1.13 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply h ad stated that ₹ 4125 crore have been 
allocated so far for Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) in 2015 -2016 and additional funds 
are expected in the Second Supplementary. 0.5% Swachh Cess on services has been 
imposed w.e.f. 15.11.2015 to supplement the budgetar y source for Swachh Bharat 
Mission. Besides this, Swachh Bharat Kosh has been established in November, 2014 
under Ministry of Finance to attract CSR funds for sanitation . In the second meeting of 
Swachh Bharat Kosh Trust, ₹ 445.07 crore have been approved for Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Gramin). In addition, ₹ 50 crore for toilets in villages around the Ganga river 
have been approved from Swachh Bharat Kosh. Funding from Overseas Indians is also 
being tapped. For this purpose, India Development Foundation of Ove rseas Indians 
(IDF-OI) Trust has been established under the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs. The 
States may also utilize other sources of funds such as 14 th Finance Commission grants, 
States own resources, CSR etc. 
  
1.14 The Committee note from the re ply of the Ministry that efforts are being 
made to tap the funds from various sources such  as levies,  Corporate Social 
Responsibility funds , budgetary allocations, voluntary contributions from NGOs 
from abroad, etc. However, the Committee would like to be apprised of the funds 
so collected, cess -wise and the expenditure incurred on the Swachh Bharat 
Mission so far and the requirements of funds for the mission in next three years.  
 
Solid Waste Management 
(Recommendation ParaNo.6) 
 
1.15 Citing lack of pos itive response from state/ UT  Governments  nam ely Assam,  
Dadra &Nagar Haveli , Goa, Nagaland, Puducherry and Sikkim, the overall decline in 

 
 
setting up of solid waste management infrastructure  as reflected in decline in number of 
Gram panchayats which set  up  solid waste management Infrastructure from 2729 in 
2011-12 to 1624 in 12 -13 and further to 1250 in 2013 -14) and also the  demand driven 
nature of the scheme, the Committee were informed that the Ministry were not fixing the 
annual targets for creating  sanitation. Terming such a plea  specious the Committee 
desired that the Government should re tailor their policy and fix annual targets for their 
schemes so that the mission is accomplished successfully within the timeline. They also 
recommended  for crea tion of awareness among the Gram Panchayats to undertake 
solid waste management activities at village level. 
 
    
1.16 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply ha ve stated that Solid and Liquid Waste 
Management (SLWM) is an integral part of the Swachh Bhar at Mission (Gramin). Under 
SBM(G) SLWM projects can be taken up in each Gram Panchayat and total assistance 
shall be worked out on the basis of total number of households in each GP, subject to a 
maximum of ₹ 7 lakh for a GP having up to 150 households, ₹ 12 lakh up to 300 
households, ₹ 15 lakh up to 500 households and ₹ 20 lakh for GPs having more than 
500 households. Any additional cost requirement is to be met with funds from the 
State/GP. The Ministry org anizes National/Regional workshops on SLWM to 
disseminate awareness amongst the States. Guidelines on SLWM have also been 
developed and shared with States. Newer technologies and best practices in SLWM are 
shared with the States.  
 
1.17 The Committee are s urprised that the Ministry has not responded to the 
Committee’s concern about the poor response of the State Governments for 
creating solid waste infrastructure.  The reply is conspicuously silent as to the 
need for retailoring the policy in view of the po or response from the State 
Governments.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
for revisit of the solid and liquid waste management policy considering the 
responses of the States and take up the matter on a mission mode for its s peedy 
execution within given time lines. 

 
 
 
R&D in Sanitation Equipments/ Technology 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
 
1.18 In the light of wide difference in the inclination of the toilet pan is 42 degree which 
uses, on an average, 0.6 litre of water per use whereas the consumption of water for the 
same purpose in urban area varies significantly between 2.2 litres and 6.6 litre , the 
Committee recommended that there is an imperative need to bridge th e  urban – rural 
divide in the matter of water being used by the rural and urban toilets inequitably.  The 
Committee had also felt strongly that the bio -digester technology developed by DRDO 
be also explored for adoption, if found efficient, economic and environment friendly by 
the Government. The Committee were informed that only 2  out of 65 R&D solid waste 
management  projects have been recommended for implementation at site/field level. In 
view of the massive and ever increasing problem of solid waste management, they 
desired that the Government should play a far more  proactive role to propagate the two 
projects and provide incentives  for their fast tracking from lab to land. The Committee 
also desired that a fresh impetus be provided to R&D on solid waste management so 
that better, cost effective and environment frien dly technologies for the purpose 
developed on war footing to address the mounting threat of solid waste.   
        
1.19 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply ha ve stated that  Sanitation is a State 
subject and the role of Government of India is to provid e financial and technical 
assistance. The Ministry promotes innovation and R&D. An Expert Committee headed 
by Dr. R.A. Mashelkar to examine the Innovative Technologies has been formed. This 
committee has enlisted various innovative technologies and a Compe ndium consisting 
of such technologies has been published and uploaded in the website of the Ministry for 
benefit of various stakeholders. Regular exhibitions of Innovative technologies 
(Indovation) are organized by the Ministry (Three such exhibitions held  in New Delhi on 
26-27th August 2014, 23 -24 January 2015 and 2 -3 July2015) wherein various 
innovative technologies in respect of Toilet, Solid and Liquid Waste Management and 
Water Treatment are showcased to various Stakeholders / Users including various 

 
 
State Governments, NGOs and Research & Academic Institutions. The choice of the 
technology lies with the State government depending on their local factors. 
 
1.20 The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MDWS) ha ve signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (DRDO) vide which the States have been given an option to adopt the 
DRDO model of bio -toilet. Under Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin), the States are free 
to choose any technology for safe disposal of excreta, including bio-toilets.  
 
1.21 The Committee take a serious note of the casual reply furnished by the 
Ministry stating that s anitation is a State subject and the role of Government of 
India is to provide financial and technical assistance  only . The Committee are of 
considered view that such a stance goes contrary to the Spirit of Swachh Bharat 
Mission, launched with great fanfare by the Government of India and of which 
sanitation is an integral part.  Since the role of the Government of India goes 
beyond merely providing assistance , the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the states may be given all manner of assistance including 
a conducive policy climate needed to achieve the set objectives. Further, t he 
reply of the Government is  conspicuously silent on the Committee’s 
recommendation for addressing the urban – rural divide in the matter of fixing of 
inequitable water norms for toilets. Considering the severe shortage of water 
being faced in many parts of India, the  Committee reit erate their earlier 
recommendation that the issue of inequitable water usage norms for urban and 
rural toilets be addressed expeditiously and the Committee apprised.   

 
 
 
CHAPTER  II 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 1 
 
 Sanitation Coverage: Sanitation has a direct bearing on human health and 
resultantly on all human endeavours. The lack of sanitation facilities in a vastly 
populated country like India has a severely debilitating effect on  not only the human 
health but also on environment, eco -systems and the economy. In fact, Mahatma 
Gandhi rightly said that 'cleanliness is next to Godliness'. The Committee note that due 
to various reasons including demographic, economic and attitudinal, t he sanitation 
facilities in their modern form are lacking in the rural areas of the country though 
according to travelogues of some foreigners, Indian villages were model of sanitation 
right up with Eighteenth century. Rural sanitation coverage in the begi nning of the 
1980s was as low as 1%. With the launch of the Central Rural Sanitation Programme 
(CRSP) in the year 1986 and its substitution by the Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) in 
1999, rural sanitation rose, remarkably, to 22% as per the Census 2001 and  to 32.7% 
as per 2011 Census. The figure touched 40.6% in 2012 -13 as per Base Line Survey 
(BLS). The Committee note that while the growth in the decade between 2001 and 2011 
has been 10.8% in the short period between 2011 and 2012 -13, it has been as high a s 
7.9%. The break -up between individual toilets and the public toilets being 30.7% and 
9.9% respectively. The low progress in regard to public toilets, the Committee find, is 
mainly due to difficulties being faced by the Government in maintenance and 
management of public toilets. The Committee also note that for the purpose of 
ascertaining the number of toilets constructed and those being utilized, there is 
absolutely no set up at the Central Government level and they have to depend on 
States to furnish thi s information on IMIS. This, as will be seen from the subsequent 
narrative, has a significant downside in the implementation of relevant schemes and 
programmes in the rural sanitation sector. 
 

 
 
 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the abysmally poor  progress made 
by the country in 67 years after Independence in creation of rural sanitation facilities. It 
is a matter of serious worry that out of 75 odd crore people living in the rural areas, 
almost 50 crore do not have individual toilets. By Governmen t's own admission in 
regard to the very low number of public toilets  (9.9%) and their poor state of 
maintenance and management, most of these people would be resorting to open 
defecation not by choice but by compulsion. Notably, the launch of Swachh Bharat  
Mission on 2nd October, 2014 resolves to make India Open Defecation Free India 
(ODFI) by 2019. Having regard to the fact that collection of credible micro and real time 
data in regard to construction and utilization of toilets in rural areas is of paramou nt 
importance, the Committee strongly feel that the Government need to plan and involve 
participation of retired Government servants, teachers and school level students and 
NGOs in the nation -wide sustained sanitation campaign. Such abroad participation of  
persons from all sections of society will generate awareness about the importance of 
cleanliness in the country. Committee also desire that Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
and NGOs should also be increasingly involved as an integral part of participato ry 
strategy in planning, construction, maintenance and upkeep of public toilets. 
         
Reply of the Government 
 The on -line monitoring has been strengthened. Data upto household level is 
included in the IMIS. A Mobile application  for uploading photograp hs of toilets 
constructed after 2.10.2014 has been launched. Third party monitoring is also being 
done through agencies such as NSSO. 
 
 The Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) is being implemented as a citizen’s 
movement with involvement of all sects of the soc iety. Community approach has been 
mentioned as the preferred approach, wherein it is expected to involve the entire 
community to bring about a collective behavior change. Cleanliness campaigns are held 

 
 
at regular intervals to continue the momentum. The sch ools and colleges are actively 
involved in such campaigns. 
 
 As per SBM(G) Guidelines, the Panchayati Raj Institutions have a pivotal role in 
the implementation of SBM(G). The Gram Panchayats are to take lead in the social 
mobilization for the triggering d emand, construction of toilets and also maintenance of 
the clean environment by way of safe disposal of waste. The Panchayat representatives 
are involved in various trainings and the States have been asked to involve them fully in 
the programme. Non Govern ment Organisations (NGOs) area also actively involved for 
assisting in carrying out Inter -personal communication and training. The GoI also 
undertakes capacity building of various NGOs, so that they can be more fruitfully 
engaged by the States for effective work. 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 4 
 
 Physical Targets vis-à-vis Financial Targets: The Committee note that upto July, 
2014, the overall allocations made under the Total Sanitation Campaign/Nirmal Bharat 
Abhiyan were ₹ 22,672.36 crore. This includes ₹ 14888.92 crore from Central share,     
₹ 5549.20 crore from State share and ₹ 2234.24 crore as Beneficiary share. A sum of    
₹ 20188.42 crore was released for the purpose. The break -up being ₹ 12781.52 crore 
from Central share, ₹ 5191.46 crore from Stat e share and ₹ 2215.44 from the 
Beneficiary share. The amount actually spent was ₹ 16775.66 crore which includes       
₹ 10659.52 crore from Central share, ₹ 4400.67 crore from State share and ₹1715.47 
from the Beneficiary share. Notably, the actual expendi ture from the fund released from 
the Central share is about 83% and that from the States' share is about 85%. As 
compared to the earmarked Outlays, the actual expenditure under Central share is on 
72% or so and under the States' share it is about 79%. In t he case of the Beneficiary 
share the actual expenditure is approximately 78% of released amount and 77% of the 
earmarked Outlay. The Committee are deeply distressed to note that the funds 
utilization for rural sanitation schemes is grossly dissatisfactory.  The low funds 
utilization, in the considered view of the Committee, is a major contributory factor for the 

 
 
insignificant achievements in the area of rural sanitation facilities. Notwithstanding the 
demand driven nature of rural sanitation schemes, the man ner of allocation, its 
reduction and low expenditure with respect to finally released funds reflects, apparently, 
a complete lack of proper planning on the part of Union Government, the State 
Governments and other executing agencies. They, therefore, recom mend that the 
spending Ministries/Departments adhere to the sound principles of financial discipline 
and fiscal responsibility while allocating resources and their release, utilization including 
monitoring the pace of expenditure and the outcome thereof. 
        
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Under Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin),  the monitoring has been strengthened 
to ensure better financial discipline. Under Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) against RE 
of Rs. 2850 crore for the year 2014-15, expenditure amount is Rs. 2850 crore (100%). It 
is also proposed to introduce, in consultation with States, Public Financial Management 
System (PFMS) for monitoring of fund -flow on real -time basis. Close coordination with 
States is being done to help the States address variou s challenges that constrain 
efficient utilization of funds. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 8 
 
 Participation of NGO/Social Organisations: The Committee note that under the 
Key Resource Centre Programme, NGOs and Social Organizations have also been 
assisting the Government in achieving the sanitation goals. These organizations have 
been organizing training programmes and workshops at State and National levels. 
Notably, during the period 2011 -12 to 2014 -15, five NGOs/Social Organizations who 
assist the Gove rnment in the field but only Plan India – WASH Institute was able to 
complete their assignment i.e. only in water sector during 2011 -12 and 2012-13. Rest of 
these organizations have not been able to complete their projects. The Committee, 
therefore, urge t he Government to look into the performance of the NGOs/Social 

 
 
Organizations receiving grant -in-aid from the Government or foreign aid and take 
appropriate corrective action and apprise the Committee in due course. 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 An evaluation of the work of KRCs was got done through the UNICEF. Based on 
the evaluation report, the work of KRCs is being streamlined. Four regional Conclaves 
have been held to bring about greater coordination between the States and 
KRCs/NGOs. The States have been requested to propose the names of such 
organizations, as they consider appropriate for imparting training within the State to GoI 
for empanelment as KRCs. The GoI will endeavor to carry out further skill upgradation 
of such KRCs/NGOs. Also, looking at the potential of State ATIs/SIRDs, the States have 
been asked that they may be treated as deemed KRCs.  
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 9 
 
 
 The Committee are deeply concerned over the aggravating sanitary conditions 
due to want of toilets, lack of adequate a nd regular water supply, the degradation 
caused by solid and liquid waste and the rising pollution of the water bodies posing 
serious threat to human habitations and the ecology. The Committee wish to recall that 
excavations of ancient sites like Mohenjo -daro and Harappa testify that there was great 
emphasis on sanitation in its all forms. The dictum that "cleanliness is next to 
godliness", captures the power and importance of sanitation. The Committee earnestly 
hope that the 'Swachh Bharat Abhiyan', being all encompassing, will achieve the 
intended objective by the year 2019. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The GoI has launched Swachh Bharat Mission-Gramin (SBM-G) on 2nd October, 
2014 to accelerate efforts to achieve universal sanitation coverage, improve cleanli ness 

 
 
and eliminate open defecation in India by 2019.The program is considered India’s 
biggest drive to improve sanitation and cleanliness in the country. The effectiveness of 
the Programme is predicated upon generating demand for toilets leading to their 
construction and sustained use by all the household members. This is to be bolstered 
with adequate implementation capacities in terms of trained personnel, financial 
incentives and systems and procedures for planning and monitoring. The emphasis is 
on stron ger focus on behaviour change intervention including interpersonal 
communication; strengthening implementation and delivery mechanisms down to the 
GP level; and giving States flexibility to design delivery mechanisms that take into 
account local cultures, practices, sensibilities and demands.  
The Ministry has taken several recent initiatives to achieve the desired outcomes.  
 The focus on capacity building has been increased, since there is a need 
to improve skills, especially those pertaining to community processes and 
triggering for collective behaviour change. In order to expand these skills 
and train the key stakeholders, State level workshops involving all the key 
stakeholders such as Collectors, CEO, Zilla Panchayats, Chairmen Zilla 
Panchayats etc. are being held in different States. Regional workshops to 
cross share learning amongst different States are also being held. The 
Government of India has also undertaken direct training of Collectors and 
more than 200 district Collectors from across India have  been trained so 
far.  
 The Centre -State coordination has been increased through increased 
visits to States, coordination meetings, and reviews. Realising the different 
socio-economic-cultural milieu in different States, the Swachh Bharat 
Mission has provided complete flexibility in implementation to the States.  
 There is also a renewed focus on IEC and a 360 degree media campaign 
is being envisaged to further boost it. The social media – twitter 
(@swachbharat), Facebook (Swachh Bharat Mission) and 

 
 
HIKE/WhatsApp is being extensively used for sharing innovative ideas 
and cross learning.   
 A National Rapid Action and Learning Unit has been constituted to 
institutionalise learning from the field and provide quick feedback.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER  III 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s reply 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER  IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 2 
 
 Sanitation in Schools: As per records of the year 2013 -14 submitted by the 
Ministry, there are 10,93,969 schools in the country. Out of these 94.45% schools have 
boys’ toilets and 84.63% schools have girls' toilets. Out of total boys'  toilets, 92.67% are 
functional. Similarly, 91.62% girls' toilets are functional. The percentage of girls toilets in 
both the terms are low as compared to boys toilets in the country. In this context when 
the Committee sought some further clarification fro m the Ministry in the light of the 
veracity of figures of DISE being challenged, the Committee were informed that of the 
11.22 lakh Government schools, 2.45 lakh schools do not have a toilet which  translates 
to a gap of 4.19 lakh toilets if at least one to ilet each is to be provided to girls and boys 
separately. The Committee note with deep concern the apparent mismatch between the 
figures submitted to them by the Ministry and the steps being taken and the time line by 
which each school would have adequate but separate toilets for girls and boys. They, 
therefore, direct the Ministry to furnish a detailed explanation alongwith the action as 
desired to the Committee in this regard within three months of the presentation of this 
Report to Lok Sabha. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 After launch of Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) on 2 nd October, 2014, school 
toilets are to be provided by Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD). Under 
Swachh Vidyalaya Initiative which aimed to provide toilet blocks for girls and boy s in 
each school, 417796 toilets were constructed in a period of one year from 15.8.2014 to 
15.8.2015.  
 
 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I) 
Observation/Recommendation No. 3 
 
 On an average the overall percentage of school to ilets having running water tap 
facility in the country is only 22.5%. The Committee note with concern that there are 
States like Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh where this coverage (water tap facility) 
percentage is as low as less than 1% and in States like Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Odisha, Rajasthan and West Bengal the same 
is far below the national average of 22.5%. This sorry state of affairs is totally 
unacceptable to the Committee. The Ministry of Human Resource  Development has 
also drawn the attention of Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation to provide running 
water facilities in school toilets. In view of the growing scarcity of water, the Committee 
feel that the matter needs to be taken up with the concern ed States to ensure 
availability of tapped water in all the schools expeditiously. The Committee further 
impress upon the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation to draw an Action Plan 
under which the schools which have no running water facilities are provided tap water in 
a time bound manner. Further, the Ministry need to identify expeditiously the schools 
which have non -functional toilets and the schools which have no toilets at all in the 
country in consultation with the Ministry of Human Resource Deve lopment and the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development so that the non -functional toilets are made, 
functional on priority basis and the school without toilets are provided the facility. They 
would like to be apprised of the action plan including timeline  for attainment of the 
above objectives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 After launch of Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) on 2 nd October, 2014, school 
toilets are to be provided by Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD). Ministry 
of Drinking Water and Sanit ation has instructed the States to provide water in the 
vicinity of school premises. 

 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
 
 Swachh Bharat Mission: Considering the fact that rural sanitation h as been 
allocated ₹ 37159 crore for XII Plan. In the first two years of the Plan, the Government 
have been able to utilize only ₹ 4723.61 crore which is only 12.71% of the total outlays 
made under XIIth Plan. The Committee further note that the Swachh Bhar at Mission, 
launched on 2nd October, 2014, aims to make India Open Defecation Free (ODF) by 
2019. As per the updated information furnished to the Committee, the total fund 
requirement of Swachh Bharat Mission (Rural) is ₹ 1,34,386 crore. Out of which Central 
share of funds is ₹ 1,00,447.02 crore in 5 years upto 2018 -19. The current Central 
outlay for Rural sanitation for the XIIth Five Year Plan under Ministry of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation alone is ₹ 37,159 crore. 
 
 Out of this, ₹4,723.61 crores have bee n utilized in years 2012 -13 and 2013 -14. 
The balance of ₹ 34,885.39 crore (including an Opening Balance with States of ₹ 2450 
crore) was available as on 1.4.2014 under the XII Plan period. The balance funds ₹ 
65561.63 crore (in addition to the budgetary al location for the XIIth Plan) required to 
achieve Swachh Bharat Mission (Rural), are to be made available via (i) contributions to 
the Swachh Bharat Kosh; (ii) through commitments under Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) and (iii) through Budgetary alloc ations in the first two years of the 
XIIIth Plan period 2017-18 and 2018-19. The Committee note that the Government have 
not yet finalized the fund availability for the Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) through 
the proposed sources though the Government have fixed the timeline for completion of 
the Mission by the year 2019. Fixing of timeline for accomplishing the mission, without 
identifying the resources, in their considered view, may not only affect the target of 
completion of the Mission but also create an  avoidable uncertainty. The Committee, 

 
 
therefore, recommend that the Government must expeditiously explore the feasibility of 
funds needed for the Mission through various sources. They would like to be informed 
of the current status in the matter including  a complete review of the NBA/TSC and 
steps needed to reformulate the policy matters and estimates in the light of 
implementation of NBA/TSC within six months of presentation of this Report to Lok 
Sabha. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 ₹ 4125 crore have been all ocated so far for Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) in 
2015-2016 and additional funds are expected in the Second Supplementary. 0.5% 
Swachh Cess on services has been imposed w.e.f. 15.11.2015 to supplement the 
budgetary source for Swachh Bharat Mission.  
 
 Besides this, Swachh Bharat Kosh has been established in November, 2014 
under Ministry of Finance to attract CSR funds for sanitation . In the second meeting of 
Swachh Bharat Kosh Trust, Rs. 445.07 crore have been approved for Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Gramin). In addition, Rs. 50 crore for toilets in villages around the Ganga river 
have been approved from Swachh Bharat Kosh. Funding from Overseas Indians is also 
being tapped. For this purpose, India Development Foundation of Overseas Indians 
(IDF-OI) Trust has b een established under the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs. The 
States may also utilize other sources of funds such as 14 th Finance Commission grants, 
States own resources, CSR etc. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 6 
 
 Solid Waste Management: Sanitation also include solid waste management and 
accordingly Gram Panchayats are being provided assistance. In the prevailing scenario 
of urbanization and industrialization, the problem of solid waste management is as 

 
 
daunting as providing sanitation facilities due to its severely adverse impact on 
environment, ecology and human and livestock health. The Committee were informed 
that the response of States for management of solid waste is very poor . There are 
States /UTs like Assam, Dadar & Nagar Haveli, Goa, Nagaland, Puducherry and Sikkim 
which have not shown their interest in creating solid waste management infrastructure 
during the preceding three years. The overall setting up of solid waste man agement 
infrastructure has disappointingly shown a declining trend. During 2011 -12, a total 2729 
Gram Panchayats have created infrastructure. This declined to 1624 in 2012 -13 and 
1250 in 2013-14. It was further informed that the Ministry has not been fixing any annual 
targets in respect of sanitation with the plea that NBA is demand driven scheme. The 
Committee find such a plea rather specious and therefore desire that the Government 
should re tailour their policy and fix annual targets for their schemes so  that the mission 
is accomplished successfully within the timeline. They also urge the Government to 
create awareness among the Gram Panchayats to undertake solid waste management 
activities at village level. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Solid and Liquid Was te Management (SLWM) is an integral part of the Swachh 
Bharat Mission (Gramin). Under SBM(G) SLWM projects can be taken up in each Gram 
Panchayat and total assistance shall be worked out on the basis of total number of 
households in each GP, subject to a m aximum of Rs.7 lakh for a GP having up to 150 
households, Rs.12 lakh up to 300 households, Rs.15 lakh up to 500 households and 
Rs.20 lakh for GPs having more than 500 households. Any additional cost requirement 
is to be met with funds from the State/GP. Th e Ministry organizes National/Regional 
workshops on SLWM to disseminate awareness amongst the States. Guidelines on 
SLWM have also been developed and shared with States. Newer technologies and best 
practices in SLWM are shared with the States.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-I) 

 
 
               
Observation/Recommendation No. 7 
 
 R&D in Sanitation Equipments/ Technology: The representative of the Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation testified before the Committee that in rural areas the 
inclination of the toilet pan is 42 degree which uses, on an average, 0.6 litre of water per 
use whereas the consumption of water for the same purpose in urban area varies 
significantly between 2.2 litres and 6.6 litre. The Committee are surprised to note such a 
wide difference in respect of water being used in Rural and Urban toilets. The 
Committee also feel strongly that the bio -digester technology developed by DRDO be 
also explored for adoption, if found efficient, economic and environmen t friendly by the 
Government. The Committee also note that the Ministry have reviewed 65 R&D projects 
out of total 136 projects and found that most of the R&D projects are not viable either 
due to application base or due to being very old. Only two R&D pro jects have been 
recommended for implementation at site/field level. In view of the massive and ever 
increasing problem of solid waste management, the Committee desire that the 
Government should play a far more proactive role to propagate the two projects a nd 
provide due incentivisation for their fast tracking from lab to land. The Committee also 
desire that a fresh impetus should be provided to R&D on solid waste management so 
that better, cost effective and environment friendly technologies for the purpose  are 
developed on war footing to address the mounting threat of solid waste. Further, there is 
an imperative need to bridge the urban – rural divide in the matter of water being used 
by the rural and urban toilets inequitably. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Sanitation is a State subject and the role of Government of India is to provide 
financial and technical assistance. The Ministry promotes innovation and R&D. An 
Expert Committee headed by Dr. R.A. Mashelkar to examine the Innovative 
Technologies has been for med. This committee has enlisted various innovative 
technologies and a Compendium consisting of such technologies has been published 
and uploaded in the website of the Ministry for benefits of various stakeholders. Regular 

 
 
exhibitions of Innovative technol ogies (Indovation) are organized by the Ministry (Three 
such exhibitions held in New Delhi on 26 -27th August 2014, 23-24 January 2015 and 2-
3 July2015) wherein various innovative technologies in respect of Toilet, Solid and 
Liquid Waste Management and Wate r Treatment are showcased to various 
Stakeholders / Users including various State Governments, NGOs and Research & 
Academic Institutions. The choice of the technology lies with the State government 
depending on their local factors. 
 
 The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MDWS) has signed a Memorandum 
of Understanding (MoU) with Defence Research and Development Organisation 
(DRDO)  vide which the States have been given an option to adopt the DRDO 
model of bio -toilet. Under Swachh Bharat Mission (Gra min), the States are free to 
choose any technology for safe disposal of excreta, including bio-toilets.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.21 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER  V 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of Government is still 
awaited 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                   DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI                              
5 August, 2016                           Chairperson, 
Shravana 14, 1938 (Saka)                           Committee on Estimates 
 
 
 

 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2016-17)  
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 29th July, 2016 from 1500 hrs to 1615 hrs. in 
Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
4. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
5. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
6. Shri Ramen Deka 
7. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
8. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
10. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
11. Shri Bhagirath Prasad 
12. Shri Arvind Sawant  
13. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
14. Shri Anil Shirole 
15. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh – Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda – Additional Director 
3. Shri R. S. Negi  – Under Secretary 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Chairperson apprised the Committee of the election of a 
new member Shri Bhagirath Prasad to the Committee.  The Committee then welcomed 
the newly elected member. 

 
 
 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports:-  
 
 (i) Memorandum No. 3 regarding draft Report on the Action Taken by the 
 Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 8 th 
 Report of the Committee on Estimates (2014-15) on the subject 'Review of 
 Sanitation Programme in Rural Areas' pertaining to the Ministry of Drinking 
 Water and Sanitation; and 
 
 (ii) xxx                                xxx                             xxx                 xxx 
 
4. The Committee after consideration adopted the above Reports with minor 
modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the light of 
factual verification from the Ministries concerned and present the same to Lok Sabha.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned with vote of thanks to the Chair. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
xxx Matter not related to this Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations   
   
09 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
(Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 8 and 9)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 4 
 
 
 
44% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply Percentage  of total 
recommendations 
  
Percentage of total recommendations                                                
 
 
 
     NIL 
       
     NIL 
 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee  
(Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6  and 7)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
05 
 
 
 
55% 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of 
Government is still awaited.   
 
Percentage of total recommendations  
Nil  
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 