1 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND 
GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 
OCCURRENCE OF HIGH ARSENIC CONTENT IN GROUND WATER 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2014-15) 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
      

FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2014-15) 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND 
GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 
OCCURRENCE OF HIGH ARSENIC CONTENT IN GROUND WATER 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on the 11 December, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2014/Agrahayana   , 1936 (Saka) 
  

 
 
 
 
 
EC No. ____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price `  ____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Gove rnment of India Press, Minto Road, New 
Delhi. 
 
  

CONTENTS  
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2014-15) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Page No. 
 
 
(iii) 
 
(v) 
 
 PART – I 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
Chapter I. Extent and Magnitude of the Arsenic cont amination in ground water 
(i) Ground water arsenic contamination 
(ii) Contamination of soil and vegetation 
(iii) Sources of arsenic contamination 
(iv) Acceptable levels of arsenic 
  
1 
1 
13 
18 
29 
Chapter II. Health Effects  
(i) Arsenic Diseases 
(ii) Data regarding diseased population 
 
34 
34 
46 
Chapter III. 
 Monitoring of Arsenic in Ground Water and Soil  
(i) CGWB 
(ii) WQAA 
(iii) Absence of soil monitoring 
 
48 
48 
53 
59 
Chapter IV. 
 Remediation  
(i) Remedial Measures 
(ii) Remediation Technologies 
(iii) CSIR Kits for Field Testing of Arsenic 
61 
61 
65 
73 
 
Chapter V. Research and Development  
(i) R&D Arsenic Mitigation 
(ii) Development of arsenic safe crops 
(iii) Research on medical treatment 
 
81 
81 
92 
97 
 
Chapter VI Issues relating to Arsenic  
(i) Absence of Central authority for arsenic mitiga tion 
(ii) Lack of focus in the National Water policy 
(iii) Absence of separate budgetary allocation 
(iv) Dearth of steps to stop anthropogenic contamin ation 
(v) Lack of awareness 
(vi) Lack of co-ordination 
 
100 
100 
106 
108 
111 
113 
115 
 
 
 
PART - II 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
120 

 
1 
                                                  APPENDICES 
Arsenic contents (Mean=SE) of irrigation groundwater and paddy soil samples in the 
middle IGP region  
 
 
140 
 
2 Averaged arsenic contents (Mean=SE) of grain samples of different paddy 
varieties grown in the middle IGP region. Bars with different alphabets are 
significantly different at p<0.5 using Tukey’s Test HSD 
 
141 
3 Arsenic in grains of different paddy varieties presently cultivated in agricultural 
soils of Uttar Pradesh (covering 58 villages located in 18 blocks of five districts) 
 
142 
4 Present revised version of Indian Stadard on “Drinking Water, IS10500” published 
in the year 2012 
 
143 
5 Number of arsenic affected habitations which are yet to be provided safe drinking 
water 
 
147 
6 Research on arsenic in the water carried by out by ICMR’s Regional Occupational 
Health Centre (ROHC) (E), Kolkata 
 
148 
7 Details of State-wise, year-wise arsenic free wells constructed in arsenic affected 
areas by CGWB 
 
150 
8 State-wise status of aquifer mapping during XII th  Plan 
 
151 
9 Recommendations of the ‘Core Committee’ on ‘Mitigation and Remedy of Arsenic 
Menace in India’ 
 
153 
10 National Water Policy (2012) 160 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v)  
 
ANNEXURES 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 15.09.2014 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 22.09.2014 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 13.10.2014 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 27.10.2014  
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 08.12.2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  (2014-15)  
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
* Elected vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II No. 987 dated  03.12.2014 against the vacancy caused by the appointment 
of Shri  Hari Bhai Chaudhary, Member of Lok Sabha in the Council of Ministers on 09.11.2014. 
 
† Elected vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II No. 987 dated  03.12.2014 against the vacancy caused by the appointment 
of Shri  Ram Kripal Yadav, Member of Lok Sabha in the Council of Ministers on 09.11.2014. 
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed  
3. Shri Kirti Azad  
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee  
*5. Shri Om Birla 
6. Shri Dileep Singh Bhuria  
7. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey  
8. Shri Ashok Chavan  
9. Col. Sonaram Choudhary  
10. Shri Ramen Deka  
11. Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo  
12. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
13. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar  
†14. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
15. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
16. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh  
17. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla  
18. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel  
19. Shri Vinod Khanna  
20. Shri P. Kumar  
21. Shri K.H. Muniyappa  
22. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
23. Shri K N Ramachandran  
24. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy  
25. Md. Salim  
26. Shri Arvind Sawant  
27. Shri Ganesh Singh  
28. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh  
29. Shri Rajesh Verma  
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav   

 
 
Secretariat 
 
   1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Additional Secretary** 
   2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Joint Secretary 
   3. Shri P.C. Koul  - Director 
   4. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director 
   5. Ms. Rachna Saxena - Committee Officer 
 
 
    
 
  ** retired on 30 
th  November, 2014 
 
  

INTRODUCTION  
 
 
I, the Chairperson of Committee on Estimates (2014- 15) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their beha lf, present this first Report on 
‘Occurrence of High Arsenic Content in Ground Water’. 
 
2. In India, around 80% of the rural population and  50% of the urban population use 
ground water for domestic purposes. Water quality i ssues like arsenic, salinity, nitrate, 
iron, flouride and heavy metals in water due to geo genic and anthropogenic reasons 
have been reported from various parts of the countr y. High arsenic content in ground 
water affects the human, animal, soil and plant sys tems. As many as 96 districts in 12 
States have been affected by high arsenic contamina tion in ground water. 70.4 million 
people in 35 districts alone have been exposed to g roundwater arsenic. Over one lakh 
deaths and 2 to 3 lakhs of confirmed cases of illne ss have reportedly been caused by 
groundwater arsenic. It is the duty of the State to improve the public health as enshrined 
in Article 47 of the Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution of India. 
 
3. Over the years, the extent and magnitude of arse nic problem in groundwater has 
been asuming gigantic proportions. However, no holi stic approach and concerted action 
was visible at the Central level to combat the arse nic issues. It is this lack of integrated 
approach and co-ordinated action, which prompted th e Committee to examine the issue 
in detail.  
 
4. The Committee’s examination reveals that there h ave been no coordinated 
efforts to tackle the menace and there is no centra lised authority to address the issues 
concerning arsenic contamination. There are no data  from Government sources about 
the arsenic diseased people, animals and plants. Th ere are gaps in monitoring and also 
in research efforts. There is no reference to arsen ic contamination in National Water 
Policy 2012. There is no separate budgetary allocat ion to deal with arsenic issues. The 
Committee have recommended corrective measures in the report. 
      (v) 

5. The Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation  on 15 September, 2014 and 
13 October, 2014 and of the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department 
of Agricultural Research and Education and Departme nt of Agriculture and 
Cooperation), Ministry of Environment, Forest and C limate Change and Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation on 13 October, 2014. The Committee took evidence of 
the representatives of the Ministry of Science and Technology including CSIR and the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on 27 October , 2014. The Committee also heard 
the views of the experts on 22 September, 2014. Bes ides, the Committee also sought 
information and suggestions from all the State Gove rnments and Union Territories in 
connection with examination of the subject.  
 
6. The Committee considered and adopted this Report  at their Sitting held on          
8 December, 2014. 
 
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e representatives of the various 
Ministries for tendering evidence before them and f or furnishing requisite material in 
connection with the examination of the subject. The  Committee also place on record 
their sincere thanks to the experts who appeared be fore the Committee besides 
furnishing written Memoranda desired by the Committee. 
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the r ecommendations/observations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Part – II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,  
8 December, 2014  
Agrahayana 17, 1936 (Saka) 
CHAIRPERSON,  
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE.  
  

PART – I10  
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS  
 
Chapter – I 
 
Extent and Magnitude of Arsenic Contamination  
  
 The Indian scriptures attach great importance to t he rivers and water bodies. One 
of the hymns in the Atharvaveda is as follows: 
 
 
"May the waters of desert be for our well-being; al so for well-being the 
waters of the low lands. May the waters dug out fro m earth be for our 
well-being; also be beneficial for us (joy-giving to us)".  
 
 
(i) Ground water arsenic contamination 
In India around 80 per cent of the rural population  and 50 per cent of the urban 
population use ground water for domestic purposes. Though ground water in major part 
of the country is potable, geogenic water quality i ssues like salinity, nitrate, iron, fluoride 
and arsenic have been reported from various parts of the country.     
  
1.2 The first groundwater Arsenic incident and its health effects in India, according to 
CSIR were reported in 1976 in the Union Territory o f Chandigarh. In 1982, groundwater 
Arsenic contamination and reports of individuals su ffering from arsenicosis emerged in 
West Bengal. Later on groundwater contamination and  the suffering of exposed 
individuals came to limelight in Bihar (2002), Utta r Pradesh (2003), Jharkhand (2004), 
and the Upper Ganga Plains of Uttar Pradesh (2009).  In the Brahmaputra Plains, 
Arsenic contamination from Assam and Manipur was al so reported between 2004 and 
2006. The population of the 35 districts identified  with ground water arsenic 
contamination in these six states is 70.4 million. 
 
 
  


  


 


1.3 The distribution of areas affected by high arse nic in ground water global scenario 
as well as Indian scenario is brought out in the at tached maps. It may be seen that as 
many as 38 countries including India around the wor ld are affected by arsenic in ground 
water. 
 
1.4 Accorrding to the Director, National Botanical Research Institute (NBRI), 
Lucknow (Dr. Chandra Shekhar Nautiyal) arsenic is a ffecting over 150 million people 
worldwide through consumption of arsenic contaminat ed drinking water (Rehman et al . 
2009) 
 
1.5 The Department of Agricultural Research and Edu cation (DARE), has stated that 
arsenic concentration in ground water is of great concern to the world since it affects the 
soil/plants/animal/human systems. The magnitude is considered to be the highest in 
Bangadesh followed by West Bengal, India. The scale  of the problem is grave and 
unprecedented, covering a geographic area of 0.173 million square kilometer, while 
exposing 36 million people in the Bengal delta basin to risk. 
 
1.6 As per the information furnished by the Ministr y of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (M/o WR, RD &GR) , the magnitude of Arsenic 
contamination in ground water state-wise is as under:     
“(i) West Bengal 
Arsenic contamination status in West Bengal from va rious studies carried 
out by different organisation reveals that out of 1 40150 samples analyzed 
for arsenic, 48.1% had found arsenic above 0.01mg/L  and 23.8% above 
0.05 mg/L. Importantly, 3.3% of the analyzed tube-w ells had arsenic 
concentrations predicting overt arsenical skin lesi ons. A total of 187 
(0.13%) had tube-wells were reported highly contami nated (>0.01 mg/L). 
The maximum arsenic concentration (0.37 mg/L) was f ound in Ramnagar 
village of GP Ramnagar II, Baruipur Block, in South  24 Paraganas district. 
Out of 19 districts of West Bengal 79 arsenic infes ted blocks in eight 
districts (Malda, Murshidabad, Nadia, North 24 Para ganas, South 24 
Paraganas, Bradhaman, Howrah, Hooghly and Kolkata),  have reported 
more than 3 mg/L arsenic concerntrations in tube-wells. 
 
 
 

(ii)  Bihar 
In 2002, ground water arsenic contamination first s urfaced in two villages, 
Barisban and Semaria Ojhapatti in the Bhojpur distr ict of Bihar in the 
Middle Ganga Plain. The area is located in the floo d-prone belt of Sone-
Ganga inter-fluvial region. Investigations by Centr al Ground Water Board 
and Public Health Engineering Department, Bihar ind icated contamination 
as hgih as 0.178 mg/L in the surrounding villages, affecting the hand 
pumps, which are generally at 20-40 m belowground s urface. With 
ongoing study, more and more contaminated districts  have surfaced. It 
was reported (CGWB, 2008) that by the year 2008, ou t of 38 districts, 15 
districts covering 57 blocks are exposed to groundw ater arsenic 
contamination above 0.05 mg/L. These districts are mostly distributed 
along the course of the river Ganga in Bihar except  Darbhanga, Purnea 
and Kishangarj, which are in isolated and scattered  places showing no 
distinct routes of connection to one-another. It wa s also predicted that the 
districts lying in the area where Ganga and other t ributaries, originating 
from the Himalaya, shifted in course of time, would  be arsenic 
contaminated. 
 
 
(iii) Uttar Pradesh 
Groundwater arsenic contamination in UP was first r eported in 2003 from 
survey of 25 villages in Ballia district. Thereafte r, with continued survey 
more districts were detected for arsenic groundwate r contamination. 20 
districts in Uttar Pradesh were found affected by a rsenic groundwater 
contamination and people suffering from arsenical s kin lesions. They used 
to drink water of hand pump operated tube wells. Al l those tube wells tap 
groundwater from shallow aquifer within about 20-30  m depth. Ironically it 
was interesting to note that, all the arsenic affec ted districts in Up and 12 
districts in Bihar are aligned along the linear tra ck of the river Ganga, so is 
the position in West Bengal where it is along the river Bhagirathi. 
 
(iv)  Jharkhand 
During 2003-04, ground water arsenic contamination above 0.05 mg/L 
was first reported in the Sahibganj district of the  Jharkhand, in the middle 
Ganga plan. Later on (2006-07), it was confirmed by  CGWB through 
detailed investigation. Arsenic contamination is cl ose to the Ganga River 
and in those areas from where the Ganga River shift ed during recent past. 
The hand pump tube-wells of depth range 25-50 m wer e reported to be 
contaminated, and the affected areas had similar ge ological formations as 
in adjacent Bihar and West Bengal. The dug wells we re reported free from 
arsenic contamination (CGWB, 2008). 
 
(v) Assam 
Ground water arsenic contamination in Assam above 0 .05 mg/L was 
reported and the magnitude was much less compared t o Ganga-padma-

Meghna plain. UNICEF reported arsenic contamination  from Assam and 
found arsenic contamination in 18 out of 23 distric ts of Asam above 0.05 
mg/L. No arsenic patient has been identified in Assam so far. 
 
(vi) Manipur 
Ground water arsenic contamination situation from Manipur state indicates 
that mainly valley districts of Manipur are arsenic  contaminated. Arsenic 
has been reported by CGWB in the year 2004-05 in 4 samples of Thoubal 
and Bishnupur districts of Manipur. The wells have been abandoned as 
the State water supply depends only on surface wate r. In Manipur at 
present people are not using hand tube wells water for drinking, cooking 
and agricultural purposes. Arsenic patients have no t been yet identified 
from states of Manipur. 
 
(vii) Haryana 
Presence of arsenic in ground water has been report ed from 13 districts of 
the State. The concentration of arsenic in ground w ater has been reported 
from more than 0.05 mg/L (permissible limit as per BIS) at Koth Kalan, 
district Hissar to 0.07 mg/L at Nalvikhurd in Karnal district. 
 
 
(viii) Punjab 
In the State of Punjab State occurrence of arsenic in ground water has 
been found in wide spatial variation in 6 districts with ranges upto 0.4 mg/L 
at Harike in Amritsar district. Only 12 samples (4. 6 %) were found to 
contain Arsenic above the safe limit of 0.05mg/l (B IS). Mansa, Amritsar, 
Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur, Kapurthala, Ropar are the di stricts where Arsenic 
contamination above maximum permissible limit has been detected. 
 
(ix) Karnataka 
Department of Mines and Geology, Govt. of Karnataka  has reported the 
presence of Arsenic in ground water in Yadgir (old Gulburga) and Raichur 
district. In Karnataka, Arsenic in groundwater is r eported in areas of gold 
mining and associated activities. The leaching and enrichment of Arsenic 
is localized and the effect is likely to be more in  the proximity of the 
dumpage in the phreatic aquifer and in bore wells a long well defined 
lineaments passing through the dumpage. As per Rura l Development and 
Panchayati Raj Engineering Department, Govt. of Kar nataka, Bangalore, 
Arsenic free water is being supplied by installing pure drinking water 
plants. 
 
(x) Chhattisgarh 
Presence of high Arsenic ground water (>0.05 mg/L) in Kaurikasa, 
Joratarai, Sonsaytola, Muletitola & Telitola villag es of AmbagarhChowki 
block of Rajnandgaon district has been reported.  T he range of Arsenic 
values in the analysed samples collected from groun d water varies from 

0.049 to 0.72 mg/L. All the ground water abstractio n structures in the 
above mentioned five villages were not contaminated  with high values of 
Arsenic (i.e. >0.05 mg/L) only a few ground water s tructures were 
contaminated by Arsenic. The contaminated well were  sealed and 
alternative water supply arrangements were made.” 
 
1.7 The Ministry of Science and Technology (Departm ent of Science and 
Technology) in a written note on the extent and mag nitude of the arsenic contamination 
stated that the 
first groundwater Arsenic incident and its health effects in India were reported in 
1976 in the Union Territory of Chandigarh. In this first report, it was suggested that the 
possibility of more wide spread groundwater Arsenic  contamination, particularly in the Ganga 
river basin might be found in the future. In 1982, groundwater Arsenic contamination and reports 
of individuals suffering from arsenicosis emerged i n West Bengal. Later on groundwater 
contamination and the suffering of exposed individu als came to limelight in Bihar (2002), Uttar 
Pradesh (2003), Jharkhand (2004), and the Upper Ganga Plains of Uttar Pradesh (2009). In the 
Brahmaputra Plains, Arsenic contamination from Assa m and Manipur was also reported 
between 2004 and 2006. The population of the 35 dis tricts identified with groundwater Arsenic 
contamination in these six states is 70.4 million. Out of the over 100,000 individuals screened 
for arsenicosis symptoms during survey were noted i n Arsenic affected states, 9.7% have been 
registered with arsenical skin lesions. The DST further stated as under:- 
 
 “
Instances of Arsenic contamination from several hitherto unaffected areas 
have also been reported from Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, 
Tripura, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and J harkhand. 
According to another study, more than 15 million pe ople face Arsenic 
contamination in the five states bordering Banglade sh - West Bengal, 
Tripura, Assam, Mizoram, and Meghalaya. Arsenic levels in ground waters 
in some parts of Assam, Tripura, Manipur, Nagaland and Arunachal 
Pradesh was observed to be above 300 ppb (parts per billion). 
  
 Arsenic-contamination is reportedly present in 64 districts and 111 blocks 
of West Bengal. The worst-affected districts of Wes t Bengal are Maldah, 
Murshidabad, Nadia, North and South 24 Parganas (in cluding parts of 
Calcutta) and minor adjoining areas of Bardhaman, H oogly and Howrah. 
Arsenic concentrations in ground water of the Benga l basin vary widely. In 
West Bengal, reported concentrations range between 5–4100 
µg/L. In 
Bangladesh, the highest reported concentration is 4730 µg/L.  
  

 Out of 12 districts of West Bengal, 9 districts ar e severely affected by 
groundwater Arsenic contamination with several orde rs of magnitude 
higher Arsenic than the stipulated WHO standard for  the permissible limit 
in drinking water (10 µg L -1)…. 
 
 Several recent surveys have identified drinking wa ter wells with elevated 
Arsenic concentrations in various parts of the midd le Ganges plain, 
adjoining the river and upstream from the Bengal ba sin, in the states of 
Jharkhand, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. Immediately ups tream along the 
Ganges from Bhojpur in Bihar are the districts of B allia, Ghazipur and 
Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh state, where widespread A rsenic contamination 
has recently been identified. Arsenic concentration s values in Ballia, 
Varanasi and Ghazipur reported that 46.5% of 4780 w ells tested had of 
≥10 µg/L. 
 
 In 30 villages and towns of Dongargaon, Mohala, an d Ambagarh-Chowki 
of Rajnandgaon district of Chhattisgarh, about 30,0 00 population is 
directly exposed to Arsenic and more than 200,000 r esidents can be put 
under the category ‘‘at risk,’’ as per WHO guidelin es. The village of 
Kaudikasa in this district which is the worst As-af fected village in the entire 
central India, where the Arsenic levels in ground w ater is very high at 
certain points and has even shown a yearly mean of 3050 ppb at one 
particular hand pump.  
 
 Several studies suggested that the groundwater Ars enic contamination is mostly 
restricted to the alluvial aquifers of the Ganges d elta comprising sediments 
carried from the sulphide-rich mineralized areas of  Bihar and elsewhere 
surrounding the basin of deposition. However, recen t studies indicated that the 
vast tract of Indo-Gangetic alluvium extending furt her to the west and the 
Brahmaputra alluvium have elevated concentrations o f Arsenic in wells placed in 
the late Quaternary and Holocene aquifers. 
 
 Many areas within the North-eastern states of Indi a with Arsenic 
concentration greater than 50 ppb have been reporte d. This implies that 
millions of people are at serious risk of poisoning  by As. In 2007, it was 
reported that the Arsenic levels in many parts of A ssam, Manipur, Tripura 
and Arunachal Pradesh were above 300 parts per billion (ppb).  
 
 
A survey, conducted by the Assam state PHE departme nt in collaboration with 
UNICEF for over a period of three years, found Jorh at district to be one of the 
worst Arsenic hit areas among the 17 districts in t he state with high Arsenic 
contamination in the ground water. In Titabor subdi vision of Jorhat district, 
comprising of 20 gaon panchayats, it is reported to  have lethal levels of Arsenic 
in the groundwater.” 

1.8 State-wise levels of arsenic contamination in g round water and the year of their 
detection as furnished by the M/o WR, RD & GR is as follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
State Year  of 
Detection 
No. of Affected Districts Level of 
Arsenic 
Contamination 
(in mg/l) 
1 West Bengal  1983 08 districts Up to 3.000* 
2 Bihar 2002 15 districts Up to 0.178 
3 Uttar 
Pradesh 
2003 20 districts Up to  0.150 
4 Jharkhand 2003 01 district  Up to 0.090 
5 Assam 2003 18 districts Up to 0.996  
6 Manipur 2004 02 districts Up to 0.500 
7 Haryana 2003 13 districts Up to 0.070  
8 Punjab 2003 06 districts Up to 0.400  
9 Karnataka 2009 02 districts Up to 1.000 
10 Chhattisgarh  1999 01 district Up to 0.720 
  Total 86 districts  
* The Ministry of Water Resources, River Developmen t & Ganga Rejuvenation in a note   
mentioned that the level of contamination was more than 3 mg/l. 
 
1.9 As per the information furnished by Ministry of  WR, RD & GR, presence of high 
arsenic in ground water has been reported from vari ous districts of States as indicated 
below: 
 
Sl. No. Name of the State  Districts partly affecte d by arsenic in ground water 
(above 0.05 mg/l) 
 
1 Assam Sivsagar, Jorhat, Golaghat, Sonitpur, Lakhi mpur, 
Dhemaji, Hailakandi, Karimganj, Cachar, Barpeta, 
Bongaigaon, Goalpara, Dhubri, Nalbari, Nagaon, 
Morigaon, Darrang and Baksha. 
 
2 Bihar Begusarai, Bhagalpur, Bhojpur, Buxar, Darbh anga, 
Katihar, Khagaria, Kishanganj, Lakhisarai, Munger, 
Patna, Purnea, Samastipur, Saran and Vaishali 
  
3 Jharkhand  Sahibgunj 
 
4 Chhattisgarh Rajnandgaon 
 
 

5 Haryana Ambala, Bhiwani, Faridabad, Fatehabad, Hi ssar, 
Jhajjar, Jind, Karnal, Panipat, Rohtak, Sirsa, Sone pat 
and Yamunanagar 
 
6 Manipur Vishnupur, Thoubal 
 
7 Punjab Mansa, Amritsar, Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur, Ka purthala 
and Ropar 
 
8 Uttar Pradesh  Bahraich, Balia, Balrampur, Bareil ly, Basti, Bijnor, 
Chandauli, Ghazipur, Gonda, Gorakhpur, Lakhimpur 
Kheri, Meerut, Mirzapur, Muradabad, Raebareli, 
Santkabir Nagar, Shajahanpur, Siddharthnagar,  
Unnao, Sant Ravidas Nagar 
   
9 West Bengal  Bardhaman, Hoogly, Howrah, Malda, Mu rshidabad, 
Nadia, North -24 Parganas and  South -24 Parganas 
 
10 Karnataka Raichur and Yadgir  
 
 
1.10 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agr icultural Research and Education) 
(DARE) listed out 71 districts in 09 states as show n below having ground water arsenic 
contamination.  
 
State  Districts Number of 
Districts 
affected 
West Bengal  Murshidabad, Maldah, Nadia, North 24 
Paraganas,South24Paraganas,Bardhaman, 
Howrah, Hoogly, Kolkata, Coochbehar, North 
Dinajpur, and South Dinajpur  
12 
Assam Sivsagar, Jorhat, Golaghat, Sonitpur, 
Lakhimpur, Dhemaji, Hailakandi, Karimganj, 
Cachar, Barpeta, Bongaigaon, Goalpara, 
Dhubri, Nalbari, Nagaon, Morigaon, Darrang 
and Baksha. 
18 
Bihar Bhagalpur, Khagaria, Munger, Begusarai, 
Lakhisarai, Samastipur, Patna, Baishali, 
Saran, Bhojpur, Buxar and Katihar  
12 
Jharkhand  Sahibgunj 01 
Uttar 
Pradesh  
Ballia, lakhimpur, Kheri, bahraich, chandauli, 
ghazipur, Gorakhpur, basti, Siddarthnagar, 
21 

Balrampur, sant Kabir Nagar, U nnao,  
bareilly, Moradabad, Raebareli, Mirzapur, 
bijnore, Meerut, Sant Ravidas Nagar, 
Shajahanpur and Gonda  
Chhattisgarh  Rajnandgaon 01 
Manipur Thoubal 01 
Tripura North Tripura, Dhalai and West Tripura 03 
Nagaland  Mokokchung and Mon 02 
Total no of districts affected. 71 
 
 
1.11 It may be observed from the Tables given above  as furnished by the M/o WR, 
RD & GR and DARE that there are huge differences in  the data regarding number of 
districts and states affected by arsenic contaminat ion in drinking water. While according 
to M/o WR, RD & GR, there were 86 affected district s in 10 States, as per DARE, there 
were 71 affected districts in 9 States. Collation o f information furnished by the M/o WR, 
RD & GR and DARE reveals that the number of distric ts affected are 96 spread over 12 
States. 
1.12 Dissatisfied with differences in information f urnished by different Ministries, the 
Committee sought clarification as to why the DARE d id not have complete list of arsenic 
affected areas and whether there was no sharing and  uploading of information among 
the Ministries / organizations concerned for taking  appropriate measures. In response, 
DARE stated that the information of arsenic affecte d areas was obtained from the 
official website of the ministry of water resources  (www.mowr.gov.in 
 
/forms/list.aspx?lid=327 ) which is in the public domain. Three states namel y Haryana, 
Punjab and Karnataka have recently been added in th e list but not uploaded in the 
website. Therefore, the Arsenic contamination in di fferent districts of these three states 
has inadvertently been missed out.   
 
1.13 Expressing concern about absence of reliable d ata, the Committee enquired as 
to why there is no centralized data available regar ding the number of people affected by 
arsenic contamination and the nature of their disease. Responding to the query, the M/o 
WR, RD and GR stated that as per information receiv ed Ministry of Drinking Water & 

Sanitation (MoDWS), data regarding nature of their disease pertains to Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare. However, MoDWS has a cen tralized system to report 
arsenic contamination in drinking water on IMIS (In tegrated Management Information 
System) of the Ministry. There are 1991 arsenic aff ected habitations in the country 
which are yet to be provided safe drinking water, w herein 29,45,091 number of people 
are at risk due to excess arsenic problem in drinki ng water as reported by States on 
IMIS of the Ministry as on 01/04/2014. The system o f reporting drinking water 
contaminations including arsenic through IMIS of th e Ministry is in vogue since the year 
2009.  
 
1.14 The Committee also sought information from the  States and UTs regarding the 
extent of arsenic problem in their State/UT, its im pact on agriculture crops/vegetables, 
details of steps/schemes for addressing the problem  and their views/suggestions to 
improve the performance. Response from some of the States was received. The States 
of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Kerala, Pu ducherry, Chandigarh, 
Rajasthan, Meghalaya, Andhra Pradesh and Manipur ha ve stated that arsenic was not 
found in the ground water sources in their State. H owever, information from State of 
Assam revealed that arsenic was first detected in 2 004. The total arsenic affected 
habitations within the State are 2570 number in 20 districts of Assam .Regarding 
measures to address the same, it was stated that th e addressal measures in affected 
habitations is carried out by the Department by pro viding drinking water through 
adopting alternative.safe source like implementation of Piped Water Supply or ring wells 
as per feasibility. The information furnished by As sam Government also revealed that a 
total of 2147 number of arsenic habitations have be en provided with alternative safe 
sources, like PWSS from surface source on ring well s with a back up of by PWSS 1201 
number habitations and by spot sources 946 habitations. 
(ii) Contamination of soil and vegetation 
1.15 In the arsenic affected areas the water used f rom tubewells for irrigation is often 
arsenic contaminated. When arsenic contaminated gro und water is used for crops 
irrigation, a part of this arsenic becomes incorpor ated into the food chain. It has been 

reported that food is the second largest contributo r of arsenic intake by people after 
direct ingestion of arsenic contaminated water. 
 
1.16 In a joint memorandum submitted to the Committ ee, two experts (Dr. C.S. 
Nautiyal, Indian Institute of Tropical Research and  Dr. R.D. Tripathi, Senior Principal 
Scientist, NBRI) stated that it is important to fin d out arsenic contamination levels in 
irrigation groundwater sources and related agricult ural fields under paddy cultivation in 
geographical areas of India, like the Indo-Gangetic   Plains (IGP) and Ganga-Meghna-
Brahmputra basin and stated that groundwater extrac tion from tubewells for irrigation is 
adding large quantities of arsenic every year (arou nd 1000 tonnes) in agricultural fields, 
resulting in high build-up of arsenic in soils and subsequent accumulation in crops and 
vegetables.  
 
1.17 Citing that West Bengal, Jharkhand, Bihar and some districts of Uttar Pradesh as 
the main affected areas of arsenic contamination in  ground water, the above mentioned 
experts stated in their memorandum that the groundw ater, which was found unsafe for 
drinking water purposes in UNICEF survey during 200 5, is continuously in use for 
irrigation of agricultural fields in the same region. 
 
1.18 In a study conducted by CSIR-NBRI, samples of irrigation groundwater, paddy 
soil and paddy plant parts were collected from the eighteen blocks of the five 
administrative districts of Uttar Pradesh located i n the Indo-Gangetic plains of Northern 
India. The field study revealed high variation in a rsenic contents in water samples of the 
five districts ( Appendix  – I). The results showed that the irrigation groundwat er has 
arsenic contents ranging between 0 and 312. The ars enic content in ‘irrigation 
groundwater’ is much higher than the recommended threshold limit for irrigation water.  
 
1.19 In paddy soil, the Arsenic content ranged from  3 – 35 mg kg 
-1. The Arsenic 
contents in the soil of the studied region showed t hat the values of Arsenic exceeded 
the typical world content, i. e. 5 mg kg -1 at most of the study sites. These sites were 
covering 26% of total soil samples of the study. Am ong these 17 villages; 2 are from 

Dist. Ghazipur (Blocks: Jamania and Reotipur), 6 fr om Dist. Bahraich (Blocks: 
Phakharpur and Tejvapur), and 9 from Dist. Ballia ( Blocks: Maniyar, Bairiya, Revati and 
Belhari). Srivastava and Sharma (2013) have also re vealed 5-15 mg kg -1 of arsenic 
content in soil samples of the studied region and f ound contaminating locally grown 
sensitive crops (like beans, tomato, spinach, etc.) . A significant (p<0.5) correlation was 
observed between arsenic contents in irrigation groundwater and paddy soils. 
 
1.20 The uptake of arsenic in different paddy plant  parts are exhibited in Appendix  – 
II . Results indicated that the accumulation of arseni c (mg kg -1) was in the roots (4.1 to 
16.2) and in the grains (0.179 to 0.932). Seventeen  paddy varieties have been found as 
commonly grown varieties in the study region. Out o f these 17 paddy varieties, higher 
arsenic contents in grains (>0.5 mg kg -1) were found in nine paddy varieties namely, 
Swarana sub-1, Kasturi, Sarjoo-52, Arize 6444, BPT- 3291, Varadhan, IPB-1, 
Sugandha-4/Pusa-1121 and revealed that these variet ies are more susceptible to high 
arsenic content in soil and accumulating comparativ ely higher arsenic in their grains. 
None of the samples of paddy grains exceeded recomm ended threshold limit of 1.0 mg 
kg. But, these eight paddy varieties were containin g grain arsenic content unsafe for 
subsistence maximum daily tolerable dietary intake by human (Williams et al. 2005). 
The arsenic content in roots showed significant dif ferences among paddy varieties, 
which showed an order of highest to lower as Bengal  Juhi> Kalanamak> IPB-1> BPT-
5204> Arize-6444> NDR-359. While, grain arsenic con tents of Bengal Juhi, Kalanamak, 
NDR-359 and BPT-5204 were found in comparable low a rsenic category and can be 
considered as low grain arsenic accumulating safe p addy varieties according to 
(Williams et al. 2005) ( Appendix  – III). There were significant varietal differences 
(p<0.05) in the arsenic contents contained in paddy  plant parts were observed among 
all 17 paddy varieties grown in the studied region. 
 
1.21 Council for Scientific and Industrial Research  (CSIR), in a note on the subject 
stated that in a study, CSIR-NBRI monitored water a nd soil samples from three districts 
of West Bengal viz. Chinsurah (district Hooghly, la titude 22 
053’N, longitude 88 0 24’E). 
Purbosthali (District Bardhaman latitude 23 015’N, longitude 87 045’E) and Birnagar 

(district Nadia, latitude 22 0 53 0-24 0 12’N, longitude 88 001’-88 048’E). The level of As in 
groundwater was found in the order Chinsurah < Purb osthali < Birnagar as 17, 27 and 
53 µg I -1, respectively. The soil As concentrations were pos itively correlated with the 
groundwater level and were 10.4, 12.6 and 15.5 µg g-1 respectively at these sites. 
 
 
1.22 In another study 
conducted by CSIR-National Botanical Research Insti tute (CSIR-
NBRI), samples of irrigation groundwater, paddy soi l and paddy plant parts were collected from 
the eighteen blocks of the five administrative dist ricts of Uttar Pradesh located in the Indo-
Gangetic plains of Northern India. The field study revealed high variation in Arsenic contents in 
water samples of the five districts. The results sh owed that the irrigation groundwater has 
Arsenic contents ranging between 0 and 312 µg l -1. The Arsenic content in irrigation 
groundwater is much higher than the recommended threshold limit for irrigation water (50 µg l -1). 
The highest Arsenic content was recorded in the Bel hari Block of Dist. Ballia (312 µg l -1). The 
Arsenic contents (>100 µg l -1) in waters were observed in the order Phakharpur ( Bahraich) > 
Maniyar (Ballia) > Revati (Ballia) > Bansdeeh (Ball ia) > Reotipur (Ghazipur) > Bairiya (Ballia) > 
Jamania (Ghazipur) > Saidpur (Ghazipur) > Belhari ( Ballia) > Palia (Lakhimpur-Kheri) > 
Tejvapur (Bahraich) >Campieerganj (Gorakhpur) > Mur lichhapara (Ballia) > Dubhad (Ballia) > 
Huzoorpur (Bahraich) > Jarwal (Bahraich) > Karanda (Ghazipur) > Issanagar (Lakhimpur-Kheri). 
Of the total water samples; 67% ranged between 100 and 200 µg Arsenic l -1) and 15% above 
200 µg Arsenic l -1. In paddy soil, the Arsenic content ranged from 3 – 35 mg kg -1 (Fig. 
2). The Arsenic contents in the soil of the studied  region showed that the values of 
Arsenic exceeded the typical world content, i. e. 5  mg kg -1 at most of the study sites. 
These sites were covering 26% of total soil samples  of the study. Among these 17 
villages; 2 are from Dist. Ghazipur (Blocks: Jamani a and Reotipur), 6 from Dist. 
Bahraich (Blocks: Phakharpur and Tejvapur), and 9 f rom Dist. Ballia (Blocks: Maniyar, 
Bairiya, Revati and Belhari).  
  
Arsenic in food chain 
 
1.23 The vision document entitled, “Mitigation and remedy of Ground Water arsenic 
menace in India” has pointed out that in the arseni c-affected areas the water used from 
tube wells for irrigation is often arsenic contamin ated and when arsenic contaminated 
groundwater is used for crops irrigation, a part of this arsenic becomes incorporated into 

the food chain. Many investigators consider water-s oil-crop-food transfer, cooking 
water, and direct ingestion of arsenic contaminated  water as the major exposure 
pathways of arsenic. Over 75% of this arsenic prese nt in the crops is inorganic in 
nature. Arsenic gathers first of all in the roots, then in the stem and after that in the crop 
proper. 
 
 
1.24 The Vision document further states that effect s of this occurrence are far-
reaching. First, as the people take in contaminated  water along with contaminated food, 
the chances of damage become greater. Secondly, the  food crops are sold off to other 
places, including uncontaminated regions where the inhabitants may consume arsenic 
from the contaminated food. Thirdly, the domestic a nimals, like cattle etc. in arsenic-
affected areas regularly take in arsenic along with  their drinking water and food, like 
straw. If human beings consume the meat from such i nfected animals, they may 
consume arsenic as well. A full-grown cow eats 10-1 2 kg straw and drinks 30-40 litres 
of water per day. From this example, it is possible  to calculate how much arsenic cattle 
consume every day. Almost all of Southeast Asia use s rice as its staple food. Due to 
irrigation with contaminated water, rice grains cou ld have excessive amounts of arsenic. 
According to a leading scientist, this contaminatio n of rice with arsenic may give rice to 
a new danger in the South-East Asia. 
 
1.25 The Chairman, Arsenic Task Force, Government o f West Bengal (Dr. K.J. Nath) 
during personal hearing stated as under:    
“In West Bengal and in other States of Bihar and UP  where agricultural 
crop is being irrigated with arsenic contaminated w ater, there is a serious 
danger.  An agricultural university has carried out  with our request a study 
and it has been found that in some of the agricultu ral crops arsenic 
contamination has been found.  Even in the rice gra ins and things like 
that. A Study is being conducted in consultations w ith British Scientists to 
see whether we can develop a particular type of gra ins where the off-take 
of arsenic would be minimal.   But as such the dang er is there and we are 
studying the problem.  I must say that at the momen t we have no 
readymade solution to the same.  But first of all, as I said, we have to 
change our irrigation practice in agriculture.  Pro fligate use of water is not 
necessary for most of the agricultural crops.  If y ou restrict water use to 
certain extent then only it is possible. That study  is also being done by 

various agricultural scientists.  There are various  alternatives but it is a 
very serious issue and it should be looked into.’’ 
 
1.26 Pointing out that more than 90% of the total g round water is used for irrigating 
the crops in arsenic affected areas, the Department  of Agriculture and Education 
(DARE) stated that the results of ICAR Network proj ect revealed that the arsenic levels 
are generally prohibitive in ground waters at shall ow depths of <125 ft. The surface 
water (ponds, shallow wells) and groundwater at gre ater depths (>250ft) usually did not 
contain arsenic at toxic level. As more than 90% of  the total groundwater is used for 
irrigating the crops in the affected areas, there a re substantial accumulations of arsenic 
in the crop produce. The accumulation in crops was more in soils with high 
contamination. The boro or summer rice using large quantities of underground water 
during lean season contained more arsenic than Khar if rice. The boro or summer rice 
using large quantities of underground water contained more arsenic than Kharif rice. 
 
1.27 DARE further stated that it is reported that c rops like elephant-foot-yam, green 
gram, cowpea sesame, groundnut, etc. tended to show  a build-up of arsenic in 
substantial quantities in different plant parts. A number of vegetables, namely 
cauliflower, tomato, bitter gourd, pointed gourd pl ant parts. A number of vegetables, 
namely cauliflower, tomato, bitter gourd, pointed g ourd were also noted to accumulate 
arsenic in their economic produce. The distribution  of arsenic content in plant parts 
generally followed the order: root>stem>leaf>economic produce. 
 
1.28 The edible parts of leafy (spinach, fenugreek etc.) and underground vegetables 
(beet, radish etc.) contained much higher arsenic a s compared to vegetables with fruit 
as edible part (brinjal, beans, ladies finger, toma to etc.). In general, fruit/grain of plants 
showed less accumulation of arsenic compared to root, stem and leaf. Arsenic intake by 
animals was low through drinking water and more through feed sources. 
 
(iii) Sources of arsenic contamination  
 
1.29 Arsenic is a naturally occurring element, comp rising an average concentration of 
approximately 0.0002% of the earth’s crust. Arsenic , derived from the Greek word 

Arsenikon, meaning ‘’potent ‘’ – has been used as a  curative as well as a poison. In 
historical times, arsenic and its derivatives were used to treat diseases like ulcers, 
cancer and syphilis.  
 
1.30 Occurrence of arsenic in ground water is attri buted to geogenic as well as 
anthropogenic causes.  Due to various Physio chemic al processes, arsenic is released 
into ground water from Arsenic bearing minerals pre sent in the aquifer. There are two 
hypotheses for arsenic in ground water. 
(i) Due to oxidation of arsenic bearing pyrite mine rals which leads to release of 
soluble Arsenic in ground water  
(ii) Due to the reducing condition, dissolution of arsenic bearing minerals like iron 
oxy hydroxides within the aquifer/ formation  
(iii) Arsenic contamination in ground water is gene rally found in younger alluvium 
of Ganga Brahmaputra alluvium plains and deltaic parts. 
 
Anthropogenic (Manmade) activities causing arsenic contamination are: 
(iv) Application of fertilisers 
(v) Industrial and mining activities 
(vi) Burning of coal and leaching from coach ashes etc. 
(vii) Anthropogenic contamination is localised in o ccurence. 
 
1.31 A Vision Document on ‘Mitigation and Remedy of  Groundwater arsenic menace 
in India’ brought out by National Institute of Hydr ology, Roorkee and Central Ground 
Water Board has stated that widely accepted mechani sms of arsenic mobilization in 
groundwater are still to be established. However, b ased on arsenic geochemistry, three 
hypotheses describing probable mechanisms of As  (arsenic) mobilization in 
groundwater specially, with reference to Holocene a quifers like in West Bengal and 
Bangladesh, have been suggested (Bose and Sharma, 2002). These are: 
(i) Mobilization of arsenic due to the oxidation of  As -bearing pyrite minerals: 
Insoluble As -bearing minerals, such as Arsenopyrite (FeAsS), ar e rapidly 
oxidized when exposed to atmosphere, realizing solu ble As(III), 

sulfate(SO 4
2), and ferrous iron (Fe 2+ ). The dissolution of these  
As -containing minerals is highly dependent on the ava ilability of oxygen 
and the rate of oxidation of sulfide. The released As(III) is partially 
oxidized to As(V) by microbially mediated reactions. The chemical reaction 
is given by: 
 FeAsS + 13Fe 3+ + 8H 2O ----> 14Fe 2+  + SO 4
2- + 13H + + H 3AsO 4 (aq.) 
(ii)  Dissolution of As-rich iron oxyhydroxides (FeOOH) due to onset of 
reducing conditions in the subsurface: Under oxidiz ing conditions, and in 
the presence of Fe , inorganic species of As  are predominantly retained in 
the solid phase through interaction with FeOOH coat ings on soil particles. 
The onset of reducing conditions in such environmen ts can lead to the 
dissolution of FeOOH coatings. Fermentation of peat  in the subsurface 
releases organic molecules (e.g., acetate) to drive  reducing dissolution of 
FeOOH, resulting in release of Fe 2+ , As +3 , and As +5  present on such 
coatings. The chemical reaction is given by: 
 8FeOOH-As (s) + CH 3COOH + 14H 2CO 3 ----> 8Fe 2+ + As (d) + 16HCO 3 + 
12H 2O 
 where As (s)  is sorbed As, and As (d)  is dissolved As. 
(iii) Release of As  sorbed to aquifer minerals by competitive exchange  with 
phosphate (H 2PO 4) ions that migrate into aquifers from the applicat ion of 
fertilizers to subsurface soil. 
 
1.32 According to the aforesaid vision document, th e second mechanism involving 
dissolution of FeOOH under reducing conditions is c onsidered to be the most probable 
reason for excessive accumulation of arsenic in groundwater. 
 
 
1.33 Pointing out that early explanations regarding  arsenic in the ground water were 
false and that the arsenic is released as a result of reduction, not oxidation, the expert 
from IIT, Kanpur (Prof. Saumyen Guha) stated in his memorandum as follows: 
“Initially, experts believed that due to over explo itation of groundwater, the 
sulphide minerals (such as arsenopyrite or arsenic containing pyrite) 

present in the aquifers were getting exposed to the  air (brought in through 
the well) and oxidation of the pyrite were releasin g the arsenic to the 
groundwater. While this was a plausible explanation , the problem was 
these minerals were rarely found in the Quaternary sediments of the 
regions affected by the high arsenic content in the  groundwater. Also, if 
the arsenic was released due to oxidation of minera ls, all the arsenic in 
the ground water will be in the oxidized state, i.e . As(V). In the affected 
region, about 50-60% of the arsenic was found in th e reduced state, i.e., 
As(III). Therefore, an alternate explanation was ne cessary. Ours and 
some others work has shown that these early explana tions were false and 
the arsenic is released as a result of reduction, n ot oxidation, barring a 
handful of select pockets. 
 
On the sediments of the affected regions, the arsen ic was mostly bound 
as ‘inner sphere complex’ in the amorphous iron oxy hydroxides 
precipitates. The rivers mobilized the arsenic from  the source minerals in 
the upper reaches and they were deposited on the do wnstream sediments 
in the oxidizing environment because these sediment s were exposed at 
the surface at that period of formation of this aqu ifer. This also explained 
why the arsenic was found in the lower reaches of the Ganges. 
 
Since the arsenic was precipitated onto the sedimen ts alongwith iron in 
the oxidizing environment it required reductive dis solution of iron to 
release the arsenic back into the groundwater. We h ave shown through 
specially designed field work that even though arse nic may be present on 
the sediment, it would not be released into the gro undwater until the redox 
condition becomes iron-reducing. The large-scale se tting in of reducing 
environment in the aquifer may have been triggered by enriched organic 
content in the aquifer from increased agricultural activities.” 
 
1.34 The Secretary, Department of Agriculture & Coo peration, Ministry of Agriculture 
informed that the lowering of water table due to pu mping introduces oxygen into the 
water table which causes the breakdown of pyrites a nd releases arsenic, iron and 
sulphate into the water. When asked, how then arsen ic is found in areas where there is 
no presence of pyrites like in U.P., the Secretary,  Agriculture stated that there is no 
evidence to check this, still it is only a hypothisis.  
 The expert (Prof. Saumyen Guha) in this connection  stated as under:- 
 “There are two things here. One is Arsenic chemist ry as to why it is there. 
The earlier thinking was that Arsenopyrite is there  and as you know 
Arsenopyrite is in the reduced form. It is mostly e ither Arsenopyrite or 
Arsenic-containing pyrites. There is a subtle difference between these two, 
and it is going to come out only when the pyrite mi neral is oxidized 

because it is a sulphide deposit. But what happened  here is actually 
reduction. Here, Arsenic is bound as an inner-spher e complex in the Iron-
oxide or Iron-oxyhydroxide precipitate on the sedim ent, and now it is well 
established. 
 When the agricultural activity increased in 1960s,  all the agricultural lands 
were turned from one-crop land to three-crop land o r in some places two-
crops land, and there was huge amount of organic sh ower and then what 
happened is this. The redox ladder goes into action. Firstly, bacteria prefer 
Oxygen for respiratioin. If Oxygen runs out when yo u have organic 
material, then Nitrate is still there; when Nitrate  runs out, then you have 
got Manganese; but there is no Manganese in these s oil. So, it comes to 
Iron reduction and as soon as that happens, as arse nic was precipated as 
Iron oxyhydroxide, when you have Iron reduction, es sentially Iron goes 
back into the solution and Arsenic that was bound g oes back into the 
solution”. 
1.35 Sources of arsenic as explained in article joi ntly brought out by P. Bhattacharya 
(IITH Royal Institute of Technology Stockholm), A. Mukherjee (IIT, Kharagpur) and AB 
Mukherjee (University of Helsinki) submitted by Dr.  Abhijeet Mukherjee (IIT, Kharagpur) 
are given below:  
 “Natural Sources 
 Arsenic in the alluvial plains and delta sediments  of the Ganges-
Brahmaputra-Meghna river system can be attributed t o their potential 
provenance from the Himalaya Mountains and the Shil long Plateau. In 
addition, several isolated geological sources withi n the cratons in 
Peninsular  India have  been recognized in India, w hich may have 
contributed to this  wide-scale arsenic  contaminat ion, as primary or 
secondary provenances.  These are: 
 
 (a) the Gondwana coal seams in Rajmahal basin in e astern India (arsenic: 
  0.02%); 
 (b) Bihar mica-belt in eastern India (arsenic conc entration ranges from 
 0.08 to 0.12%); 
 (c) Pyrite bearing shale from the Proterozoic-aged  Vindhyan range 
 containing  in central India 0.26% arsenic; 
 (d) Son river valley gold belt in eastern India co ntains arsenic with average 
 concentration of 2.8%; 
 (e) Isolated outcrops of sulfides in eastern Himal ayas contain 0.8%  
  arsenic 
 
 Probable connection to the Himalayan origin   
 The most extensive, as enriched provinces in the w orld are located in the 
 foreland and other basins related to the Himalayan  orogenic belt. The As 

 affected areas include the alluvial basins of the rivers Indus (Pakistan), 
 Ganges and  Brahmaputra (India and Bangladesh), Me ghna (Bangladesh), 
 Irrawady (Burma, presently Myanmar), Mekong (Cambo dia and Thailand), 
 and Red (Vietnam).  Several workers suggested that  the Siwalik Group, which 
 acts as the immediate provenance of the Himalayan sediments, are the 
 probable reservoir of the As. These sediments are transported 
 downstream by the Indus-Ganges-Brahmaputra river s ystems. 
 
 However, Siwaliks cannot be the primary source of As, as it corresponds to a 
 detrital foreland deposit that is being eroded awa y to modern foreland basins, 
 and at most, might act as a secondary sink. This i ndicates that the orogenesis 
 of the Himalaya is the main cause of high As groun dwater in southeast 
 Asia. There  are two different schools of thoughts  about the primary and 
 secondary  provenance of As in the various alluvia l systems in the 
 Himalayan foreland: 
 
 (a) the Quamdo-Simao (QS) volcanic and ophiolite p rovince located north 
 of the Namche Barwa syntaxis near Indo-Myanmar bor der, is the 
 original source of As, and were transported during  the Miocene 
 toward the Siwalik  foreland basin. 
 (b) the ophiolites in the Indus-Tsangpo suture zon e is the original source 
 of As, feeding the Siwalik Group during the Miocen e and 
 Pleistocene, before  being removed by extensive we athering during the 
 Holocene. 
  
 The combination of this strong tectonic activity i n the Himalayas and a more 
 humid climate during the Holocene probably lead to  the sequential removal of 
 As stored in the Siwalik sediments and its transpo rtation by the Ganga-
 Brahmaputra river-system towards the Bay of Bengal , through the  North 
 Indian plain. 
 
 Anthropogenic Sources 
 There is dearth of information on contaminant cont ribution through 
 anthropogenic  sources in India. Several high temp erature process, such 
 as pyrometallurgical,  non-ferrous metal mining an d production, iron and 
 steel manufacturing and coal  combustion release a rsenic to the 
 environment. The probable contribution of  arsenic  from process 
 industries depends on several factors: (a) the min eralogical  composition of 
 ore; (b) physiochemical properties of associated m ajor and trace  metals; 
 (c) production technology and the efficiency of ga s cleansing 
 equipments. In addition, arsenic may be released t o the hydrologic system 
 from  cement production, burning of wastes, and ch emical industries in India. 
 
 High arsenic concentrations are reported in the mi ning areas of Rajasthan in 
 western India, especially around the mining areas of Khetri Copper Complex 
 and  Zawar mines in Jhunjhunu and Udaipur district s respectively. In Bihar 

 belt, there  are many open pit mines from where su lfides bearing copper 
 and lead ores are  mined. These ores contain arsen ic in trace amounts, 
 which, if mobilized, may  significantly contaminat e the groundwater 
 resources. In addition, India is the third  larges t hard coal producer in the 
 world; the coal mining area covers some 855  km2 a nd the total coal mines 
 is 572 in 2004. Hence, coal mines are also a  pote ntial source of arsenic 
 emission and the average concentration of arsenic in  Indian coal ranges up 
 to 0.15 – 40 mg kg-1. India produces over 100 mill ion tons  of coal fly ashes 
 and the major part is dumped in the close vicinity  of the plant  sites. 
 Concern has been raised due to leaching of arsenic  during coal washing, 
 combustion and ash. 
 
 Fertilizers and various pesticides, insecticides, herbicides, and fungicides 
 often  contain high concentration of arsenic and t heir widespread use are 
 known to cause considerable groundwater contaminat ion especially in the 
 agricultural  states of India such as documented i n Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, 
 Haryana, Karnataka, Tamilnadu, West Bengal, and Ut tar Pradesh.” 
 
1.36 The Chairman, Arsenic Task Force, Government o f West Bengal (Prof. K. J. 
Nath) in a note submitted to the Committee on ‘Arse nic contamination of Ground Water: 
A critical threat to community health’, submitted as follows: 
 “Though there have been localized causes of arseni c contamination due 
 to anthropogenic factors like dumping of industria l waste, containing 
 high amount of arsenic, the present crisis in the Indian sub-continent 
 is due to geo-morphological reasons. Although arse nic occurs in 
 alluvial sediments the ultimate origin of the arse nic must be in the 
 outcrops of hard rocks higher up the Ganges catchm ent  that were 
 eroded in the recent geological past and then re-d eposited in West 
 Bengal and Bangladesh by ancient courses of the Ga nges. At present, 
 these  source rocks have not been identified. It i s also important to 
 understand that arsenic does not occur at all dept hs in the alluvial 
 sediments. Although there is not enough evidence t o draw firm 
 conclusions, it appears that high  concentrations are restricted to the 
 upper 150 meters of the alluvial sediments and off ers prospects of 
 obtaining arsenic free waters from deeper layers.  
  The mechanism of dissolution and desorption of ar senic from soil 
 sediments to the ground water is not well understo od. The most widely 
 accepted theories include. 
 
• Oxidation of arsenopyrite or arsenic-rich pyrite m inerals (oxidation 
hypothesis) 
• Reduction of arsenic-rich iron-oxyhydroxides (redu ction hypothesis)   
 

 The most important ores of arsenic are arsenic pyr ites, realgar and 
 orpiment. The average concentration of arsenic in alluvial sand and 
 clay has been reported to  be 2.9 mg/kg and 6.5 mg /kg respectively in 
 Bangladesh. There have been also reports of much h igher 
 concentration arsenic in soil from parts of Bangla desh and other 
 countries. But the concentration of arsenic in gro und water is not 
 always dependant or proportional to the amount of arsenic in soils. 
 Geochemistry of the soil and the environmental con dition prevailing 
 underground would have  significant influence on t he arsenic speciation 
 and mobility. The dissolution &  desorption of ars enic from sediments 
 and reduction of pentavalent arsenate to trivalent  arsenite, which is  more  
 mobile appear to be the most likely mechanism of g round water 
 contamination in the Ganga Brahmaputra basin in Ba ngladesh &  India. 
 Having said this one should not also loose sight o f the microbial and 
 chemical reaction underground influenced by the ag ricultural and 
 irrigational  practices, use of phosphatic fertili zer and profligate use of 
 ground water. It has  also been reported by a grou p of scientists in 
 India that due to heavy withdrawal of ground water , the aquifer was 
 aerated and the pyrites rich in arsenic got oxidiz ed which helped 
 leeching of arsenic in soluble form in ground wate r. Many  attribute the 
 cause of arsenic concentration to the profligate u se of ground water 
 to support the “Green Revolution” since the 1960s,  but there is no 
 scientific  evidence so far to support the theory.  Though switching over 
 from rain-fed  cultivation to four-crop cycle with  irrigation facility, supported 
 by shallow bore  wells had definitely disturbed th e water table and 
 ground water quality.” 
 
1.37 During personal hearing on 22 September, 2014,  when asked as to why, along 
the running water in Indo Gangetic plain, there is more arsenic rather than in the rocky 
places, the expert from IIT Kharagpur (Dr. Abhijeet Mukherjee) stated as under: 
“Sir, we have a hypothesis that recently got publis hed and what we 
believe is that the source of the arsenic lies in t he Himalayas and Shivalik 
Hills. The reason for presence of high arsenic in t he sediments of Shivalik 
Hills is because the way the Himalaya was formed, t here are some natural 
processes by which elements like arsenic and seleni um come to the 
surface, and it is in geologic foreland basins. The se foreland sediments 
which include our Indo-Gangetic Plain, gets enriche d with arsenic carrying 
sediments from the Himalayas as the rivers like Ind us, Ganges, and 
Brahamaputra flow from the Himalayas towards the sea. 
 
As a consequence, arsenic is mostly present in the sediments, which are 
formed because of the riverine deposits, mostly the  big rivers that come 
from the Himalayas. We see very similar scenarios i n other Continents, in 
North America in the Rockies and also in the Centra l Asian Geologic 

Foreland basins. We believe that this is the reason  which is very natural, 
and it is throughout the world. It is not only in India.  
 
The reason that the problem is most manifested in I ndia is because of the 
high population that lives in the Indo-Gangetic pla in and also because we 
have a lot of water related activities that we do f rom the ground water. As 
you might be certainly aware that India is now the largest ground water 
using country in the world. As a consequence, the p roblem which was 
originally very natural has also spread into other places, which were not 
initially having arsenic. We believe that it has sp read from Uttar Pradesh, 
middle to southern Uttar Pradesh to most of Bihar ( at least the Gangetic 
part of Bihar), to most of gangetic west bengal. Ou r recent study shows 
the presence of high arsenic in the plains of Assam , close to Brahmaputra 
valley, also in Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura and the areas, which are very 
adjacent to Brahmaputra river system.” 
 
1.38 According to the M/o WR, RD & GR the Indo-Gang etic alluvium and the 
Brahmaputra alluvium have higher concentrations of arsenic in localized pockets. 
Arsenic released during weathering of sulphide mine rals is generally absorbed onto the 
surface of iron oxy-hydroxides that are precipitate d under oxidizing conditions normally 
prevailing during the deposition of the Holocene se diments. Arsenic-containing ground 
water in Ganga-Brahmaputra River basins is hosted b y the sediments deposited by the 
rivers during the late Quaternary or Holocene age ( <12 thousand years). Lithology of 
those late Quaternary sediments includes sands, sil t and clay. There is a thick layer of 
newer alluvium containing sand, silt and clay, whic h spread out by numerous rivers that 
originate from the Himalayas both in the North and Northeast. Most environmental 
arsenic problems, recognized so far, are the result  of mobilization under natural 
conditions. Thus, the occurrence of arsenic in grou nd water in the Brahmaputra alluvial 
plains and Gangetic plains have been recognized as of geological origin with spread out 
resulting from its mobilization under natural hydro-geologic conditions.  
 
1.39 Explaining the reasons for arsenic contaminati on in ground water, the M/o WR, 
RD and GR submitted that elevated level of arsenic in ground water or arsenic 
contamination is caused largely by natural processe s and partly due to anthropogenic 
activities like application of fertilizers, burning  of coal, leaching from coal-ash tailings 
and from mining activity. An example of the natural  arsenic contamination of ground 

water is the Ganga Bhramaputra basin, where the Lat e Quaternary or Holocene (< 
11000 years) deposits host the contaminated ground water. The arsenic remains in 
solid phase . However, the mobilization process, which helps in a rsenic release from 
minerals (aquifer framework) to ground water is yet  to be fully understood. There are 
several hypotheses   propounded by scientists for t he mechanism of release of arsenic 
in to ground water by natural; as well as anthropog enic activity. As far as the natural 
process of arsenic contamination is concerned, ther e are broadly two hypothesis which 
are as below:   
i. Mobilization of Arsenic due to the oxidation of Arsenic bearing pyrite 
minerals: Insoluble Arsenic bearing minerals, such as Arsenopyrite, are 
rapidly oxidized when exposed to oxygen, leading to  releasing soluble 
Arsenic in to ground water. The dissolution of thes e Arsenic containing 
minerals is highly dependent on the availability of  oxygen and the rate of 
oxidation of sulphide.  
ii. Dissolution of Arsenic-rich iron oxy-hydroxides  due to onset of reducing 
conditions in the subsurface: The arsenic remains a dsorbed in iron oxy-
hydroxide’ which is released if a reducing conditio n is developed in the 
aquifer. The conducive environment for development of reducing condition 
in the aquifer are organic carbon availability in t he sediment, water logging 
condition, sluggish ground water movement etc. 
 As regard hypothesis of anthropogenic contaminatio n, release of Arsenic to 
ground water by competitive exchange with phosphate  ions that migrate into aquifers 
from the application of fertilizers to subsurface s oil is one of the possibilities . Localized 
contamination of arsenic is reported from other ant hropogenic activity such as mining, 
burning of coal etc.   
 
1.40 The Committee were curious to know as to why o nly the flood plains of Ganga, 
Brahmaputra and Imphal rivers have been affected by  arsenic. The M/o WR, RD & GR 
stated in a written response that several studies s uggested that Arsenic contamination 
in groundwater is mostly restricted to the alluvial  aquifers of the Ganges delta 
comprising sediments carried from the sulphide-rich  mineralized areas of Bihar and 

elsewhere surrounding the basin of deposition. Howe ver, recent studies have indicated 
that the vast tract of Indo-Gangetic alluvium exten ding further to the west and the 
Brahmaputra alluvium have elevated concentrations o f Arsenic in wells constructed in 
the late Quaternary and Holocene aquifers. Arsenic released during the weathering of 
sulphide minerals is generally adsorbed onto the su rface of iron oxy-hydroxides that 
precipitated under oxidizing conditions. Besides , the reductive dissolution of iron oxides 
also transfers amounts of Arsenic in aqueous phases  through biogeochemical 
interactions. Arsenic contaminated groundwater in G anga–Brahmaputra River basin is 
hosted by the sediments deposited by the rivers dur ing the late Quaternary or Holocene 
age (<12 thousand years). The occurrence of Arsenic  in groundwater in the Bengal 
Delta Plain and Gangetic plains has been recognized as of geological origin with spread 
out resulting from the mobilization under natural h ydro-geologic conditions. The sources 
of arsenic in ground water through natural process in Ganga Bhramputra plain has not 
been fully established so far. 
 
1.41 To a pointed query as to whether there are dif ficulties, if any, in establishing fully 
the sources of arsenic in Ganga-Brahmaputra plain, the M/o WR, RD & GR in a written 
reply submitted that sources of arsenic in Ganga Br ahmaputra plain is mostly the 
sediments having arsenic bearing minerals. However,  the process of release of arsenic 
into ground water and particularly the local variat ion in the concentration of arsenic is 
yet to be fully understood, as it depends on variou s factors such as physic-chemical 
conditions, hydro geological characteristics of aqu ifers, dynamic nature of aquifers, 
presence of arsenic bearing minerals in the sedimen ts etc. necessitating micro level 
studies.  
 
1.42 Arsenic contamination in Chattisgarh is said t o be not from flood plains of newer 
alluvium. Pointing out the source of arsenic contam ination of ground water in 
Chhattisgarh and Haryana, the M/o WR, RD & GR submi tted that the high arsenic 
ground water occurrence in eastern part of Chowki b lock, Rajnandgaon district, 
Chhattisgarh is confined to the early Proterozoic ( 2500 to 542 million years ago) meta 
volcanic-granite rocks along Kotri-Dongargarh rift zone. The intrusion of rhyolitic-granitic 

magma, followed by the hydrothermal phase is consid ered to be responsible for Arsenic 
enriched sulphide mineralization and arsenic enrich ment in bedrock in Chhattisgarh. 
The emplacement of basic rocks took place after the  hydrothermal phase, the limited 
occurrence of arsenic in basic rocks is due to assi milation and remobilization reaction. 
The most severely affected villages are mainly situ ated on rhyolite and granite rocks 
close to shear zone. The relatively younger metabas ic, basic and pyroclastic aquifers 
are less contaminated. In Haryana, where the arseni c in ground water is confined to the 
alluvial deposits, the mobilization process is like ly to be geogenic i.e. due to geological 
formations different from Chhattisgarh.  
 
1.43 Pointing out that arsenic is an important envi ronmental contaminant and arsenic 
exposure is through food and water, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Deptt. of 
Health) stated, in a summary of studies funded by I CMR on arsenic related 
contamination, that drinking water is the largest s ource of arsenic exposure. 
Underground water contamination with arsenic, induc es toxicity and causes deteorating 
health. The level of arsenic in the environment (ai r & soil) is due to the manufacture of 
various agricultural products, melting of various m etals, combustion of fossil fuels & 
pesticide production. Arsenic exists in both organi c and inorganic forms, the inorganic 
form is considered more toxic.  
 
(iv) Acceptable levels of arsenic 
1.44 Actual levels of arsenic in different acquatic  environments in India as given in an 
article jointly brought out by P. Bhattacharya, (KT H Royal Institute of Technology, 
Stockholm), A. Mukherjee (IIT, Kharagpur)  and A.B.  Mukherjee (University of Helsenki) 
as furnished by Dr. Abhijeet Mukherjee are given below: 
Arsenic in different aquatic environments in India 
Source  Wate r 
(mg/L) 
Sediment  
(mg/kg) 
Reference  
 
Surface water     
Lake Chilka, Orissa 35 - 1 
Alaknanda River, Devaprayag 6.3  6 
Bhagirathi River, Devaprayag 4.6  6 
Ganges, Bhagalpur 4.2  7 
Bhagirathi-Hoogly (West Bengal) 0.3 to 4  8 

Jalangi river 55 – 101  8 
Ichamati river 37  8 
Baitrani river 0.1 – 2.1  1 
Mahanadi river 0.1 – 3  1 
Ganges river - 2-9 4 
Brahmaputra river - 2-6 4 
Yamuna river - 3-11 4 
Narmada & Tapti River - 3-5 4 
Godavari river - 4-14 4 
Krishna river - 2-5 4 
Cauveri river  2-4 4 
Shivnath River 100-300 - 4 
    
Ground water    2 
Western Bengal Basin, West Bengal  <1–4200 -  
Middle/Lower Ganges Plain, Bihar  <10–1654   
Middle/Lower Ganges Plain, Jharkhand  <1–620   
Upper Ganges Plain, Uttar Pradesh  <1–700   
Central Indian igneous terrain, Chattisgarh  <1–880    
Brahmaputra basin, Assam  
 
<1–657   
Mineralised areas, Rajasthan  
 
<1–13.8 - 3 
1Konhauser et al. (1997), 2Mandal et al. (1996), 2von Bro¨mssen (1999), 3Madhavan 
and Subramanian (2000),4Subramanian et al. (1985), 6Chakrapani (2005), 7Mukherjee 
et al. (2007), 8Mukherjee and Fryar (2008), 9Pandey et al. (2002). 
 
1.45 The acceptable limit of arsenic in drinking wa ter according to World Health 
Organization (WHO) is 10 parts per billion (ppb) or  0.01 parts per million (ppm) or 0.01 
mg/l. The M/o WR, RD & GR, however, stated that as per the recommendations of 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the maximum permi ssible limit for arsenic in drinking 
water is 0.05 mg/l as against WHO standard of 0.01 mg/l. In a written reply to a query 
as to when BIS fixed permissible limit of arsenic i n drinking water as 0.05 mg/ l, the M/o 
Food, Public Distribution & Consumer Affairs submitted as follows: 
 
“The Present revised version of Indian standard on ‘’ Drinking water, IS 
10500” was published in the year 2012 (Appendix – IV) . This standard 
specifies the maximum acceptable limit of Arsenci a s 0.01mg/l. However, 
in the absence of alternate source of water the per missible limit of Arsenic 
has been relaxed to 0.05mg/l maximum’’. 
 

1.46 With regard to the reasons for fixing the limi t much higher than that of WHO, the 
M/o of Food, Public Distribution & Consumer Affairs stated as follows: 
“...the maximum acceptable limit of Arsenic  as has been fixed as 0.01mg/l 
which is same as prescribed by WHO , but in the abs ence of alternate 
source of water the permissible limit of Arsenic  h as been relaxed to 
0.05mg/l maximum.’’   
 
1.47 Concerned about the adverse input on the healt h of the people, the Committee 
questioned the Ministry of Food, Public Distributio n and Consumer Affairs (BIS) as to 
whether they are certain that Arsenic contamination  between 0.01mg/ l and 0.05 mg/l in 
drinking water will not cause any carcinogenic effe cts on human health. Responding to 
the query, the Ministry of Food, Public Distributio n & Consumer Affairs stated that the 
above relaxation in the requirement of Arsenic was done by the BIS Sectional 
Committee on “Drinking water’’ chaired by Director of National Environment Engineering 
Research Institute (NEERI). This Committee among ot her is also represented by Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR), ministry of wat er resources, Indian Country office 
of World Health Organization as well as UNICEF. 
 
1.48 It is observed from the Minutes of the 2 
nd  meeting of Drinking Water Sectional 
Committee of BIS held on 28.01.2010 that UNICEF had  pointed out that only ‘arsenic’ 
has a quantified permissible limit, for other toxic  parameters, it is ‘no’ relaxation. The 
BIS Sectional Committee, however, noted in this reg ard that permissible limit of arsenic 
in Manual of Central Public Health and Environmenta l Engineering (CPHEEO) of the 
Ministry of Urban Development for water supply and treatment is also 0.5 mg/l and 
decided that permissible limit of 0.5 mg/l max for arsenic is justified in view of 
abundance of arsenic in ground water in several are as of the country and non-
availability of alternate sources and decides to retain the same. 
 
1.49 In the light of the fact that anthropogenic ac tivities like mining, fertilizers and 
pesticide addition leads to arsenic contamination, the Committee enquired whether 
there are any regulations governing these activitie s to ensure that the risk of 
contamination is mitigated, the Ministry of WR, RD & GR stated in a written reply that 
the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Chan ge has notified general standard 

for discharge of environmental pollutants which inc ludes industrial effluents also for 
various recipient sources such as inland surface wa ter, public sewerage, land for 
irrigation and marine coastal areas etc. The limit of discharge for arsenic in waste water 
has been defined for all the recipient sources as 0 .2 mg/l. The industry specific 
standards have been specified for all the grossly p olluting industries. Wherever pollution 
is not specified in industry specific standards, li mits of General Standards for discharge 
are applicable. 
 
1.50 Recognising the need for arsenic limits in ric e, vegetables, fruits, etc., the 
Committee sought to know the standards in this rega rd. The Deptt. of Agriculture and 
Cooperation (DAC) stated in a written reply that UN  Food Standard Body Codex 
Alimentations Commission has adopted a maximum leve l for arsenic in rice of 0.2 
mg/kg. DAC further stated that the mandate of presc ribing maximum acceptable limit of 
arsenic in various food crops etc. is vested with F ood Safety & Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI). FSSAI has, so far, prescribed maximu m permissible limit of arsenic in 
various food commodities as follows: 
 
S.No.  Name of Food Commodities  Maximum 
acceptable limit of 
arsenic (Parts per 
million) 
1 Milk  0.1  
2 Beverages   
 Soft drink intended for consumption after 
dilution except carbonated water 
0.5 
 Carbonated water 0.25 
 Infant Milk Substitute and Infant Foods 0.05 
 Turmeric whole and powder 0.1 
 Juice of orange, grape, apple, tomato, 
pineapple and lemon 
0.2 
 Pulp and pulp products of any fruit 0.2 
 Preservatives, anti-oxidants, emulsifying and 
stabilising agents and synthetic food colours 
3.0 on dry matter 
 Ice-cream, iced lollies and similar frozen 
confections  
0.5 
 Dehydrated onions, edible gelatine, liquid 
pectin 
2.0 
 Chicory-dried or roasted 4.0 

 Dried herbs, finings and clearing agents, 
solid pectin all grades, spices 
5.0 
 Food colouring other than synthetic colouring 5.0 on dry colouring 
matter 
 Hard boiled sugar confectionery  1.0 
 Iron Fortified Common Salt 1.0 
 Brewed Vinegar and Synthetic Vinegar 0.1 
3 Food not specified  1.1  
 
1.51 The Indian Standard on Drinking Water also spe cifies the maximum limits of 
Nitrate, Iron and Flouride. The comparative chart f or the limits with respect to Nitrates, 
Flouride and Iron given in Indian Standard and WHO is given below: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Requirement  Indian Standard on Drinking Water, 
IS 10500: 2012, Maximum 
Acceptable limit 
WHO, guidance 
value 
1. Nitrate 45 mg/l 50 mg/l 
 
2. Flouride 1 mg/l (acceptable limit) 
1.5 mg/l (permissible limit) 
 
1.5 mg/l 
3. Iron 0.3 mg/l No recommendation 
 
                                                    
  

CHAPTER II  
 
Health Effects  
 
 
(i) Arsenic Diseases 
 
 Drinking of water with high Arsenic content over a prolonged period leads to 
several diseases as documented by various researche rs. These diseases are (i) Hyper 
Pigmentation, (ii) Keratosis,(iii) Weakness,(iv) An emia, (v)Burning sensation of eyes, 
(vi) Swelling of legs, (vii) Liver fibrosis, (viii)  Chronic lung disease (ix) Gangrene of 
toes,(x) Neuropathy,and; (xi) Skin cancer. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (Min. 
of H&FW) has pointed out that of these diseases onl y hyper pigmentation is reversible 
on removal from exposure. Other conditions are usua lly static or keep progressing. The 
treatment mainstay is removal of further exposure by provision of arsenic free water and 
symptomatic treatment for the manifestations. 
 
2.2 According to the Council of Scientific and Indu strial Research (CSIR), various 
types of skin manifestations and other Arsenic toxi city have been observed including 
melanosis, keratosis, hyperkeratosis, dorsal keratosis, non-pitting edema, gangrene and 
cancer. Overall prevalence of clinical neuropathy h as been reported in various studies 
in populations of 24- Pargana-North, 24- Pargana-So uth, Murshidabad, Nadia, and 
Bardhaman districts of West Bengal and in the state s of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, 
Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh. The children in the Ars enic contaminated areas are often 
more affected than the adults. Most of the populati on suffering from Arsenic skin lesions 
is from a poor socio-economic background. 
 
2.3 Explaining out the arsenic effect on human and animal health, DARE stated in a 
note that people exposed to chronic arsenic toxicit y suffer from arsenical melanosis and 
hyperkeratosis, skin cancer, enlargement of liver, non-cirrhotic portal fibrosis, and 
respiratory disorders. In severe cases, gangrene in  the limbs and malignant neoplasm 
are also observed. In animals also, the arsenic poi soning causes many abnormalities. 
The problem seems to have arisen due to more withdr awal of groundwater during lean 
period (when the groundwater availability in the aq uifer is at its minimum) for summer 

paddy, causing oxygenated decomposition of pyritic sediments containing high amounts 
of arsenic. These sediments upon oxidation release sulphuric acid that solubilizes 
arsenic. The solution moves down to aquifers in due  course of time, polluting the 
groundwater. Arsenic is one of the most toxic eleme nts to fish. Acute exposures can 
result in immediate death. Chronic exposures can re sult in the accumulation of the 
metalloid to toxic levels. In fish, bizarre morphol ogical alterations, as well as early 
neoplastic alterations are produced in the liver. 
            
2.4 The vision document ‘Mitigation and Remedy of G roundwater Arsenic Menace in 
India’ June 2010 brought out the effects on health as under:   
 
 “The available health effect reports, after ingest ion of arsenic contaminated 
groundwater, are mainly from the epidemiological study  of chronic arsenic 
exposure. Number  of incidents and studies related to acute arsenic toxicity are 
meager compared to chronic arsenic exposure. During  the last decade plenty of 
chronic arsenic exposure  incidents have been repor ted from Asian countries 
due to use of arsenic contaminated groundwater and associated health effects. 
More and more studies have been carried out to know  various health effects due 
to chronic exposure. During the last decade 4 monographs  (IARC 2004, IPCS 
2001, NRS 1999, NRS 2001) along with large number o f reports and special 
issues have been published to include the research activities of chronic arsenic 
exposure and various carcinogenic and non- carcinog enic health effects. 
 
 It is evident now that inorganic arsenic exposure deactivates the function of 
enzymes, some important anions, cations, transcript ional events in cells and 
causes other direct or indirect effects. Such activ ities of inorganic arsenic result 
in numerous illnesses that have been also confirmed  by repeated 
epidemiological investigations. Examples of the same  are: (i) Dermal effects, (ii) 
Cardiovascular effects, (iii) Respiratory effects, (iv) Gastrointestinal effects,  (v) 
Endocrinological effects (diabetes mellitus), (vi) Neurological effects, (vii) 
Reproductive and developmental  effects, (viii) Can cer effects, and (ix) other 
effects. Symptoms of arsenicosis are  primarily man ifested in the form of 
different types of skin disorders such as skin lesi ons, hyperkeratosis and 
melanosis.” 
 
 
West Bengal’s groundwater arsenic contamination and  health effects surfaced in 
1983. West Bengal is one of the worst  arsenic affe cted areas in the world 
arsenic scenario. During last 25 years, more scient ific and medical investigations 
have been carried out in this State by (a) School o f Tropical Medicine (STM), (b) 
All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health (A IIH&PH), (c) Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB), (d) Centre for Study of Man and  Environment (CSME), (e) 

WB Government Public Health Engineering Department (PHED), (f) Arsenic 
group in Seth  Sukhlal Karnani Memorial Hospital, a nd (g) WB Directorate 
of Health Services,  Government of West Bengal (h) Kolkata Medical College, 
etc. In very preliminary work, medical group of Sch ool of Environmental Studies 
(SOES) examined around 96,000 individuals, includin g children (age range: 
infants to 11 years), for arsenic toxicity from ars enic affected villages of West 
Bengal and 9,356 of them showed skin lesions; in children, these  numbers 
were 5.6% (n=14,000). Various types of skin manifes tations and other arsenic 
toxicity were observed from melanosis, Keratosis, h yperkeratosis, dorsal 
keratosis, and non pitting edema to gangrene and cancer…… 
 
Arsenic exposure during pregnancy can adversely aff ect several reproductive 
endpoints. In several studies the  association betw een arsenic exposure and 
adverse pregnancy outcome, including  spontaneous a bortion, preterm birth, 
stillbirths, low birth weight and  neonatal and pre natal mortality have been 
documented from arsenic affected villages of West-B engal and other States in 
India. 
 
Skin itching to sun rays, burning and watering of e yes, weight loss, loss of 
appetite, weakness, lethargy and easily fatigued li mited the physical activities 
and working capacities. 
 
Chronic respiratory complaints were also common. Ch ronic cough with or without 
expectoration was evident in more than 50%. As repo rted by the villagers, the 
unique sound of “cough of  arsenicosis” was reporte d from adjacent village 
homes at night to  create an unusual atmosphere. Th e cough may be painful 
and sputum may contain blood to be misdiagnosed as pulmonary tuberculosis. In 
late stages, shortness of breath might predominate. 
 
Gastrointestinal symptoms of anorexia, nausea, dyspepsia, altered  taste, pain in 
abdomen, enlarged liver and spleen, and ascites (co llection of fluid and 
abdomen) were also observed in 50% patients. 
 
- Moderate to severe anemia was evident in some cas es. 
 
- Conjunctival congestion, Leg edema was less commo n.” 
 
 
 
2.5 With regard to effect of arsenic poisoning in c hildren, the vision document states 
that infants and children are often considered more  susceptible to the adverse effects of 
toxic substances than adults. Normally children und er 11 years of age do not show 
arsenical skin lesions although their biological sa mples contain high level of arsenic. 
However exceptions are observed when (i) arsenic co ntent in water consumed by 

children is very high ( ≥1000 µg /l) and (ii) arsenic content in drinking water is not so high 
(around 500 µg/l) but the children’s nutrition is p oor. High arsenic content in their 
biological samples prove that children in the arsen ic affected areas of the GMB plain 
have a higher body burden, though dermatological ma nifestations are few. The children 
in the arsenic contaminated areas are often more af fected than the adults. Children’s 
body try very hard to expel the poison from their s ystems, but in trying to do so; their 
internal organs become badly damaged. That in turn retards their further growth, both 
physical and mental. The sufferings of children in arsenic affected areas in GMB plain 
had also been reported in many literatures. 
 
 
2.6 In a summary of studies funded by ICMR in arsen ic related contamination, the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health) stated as follows:  
 
“Arsenic exposure during childhood is associated wi th hearing loss, 
lowering IQ affiliction of memory etc. Chronic expo sure can lead to 
mental retardation & developmental disabilities suc h as physical, 
cognitive and psychological etc. Studies have shown  that it causes 
oxidative stress & DNA damage in blood and brain. A rsenic has well 
known carcinogenic properties as well as cancer treating activities. 
 
Studies by Prof. A.K. Santra, Centre for Liver Rese arch, Kolkata has 
shown firm association between chronic arsenic toxi city and hepatic 
fibrosis. It has been found that the prolonged expo sure of arsenic, 
causes oxidative stress in liver followed by liver damage and finally 
hepatic fibrosis.  
 
Another studies by Dr. S.J.S Flora, Defence Researc h & Development, 
Gwalior and Dr. Pushpa Dhar, AIIMS, New Delhi, have  shown that the 
exposure of arsenic during the early post natal lif e induces adverse 
neurological effects in hippocampus. Hippocampus is  one of the major 
areas of brain association with learning and memory  and is highly 
vulnerable to environmental contaminants. It has be en observed that 
various nutritional supplements like Quercetin, Alp ha lipoic acid, an 
effective antioxidants & aqueous extract of iron ri ch plants alone or 
along with chelating agents’ administration could r educe arsenic 
induced oxidative stress and can also revert back t he changes of 
impairment of learning and memory to substantial ex tent in children 
exposed to arsenic. 
 
 

Another study by Dr. Prof. Karmakar, Jadavpur Unive rsity, Kolkata, of 
arsenic role in AKT signalling pathway has shown th at arsenic induces 
both necrosis and apoptosis and reduces the number of viable cells. 
Arsenic may directly or indirectly influence AKT ac tivation. AKT plays a 
vital role in regulating the cellular fate after an y kind of stress. AKT 
phosphorylation is essential for cell survival and it not only suppresses 
apoptosis but also stimulates cell growth by includ ing growth promoting 
factors. Study by Dr. A.K. Giri, ICB, Kolkata, indi cates that chronic 
arsenic exposure is also responsible for increased genetic damage in 
exposed population than in unexposed population. Th e overall study 
indicates that the exposed group is more prone to a rsenic induced 
diseases, including the risk of cancer due to subst antial chromosome 
damage in lymphocytes in exposed population and for ms a sensitive 
group.” 
 
2.7 Some of the photographs showing arsenic patient s as published in the 
vision documents “Mitigation and Remedy of Groundwa ter arsenic menace in 
India” as sourced from the School of Environmental Science (SOES) and some 
as furnished by the Deptt. Of Agriculatural Researc h and Education (DARE) are 
given in the following pages.” 
 

Photographs showing some arsenic patients from arsenic affected districts of Bihar. 
 
 
 
  


Photograph showing some arsenic affected patients from UP  
 
I  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 


Photograph showing cancer patient with arsenical skin lesions from Jharkhand  state 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Photographs showing some arsenic affected patients from West Bengal 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


 
 
 
 
 
 
  


 
 
  


(ii) Data regarding diseased population 
 
2.8 In a memorandum submitted to the committee, an expert from IIT, Kanpur (Prof. 
Saumyen Guha) stated that the estiamte of number of  people exposed to high arsenic 
containing groundwater vary. However, most estimate s fall between 6-10 million people 
in India. The estimates of confirmed cases of illne ss due to arsenic poisoning fall in the 
range of 200,000 to 300,000. Estimates of death due  to arsenic poisoning runs above 
100,000. 
 
2.9 To a query about the data regarding the number of people affected by arsenic 
contamination and the nature of disease affected by  them, the Ministry of Water 
Resources, RD & GR stated that the Central Ground W ater Board (CGWB) do not 
possess such information. Quoting ICMR, the Ministr y of WR, RD&GR stated further 
that data on Arsenic affected individuals is not be ing routinely collected and information 
is not available from Central Bureau of Health Inte lligence (CBHI), DGHS.  However, 
ICMR through its institute in Kolkatta has conducte d some research studies in West 
Bengal wherein the prevalence of Arsenic affected i ndividuals was found to be 15.4% in 
males and 3.8% in females in 2006.  In another grou ps the prevalence was 5% in 2008-
09.  Another study reported in 2012-13, the prevale nce was 6.4% for Arsenic induced 
pigmentosis.  
  
2.10 Disappointed with absence of data regarding ar senic affected people, the 
Committee raised a pointed query as to why there is  no centralized data. The Min. of 
WR, RD & GR stated in response that health is a Sta te subject and centralized data is 
collected by the CBHI in relation to the National P rograms on various diseases along 
with other relevant health related data. No data re garding number of people affected by 
Arsenic is available centrally. 
  
 
 
 

2.11 Admitting that there is no data on Arsenic aff ected population, a representative of 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (M/o H&FW ) stated during oral evidence on 
27 October, 2014 as under:  
 
“In July last year, the Ministry wrote to all the S tates asking them to collect 
data so that they could come up with preventive and  curative medical 
measures. This data is being collected by the State s and now we have 
also asked them that once they have the data, they should collate the 
data, make a plan based on that data and then put i t in their Project 
Implementation Plan under the National Health Missi on so that we can 
fund it” 
 
 
2.12 DARE informed in a note that abnormalities wit h symptoms akin to these of 
arsenic poisoning have been detected in 40% of anim als (cattle and goats) inspected in 
the area.  
 
2.13 AIIMS have also submitted a note regarding imp act on health of people 
consuming arsenic in drinking water and its short-t erm and long-term consequences, 
the curability and availabilty or otherwise of the treatment for such diseases. The note 
reiterates the diseases already elaborated in the preceeding paragraphs.  
 
  

CHAPTER - III  
 Monitoring of Arsenic in Ground Water and Soil 
(i) Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) monitors ground w ater quality on regional 
scale once in a year, through a network of 12,946 g round water observation wells in 
different hydro geological units located all over t he country. The main objective of 
ground water quality monitoring programme is to gen erate information on the 
distribution of water quality parameters on a regio nal scale as well as to create a 
background data base of different chemical constitu ents in ground water. In addition, 
ground water samples are also collected and analyze d from the exploratory wells drilled 
by CGWB, Special Studies and Ground Water Managemen t Studies taken up in 
different areas as per the Annual Action Plan. The results and findings of the regular 
monitoring and various studies carried out from tim e to time are shared with the 
respective State Agencies. 
3.2 The ground water quality monitoring is carried out with following 
purposes/objectives: 
 “ 
• Periodic monitoring of geogenic contamination of g round water. 
• Identification of contaminated and contaminated fr ee aquifers. 
• As an input to determine the nature and extent of contamination. 
• Reporting ground water contamination to state wate r supply authorities. 
• Disseminating the information to the stakeholders. ” 
 
3.3 More than 20,000 samples per annum are analysed  in various regional water 
quality labs of CGWB for basic parameters, heavy me tals as well as for pesticides in 
ground water samples. 
3.4 CGWB has sixteen well equipped Regional chemica l laboratories located in 
different parts of the country and attached with re gional offices of Central Ground Water 
Board as shown below:- 

 
Sl. 
No. 
Region  States Covered  Location of 
Laboratory 
1 North Western 
Himalayan Region 
(NWHR),Jammu 
Jammu & Kashmir Jammu 
2 North Western Region 
(NWR),Chandigarh 
Punjab,Haryana,Himacha 
l 
Pradesh,Uttarakhand,Del 
hi & Chandigarh(UT) 
Chandigarh 
3 Northern Region 
(NR),Lucknow 
Uttar Pradesh,special 
studies of Uttarakhand 
Lucknow 
4 North Central Region 
(NCR), Bhopal 
Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 
5 Mid Eastern 
Region(MER), Patna 
Bihar, Jharkhand Patna 
6 Eastern Region (ER), 
Kolkata 
West Bengal, Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, Sikkim 
Kolkata 
7 North Eastern Region 
(NER),Guwahati 
Assam,Meghalaya,Aruna 
chal Pradesh, 
Tripura,Mizoram, 
Nagaland,Manipur 
Guwahati 
8 South Eastern Region 
(SER),Bhubaneshwar 
Odisha Bhubaneshwar 
9 North Central 
Chhattisgarh Region 
(NCCR) 
Chhattisgarh Raipur 
10 West Central Region 
(WCR),Ahmedabad 
Gujarat & Daman & 
Diu(UT) 
Ahmedabad 
11 Western Region 
(WR),Jaipur 
Rajasthan Jaipur 
12 Central Region (CR), 
Nagpur 
 
Maharashtra & Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
Nagpur 
13 South Western Region 
(SWR),Bangalore 
Karnataka & Goa Bangalore 
14 South Eastern Central 
Region 
(SECR),Chennai 
Tamil Nadu & 
Pondicherry(UT) 
Chennai 
15 Kerala Region (KR), 
Thiruvannanthapuram 
Kerala, 
Lakshwadeep(UT) 
Thiruvannanthapu 
ram 
16 Southern Region 
(SR),Hyderabad 
Andhra Pradesh 
&Telengana 
Hyderabad 
 

3.5 The M/o WR, RD &GR  informed that out of sixtee n labs, 3 chemical laboratories 
namely Lucknow, Chandigarh and Hyderabad have got N ational Accreditation Board for 
Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) accredi tation. CGWB is in the process of 
getting remaining laboratories accreditation from N ABL in a phased manner. The 
CGWB labs in Bangalore and Trivandrum have got empa nelment certificate from 
concerned State Pollution Control Board. The proces s of accreditation of CGWB 
laboratories was initiated in April, 2011. The accr editation process involves fulfilling the 
requirements of standards as prescribed by NABL. It  is observed from the information 
furnished on 19.11.2014 that during Twelfth Plan (t ill 2016-17) only 5 more chemical 
labs have been targeted for NABL accreditation. The se are Jaipur, Bhubaneswar, 
Nagpur, Ahmedabad and Guwahati. 
 
3.6 On being enquired as to whether CGWB has any mo bile testing labs, the M/o 
WR, RD & GR stated in a written reply that Central Ground Water Board has the facility 
of portable arsenic testing kits for on-the-spot te sting of arsenic in ground water. Central 
Ground Water Board do not have any Mobile testing l ab. CPCB also has no functional 
mobile testing labs. 
 
3.7 The Annual Action Plan (AAP) / Annual Work Prog ramme of different Regional 
Chemical laboratories of Central Ground Water Board  is formulated every year based 
on the availability of manpower and equipment as we ll as targets fixed in the EFC of XII 
plan. The target of analysis of 20,000 samples are also collected in short term studies 
and at times on the request of State Agencies. The progress of all the laboratories is 
monitored on monthly basis by a dedicated cell at C entral Headquarters of CGWB 
under the overall contral of Member (Technology Tra nsfer and Water Quality). Regular 
review meetings are being undertaken to ensure that  the targets are achieved. Need 
based review meetings are being taken by Chairman/M ember to address the 
bottlenecks, if any regarding the target/progress. 
 

3.8 The M/o WR, RD & GR further stated that there i s regular training programme 
being organized by Rajiv Gandhi Institute at Raipur  for the Chemists of CGWB and 
professionals from various and Institutes. Chemists  from CGWB also act as faculty and 
deliver lectures. Findings of chemical studies are published in national as well as 
international Workshops and Seminars in the form of  research papers by the scientists 
of CGWB. 
  
3.9 Observing from the data furnished by the Minist ry of WR, RD &GR on state-wise 
number of water quality monitoring observation Wells of CGWB (as on 30.06.2014). The 
Committee pointed out that out of 12,946 WQ monitor ing stations, more than thousand 
wells each have been located in four States viz. Or issa (1249), Karnataka (1129), 
Madhya Pradesh (1068) and Maharashtra (1058) and en quired whether there is any 
criterion in establishing water quality monitoring stations in each State. The Ministry of 
WR, RD & GR replied that CGWB is monitoring ground water level and quality of 
shallow aquifers on regional scale through network of existing observation wells in the 
Country.  Water quality monitoring stations are gen erally existing dug wells, wherever 
water samples from existing dug wells cannot be col lected, hand pumps are used for 
ground water quality sampling. Emphasis is given to  select wells which are in regular 
use and tapping shallow aquifers. 
 
3.10 The basic criteria followed in establishing/ i dentifying an existing dug wells as 
monitoring well are:- 
 
The representative existing dug wells / open wells are selected as 
monitoring wells by the scientists of the CGWB afte r considering the local 
hydro geological conditions. While selecting the re presentative well 
following considerations inter-alia  are made: 
 
/head2right The well should be in regular use and should not b e fitted with 
motorized pump. 
/head2right The existing well should be tapping the shallow aq uifer and represent 
single aquifer system. 
/head2right Attempts are made to establish at least one existi ng water quality 
monitoring well in each assessment unit. 

/head2right In the area where water samples cannot be taken fr om the identified 
existing monitoring well, samples are taken from ne arby existing dug well/ 
hand pump to maintain the consistency of data etc. 
 
3.11 The Committee sought to know whether there is any specific reason why Odhisa, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra have huge  number of WQ monitoring 
stations. The Ministry of WR, RD & GR responded by saying that samples for water 
quality monitoring are collected from the representative existing dug wells.  Major part of 
the said states is occupied by hard rock terrain wh ere dug wells are common ground 
water abstraction structures, as compared to alluvi al area, where hand pumps are 
prevalent. CGWB is in process of strengthening its monitoring network during XII Plan 
period to expand the network by bringing in its amb it a large number of existing dug 
wells in all the States. 
 
3.12 Not satisfied with the reasons given for dispr oportionate number of monitoring 
stations in four States, the Committee enquired whe ther the existing network of 12,946 
observations wells are adequate to monitor water qu ality in ground water in the entire 
country. The Ministry of WR, RD & GR admitted that the present density is not 
adequate. Therefore, in order to address this issue , CGWB has proposed to identify 
additional existing dug wells and converting into m onitoring stations during XII Plan 
period. 
 
3.13 Explaining the monitoring process, the Ministr y of WR, RD & GR stated that the 
scientific officers of CGWB visit ground water obse rvation wells four times a year in the 
country for ground water level monitoring and water quality samples are collected during 
pre-monsoon period. Based on the analysis and resul ts of ground water regime 
monitoring, a report is prepared. As a follow up, t he findings/results are shared with all 
concerned Central/State Agencies to take necessary remedial measures. 
 
 

3.14 To a query about the constraints faced by CGWB , the Ministry of WR, RD & GR 
stated in a note as under:  
 “The Board is headed by Chairman and has five Memb ers under whom 18 
Regional Offices function in different State capita ls headed by Regional 
Directors. Besides, there are 17 Divisional Offices and 11 State Unit Offices, 
the CGWB has a strength of about 4159 personnel to fulfill its mandate. Out 
of these posts 1170 posts (644 –Direct Recruitment Quota, 522 – Promotion 
Quota and 4 Excadre Quota) are vacant (28%). The Bo ard has placed the 
indent for filling up the vacant posts. 
 To address the emerging challenges in ground water  sector the ongoing 
scheme of ground water management and regulation ha s been expanded 
by including new component of Aquifer mapping and M anagement during 
XII plan period with an estimated outlay of Rs. 331 9 crore. Sufficient 
financial provision exists under the scheme for imp lementation of NAQUIM. 
The physical and financial targets have been increa sed seven fold as 
compared to XI plan. 
 A post of Member, Finance, CGWB has recently been created in CTWB for 
a better implementation of NAQUIM programme.” 
 
(ii) Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA):  
3.15 The Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) was constituted with effect 
from 29 May, 2001, by the Ministry of Environment &  Forests under Environment 
Protection Act, 1986. The Joint Secretary (Administ ration), Ministry of Water Resources 
is the Member Secretary of the Authority. Water Qua lity Cell, Ministry of Water 
Resources is providing secretariat to WQAA and coor dinates the activities of the 
constituent agencies of the Authority and undertake s various programmes/activities as 
decided by WQAA. The monitoring and assessment work s of water quality are got done 
through Member Organizations of WQAA like CPCB, CWC , CGWB, NEERI (National 
Environmental Engineering Research Institute), etc. 
 
3.16 Although the WQAA was constituted under the Ch airmanship of Secretary, 
Ministry of Environment & Forests, the Secretariat is provided by the Ministry of MWR, 
RD & GR. Curious to know about the reasons for this  peculiar arrangement, the 

Committee sought information in this regard. The M/ o WR, RD & GR stated in response 
as follows:  
  “As per the information provided by WQAA, it was observed that the water 
quality monitoring programme was under implementati on by different 
Central/State agencies but there was very little or  no coordination among the 
agencies and no uniform procedure was followed for sampling, analysis, data 
storage and reporting.  
 
Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change(M oEF&CC), therefore, 
after elaborate consultation with concerned departm ents decided to create an 
Authority at the Central level under ‘The Environme nt (Protection) Act, 1986’ 
with the mandate comprising of water quality monito ring and assessment 
issues as well as water quality management issues. MoEF&CC being the 
administrative ministry for The Environment (Protec tion) Act 1986, the 
Authority was constituted under the chairmanship of  Secretary, MoEF&CC. 
As the Authority is an inter-ministerial body, Memb er Secretary of the WQAA 
was made from MoWR, RD & GR for effective coordinat ion between the two 
ministries.  The notification on Water Quality Asse ssment Authority (WQAA) 
in the year 2001 contained “ The Ministry of Water Resources shall create a 
cell to assist the Authority to carry out the assig ned functions ”.  A cell was 
then created in MoWR to provide secretariat services to WQAA.”  
 
3.17 Unconvinced by the reply, the Committee furthe r enquired whether the above 
arrangement is effective in realizing the objective s for which WQAA was set up. The 
M/o WR, RD and GR responded by stating that this ar rangement is effective in realizing 
the objectives for which WQAA was set up. 
  
 The Authority exercises the following powers and f unctions:- 
“I. To exercise powers under section 5 of the said Act for issuing directions and 
for taking measures with respect to matters referre d to in clauses (ix), (xi), 
(xii) and (xiii) of sub- section 2 of section 3 of the Act. 
II.  To direct the agencies (government/local bodie s/non-governmental) for the 
following. 
(a) To standardize method(s) for water quality moni toring and to ensure 
quality of data generation for utilization thereof; 
(b) To take measures so as to ensure proper treatme nt of wastewater with 
a view to restoring the water quality of the river/ water bodies to meet 
the designated-best-uses; 

(c) To take up research and development activities in the area of water 
quality management; 
(d) To promote recycling/re-use of treated sewage/t rade effluent for 
irrigation in development of agriculture; 
(e) To draw action plans for quality improvement in  water bodies, and 
monitor  and review/assess implementation of the sc hemes 
launched/to be launched to that effect; 
(f) To draw scheme for imposition of restriction in  water abstraction and 
discharge of treated sewage/trade effluent on land,  rivers and other 
water bodies with a view to mitigating crisis of water quality; 
(g) To maintain minimum discharge for sustenance of  aquatic life forms in 
riverine system;   
(h) To promote Rain water harvesting; (This mandate  has been deleted 
vide MoEF notification No. SO-728 (E) dated 25 th  May, 2005) 
(i) To utilize self-assimilation capacity at the cr itical river stretches to 
minimize cost of effluent treatment; 
(j) To provide information to pollution control aut horities to facilitate 
allocation of waste load;   
(k) To review the status of quality of national wat er resources (both 
surface water and  ground water; except-that due to geo-genic aspect)) 
and indentify “Hot Spots” for taking necessary acti ons for improvement 
in water quality;   
(l) To interact with the authorities/committees con stituted or to be 
constituted under the provisions of the said Act fo r matters relating to 
management of water resources; 
(m) To constitutes/set-up State-level Water Quality  Review Committees  
(WQRC) to coordinate the work to be assigned to suc h committees; 
and 
(n) To deal with any environmental issue concerning  surface and 
groundwater quality (except-that due to geogenic as pect) which may 
be referred to it by the Central Government or the State Government 
relating to the respective areas, for maintenance a nd/ or restoration of 
quality to sustain designated-best-uses.” 
 
3.18 The Committee observed from the above mandate that quality issues caused by 
geogenic sources have been excluded from the purvie w of WQAA. The Committee 
enquired whether the Ministry of WR, RD & GR has an y suggestions to ensure efficient 
functioning of WQAA, the M/o. WR, RD & GR stated th at as per information provided by 

WQAA, a sub-committee for “Re-evaluation of powers and mandate of WQAA” was constituted 
by WQAA in its 9 th  meeting. The sub-committee in its report recommend ed that the Authority 
should focus on monitoring and assessment of water quality holistically and management 
aspects should be dealt by MoEF&CC and respective S tate Governments.  The Authority 
accepted this report in its 10 th  meeting and the notification of the Authority with revised mandate 
on monitoring and assessment of water quality is un derway.  After the notification, the mandate 
of the Authority would be on monitoring and assessment aspect of water quality of surface water 
and ground water.  It would help in bringing more efficient functioning of WQAA 
 
3.19 It was further stated that the sub-Committee s ubmitted its Report on 10 th  April, 
2013.  The sub-committee viewed that there is dupli cation of mandate of WQAA with 
other organizations/ministries, the management aspe ct should be taken up by 
MoEF&CC and respective State Governments and implem entation of the existing 
mandate in terms of management aspects may not be a chievable with the existing 
infrastructure and manpower. The sub-committee reco mmended that the WQAA should 
focus on monitoring and assessment of water quality  of surface water and ground water 
and address all the related aspects holistically. 
 
3.20 The Committee were informed that in the 10 th  meeting of WQAA, held on 
30.05.2013, the Authority decided to include geogen ic contamination in its mandate for 
monitoring and assessment aspects. 
 
3.21 The revised mandate and powers of WQAA as reco mmended by the Sub-
Committee are: 
 “  
(i). To exercise powers under section 5 of the said Act for issuing 
directions for taking measures with respect to matt ers referred to in 
clauses (i), (ix), (xii), (xiii) and (xiv) of sub- section 2 of section 3 of the 
Act. 
(ii). To direct the agencies (government/local bodies/non-governmental) for 
the following: 
a. To review and direct the agencies to standardize th e method(s) 
for water quality monitoring and to ensure quality of data 
generation for utilization thereof; 

b. To promote research and development activities in t he area of 
water quality monitoring and assessment; 
c. To direct the agencies to review the status of qual ity of national 
water resources (both surface water & groundwater) and identify 
‘Hot Spots’ based on the guidelines by WQAA for tak ing 
necessary actions for improvement of water quality; 
d. To direct the agencies to interact with the authori ties/ 
committees for matters relating to monitoring and assessment of 
water quality; 
e. To direct the State Governments/U.T’s to constitute /set-up 
state-level Water Quality Review Committees to coor dinate the 
work to be assigned to such committees; 
f. To review and address the inter-ministerial issues pertaining to 
water quality monitoring and assessment; 
g. Nationwide training programme involving all stakeho lders in 
water quality monitoring and assessment issues thro ugh 
workshops/seminars including international training /study tours 
for capacity building, international cooperation an d sharing of 
information.” 
 
3.22 The following are the ongoing activities in WQ AA: 
   
• Revision of Uniform Protocol on Water Quality Moni toring (UPWQM): 
The revision of existing UPWQM has been completed b y a 
Committee constituted by WQAA in its 10 
th  meeting. The revised 
UPWQM is to be ratified by WQAA before notifying the same.  
• Organization of data base on water quality at a si ngle platform: 
CPCB has been directed by WQAA in its 10 th  meeting to establish 
Data Centre as a central repository for water quali ty data generated 
by all concerned organizations.  
• Standardization of water quality laboratories: Dir ections have been 
issued to all concerned central and state governmen t organizations 
to initiate process of accreditation of their labor atories with NABL for 
all the parameters enumerated in UPWQM.  
• Rationalization and optimization of water quality monitoring stations: 
In view of the duplication of water quality monitor ing by different 
organizations like NRCD (National River Conservatio n Directorate), 
CPCB (Central Pollution Control Board), SPCBs (Stat e Pollution 
Control Board), CWC (Central Water Commission) and CGWB, a 
Committee approved by WQAA in its 1 0th  meeting has taken up the 
task of rationalization and optimization of water q uality monitoring 
stations in the country. 

3.23 The future course of action accepted by WQAA i n its 10 th  meeting is as follows:  
       “ 
• Devise mechanism for implementation of UPWQM by al l States and 
Central Government agencies, as also its review from time to time. 
• Preparation of guidelines for identification of po llution ‘hot spots’. 
• Rationalization and optimization of water quality monitoring network. 
• Identification of training needs to implement the mandate of WQAA. 
• Promotion of R & D activities in the field of wate r quality monitoring & 
assessment.” 
 
3.24 On being enquired by the Committee as to how C PCB monitors water quality, the 
M/o EF & CC in a written submission stated that CPC B is monitoring water quality at 
2500 locations in 29 States and 6 Union Territories  spread over the country. The 
monitoring network covers 445 Rivers, 154 Lakes, 12  Tanks, 78 Ponds, 41 
Creeks/Seawater, 25 Canals, 45 Drains, 10 Water Tre atment Plant (Raw Water) and 
807 Wells. Among the 2500 locations, 1275 are on ri vers, 190 on lakes, 45 on drains, 
41 on canals, 12 on tanks, 41 on creeks/seawater, 7 9 on ponds, 10 Water Treatment 
Plant (Raw Water)and 807 are groundwater stations. Arsenic is one of the parameters 
among the specific group of trace metals analysed i n water samples. The trace metals 
are found in traces (usually less than 1-10 ppm) an d have been defined accordingly. 
Monitoring of water quality over the years does not  reflect any detectable presence of 
arsenic contamination at any of monitored locations of the network. 
 
3.25 One of the achievements of WQAA is stated to b e regarding “minimum 
environmental flows in Indian rivers”. However, on closer scrutiny, it is observed that 
there is hardly any worthwhile progress during the last 11 years except for constituting a 
working group in the year 2003 which took four year s to submit its Report in 2007, 
followed by constitution of a Committee for impleme nting the working group’s 
recommendations which submitted its Report in 2009.  Eventually, the recommendations 
of the Committee have not been accepted by WQAA in its meeting held on 30 
th  May, 
2013. When asked to justify loss of 11 years withou t any fruitful results in ensuring 
minimum environmental flows in Indian, it was state d that the Authority felt the need to 
review the recommendations contained in the Report submitted by Working Group in 
2007. For this purpose, a sub-Committee was constit uted whose Report was 

deliberated by the Authority in its meeting held on  30 th  May, 2013. The Authority did not 
accept the Report as it found that the recommendati ons were generic, i.e., it was not 
river-wise, and in that too, stretch-wise. However,  these Reports provide the base work 
in the field of evaluation of minimum environmental  flows in the rivers which can be 
used in future for further elaborate studies. Simil arly, the Report submitted by the 
Committee on ‘Legal and institutional implication o f the implementation of the 
recommendations of the Working Group’ submitted in 2009 gave its recommendations 
on the legal aspects of the issues involved in this  matter. Therefore, these Reports 
would be of immense use for future development in this domain. 
 
3.26 It is, however, observed that as on 19.11.2014  arsenic is not listed in CPCB’s list 
of NABL accredited analytical parameters for water and waste water Laboratory, as 
evident from the list displayed in the CPCB website  under the link infrastructure – 
Laboratories – Water and Waste Water Laboratories –  List of NABL Accredited 
Analytical parameters. 
 
(iii) Absence of Soil Monitoring 
3.27 Concerned about absence of monitoring of arsen ic content in soil as a result of 
arsenic contaminated ground water irrigation, the C ommittee enquired about water 
quality control for irrigation purposes. The Minist ry of WR, RD & GR stated in a written 
reply that Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), monit ors ground water quality of 
shallow aquifers on a regional scale, once in every  year, during pre-monsoon 
(April/May) and generate background data on ground water quality.  Ground water 
quality monitoring indicates the status of ground w ater contamination on regional scale.  
Besides this, ground water quality data is also gen erated during hydro geological 
studies and ground water exploration.  The findings  of ground water monitoring and 
various scientific studies indicate suitability or otherwise of quality of ground water for 
irrigation purpose. The data and reports are shared  with State Government for taking 
necessary remedial measures. The Ministry WR, RD & GR informed on 19.11.2014 that 
soil analysis for contamination of arsenic is not being carried out by CGWB. 

 
3.28 In response to a pointed query as to whether t here is any plan to monitor the 
arsenic build up in soils in the arsenic affected a reas and to take remedial action, DARE 
stated that ICAR is not monitoring the arsenic buil d up in soils. DAC, however, stated in 
this regard in a written reply that it relates to M inistry of WR, RD & GR which is 
mandated for periodical assessment of arsenic contamination in ground water. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – IV 
 
Remediation 
(i) Remedial Measures 
     The M/o WR, RD & GR have stated that the initi ative to combat the 
menace of Arsenic hazards, in true sense, came into  existence in the year 1992. 
From 1992 onwards, Government of West Bengal and Ce ntral Government, 
along with several academic Institutions and Non-Go vernmental Organizations, 
have initiated a number of measures coupled with ac tion plan. Their main focus 
was on the detailed investigations to understand th e physiochemical process and 
mechanism, alternate arrangement to supply Arsenic free water to the affected 
populace and the development of devices for Arsenic  removal and their 
implementation at the field, etc. The steps and mea sures to combat the 
groundwater Arsenic menace also includes public awa reness programs, devising 
and demonstrating some of the results acquired from  scientific analysis. Some of 
the important steps taken by West Bengal Government are as follows:  
 “ 
i. Most of the infected hand pumps and tube wells, which were 
being used for domestic usages in the Arsenic affec ted areas, 
have been largely identified and put into hold for further usages. 
ii. The problem of groundwater Arsenic contaminatio n has been 
prioritized in the state and an ‘Arsenic Task Force ’, comprising 
technical experts from different disciplines workin g in the state, 
has been constituted to prepare an Arsenic mitigati on action 
plan report for the aquifers in the Arsenic infested districts. 
iii. A ‘Master Plan’ has been prepared for the enti re state under the 
guidance of the ‘Arsenic Task Force’; to provide Ar senic free 
water to the Arsenic affected villages using surfac e water and 
groundwater based schemes with the provision of Ars enic 
Treatment Unit.  
iv. Public Health Engineering Department, Governmen t of West 
Bengal has established district level chemical labo ratories for 
detecting Arsenic content in groundwater. Those che mical 

laboratories have been equipped with equipments to detect trace 
elements including Arsenic.  
v. A number of surface water based schemes have bee n put into 
operation in places, wherever they are feasible, wi th provision of 
chemical treatment.  
vi. Arsenic removal plants, based on various treatm ent technologies 
to treat Arsenic contaminated groundwater, have bee n installed 
in many places and put into operation to provide po table water to 
the affected populace where there were no access of  other 
sources of potable water supply. 
vii. Arsenic free deeper aquifers and wells explore d and constructed 
by CGWB have been put to use by the state agencies for public 
water supply.  
viii. Arsenic content in food chains and their effe ct on ingestion have 
been analyzed. However, what forms of arsenic, orga nic or 
inorganic, are present in groundwater and the degre e of 
consequantial impact of arsenic containing food cha ins on 
human health is yet to be established. 
ix. R&D studies focusing towards understanding sour ce and 
causes, geochemical prcesses, extent of mobilizatio n, social and 
health hazards, impact on food chains, etc. have been initiated.” 
 
4.2 To a specific query as to why it took almost 10  years to initiate steps to 
combat arsenic hazards in West Bengal, where the pr oblem surfaced in 1983, 
the M/o WR, RD and GR, stated as follows: 
 “After initial detection of Arsenic affected patie sts in 1982-83, water 
analysis drive was taken to assess the contamination level. In the year 
1988, Government of West Bengal under the aegis of Technology 
Mission, funded by Government of India, initiated a  project to study 
the nature, extent and cause of contamination. A St eering Committee 
was constituted by the State to formulate further s trategies, on the 
basis of the study which has submitted its report i n June, 1991. 
Subsquently, the State Government constituted anoth er committee for 
further study in 1992; the final report of this com mittee was submitted 
in October, 1994. The committee suggested mitigatio n plan 
recommended for funding. Accordingly, the State PHE D started 
implementing measures through ARP and awareness rai sing 
programmes including exhibition etc. to co-ordinate  different activities 
related to assessment and remediation of Arsenic co ntamination, the 
State Government constituted a Task Force in the ye ar 1995, which 
was subsequently reconstituted in July, 1999, Septe mber 2001 and 

further in September, 2003. This committee was chai red by Prof. 
Nath, President, Institute of Public Health Engineers India.” 
 
4.3 The M/o WR, RD & GR stated further in a note th at the schemes adopted 
as remedial options can broadly be grouped as under:  
       “ 
i. Uses of surface water sources : Supply of surface water from ponds, 
rivers etc. for drinking purposes through pipe netw ork system after 
suitable purification by conventional method of tre atment viz. 
coagulation, flocculation, rapid sand filtration an d disinfections, as an 
alternate option, have been put into practice in so me places by the 
State Government.  
ii. Exploring and harnessing alternate Arsenic free  aquifer: The Arsenic 
contaminated zones mostly lie within the shallow aq uifer (<100m bgl). 
But in many places the shallow aquifer is free from  Arsenic 
contamination. Such risk free potential zones in th e shallow aquifer 
provide scope for tapping. The deep aquifers (>100 m bgl) underneath 
the contaminated shallow aquifer, are normally Arse nic free. It is 
observed that properly designed tube wells are capa ble to harness 
deeper Arsenic free aquifer. Taking into considerat ion the above 
scientific propositions, the Public Health Engineer ing Department 
(PHED), Govt. of West Bengal, has put into operatio n, few water 
supply schemes tapping deeper Arsenic free aquifers  for water 
supply.  
iii. Removal of Arsenic from groundwater using Arse nic treatment 
plants/filters: A number of Arsenic removal devices , developed by 
various organizations, based on different scientifi c propositions have 
been put in practice. Central government, state gov ernment, 
academic institutions and few private organizations  have implemented 
number of Arsenic removal devices in many places to  provide treated 
Arsenic free water to the populace. These devices v ary in size, 
filtering mechanisms, and mechanisms of operation. Based on the 
size, the schemes can be categorized as ‘Arsenic Re moval Unit 
(ARU)’ and ‘Arsenic Removal Plant (ARP)’. ARUs are those, whose 
inlet are directly connected to a hand pump or tube  well. Arsenic 
Removal Unit is normally a small assembly which can  meet 
requirement of water for a smaller section of peopl e. ARPs, on the 

other hand, are those units, which have the capacit y to treat a large 
quantity of water and can cover a large section of populace. However, 
most of the Arsenic removal devices particularly, A RUs, failed to 
produce satisfactory results mainly due to the shor tcomings in 
operation and maintenance. The Arsenic removal devi ces, whose O & 
M aspects are managed by community participation, c ould produce a 
satisfactory performance. 
iv. Adopting rainwater harvesting/ watershed manage ment practices: 
Rain water harvesting in Arsenic affected areas, ca n prove to be a 
promising alternative. The recharged water will low er the 
concentration of arsenic in ground water by way of ground water.” 
 
4.4 State-wise number of Arsenic affected habitatio ns which are yet to be 
provided safe drinking water, as furnished by the M inistry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation is given in  Appendix – V. 
 
4.5 In response to a suggestion made by an expert t hat water conservation 
and rain water harvesting be adopted to mitigate ar senic contamination as a long 
term measure, the M/o WR, RD & GR stated that water  conservation, rain water 
harvesting and artificial recharge are measures whi ch may augment ground 
water besides diluting Arsenic concerntraiton. Mode l designs for terrain specific 
artificial recharge and rain water harvesting struc tures along with tentative costs 
have been circulated to state governments for const ruction under MGNREGA 
and other schemes. 
 
4.6 An expert (Dr. Ashok Ghosh, Prof. In Charge, De pt. of EWM, A.N. College, 
Patna) suggested inter-alia in a memorandum submitt ed to the Comittee that 
there is a need to gain understanding of arsenic mo bility from a geological and 
fluid flow perspective and predict arsenic behaviou r in rapidly shifting redo 
conditions towards development of drinking water tr eatment concepts (settlement 
scale). Responding to this suggestion, the M/o WR, RD & GR stated that CGWB 
has been involved in identification of arsenic free  aquifers. Tube well construction 

practices in arsenic infested areas must take into consideration proper sealing of 
contaminated zones from the deeper arsenic free zon es. The reason for elevated 
arsenic concentration at depth is absence of inverv ening clay layers which 
restricts downward flow of contaminated water to de eper levels. For identification 
of arsenic free aquifer it is absolutely essential that hydraulic parameters and 
water quality of different water bearing zones are ascertained. CGWB has carried 
out scientific investigations in and around the ars enic areas including exploratory 
drilling as a part of ongoing activity under of gro und water exploration to 
delineate of arsenic free aquifers. On identificati on of arsenic contamination 
during the exploratory drilling, arsenic contaminat ed zones are sealed and 
arsenic free zones are identified by CGWB and tappe d for arsenic free water. 
The scientific parameters along with well design ev olved are share with State 
Government as a Technology Transfer, for guiding th em to take up future ground 
water development in arsenic affected areas. The we lls constructed by CGWB 
tapping arsenic free zones are being haded over to the State Government 
departments for water supply. Further stated that u nder Aquifer Mapping and 
Management Programme (NAQUIM), CGWB has taken up aq uifer mapping 
programme in quality affected areas including areas  with arsenic contamination, 
wherein these issues are expected to be addressed.  
 
 
(ii) Remediation Technologies 
 
4.7  To a query regarding filter equipments available fo r making water arsenic 
free at supply point itself, an expert from IIT, Ka npur (Prof. Saumyen Guha, 
Department of Civil Engineering) who appeared befor e the Committee on 22 
September, 2014 stated as follows: 
 
 “Essentially, AMAL Filter is being implemented in 15 to 20 villages. It 
was designed by Prof. Amal K. Dutta of BESU, and it  is working sicne 

1997-99. The main problem with it is that one does not know when the 
filter is exhausted because Arsenic analysis is not  easy. So, what they 
do is that before they install the filter they go t o that village and create 
a local user group and trian them for sampling. The y bring the sample 
occasionally every 15 days to the lab; get it teste d; and if the 
exorbitant has exhausted, then the BESU people once  change the 
exorbitant. This has been going on for years now.” 
 
4.8 Adding further, the expert submitted as follows : 
 “For large scale, I recommend changing of the wate r source. Even if 
you try to remove arsenic at large scale, your economy will play out. In 
large scale, change it to surface water and treating them with standard 
water treatment procedure will actually be cheaper.  I only 
recommended this filter for small scale pockets. Investing large money 
in water treatment system will not be a good idea. That is why, the 
solution has to be scale dependant.” 
 
4.9 The details of technologies for removal of arse nic from ground water and 
kits for field testing of arsenic as furnished by CSIR are brought out below: 
 
(A) Ceramic membrane based cost effective technolog y with novel nano-
sorbent for Arsenic and iron free potable water in rural India 
 
4.10 The conventional processes for Arsenic removal  involve chemical precipitation, 
oxidation and coagulation which often show lower ef ficiency, consumption of chemicals 
and produces toxic sludge. To overcome this, novel ecofriendly sorbent material has 
been developed having higher sorption capacity of A rsenic using a green synthesis 
technique.  
 
4.11 Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute ( CSIR-CGCRI), Kolkata has 
developed a novel hybrid process consisting of adso rption of Arsenic by a proprietary 
media suspended in water and separation of the same  by ceramic membrane filters 
under cross-flow filtration condition for simultane ous removal of Arsenic and iron from 
highly contaminated ground water containing 0.9 ppm  – 1.3 ppm Arsenic and 5 ppm–12 
ppm iron.  

 
• The level of purification achieved is as per WHO r ecommended limits for Arsenic 
(<0.01 ppm) and iron (<0.3 ppm) in drinking water. 
• The technology is capable of treating ground water  containing higher 
concentration of Arsenic (up to 1.3 ppm) and iron (up to 12 ppm).  
 
4.12 The technology for production of quality drink ing water from Arsenic and iron 
contaminated ground water is based on the principle  of  aerial oxidation of As(III) & 
Fe(II), adding nano-colloidal media in water for ad sorption of Arsenic and separation of 
suspended adsorbent using ceramic micro-filtration membrane modules developed by 
CSIR-CGCRI. Contaminated ground water is pumped to a tank containing the 
adsorbent media and the raw water is allowed to com e in contact with the suspended 
media for a pre-determined time depending on the co ncentration of Arsenic and iron in 
the raw water. The contaminated water along with th e colloidal media is then passed 
through tubular ceramic membrane module under press ure for separation of the media 
particles in the retentate stream and production of  safe drinking water as the permeate. 
The adsorbent media is not required when only iron is present in the ground water. 
 
4.13 Simultaneous removal of Arsenic, iron, turbidi ty from contaminated ground water 
and production of sparkling quality water (comparab le to packaged/bottled water), low 
pressure (< 2 Kg/cm 
2 ) operation and low power consumption ( use of indi genous  pump 
of 2HP or 3 HP) make the technology  more attractiv e.  The capacity community model 
plants can vary from 2500 LPD to 10, 000 LPD while the hand pump attached unit is 
generally of 2500-5000 LPD capacity for supplying drinking water to 500-1000 people.  
 
4.14 The CSIR-CGCRI technology has been patented in  Bangladesh (BD5912002, 
dated 28.03.2002), Chili (CL605-2002 dated 28.03.20 02), Taiwan (TW91106287 dated 
29.3.2002) and USA (Patent no. 7,014,771 dated March 21, 2006). 
 
 

 
 
4.15 A pilot plant of 60 LPH capacity, based on thi s technique has been running for 
seven years using single channel ceramic tubes and providing sparkling quality water 
containing Arsenic (<10 ppb) and iron (<0.3 ppm) co ntent conforming the WHO 
specifications.  
 
4.16 Four community model plants (2500 LPD capacity ) are in operation for 
community supply of drinking water in North 24 Parganas district of West Bengal. 
 
4.17 CSIR-CGCRI is in the process of installing one  8 m 
3/hour ceramic membrane 
based Arsenic and Iron Removal Plant in Ramchandrap ur, Dist. Malda, West Bengal in 
collaboration with PHED, Govt. of West Bengal at th e site provided by them. This plant 
has been developed by CSIR-CGCRI and the technology  is transferred to M/s Porel 
Dass Water & Effluent Control Pvt. Ltd., Howrah. 
 
(B) The following technologies for water purificati on using low cost ceramic 
membranes have been developed and demonstrated for mass application: 
• Technology for Arsenic & Iron Removal form Groundw ater (2500-5000LPD 
capacity); 
• Technology for Iron Removal from groundwater (2500 -10000LPD); and 
• Membrane based pretreatment system for BRWO/SWRO P lants (10000LPD 
capacity). 
 
 
 


Salient features 
Technical 
• The level of purification achieved is as per WHO r ecommended limits for Arsenic 
(< 0.01 ppm) and iron (< 0.3 ppm) in Drinking Water; 
• Simultaneous removal of Arsenic and Iron from cont aminated ground water makes 
the technology still more superior; 
• The technology is capable of treating ground water  containing higher 
concentration of Arsenic (up to 2.7 ppm) and iron (up to 13 ppm); and 
• Minimum sludge generation to higher adsorption cap acity of the colloidal media. 
 
Operational 
 
• The ownership of the plant by the local population ; 
• Management by local people, thereby generating emp loyment;  
• Operation and maintenance cost is raised by contri bution of the users against 
supply of water; and 
• The concept could be made operational for the basi c reason that the quality of 
the purified water is much better than those availa ble currently using alternative 
technologies. 
 
Technology Utilization  
 
• 63 Nos. Ceramic Membrane Based Community Model Pla nts installed for Iron & 
Arsenic removal, are in Operation in WB and North Eastern states (8 States); and 
• 22 Nos. Iron Removal plants have been installed by  Private Entrepreneurs (self / 
bank financing) under SSI sector with the opportunity of employment generation. 
 
 
(B)  Cation exchange resins for selective removal of Ars enic from water of 
 normal salinity  
 
4.18 CSIR-Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Researc h Institute (CSIR-CSMCRI) 
has developed cation exchange resins for selective removal of Arsenic from water 
containing up to 200 ppb Arsenic. 
 
4.19 The technology developed helps in selective re moval of Arsenic or fluoride from 
drinking water containing Arsenic up to 200 ppb or fluoride up to 10 ppm and requires 

no electricity for operation of the plants.Water pu rification units from domestic size to 
community scale capacities can be madebased on the technology.  
Technology Utilization 
 
• 65 domestic and 10 community scale dearsenificatin g units containing the 
developed resin were installed in the Arsenic affec ted villages of West Bengal. 
Each domestic and community scale unit can produce 25 and 250 liters of 
Arsenic free waterper hour respectively. Arsenic co ncentration in treated water is 
within the limit prescribed by WHO; 
• 10 domestic defluoridation units (25 liters/hour) have been set up in Gujarat and 
Tamil Nadu;  
• Each of the community scale units produced ~ 20000 0 ltr. of Arsenic free water 
without regeneration of resin since their installation i.e. January-2013; and 
• Another 50 dearsenification units are under fabric ation for installation in West 
Bengal, under the scheme sponsored by MoEF. 
 
 
 
(D) Chemo-Dearsenification Technology for Arsenic r emoval 
 
 
4.20 CSIR-National Environmental Engineering Resear ch Institute (CSIR-NEERI), 
Nagpur has developed aChemo-dearsenification techno logy using iron in the chemical 
form [i.e. Ferrous Sulphate (FeSO 
4. 7H 2O) and Ferric Chloride (FeCl 3)]to remove Arsenic 
from spiked waters. The technology involves the uti lity of the combination of 
FeSO 4. 7H 2O and H 2O2(as Fenton’s reagent) and the combination of FeCl 3 with 
KMnO 4for Arsenic removal.The process was found to be eff icient for Arsenic removal 

from ground water. The technology allows for instal lation of household Arsenic removal 
units in Arsenic affected areas.  
 
The salient features of the technology are: 
• Requires no power (electricity or battery); 
• Environment-friendly; 
• Easy to operate and maintain;  
• Treated water quality as per WHO Guideline value; and 
• Cost Effective. 
 
4.21 Field evaluation of the developed Arsenic remo val units was conducted using 
real life ground water samples from Kaudikasa villa ge, Rajnandgaon District, 
Chhattisgarh. The developed units were tested with two ground water samples with 
higher Arsenic concentrations i.e. 929 and 2634 ppb  to bring about Arsenic removal to 
desired concentrations.  The developed units exhibi ted good removal efficiency using 
the field samples: the residual Arsenic concentrati ons where 
≤ 10 ppb i.e. WHO 
guideline value for Arsenic. The measured values of  pH, conductivity, turbidity, iron, 
manganese, sulphate, chloride, residual chlorine an d potassium were also well within 
the desirable range as per BIS ( IS: 10500, 2012 ). 
 
Technology Implementation 
 
4.22 Five household Arsenic removal units using Fen ton’s reagent have been 
successfully installed in the Arsenic affected area  of Kaudikasa village of Chowki block 
in Rajnandgaon district of Chhattisgarh state of In dia. The technology was found to be 
cost effective, simple and easy to operate, environ ment friendly and most importantly 
reduces Arsenic concentration below 10 ppb, the WHO guideline value for Arsenic.  

 
 
(D) Arsenic removal from water using calcined Mg–Al  layered double 
hydroxide (LDH) 
4.23 Inorganic adsorbents for removal of Arsenic fr om drinking water were developed 
by CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technol ogy (CSIR-NEIST), Jorhat in 
collaboration with Defense Research Laboratory (DRL ) Tezpur at laboratory 
scale.Calcined Mg–Al layered double hydroxide (LDH)  adsorbents were developed for 
Arsenic removal from water. 
 
4.24 It was found that layered double hydroxide wit h the general formula  
[M 
2+ 
(1-x) M3+ 
x(OH) 2]xAx-nH2O due to their large surface area and high anion ex change 
capacity are good adsorbents for the removal of Ars enic from contaminated water. 
Laboratory results demonstrated that there is removal of 99.99% Arsenic from a solution 
of 100 ppb of Arsenic and the adsorbent required at  saturation was 0.10g/20 ml Arsenic 
solution with 90 min of exposureat (30±1)° C. Factor s like pH, adsorbent dose and 
shaking time distinctly influenced the rate of Arsenic removal.  
 
4.25 The Preliminary Cost Estimation on the basis o f 2009 prices show that for the 
production of Mg-Al Layered Double Hydroxide on a 100kg/batch/day capacity plant, the 
cost of production is Rs 100/Kg. In due considerati on of the high efficacy of the 
adsorbents and their reusability, the adsorbents ar e expected to be highly beneficial in 
the actual field conditions. CSIR-NEIST has carried  further scale up study on the pilot 


scale level production of these Arsenic removing ad sorbent materials and is exploring 
technology transfer opportunities. 
 
(E) Arsenic removal using naturally occurring miner als  
 
4.26 CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR-N ML) has developed a process 
technology for Arsenic removal using naturally occurring minerals. It is helpful in Arsenic 
and iron remediation. 
 
 
4.27 Field trial for about three months in 50 house holds in Sahebgunj district has 
shown that the technology is technically viable, i. e., it can remove iron and Arsenic 
present in water to the desired level. The sludge g enerated thereby can be easily 
contained, which however, requires a concerted meth odology for its collection. This can 
be accomplished at the village level through pancha yats and self help groups. The 
consumables’ cost is very low and well affordable b y all sections of people. Discussions 
are currently on-going for transfer of the technology. 
 
 
CSIR Kits for Field Testing of Arsenic  
 
(a) Standard Mercuric Bromide Stain method 
 
4.28 CSIR-National Environmental Engineering Resear ch Institute (CSIR-NEERI) has 
developed a facile method for Arsenic testing. It i s based on the Standard Mercuric 


Bromide Stain method and eliminates most of the dra wbacks observed in the existing 
kits, available in market.  The process is simple: the chemicals are added to the sample 
water and the colour developed is compared with col our strips provided in the kit to 
estimate Arsenic concentration in the water.  The m ethod provides for precise and 
accurate determination of Arsenic levels >50 ppb, w ith detection range of 0.01-1.0 mg/L 
Arsenic.  A yellow stain is developed at low Arsenic concentrations, while a black spot is 
developed at high Arsenic concentration.  The devel oped kit enables conduct of 100 
tests per kit. The technology has been transferred to entrepreneurs. 
 
 
 
 
(b) Semi-quantitative Arsenic detection kit 
 
4.29 A semi-quantitative Arsenic detection kit has been developed by CSIR-CSMCRI 
which can detect Arsenic in ground water semi quant itatively up to 10 ppb and on 
wards-up to 500 ppb. The kit is equivalent to comme rcially available kits in the market. 
The performance of the kit has been found to be rep roducible even after 1 year and can 
be stored at ambient temperature.About 150 test kit s were distributed among the 
affected population of the area in 24 Parganas (N), WB. 
 


 
 
4.30 When asked as to why no single effective filtration  device has been developed 
that can meet the localised need of the rural peopl e in the country even after 30 year of 
the problem first surfacing on a large scale, the M/o WR, RD & GR stated: 
 
 “As per the information provided by Ministry of Dr inking Water and 
Sanitation, there are a number of effective technol ogies for treatment of 
Arsenic in drinking water. Since each technology ha s its pros and cons and 
its selection is also dependant on cost of the tech nology, it is not 
appropriate for the Ministry to decide any single f iltration system for Arsenic 
treatment. With support from CSIR-NEERI, Nagpur, th e Ministry had 
documented “Handbook on Drinking Water Treatment Te chnologies” in the 
year 2011, which includes some of the most suitable  technologies for 
treatment of variety of contaminants including Arse nic.  The Technology 
Manual has again been got updated in the year 2013 with support of 
NEERI-Nagpur and has been provided to all the States.” 
 
 
(iii) Medical Treatment 
 
 
4.31 Regarding curability of the arsenic diseases, the M/o H&FW stated that acute 
consumption for short term may cause gastrointestin al symptoms including nausea, 
vomiting and diarrhea, cardiopulmonary toxicity and  neurological effects like headache, 
seizures and neuropathy. Intensive gut decontaminat ion with chelating agents unithiol 
3-5 mg/kg intravenously every 4-6 hours or dimercap rol 3-5 mg/kg intramuscularly with 
supportive therapy are the mainstays of treatment of acute cases. 


4.32 Chronic consumption of drinking water with ars enic concentrations more than 
permissible limits may produce symptoms involving s kin, risk of development of 
diabetes and cancer. Exposure of arsenic in pregnan cy could result in fetal 
malformations. Management of chronic poisoning cons ists of termination of exposure 
and symptomatic supportive care. 
 
4.33 On the question of preventive steps, a represe ntative of the M/o H&FW stated as 
follows: 
“Sir, unfortunately, so far, all the preventive asp ects have not been taken up 
by the Ministry of health.  Only the curative aspec t and the medical aspects 
have been looked after” 
 
4.34 Emphasising the need for creation of National Health Programme for ground 
water quality related health problems, a Working Gr oup on “Sustainable Groundwater 
Management” in its report submitted to planning Com mission in 2011 suggested that a 
National Health Programme for ground water quality related health problems needs to 
be created, within the Ministry of Health, so as to  forge convergence with groundwater 
quality monitoring. This programme should include e stablishment of diagnostic facilities 
in areas with severe health implications of ground water contamination, execution of 
surveys and imparting training for mitigation measu res. Specifically the surveys that can 
be carried out immediately are those on flurosis , (Dental Flurosis and skeletal Flurosis 
for children especially  through school health surveys), Arsenosis, accurate database for 
Enteretic related problems , renal stone surveys , relating to incidence of other diseases 
such as high cancer rates to possible water quality  problems  such as heavy pesticide 
use or industrial effluents). There is a need to re cognize the linkage between 
malnutrition and water quality related problems par ticularly in the context of 
urban/health poor. 
4.35 In response to a query as to what action was t aken on the above suggestion, the 
representative of the M/o H&FW stated on 27 October, 2014 as under: 

“Sir, to the best of my knowledge, this convergence  has only taken place for 
Kala Azar.  That is the only Inter-Ministerial Comm ittee that we have right 
now.  We do not have Inter-Ministerial Committee for arsenic, etc.” 
 
4.36 The representative of the M/o H &FW, added fur ther in the connection:   
“Unfortunately, the Ministry has not formulated any  national programme for 
these ground water problems as yet.  However when I  called the experts 
last time, I had suggested a Task Force of experts to give us the 
recommendation of what kind of programme we should run. That we should 
be able to do soon.” 
 
4.37 In response to a specific query as to why desp ite the detection of arsenic 
contamination way  back in early 1980’s suitable st eps were  not taken to address the 
problem in its entirety, the witness stated as follows:   
“As far as the State issues are concerned, we do no t want to stop at saying 
that it is a State subject. Once the State Governme nt brings up, the funding 
will be made available under the National Health Mi ssion. That is not a 
problem. Even for diagnostics, we will be able to support them with funds. 
Testing has been a major issue and as far as testin g is concerned, I have 
discussed it with the experts and they feel that we could set up some kind of 
a testing facility at the district level to begin w ith, apart from the forensic 
facility which is available at the State level, and  we will be advising all the 
States to prepare the plan for the districts. We wi ll fund it under the National 
Health Mission. 
Third, the basis of all this, if I may be permitted  to say, has to be a national 
programme, which we need to formulate. Once we have  a national 
programme in place, the policy or the direction tha t we are thinking of, will 
get inbuilt into that national programme. Testing w ill come from it and 
research will flow from it. 
Prevention relates to not having arsenic mixed wate r. Unfortunately, in the 
country, even with the best of efforts, that has no t yet happened. We need 
to do that. We need to get together with the Depart ment of Drinking Water 
to ensure that we are able to achieve that. But til l such time that we are able 
to achieve that, the Ministry’s mandate will be to ensure that whoever is 
suffering from it, is cured and medicines are provided to him. For that we will 
try to build a programme and I am hopeful that we w ill try and bring back 
focus on to this, which was not there.  

Next, we will constitute a task force and will try to see that drinking water 
remains a part of it because the major input will come from there.”  
 
4.38 In view of the involvement of multiple Ministr ies such as Ministries of (i) WR, RD 
& GR, (ii) Drinking Water and Sanitation, (iii) Agr iculture (Department of Agriculture 
Research and Education and Department of Agricultur al Cooperation), (iv) Health and 
Family Welfare (Department of Health), (v) Science and Technology (Department of 
Science and Technology), (vi) Environment and Fores ts and Research bodies such as 
ICMR, ICAR, CSIR etc., for tackling different aspec ts of arsenic contamination , the 
Committee sought to know during oral evidence of th e Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare whether there is any Central Task Force for  dealing with arsenic problem. The 
representative of the Ministry of Health and Family  Welfare stated during oral evidence 
on 27 
th  October, 2014 that there is no Central task force dedicated towards arsenic as 
of now.   
 
4.39 Regarding constitution of a Task Force, the re presentatives of the M/o. H&FW 
submitted as under:  
“We will constitute the Task Force now and within t wo to three months, we 
should have a report with us, hopefully.” 
 
 
4.40 In response to a query as to the timeline for report of the Task Force, the witness 
stated as follows: 
“Sir, I would say by February, if I may be permitte d to say so.  It is because 
we are still in the process of constituting the Tas k Force. We have not yet 
finalised that. But we should be able to do it.” 
 
4.41 To a query about the availability or otherwise  of standard tests / methods / 
instruments for early detection of arsenic content in the body, the representative of M/o 
H&FW stated during evidence on 27 October, 2014 that: 
“I have had a discussion with the experts who have suggested that there are 
two types of testing, which is possible.  One is bl ood test sample, which the 
experts even sitting here, do not agree among thems elves that it is 
conclusive. The second is a test of a nail and hair , which actually 

establishes arsenic content. Unfortunately, that te st is only available in the 
forensic science laboratories, right now; and we do  not have it at the district 
level for testing.  That is our problem as far as t esting is concerned.  So, we 
need to create some infrastructure.”   
 
4.42   In written response to a query as to why no health initiatives e.g. Mobile team to 
treat patients, provision of necessary medication a t subsidized/no cost to all of the 'at 
risk' population was taken, the M/o Health and Fami ly Welfare (ICMR), in a written reply 
stated that provision of health services is under t he purview of State Government, since 
health is a state subject.  
4.43  In response to a query as to whether any relief mea sures have been provided to 
affected citizens, in terms of medical care, compen sation (for medical treatment costs), 
safeguards etc. the M/o Health and Family Welfare ( ICMR), stated that the information 
relating to compensation and other relief measures may be available with the respective 
State Governments.  
 
Socio Economic impact of arsenic contamination  
4.44 Pointing out that the arsenic problem has a ma jor effect on the socio economic 
structure, the vision document has observed that a good portion of 500 million people, 
living in the 569749 sq. km of the Ganga-Meghna-Bra hmaputra belt, live in danger of 
drinking arsenic contaminated water. Around 30% of this populace is constituted of 
illiterate inhabitants who live below poverty line.  Affected populace are those who are 
economically backward and lack in nutritious food. Women are affected the most 
compared to men. Further, infants and children are adversely affected than the adults. 
An arsenic patient loses his strength and cannot wo rk outdoors, but his family incurs 
more expenses than before because of his illness. M any of them borrow money from 
the local moneylender who charges them a high rate of interest, i.e. 5-10 monthly 
compound interest. Often villagers lose all their e arthly possessions including the roof 
over their heads, trying to pay the moneylender bac k. Society too, turns an arsenic 
patient into an outcast. The arsenic problem, thus,  has a major effect on the socio-

economic structure. People often mistake symptoms o f arsenic poisoning for leprosy or 
other contagious skin diseases, and thus marriage, employment, and even the simplest 
social interaction become impossible for the victim . Thus, an arsenic patient often 
becomes depressed and sometimes even tries to commit suicide. 
 
4.45 The socio economic effects of Arsenic contamin ation are severe because people 
often mistake the symptoms of arsenic poisoning for  leprosy or other contagious skin 
diseases, and thus marriage, employment and other s ocial interactions become 
impossible for the victim. In response to a query a s to whether the Government have 
any rehabilitation and reintegration program in place, to help the victims psychologically, 
the M/o WR, RD & GR stated as follows: 
“As per the information provided by the Ministry of  Drinking Water and 
Sanitation (MoDWS), the Ministry is aware about the  socio-economic issues 
pertaining to Arsenic contamination of drinking wat er. Excess Arsenic 
causes Melanosis and Keratosis, which may also lead  to cancer and other 
diseases.  MoDWS has advised States to paint the ha nd pumps in red 
colour where excess Arsenic has been found and not to drink Arsenic 
contaminated water.  All the Arsenic affected State s have been advised to 
focus on awareness generation activities in Arsenic affected habitations. For 
conducting IEC activities, the Ministry provided NR DWP-Support Funds 
(5%) as 100% Central share.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER - V 
 
 
Research and Development 
 
(i) R&D Arsenic Mitigation 
 
 The Ministry of Science and Technology (Department  of Science and 
Technology) launched Water Technology Initiative in  the year 2007-08. A Technical 
Expert Committee constituted by the Government of I ndia, identified 26 major water 
challenges prevalent in the country. One of these c hallenges was geogenic 
contamination due to Arsenic. 
 
5.2 The R&D activities promoted by the DST focused primarily on the issues related 
to removal of Arsenic from the drinking water and d etecting the presence of Arsenic in 
drinking water. The R&D challenges identified by the DST included the following. 
 “ 
 (i)  Development of cost effective and efficient m aterials for Arsenic  
  removal based on locally available resources. 
 (ii)  Cost effective detection techniques with tec hnical performance  
  better or comparable to currently available alter natives 
 (iii). Development of household and community Arse nic removal systems 
  based on indigenously developed materials 
 (iv). Field demonstration of developed systems to assess their suitability 
  in specific social context.”  
 
5.3    The objective of the R&D activities was to d evelop adsorbents which were 
cheaper yet efficient for removal of arsenic from d rinking water. Various types of 
adsorbents were prepared and their loading capacity  was compared with other 
alternatives. Attempts were made to develop adsorbe nts superior to commercially 
available adsorbents for a wide range of operating condition i.e. pH & temperature, 
having larger surface area and higher adsorption ca pacity. Further, suitable 
encapsulation and stabilization of the developed ma terial through appropriate 

techniques was undertaken to enable their prolonged  use with least adverse effect on 
the efficiency. 
 
5.4 Considering the fact that Arsenic (III) removal  was quite difficult, efforts were also 
made to develop improved methods besides chemical o xidant for faster conversion of 
Arsenic (III) to Arsenic (v). Recognizing the impor tance of developing low cost detection 
techniques for estimation of Arsenic in ground wate r, efforts were made to develop cost 
effective field test kits having shelf life, detect or strip sensitivity, incubation time and 
interference due to presence of other contaminants,  better than or at least comparable 
to commercially available imported test kits.  
 
5.5   The promising leads obtained from the investi gations of various materials were 
taken to the next logical steps which focused on la b scale studies of these materials for 
spiked as well as naturally contaminated Arsenic laden water.  
 
5.6  The successful lab scale systems were up scale d and prototypes were tested in 
real field conditions. The systems which conformed to technical performance 
parameters and found large community acceptance wer e replicated in larger numbers 
to generate enough scientific data for validation.  
 
5.7 Several R&D projects, involving water treatment  systems/ processes, devices, 
materials, etc., for providing safe and adequate dr inking water have reportedly been 
initiated. The DST has so far supported around 25 R &D projects at a total cost of Rs 
675 lakh. The accomplishment of some of these proje cts is summarized in the table 
below:- 
  “ 
S. 
No 
Project(s)  
 
Achievements 
1 Development of low cost 
household filter for arsenic 
and other pollutant-free 
drinking water using modified 
laterite. 
 
/xrhombus Development of highly efficient 
modified laterite adsorbent (24 
mg/g of Arsenic V). 
 
/xrhombus Design and installation of 
arsenic filter for domestic (120 

Field trial of low cost laterite 
based arsenic filter: Domestic 
and community scale 
 
Prof. Sirshendu De, 
Department of Chemical 
Engineering , Indian Institute 
of Technology, Kharagpur-
721302 
L/day) and community (500 
L/day) scale integrated with 
alum dosing to remove iron and 
bacterio-static carbon to remove 
coliform.  
 
/xrhombus Evaluation of 10 domestic filter 
and 1 community filter revealed 
successful performance. 
2 Implementation of Cost 
Effective Household Arsenic 
Remediation Technology in 
West Bengal. 
 
Demonstration of Cost-
Effective and indigenous 
Domestic Arsenic 
Remediation Technology for 
Arsenic Mitigation in arsenic 
affected areas of India 
 
Save the Environment , 
Kailash Ghosh Road,      
Kolkatta- 700 008  
/xrhombus Technology sourced from Naval 
Materials Research Laboratory 
(NMRL) Ambernath (DRDO).  
 
/xrhombus Design of Cost effective, 
requires no power, environment 
friendly, easy to maintain & 
operate household Arsenic 
removal filter 
 
/xrhombus Utilisation of locally available 
processed waste of Steel 
Industry for co-precipitation of 
arsenic with iron. 
 
/xrhombus Demonstration in in North 24 
Paraganas (West Bengal), Balia 
(UP) and Bhagalpur (Bihar).  
3 Development of arsenic 
adsorbing polymeric beads 
and their performance study 
in packed bed columns 
 
Development of prototype 
systems to produce arsenic-
free safe drinking water 
 
Prof. Priyabrata Sarkar 
Department of Polymer 
Science and Technology,  
University of Calcutta, 92 
A.P.C. Road,       Kolkata-700 
009 
/xrhombus High capacity Arsenic adsorbing 
beads (17.5 mg/g of Arsenic V) 
based on synthesised nano- 
alumina dispersed in chitosan 
grafted poly-acrylamide.  
 
/xrhombus Development of ceramic filter 
candle containing adsorbents 
immobilized/ micro 
encapsulated in polymer matrix 
for removal of Arsenic from 
drinking water  
 
/xrhombus Interference and optimisation 
studies required to assess 
suitability for field use. 

4 Field Application and 
Management of community 
based Arsenic Removal units 
in Rural Areas of West 
Bengal 
 
Dr. Asis Mazumdar 
School of water resource 
Engineering, 
Jadavpur University 188 Raja 
S.C. Mulik Road,West 
Bengal-700032 
/xrhombus Field model (800-1000 lt/hr) 
based on co-precipitation, 
adsorption and filtration 
mechanism developed for 
Arsenic removal. 
 
/xrhombus Hand-pump attached units 
demonstrated at 3 locations, 
each benefiting around 50 
families. 
 
/xrhombus Unit does not operate under 
pressure. 
/xrhombus Possibility of upscaling for 
higher capacity 
5 Field Test Kit for Arsenic in 
Water 
 
Prof.    Priyabrata Sarkar, 
Department of Polymer 
Science & Technology,  
University of Calcutta, 92 
A.P.C. Road, West Bengal, 
Kolkata 
Mercuric bromide and silver nitrate 
detector element low cost kit for total 
arsenic and arsenate, 
 
/xrhombus Colorimetric sensor for ppb level 
arsenic contamination in 
drinking water. 
/xrhombus Dip Stick colorimetric sensor for 
detection of arsenate in drinking 
water. 
 
6 Continuous Arsenic Removal 
Using Zero-valent Iron Filter 
(ARUZIF) from Drinking 
Water 
 
Development of continuous 
mode arsenic removal 
technology for drinking water 
based on indigenous 
zerovalent iron 
 
Dr Sanjeev Chaudhari,   
Professor,  Center for 
Environment Science and 
Engineering,  
Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay 
Powai, Mumbai- 400 076 
/xrhombus Development of a simple process 
that uses indigenous zero valent 
iron and a specially designed unit 
(which ensures good oxygen 
transfer, separation of Hydrous 
Ferric Oxide (HFO) flocs and 
uses locally available low cost 
granular media) for arsenic 
removal from drinking water. 
/xrhombus Two units operating at a flow rate 
of 600 litres per hour in villages 
of West Bengal from February 
2008.  
 
/xrhombus 46 more such units have been 
installed in various parts of UP, 
Bihar, West Bengal and Assam. 

7 Design consideration and 
field performance validation of 
high arsenic removal water 
filter packed with lab-bench 
developed materials: A lab-to-
field technology transfer 
programme” 
 
Dr. S. Chakrabarti,  
Pesidency University,  
Kolkata. 
/xrhombus Synthesis of cost effective non 
hazardous Manganese 
incorporated Ferric oxide (MnFO) 
 
 
/xrhombus Arsenic removal using 
synthesized nanoparticles of 
MnFO 
 
/xrhombus Efficiency in removal of high 
Arsenic, Nitrate, Chloride, 
Phosphate contaminated water 
established. 
 
/xrhombus Sludge analysis indicates non 
hazardous nature of adsorbent 
8 Ion-Specific Resins and 
Membrane based 
systems/processes to bring 
the level of Arsenic to WHO 
limits in drinking water 
 
Dr. K.M. Popat,  
CSMCRI, Bhavnagar. 
/xrhombus Pre-treatment of Arsenic 
contaminated water and removal 
of Arsenic by Reverse Osmosis 
(RO) process. 
/xrhombus Utilisation of sludge as bricks and 
no Arsenic leached out from 
these bricks 
/xrhombus Mercuric Bromide coated test 
strips developed for sensitivity 
upto 25 ppb. 
/xrhombus Use of indigenously developed 
Arsenic specific resin for final 
polishing of water being 
investigated. 
9 Integrated technology for the 
removal of Arsenic from 
Ground Water 
 
Field scale trials of the ARI, 
Pune technology for the 
removal of arsenic from 
drinking water in 
Rajnandgaon District of 
Chhattisgarh. 
 
Dr. K.M. Paknikar, 
Scientist,  Agarkar Research 
Institute, Pune  
/xrhombus Use of  Microbacterium lacticum  
to oxidize arsenite (As3+) in 
groundwater rapidly to arsenate 
(As5+). 
 
/xrhombus Developed a unique ‘integrated 
microbial oxidation alumina 
adsorption process for the 
removal of arsenic from 
groundwater rendering it 
completely safe.  
 
/xrhombus Feasibility on applicability of flat 
sheet liquid membrane based 
separation process for removal of 
Arsenic from groundwater. 

10 Removal of Arsenic from 
Drinking water using 
polymeric membranes. 
 
Development of a low cost 
Adsorbent (Hydrogen Ferric 
Oxide) and household model 
for removal of Arsenic from 
Underground Water. 
 
Dr. U.K. Kharul, NCL, Pune 
Dr. G.P. Aggarwal, IIT Delhi 
Hauz Khas,Delhi    
/xrhombus Development of low pressure 
ultra filtration (UF) membrane 
process for effective and 
selective removal of Arsenic (As-
V). 
 
/xrhombus Applicability of polyacrylonitrate 
(PAN) based negetively charged 
UF membrane for effective 
Arsenic removal. 
/xrhombus Membranes did not foul, worked 
for long and rejected 100% 
arsenic. However, efficacy 
reduced in the presence of 
Phosphate, Sulphate, Carbonate 
etc. 
11 Development of Multichannel 
Ceramic Membranes with 
Optimum Channel 
Congiguration for up scaling 
the Technology for 
Purification of Arsenic 
Contamination Ground Water. 
 
 
Dr. S. Bandyopadhyay, 
Scientist, Central Glass and 
ceramic Research Institute, 
Jadavpur, Kolkata- 32 
/xrhombus Hybrid process using suspended 
adsorption media and cross flow 
micro-filtration for 
decontamination of Arsenic. 
 
/xrhombus Optimum Channel Configuration 
(Circular and Star) for minimising 
fouling of membrane surface. 
12 Integrated Arsenic and Iron 
removal from contaminated 
ground water 
 
Dr. Robin Kumar Dutta,  
Department of Chemical 
Sciences, Tezpur University, 
Napaam, Tezpur, Assam . 
/xrhombus Development of a method based 
on oxidation-coagulation at 
optimum pH. 
 
/xrhombus Removes Arsenic as well as Iron 
from contaminated groundwater.  
 
/xrhombus Technique uses three common 
chemicals for coagulation and 
adsorption of Arsenic.  
 
/xrhombus Cost effective, user-friendly and 
works without electricity. 
                         “ 
 
 DST informed that most of the R&D projects were in itiated since 2007. The field 
demonstration of these systems has taken place during 2012-13. 

5.8 DST is stated to have promoted a network of res earchers from leading R&D/ 
academic institutions working in the area of Arseni c from various parts of the country. It 
has been stated that DST and concerned R&D/ academi c institutions have closely 
worked with district administration and line depart ments to facilitate allotment of land, 
accord necessary permission for treatment plants, f acilitate provision of utilities, 
participation in setting up of plant and its operat ion, etc. Community interest was 
evinced through participation of local Non Governme ntal Organisations (NGOs) and 
field groups. Public Health Engineering Department (PHED) was involved in all the field 
demonstration initiatives. 
 
5.9 The outcomes of these research efforts are also  shared at various inter-
ministerial fora including core committee on Arsenic mitigation.  
 
5.10 The initiative of the DST is relatively nascen t. However, the limited experience of 
the department has reportedly revealed the need to have last mile connectivity to 
translate the research outputs to field. DST has st ated that while these R&D projects 
have proven their potential at lab scale, demonstra tion of capabilities of these 
technologies to provide convergent solutions with p ossible up scaling needs sustained 
efforts.  
 
5.11 Evolving customized technological solutions fo r Arsenic removal from water 
suited to specific social context requires continue d scientific and technological inputs. 
Recognising the immense value of the expertise deve loped and insight gained during 
the course of implementation of R&D activities for addressing water challenge related to 
Arsenic, the department is continuing this activity  as part of the plan programme and 
proposes to develop synergies with state government , water resources Ministry and 
other stakeholders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5.12 The Committee were interested in knowing how m any of these research efforts 
have culminated into useful output in field. In res ponse, DST indicated the following 
seven research efforts that have already culminated into useful output in field: 
     “ 
i. AMRIT- Arsenic and Metal Removal by Indian Techn ology - Indian 
Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu 
ii. IITB Arsenic Filter (Zero Valent Iron based)- I ndian Institute of 
Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra 
iii. DRDO Arsenic Removal Filter-  NMRL-DIPAS/ DRDO , Mumbai/ 
Delhi 
iv. Low cost Laterite base  Arsenic Filter - Indian  Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur, Kharagpur, West Bengal 
v. Arsiron Nilogon- Tezpur University, Tezpur, Assa m 
vi. ARI groundwater arsenic treatment plant - Aghar kar Research 
Institute, G G Agarkar Road, Pune, Maharashtra 
vii. Arsenic Removal Unit- School of Water Resources Engineering, 
Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal” 
 
 
5.13 When the Committee enquired whether there are any collaboration with global 
R&D institutions, DST stated in a written reply tha t two collaborative public- private R&D 
initiatives specific to arsenic removal are underwa y in country with leading US R&D 
institutions, under the aegis of Indo-US Science an d Technology Forum (IUSSTF), a 
bilateral body co-promoted by DST and US Government. These are:- 
 
i) Commercializing a patented Electro Chemical Arse nic Remediation (ECAR) 
technology which enables low cost affordable arseni c-remediation of water, 
within a sustainable service delivery model involvi ng Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA  and LIGTT Corporation, Oakland, CA,  
as US partners and Jadavpur University, Kolkata & L uminous Water 
Technologies Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi as Indian Partner s. Under this model, 
safe water would be provided to school children whi le excess may be sold 
at a low cost affordable price. This public-private  partnership would ensure 
that the plant is not abandoned due to failed maint enance that has plagued 
other implementations.  
 
ii) Utilisation of a novel, locally-sourced Donnan Principle-based second 
generation Arsenic adsorbent (Donna-AFSorb) with a micro-franchise 
business model providing appropriate community-base d or domestic water 
filters to villagers involving Lehigh University, PA  , WIST, Inc., Brighton, 

MA, as US partners and Rite Water Pvt. Ltd., Nagpur  and Society  for 
Technology with a Human Face, Kolkata is under implementation”.  
 
 
5.14 To a query as to the types of technologies whi ch proved to be  most efficient, 
cost effective, more acceptable and easy to operate and maintain, DST stated as under:  
“In fact, this depends upon water quality.  CSIR laboratories have developed 
water purification technologies, kits for arsenic t esting and rice genotype            
which accumulates low arsenic when cultivated in ar senic contaminated 
water.  Each of the water purification technologies  developed by CSIR 
laboratories is unique in its own way, addresses th e removal of 
contamination of one or more pollutants (arsenic, a rsenic/iron, etc.) and can 
be deployed on domestic or commercial scales. The p rocess of purification, 
treatment of sludge/ waste and the maintenance para meters largely depend 
upon the complexity of the technology. Arsenic conc entration and variation 
in source water composition also impact the efficie ncy and 
applicability/appropriateness of a given technology . In addition to the 
technological parameters, the user parameters such as installation cost, 
operating cost, maintenance cost and requirement of  skilled personnel, 
besides societal acceptance play an important role for a technology to be 
effectively utilized in the public domain. The user  requirements vary widely 
and a portfolio of technologies that can enable one  to choose an optimal 
one based on specific/identified need is thus desir able. The CSIR water 
purification technologies for arsenic contamination  may thus provide options 
to the concerned stakeholder for necessary adoption .  At community level 
CSIR’s RO based technology has been found to be the most effective one.”  
 
5.15 The Committee asked about the reasons for lakh s of people facing arsenic 
menace and suffering arsenic related diseases despi te a number of technological 
options for arsenic removal developed by CSIR and o ther organizations. In response, 
DST stated as follows: 
“The issue is very complex.  In addition to the effo rts by the Government 
agencies, it requires partnership of the masses and  corporates through 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) framework.  T echnologies for arsenic 
removal developed by CSIR and other organizations a ddress a very 
important issue of ground water contamination by th e metalloid. The 
deployment of technologies for routine use is often  dependent on the 
perceived gravity of the issue as well as the econo mics of suitable 
interventions. In the country, water is largely con sidered to be a commodity 
for which the public desires due Government interve ntions in terms of its 
supply and quality. The endeavor of providing quali ty potable water seeks 
the involvement of all stakeholders and it requires  a continuous and 

concerted effort for water source mapping, desired technology development 
and deployment.  It requires partnership of R&D org anizations, specific 
Government Departments/Ministries, industries and a  sustainable business 
model, besides the acceptability of a technology by  public at large. Like 
affordable health care, making available high quali ty potable water should 
also be taken in mission mode with an effective Pub lic-Private Partnership 
model. 
 
The research efforts have succeeded in demonstratin g potential of 
technologies developed to provide potable water at reasonable cost to 
public. However, all these technologies could not b e transferred to industry 
as rural water sector is not considered a lucrative  sector by the industry. 
Having developed the technologies and demonstrating  them successfully in 
field, the academicians/ scientists do not find fur ther work challenging 
scientifically and mechanisms are limited to encour age them to convert their 
output to promote enterprises. 
 
Globally, promising research leads from labs are pi cked up early by 
industries and converted into products/ processes. The industry perfects the 
process and also upscales the process to commercial  level. In Indian 
context, as participation of established industry m ay not be possible in the 
early stage of development, direct support to resea rch group for promoting 
start-ups may be considered by way of soft loan/ gr ant. A company 
incubated at IITM InnoNano Private Ltd has attempte d to commercialise 
research outputs. Similar efforts by other research  groups need 
encouragement. Policies regarding procurement at St ate level also need to 
support scientifically validated indigenous initiatives.”    
 
 
5.16 According to the Ministry of WR, RD & GR, in-s itu remediation of arsenic from 
aquifer system or de-contamination of aquifer is th e best technological option. It has, 
however, been stated that no R&D work regarding in- situ remediation of arsenic has 
been taken up by any Indian Institute. In a written  reply to a specific query as to the 
reasons for not taking any initiative for R&D in th is field by any Indian institute, the Min. 
WR, RD & GR stated as under: 
“As per information available, in-situ remediation of Arsenic has not yet 
 been taken up by any Indian Institute. However, as  per the information 
 available on the website, globally, since last two  decades or so, a few 
 institutions have initiated R&D for in-situ remedi ation of Arsenic, which 
 are as under: 
 
• United State Geological Survey, USA. 
• School of Earth Sciences, University of Birmingham , UK. 

• Utah Water Research Laboratory, Utah State Univers ity, USA. 
• Queen’s University Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK. 
 
 
Prof. Dipankar Chakravarty Report, School of Enviro nment Sciences, 
University of Jadhavpur; All India Institute of Pub lic Health and Hygiene, 
and NIH are doing research in the field of Arsenic contamination and they 
are in touch with these four Institutions for devel opments of in-situ 
remediation of Arsenic." 
  
 
5.17 To a specific query as to why Water Quality As sessment Authority (WQAA) has 
not funded any R&D project on arsenic contamination , M/o WR, RD & GR, in a written 
reply, stated as follows: 
“As per information provided by WQAA, addressing th e issues related with 
geogenic contamination is not under the mandate of WQAA.  Arsenic being 
primarily a geogenic contamination, WQAA did not fu nd any R&D project 
regarding in-situ remediation of Arsenic in groundwater.” 
 
 
 
5.18 The Min. WR, RD & GR informed the committee th at as per the information 
available on the website of PHED,  the R&D Study on Efficacy of Arsenic Removal Plant 
for piped water supply scheme was first taken up at  Sujapur in Kaliachak block of Malda 
district, West Bengal by PHED, Government of West B engal in the year 1998.  The 
R&D Study on Causes, Effects & Remedial Measures of  Arsenic in parts of West 
Bengal was taken up by State Water Investigation Di rectorate, Government of West 
Bengal in the year 2000.  
 
5.19 When enquired whether any effort has been made  for collaboration or joint 
research between ICAR and other research institutes  like NBRI , ICMR ,etc., in 
research activities of development of arsenic safe crops and water quality issues and in 
exchanging findings for appropriate follow-up action, DARE submitted as under: 
 “ICAR under National Agriculture Innovation Projec t (NAIP) funded project 
on ‘Arsenic in food chain: cause, effect and Mitiga tion ‘made collaboration 
with D.N. Guha Majumdar Research Foundation (a Medi cal Research 
Institution), Kolkata. However, no collaborative ef forts were made with NBRI, 
ICMR and other institutions in this direction.” 

5.20 According to DARE, several weed species are no ted to accumulate considerable 
amounts of arsenic in their biomass. However, such accumulation of arsenic does not 
necessarily lead to its detoxification per se unles s the plant – accumulated toxin is 
effectively detoxifies within the plant body by its  metabolic process. For this, a 
systematic search for phyto accumulating or phyto excluding plant species is necessary.  
In response to a query as to the status of research  in this regard, DARE sated that the 
preliminary investigation has been made.  
 
 
(ii) Development of Arsenic safe crops 
 
5.21 It is observed from the joint memorandum submi tted by two experts (Dr. C.S. 
Nautiyal, Director, CSIR-NBRI and Dr. R.D.Tripathi,  Senior Principal Scientist, NBRI) 
that CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute, Lu cknow in collaboration with Rice 
Research Station, Chinsurah, West Bengal under took  the research work entitled 
“Characterization of low grain. Arsenic accumulatin g rice genotypes safer for human 
consumption” in 2006. Three sites were selected fro m West Bengal with different soil 
arsenic concentrations, in ascending order, Chinsur ah<Purbosthali<Birnagar and 
cultivated about 300 rice genotypes over five years  period Screening results indicated 
positive correlation between soil and rice grain Ar senic accumulation. Among the 
screened diverse rice genotypes, only nine cultivar s viz., IET-4786, Dusmix-40 S 
Sankar, IR-64, Gotrabhog, Nayanmoni. CN 1643-3 and CN1646-2. CN1794-2-CSIR-
NBRI were accumulating low grain Arsenic in grains at all the three sites. To validate 
the findings and reproducibility of results they fu rther conducted multi-locational field 
trails (Chinsurah, Purbosthali, Birnagar, Gaighata,  Durgapur, Beldanga) in different 
agro-climatic zones of West Bengal differing in soil profile and arsenic level. 
 
5.22 According to the two experts, a multi-location al on-farm yield trial with ten rice 
genotypes including five previously identified low- grain arsenic genotypes (IET 19226, 
Nayanmoni, CN 1643-3, CN 1646-2 and CN 1646-5), three promising aromatic breeding 
lines (CN 1794-2, CN 1646-6, CN1719-1), one high grain arsenic line (BRG 12) and one 
popular high yielding variety (IET 4786) was initia ted during 2012-2013 in six arsenic 
contaminated areas of different districts in West B engal jointly by Rice Research 

Station, Chinsurah, Government of West Bengal and CSIR-National Botanical Research 
Institute, Lucknow. Data from various seasons (Khar if 2011 & 2012 and Boro 2011-
2012 & 2012-2013) demonstrated that rice cultivar C N 1794-2-CSIR-NBRI was the best 
cultivar amongst all trial entries with respect to low arsenic content in grains and highest 
grain yield. This variety has been found to be safe  for human consumption as per 
provisional maximum tolerate daily intake (MTDI) of  arsenic. Thus, CN 1794-2 CSIR-
NBRI is proposed to be released for cultivation in vast arsenic affected belts of West 
Bengal.  
 
5.23 The two experts also emphasised in their memor andum, the need for 
development of safe arsenic crops for the arsenic a ffected areas to restrict arsenic 
contamination in food chain. In response to this su ggestion, the Min. of WR, RD & GR 
furnished the following information: 
 
“CSIR-NBRI has carried out work in collaboration wi th Rice Research station, 
Chinsura, Hoogly(WB) . The arsenic contamination of  food grains has been 
assessed for west Bengal. The implications of consu mption of arsenic 
contaminated rice grains are also documented in such areas.   
 
To overcome this menace, CSIR- NBRI has identified low grain arsenic rice 
cultivator (CN 1646-2, CN 1643-3, Gotrabhog and Nay anamoni), which has 
been recommended for growing in the state of west Bengal.  
 
National Botanical Research Institute (NBRI), a con stituent organisation of 
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSI R), has carried out work 
indicating levels of arsenic (As) in seeds of diffe rent paddy varieties presently 
cultivated in agricultural soils of Uttar Pradesh. Teh data covering 58 villages 
of five districts namely Gazipur, Bahraich, Ballia,  Gorakhpur and Lakhimpur - 
Kheri indicates presence of arsenic.  
 
Under a University Grants Commission (UGC) project,  A.N. College, Patna 
has conducted experiment in parts of Bhagalpur ditr ict in Bihar where an 
irrigation borewell (32 m depth) has arsenic concen tration of 1.020mg/L and 
mature plant irrigated by the water has As concentration of 0.136 mg/gm 
 
In pot experiment six varieties of rice viz. 9PNR 3 81, Turantha, Saroj, 
Sugandha, saran and Katarni) were taken. Out of the se two varieties Saroj 
and Sugandha have been found to be Arsenic resistan t , whereas the saran 
variety has been found as very low accumulator of As.” 
 

 
5.24 Enquired about the efforts made to develop ars enic safe crops, DARE submitted 
that rice varieties IET, 1444, Gotrabhog, Nyanmoni and Shatabdi have been identified 
relatively tolerant to arsenic toxicity. 
 
5.25 To mitigate the problem of arsenic contaminati on the Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education (DARE) stated in a note that  boro rice requiring more 
groundwater should be replaced with other suitable and less water demanding crops. 
Various legumes and pulses have great promise in th is regard. While the farmyard 
manure application moderated the toxic effect of ar senic in soil-plant system, the 
phosphate application aggravated it. The reduced ir rigation coupled with application of 
zinc sulphate also reduced the arsenic content in s oils and plants while not affecting the 
yield. There should be more use of organic and gree n manures that moderate arsenic 
toxicity in soil-plant system by forming organo-ars enic complexes. The 
phytoremediation employing hyper-accumulating plant /microbial spp like brake fern 
(Pteris Vittata), water hyacinth (Eichornia crassip es) and others also hold promise in 
detoxification of arsenic from soils and aquatic sy stems. The Blue Green Algae (BGA) 
having ability of decontaminate soils of arsenic sh ould be introduced in the paddy fields. 
A number of microbial species (e.g. the bacterial s pecies, namely Proteus sp., 
Escherchia coli, Flavobacterium sp.; Corynebacteriu m sp. And Pseudomonas sp., the 
fungus, namely Candida humicola; the freshwater alg ae, namely Chlorella ovalis. 
Phaepdactuylum Tricornutum. Oscillatoria rubescens)  have been reported to possess 
varying degrees of arsenic accumulating abilities. 
 
5.26 In response to a query as to whether the Minis try of Agriculture help the farmers 
in case they are ready to shift to less water deman ding plants from water intensive boro 
rice cultivation, the Secretary, Department of Agri culture & Cooperation, Ministry of 
Agriculture,  was candid in his admission that the Deptt. had not so far thought of this 
issue at all in its crop husbandry programmes. He stated in this connection as follows :-  
“We work through the State Governments and we work through the 
district agencies of agriculture.  They have limita tions.  Some States are 
better equipped than others but most of the States have limitations.  
Under our ATMA project, we have sanctioned three po sts per block as 

Extension Advisers and the subject matter specialis ts.  That is basically 
to strengthen because we realize that in most State s, after the 1980s 
there has been very miniscule recruitment in the ag riculture extension 
services.  We are doing that.  But, more importantly, what we are trying to 
do and what we would like to do is this.  So far wh at we had been doing 
till about three years was that we were implementin g all our Schemes 
and Programmes on individual beneficiary-oriented a pproach.  That was 
not visible, and it was not even monitored.  It was  not even a kind of 
technically back stoppable by our scientists becaus e the spread was so 
huge.  For the past three years what we have been t rying to do is this.  
We operate now only in clusters.  In the flat plain  conditions, we operate 
in 100 hectares, and in the hills it becomes smalle r.  In the entire area, 
we cover in one big solid junk so that whatever tec hnology we 
demonstrate is easily available and visible.  The i mpact is that the 
neighbouring farmers also try and adopt it.  We hav e had a lot of success 
in this technology, especially the BGREI and NFSM p rogrammes in the 
eastern India.  Having said that, I do recognize th at we had not so far 
thought of this issue at all in our Crop Husbandry Programmes.  I must 
confess that.  If at all, it is I who is guilty of this because I should have 
thought of that.  Now that it is being brought up, we will certainly look into 
this because this is a very important matter which will affect the long-term 
health of our people especially of that area.” 
 
 
 
5.27 The DARE suggested the following remedial opti ons to combat the arsenic 
problem:-  
 
 “(i) Conjunctive use of ground and surface water. 
  (ii) Preference to growing non-edible and legumin ous crops during dry 
season. 
(iii) Storing of Arsenic contaminated groundwater i n ponds and 
subsequent  dilution with rainwater. 
 (iv) Recharge of groundwater with harvested rainwa ter, free of arsenic. 
 (v) Increased use of farm yard manure and other ma nures + green   
                    manure crops. 
 (vi) Application of appropriate amendments (zinc/i ron salts as and    
                   wherever applicable). 
 (vii) Cost-effective phytoremediation options. 
 (viii) Capacity building and awareness programmes. ” 
 
 
5.28 In response to a query as to whether any strat egy has been worked out by the 
Ministry of agriculture or by any other Ministry to  mitigate Arsenic build up in soils and 

crops, DARE stated that based on the research findi ngs, ICAR has suggested the 
following measures to mitigate arsenic build up in soils and crops :- 
 
 “(a) optimum conjunctive use of ground and surface  water (e.g. use of 
harvested rain water during lean period)  
 (b) Irrigation with pond –stored ground water – de contamination being 
facilitated by rainfall and sedimentation  
 (c)   Recharge of ground water resource with harve sted rain water, free of  
Arsenic  
 (d)   Enhancing the water use efficiency (through optimum water management) 
for ground water irrigation, especially for summer (boro) rice  
 (e)   Preferring low water requiring, farmer attra ctive cropping sequence 
(especially for the lean period)  
 (f)    Boro rice variety IET 1444 may be preferred  in arsenic contaminated   
areas 
 (g)      increased use of verminopost ,FYM and oth er manures + green manure 
crops , inclusion of pulses/ other legumes in cropping sequences , as well 
as application of appropriate amendments ( zinc/ ir on salts as and 
wherever applicable ) 
 (h)     cost effective phyto remediation options u sing Blue Green algae , Azolla 
and duxk weed  
 (i)  creation of general awareness: mass campaigni ng, holding of farmers 
day field demonstrations.” 
 
5.29 Referring to the Government’s proposed plan to  replicate water intensive green 
revolution in eastern part of India, the Committee enquired whether any study was 
conducted to assess its impact on the spreading or otherwise of arsenic in ground water 
in Eastern India. In response, Secretary, Departmen t of Agriculture & Cooperation, 
Ministry of Agriculture stated during evidence on  
13 October. 2014 as follows: 
“Sir, it is an extremely important issue.  The reas on we introduce this 
programme called ‘bringing Green Revolution into Ea stern’ India’ was that we 
felt that the water tables there are so high and th e soil is so fertile so that is 
an apt area to be exploited for production or incre asing productivity.  
Production levels in Eastern India are far below th eir potential and that is 
reason why we chose that.  Having said that, we als o realized that especially, 
in those parts of Bengal where arsenic contaminatio n has been found to be 
the maximum, we attributed – whether it is scientif ic or not, I do not know – 
that the excess drawl of ground water from shallow depths is probably the 
reason which is causing this. We had not taken cogn izance of this so far but I 
think we shall.  What we shall try and do is that m ake more focused efforts on 
conjunctive use of water instead of just tapping in to easily available ground 

water sources.  Look at surface water at a major wa y.  The point is that 
unless the arsenic gets washed out it will remain t here.  So whether it is crop 
or whether it is agriculture or whether it is anima l husbandry or fisheries that 
contamination will be there.  So that is difficult to get rid of.  As the population 
density is so high in the area we just cannot wish away that we cannot do 
agriculture there.  This is something that we will have to think about very 
carefully.  I think we need to do this.  Next week or the week after that Nepal, 
Bangladesh and ourselves are coming together and do ing a programme on 
scientific exchange in respect of agriculture, focused basically on exchange of 
existing germplasm without need for further trials.   We can take this 
programme on board as well because all three countr ies having similar agro-
ecologies or having similar problems.  So, as you h ave said, if we pull our 
resources, maybe we can find a way out which is mor e reasonable because 
right now, very frankly, these are all shots in the  dark. The arsenic is still 
there.  So unless it gets washed out, we cannot wish it away”   
 
5.30 When enquired about the steps taken by Ministr y of Agriculture to minimize the 
arsenic content in agriculture, dairy produce and m eat products Secretary, Department 
of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agricultu re was candid in his admission that 
the Ministry was not focussing on the quality of gr ound water and stated during 
evidence as under:     
“I must confess that so far the way that we go abou t disseminating 
agriculture practices, we have not been focusing on  the quality of ground 
water.  We obviously need to adopt that now into our systems.   
Sir, there are two or three things that we need to do. There are certain 
crop varieties which are less susceptible to uptake  of arsenics.  
Obviously, we need to promote that.  But, more importantly, we also need 
to look at other models. Ideally I would suggest th at agro-forestry is a 
great way forward.  But I do not think that the lan dholding size of the 
farmers of that area is so small and they are so vu lnerable and it is 
difficult for them to make a living on that.” 
  
5.31 The Ministry of Agriculture (DARE), in respons e to a query as to whether any 
action has been taken to ensure that arsenic laden agricultural produce is not 
consumed by human beings and live stock, submitted in a written reply that so far no 
comprehensive strategies have been worked out to en sure that arsenic laden 
agricultural produce is not consumed by human beings and live stock. 
  
 
 
 
 
 

(iii) Research on medical treatment  
 
5.32 Enquired about research on medical treatment o f arsenic diseases, a 
representative of the Min. of Health and Family Wel fare (Min. of H & FW) stated during 
oral evidence on 27-10-2014 as follows :- 
“We have had a brain-storming session last week onl y on the 20 th  in which we 
have called experts on arsenic to find out what are  the further research areas 
which we can take up in future. In that, major issu es have been highlighted. One 
is the effect of nutrition and the anti-oxidative s tress on the effects of arsenic 
toxicity. Second, what the experts mentioned in tha t meeting was about 
treatment protocol.”  
 
5.33 Pointing out that high arsenic consuming group  has irreversible oxidation stress, 
the M/o H&FW submitted a note on research carried o ut by ICMR’s Regional 
Occupational Health Centre (ROHC), Kolkata, extract of which is as follows: 
 
 “The human exposure to arsenic is being evaluated by clinical signs and 
symptoms sand by laboratory investigation like meta bolic products of 
arsenic in urine. Objective of the present study wa s to detect and 
characterise suitable biomarker for detection of ea rly exposure. All subjects 
were investigated for health status and antioxidant  profile. Water and Urine 
samples were analysed for arsenic analysis. Signifi cant rise (p. <0.001) in 
serum uric acid (UA) level, as preliminary oxidativ e stress marker, was 
observed in 58% cases of group testd population con suming >50µg/lit 
arsenic in drinking water. Morever, decline in Tota l Antioxidant Status (57% 
cases) of the >50 µg/lit group supported the elevat ion of serum UA. Arsenic 
induced skin pigmentation and keratosis was observe d in 6.4% of teased 
population. Our study also indicated reduced oxidat ive stress parameters in 
a significant number of cases without signs and sym ptoms of arsenic 
exposure. Therefore, it may be concluded that the h igh arsenic consuming 
groups has irreversible oxidative stress, which lea ds to symptomatic 
disease.” 
 
  
5.34 Admitting that there is inadequate research on  the arsenic contamination and its 
impact of health, a representative of the M/o H&FW during his deposition before the 
Committee stated as under: 

“Sir, it is a fact that inadequate research has tak en place. We have tried to 
find out whatever has been the research on this by various organisations. 
ICMR has only funded sporadic research projects out side ICMR. There is 
no central ICMR research on this. 
The second is, All India Institute of Hygiene and P ublic Health, Kolkata did a 
survey in two districts of West Bengal and they hav e found certain prevalence. 
But in terms of the medical corrective treatment an d the causes etc., there has 
been no centralised research. We have tried to find  out further and I have been 
told that DRDO has also done a research on saniting  agents which they say 
reverses the trend slowly and that I am told is und er trial. Unfortunately we do 
not have evidence-based findings from any of this research so far.” 
 
5.35 A note submitted by the M/o H&FW on Research o n arsenic in the water carried 
out by  ICMR’s regional Occupational Health Centre (ROHC), Kolkata, may be seen in 
Appendix – VI.  
 
5.36 To a specific query as to whether ICMR is enco untering any infrastructure and 
manpower problems for carrying out R&D and for trea ting patients, the representative 
stated as follows:   
“Exactly for this purpose, we had this brainstormin g session where we called 
the experts on arsenic and people who are working o n arsenic to say what all 
they have done till now and what they would like fu ture research to be 
concentrated on and they have given us these few po ints on which we will be 
constituting a Task Force soon.”  

CHAPTER - VI 
Issues relating to arsenic 
 
(i) Absence of Central authority for arsenic mitiga tion 
 Ministry of Water Resources, Government of India, inter-alia , is responsible for 
development, conservation, and management of water as a national resource; overall 
national perspective of water planning and coordina tion in relation to diverse use of 
water; ground water management; conjunctive use of surface and ground water and 
water quality assessment. 
 
6.2 Central Ground Water Board, a sub-ordinate offi ce of the Ministry of WR, RD & 
GR is the National Apex Organisation with the manda te to ‘Develop and disseminate 
technologies, and monitor and implement national po licies for the Scientific and 
Sustainable development and management of India’s G round Water Resources, 
including their exploration, assessment, conservati on, augmentation, protection from 
pollution and distribution, based on principles of economic and ecological efficiency and 
equity. The main functions of the Central Ground Wa ter Board are Ground Water 
Surveys, monitoring, exploration, resources assessm ent, management, dissemination 
of information and capacity building. 
 
6.3 Regulation of ground water development & manage ment is being done by 
CGWB through Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) constituted under Section 3 
(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to re gulate and control development and 
management of ground water resources in the country  and to issue necessary 
regulatory directions for the purpose. 
 
6.4 The steps taken to combat Arsenic contamination  during the last three decades 
by the Ministry of WR, RD & GR are as follow:- 
“A number of measures, steps and research studies h ave been initiated 
and put into practice mainly in West Bengal. The me asures and steps are 
focused towards providing Arsenic free drinking wat er to the entire 

population in the Arsenic infested areas, by arrang ement of alternate 
freshwater sources as also by treating contaminated  groundwater using 
Arsenic removal techniques.” 
 
6.5 During the last three decades, substantial amou nt of R & D work has been done 
to enrich knowledge in respect of the following: 
    “ 
• Identification of Arsenic poisoning through affect ed patients of West 
Bengal through drinking water pathway. (1983) 
• Sampling of ground water for Arsenic contamination  in West Bengal. 
(1983-onwards) 
• Research on Arsenic mobilization in ground water, establishing extent of 
contamination in the entire State. (1985-onwards) 
• Development of ex-situ technologies for removal of  Arsenic from 
groundwater and adoption for water supply, analysis  of ground water 
sample for establishing arsenic affected areas (1987-onwards) 
• Search for alternate Arsenic/safe aquifer for comm unity water supply as 
well as alternate sources from surface water supply (1993-onwards) 
• Detection of Arsenic in the up streams of the Gang etic plains in 2003, the 
area which was earlier thought to be arsenic contam ination free. (2003-
onwards) 
• Analysis of ground water samples from the entire G angetic plain/ 
Brahmaputra plain and other Holocene deposit areas for demarcation of 
contaminated zones. (2003-onwards) 
• Establishing Arsenic contamination areas in 10 Sta tes, research on 
mobilization of Arsenic in the affected States othe r than West Bengal. 
(2004- onwards)  
• Adoption of removal technologies, search and alter nate Arsenic safe 
aquifer based water supply and surface water depend ent potable water 
supply schemes. (2005- onwards)  
• National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee and  Central Ground Water 
Board (CGWB) under the aegis of Ministry of Water R esources has 
prepared a Vision Document entitled "Mitigation and  Remedy of 
Groundwater Arsenic Menace in India: A Vision Document (2010)” 
 
6.6 Asked about future plans, if any, for combating  Arsenic contamination in ground 
water, the Ministry of WR, RD & GR stated that the abatement of arsenic contamination 
and supply of arsenic free potable water is in the domain of state government. 

6.7 When asked to spell out clearly and categorical ly its exact role and responsibility 
in arsenic mitigation in ground water, the M/o WR, RD &GR, in a written reply submitted 
as under:      
 “To fulfil the mandate, Central Ground Water Board  (CGWB) has the 
responsibility to carry out scientific surveys, exp loration, monitoring, 
management of Country’s vast ground water resources .  The data generated 
from these investigations provide a scientific base  for user agencies and 
states for planning and management of ground water resources.  CGWB is 
also taking up special studies on various aspects l ike artificial recharge, 
geogenic contamination etc.  The data generated is disseminated through 
publications such as State Hydrogeological Atlases,  State Reports, District 
Reports, Ground Water Year Books, Ground Water Expl oration Report, 
District Ground Water Brochures, and Quarterly Bhuj al Journal etc. 
Collaborative special Studies are also taken up wit h premier scientific/ 
Academic/ Public Sector organizations/ Institutes in field of Ground Water. 
 
In order to develop human resources through trainin g of Ground Water 
professionals in the ground water domain, Rajiv Gan dhi National Ground 
Water Training & Research Institute (RGNGWTRI) impa rts training to ground 
water professionals and sub-professionals in ground  water investigations, 
development and management techniques. 
 
A few R&D studies have been carried out jointly wit h other institutes of India 
mainly focusing on distribution of Arsenic and aqui fer characterisation.  In 
Arsenic affected areas, CGWB has constructed wells tapping Arsenic free 
aquifers under the ground water exploration program me.  After the 
investigation, the Arsenic free exploratory wells a re handed over to State 
Governments for water supply as provision of Arseni c free potable water is 
currently in the State domain.  
 
Considering the severity of arsenic contamination a nd its spread in different 
States, various technologies developed for its abat ement in India and abroad, 
the Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR took the i nitiative for preparing a 
vision document entitled "Mitigation and Remedy of Ground Water Arsenic 
Menace in India” by NIH and CGWB, taking inputs fro m various experts on 
Arsenic and available literature on the subject.  T he document was circulated 
by NIH to concerned State Governments. This documen t also suggests future 
strategies for remediation and mitigation of Arsenic in ground water.’’ 
 
6.8 The Committee enquired about programme/scheme, if any, conceptualized by 
the Ministry of WR, RD & GR to deal with issues reg arding arsenic contamination. In 
response, it was stated that CGWB does not have any  specific programme to deal with 
the issues regarding Arsenic contamination in groun d water. Asked as to why no 

separate scheme for Arsenic remediation has been fo rmulated till now, the M/o WR, RD 
and GR stated in a written reply that while Central  Ground Water Board (CGWB) does 
not have any specific scheme on Arsenic contaminati on, yet in many instances CGWB 
has carried out scientific investigations in and ar ound the Arsenic affected areas 
including exploratory drilling as a part of ongoing  activities under ground water 
exploration to delineate arsenic free aquifers. Suc h wells, tapping Arsenic free aquifers 
are handed over to the State Government for further utilization. 
 
6.9  The Ministry of WR, RD & GR stated in a note t hat CGWB carried out area 
specific ground water exploration for identificatio n of arsenic free aquifers on request of 
State Government under its general programme. When asked whether CGWB should 
not suo moto, identify arsenic free 'aquifer, witho ut waiting for the State Government 
concerned to make a request, the Ministry of WR, RD & GR stated as under:  
“Though Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) does not have any specific 
scheme on Arsenic contamination, in many instances CGWB has carried out 
scientific investigations in and around the Arsenic  affected areas including 
exploratory drilling as a part of ongoing activity underground water exploration 
to delineate arsenic free aquifers. Wherever Arseni c is reported in ground 
water, CGWB in consultation with State Government s elects exploratory 
drilling sites for carrying out ground water explor ation for obtaining suitable 
sites in Government land.”   
 
6.10 When enquired whether it is not desirable for CGWB to draw up a programme in 
this regard, the M/o WR, RD & GR stated that taking  up of aquifer mapping programme 
in arsenic affected areas is a part of NAQUIM (Nati onal Aquifer Mapping and 
Management Programme), wherein assessment of aquife r wise water quality and 
development of management plans are envisaged. This  information will be shared with 
the concerned Central and State agencies for taking remedial measures.  
 
6.11 Asked as to what action is taken when contamin ation is revealed on monitoring 
by CGWB, the M/o WR, RD&GR stated as follows: 
‘’On confirmation of Arsenic contamination in ground water from monitoring by 
CGWB, the information is shared with the concerned agencies for taking 

necessary remedial action.  However, on identificat ion of Arsenic 
contamination during the exploratory drilling, Arse nic contaminated zones are 
sealed and Arsenic free zones are identified by CGW B and tapped for 
Arsenic free water.  The scientific parameters alon g with the well design are 
shared with State Government as a Technology Transf er, for guiding them to 
take up future ground water development in Arsenic affected areas. The wells 
constructed by CGWB tapping Arsenic free zones are being handed over to 
the State Government departments for water supply.’’ 
  
6.12 The Ministry of WR, RD & GR further stated in this connection as follows: 
“Remediation of arsenic is within the purview of dr inking water supply 
agencies. However, CGWB carries out identification of arsenic free aquifers in 
the arsenic affected areas under normal ground wate r exploration programme 
and dissemination of technology for construction of  wells tapping arsenic free 
aquifers.” 
 
6.13 To a query about the identified alternative so urces, population benefitted from 
and the financial assistance, if any, given to the states, the Ministry of WR, RD and GR  
stated in a written reply as follows:  
“Central Ground Water Board identifies deeper arsen ic free aquifers as an 
alternative source, under normal ground water explo ration programme. So 
far, 254 wells have been constructed in arsenic aff ected areas in the sates of 
Assam, Bihar, chattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and west B engal. Out of these, 167 
wells have been handed over to respective state age ncies for water supply. 
Considering average discharge of 10 lps in alluvium  and 4 lps in hard rock, 
these wells are expected to cater the drinking wate r needs of about 24 lakhs 
of population. Remaining 87 wells are in process of  being handed to the state 
Governments” 
 
6.14 CGWB has taken up ground water exploration to delineate arsenic free ground 
water aquifers which are handed over to State Gover nments for water supply. The work 
for construction of wells in arsenic affected areas  was started in the year 1997.  The 
number of arsenic free ground water aquifers so far  handed over to State Governments, 
state-wise and year-wise as furnished by M/o WR, RD & GR is given at Appendix-VII. 
 
6.15 The Ministry of WR, RD & GR in a note submitte d to the Committee stated that 
under the scheme of Ground Water Management & Regul ation a National Inter-

Department Steering Committee having representative s from Central Ministries / 
Departments of State Governments has been constitut ed in 2013 to oversee and 
prioritize arsenic mapping and management programme . As per the decision taken 
during the first meeting of National Inter-Departme nt Steering Committee (NISC), held 
in November 2013, areas prioritized for aquifer map ping should include ‘Over-
Exploited’, ‘Critical, ‘Semi-Critical’ areas, water  quality affected areas, Bundelkhand 
area of U.P. and M.P (identified by Planning Commis sion) and priority  areas identified 
by Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation.  In t he second meeting of the NISC, held 
in April 2014, prioritization of about 8.89 lakh sq .km area for aquifer mapping has been 
considered.  
 
6.16 Asked about the time line for implementation o f this prioritization, the Ministry of 
WR, RD & GR stated that for initiation of aquifer m apping in prioritized areas during the 
XII Plan is as follows: 
/head2right Areas where aquifer mapping already initiated:  Ab out 2.76 lakh 
sq.km 
/head2right Areas where aquifer mapping will be initiated duri ng 2015-16:  
About 1.96 lakh sq.km 
/head2right Areas where aquifer mapping will be initiated duri ng 2016-17:  
About 4.17 lakh sq.km” 
 
6.17 State-wise details where aquifer mapping is in itiated and yet to be initiated during 
the remaining period of XII Plan are given at Appendix- VIII. 
 
6.18 Ministry of WR, RD & GR constituted a “Core Co mmittee” for “Mitigation and 
Remedy of Arsenic Menace in India” in December, 201 3 comprising 28 Members with 
Director, National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Ro orkee, as the Chairman to suggest 
and recommend actions to be taken by the Ministry o n arsenic related matters. The 
recommendations of the Core Committee submitted on 15 October, 2014 are given in 
Appendix- IX . One of the major recommendations of the Committee  is that each of the 
affected State should have an ‘Arsenic Task Force’ spearheaded by the nodal “National 
Arsenic Mission Task Force (NAMTF)’ at Central leve l. The Central level task force 
should have proper linking mechanism with the affec ted State units. The ‘NAMTF’ 

should have representation from the State departmen ts together with related Central 
Government departments like Ministry of Drinking Wa ter & Sanitation, Ministry of Urban 
Development, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,  Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change, individual experts, R&D and academi c personnel, medical 
professionals, economists, social scientists etc. 
 
(ii) Lack of focus in the National Water Policy 
6.19 It has been stated in the National Water Polic y (2012) document ( Appendix-X) 
that the present scenario of water resources and th eir management has given rise to 
several concerns. Two of these concerns regarding s afe drinking water and over 
exploitation of ground water are access to safe drinking water and other domestic needs 
still continues to be a problem in many cases. Skew ed availability of water between 
different regions and different people in the same region and also the intermittent and 
unreliable water supply has the potential of causin g social unrest. (para 1.2-v). Ground 
water, though part of hydrological cycle and a comm unity resource is still perceived as 
an individual property and is exploited inequitably  and without any consideration to its 
sustainability leading to it’s over exploitation in several areas. (para 1.2-vi). 
 
6.20 One of the basic principles governing public p olicies on water resources as 
stated in para 1.3 (vi) of NWP is as under:  
“Safe Water for drinking and sanitation be consider ed as per-emptive needs, 
followed by high priority allocation for other basi c domestic needs (including 
needs of animals), achieving food security, support ing sustenance 
agriculture and minimum eco-system needs. Available  water, after meeting 
the above needs, should be allocated in a manner to  promote its 
conservation and efficient use”.  
 
 
6.21 Stressing the need for mapping of aquifers to know the quantum and quality of 
ground water resources and the need to arrest the decline in ground water levels in over 
exploited areas, the NWP States as under: 
“Para 5.3 There is a need to map the aquifers to kn ow the quantum and 
quality of ground water resources (replenishable as  well as 
non-replenishable) in the country. This process sho uld be fully 

participatory involving local communities. This may  be 
periodically updated. 
 
Para 5.4 Declining ground water levels in over-expl oited areas need to 
be arrested by introducing improved technologies of  water use, 
incentivizing efficient water use and encouraging c ommunity 
based management of aquifers. In addition, where ne cessary, 
artificial recharging projects should be undertaken  so that 
extraction is less than the recharge. This would al low the 
aquifers to provide base flows to the surface syste m, and 
maintain ecology.” 
 
6.22 Regarding quality problems in ground water, th e policy states as follows: 
“Para 6.7 There should be concurrent mechanism invo lving users for 
monitoring if the water use pattern is causing prob lems like 
unacceptable depletion or building up of ground wat ers, 
salinity, alkalinity or similar quality problems, etc., with a view to 
planning appropriate interventions. 
 
Para 8.6 Quality conservation and improvements are even more 
important for ground waters, since cleaning up is v ery difficult. 
It needs to be ensured that industrial effluents, l ocal cess 
pools, residues of fertilizers and chemicals, etc.,  do not reach 
the ground water. 
 
Para 15.1 Continuing research and advancement in te chnology shall be 
promoted to address issues in the water sector in a  scientific 
manner. Innovations in water resources sector shoul d be 
encouraged, recognized and awarded.” 
 
6.23 Pointing out the extent and magnitude of the a rsenic problems and taking note 
that there is no mention of mitigation of arsenic o r other contamination in ground water 
as part of ground water management in the National Water Policy, the Committee 
enquired whether it is not a serious omission in th e National Water Policy. In response, 
the M/o WR, RD and GR stated in a written reply as under: 
“Issues related to ground water management have been  covered in the 
National Water Policy, 2012 adopted by the National  Water Resources 
Council, inter-alia, comprising Chief Ministers of all States and related Union 
Ministers. “Safe Water” for drinking has been defin ed as a pre-emptive need 
(para 1.3 (vi)), emphasizing necessary efforts  for  treatment of water (which 
includes ground water) and removal of all kinds of contamination – both 
anthropogenic and geogenic, like arsenic etc.  The National Water Policy, 

2012 has stressed on the need for mapping of aquife rs to know the quantum 
and quality of ground water resources (para 5.3) an d arresting trends of 
declining ground water level in over exploited areas (para 5.4).” 
 
 
6.24 Noting that quality conservation and improveme nts are even more important for 
ground water,  since cleaning up is very difficult (para 8.6), the National Water Policy, 
2012 lays emphasis on ensuring that industrial effl uents, local cess pools, residue of 
fertilizers and chemicals, etc. do not reach ground  water.  The National Water Policy, 
2012 considers ground water as part of overall wate r resources. Arsenic contamination 
is one of the type of contaminations for which the National Water Policy, 2012 stresses 
on remedial measures through continuing research an d advancement in technology 
(para 15.1).  
 
6.25 The claim of the Ministry of WR, RD & GR in th e above reply that the NWP 
emphasizes necessary efforts for treatment of water  (which includes ground water) and 
removal of all kinds of contamination – both anthro pogenic and geogenic, like arsenic 
etc. seems to be a far- fetched interpretation rather than an element of the policy. 
 
6.26 Although arsenic contamination in ground water  was first reported almost four 
decades ago and presently spread over 96 districts in 12 States and the population 
identified with groundwater arsenic contamination in 35 districts of six States is as much 
as 70.4 million, arsenic contamination does not fin d a mention in the National Water 
Policy 2012 for focused remedial action. 
 
(iii) Absence of separate budgetary allocation 
6.27 When information was sought on the budgetary t argets and actuals for 
construction of Arsenic free wells, treatment of co ntaminated ground water and 
identifying Arsenic free aquifers, the Ministry of WR, RD and GR stated that there is no 
separate scheme in (CGWB) for this purpose. However , Central Ground Water Board 
carried out area specific ground water exploration for identification of Arsenic free 

aquifers on request of state Government under its r egular programme. These 
delineated arsenic free aquifers, if any, can be tapped for community water supply.     
 
6.28 The physical and financial targets and achieve ments during 2012-13 and 2013-
14 for aquifer mapping as furnished by the M/o WR, RD & GR, are as follows: 
Physical Targets & Achievements 
                                                                                               (In lakh sq.km) 
SI.No. Activities Year Target   Achievement 
1. Aquifer Mapping  2012-13 0.54 0.56 
2. Aquifer Mapping  2013-14 0.54 0.54 
 
 
Financial Targets & Achievements (Scheme: Ground Wa ter Management and 
Regulation)   
 
                                                          (Rs. In crore)  
SI.No. 
 Year BE RE Actual 
1. 2012-13 318 180  118.64 
2. 2013-14 275 140  83.17 
  
6.29 It may be observed from above that the actual achievement for 2012-13 in 
respect of Aquifer Mapping was in excess of the tar get by 2000 km and the target could 
be achieved roughly at one-third of the budget esti mate that Rs. 118.64 cr. (37.3% of 
BE) and in 2013-14, the cost for undertaking aquife r mapping of 0.54 lakh sq.km was 
even much less at Rs. 83.17 cr. which was just 70% of the previous year’s cost.  When 
asked to clarify as to how this was possible and wh ether there was any over estimation 
of budget estimate the Ministry of WR, RD & GR stat ed in a written reply that the BE 
figures of 2012-13 were based on the assumption tha t the scheme will start in financial 
year 2012-13.  However, since the CCEA approval of the scheme was received in 
September 2013, the physical and financial achievem ent of 2012-13 are based on 

Actuals.  Further, the BE for the year 2012-13 pert ains to the scheme of Ground Water 
Management & Regulation, which include aquifer mapp ing besides other activities such 
as technological up gradation and regular ongoing a ctivities (viz. ground water 
monitoring, assessment and regulation etc).  The Aq uifer Mapping component 
envisages outsourcing of the activities together wi th the internal capabilities of Central 
Ground Water Board (CGWB).   In financial year 2013 -14, in view of approval received 
only in September 2013, the physical and financial achievements are mainly due to the 
internal capabilities of CGWB. 
 
6.30 B.E. for the year 2014-15 is stated to be of R s. 153.32 crore for Major works 
(including aquifer mapping, artificial recharge wor ks etc)and the target for aquifer 
mapping for 2014-15 is about 1.30 lakh sq.km.  
 
6.31 Dissatisfied with the absence of separate budg etary allocation for water quality 
issues, the Committee enquired as to why there is n o specific allocation for remediation 
of Arsenic from ground water/ surface water. The Mi nistry of WR, RD & GR  stated in 
response that the programmes of Ministry of Water R esources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation and the Ministry of Drinking Wat er & Sanitation have different 
mandate. While the Ministry of Water Resources, Riv er Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation plan for overall water management; Min istry of Drinking Water & 
Sanitation addresses drinking water isues. Though t here is no specific allocation for 
arsenic remediation, the water supply is being take n care by the concerned state 
Government Departments such as PHED, Jal Nigam etc.  Ministry of drinking water and 
sanitation has further informed that budgets to sta tes are given on fixed Inter State 
allocation criteria and that, up to 67 % of the NRD WP funds could be utilized for 
coverage as well as tackling water quality problems . Arsenic and fluoride are priority 
areas of the Ministry and therefore, 5% funds are e armarked for providing safe water in 
these areas of which 75% could be utilized for tackling for chemical contamination. 
 

 6.32 The CGWB added in this connection that the Ce ntral ground water board carries 
out area specific ground water exploration for iden tification of Arsenic free aquifers 
under its regular programme. Under the National Aqu ifer management programme, 
arsenic contaminated aquifers as well as arsenic fr ee aquifers are identified. A sum of 
Rs. 325 crores has been allocated for the same for the year 2014-15. To address the 
emerging challenges in ground water sector the ongo ing scheme of ground water 
management and regulation has been expanded by including new component of Aquifer 
mapping and Management during XII Plan period with an estimated outlay of 3319 
crore. sufficient financial provision exists under the scheme for implementation of 
NAQUIM. The physical and financial targets have bee n increased seven fold as 
compared to XI Plan. A Post of Member, Finance, CGW B has recently been created in 
CGWB for a better implementation of NAQUIM Programme. 
 
6.33 When enquired whether there is any budgetary a llocation for carrying out 
research on diseases arising out of consumption of drinking water containing arsenic, 
the Ministry of H & FW stated in a written reply that there is no specific budget allocation 
for arsenic related diseases but Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has been 
supporting studies on arsenic related disease throu ghout the period. ICMR has 
supported 20 ad-hoc projects conducted by various r esearchers in different institutions. 
In addition ICMR’s Regional Occupational Health Cen tre situated in Kolkata has also 
been conducting research in diseases due to arsenic  through intramural as well as 
extramural mode. 
 
(iv) Dearth of Steps to Stop Anthropogenic contamin ation   
6.34 Asked about the steps taken to prevent manmade  contamination of water by 
Arsenic such as from use of fertilizers, the M/o WR , RD& GR stated that in order to 
prevent the ground water contamination through anth ropogenic activities, Ministry of 
Environment and Forests has notified general standa rds for discharge of environmental 
pollutants which includes industrial effluents also  for various recipient sources such as 
inland surface water , public sewerage, land for ir rigation  and marine coastal areas etc. 

The limit for discharge for arsenic in waste water has been defined for all the sources as 
0.2 mg/l. The industry specific standards have been  specified for grossly polluting 
industries. 
 
6.35 One of the achievements of WQAA is stated to b e regarding “Minimum 
environmental flows in Indian rivers”.  However, on  closer scrutiny, the Committee 
observed that there was hardly any worthwhile progr ess during the last 11 years except 
for constitution of working group in the year 2003 which took four years to submit its 
report in 2007, followed by constitution of a commi ttee for implementing the working 
group’s recommendations which submitted its report in 2009.  Eventually, the 
recommendations of the Committee have not been acce pted by WQAA in its meeting 
held on 30 
th  May, 2013. 
 
6.36 When asked to justify loss of 11 years without  any fruitful results in ensuring 
minimum environmental flows in Indian rivers, the M inistry of WR, RD & GR stated in a 
written reply that as per information provided by W QAA, the Authority felt the need to 
review the recommendations contained in the report submitted by Working Group in 
2007. For this purpose, a sub-committee was constit uted whose report was deliberated 
by the Authority in its meeting held on 30 
th  May, 2013. The Authority did not accept the 
report as it found that the recommendations were ge neric, i.e., it was not river-wise, and 
in that too, stretch-wise. However, these reports p rovide the base work in the field of 
evaluation of minimum environmental flows in the ri vers which can be used in future for 
further elaborate studies. Similarly, the report su bmitted by the committee on ‘Legal and 
institutional implication of the implementation of the recommendations of the Working 
Group’ submitted in 2009 gave its recommendations o n the legal aspects of the issues 
involved in this matter. Therefore, these reports w ould be of immense use for future 
development in this domain. 
 
 Leather tanneries are said to lead to alarming lev els of arsenic, cadminum, 
mercury, chrome VI, pesticides and other heavy metals which are potent source of renal 
neurological and skin diseases as indicated in the report of Facility of Ecological and 

Analytical Testing conducted by IIT, Kanpur in the year 2002 on ground water in the 
villages situated near 350 odd tanneries. Some of the findings of the aforesaid study are 
given below: 
 
Sl. No. Discription of Samples Arsenic content 
1. Tannery Effluent, Unnao 5.07 mg/l 
2. Ground water, Sheikhpur 0.64 mg/l 
3. Sludge sample, Jajmau 0.33 mg/l 
4. Sludge sample, Rooma 0.50 mg/l 
 
 
(v) Lack of awareness 
6.37 The Experts (Dr. C.S. Nautiyal, Director, CSIR , IITR, Lucknow and Dr. K.J. Nath, 
Ex. Director, All India Institute of Public Health and Hygiene (AIIPHH), Kolkata) in their 
Memoranda submitted to the Committee emphasized the  need for awareness 
generation among the people regarding the arsenic p roblem and effort undertaken by 
the Government and agencies.  One expert (Dr. K.J. Nath) suggested that people and 
media should have easy access to the scientific inf ormation but in no case these should 
be used for creating unnecessary panic among the people.   
 
6.38 Reacting to the above suggestions to the M/o W R, RD & GR, stated in a written 
reply as follows:  
      “As per the information provided by Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
(MDWS), the States have been advised to focus on Aw areness Generation 
activities in arsenic affected habitations. For con ducting IEC activities, the 
Ministry provided NRDWP-Support Funds (5%) as 100% Central share. 
 
The MDWS has advised States to paint red colour on the hand pumps where 
excess arsenic have been found and not to drink arsenic contaminated water. 
 

Central Ground Water Board has organized several aw areness generation 
programmes to make people aware about the ground wa ter quality including 
Arsenic contamination in ground water and its impact on human health.  
 
The findings of scientific studies carried out by C entral Ground Water Board 
are shared with the concerned Central and State age ncies and major 
publications are placed in web site in public domain.” 
 
6.39 When asked whether any steps have been taken t o involve student community in 
mass awareness programmes regarding ground water co ntamination issues, the M/o 
WR, RD & GR, stated in a written reply that CGWB co nducts Awareness raising 
programmes regularly in the form of mass awareness programme, painting 
competitions, water management & training programme wherein students are one of the 
target groups. 
  
6.40 A Task Force of Planning Commission on formula ting action plan for removal of 
arsenic contamination in West Bengal in its report of July, 2007 recommended that 
intensive awareness raising activities with regard to the relative health effects of 
drinking arsenic contamination water in order to in troduce preventive measures in co-
operation with local bodies, NGOs and others.  To a  specific query as to whether any 
awareness raising activities are being undertaken b y the M/o Health and Family with 
respect to negative health effects of drinking arse nic contaminated water, the Ministry 
stated that specific awareness raising activity in health effects of arsenic contaminated 
water is not undertaken by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
 
6.41 In response to a query as to whether informati on about the remedial options has 
been disseminated for implementation in arsenic con taminated areas Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education stated that Far mers’ awareness programme, 
workshops, training programme and medical checkups have been organised to educate 
people of affected areas under National Agricultura l Innovation Project (NAIP) funded 
project on ‘Arsenic in food chain: cause, effect an d mitigation‘between 2008-12. Radio 

talks and Doordarshsn discussion on arsenic and env ironmental issues have also been 
deliberated by the scientists. 
 
(vi) Lack of Co-ordination 
6.42 At present the status of coordination with Sta te Governments as stated by the 
Ministry of WR, RD & GR is as follows: 
     “ 
a. There is a steering committee chaired by the State drinking water 
supply department for clearing of drinking water su pply schemes 
funded by Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation i n contaminated 
areas.  
b. State Ground Water Coordination Committee (SGWCC), Chaired by 
Principal Secretary dealing with ground water has b een constituted for 
implementation of Aquifer Mapping Programme at State Level.  
c. During the framing of annual work programme of Cent ral Ground 
Water Board (CGWB) the State agencies are consulted.  
d. Area under Aquifer Mapping and Management has been prioritized 
and duly vetted by the State Government agencies.  
e. Under ground water exploration programme drilling s ites are selected 
jointly with State Government departments.  
f. Results and finding of studies of CGWB are regularl y shared with 
respective State Government agencies.” 
 
6.43 Asked about the need for an integrated program me to monitor ground water and 
to combat arsenic contamination, the Ministry of WR , RD & GR stated in a written reply 
that more coordination and synergy between various Central and State Agency would 
give thrust for evolution suitable strategies for c ombating arsenic contamination of 
ground level.  
 
6.44 In view of duplication of water quality monito ring by different organizations like 
National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD), Cen tral Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB), State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs), Cen tral Water Commission (CWC) & 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), the Ministry of WR, RD & GR stated that a 
committee approved by WQAA has taken up the task of  rationalization and optimization 
of water quality and monitoring status in the count ry. When asked, how soon the task of 

rationalization and optimization of water quality a nd monitoring status will be achieved, 
the Ministry of WR, RD & GR stated in a written rep ly that as per information provided 
by WQAA, the committee was formed on 12 th  July, 2013.  Member Secretary, Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) is the Chairman of t he committee.  Member Secretary, 
CPCB has informed that the committee is expected to  finalize the report by December, 
2014.  
 
6.45 To a query as to how it is ensured that there is no overlapping of functions or 
conflicting stands between the Ministry of Water Re sources and the Ministry of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation in handling the problem of Ars enic contamination, the M/o WR,RD 
&GR stated as follows: 
“Central Ground Water Board carries out ground wate r exploration of different 
aquifer systems in the country including Arsenic in fested aquifers. The 
outcomes of such exploration programme are being sh ared with concerned 
State Government departments for development, and m anagement of ground 
water resources by them.   
 
6.46 The water supply is being taken care by the co ncerned State Government 
Departments such as PHED etc. the Ministry of Drink ing Water & Sanitation has 
informed that 20% of the allocated funds under the National Rural Drinking Water 
Program (NRDWP) are earmarked for water quality pro blems. Further, it is indicated 
that the States may utilize up to 65% of funds rele ased under NRDWP for improving 
water quality of ground and surface water. It has b een further added that the 
programmes of Ministry of Water Resources, River De velopment and Ganga 
Rejuvenation and Ministry of Drinking Water and San itation are different. While Ministry 
of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rej uvenation plans for overall 
water management, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation is one of the users only.  
 
6.47 When enquired whether there is any Mission mod e programme with other 
ministries concerned viz. Drinking water and Sanita tion, Health and Family Welfare, 
WR, RD & GR, etc., to tackle the problem of arsenic  contamination, the Secretary, 

Department of Science and Technology (DST), stated during evidence on 27 October, 
2014 as follows: 
“There is a major programme which the DST chairs. T he Department 
coordinates with other departments and Ministries. It is called the War for 
Water. We have been pushing that programme not just  with arsenic but with 
general problem of quality of water and availability of water including arsenic.”  
 
6.48 The Secretary, Department of Science and Techn ology further added as 
under: 
“There is a water mission. The War for Water Progra mme is chaired by the 
Secretary, Department of Science and Technology “ 
 
6.49 A representative of Department of Science and Technology added in this 
connection:  
 “We have, as the Secretary said, Winning, Augmenta tion and Renovation for 
water, which addresses various issues related to co ntamination, that is, to find 
out research based technological solutions to addre ss various water 
challenges in the country. Secretary is the Chairma n of the Committee, 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry  of Water Resources, CWC, 
Central Ground Water Board are members of the Board . It is funded by the 
Department of Science and Technology.” 
 
6.50 Emphasizing the need for coordination action, the Vision document  “Mitigation 
and Remedy of Arsenic contamination” brought out by  National Institute of Hydrology, 
Roorkee and Central Ground water Board, New Delhi u nder the aegis of M/o WR, RD 
and GR states that even after spending huge amount of money for providing arsenic 
safe drinking water to the villagers from contamina ted hand tube wells and other 
sources, the overall result suggests requirement of  more concentrated and focussed 
efforts in planning and management to cope up with such gigantic calamity. Attempts 
made so far to combat the menace of groundwater ars enic contamination like to 
identify the causes, to provide arsenic free drinki ng water to people dependent on 
ground water supply, to reduce arsenic related soci al and socio – economic problems 
and to develop cost effective technology for eradic ation of arsenic contamination have 

proven inadequate, fragmented and less responsive, as is evident from the rise in 
number of arsenic affected areas with every new sur vey . There is, therefore, a need 
for adopting holistic approach to resolve solution considering management of science 
and society resources together, but not merely healing the pain externally. 
 
6.51 In view of the magnitude and impact of Arsenic  contamination and the 
involvement of multiple Ministries / Organization i n tackling different aspects of Arsenic 
contamination, it was enquired from the Cabinet Sec retary of Government of India as 
to whether there is any comprehensive approach with  an integrated policy, action plan 
and coordination. The Cabinet Secretariat in a note  dated the 15 
th  October, 2014 
stated, inter-alia  as under: 
“Presence of arsenic in sources of drinking water constitutes a major segment 
of the larger problem of presence of arsenic n grou nd water. As of 1.4.2014 , 
there are 1991  arsenic affected  habitations in si x states viz. Assam ( 424) , 
Bihar ( 357) , Karnataka( 12), Punjab91), Uttar Pra desh (73) and west 
Bengal( 1124) which are yet to be provided safe dri nking water. As water 
supply is a state subject, state Governments /UTs a re responsible for 
supplying drinking water. Government of India suppl ements efforts of the 
state by providing technical and financial assistan ce under the National Rural 
Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) for providing safe  and adequate 
drinking supply facilities in rural areas of the co untry, where a coordinated 
view of mitigation strategies is being taken. In or der to combat water quality 
problem, up to 25% of the funds under NRDWP can be used for tackling 
water quality problems including the problem of ars enic levels. As part of the 
long term sustainable solutions, State Governments have been advised to 
provide alternate safe drinking water through surfa ce based piped water 
supply schemes. As surface water bodies are at distant places, gestation time 
of commissioning these projects is high. However, s tates such as West 
Bengal and Assam have already such schemes. As an i mmediate short term 
solution, State Governments have been advised to ad opt appropriate 
technologies which have been vetted / recognized by  the CSIR laboratories. 
Alternative solutions of shallow dug wells or deep tube wells are taken up 
depending on the location of the arsenic free aquif ers. The Ministry has  
directed the State Governments to provide safe drin king water atleast for 
drinking and cooking purposes in all theses 1991 ar senic affected habitations 
by March 2017 “ 
  
6.52 To a query as to whether any interim arrangeme nt has been made in all these 
1991 arsenic affected habitations to provide safe d rinking water till regular arrangement 

is ensured, the Cabinet Secretariat in a note dated the 3 rd  November, 2014 stated  inter- 
alia  as follows: 
“….M/o Drinking Water and Sanitation has informed t hat as a short term 
mesure , states have been advisesd to use treatment  technologies vetted by 
CSIR labs. Some states have used absorption –co- pr ecipitation technology 
based on activated alumina and other absorption med ia. Sates such as U.P. 
and Bihar are tapping water from uncontaminated 3 rd  aquifer (deeper 
aquifers) by providing 2-3 meter capping between th e arsenic rich 2 nd  aquifer 
and deeper arsenic free aquifer in affected areas. States have also been 
advised to address reject management protocol, prep are comprehensive 
O&M plans and conduct training programmes for panch ayats. The Ministry 
has also informed that they are reviewing the situation from time to time.” 
 
6.53 On the question of integrated policy, action p lan and coordination, the 
Cabinet Secretariat, on 15 th  October, 2014 stated as under: 
“It may be seen that the issue of arsenic in ground  water has multiple 
dimensions and as the mitigation and remedial measu res are sector specific, 
they involve several ministries/ departments which are engaged with this 
issue. A more active engagement by different minist ries/departments of the 
Central Government and State Governments would lead  to an integrated 
approach and action plans for mitigation of adverse  impact of arsenic on 
human, plant and animal health by effectively elimi nating arsenic from 
drinking water and food supply chain.” 
 
6.54 When further enquired whether any specific act ion is proposed in this regard, the 
Cabinet Secretariat informed on 3 
rd  November that as regards planning of an integrated  
approach, it has been decided to convene meeting of  Committee of Secretaries with the 
concerned Ministries/ departments soon to discuss the matter.   
 
 
 
  

PART-II 
Recommendations / Observations of the Committee 
 
 
 High arsenic content in ground water is of great c oncern to the 
Committee as it affects the human/animal/soil/plant s system and has 
caused over one lakh deaths and 2 to 3 lakhs of con firmed cases of 
illness. The Committee’s examination of “Occurrence  of High Arsenic 
Content in Ground Water” reveals that as many as 96  districts in 12 
States have been affected by arsenic contamination in ground water 
with arsenic level of more than 3mg/l in one State as against the 
permissible limit of 0.01mg/l. 70.4 million people have been exposed 
to Ground Water arsenic contamination in 35 distric ts of six States 
alone.  Abnormalities have been detected in 40% of animals in arsenic 
affected areas.  The Committee are shocked to learn  that in spite of 
the severity of arsenic contamination and its sprea d in different 
States over the last three decades, there have been  no coordinated 
efforts to tackle the menace and there is no centra lised authority to 
address the issues concerning arsenic contamination . There are no 
data from Government sources about the arsenic dise ased people, 
animals and plants.  There are  serious gaps in monitoring and also in 
research efforts.  There is no reference to arsenic  contamination in 
National Water Policy 2012.  There is no separate budgetary allocation 
to deal with arsenic issues.  Though a Vision Docum ent entitled 
“Mitigation and Remedy of Ground Water arsenic mena ce in India” 
was prepared by the National Institute of Hydrology  (NIH) and the 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) in the year 2010,  no concerted 

action is visible.  The Succeeding paragraphs of th e Report deal with 
these issues in detail. 
2. The Committee are at a loss to understand as to why there is no 
comprehensive data about affected districts/States and the magnitude 
of population exposed to arsenic, even thirty-eight  years after first-
arsenic contamination incident came to notice in Ch andigarh. The 
information furnished by the Ministry of Water Reso urces, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (M/o WR, RD & GR ) shows that 
86 Districts in 10 States have arsenic contaminatio n exceeding the 
permissible limit.  The Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education (DARE) has, however, listed out only 71 D istricts in 09 
States having Ground Water arsenic contamination.  The Department 
of Science and Technology (DST) has come out with y et another list 
of affected districts and States. Collation of info rmation furnished by 
different Ministries shows that there are 96 distri cts in 12 States 
affected by ground water arsenic.  According to the  Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), 70.4 mil lion people have 
been identified with ground water arsenic contamina tion in 35 
Districts in six States. The figure of affected pop ulation will be much 
higher if data about affected people in all the 96 districts are 
collected.  All these conflicting data show that th ere had been no 
attempt to collect reliable data by any central age ncy. The Committee 
deplore such casual attitude and hardly need to emp hasise that 
dependable, accurate and regular update of data are  essential for 
providing perspectives with regard to public health , agriculture and 
other purposes.  The Committee, therefore, desire  that immediate 

steps should be taken to draw up a central  data  b ase  about  arsenic  
affected  districts/States  not  only  for drinking  water segment but 
also for irrigation and the data of human populatio n, animals and 
crops exposed to arsenic. 
3. According to the finding of Indian Council of Ag ricultural 
Research (ICAR), more than 90 per cent of the total  ground water in 
arsenic affected areas is used for irrigating crops . Many investigators 
consider water-soil-crop-food transfer, cooking wat er and direct 
ingestion of arsenic contaminated water as the majo r exposure 
pathways of arsenic as reported by the vision docum ent of NIH and 
CGWB.  As the people take contaminated water along with 
contaminated food, the chances of damage become greater.  The food 
crops sold off to inhabitants of uncontaminated reg ions lead to their 
consumption of arsenic contaminated food.   The domestic animals in 
arsenic affected areas regularly consume arsenic la den drinking 
water, fish and food.  Consumption of meat from suc h infected 
animals, causes arsenic intake.  All these show the  great danger of 
arsenic spread and call for urgent steps to ensure proper Ground 
Water management to minimize use of arsenic rich gr ound water for 
irrigation purposes.  The Committee stress that rem edial measures 
should be taken in this regard without loss of time. 
4. The Committee are dismayed to learn that source of arsenic in 
ground water through natural processes in Ganga-Bra hmaputra Plain 
has not been fully established during the last almo st four decades. 
According to the M/o WR, RD & GR, elevated level of  arsenic in 
ground water is caused largely by natural process a nd partly due to 

anthropogenic activities like application of fertil izers, burning of coal, 
leaching from coal-ash tailings and from mining act ivity.  There are 
several hypotheses propounded by scientists for the  mechanism of 
release of arsenic into ground water by natural as well as 
anthropogenic activity, as described in section 2 -  Chapter 01 of this 
Report.  It has been, stated that sources of arseni c in Ganga-
Brahmaputra plain is mostly sediments having arseni c bearing 
minerals.  However, the process of release of arsen ic into ground 
water particularly the local variation in the conce ntration of arsenic is 
yet to be fully understood,  as it depends on vario us factors such as 
physico-chemical conditions, hydro-geological chara cteristics of 
aquifers, dynamic nature of aquifers,  presence of arsenic bearing 
minerals in the sediments, etc. necessitating micro  level studies. The 
Committee hardly need to stress that identifying th e geogenic source 
of contamination is necessary to identify appropria te mitigation 
methods. It is not clear why no attempt has been ma de to identify the 
real cause of arsenic in ground water. No geogenic cause has been 
pointed out for the arsenic contamination in ground  water. The 
Committee recommend that a time bound programme be implemented 
for identifying sources to conclusively establish t he mobilization 
process which helps in arsenic release from mineral s to ground 
water. 
5. The Committee hold that there is no scientific b asis for the 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) to prescribe the m aximum 
permissible limit for arsenic in drinking water as 0.05mg/l higher than 
the World Health Organisation’s (WHO) standard of 0 .01mg/l. BIS has 

pleaded that relaxed standard of arsenic limit was effected in view of 
abundance of arsenic in ground water in several are as of the country 
and non-availability of alternate sources.  The Com mittee do not 
accept this stand and would caution that there shou ld be no 
compromise on the health of the people.  It is the duty of the State to 
improve the public health which includes the provis ion of safe 
drinking water  as enshrined in Article 47 of the Directive Principles of 
the State Policy of the Constitution of India.  The  Committee, 
therefore, urge that the relaxed arsenic permissible limit of 0.05mg/l in 
drinking water should be done away forthwith and ac ceptable limit of 
0.01mg/l ensured. 
6. The Committee are distressed to learn that there  is no 
centralized data regarding the number of people aff ected by arsenic 
poisoning and it shows the casual attitude on the p art of the 
Government.  The Committee have been informed that Centralised 
data is collected by the Central Bureau of Health Intelligence (CBHI) in 
relation to only the national programmes on various  diseases.  
Arsenic intake causes serious ailments like hyper p igmentation, 
keratosis, anaemia, swelling of legs, liver fibrosi s, chronic lung 
disease, gangrene, neuropathy, cancer, etc.  Accord ing to one expert, 
there are 2 to 3 lakhs of confirmed cases of illnes s and over one lakh 
deaths due to arsenic poisoning. In animals too, th e arsenic 
poisoning causes many abnormalities.  It has been stated that arsenic 
is one of the most toxic elements to fish and acute  exposure results 
in immediate death.  The Committee express their st rong displeasure  
as to why in spite of such serious diseases caused to human beings 

and animals, no steps were taken to collect relevan t data or initiate 
appropriate diagnostic and curative measures.   Con sidering the fact 
that there are as many as 12 arsenic affected State s and huge 
population affected by arsenic poisoning,  the Comm ittee fail to 
understand as to why no national programme on arsen ic mitigation 
and treatment has been launched as recommended by t he Working 
Group of Planning Commission.  The Committee recomm end  that at 
least now, a national programme be launched in this  regard and 
immediate steps taken to ensure regular collection of relevant data 
and providing appropriate diagnostic and curative m easures both for 
human beings and for cattle by the M/o H&FW and by the Department 
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries respectiv ely. The 
Committee should be apprised of the action taken in  this regard 
within one month. 
7. No convincing reasons have been given by the Cen tral Ground 
Water Board (CGWB) as to why 4,504 out of its 12,94 6 water quality 
monitoring stations have been located disproportion ately in just four 
states viz. Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra & K arnataka.  The 
CGWB monitors ground water quality through a networ k of 12,946 
ground water observation wells with the objective o f, inter-alia,  
periodic monitoring of geogenic contamination of gr ound water.  The 
Committee, in this connection note that water quali ty monitoring is 
done not only by CGWB but also by Central Pollution  Control Board 
(CPCB), States Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs), Ce ntral Water 
Commission (CWC) and National River Conservation Di rectorate 
(NRCD). The Committee emphasise that there should b e no 

duplication of water quality monitoring efforts.  T he Committee desire 
that additional water quality monitoring stations b eing set up by 
CGWB should be located in such places as to conform  to a 
rationalized and optimized network of water quality  monitoring 
stations. 
8. Accreditation by National Accreditation Board fo r Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) recognizes the technical competence 
of laboratories.  The process of accreditation of C GWB laboratories 
was initiated in April 2011 and only 03 out of 16 c hemical laboratories 
of CGWB (Lucknow, Chandigarh & Hyderabad) have been  accredited 
so far.  The accreditation process involves fulfill ing the requirements 
of standards as prescribed by NABL.  The Committee see no reason 
why only five more labs have been targeted for NABL  accreditation 
during the 12 
th  Plan.  The Committee urge that serious efforts sho uld 
be made to get NABC accreditation for all the remai ning 13 labs of 
CGWB before the end of 12 th  Plan.  
9. It transpired during the examination of the subj ect that the 
functioning of CGWB is constrained by paucity of staff.  As against its 
sanctioned strength of 4195 personnel, 1170 posts are lying vacant.  It 
is obvious that no organization can function effici ently and effectively 
unless there is optimum manpower. The Committee rec ommend that 
necessary steps should urgently be taken to ensure that CGWB has 
full complement of staff at the earliest. 
10. The Committee are startled to hear from the Min istry of 
Environment & Forests that monitoring of water quality over the years 
by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) at 25 00 locations 

(covering 445 rivers, 45 drains, 807 ground water s tations etc. spread 
over all the 29 States and 06 Union Territories) do es not reflect any 
detectable presence of arsenic contamination at any of the monitoring 
locations.  The Committee suspect that the informat ion displayed in 
the CPCB’s website as on 20-11-2014 suggests a diff erent story.  
Arsenic parameter is nowhere in the list of chemica l analyses of 
CPCB, as evident from the list of NABL accredited a nalytical 
parameters displayed in the website.  Obviously, CP CB’s monitoring 
cannot show any arsenic contamination. The Committe e strongly 
recommend that there should be an immediate relook at the testing 
parameters by the M/o EFCC / CPCB and the lacuna, i f any, in this 
regard should be addressed.  The Committee need to be apprised of 
the factual position and action proposed in this regard. 
11. Precious little has been done by Water Quality Assessment 
Authority (WQAA) constituted in the year 2001 to de al with, inter-alia,  
any environmental issue concerning surface and ground water quality 
and reviewing the status of quality of natural wate r resources.  One of 
the achievements of WQAA is stated to be regarding “minimum 
environmental flows in Indian rivers”.  However, on  closer scrutiny, it 
is observed that there is hardly any worthwhile pro gress during the 
last 11 years except for constituting a working gro up in the year 2003 
which took four years to submit its report in 2007,  followed by 
constitution of a committee for implementing the wo rking group’s 
recommendations which submitted its report in 2009.   Eventually, the 
recommendations of the Committee have not been acce pted by 
WQAA in its meeting held on 30 th  May, 2013.  Strangely, WQAA’s 

mandate excluded quality issues arising due to geog enic aspect.  
This lacuna has been corrected only recently by rev ision of its 
mandate.  The Committee suggest that WQAA should fo cus on 
monitoring and assessment of water quality of surfa ce water/ground 
water and address all related aspects holistically.  For this purpose, 
the Committee recommend that sufficient budgetary p rovisions be 
made available for equipping WQAA with sophisticate d equipments 
and trained human resource. This would bring in mor e efficient 
functioning of WQAA. 
12. Unfortunately, no monitoring of arsenic build-u p in soil, crops 
and vegetables has been undertaken by any organisat ion. DARE has 
stated that ICAR is not monitoring the arsenic buil d-up in soils.  DAC 
claimed that M/o WR, RD & GR is mandated for periodical assessment 
of arsenic contamination in ground water including arsenic build-up 
in soils.  The M/o WR, RD & GR have informed that s oil analysis for 
arsenic contamination is not carried out by CGWB. M /o EFCC and 
CPCB have not done any study on the build-up of ars enic in soil, 
crops and vegetables. The Committee never expected that their 
queries on issues of national importance would be s huttled from one 
Ministry to another without yielding desired inform ation.  The 
Committee desire that the Cabinet Secretary should sort-out the issue 
and intimate the Committee as to whose responsibili ty is it to monitor 
arsenic build-up in soils, crops and vegetables and  ensure that 
necessary steps are taken in this regard under inti mation to the 
Committee.  The Committee further desire that a spe cial National 
Sample Survey should be conducted to ascertain all water quality 

problems and to devise an appropriate remedial plan .  The Committee 
recommend that there should be a mechanism for cons tant 
monitoring of contamination levels in water and soi l throughout the 
country for taking timely corrective measures. 
13. There are a number of arsenic removal devices, developed by 
various organizations based on different scientific  propositions. 
These devices vary in cost, size, filtering mechani sms and 
mechanisms of operations as summarized in Chapter III of this report.  
The Committee have been informed that most of the a rsenic removal 
devices have failed to produce satisfactory results  mainly due to 
shortcomings in operations and maintenance (O&M).   The Committee 
agree with the M/o WR, RD & GR that arsenic removal  devices, whose 
O&M aspects are managed by community participation,  could 
produce satisfactory performance. The Committee hop e that 
appropriate steps will be taken to enlist community  participation to 
operate and maintain the arsenic removal devices in  the arsenic 
contaminated areas.  The Committee would also recom mend that 
arsenic testing kits should be distributed free in affected areas. The 
Committee feel that further R&D efforts need to be undertaken to 
address the problems relating to O&M. 
14. The Committee are displeased to note that no na tional health 
programme has so far been formulated for ground wat er quality 
related health problems as suggested by the working  group of 
Planning Commission in the year 2011.  During his d eposition before 
the Committee, a representative of the M/o Health &  Family Welfare 
emphasised the need to formulate a national program me in this 

regard and assured that a task force would be const ituted to look into 
arsenic issues and would be asked to submit its rep ort by February, 
2015.  He also assured that funds would be provided  to State 
Governments under National Rural Health Mission for  diagnostic 
facilities, treatment and medicine for arsenic dise ases. The 
Committee expect that action is taken in this regar d promptly as 
promised, with sufficient budgetary provision.  The  Committee also 
desire that a detailed report should be made to Par liament regularly 
every six months (say April and November) bringing out the efforts 
made and progress achieved state-wise in treatment of arsenic 
affected people under the proposed National Health Programme.  
15. Arsenic affected people are economically backwa rd and loose 
their earthly possession in the process of arsenic treatment.  The 
Committee feel that it is the duty of the State to provide them relief.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that arsenic af fected people 
should be provided treatment and medicines free-of- cost.  They 
should also be provided with health insurance and l ife insurance with 
the cost of premium borne by the Government.   
16. The Committee recommend that there should be an  annual 
conference of Health Ministers of all States to dis cuss and decide 
about ways and means to address water quality relat ed health 
problems and decide appropriate remedial measures.  This forum can 
also be used for annual assessment of progress and the results 
achieved. 
17. The Committee appreciate the commendable work d one by the 
Department of Science and Technology (DST) and the Council of 

Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in promot ing a network of 
researchersfromleading R&D/academic institutions wo rking in the 
area of arsenic.  The work done by CSIR-National Bo tanical Research 
Institute (NBRI) in identifying arsenic safe rice g enotype CN1794-
2CSIR-NBRI deserves a special mention.  This variet y is proposed to 
be released for cultivation in vast arsenic affecte d belts of West  
Bengal.  The Committee also note that the DST’s pro motion of 
research efforts initiated in 2007 have resulted in  development of 07 
different devices for arsenic removal.  The Committ ee in this 
connection would suggest that DST/CSIR should explo re 
collaboration with global R&D institutions in arsen ic related areas 
particularly for in-situ  remediation of arsenic from aquifer system for 
which no R&D work has been taken up by any Indian Institute.  
18. The Committee find that in the areas of medical  curative 
treatment and the causes, there has been no central ized research.  A 
representative of the M/o H&FW admitted during his oral evidence 
before the Committee that medical research of arsen ic causes and 
treatment has been inadequate. The Committee need n ot over 
emphasise that there should be a focused research f or medical cure 
of arsenic diseases. The Committee are sure that an y discovery of 
cost effective medicine and treatment procedure wil l be well received 
not only in our country but also in other arsenic affected countries, as 
there is huge population of arsenic affected people world-wide. 
19. The Department of Agricultural Research and Edu cation (DARE) 
has pointed out the need for a systematic search fo r phyto-
accumulating or phyto-excluding plant species to id entify species 

which effectively detoxifies within the plant body by its metabolic 
process.  By way of remedial options to combat arse nic problem, 
DARE has suggested, among other things, conjunctive  use of ground 
and surface water, recharge of ground water by rain  water harvesting, 
increased use of farmyard manure and cost effective  phyto-
remediation options.  Unfortunately, it appears tha t DARE has not 
pro-actively promoted these measures and generated an awareness 
about the arsenic impact on agriculture.  So much s o even the 
Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperatio n was not aware 
of arsenic impact on plants and vegetations. The Co mmittee are 
unhappy that so far no comprehensive strategies hav e been worked 
out to ensure that arsenic laden agricultural produce is not consumed 
by human beings and live stock.  The Committee exho rt DARE that in 
consultation with the Department of Agriculture and  Cooperation and 
other concerned Ministries, appropriate strategies should be worked 
out and implemented within three months of presenta tion of the 
report  under intimation to the Committee. 
20. The Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Co operation was 
candid in his admission that the Department had so far not thought of 
the ground water arsenic impact on agriculture and promised to adopt 
such agricultural practices as to promote crop vari eties which are 
less susceptible to uptake of arsenic and other mea sures which 
would minimize arsenic in agricultural produce.  It  is a matter of 
satisfaction to the Committee that the Committee co uld create 
awareness at very high level about ground water ars enic impact on 
the agricultural sector.  The Committee recommend t hat the remedial 

measures suggested by DARE should be incorporated i n the crop 
husbandry programme and the measures vigorously pro moted to 
minimize the arsenic impact. 
21. According to an expert, arsenic has affected ov er 150 million 
people worldwide through consumption of arsenic con taminated 
drinking water.  It is learnt that as many as 38 co untries including, 
USA, UK, Canada, Australia and China have been affe cted by high 
arsenic in ground water. DARE has pointed out that arsenic 
concentration in ground water is of great concern to the world since it 
affects the soil, plants, animals-human systems.  T he Committee feel 
that India can render possible help to other arseni c affected countries 
with remediation technologies, arsenic removal devi ces and arsenic 
safe crop genotypes, etc. and would urge the Govern ment to take 
suitable steps in this regard. 
22. The Committee find that the problem of ground w ater arsenic 
contamination, in spite of being very grave, has no t received 
deserved attention due to lack of its focus in the National Water 
Policy-2012. The arsenic contamination in ground wa ter was first 
reported almost four decades ago and presently spre ad over 96 
districts in 12 States. The population identified w ith arsenic 
contamination is as much as 70.4 million and 2 to 3  lakhs of 
confirmed cases of arsenic illness.  In view of the  seriousness of the 
problem, the Committee urge that there should be a specific focus in 
the National Water Policy to address this humongous  problem, by 
appropriate addendum to the National Water Policy-2012.   

23. The Committee regret to note that there is no s eparate 
budgetary allocation for arsenic related issues or for that matter for 
any water quality issues.  At present, funding for water quality is 
made only through the National Rural Drinking Water  Programme 
under the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that there should be a separate budgetary head 
of expenditure for water quality with a sub-head fo r arsenic 
contamination in order to adequately meet the fund requirements.  
Similarly, there is no specific budget allocation f or arsenic related 
diseases under the Ministry of Health & Family Welf are.  Now that a 
National Programme for Ground Water related health problems is 
proposed to be formulated by the Ministry of Health  & Family Welfare, 
there should be a separate budgetary head for the n ew national 
programme with sufficient funding. 
24. The M/o EFCC have reportedly notified general s tandards for 
environmental pollutants which include industrial e ffluents also for 
various recipients sources, inter-alia,  land for irrigation.  The limit for 
discharged arsenic in waste water has been defined for all the 
sources as 0.2mg/l. As already stated in a precedin g paragraph, the 
Water Quality Assessment Authority has done nothing  so far to 
ensure minimum environmental flows. The Central Population Control 
Board has not included ‘Arsenic’ in their chemical analyses for 
testing of waste water.  The Committee in this conn ection note that 
analytical testing of effluents of leather tannerie s conducted by IIT 
Kanpur in the year 2002 showed alarming levels of a rsenic, cadmium, 
mercury and other heavy metals.  The arsenic level of tannery effluent 

at Unnao was as high as 5.07 mg/l as against the pr escribed limit of 
0.2 mg/l.  Thus, anthropogenic causes of arsenic co ntent in ground 
water and in soils have remained unaddressed.  The Committee view 
this failure seriously and urge the Ministry of Env ironment & Forests 
to immediately look into the shortcomings and take urgent remedial 
steps to ensure that anthropogenic sources of arsen ic in water and 
soil are plugged.  The Committee also recommend tha t there should 
be a survey of all industries on the river side to check the quality of 
their effluents and adherence to environmental stan dards.  They 
should be closed if they fail to adhere to effluent  standards besides 
being imposed heavy penalty. Huge amount of pestici des and 
chemical fertilizers also leach into the groundwater and river and their 
contents in soil and in river water should be caref ully studied to take 
appropriate preventive steps. 
25. The Committee observe that public awareness cam paigns to 
make people aware about arsenic contamination in gr ound water and 
its impact on human health do not appear to have cr eated sufficient 
awareness about the problem. CGWB has reportedly or ganized 
several awareness generation programmes regularly i n the form of 
mass awareness programme, painting competition, wat er 
management and training programme wherein students are one of the 
targeted groups.  The Ministry of Drinking Water an d Sanitation 
provides funds through NRDWP to focus on awareness generated 
activities in arsenic affected habitations.  The Mi nistry of Health & 
Family Welfare, however, have not undertaken any specific awareness 
raising activity in health effects of arsenic contaminated water despite 

the recommendation of a Task Force of Planning Comm ission in the 
year 2007.  DARE has claimed that farmers’ awarenes s programme, 
workshop, training programme and medical check-ups have been 
organized to educate people of affected areas under  the National 
Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP) on ‘Arsenic in Food Chain: 
Cause, Effect & Mitigation’ between 2008-12.  The C ommittee feel that 
frequent and sustained campaigns through print and electronic media 
would also be necessary in addition to other local progammes 
mentioned above, for effective awareness campaign. 
26. It is a matter of serious concern that in spite  of grave multi-
dimensional arsenic problem being faced by vast par ts of the country 
for the past decades, the Govt. have not thought it  fit to identify a 
Central agency to tackle the arsenic menace.  Repea ted queries to 
M/o WR, RD & GR as to who is responsible for abatem ent of arsenic 
contamination at the Central level have not yielded  any specific 
information. The M/o WR, RD & GR attempted to shift  the 
responsibility by simply stating that abatement of arsenic 
contamination in drinking water is in the domain of  State 
Governments.  The Committee do not approve of this stand.  The very 
fact that the problem of arsenic contamination is s pread over 96 
districts in 12 different States with huge human and animal population 
having been affected by arsenic poisoning calls for immediate Central 
intervention. At the Central level, there are as ma ny as seven 
Ministries / Departments and a number of Central organizations which 
are required to handle sthis problem, besides State  Governments and 
their agencies. These are Ministry of Water Resourc es, River 

Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, Ministry of Drink ing Water & 
Sanitation, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, De partment of 
Agriculture and Cooperation, Department of Agricult ural Research 
and Education, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dair ying & 
Fisheries, Min. of Science & Technology, Central Gr ound Water 
Board, Central Ground Water Authority, Water Qualit y Assessment 
Authority, Council of Scientific & Industrial Resea rch, Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research, National Botanical Resear ch Institute,  
Indian Council of Medical Research, etc.  There sho uld be a single 
authority at the Centre to look at the issue of ars enic problem 
holistically and take appropriate coordinated corre ctive measures. 
The Ministry have failed to convince the Committee of any concrete 
action taken by them. It is callous negligence on t he part of the 
Government that they had not taken any action in th e past in this 
regard.  It is only after the matter has been taken  up by the 
Committee, a Core Committee headed by the Director,  NIH has 
recommended  in its report submitted on 15 October,  2014, that each 
of the affected States should have an ‘Arsenic Task  Force’ 
spearheaded by the model ‘National Arsenic Mission Task Force’ 
(NAMTF) at Central level.  It is indeed intriguing as to why the 
ministries and departments of the Government of Ind ia remained 
oblivious of the said Core Committee while deposing  before the 
Committee.  The Committee deprecate the lapse on th e part of the 
representatives of ministries/departments concerned  who appeared 
before them .  The Minutes of the meeting of the Co re Committee 
should be furnished to the Committee.  The Committe e urge the 
Government to ensure functioning of the Core Commit tee on war 

footing. Results of the action taken should be made  available to the 
Committee within 3 months.   
27. It was enquired from the Cabinet Secretary as t o whether there 
is any comprehensive approach with an integrated po licy, action plan 
and coordination for tackling different aspects of arsenic 
contamination. In response, a vague reply was recei ved on 15 
October, 2014 stating that a more active engagement  by different 
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government an d State 
Governments would lead to an integrated approach an d action plans 
for mitigation of adverse impact of arsenic on huma n, plant and 
animal health by effectively eliminating arsenic fr om drinking water 
and food supply chain.   Not satisfied with the rep ly, the Committee 
enquired whether any specific action is proposed in  this regard.  The 
Cabinet Secretariat responded on 3 rd  November, 2014 by stating that 
as regards planning of integrated approach, it has been decided to 
convene meeting of Committee of Secretaries with co ncerned 
Ministries/Departments soon to discuss the matter.   It is strange that 
Cabinet Secretariat has not taken the cognizance of  the existence of 
the Core Committee.  The Committee desire that the Committee of 
Secretaries including those of the Ministries/Depar tments mentioned 
in the preceding para of this report should conside r the matter and 
ensure that an integrated policy and effective co-o rdination 
mechanism is in place for planning and implementati on of all arsenic 
related issues and the removal of arsenic contamina tion should be 
taken on a Mission mode.  

28. The Committee have dealt with arsenic related i ssues in detail in 
this report.  Other major contaminants viz. fluorid e, iron, nitrate, 
salinity and other heavy metals in water are no les s serious as they 
impact the health of millions of people.  The Commi ttee are of the 
view that water quality issues demand focused attention.   This can be 
achieved only if there is a separate department for  the purpose.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a separate dep artment of 
water quality issues should be created within the M inistry of Drinking 
Water & Sanitation. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,  
8 December, 2014  
Agrahayana 17, 1936 (Saka) 
CHAIRPERSON,  
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE.  
  

Appendix I 
(vide Para No. 1.18 of the Report) 
 
  
 
 


Appendix II 
(vide Para No. 1.20 of Report) 
 
 
 
 


Appendix III 
(vide Para No. 1.20 of Report) 
 
 
 


Appendix IV  
(vide Para No. 1.45 of the Report) 
 
 


  


 
  


 
 


APPENDIX – V 
(Vide para no. 4.4 of the report) 
 
NUMBER OF ARSENIC  AFFECTED HABITATIONS WHICH ARE YET TO BE 
PROVIDED SAFE DRINKING WATER 
(As Reported on online IMIS of the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation by 
States) 
 (as on 01/04/2014) 
S.No.  State  Number of Arsenic  
affected habitations 
1 BIHAR 357 
2 CHATTISGARH 0 
3 HARYANA 0 
4 JHARKHAND 0 
5 KARNATAKA 12 
6 PUNJAB 1 
7 UTTAR PRADESH 
(Data under reconciliation) 
73 
8 WEST BENGAL 1124 
9 ASSAM 424 
10 MANIPUR 0 
Total  1991  
 

APPENDIX VI 
 
                      (vide Para No. 5.35 of Report)  
  


 


 
APPENDIX – VII 
(vide Para No. 5.35 of Report) 
 
Details of State-wise, year-wise Arsenic free Wells constructed in Arsenic 
affected areas by CGWB 
State  Year  Number of 
wells handed 
over 
Number of 
wells yet to be 
handed over 
Total  
Assam  2009 0 4 4 
 2010 2 5 7 
 2011 5 6 11 
 2012 0 8 8 
 2013 0 6 6 
 2014 11 0 11 
Sub total Assam   18  29  47  
     
Bihar  2005 4 0 4 
 2006 4 0 4 
 2007 2 0 2 
 2009 6 0 6 
 2010 3 1 4 
 2011 0 1 1 
 2012 6 1 7 
Sub total Bihar   25  3 28  
     
Chhattisgarh  2002 2 0 2 
 2005 4 0 4 
Sub total 
Chhattisgarh 
 6 0 6 
     
Uttar Pradesh      
 2006 4 4 8 
 2007 1 1 2 
 2008 5 0 5 
 2009 3 0 3 
 2010 1 0 1 
 2011 4 0 4 
 2012 1 1 2 
 2013 1 1 2 
 2014 1 0 1 

     
Subtotal Uttar 
Pradesh 
 21  07  28  
     
West Bengal  1997 6 3 9 
 1998 5 3 8 
 1999 3 2 5 
 2000 2 3 5 
 2001 5 2 7 
 2002 9 3 12 
 2003 3 0 3 
 2004 10 3 13 
 2005 5 4 9 
 2006 9 4 13 
 2007 8 6 14 
 2008 7 3 10 
 2009 8 0 8 
 2010 0 3 3 
 2011 4 1 5 
 2012 6 1 7 
 2013 6 4 10 
 2014 1 3 4 
Sub total (West 
Bengal) 
 97  48  145  
     
Total (India)   167  87  254  
*** 
 
  

APPENDIX – VIII 
(vide Para No. 6.17 of Report) 
 
STATEWISE STATUS OF AQUIFER MAPPING DURING XIITH PLAN  
S. No.  State / UT  Area in which 
aquifer mapping 
initiated (sq.km) 
Area in which 
aquifer mapping yet 
to be initiated 
(sq.km) 
1 ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR  1348  0 
2 ANDHRA PRADESH  14421  47429  
3 ARUNACHAL PRADESH  1100  927  
4 ASSAM  5635  0 
5 BIHAR  3715  3889  
6 CHANDIGARH  115  0 
7 CHHATTISGARH  4596  7127  
8 DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI  0  490  
9 DAMAN AND DIU  112  0 
10 DELHI  1483  0 
11 GOA  516  934  
12 GUJARAT  19448  62146  
13 HARYANA  24211  17679  
14 HIMACHAL PRADESH  4477  3183  
15 JAMMU AND KASHMIR  10158  332  
16 JHARKHAND  4295  2070  
17 KARNATAKA  24079  69230  
18 KERALA  3794  1406  
19 LAKSHADWEEP  32  0 
20 MADHYA PRADESH  15727  54181  
21 MAHARASHTRA  11176  31391  
22 MANIPUR  155  539  
23 MEGHALAYA  1600  200  
24 MIZORAM  700  0 
25 NAGALAND  400  394  
26 ORISSA  4292  12208  
27 PUDDUCHERY  432  0 
28 PUNJAB  11612  36917  
29 RAJASTHAN  31330  110315  
30 SIKKIM  750  0 
31 TAMIL NADU  17411  52259  
32 TELANGANA 11023  27218  
33 TRIPURA  559  2975  
34 UTTAR PRADESH  32205  58569  
35 UTTRAKHAND  7811  0 
36 WEST BENGAL  6232  8146  
Note-Aquifer maps are expected to be ready after a period of three years since 
initiation.  
 

 
APPENDIX – IX 
(Vide para no. 6.18 of the report) 
 
Recommendations of the ‘Core Committee’ on “Mitigation 
and Remedy of Arsenic Menace in India” 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
1  Demand driven R & Ds   
 
(i) Prepare a compendium of works done and the resu lts thereof on various 
aspects; viz. technological initiatives and interve ntions, alternate water 
supply arrangements, socio-economic and socio-cultu ral impacts, 
agricultural and health impacts, etc.  
 
(ii) Initiate diagnostic survey of the arsenic affe cted/vulnerable areas, 
prepare arsenic risk and vulnerability maps and del ineate arsenic safe 
aquifers, both shallow and deep, including assessme nt of potential yield to 
tap arsenic safe water;  
 
(iii) Encourage development and certification of fi eld testing kits, which are 
robust, reliable, affordable and simple enough to u se by relatively unskilled 
users in the villages;  
 
(iv) Undertake the task of comprehensive Life Cycle  Assessment (LCA) 
and Social audit of reportedly successful and promi sing arsenic removal 
technologies and initiate steps to scale-up the imp lementation of most 
potential ones;  
 
(v) Standardize the process of monitoring and analy tical practices of 
arsenic detection by accreditation of concerned lab oratories through NABL 
(National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories) ;  
 
(vi) Encourage detection of genesis of arsenic occu rrence in Ganga- 
Brahmaputra flood plains, finding reasons of large scale activation in 
Holocene aquifers, assessment of arsenic mobilizati on under different 
hydro-geo-chemical settings in order to evolve soun d aquifer management 
strategies;  
 

(vii) Encourage development of innovative and cost- effective arsenic 
removal techniques/technologies, both ex-situ & in- situ, including arsenic 
detection technologies;  
 
(viii) Encourage development of eco-friendly and in novative methods for 
arsenic sludge treatment & management;  
 
(ix) Encourage development of alternate water suppl y and management 
strategies viz. Bank Filtration (BF), Managed Aquif er Recharge (MAR) in 
arsenic affected/vulnerable areas to meet demand of  safe drinking and 
irrigation water requirements including feasibility  studies for overall water 
management;  
(x) Encourage development of arsenic resistant crops.  
 
2  Ensuring supply of Arsenic safe potable water in  Arsenic 
 affected areas   
 
The potential interventions for ensuring drinking water supply in the arsenic 
affected/vulnerable areas can be as follows:  
 
(i) Revive and strengthen the non-functional arseni c removal schemes 
displaying potential by appropriate interventions. The public-private 
partnership and the community participation models may be effectively 
explored for better O & M results;  
 
(ii) Develop appropriate mechanisms for arsenic slu dge management while 
scaling-up the arsenic removal schemes. Few potenti al sludge 
management techniques reported such as, mixing of a rsenic sludge with 
concrete in controlled ratio, and with clay for bur ning for brick 
manufacturing may be given special consideration;  
 
(iii) Install new tube wells with appropriate seali ng to arrest inter-aquifer 
contamination to tap safe deep aquifers, and create  infrastructure to supply 
risk free potable drinking water in the arsenic affected/ vulnerable areas;  
 
(iv) Develop infrastructure for secured drinking wa ter supply schemes 
based on surface water sources, wherever feasible, and encourage 
planned rainwater harvesting schemes for groundwate r recharge in the 

vulnerable aquifers to ensure potable water to the people of arsenic 
vulnerable areas.  
 
 
 
3  Human Interface: health risk assessment  
 
The recommendations under this category are as follows:  
 
(i) Detailed epidemiological study to assess impact of arsenic contaminated 
water on human health;  
 
(ii) Investigation and assessment of impact of arse nic biomagnifications in 
food chains especially during different stages of p addy cultivation and 
harvesting and consequential health risks;  
 
(iii) Assessment of impact of arsenic contamination  on socio-cultural and 
socio-economic aspects.  
 
4  Social sensitization and capacity building progr ammes  
 
The potential interventions for social sensitization, empowerment and 
capacity building programmes may be as follows:  
 
(i) Promote mass awareness programmes for social se nsitization and 
empowerment through NGOs and local Panchayati raj n etworks using 
existing government schemes viz. IEC;  
 
(ii) Establish and strengthen water quality testing  laboratories in each 
arsenic affected State with a network of level-II c ategory laboratory in each 
district having scope to detect physic-chemical, microbiological constituents 
and selected toxic elements. All the laboratories s hould be accredited by 
NABL. In the event of problems faced due to the she er scale of the 
recommended step, a network may be created to begin  with linking the 
existing sophisticated laboratories in various rese arch and academic 
institutions;  
 
(iii) In the district hospitals, appropriate facilities for diagnosis and treatment 
and also rehabilitation of Arsenicosis patients should be created;  
 

(iv) Awareness and training of medical practitioner s and the Para medical 
staff should be conducted for Arsenicosis diagnosis  and 
treatment/management;  
 
 
(v) Personnel at the Senior and Junior levels invol ved in the technological 
handling, operation and maintenance of related sche mes/projects should 
be trained at regular intervals in order for them t o acquire routine and 
advanced knowledge and know-how. The skills of trai ned personnel should 
be used appropriately. NGOs and Panchayat personnel  in the area should 
be involved to the extent possible;  
 
(vi) Appropriate steps should be taken to update th e educational curriculum 
at school and professional levels to make them more  information based 
regarding Arsenic occurrence, its effects and the s olutions. Existing 
information with the international agencies like WH O and other national 
agencies may be utilized.  
 
5  Institutional and governance issues  
 
Institutional and governance issues, which connect science and the 
society, would play an important role to achieve th e goals emphasized 
under section (2.2), (2.3) and (2.4). The ‘Committe e’ thus proposes the 
following under this category:  
 
(i) Each State can have an ‘Arsenic Task Force’ spe arheaded by the nodal 
‘National Arsenic Task Force (NATF)’ having proper linking mechanism 
with the affected State units. The ‘NATF’ can have representation from the 
State wing together with concerned central governme nt officials like 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ga nga Rejuvenation, 
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, Ministry o f Urban Development, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change, Ministry of Science & Technology, i ndividual experts, R & 
D and academic personnel, medical professionals, ec onomists, social 
scientists etc. The NATF can approach and work in c ollaboration with other 
national and international organizations working in groundwater sector such 
as, World Bank, NABARD, UNESCO, WHO, UNICEF, and UN DP. The 
“NATF’ should be vested with legal and financial po wers with a proper 
administrative setup. The “NATF’ can have the roles  of facilitating the 
activities of R & D, supply of Arsenic safe potable  water, health risk 

assessment, social sensitization and capacity build ing program, 
implementation of programs and other matter related to arsenic;  
 
(ii) A dedicated exclusive website may be launched by the proposed 
‘National Arsenic Task Force” providing a linkage b etween all concerned 
stakeholders. This may be employed for Information dissemination on all 
aspects on one hand, as well as gathering responses  and opinions on the 
other.  
 
(iii) The developed technologies may be allowed to be duly protected but 
should be available free of cost directly or throug h technology transfer for 
common use;  
 
(iv) Evolve methods/mechanisms for scale-up of pote ntial arsenic removal 
techniques/technologies under public-private partne rship for 
implementation, operation and maintenance of the sc hemes and develop 
rope-in methods for translating effective and susta inable 
techniques/technologies from lab to field.  
 
(v) Motivate small entrepreneurs in production and maintenance of low-cost 
household Arsenic removal devices and their after s ale services. 
Government may play a pro-active role in subsidisin g the household 
devices for rural people.  
 
(vi) Set-up a single-window based project review, clearance and monitoring 
mechanism to help build confidence among service pr oviders and 
stakeholders, for efficient and effective management of tasks with minimum 
chance of duplication;  
 
(vii) Promote the tasks as a ‘Mission’ with specifi c time line and review 
mechanisms from time to time. To achieve the goals of the ‘Mission’, the 
arsenic related activities at the Centre should be dealt under a single 
umbrella having responsibility with the ‘Ministry o f Drinking Water and 
Sanitation’, Government of India.  
     -------------  
R & D service providing Organizations/Institutions on Arsenic in India  
 
(i) All India Institute of Public Health & Hygiene, Kolkata  
(ii) A. N. College, Magadh University, Patna  

(iii) BARC, Trombay, Mumbai  
(iv) Bengal Engineering & Science University, Sibpur, West Bengal.  
(v) Central Ground Water Board  
(vi) Geological Survey of India, Kolkata  
(vii) IITs Bombay, Kanpur, Kharagpur, Roorkee, Guhawati (Departments of 
Earth Sciences, Environmental Engineering, Hydrology & Water 
Resources, etc.)  
(viii) Indian Institute of Sciences, Bangaluru  
(ix) Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad  
(x) Indian Institute of Toxicological Research (IITR), Lucknow  
(xi) Jadavpur University, Kolkata (School of Environmental Studies, School 
of Water Resources Engineering, Department of Geology, and Department 
of Chemistry)  
(xii) Kalyani University, West Bengal  
(xiii) National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI), 
Nagpur  
(xiv) National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee  
(xv) National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI) , Hyderabad  
(xvi) Public Heath Engineering Department of States  
(xvii) State Groundwater Departments  
(xviii) School of Environmental Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New 
Delhi  
(xix) School of Tropical Medicines, Kolkata  
(xx) Water Technology Mission, ICAR.  
 
R & D service proving organizations/Institute on Arsenic 
contamination in Food chains  
 
(i) Agricultural Universities in Bihar, U. P., Punjab, Haryana  
(ii) Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidalaya (BCKV), West Bengal  
(iii) ICAR Institutes in different states.  
 
Service providing organizations for Social & Environmental impact 
assessment  
 
(i) Centre for Studies of Man & Environment, Kolkata  

(ii) Indian Institute of Social Welfare & Business Management (IISWBM), 
Kolkata  
(iii) Institute of Economic Studies, Patna  
(iv) Institute of Social Sciences, New Delhi  
 
(v) School of Social Sciences, JNU, New Delhi  
(vi) Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai  
 
Some foreign Organizations/Institutions working on Arsenic  
 
(i) CSIRO, Adelaide, Australia  
(ii) Department of Earth Sciences, University College of London, UK  
(iii) Harbauer GmbH, Germany  
(iv) KTH- Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm  
(v) Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA (Civil Engineering 
Department)  
(vi) Queen’s University, Belfast, UK  
(vii) Swiss Federal Institute for Aquatic Science & Technology, Switzerland  
(viii) University of Guelph, Canada  
(ix) US-EPA & USGS  
(x) University of Berkeley, USA  
  

APPENDIX – X 
(vide Para No. 6.19 of the Report) 
 
 
Government of India 
 
Ministry of Water Resources  
NATIONAL WATER POLICY (2012)  
1. PREAMBLE 
1.1 A scarce natural resource, water is fundamental  to life, livelihood, food security and 
sustainable development. India has more than 18 % o f the world’s population, but has 
only 4% of world’s renewable water resources and 2. 4% of world’s land area. There are 
further limits on utilizable quantities of water ow ing to uneven distribution over time and 
space. In addition, there are challenges of frequen t floods and droughts in one or the 
other part of the country. With a growing populatio n and rising needs of a fast 
developing nation as well as the given indications of the impact of climate change, 
availability of utilizable water will be under furt her strain in future with the possibility of 
deepening water conflicts among different user grou ps. Low consciousness about the 
scarcity of water and its life sustaining and econo mic value results in its 
mismanagement, wastage, and inefficient use, as als o pollution and reduction of flows 
below minimum ecological needs. In addition, there are inequities in distribution and 
lack of a unified perspective in planning, manageme nt and use of water resources. The 
objective of the National Water Policy is to take c ognizance of the existing situation, to 
propose a framework for creation of a system of law s and institutions and for a plan of 
action with a unified national perspective.  
1.2 The present scenario of water resources and the ir management in India has given 
rise to several concerns, important amongst them are; 
(i) Large parts of India have already become water stressed. Rapid growth in demand 
for water due to population growth, urbanization an d changing lifestyle pose serious 
challenges to water security. 
(ii) Issues related to water governance have not be en addressed adequately. 
Mismanagement of water resources has led to a criti cal situation in many parts of the 
country. 
(iii) There is wide temporal and spatial variation in availability of water, which may 
increase substantially due to a combination of clim ate change, causing deepening of 
water crisis and incidences of water related disasters, i.e., floods, increased erosion and 
increased frequency of droughts, etc. 

(iv) Climate change may also increase the sea level s. This may lead to salinity intrusion 
in ground water aquifers / surface waters and incre ased coastal inundation in coastal 
regions, adversely impacting habitations, agriculture and industry in such regions. 
(v) Access to safe water for drinking and other dom estic needs still continues to be a 
problem in many areas. Skewed availability of water  between different regions and 
different people in the same region and also the in termittent and unreliable water supply 
system has the potential of causing social unrest.  
(vi) Groundwater, though part of hydrological cycle  and a community resource, is still 
perceived as an individual property and is exploite d inequitably and without any 
consideration to its sustainability leading to its over-exploitation in several areas. 
(vii) Water resources projects, though multi-discip linary with multiple stakeholders, are 
being planned and implemented in a fragmented manne r without giving due 
consideration to optimum utilization, environment s ustainability and holistic benefit to 
the people. 
(viii) Inter-regional, inter-State, intra-State, as  also inter-sectoral disputes in sharing of 
water, strain relationships and hamper the optimal utilization of water through scientific 
planning on basin/sub-basin basis. 
(ix) Grossly inadequate maintenance of existing irr igation infrastructure has resulted in 
wastage and under-utilization of available resource s. There is a widening gap between 
irrigation potential created and utilized. 
(x) Natural water bodies and drainage channels are being encroached upon, and 
diverted for other purposes. Groundwater recharge zones are often blocked. 
(xi) Growing pollution of water sources, especially  through industrial effluents, is 
affecting the availability of safe water besides ca using environmental and health 
hazards. In many parts of the country, large stretc hes of rivers are both heavily polluted 
and devoid of flows to support aquatic ecology, cultural needs and aesthetics. 
(xii) Access to water for sanitation and hygiene is  an even more serious problem. 
Inadequate sanitation and lack of sewage treatment are polluting the water sources. 
(xiii) Low consciousness about the overall scarcity  and economic value of water results 
in its wastage and inefficient use. 
(xiv) The lack of adequate trained personnel for sc ientific planning, utilizing modern 
techniques and analytical capabilities incorporatin g information technology constrains 
good water management. 
(xv) A holistic and inter-disciplinary approach at water related problems is missing. 

(xvi) The public agencies in charge of taking water  related decisions tend to take these 
on their own without consultation with stakeholders , often resulting in poor and 
unreliable service characterized by inequities of various kinds. 
(xvii) Characteristics of catchment areas of stream s, rivers and recharge zones of 
aquifers are changing as a consequence of land use and land cover changes, affecting 
water resource availability and quality. 
1.3 Public policies on water resources need to be g overned by certain basic principles, 
so that there is some commonality in approaches in dealing with planning, development 
and management of water resources. These basic principles are:  
(i) Planning, development and management of water r esources need to be governed by 
common integrated perspective considering local, re gional, State and national context, 
having an environmentally sound basis, keeping in v iew the human, social and 
economic needs. 
(ii) Principle of equity and social justice must inform use and allocation of water. 
(iii) Good governance through transparent informed decision making is crucial to the 
objectives of equity, social justice and sustainabi lity. Meaningful intensive participation, 
transparency and accountability should guide decisi on making and regulation of water 
resources. 
(iv) Water needs to be managed as a common pool com munity resource held, by the 
state, under public trust doctrine to achieve food security, support livelihood, and ensure 
equitable and sustainable development for all. 
(v) Water is essential for sustenance of eco-system , and therefore, minimum ecological 
needs should be given due consideration. 
(vi) Safe Water for drinking and sanitation should be considered as pre-emptive needs, 
followed by high priority allocation for other basi c domestic needs (including needs of 
animals), achieving food security, supporting suste nance agriculture and minimum eco-
system needs. Available water, after meeting the ab ove needs, should be allocated in a 
manner to promote its conservation and efficient use. 
(vii) All the elements of the water cycle, i.e., ev apo-transpiration, precipitation, runoff, 
river, lakes, soil moisture, and ground water, sea, etc., are interdependent and the basic 
hydrological unit is the river basin, which should be considered as the basic hydrological 
unit for planning. 
(viii) Given the limits on enhancing the availabili ty of utilizable water resources and 
increased variability in supplies due to climate ch ange, meeting the future needs will 

depend more on demand management, and hence, this n eeds to be given priority, 
especially through (a) evolving an agricultural sys tem which economizes on water use 
and maximizes value from water, and (b) bringing in  maximum efficiency in use of water 
and avoiding wastages. 
(ix) Water quality and quantity are interlinked and  need to be managed in an integrated 
manner, consistent with broader environmental manag ement approaches inter-alia 
including the use of economic incentives and penalties to reduce pollution and wastage. 
(x) The impact of climate change on water resources  availability must be factored into 
water management related decisions. Water using act ivities need to be regulated 
keeping in mind the local geo climatic and hydrological situation.  
2. WATER FRAMEWORK LAW 
2.1 There is a need to evolve a National Framework Law as an umbrella statement of 
general principles governing the exercise of legisl ative and/or executive (or devolved) 
powers by the Centre, the States and the local gove rning bodies. This should lead the 
way for essential legislation on water governance i n every State of the Union and 
devolution of necessary authority to the lower tier s of government to deal with the local 
water situation. 
2.2 Such a framework law must recognize water not o nly as a scarce resource but also 
as a sustainer of life and ecology. Therefore, wate r, particularly, groundwater, needs to 
be managed as a community resource held, by the sta te, under public trust doctrine to 
achieve food security, livelihood, and equitable an d sustainable development for all. 
Existing Acts may have to be modified accordingly. 
2.3 There is a need for comprehensive legislation f or optimum development of inter 
State rivers and river valleys to facilitate inter- State coordination ensuring scientific 
planning of land and water resources taking basin/s ub-basin as unit with unified 
perspectives of water in all its forms (including p recipitation, soil moisture, ground and 
surface water) and ensuring holistic and balanced d evelopment of both the catchment 
and the command areas. Such legislation needs, inte r alia, to deal with and enable 
establishment of basin authorities, comprising part y States, with appropriate powers to 
plan, manage and regulate utilization of water resource in the basins. 
3. USES OF WATER 
3.1 Water is required for domestic, agricultural, h ydro-power, thermal power, navigation, 
recreation, etc. Utilisation in all these diverse u ses of water should be optimized and an 
awareness of water as a scarce resource should be fostered.  

3.2 The Centre, the States and the local bodies (go vernance institutions) must ensure 
access to a minimum quantity of potable water for e ssential health and hygiene to all its 
citizens, available within easy reach of the household. 
3.3 Ecological needs of the river should be determi ned, through scientific study, 
recognizing that the natural river flows are characterized by low or no flows, small floods 
(freshets), large floods, etc., and should accommod ate developmental needs. A portion 
of river flows should be kept aside to meet ecologi cal needs ensuring that the low and 
high flow releases are proportional to the natural flow regime, including base flow 
contribution in the low flow season through regulated ground water use. 
3.4 Rivers and other water bodies should be conside red for development for navigation 
as far as possible and all multipurpose projects ov er water bodies should keep 
navigation in mind right from the planning stage. 
3.5 In the water rich eastern and north eastern reg ions of India, the water use 
infrastructure is weak and needs to be strengthened in the interest of food security.  
3.6 Community should be sensitized and encouraged t o adapt first to utilization of water 
as per local availability of waters, before providi ng water through long distance transfer. 
Community based water management should be institutionalized and strengthened. 
4. ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE 
4.1 Climate change is likely to increase the variab ility of water resources affecting 
human health and livelihoods. Therefore, special im petus should be given towards 
mitigation at micro level by enhancing the capabili ties of community to adopt climate 
resilient technological options. 
4.2 The anticipated increase in variability in avai lability of water because of climate 
change should be dealt with by increasing water sto rage in its various forms, namely, 
soil moisture, ponds, ground water, small and large  reservoirs and their combination. 
States should be incentivized to increase water sto rage capacity, which inter-alia should 
include revival of traditional water harvesting structures and water bodies. 
4.3 The adaptation strategies could also include be tter demand management, 
particularly, through adoption of compatible agricultural strategies and cropping patterns 
and improved water application methods, such as lan d leveling and/or drip / sprinkler 
irrigation as they enhance the water use efficiency , as also, the capability for dealing 
with increased variability because of climate chang e. Similarly, industrial processes 
should be made more water efficient. 
4.4 Stakeholder participation in land-soil-water ma nagement with scientific inputs from 
local research and academic institutions for evolvi ng different agricultural strategies, 

reducing soil erosion and improving soil fertility should be promoted. The specific 
problems of hilly areas like sudden run off, weak w ater holding capacity of soil, erosion 
and sediment transport and recharging of hill slope  aquifers should be adequately 
addressed. 
4.5 Planning and management of water resources stru ctures, such as, dams, flood 
embankments, tidal embankments, etc., should incorp orate coping strategies for 
possible climate changes. The acceptability criteri a in regard to new water resources 
projects need to be re-worked in view of the likely climate changes 
5. ENHANCING WATER AVAILABLE FOR USE 
5.1 The availability of water resources and its use  by various sectors in various basin 
and States in the country need to be assessed scientifically and reviewed at periodic 
intervals, say, every five years. The trends in wat er availability due to various factors 
including climate change must be assessed and accou nted for during water resources 
planning. 
5.2 The availability of water is limited but the de mand of water is increasing rapidly due 
to growing population, rapid urbanization, rapid in dustrialization and economic 
development. Therefore, availability of water for u tilization needs to be augmented to 
meet increasing demands of water. Direct use of rainfall, desalination and avoidance 
of inadvertent evapo-transpiration are the new addi tional strategies for augmenting 
utilizable water resources. 
5.3 There is a need to map the aquifers to know the  quantum and quality of ground 
water resources (replenishable as well as non-reple nishable) in the country. This 
process should be fully participatory involving loc al communities. This may be 
periodically updated. 
5.4 Declining ground water levels in over-exploited  areas need to be arrested by 
introducing improved technologies of water use, inc entivizing efficient water use and 
encouraging community based management of aquifers.  In addition, where necessary, 
artificial recharging projects should be undertaken  so that extraction is less than the 
recharge. This would allow the aquifers to provide base flows to the surface system, 
and maintain ecology. 
5.5 Inter-basin transfers are not merely for increa sing production but also for meeting 
basic human need and achieving equity and social ju stice. Inter-basin transfers of water 
should be considered on the basis of merits of each  case after evaluating the 
environmental, economic and social impacts of such transfers. 

5.6 Integrated Watershed development activities wit h groundwater perspectives need to 
be taken in a comprehensive manner to increase soil  moisture, reduce sediment yield 
and increase overall land and water productivity. T o the extent possible, existing 
programs like MGNREGA may be used by farmers to har vest rain water using farm 
ponds and other soil and water conservation measures. 
6. DEMAND MANAGEMENT AND WATER USE EFFICIENCY 
6.1 A system to evolve benchmarks for water uses fo r different purposes, i.e., water 
footprints, and water auditing should be developed to promote and incentivize efficient 
use of water. The ‘project’ and the ‘basin’ water u se efficiencies need to be improved 
through continuous water balance and water accounti ng studies. An institutional 
arrangement for promotion, regulation and evolving mechanisms for efficient use of 
water at basin/sub-basin level will be established for this purpose at the national level. 
6.2 The project appraisal and environment impact as sessment for water uses, 
particularly for industrial projects, should, inter -alia, include the analysis of the water 
footprints for the use. 
6.3 Recycle and reuse of water, including return flows, should be the general norm. 
6.4 Project financing should be structured to incen tivize efficient & economic use of 
water and facilitate early completion of ongoing projects. 
6.5 Water saving in irrigation use is of paramount importance. Methods like aligning 
cropping pattern with natural resource endowments, micro irrigation (drip, sprinkler, 
etc.), automated irrigation operation, evaporation-transpiration reduction, etc., should be 
encouraged and incentivized. Recycling of canal see page water through conjunctive 
ground water use may also be considered.  
6.6 Use of very small local level irrigation throug h small bunds, field ponds, agricultural 
and engineering methods and practices for watershed  development, etc, need to be 
encouraged. However, their externalities, both posi tive and negative, like reduction of 
sediments and reduction of water availability, downstream, may be kept in view. 
6.7 There should be concurrent mechanism involving users for monitoring if the water 
use pattern is causing problems like unacceptable d epletion or building up of ground 
waters, salinity, alkalinity or similar quality pro blems, etc., with a view to planning 
appropriate interventions. 
7. WATER PRICING 
7.1 Pricing of water should ensure its efficient us e and reward conservation. Equitable 
access to water for all and its fair pricing, for d rinking and other uses such as sanitation, 

agricultural and industrial, should be arrived at t hrough independent statutory Water 
Regulatory Authority, set up by each State, after w ide ranging consultation with all 
stakeholders. 
7.2 In order to meet equity, efficiency and economi c principles, the water charges 
should preferably / as a rule be determined on volu metric basis. Such charges should 
be reviewed periodically. 
7.3 Recycle and reuse of water, after treatment to specified standards, should also be 
incentivized through a properly planned tariff system. 
7.4 The principle of differential pricing may be retained for the pre-emptive uses of water 
for drinking and sanitation; and high priority allo cation for ensuring food security and 
supporting livelihood for the poor. Available water , after meeting the above needs, 
should increasingly be subjected to allocation and pricing on economic principles so that 
water is not wasted in unnecessary uses and could be utilized more gainfully. 
7.5 Water Users Associations (WUAs) should be given  statutory powers to collect and 
retain a portion of water charges, manage the volum etric quantum of water allotted to 
them and maintain the distribution system in their jurisdiction. WUAs should be given 
the freedom to fix rates subject to floor rates determined by WRAs. 
7.6 The over-drawal of groundwater should be minimi zed by regulating the use of 
electricity for its extraction. Separate electric f eeders for pumping ground water for 
agricultural use should be considered. 
8. CONSERVATION OF RIVER CORRIDORS, WATER BODIES AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
8.1 Conservation of rivers, river corridors, water bodies and infrastructure should be 
undertaken in a scientifically planned manner throu gh community participation. The 
storage capacities of water bodies and water course s and/or associated wetlands, the 
flood plains, ecological buffer and areas required for specific aesthetic recreational 
and/or social needs may be managed to the extent po ssible in an integrated manner to 
balance the flooding, environment and social issues  as per prevalent laws through 
planned development of urban areas, in particular. 
8.2 Encroachments and diversion of water bodies (li ke rivers, lakes, tanks, ponds, etc.) 
and drainage channels (irrigated area as well as ur ban area drainage) must not be 
allowed, and wherever it has taken place, it should  be restored to the extent feasible 
and maintained properly. 

8.3 Urban settlements, encroachments and any develo pmental activities in the 
protected upstream areas of reservoirs/water bodies , key aquifer recharge areas that 
pose a potential threat of contamination, pollution , reduced recharge and those 
endanger wild and human life should be strictly regulated. 
8.4 Environmental needs of Himalayan regions, aquat ic eco-system, wet lands and 
embanked flood plains need to be recognized and tak en into consideration while 
planning. 
8.5 Sources of water and water bodies should not be  allowed to get polluted. System of 
third party periodic inspection should be evolved a nd stringent punitive actions be taken 
against the persons responsible for pollution. 
8.6 Quality conservation and improvements are even more important for ground waters, 
since cleaning up is very difficult. It needs to be  ensured that industrial effluents, local 
cess pools, residues of fertilizers and chemicals, etc., do not reach the ground water. 
8.7 The water resources infrastructure should be ma intained properly to continue to get 
the intended benefits. A suitable percentage of the  costs of infrastructure development 
may be set aside along with collected water charges , for repair and maintenance. 
Contract for construction of projects should have i nbuilt provision for longer periods of 
proper maintenance and handing over back the infrastructure in good condition. 
8.8 Legally empowered dam safety services need to be ensured in the States as well as 
at the Centre. Appropriate safety measures, includi ng downstream flood management, 
for each dam should be undertaken on top priority. 
9. PROJECT PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION 
9.1 Considering the existing water stress condition s in India and the likelihood of further 
worsening situation due to climate change and other  factors, water resources projects 
should be planned as per the efficiency benchmarks to be prescribed for various 
situations. 
9.2 Being inter-disciplinary in nature, water resou rces projects should be planned 
considering social and environmental aspects also i n addition to techno-economic 
considerations in consultation with project affecte d and beneficiary families. The 
integrated water resources management with emphasis  on finding reasonable and 
generally acceptable solutions for most of the stak eholders should be followed for 
planning and management of water resources projects. 
9.3 Considering the heavy economic loss due to dela y in implementation of projects, all 
clearances, including environmental and investment clearances, be made time bound. 

9.4 Concurrent monitoring at project, State and the  Central level should be undertaken 
for timely interventions to avoid time and cost over-runs. 
9.5 All components of water resources projects shou ld be planned and executed in a 
pari-passu manner so that intended benefits start a ccruing immediately and there is no 
gap between potential created and potential utilized. 
9.6 Local governing bodies like Panchayats, Municip alities, Corporations, etc., and 
Water Users Associations, wherever applicable, shou ld be involved in planning of the 
projects. The unique needs and aspirations of the S cheduled caste and Scheduled 
Tribes, women and other weaker sections of the soci ety should be given due 
consideration. 
9.7 All water resources projects, including hydro p ower projects, should be planned to 
the extent feasible as multi-purpose projects with provision of storage to derive 
maximum benefit from available topology and water resources. 
10. MANAGEMENT OF FLOOD & DROUGHT 
10.1 While every effort should be made to avert wat er related disasters like flood sand 
droughts, through structural and non-structural mea sures, emphasis should be on 
preparedness for flood / drought with coping mechan isms as an option. Greater 
emphasis should be placed on rehabilitation of natural drainage system. 
10.2 Land, soil, energy and water management with s cientific inputs from local, 
research and scientific institutions should be used  to evolve different agricultural 
strategies and improve soil and water productivity to manage droughts. Integrated 
farming systems and non-agricultural developments m ay also be considered for 
livelihood support and poverty alleviation. 
10.3 In order to prevent loss of land eroded by the  river, which causes permanent loss, 
revetments, spurs, embankments, etc., should be pla nned, executed, monitored and 
maintained on the basis of morphological studies. T his will become increasingly more 
important, since climate change is likely to increase the rainfall intensity, and hence, soil 
erosion. 
10.4 Flood forecasting is very important for flood preparedness and should be 
expanded extensively across the country and moderni zed using real time data 
acquisition system and linked to forecasting models . Efforts should be towards 
developing physical models for various basin sectio ns, which should be linked to each 
other and to medium range weather forecasts to enhance lead time. 

10.5 Operating procedures for reservoirs should be evolved and implemented in such a 
manner to have flood cushion and to reduce trapping  of sediment during flood season. 
These procedures should be based on sound decision support system. 
10.6 Protecting all areas prone to floods and droug hts may not be practicable; hence, 
methods for coping with floods and droughts have to  be encouraged. Frequency based 
flood inundation maps should be prepared to evolve coping strategies, including 
preparedness to supply safe water during and immedi ately after flood events. 
Communities need to be involved in preparing an act ion plan for dealing with the flood/ 
drought situations. 
10.7 To increase preparedness for sudden and unexpe cted flood related disasters, 
dam/embankment break studies, as also preparation a nd periodic updating of 
emergency action plans / disaster management plans should be evolved after involving 
affected communities. In hilly reaches, glacial lak e outburst flood and landslide dam 
break floods studies with periodic monitoring along  with instrumentation, etc., should be 
carried out. 
11. WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION 
11.1 There is a need to remove the large disparity between stipulations for water supply 
in urban areas and in rural areas. Efforts should b e made to provide improved water 
supply in rural areas with proper sewerage faciliti es. Least water intensive sanitation 
and sewerage systems with decentralized sewage trea tment plants should be 
incentivized. 
11.2 Urban and rural domestic water supply should p referably be from surface water in 
conjunction with groundwater and rainwater. Where a lternate supplies are available, a 
source with better reliability and quality needs to  be assigned to domestic water supply. 
Exchange of sources between uses, giving preference  to domestic water supply should 
be possible. Also, reuse of urban water effluents f rom kitchens and bathrooms, after 
primary treatment, in flush toilets should be encouraged, ensuring no human contact. 
11.3 Urban domestic water systems need to collect a nd publish water accounts and 
water audit reports indicating leakages and pilfera ges, which should be reduced taking 
into due consideration social issues. 
11.4 In urban and industrial areas, rainwater harve sting and de-salinization, wherever 
techno-economically feasible, should be encouraged to increase availability of utilizable 
water. Implementation of rainwater harvesting shoul d include scientific monitoring of 
parameters like hydrogeology, groundwater contamina tion, pollution and spring 
discharges. 

11.5 Urban water supply and sewage treatment scheme s should be integrated and 
executed simultaneously. Water supply bills should include sewerage charges. 
11.6 Industries in water short regions may be allow ed to either withdraw only the make 
up water or should have an obligation to return treated effluent to a specified 
standard back to the hydrologic system. Tendencies to unnecessarily use more 11 
water within the plant to avoid treatment or to pol lute ground water need to be 
prevented. 
11.7 Subsidies and incentives should be implemented  to encourage recovery of 
industrial pollutants and recycling / reuse, which are otherwise capital intensive. 
12. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
12.1 There should be a forum at the national level to deliberate upon issues relating to 
water and evolve consensus, co-operation and reconc iliation amongst party States. A 
similar mechanism should be established within each  State to amicably resolve 
differences in competing demands for water amongst different users of water, as also 
between different parts of the State. 
12.2 A permanent Water Disputes Tribunal at the Cen tre should be established to 
resolve the disputes expeditiously in an equitable manner. Apart from using the „good 
offices 
‟ of the Union or the State Governments, as the case  may be, the paths of 
arbitration and mediation may also to be tried in dispute resolution. 
12.3 Water resources projects and services should b e managed with community 
participation. For improved service delivery on sus tainable basis, the State 
Governments / urban local bodies may associate priv ate sector in public private 
partnership mode with penalties for failure, under regulatory control on prices charged 
and service standards with full accountability to democratically elected local bodies. 
12.4 Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) taking river basin / sub-basin as 
a unit should be the main principle for planning, d evelopment and management of water 
resources. The departments / organizations at Centr e / State Governments levels 
should be restructured and made multi-disciplinary accordingly. 
12.5 Appropriate institutional arrangements for eac h river basin should be developed to 
collect and collate all data on regular basis with regard to rainfall, river flows, area 
irrigated by crops and by source, utilizations for various uses by both surface and 
ground water and to publish water accounts on ten d aily basis every year for each river 
basin with appropriate water budgets and water acco unts based on the hydrologic 
balances. In addition, water budgeting and water ac counting should be carried out for 
each aquifers. 

12.6 Appropriate institutional arrangements for eac h river basin should also be 
developed for monitoring water quality in both surface and ground waters. 
12.7 States should be encouraged and incentivized t o undertake reforms and 
progressive measures for innovations, conservation and efficient utilization of water 
resources. 
13. TRANS-BOUNDARY RIVERS 
13.1 Even while accepting the principle of basin as  a unit of development, on the basis 
of practicability and easy implementability, effort s should be made to enter into 12 
international agreements with neighbouring countrie s on bilateral basis for exchange of 
hydrological data of international rivers on near real time basis. 
13.2 Negotiations about sharing and management of w ater of international rivers should 
be done on bilateral basis in consultative associat ion with riparian States keeping 
paramount the national interest. Adequate instituti onal arrangements at the Center 
should be set up to implement international agreements. 
14. DATABASE & INFORMATION SYSTEM 
14.1 All hydrological data, other than those classi fied on national security consideration, 
should be in public domain. However, a periodic rev iew for further declassification of 
data may be carried out. A National Water Informati cs Center should be established to 
collect, collate and process hydrologic data regula rly from all over the country, conduct 
the preliminary processing, and maintain in open an d transparent manner on a GIS 
platform. 
14.2 In view of the likely climate change, much mor e data about snow and glaciers, 
evaporation, tidal hydrology and hydraulics, river geometry changes, erosion, 
sedimentation, etc. needs to be collected. A progra mme of such data collection needs 
to be developed and implemented. 
14.3 All water related data, like rainfall, snowfal l, geo-morphological, climatic, 
geological, surface water, ground water, water qual ity, ecological, water extraction and 
use, irrigated area, glaciers, etc., should be inte grated with well defined procedures and 
formats to ensure online updation and transfer of d ata to facilitate development of 
database for informed decision making in the management of water. 
15. RESEARCH & TRAINING NEEDS 
15.1 Continuing research and advancement in technol ogy shall be promoted to address 
issues in the water sector in a scientific manner. Innovations in water resources sector 
should be encouraged, recognized and awarded. 

15.2 It is necessary to give adequate grants to the  States to update technology, design 
practices, planning and management practices, prepa ration of annual water balances 
and accounts for the site and basin, preparation of  hydrologic balances for water 
systems, benchmarking and performance evaluation. 
15.3 It needs to be recognized that the field pract ices in the water sector in advanced 
countries have been revolutionized by advances in i nformation technology and 
analytical capabilities. A re-training and quality improvement programme for water 
planners and managers at all levels in India, both in private and public sectors, needs to 
be undertaken. 
15.4 An autonomous center for research in water pol icy should also be established to 
evaluate impacts of policy decisions and to evolve policy directives for changing 
scenario of water resources. 
15.5 To meet the need of the skilled manpower in th e water sector, regular training and 
academic courses in water management should be prom oted. These training and 
academic institutions should be regularly updated b y developing infrastructure and 
promoting applied research, which would help to imp rove the current procedures of 
analysis and informed decision making in the line d epartments and by the community. A 
national campaign for water literacy needs to be st arted for capacity building of different 
stakeholders in the water sector. 
16. IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL WATER POLICY 
16.1 National Water Board should prepare a plan of action based on the National Water 
Policy, as approved by the National Water Resources  Council, and to regularly monitor 
its implementation. 
16.2 The State Water Policies may need to be drafte d/revised in accordance with this 
policy keeping in mind the basic concerns and princ iples as also a unified national 
perspective. 
  

Annexures 
 
MINUTES OF SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2014-15)  
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 15 
th  September, 2014 from 1100 hrs. to 1410  
hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
              PRESENT 
  
Dr. Murli 
Manohar Joshi – 
Chairperson  
 
   MEMBERS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed  
3. Shri Kirti Azad  
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee  
5. Shri Dileep Singh Bhuria  
6. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey  
7. Shri Ashok Chavan  
8. Col. Sonaram Choudhary  
9. Shri Ramen Deka  
10. Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo  
11. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
12. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar  
13. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
14. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh  
15. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla  
16. Shri Vinod Khanna 
17. Shri K.H. Muniyappa  
18. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
19. Shri K N Ramachandran  
20. Md. Salim  
21. Shri Arvind Sawant  
22. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh  
23. Shri Rajesh Verma  
24. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
25. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav  

 
 
 
 
          
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri S. Chatterjee  - Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda     - Additional Director  
4.   Shri  U.C. Bharadwaj  - Deputy Secretary 
 
  LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT &  
GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 1. Shri Alok Rawat   - Secretary  
 2. Dr. Amarjeet Singh   - Addl. Secretary 
 3. Shri Sunil Kumar Kohli  - Joint Secretary & FA  
 4. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Mishra  - JS & Mission Direct or, 
        National Mission for Clean Ganga 
 5. Shri Pradeep Kumar  - Commissioner (SP) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER & SANITATION 
 1. Shri Satyabrata Sahu  - Joint Secretary (Water)  
 
 
CENTRAL GROUND WATER BOARD 
 1. Ms. Urvilla Khati   - Chairman (CGWB) 

 2. Dr. R.C. Jain    - Member (SAM)  
 3. Dr. K.M. Najeeb   - Member (SML)  
 4. Shri K.C. Naik    - Member (TT & WQ) 
 5. Dr. Dipankar Saha   - Member (RGI) 
 6. Shri K.B. Biswas   - Member (ED & MM) 
 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HYDROLOGY 
 1.  Dr. N.C. Ghosh   -  Sci ‘G” & Head, Ground Wat er  
        Hydrology Division 
 2. Dr. C.K. Jain    - Sci ‘G’ & Head, Environmenta l  
        Hydrology Division 
 
 
. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the repre sentatives of the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuve nation and the other officials 
to the sitting of the Committee and drew their atte ntion to Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions 
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentialit y of the proceedings of the 
Committee.  
 
2. A representative of the Ministry of Water Resour ces, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation made a power point presentation on the subject ‘Occurrence of 
High Arsenic Content in Ground Water’. The Committe e sought clarification on various 
issues related to the subject to which representati ves of the Ministry responded. To the 
points to which the representatives could not readi ly respond, the Chairperson desired 
the Secretary of the Ministry to furnish detailed written replies within ten days. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
  

MINUTES OF FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2014-15)  
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 22 September, 2014  from 1100 hrs. to 
1500 hrs. in Room 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
                   PRESENT 
  
      Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5. Shri Dileep Singh Bhuria 
6. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
7. Col. Sonaram Choudhary 
8. Shri Ramen Deka 
9. Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
10. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
12. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla 
13. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
14. Shri P. Kumar 
15. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
16. Shri Arvind Sawant 
17. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
18. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav 
 
 

          SECRETARIAT  
          1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Additional Sec retary 
        2. Shri S. Chatterjee  - Director 
        3.   Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Di rector 
        4.   Shri U.C. Bharadwaj - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Memb ers to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee heard the view s of each of the following experts 
on the subjects shown below:- 
 
Experts on the subject ‘Occurrence of Arsenic Content in Ground Water’ 
 
 
1. Dr. C.S. Nautiyal  - Director, CSIR – National B otanical  
      Research Insitute and  
      CSIR – Indian Institute of Toxicology 
      Research, Lucknow  
  
2. Dr. K.J. Nath   - Ex. Director, All India  
     Institute of Hygiene and Public Health 
     Kolkata  
 
3. Dr. Abhijeet Mukherjee - Assistant Professor, Ge ology &  
        Geophysics, IIT Kharagpur 
 

4. Prof. Saumyen Guha - Department of Civil Enginee ring, IIT  
     Kanpur 
 
 
Experts on the subject ‘Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Programme’ 
 
 
1. Prof. Purnendu Bose - Department of Civil Engine ering, IIT  
       Kanpur 
 
  2. Shri A. Kalimuthu  - Director, Water for Peopl e, New Delhi 
 
   
  
3. The experts appeared before the Committee one af ter another. The Chairperson 
drew the attention of each expert to Direction 55(1 ) of Directions by Speaker, Lok 
Sabha regarding confidentiantly of the proceedings of the Committee. On the subject 
‘Occurrence of Arsenic Content in Ground Water’, th e hearing was broadly focused on 
the extent of the problem in the country, causes, i mpact on human health, soil and 
agriculture, crops and vegetables and technological  options available to provide arsenic 
safe water in the affected areas etc. One of the ex perts also suggested enactment of a 
legistation on ‘Drinking water Security’.  
 
 
4. On the issue of rural water supply and sanitatio n, the experts referred to the 
WHO guidelines on improved sanitation, sanitation t argets and status viz-a-viz 
Millennium Development Goals, improvement of rural water supply in the country, etc. 
The experts also responded to the queries of the Me mbers regarding cheap and low 
cost toilets, bio-degradation, chemical treatment, etc.  

 
5. In respect of the points, for which the informat ion was not readily available, the 
experts were asked to furnish written replies at the earliest. 
  
 Hearing of experts concluded. 
 
 
6. Thereafter, the Committee deliberated and decide d to invite information from all 
the State Governments as to what action has been ta ken by them to mitigate arsenic 
contamination and also on rural water supply and sanitation.   
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
. 
 
 
      
 
  

MINUTES OF SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2014-15)  
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 13 
th  October, 2014 from 1100 hrs. to 1330  
hrs. in Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS  
2.  Shri Kirti Azad 
3.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4.  Shri Dileep Singh Bhuria 
5.  Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
6.  Col. Sonaram Choudhary 
7. Shri Ramen Deka 
8. Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
9. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar 
10. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla 
11. Shri Vinod Khanna 
12. Shri P. Kumar 
13. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 

14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
15. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy 
16. Shri Md. Salim        
17. Shri Ganesh Singh  
18. Shri Rajesh Verma 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin – Additional Secretary 
2. Shri S. Chatterjee – Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda – Additional Director 
 
 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
 
(i) DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION 
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna Secretary, DAC 
2. Shri R.B. Sinha Joint Secretary (NRM), DAC 

 
 
 
(ii) DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE RESEARCH AND EDUCATION  
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the repr esentatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and the Department of Agriculture Resea rch and Education to the sitting of 
the Committee for evidence on the subject ‘Occurren ce of High Arsenic Content in 
Ground Water’ and drew their attention to Direction  55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. 
 
3. A representative of the Department of Agricultur e Research and Education made 
a power point presentation regarding ‘Occurrence of  High Arsenic Content in Ground 
Water’. The Committee sought clarification on vario us issues related to the subject to 
which representatives of the Departments responded.  To the points to which the 
representatives could not readily respond, the Chai rperson desired the Secretary of the 
Ministry to furnish detailed written replies. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
3. Shri C.M. Pandey Additional Commissioner (NRM), 
   
1. Dr. A.K. Sikka DDG (NRM) 
2. Dr. Suresh Kumar Chaudhary ADG (SWM) 

MINUTES OF SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2014-15)  
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 13 
th  October, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 1745  
hrs. in Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS  
2.  Shri Kirti Azad 
3.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4.  Shri Dileep Singh Bhuria 
5.  Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
6.  Col. Sonaram Choudhary 
7. Shri Ramen Deka 
8. Shri Kalikesh N. Singh Deo 
9. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar 
10. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla 
11. Shri Vinod Khanna 
12. Shri P. Kumar 
13. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 

14. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
15. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy 
16. Shri Md. Salim        
17. Shri Ganesh Singh  
18. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
19. Shri Rajesh Verma 
20. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
21. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin – Additional Secretary 
2. Shri S. Chatterjee – Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda – Additional Director 
 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT & GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 1. Shri Alok Rawat   - Secretary  
 2. Dr. Amarjit Singh   - Addl. Secretary 
 3. Shri Sunil Kohli   - Joint Secretary & FA  
 4. Shri Pradeep Kumar  - Commissioner (State Proje cts) 

 5. Shri K.A. Roy   - OSD (GRBA) 
 6. Ms. Urvilla Khati   - Chairman (CGWB) 
 7. Dr. R.C. Jain    - Member (SAM), CGWB  
 8. Dr. K.Md. Najeeb   - Member (SML), CGWB 
 9. Shri K.C. Naik    - Member (WQ & TT), CGWB 
 10. Shri K.B. Biswas   - Member (ED & MM), CGWB 
 11. Dr. D. Saha    - Member (RGI), CGWB 
 12. Dr. N.C. Ghosh   -  Sci ‘G’, National Institut e of     
                                                                                     Hydrology 
 13. Dr. C.K. Jain    - Sci ‘G’, National Institue of   
                                                                                     Hydrology  
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS & CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 1. Ashok Lavasa   - Secretary 
 2. Shri Susheel Kumar   - Additional Secretary  
 3. Dr. Rashid Hasan   - Advisor  
 4. Dr. A B Aholkar   - Member Secretary  
        Central Pollution Control Board 
   
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER & SANITATION 
 
 1. Mrs. Vijay Laxmi Joshi  - Secretary  
 2. Shri Satyabrata Sahu  - Joint Secretary (W) 
 3. Saraswati Prasad   - Joint Secretary (S) 
 

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the repr esentatives of the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvena tion, Ministry of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation and the Ministry of Environmen t Forests & Climate Change to the 
sitting of the Committee for evidence/further evide nce in connection with examination of 
the subjects (i) Occurrence of High Arsenic Content  in Ground Water and (ii) Rural 
Water Supply and Sanitation Programme and drew thei r attention to Direction 55(1) of 
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding co nfidentiality of the proceedings of 
the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee discussed various issues related t o the subjects viz. ‘Occurrence 
of High Arsenic Content in Ground Water’ and ‘Rural  Water Supply and Sanitation 
Programme’. To the points to which the representati ves could not readily respond, the 
Chairperson desired the Ministries to furnish detailed written replies. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been ke pt. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

MINUTES OF EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2014-15)  
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 27 
th  October, 2014 from 1100 hrs. to 1410  
hrs. in Room No. ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
MEMBERS  
2.  Shri Sultan Ahmed 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4.  Shri Dileep Singh Bhuria 
5.  Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
6.  Shri Haribhai Chaudhary 
7. Shri Ashok Chavan 
8. Col. Sonaram Choudhary 
9. Shri Ramen Deka 
10. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
11. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar 
12. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
13. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
14. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel 
15. Shri P. Kumar 
16. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
17. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
18. Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
19. Shri Md. Salim        
20. Shri Arvind Sawant 
21. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh  
22. Shri Rajesh Verma 
23. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
24. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin – Additional Secretary 
2. Shri S. Chatterjee – Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda – Additional Director 
 

LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES  
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH) 
 
 1. Dr. C.K. Mishra   - Additional Secretary & MD ( NHM) 
 2. Dr. H.K. Kar    - Medical Superintendent,  
       Dr. RML Hospital 
 3. Dr. Ramesh    - HOD, Dermatologist, SJH 
 4. Dr. Y. K. Gupta   - HOD, Pharmacology, AIIMS 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY) 
 
 1. Dr. K. Vijay Raghavan  - Secretary, DST 
 2. Dr. D. R. Prasada Raju  - Scientist – ‘G’/Head,  TMC  
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH  
(COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH) 
 
 1. Dr. P.S. Ahuja   - D.G., CSIR 
 2. Dr. Sudeep Kumar   - Head, PPD, CSIR 
 3. Dr. Anupama   - Joint Secretary (Parl.), DSIR, CSIR  
 
 
2. The Committee first took evidence of the represe ntatives of the Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare (Department of Health) in connecti on with the examination of the 
subject ‘Occurrence of High Arsenic Content in Grou nd Water’. The Chairperson drew 
their attention to Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions b y the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. 
3. The Committee then held discussion with the repr esentatives of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare (Deparatment of Health) o n the subject. The representatives 
responded to the points raised by the Committee. To  the points which could not be 
readily responded to by the representatives of the Ministry, the Chairperson directed 
them to furnish detailed replies. 

The witnesses then withdrew  
4. Thereafter, the representatives of Ministry of S cience and Technology 
(Department of Science and Technology) and Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research (CSIR) were called in. The Chairperson dre w their attention to Direction       
55 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. The re presentatives of the Ministry and 
CSIR made power point presentation on the subject. 
5. The Committee held discussion with the reprsenta tives on the subject 
‘Occurrence of High Arsenic Content in Ground Water ’. The representatives responded 
to the queries raised by the Committee.To the point s to which the representatives could 
not readily respond, the Chairperson directed them to furnish detailed written replies. 
6.. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been k ept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

MINUTES OF NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2014-15)  
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 8 th  December, 2014 from 1500 hrs to 1615  
hrs in Room No. ’52-B’, (Chairpersons’ Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
MEMBERS  
2.  Shri Sultan Ahmed 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee  
4.  Shri Dileep Singh Bhuria 
5.  Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
6.  Shri Om Birla 
7. Col. Sonaram Choudhary 
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
9. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
10. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla 
11. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
12. Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
13. Shri Arvind Sawant 
14. Shri Ganesh Singh 
15. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh  
16. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1         Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy              –Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul   – Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  – Additional Director 
4. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj              – Deputy Secret ary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Memb ers to the Sitting of the 
Committee and informed them of the election of two new Members viz. Shri  Om Birla 
and Shri   Sudheer Gupta  to the Committee. The Com mittee welcomed the new 
Members.   

  3.  The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on ‘Occurrence of 
High Arsenic Content in Ground Water’ pertaining to  Ministry of Water Resources ,River 
Development and  Ganga Rejuvenation  and adopted th e same with certain  
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Ch airperson to finalize the Report in 
the light of modifications suggested and factual ve rification and present the same to Lok 
Sabha. 
                         The Committee then adjourned 
. 
  
 