MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
RATIONALIZATION OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
2015-2016
TWELFTH REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
12

TWELFTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
(Rationalization of Demands for Grants)
(Presented to Speaker on 28.01.2016)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.02.2016
 LOK SABHA SECRETARIA T
NEW DELHI
January, 2016/Magha, 1937 (Saka)

E.C.  No.  1497
Price:  ` 32.00
© 2016  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION  OF  THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16) ..................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT................................................................................................... 1
Introductory ............................................................................................. 1
Observations/Recommendations ............................................................. 9
ANNEXURE
Demands for Grants 2016-17................................................................... 12
APPENDICES
 I. Minutes of the sitting held on 08.01.2016 ......................... 15
II. Minutes of the sitting held on 19.01.2016 ......................... 17

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  ON ESTIMA TES
(2015-16)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri Kirti Azad
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
*5. Shri Anil Shirole
6. Shri Om Birla
7. Shri Ashok Chavan
8. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
9. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
10. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo
13. Shri  Sanjay Dhotre
14. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
15. Shri Sudheer Gupta
16. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
17. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
18. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla
19. Shri Vinod Khanna
20. Shri P. Kumar
21. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
22. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
23. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
25. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy
26. Md. Salim
27. Shri Arvind Sawant
28. Shri Ganesh Singh
29. Shri Rajesh Verma
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar — Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Additional Director
* Elected Vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II No. 2181 dated 31.07.2015. Consequent upon
vacancy caused by the death of Shri Dileep Singh Bhuria, MP on 24 June, 2015.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Twelfth Report of
Estimates Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Rationalization of
Demands for Grants’ pertaining to the Ministry of Finance (Department of  Economic
Affairs).
2. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) has taken up an
initiative to rationalize and reduce the number of Demands for Grants by clubbing
together some of the related Demands for Grants in the Budget 2016-17 to bring out
a more holistic picture of Budgetary allocation for a Ministry/Department. As per
mandate of the Committee, the Ministry vide their letter dated 21 December, 2016
sought the approval of the Estimates Committee for rationalization involving merger/
reduction of some of the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on 08 January, 2016. The Draft Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee on Estimates (2015-16) at their
sitting held on 19 January, 2016.
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations/observations
of the Committee have been printed in Bold in Part-II of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
21 January, 2016 Chairperson,
1 Magha, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Estimates.
 (v)

REPORT
Rationalization of Demands for Grants
Introductory
One of the principal functions of the Estimates Committee is to suggest the form
in which the estimates shall be presented to Parliament.  Article 112 casts an obligation
on the President to place an Annual Financial Statement, popularly known as 'Budget'
before the Parliament showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the
Government of India for the ensuing financial year. Rule 204 (2) of the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha stipulates that Budget shall be
presented to the Lok Sabha in such form as the Finance Minister may, after
considering the suggestions, if any, of the Estimates Committee, settle. Article 113
of the Constitution prescribes the procedure with respect to the estimates to be
submitted to the Parliament as under:
"Art.113(1) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the
Consolidated Fund of India shall not be submitted to the vote of Parliament, but
nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the discussion in either
House of Parliament of any of those esimates (2) So much of the said estimates
as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted in the form of Demands for
Grants to the House of the People, and the House of the People shall have power
to assent, or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand
subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein (3) No demand for a grant
shall be made except on the recommendation of the President."
2. Normally, each Ministry and Department is assigned a separate Demand for
Grant to seek appropriations, while bigger Ministries may have more than one
Demands for Grants. Besides, there are specific Services such as Repayment of
Debt, Interest Payment, Loans to Government Servants, Transfer to States and UTs
etc. for which appropriation is sought through separate Demands for Grants. Separate
Demand for Grant is also provided for distinct Constitutional entities such as
President, Vice-President, UPSC, CVC, Election Commission and UTs with and without
Legislature etc. At present, there are 109 Demands for Grants excluding Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Railways (Annnex) in the Budget 2015-16.
3. The number of Demands and the serial numbers of Demands get changed if
new Demands are created or existing Demands are merged into another Demand.
For instance, in the recent past, the serial number of some Demands has changed
due to creation of a new Ministry of Skill Development and merger of Department of
NACO into Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

2
Merger of Demands for Grants
4. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) vide their letter
dated 21 December, 2015 sought the approval of the Estimates Committee for merger
of some of the Demands for Grants. Subsequently, the Ministry submitted a
background note which stated interalia as under:
"This Ministry has taken up an initiative to rationalise and reduce the number of
Demands for Grants by clubbing together some of the related Demands for
Grants in the Budget 2016-17 to bring out a more holistic picture of Budgetary
allocation for a Ministry/Department. This will also result into more coherent
Budget monitoring and review at any point of time more particularly at the stage
of mid-year Budget review to firm up Revised Estimates. The merger of two
similar Demands under one larger administrative umbrella may also give flexibility
to Integral Finance Department (IFD) to readjust budgetary allocations across
sub-administrative entities depending on the expenditure trend. This will ensure
a more holistic and realistic expenditure planning. The exercise has been initiated
with the purpose of merging DGs of separate administrative units in a Ministry
to the extent practically feasible and to reduce the overall number of Demands
for Grants."
5. The details of the proposal of merger of Demands submitted to the Estimates
Committee along with the rationale as provided by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of economic affairs) are as follows:
Sl. Existing Demand To be merged Revised Rationale
No. No. into Nomenclature
12 3 4 5
(i) 56 - Other 53 - Ministry of Ministry of Demand  No.  56  is a small
Expenditure of Home Affairs Home Affairs Demand  catering to Budget
Ministry of Home allocation   for   relief  and
Affairs rehabilitation   of   refugees,
pension and other benefits
to freedom fighters and
Helicopter service in NE
only. These 3-4 activities
which come under the
domain of MHA can easily
be reflected as Budget lines
in the Parent Demand (53)
for a more coherent
depiction of Budget of MHA.
(ii) 105- 104- Department of Demand No. 105 and 106 are
Public Works Department of Urban very small Demands catering
Urban Development to the Budget allocation of
106- Stationary Development Printing  Press  and  CPWD
and Printing under M/o Urban Development
and its merger into the
parent Demand will result
into more coherent depiction
of Budget of M/o UD.

3
(iii) 50 - Department 48-Department Department of Through a Gazette notification,
of AIDS Control of Health and Health and the  Department  of  AIDS
Family Welfare Family Welfare Control  under  M/o  Health
and  Family  Welfare   is  no
more a separate Department.
Merger into the parent
Demand is a logical action
following this.
(iv) 05 - Nuclear 04 - Atomic Atomic Energy Both   are   similar   nature
Power Scheme Energy Demands   consisting    of
inter-related activities.
(v) 37 - Transfer to Transfer to The     nomenclature     of
State and Union States Demand No. 37 contain the
Territory term "UT" only due to one
Governments budget   line   for  release of
Grants in-lieu of shares in
Central Taxes and duties to
NCT of Delhi. This will be
reflected in the exclusive
Demand for Transfer to
Union Territories with
Legislature Demand No. 37
as proposed below.
(vi) Demad No. 38 - Demand No. Department of Demand   No.   38 is a very
Loans to 34 - Department Economic small  Demand  catering  to
Government of Economic Affairs (DEA) specific activity of Loans to
Servant Affairs (DEA) Go vernment   Servants  and
may easily be accommodated
into the Demand of DEA.
(vii) 57 - Transfer to Transfer to To make it more meaningful
Union Territory Union and  explanatory as there is
Governments T erritories with already   separate   Demands
Legislature for UTs without Legislatures.
6. On reconsideration, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
submitted that the proposal to merge the Demand No. 36 - Interest payment and
Demand No. 39 - Repayment of Debt and also to merge Demand No.  44-Direct tax
and Demand No. 45 - Indirect tax into Demand No. 43 Department of Revenue is
withheld for the time being. These proposals need more detailed deliberations with
the Stakeholders and hence are deferred.
7. In a subsequent request, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) stated that Ministry of Defence (Finance) has informed vide the ID note
No. 1(14)/Bud.-1/2015 dated 6-01-16 that the 8 Demands of Ministry of Defence are
also proposed to be rationalised and merged into 4 Demands for Grants with the
12 3 4 5

4
approval of Raksha Mantri. The following Demands of Ministry of Defence are
accordingly, proposed to be merged:
Sl. Existing Demand To be merged Revised Rationale
No. No. into Nomenclature
12 3 4 5
(i) 23-Defence Defence Defence The three separate Demands
Services—Army Services Services for Grants relating to Army,
(Revenue) (Revenue) Navy  and  Air  Force,  may
24-Defence be merged   to   form    one
Services—Navy consolidated   Demands  for
25-Defence Grants i.e. Defence Services
Services—Air (Rev enue), since each of Army,
Forces Air  Force  and  Navy
presently have separate
major Head and hence, the
merger of demands for all
revenue provisions of
defence services will be easy.
Further, this will provide
entire Defence Services
(Revenue) at one place.
(ii) 26-Defence Ministry of Ministry of Even at present the Demands
Ordinance Defence Defence for   Grants,   Ministry   of
Factories (Misc.) Defence (Civil) is in nature of
27-Defence miscellaneous demand having
Services— provisions  for  Coast  Guard,
Research and Border  Roads,   Jammu   &
Development Kashmir   Light   Infantry
(JAKLI), Defence Estates,
Canteen Stores Department,
MoD Secretariat, and
Defence Accounts Service,
etc. It is felt that certain
other budgetary provisions
which are in the nature of
miscellaneous items may
also be shifted to this
Demand viz.  (a) Rashtriya
Rifles, National Cadet Corps,
Inspection and Military
farms from the Demands
from the Army . In addition,
the Demands for Grants
relating to Defence
Ordnance Factories (Demand
No. 26) and Defence
Services—Research and
Development, (Demand No.
27) may be merged in the
above revised Demand for
Grant—Ministry of
Defence—Miscellaneous.

5
8. Later, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in yet another
request stated that it is also proposed to merge the Ministry of Overseas Indian
Affairs (MoIA) with the Ministry of External Affairs. Accordingly, the Demand for
Grant No. 70 MoIA would be merged with the Demand for Grant, No. 33, Ministry of
External Affairs w.e.f. Budget (2016-17). The proposal for merger and rationale thereof
was furnished as follows:
Sl. Existing Demand To be merged Revised Rationale
No. No. into Nomenclature
1 70-Ministry of 33-Ministry Ministry of As per the proposed merger of
Overseas of External External the two Departments. Further,
Indian Affairs Affairs Affairs the total budget of MoIA is
very small (Rs. 94.75 crore
in 2015-16) and may well be
accommodated in the bigger
demand of MEA.
9. Since it is one of the functions of the Estimates Committee constituted under
Rule 310 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha to
suggest the form in which the estimates shall be presented to Parliament, the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), sought the approval of the Committee
not only for the merger of the Demands as mentioned above but also for merger of
Demands in future too on the same rationale.
10. Apprising the Committee of the current structure of Demands for Grants,
Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), on 8 January,
2016, deposed as under:
‘‘Broadly, there are four categories in which the Demands for Grants are
today in existence. One category is that each Ministry has a separate Demand.
That is one principle. Second principle is that the bigger Ministries which
have large allocations and bigger establishment like, for example, the Tax
Departments—the CBDT and the CBEC—there are two separate Demands
for them. So, bigger Ministries therefore have more than one Demand. The
third principle is that for certain specific services such as repayment of debt
or for interest payments or for loans to Government Servants, there are separate
Demands. The fourth category is for distinct administrative (Constitutional)
entities like, for example, for the Office of the President of India, Vice-President
of India, the UPSC, the Election Commission, which are institutions and
autonomous bodies created by the Constitution, there are separate Demands
for them. This is how broadly the Demands are structured.’’
11. Queried further, on the rationalization and reduction in the number of
Demands for Grants, the Secretary, stated as follows:
‘‘Sir, we have analyzed the whole matter and we have placed before the
Committee for its consideration the merger of certain Demands where we feel
that either the Demand sizes are very small or there is a lot of overlap between
two Demands and often it becomes very difficult to decide a particular
expenditure, whether it should go into this Demand or that Demand because

6
there is a lot of overlap and commonality of purpose between two Demands.
So due to that the because of the difficulties which we encounter in monitoring
their expenditure during the year and monitoring the implementation of various
programmes by a particular Ministry, we have certain practical and
administrative difficulties. Keeping these in mind, we have proposed this
merger and rationalization of Demands.’’
12. The witness highlighted the four distinct advantages of the proposed merger
thus:
‘‘What we are trying to achieve is four distinct benefits or four distinct
advantages we expect to achieve out of these efforts. First is that this is an
initiative to rationalize the Demands, to avoid the overlap of purpose or
duplication of purpose. Second thing is that it will present a more holistic
picture to the Parliament about the allocation made to a particular Ministry.
For example, for Home Ministry, we have a Demand for the Ministry of Home
Affairs; then, there is something called the other MHA, that is, the other
expenditures of the Ministry of Home Affairs. So, if we combine them, we are
able to present a more holistic picture of the total allocation to the Ministry of
Home Affairs to the Parliament which will lead to better accountability. The
third point is it will also facilitate coherent budget monitoring, monitoring of
expenditure by a Ministry also will be facilitiated. The fourth point is the
Ministry, from an administrative point of view, will have flexibility for
re-appropriation of allocations during the year. Today, as you would be very
well aware and the hon. Members would be well aware, we cannot
re-appropriate money from one Demand to the other Demand without specific
parliamentary approval through the Supplementary Demands for Grants. But
there are administrative necessities and there are urgencies because of which
we have to re-appropriate at certain times expenditure from one Head where
due to some unforeseen development, there is lower demand, or in certain
areas, due to certain urgent requirement, we need to spend more money. That
re-appropriation also would become possible if these two Demands are
merged. But having said that, let me also say very clearly that the
re-appropriation powers which are vested with the Government, with the
Executive, or the re-appropriation powers which are delegated to the various
administrative Ministries are subject to certain restrictions. It is not unlimited
or unbridled.’’
13. The representative of the Ministry then explained the details of the merger
proposed:
‘‘We propose to merge Demand No. 53, Ministry of Home Affairs and other
expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs into a single common Demand.
That is number one. Then, the Department of Urban Development, it is a very
big Demand. Their total allocation is more than Rs. 16,000 crore, but there are
two smaller Demands which are also administered by the Urban Development
Department, namely, the Stationery and Printing Department where the total
BE this year is only Rs. 57 crore and there is an allocation for Public Works,

7
which is Rs. 2,326 crore. So, the Ministry of Home Affairs and other expenditure
of  the Ministry of Home Affairs, we are merging; that is the first proposal.
The second is Stationery and Printing, which is Demand No. 106; Public
Works, which is Demand No. 105; these two will be merged with the
Department of Urban Development, which is Demand No. 104. That is the
second proposal. The third Proposal is relating to the two Departments which
have already been merged, that is, the Department of AIDS Control has been
merged with the Department of Health and Family Welfare. That is the third
proposal. The fourth proposal, today, there are two separate  Demands—one
for Nuclear Power Schemes and the other one is for Atomic Energy. We
propose to merge them both into a single Demand, namely, Atomic Energy.
Demand No. 37 is Transfer to State and Union Territory Government. The
whole demand relates to States. But there is only entry which relates to the
Government of Delhi for one expenditure item. We want to Transfer that.’’
14. Asked whether, the Ministry of Finance has consulted the affected
Ministries/Departments, the witness submitted:
‘‘ ... We got the concurrence from the Defence Ministry only day before
yesterday. They have today eight Demands. Out of these eight Defence
Services (Army), Defence Services (Navy) and Defence Service (Air Force)
are entirely revenue expenditure primarily salary related expenditure. We want
them to be merged into Defence Services (Revenue). This has been agreed
also by the Ministry of Defence.
We have got the Defence Ordnance factories. Today that is a separate
Demand and then we have the Defence Services (Research and
Development) which is mainly the expenditure provision relating to the DRDO.
These are also two separate Demands but small expenditures. We want to
merge them together. Ministry of Defence has conveyed their concurrence to
this. These are the proposals.’’
15. In response to a query as to whether the proposed merger of specified
Demands of Ministry of Defence which enables the executive to reappropriate
money from one head to another, would deprive the Parliament of its financial
powers, the Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
replied as under:
‘‘Your concen is absolutely valid. I would like to submit that this is all salary-
related, revenue items of expenditure. So, therefore, the reappropriation will
not be done and cannot be done just from one Ministry to the other or the
purposes of payment of salary, we will not do it, we cannot do it also.’’
16. Elaborating further, the Secretary stated as follows:
‘‘Since these are entirely revenue items which relate primarily to salary, allow-
ances and other aspects,the question of reappropriation without necessity
or re-appropriation for a particular or for any other extraneous reason is
something which should not happen. That is the only submission I would
like to make.’’

8
17. Referring to the apprehension expressed in relevant quarters that merger of
Demand No. 106 (Stationery and Printing) along with Demand No. 105 (Public
Works) with Demand No 104 (Department of Urban Development) to close down
the stationery and Printing units spread across different cities and outsource the
same and to monetise the land on which these units are located, Secretary,
submitted as under:
‘‘There is no such proposal now with the Government. If at all in a future date,
it is always subject to Parliamentary oversight.’’
The witness also clarified that Ministry of Urban Development had been
consulted about the proposed merger of their Demands for Grants and they had
concurred in the proposal.
Rationalisation of Plan and Non-Plan Schemes
18. Apart from the rationalisation of the Demand for Grants, the representative of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), submitted that in the
Budget (2016-17) as exercise to rationalise Plan and Non-Plan schemes of all
Ministries and Departments has been undertaken by Ministry of Finance to avoid
duplication of resource application and to avoid too thin spread of resources. From
the view point of continuity, and to depict the historical data of Actual (2014-15),
BE (2015-16), and RE (2015-16), the old schematic structure has to be retained in
Expenditure Budget V olume II. As a result, this document will become too
voluminous. To Address this problem, it is proposed to print Expenditure Budget
V olume-II in two parts; Part A for Demand Nos. 1-50 and Part B for Demand Nos. 51
to the last Demand. the Ministry also sought the approval of the Committee for this
change in presentation of Expenditure Budget V olume-II in the Budget 2016-17 and
also to make some minor consequential changes required at the last stage of
printing.
Separate Budgetary Head for Arsenic related issues
19. The Committee in their report No. 1 (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Occurrence of
High Arsenic Content in Ground Water’ presented to Lok Sabha on 11 December,
2014 had pointed out that there was no separate budgetary allocation for Arsenic
related issues or for that matter for any water quality issues. The Committee there-
fore recommended that there should be a separate budgetary head of expenditure
for water quality with a sub-head for Arsenic contamination in order to adequately
meet the fund requirements. The Committee also recommended that there should be
separate budgetary head for the proposed National Programme for Ground Water
related Health Problems with sufficient funding. When the matter was brought to
the notice of Secretary in the course of evidence, he deposed before the Committee
as under:
‘‘We will ascertain the position from the concerned Ministries. If the details
are given to us like the date of the report, we will write to the concerned
Ministry and get the position from the concerned Ministry and submit a
report. We will give a written submission after ascertaining the correct
position from the concerned Ministry and submit a report on that matter.’’

OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
1. One of the principal functions of the Estimates Committee is to suggest the
form in which the estimates shall be presented to Parliament. The Committee in
their Twenty-Fourth Report, 5th Lok Sabha, had made certain recommendation of
far reaching import on the form and contents of the Demands for Grants which
were accepted by the Government. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic
Affairs vide their letter dated 21 December, 2015 sought the approval of the
Committee to reduce the number of DFGs which are extantly 109. In their
submission before the Committee, the Ministry stated that the merger of some of
DFGs would reduce the total number of DFGs, bring greater budgetary coherence,
remove departmental overlaps and duplication in thier functioning, avoid too thin
spread of resources and provide greater flexibility in reappropriation of allocation
within the DFG, present a more holistic budgetary picture to Parliament and help
overcome the difficulties encountered in monitoring the implementation of various
programmes by the Ministries concerned.
2. Notably, the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, sought
the approval of the Committee to merge DFG No. 56 (other  expenditure of MHA)
with DFG No. 53, DFG Nos. 105 (Public Works) and 106 (Stationery and Printing)
with DFG No. 104 (Department of Urban Development); DFG No. 50 (Department
of AIDS Control) with DFG No. 48 (Department of Health and Family Welfare);
DFG No. 05 (Nuclear Power Scheme) with DFG No. 04 (Atomic Energy); DFG No.
38 (Loan to Government Servants) with DFG No. 34 (Department of Economic
Affairs); Merger of DFG Nos. 23 (Army), 24 (Navy) and 25 (Air Force) into one
single consolidated DFG under the nomenclature Defence Services (Revenue) and
merger of DFG No. 26 (Defence Ordinance Factories) and DFG No. 27 (Defence
Service, Research and Development) in the revised DFG—Ministry of Defence
(Miscellaneous); and merger of DFG No. 70 (Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs
with DFG No. 33 (Ministry of External Affairs). The Ministry of Finance also
sought approval for slight amendment in the nomenclature of DFG No. 37 from
‘‘Transfer to State and Union Territory Governments’’ to ‘‘Transfer to States’’ and
in the Demand No. 57 ‘‘Transfer to Union Territory Governments’’ to ‘‘Transfer to
Union Territory with Legislature’’. The representatives adduced the grounds for
affecting the proposed rationalization. Responding to the concern of the Committee
that the proposed merger of the Demands for Grants may, while granting greater
flexibility to the Ministries concerned, dilute or affect the financial control and
oversight by the Parliament which cannot be sacrificed or abdicated on the ground
of administrative flexibility. The Committee also raised concern about the
apprehended de-departmentalization of the ‘‘Printing and Stationery Organization’’
of the Ministry of Urban Development and the unrest among the workers. The
representative of the Ministry of Finance testified before the Committee that there
was ‘‘no such proposal now with the Government’’ and assured that any such move
would be ‘always subject to parliamentary oversight’. The representative also
clarified that merger of the proposed DFGs was mostly salary related revenue
expenditure and explained the benefits that would accrue. He further deposed that
the proposals also had the approval of the Minister(s) incharge but submitted that
they would be guided by the decision of the Committee. Having regard to the
9

10
multiple advantages like removal of departmental overlaps and duplication of works,
greater operational flexibility in reappropriation within a DFG, better allocation of
resources and holistic budgetary picture, the Committee approve of the proposed
merger and rationalization subject to the condition that merger of the DFGs does
not in any way whittle down Parliamentary scrutiny or erode financial control by
Parliament. The Committee would however like to be apprised in due course of the
impact of the merger and rationalization on excess expenditure, surrender of
unspent provisions and major reappropriations.
3. The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) in their background note submitted to the Committee sought the
Committees’ approval not only for the merger of the Demands indicated but also to
merge some of the Demands for Grants on the same rationale in future too. The
Committee take a session note of  the request made by the Ministry for blanket
approval for future merger of the demands on the same rationale. Since such a
proposal is fraught with the serious implications of affecting financial control of
Parliament, the Committee outright reject such a proposal. They, therefore,
reiterate that as, the extant practice, the Ministry of Finance should obtain the
Committee’s prior approval in future as well in case of any proposed change in the
form in which Demands for Grants are to be presented to Parliament.
4. The Committee would also like to caution that the rationalisation of
Demands should not be initiated as a precursor to making fundamental changes
such as outsourcing the services, retrenchment of the existing labour force and to
monetise the land as is being apprehended in respect of the merger of Demand No.
106 (Stationery and Printing) with Demand No. 104  (Department of Urban
Development). The Committee however note the assurance of the Ministry of Finance
that any such move in future, if any, will be subject to Parliamentary oversight.
5. The Committee note that apart from undertaking rationalisation of the
Demands for Grants, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs),
proposes to carry out an exercise in the Budget (2016-17) to rationalise Plan and
Non-Plan schemes of all Ministries and Departments to avoid duplication of
resource application and to avoid too thin spread of resources. Such an exercise,
from the view point of continuity and depiction of the historical data of Actual
(2014-15), BE (2015-16), and RE (2015-16), the old schematic structure has to be
retained in the Expenditure Budget Volume II. This, the Ministry stated, would
result in Expenditure Budget document becoming too voluminous and therefore
sought the concurrence of the Committee to print Expenditure Budget Volume-II
in two parts: Part A for Demand Nos. 1—50 and Part B for Demand Nos. 51 to the
last Demand. The Committee do not have any objection to the said proposal. The
Committee would also like to know the rationale for continuing with the old
classification of Plan and Non-plan schemes/expenditure after the formation of
NITI Aayog and also the justification of the word ‘Aayog’ with NITI, which is the
National Institution for Transformation of India.
6. The Committee in their 1st report (16th LS) on the subject ‘Occurrence
of High Arsenic Content in Gr ound Water’ pertaining to Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (M/o WR, RD & GR), in

11
view of the absence of separate budgetary allocation for Arsenic related issues or
for that matter for any water quality issues, had strongly recommended that there
should be a separate budgetary head of expenditure for water quality with a sub-
head for Arsenic contamination in order to adequately meet the fund requirements.
Taking note of no specific budget allocation for arsenic related diseases by the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (M/o H & FW), the Committee had also
recommended that there should be a separate budgetary head for the proposed
National Programme for Ground Water related Health Problems with sufficient
funding. Regrettably, the M/o WR, RD & GR have not accepted the recommendation
on the ground that it would require changes in the extant National Rural Drinking
Water Programme (NRDWP) guidelines. When the attention of the Secretary,
Department of Economic Affairs was drawn to such a vital matter, he assured the
Committee that the position would be enquired from the concerned Ministries.
The Committee, therefore reiterate that the Ministry of Finance in consultation
with the M/o WR, RD & GR and M/o H & FW should revisit the issue and implement
the Committees' recommendation for separate budgetary head for arsenic related
water issues and apprise the Committee in due course.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
21 January, 2016 Chairperson,
1 Magha, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Estimates.

ANNEXURE
LIST OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS—2016-17
Code. Demand Name of Ministry/Department
No. No.
12 3
1 Ministry of Agriculture
1 Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
2 Department of Agricultural Research and Education
3 Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
2 Department of Atomic Energy
4 Atomic Energy
5 Nuclear Power Schemes
3 Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga and
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy (AYUSH)
6 Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy,
Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH)
4 Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
7 Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals
8 Department of Fertilizers
9 Department of Pharmaceuticals
5 Ministry of Civil Aviation
10 Ministry of Civil Aviation
6 Ministry of Coal
11 Ministry of Coal
7 Ministry of Commerce and Industry
12 Department of Commerce
13 Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
8 Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology
14 Department of Posts
15 Department of Telecommunications
16 Department of Electronics and Information
Technology
12

13
9 Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution
17 Department of Consumer Affairs
18 Department of Food and Public Distribution
10 Ministry of Corporate Affairs
19 Ministry of Corporate Affairs
11 Ministry of Culture
20 Ministry of Culture
12 Ministry of Defence
21 Ministry of Defence
22 Defence Pensions
23 Defence Services — Army
24 Defence Services — Navy
25 Defence Services — Air Force
26 Defence Ordnance Factories
27 Defence Services — Research and Development
28 Capital Outlay on Defence Services
13 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
29 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
14 Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
30 Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
15 Ministry of Earth Sciences
31 Ministry of Earth Sciences
16 Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
32 Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
17 Ministry of External Affairs
33 Ministry of External Affairs
18 Ministry of Finance
34 Department of Economic Affairs
35 Department of Financial Services
36 Appropriation — Interest Payments
37 Transfers to State and Union Territory Governments
38 Loans to Government Servants, etc.
39 Appropriation — Repayment of Debt
40 Department of Expenditure
4 1 Pensions
42 Indian Audit and Accounts Department
43 Department of Revenue
44 Direct Taxes
45 Indirect Taxes
46 Department of Disinvestment
12 3

14
19 Ministry of Food Processing Industries
47 Ministry of Food Processing Industries
20 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
48 Department of Health and Family Welfare
49 Department of Health Research
50 Department of AIDS Control
21 Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
51 Department of Heavy Industry
52 Department of Public Enterprises
22 Ministry of Home Affairs
53 Ministry of Home Affairs
54 Cabinet
55 Police
56 Other Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs
57 Transfers to Union Territory Governments
23 Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
58 Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
24 Ministry of Human Resource Development
59 Department of School Education and Literacy
60 Department of Higher Education
25 Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
61 Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
26 Ministry of Labour and Employment
62 Ministry of Labour and Employment
27 Ministry of Law and Justice
63 Election Ccmmission,
64 Law and Justice
65 Appropriation-Supreme Court of India
28 Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
66 Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
29 Ministry of Mines
67 Ministry of Mines
30 Ministry of Minority Affairs
68 Ministry of Minority Affairs
31 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
69 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
32 Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs
70 Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs
12 3

15
33 Ministry Panchayati Raj
71 Ministry of Panchayati Raj
34 Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs
72 Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs
35 Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
73 Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
74 Central Vigilance Commission
36 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
75 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
37 Ministry of Planning
76 Ministry of Planning
38 Ministry of Power
77 Ministry of Power
39 The President, Parliament, Union Public Service
Commission and the Secretariat of the Vice-President
78 Appropriation—Staff, Household and Allowances of
the President
79 Lok Sabha
80 Rajya Sabha
81 Appropriation — Union Public Service Commission
82 Secretariat of the Vice-President
40 Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
83 Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
41 Ministry of Rural Development
84 Department of Rural Development
85 Department of Land Resources
42 Ministry of Science and Technology
86 Department of Science and Technology
87 Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
88 Department of Biotechnology
43 Ministry of Shipping
89 Ministry of Shipping
44 Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
90 Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
45 Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
91 Department of Social Justice and Empowerment
92 Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities
46 Department of Space
93 Department of Space
12 3

16
47 Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
94 Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
48 Ministry of Steel
95 Ministry of Steel
49 Ministry of Textiles
96 Ministry of Textiles
50 Ministry of Tourism
97 Ministry of Tourism
51 Ministry of Tribal Affairs
98 Ministry of Tribal Affairs
52 Union Territories (Without Legislature)
99 Andaman and Nicobar Islands
100 Chandigarh
101 Dadra and Nagar Haveli
102 Daman and Diu
103 Lakshadweep
53 Ministry of Urban Development
104 Department of Urban Development
105 Public Works
106 Stationery and Printing
54 Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation
107 Ministry of Water Regources, River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation
55 Ministry of Women and Child Development
108 Ministry of Women and Child Development
56 Ministry of Y outh Affairs and Sports
109 Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
12 3

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2015-16)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 8th January, 2016 from 1530 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in
Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
3. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
6. Shri Sudheer Gupta
7. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
8. Shri P. Kumar
9. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy
10. Shri Md. Salim
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar — Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Additional Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs)
Shri Shaktikanta Das — Secretary
Shri Prashant Goyal — Joint Secretary (Budget)
Shri H.K. Srivastava — Director (Budget)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson invited the members to the sitting of the
Committee and informed the members of the request received from the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) for according approval of the Estimates
Committee for Ministry's proposal for rationalization of the Demands for Grants for
the specified reasons. In this context, the Chairperson informed the members that
one of the main functions of the Estimates Committee is to suggest the form in
which the estimates shall be presented to Parliament. It is as part of this mandate;
the Chairperson informed the members that the representatives of the Ministry of
17

18
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) were invited to brief the Committee on
the subject.
3. The Chairperson then welcomed the representative of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) to the sitting of the Committee and invited their
attention to Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker regarding the
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.
4. The representatives of the Ministry replied to various issues and concerns
raised regarding the rationalization of the Demands for Grants and allayed the
apprehension of the dilution of the Parliamentary control and oversight over the
finances of the Government due to such rationalization of Demands for Grants.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMA TES
(2015-16)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th January, 2016 from 1500 hrs. to 1715 hrs.
in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
3. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
4. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
7. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
8. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
9. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
10.Shri Arvind Sawant
11. Shri Rajesh Verma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar — Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Additional Director
WITNESSES
*** *** ***
*** *** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the
Main Committee.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject
‘Rationalization of Demands for Grants’ pertaining to the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs).
4. The Committee after consideration adopted the above Report without any
modification. Since, the report is related to preparation of the Union Budget, the
Ministry had requested the Committee to accord approval for the proposed
rationalization of the Demands for Grants at the earliest. As the Parliament is not in
session and recommendations of the Committee relate to the DFGs which are part of
the Budget, the Committee decided to present the report to Hon'ble Speaker under
19

20
Direction 71A (1) of  the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and under the
provision of Rule 280, and authorized the Chairperson for the same.
5. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
6. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Not Portion to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—4162LS(S3)—19.02.2016.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520 006
(AP).
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842 002 (Bihar).
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9,
Prem  House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110 001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110 009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110 024.
(Tel. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131).
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110 001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110 052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110 002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110 002.
(Tel.No. 23262515).
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110 054 (Tel. No. 23911966).
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110 003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110 006 (Tel. No. 23866768).
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street,
Karol Bagh, New  Delhi-110 005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110 001
(Tel. No. 23411919).
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (Pvt.) Ltd.,
A/15-17, Mohan Garden,
Najafgarh  Road, New Delhi-110 059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service,  C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110 034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462 003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A,
Chitra Bazar, Khan House,
P .B. No. 2621, Mumbai-400 002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400 002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605 001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641 012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600 014.
UTTAR  PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (UP).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building, Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226 001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI 110002.