1 
 
 
 
24 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT 
AND GANGA REJUVENATION  
 
 
GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fifteenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]  
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2017-18) 
 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 

2 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2017-18) 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND 
GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fifteenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]  
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 December, 2017) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2017/Agrahayana 1939 (Saka) 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
E.C. No. ________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : ₹ _____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2016 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government 
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi – 110002. 
 
 

4 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
                 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2017-18)    
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
31 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies 
 
78 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government’s replies have not been accepted 
by the Committee 
 
79 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
  
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited 
 
 
(i)  State wise statement indicating the projects completed  
     and ongoing under Namani Ganga Programme 
 
(ii)  Directions under section 18(i)(b) of the water 
      (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
      regarding treatment and utilization of sewage 
 
(iii)  Directions under Section 5 of the Environment 
      (Protection) Act, 1986 regarding treatment and 
      utilization of sewage for restoration of water quality of 
      River 
 
(iv)  Directions issued under Section 18(i)(b) of the water 
       (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 for  
        restoration of water quality of River Ganga 
 
99 
 
 
100 
 
107 
 
112 
 
 
117 
 

5 
 
 
 
(v)  Crop diversification programme(CDP), a sub scheme  
       of RKVY 
  
(vi)   Decadal (Flow Data in Cum/sec)                                                            
 
(vii)  Recommendation on the de-siltation 
 
(viii)  A brief report on 'Alternate water supply 
       Management strategies in arsenic affected/ vulnerable  
       areas:  mapping of arsenic affected zones/regions in 
       eastern U.P. (Balia district). 
 
APPENDICES 
(i)    Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee on held  
        on 08 August, 2017 
                                   
    
(ii)   Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government  
       on the Recommendations/Observations contained  
       in the Fifteenth Report of the Committee  on  
       Estimates (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
'Ganga Rejuvenation' 
 
123 
125 
128 
134 
 
 
 
 
138 
 
 
140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2017-18) 
 
         Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
           % 2. Vacant  
   3.  Shri A. Arunmozhithevan  
   4.  Shri George Baker  
   5.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee  
         @ 6.  Vacant  
   7.  Shri Dushyant Chautala  
   8.  Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary  
   9.  Col. Sonaram Choudhary  
   10.  Shri Ramen Deka  
   11.  Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
   12.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar  
           13.  Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri  
   14.  Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntala  
               15.  Smt. Raksha Khadse  
               16.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  
   17.  Shri P. Kumar  
   18.  Shri Rajesh Pandey  
   19.  Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
         # 20.  Vacant  
           21.  Dr. Bhagirath Prasad  
           22.  Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan  
   23.  Shri Konakalla Narayan Rao  
           24.  Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy  
   25.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant  
           26.  Shri Arjun Charan Sethi  
           27.  Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
   28.  Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
         @  29.  Vacant  
   30.  Shri Jay Prakash Narayan Yadav 
 _____________________________________________________________________________ 
 % Consequent upon sad demise of Shri Sultan Ahmed, MP on 4 th September, 2017 vide 
Notification No. 21/4(3)/2017/T(B) dated 10 October, 2017. 
 @ Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon 
his induction in the Council of Ministers on 3 September, 2017 vide Notification No. 
21/1(3)/2017/T(B) dated 14 December, 2017. 
 # Resignation of S hri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole from Lok Sabha accepted w.e.f. 14 
December, 2017 vide Notification No. 21/1(3)/2017/T(B) dated 14 December, 2017. 
 @ Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent 
upon his induction in the Council of Ministers on 3 September, 2017 vide notification No. 
21/1(3)/2017/T(B) dated 14 December, 2017. 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
                                  SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt Sudesh Luthra  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N.C Gupta  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Vipin Kumar  - Director  
4. Shri R.S Negi   - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Rajeev Kumar   - Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2017 -18) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Twenty-fourth Report on action taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Committee (2016 -17) on the 
subject 'Ganga Rejuvenation' pertaining to the Minis try of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. 
 
2. The Fifteenth Report of the Committee on Estimates was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 11 May, 2016.  Action Taken Notes on observations/ recommendations were 
received from the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation on 25 April, 2017.  The draft Report was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 08 August, 2017. 
 
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Committee is given in 
Appendix II. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI, 
11 November, 2017 
20 Kartika, 1939 (Saka) 
CHAIRPERSON, 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE. 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 
     This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Ganga Rejuvenation' pertaining to the 'Ministry of Water Resources River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation'. 
  
1.2 The Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 
11.05.2016. It contained 31 observations/recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all 
these observations/recommendations were received from the Ministry of Water 
Resources,  River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on 25.04.2017. 
 
1.3 Replies to the observations and rec ommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos.   1,2,3,7,8,9,11,13,15,16,17,18,19,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29 and 30       (Total 22)           
                                                                                                                (Chapter - II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of Government’s reply: 
Sl. Nos.        Nil           (Chapter - III)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s replies have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos.   4,5,6,10,12,14,20,21 and 31                                    (Total 9)               
                                                                                                                         (Chapter - IV) 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. Nil                                              (Chapter - V) 
 
1.4.  The Committee hope and believe that Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government would be implemented expeditiously. The 

2 
 
Committee desire that response to the comments contained in Chapter - I of this 
Report should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations. 
 
Delay in setting up STPs and cost  escalation thereto  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
1.6 In their original report, t he Committee had observed that the setting up of STPs at 
Badrinath and Karanprayag with a capacity of 3.0 and 1.4 MLD was sanctioned on 
22.08.2008 and 24.12.2008 with an outlay of ₹4.62 and ₹3.49 crore respectively. 
However, construction of the same could not be commenced and not even a single rupee 
was spent even after a lapse of about seven years reportedly due to adverse weather 
conditions, natural disasters, dispute over lands, etc. Similarly, the projects for I&D of the 
sewage at Badrinath, Deoprayag, Karanprayag, Rudraparyag, Josh imath, were 
sanctioned in 2008/2009 /2010, the physical progress of these projects range d from 13 - 
40% only even after about seven years due to delay in obtaining permission from the 
Border Road Organization (BRO), natural calamities, delay in land acquisition, etc. Even 
EAP such as JICA assisted Ganga Action Plan Phase - II project at Varanasi, witnessed 
massive delays. The project, though sanctioned on 14.07.2010, could not be completed 
even after a bout five years. Surprisingly, the physical  progress of the project was 22 % 
only as at the end June, 2015 and no further progress was reported to the Committee. 
Similarly, the project - Sewage System & STP Works (Phase -II) at Kannauj, though 
sanctioned on 24.02.2011, had seen physical progress of 22% only even after lapse of 
four years. Asked to furnis h the reasons for the extremely tardy progress of these 
projects, the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development &  Ganga Rejuvenation, 
merely stated that original date of completion of JICA assisted Varanasi project and the 
sewerage system & STP works at Kannauj were 31.07.2015 and 31.03.2016 respectively 
and the cost escalation, if any, due to delay would be borne by  the Government of Uttar 
Pradesh without intimating the Committee about the latest progress in the matter. Further, 
the projects for Sewer network, Sewage Pumping stations (SPS) and STP, funded by 
World Bank, at Begusarai, Buxar, Hajipur, Munger despite getting the sanction in 2010 as 

3 
 
EAPs, could not be completed even after 5 years. Disturbingly, the physical progress of 
the projects range d from 21-45%. Despite such a slow progress, the M/o WR, RD &GR 
assured that these projects would be completed during 20 15-16 and 2016 -17. The 
ministry attributed the delays due to delays in land acquisition, court cases, introduction of 
new land acquisition bill and thereby changes of compensation eligibility of land owners, 
etc. The additional cost, if any, due to delay w ould be borne by the State Government. 
The Committee note that without assessing the ground realities in acquiring the land for 
setting up of sewerage projects, sanctions/ approvals were given and funds allocated and 
allowed to lapse. Unfortunately, this was not confined to one / two projects but across the 
states such as Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. The Committee were deeply 
concerned to note that for want of approval from BRO, a sewer project got delayed badly. 
Such avoidable delays, the Committe e believe d, were due to absence of close 
coordination in keeping with the salutary principle of cooperative federalism and want of 
regular interventions by the authorities concerned. Undoubtedly, had there been effective 
coordination and synergy between th e multiple authorities, delays in completion of the 
projects could have been avo ided or overcome. Further, the C ommittee were informed 
that many projects are scheduled to be completed /to have been completed during 2015 -
16. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of these projects within next six 
months, State-wise, STP wise indicating clearly the cost and time overruns alongwith  the 
reasons for delays, the revised timelines for their completion and  the author ities which 
would bear such escalated costs. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
1.7 In their original report, the Committee had  deplored that unconscionable inordinate 
delays in completion of the sewer projects which resulted in continued emptying of 
untreated hazardous sewer into river Ganga. Further, the cost of the projects had gone up 
manifold increas ed the financial burden of the States already reeling under financial 
crunch. For instance, the State Government of Uttar Pradesh informed the Committee 
that implementing body (UP Jal Nigam) was already facing financia l stress. Hence, the 
Committee were of the considered view that states may not be able to meet the cost of 
escalation of the projects thereby casting shad ow on the completion of these projects. 
Some of these ongoing works fall under Component ‘A’ of th e ‘Namami Gange 

4 
 
Programme’ and we re funded as Central Sector Scheme with c ontribution of GoI and 
States in the ratio of 70:30. The Committee noted that in order to ensure that the 'nirmalta' 
and the 'nirantarta' or 'aviralta' of the Ganga is att ained by July, 2018, the GoI had  made 
the Ganga Rejuvenation a Hundred Percent Central Sector Schem e as stated in reply to 
a supplementary to SQ.No.  61 in Lok Sabha on  28.04.2016. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that M/o WR,RD&GR  may explore the possibility of treating the 
uncompleted projects as new initiatives and fund them entirely as Central Sector scheme 
under component ‘B’ of the 'Namami Gange' for the success  of the Programme. Further, 
the Committee had desired to be apprised of the expenditure  incurred so far and to be 
incurred year -wise and State -wise during the  years 2015 -16, 2016 -17 and 2017 -20 
(December). 
Replies of the Government 
1.8 A Statewise statement indicating the projects completed, ongoing alongwith 
requisite details viz., sanctioned cost, nature of works, progress and time lines is 
enclosed as Annexure - I.                                                 
(Reply to recommendation No. 4)  
 
1.9 There are 80 projects continuing under erstwhile NGRBA framework and are 
being continued under Namami Gange programme.  The detailed statement is given at 
Annexure - I.  As is seen from the Statement, 66 ongoing projects are scheduled for 
completion during next two years.  3 projects were reconsidered for revised sanction 
based on the re quests received from the State G overnments. The recommendations of 
the Committee have been noted for future consideration by the Government. 
Funds released to the States till 2015-16 &2016-17(30.11.2016)                                 
(Rs. In crore) 
States 2015-16* 2016-17* Grand Total 
Bihar 120.23 5.83 126.06 
Jharkhand 27.83 34.15 61.98 
Uttar Pradesh 147.58 465.75 613.33 
Uttarakhand 30.26 6.55 36.81 
West Bengal 185.79 6826 254.05 

5 
 
Haryana 30.00 37.00 67.00 
Delhi 4.96  4.96 
Environmental Planning & 
Coordination Organisation, Jabalpur 
3.39  3.39 
Grand Total 550.04 617.54 1,167.58 
*Rs.578 crore releases to Ministry of Drinking Water for Swach  Bharat  Rural), Rs. 263 
crore in the year 2015-16 and Rs. 315 crore in the year 2016-17. 
 
 
(Reply to recommendation No. 5) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.10 While noting delays in completion of sewage projects and STPs works, the 
Committee in their original report had emphasized for coordination and synergy 
between the multiple authorities and also desired to be apprised of the status of 
the projects State -wise/STP-wise indicating clearly the cost and time overruns 
alongwith  the reasons for delays, the revised timelines for their completion and 
the authorities which would bear such escalated costs.  The Government in the 
action taken reply has furnished a statement indicating State-wise status of various 
projects/works in various States.  The analysis of the data is as under:- 
 
State/UT Work  
completed 
AA&ES issued Work  in progress/   
on going 
Bid issued/     
under bidding 
Others Total 
Uttarakhand 9 15 4 3 - 31 
Uttar Pradesh 4 1 9 3 2 (Revised tenders to be 
issued for one project and 
for another project 
compliance document being 
prepared in view of World 
Bank conditional NOC  
 
19 
Bihar - 1 2 8 
(5 under 
bidding+ 3 re-
tendering) 
1 (work stopped as BUIDCO 
proposed termination of 
contractor 
12 
Jharkhand 1  1 - - 2 
West Bengal 1 - 5 - - 6 

6 
 
Haryana - - 2 - - 2 
Delhi - - - 8 (Bidding 
stage) 
- 8 
Total 14 18 23 22 3 80 
  
 The aforesaid analysis reveals that out of 80 project s, work has been 
completed in 14 projects and work is in progress in a nother 23 projects, thus in 
many of the projects i.e. 43 in number, work is yet to commence.   So far as the 
targeted date of completion of the projects is concerned, in two projects the likely 
date of completion was 2016-17 and in another two, the likely date of completion 
was May, 2017.  The Committee hope that these four projects would have been 
completed by now and would like to be apprised about the status at the final 
action taken stage.  In 15 projects, the t entative year of completion has  been 
indicated as 2017 -18 and  in 23 projects, the tentative year of completion has 
been given as 2018 -19.  In another six projects, the tentative year of completion 
has been mentioned as 2019 -20.  With regard to the projec ts/works at Jharkhand 
and Delhi and three projects in Bihar and one in UP,  the tentative year of 
completion has not been mentioned.  From the progress of work indicated for the 
projects/works particularly where the tentative year of completion has been 
mentioned as 2017-18, the Committee have their doubts about completion of work 
by the targeted date since the projects are at very initial stages of administrative 
approvals and work is yet to commence.   
Besides not much progress seems to have been made in  STP/sewer works 
as highlighted in the original report, as is evident from the status of STP at 
Badrinath and STP & I&D at Karanpryag, where the status of financial progress, 
which was reported as nil at the examination stage remains the same at the 
action taken stage. 
Another revealing feature noticed in the statement is mismatch between 
physical and financial progress particularly with regard to the works alr eady 
completed in Uttarakhand. Whereas physical pr ogress has been stated to be 
100%, the financial progress reported is between 60% to 96%.  The Ministry in the 
action taken reply has furnished the data with regard to release of funds to 
various States till 2015 -16 and 2016 -17. The analysis indicates that  funds 

7 
 
allocated during the year 2016 -17 in  some of the States like Bihar, Uttarakhand 
and West Bengal were far below the releases made during the previous year, 
whereas in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and Haryana, the releases are 
more during 2 016-17 as compared to the previous year. The aforesaid situation 
clearly indicates unrealistic projections on the part of the Ministry/State 
Governments. 
On the recommendation of the Committee, to treat the incomplete projects 
as new initiatives and fund t hem entirely as Central Sector Scheme, the Ministry 
in a very casual way has stated that the recommendation is noted for future 
consideration.  The Ministry has chosen not to respond to the specific 
information asked for with regard to cost and time overru ns as well as need for 
effective coordination and synergy between the multiple authorities as 
recommended in the original report.   
 The aforesaid scenario clearly indicates the sorry state of affairs with 
regard to the implementation of the programmes relating to  sewer projects/works 
in various States, meant for treatment of sewage and thereby addressing to the 
issue of dumping of sewage in the water bodies.  In this connection the 
Committee would also like to refer to the fact that the single major sourc e for 
water source for water resources deterioration contributes 70% of the pollution 
load to water bodies, as stated in a letter of Chairman, Central Pollution Control 
Board as appended with the replies as Annexure -I.  While noting the deplorable 
state of  affairs, the Committee would like to reiterate their concerns on the 
inordinate delay of projects/works and would like the Ministry for having round 
the clock monitoring mechanisms to oversee the progress of work so that these 
projects are completed in a time bound frame and nirantarta or aviralta of Ganga 
is attained expeditiously.  The use of latest technological tools/applications can 
also be used for monitoring. The concrete actions on the suggested lines as per 
the original recommendation and action taken comments may be taken and the 
Committee apprised accordingly.       
 

8 
 
Gap between installed and actual utilization capacity of STPs 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed that in the State of West Bengal STPs were set up 
at 31 locations in the cities/ towns situated along the River Ganga with a capacity to treat 
355 Million Liters per day (MLD) under Ganga Action Plan-I&II. Out of these 31 STPs, two 
STPs with a capacity of 11.86 MLD are operating at 100%, 13 are operating at 50%, 4 are 
operating at less than 50% of the installed capacity. Five STPs are not commissioned at 
all and one STP has stopped functioning. As a result, out of 355MLD installed treatment 
capacity, operational / working capacity is 166 MLD (approx). In other words, the 
operational capacity is less than 50% of the installed capaci ty. The inescapable 
conclusion was that more than  50% of sewage, which the STPs we re supposed to treat, 
was being allowed to flow into Ganga due to less than optimal functioning of these STPs. 
Similarly, in Bihar, the five STPs established at Beur, Saidpur, Pahari, Karmalichak and 
Bhagalpur under GAP I &II with an installed capacity of 120 MLD are operating at 65MLD 
(approx 50%) of the installed capacity. The Central Pollution Control Board carried out 
third party assessment of 51 STPs sanctioned by Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change (MoEF&CC) in Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal. The 
Committee noted that the assessment by CPCB revealed that (i) as  against the installed 
capacity of 1009 MLD, the actual capacity  utilization is 602 MLD which is 59%, (ii) STPs 
are violating BOD parameters, 1 STP exceeded the COD for discharge and 14 STPs are 
found non operational . Surprisingly, the assessment wa s conspicuously silent  
as to the reasons for substantial underutilization of installed  capacities, exceeding the 
COD and BOD limits and non  operationalisation of 14  STPs. The Committee therefore, 
recommended that the specific reasons for sub optimal performance of these STPs  be 
ascertained and the problems rectified and the action taken in  this regard may be 
intimated to the Committee within six months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.12 There are 67 STPs located in various cities/ towns along the river Ganga.  Out of 
these, based on monitoring of 35 STPs carried out by CPCB during April -

9 
 
December’2016, 17 were found to be complying with the extant standards while 14 
were found to be non -operational. While 4 STPs were found to be non -complying.  
NMCG in association with State government and its agencies has already initiated an 
exercise to identify the reasons for sub -optimal level of oper ations of these STPs and 
also reasons for a large number of them being non -operational.  Base -line information 
so gathered would be utilized to take suitable measures to address these causative 
reasons for non-functioning of STPs as well as their functioning below optimum levels. 
Besides, CPCB has taken various measures for management of sewage and 
operation of STPs: 
 CPCB has issued directions in April, 2015 under section 18 (1) (b) of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 to the State Pollution Control 
Boards (SPCBs) of the five Ganga basin states (Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar, Jharkhand & Wes t Bengal) and asked to direct concerned municipalities 
and other concerned authorities in the State responsible for treatment and 
disposal of sewage for treatment of sewage and to evolve methods of utilization 
of sewage and suitable trade effluents in agriculture (Annexure - II). 
 
 CPCB has also issued directions under Section 5 of Environment (Protection) 
[E (P)] Act, 1986 on October, 2015 to the Commissioner/Mayor/Chief Executive 
Officer of Nagar Nigam/Palika/Panchayat of 118 towns located on the main 
stem of River Ganga and regarding treatment and utilization of sewage for 
restoration of water quality of river (Annexure - III) and also directed that  
o Untreated sewage shall not be disposed into the river or any other 
recipient system. 
o The local urban body s hall set STPs of adequate capacity and 
provide sewerage system to cover the entire local/urban area and to 
ensure the complete treatment of sewage generated.  
 
 CPCB has issued directions in March, 2017 under section 18 (1) (b) of the 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 to the State Pollution 
Control Boards (SPCBs) of the five Ganga basin states (Uttarakhand, Uttar 

10 
 
Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand & West Bengal) and asked to monitor the STPs 
discharging into river Ganga  on monthly basis and to di rect STPs operators for 
continuous operation of STPs without breakdown and to file prosecution against 
the STP operators, if STPs are found to be non-compliant or not being operated 
for a long time without justifiable reasons. (Annexure - IV) 
  
 In additio n, due to under utilization of the STPs in few States like Bihar, new 
projects are sanctioned to take care of the existing sewage load as well as future 
demands including necessary Operation and Maintenance facility for 10 years.  The 
existing STP capaciti es have also been upgraded with enhanced treatment capacity in 
Patna as per the details given below: 
S. 
No. 
Treatment  Plant Zone Existing 
treatment 
capacity 
(MLD) 
Proposed 
Treatment 
Capacity 
(MLD) 
Present Status 
1 Pahari-Patna 25 60 Revised Administrative 
Approval is being issued.  
2 Beur-Patna 35 43 Works awarded. Work to 
commence soon. 3 Saidpur-Patna 45 60 
4 Karmalichak-Patna 4 37 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.13 The Committee in their original recommendation had not ed that the 
operational capacity of STPs set up in the State of West Bengal at 31 locations in 
the cities/towns situated along the river Ganga was less than 50 per cent of the 
installed capacity.  In the action taken reply, the Ministry has given the status of 
67 STPs located in various cities/towns along the river Ganga.  It has been stated 
that based on monitoring of 35 STPs carried out by CPCB during April-December,  
2016, 17 were found to be complying with the extant standards while 14 were 
found to be non-operational while 4 STPs were found to be non -complying.    The 
Committee note from the reply that more than 50 per cent of the STPs are non -
operational/not complying with the ext ant standards.  It is not clear from the 

11 
 
replies whether the standards quoted rel ate to the working capacity of these 
STPs.  The Committee also note that NMCG in association with State 
Governments and its agencies has already initiated an exercise to identify the 
reasons for sub-optimal level of operations of these STPs and also reasons for a 
large number of them being non -operational.  Base -line information so gathered 
would be utilized to take su itable measures to address these causative reasons 
for non -functioning of STPs as well as their functioning below optimum levels .  
The Committee in this regard would like to be apprised about the findings of the 
exercise being undertaken to identify the re asons for sub -optimal level/non -
operational status of the STPs.   
 The Committee also find that Central Pollution Control Board  has issued  
directions to (i) State Pollution Control Boards of the five Ganga basin States and  
(ii)Commissioner/Mayor/Chief Executive Officer of Nagar Nigam/Palika/Panchayat 
of 118 towns located on the main stem of River Ganga . The Chairman, CPCB, in 
the correspondence as mentioned at (ii)  above has given certain directions like 
setting up of STPs to cover the local/urban areas, complete treatment of sewage 
and to ensure maintenance of existing sewage plants, while referring to the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court directions in a case regarding pollution in Delhi, whereby 
the Hon’ble Su preme Court while referring to Article 21 - which guarantees Right 
of Life, Article 48A which states that the State shall endeavour to protect and 
improve the environment and to safeguard the forest and wildlife of the country 
and 51 A(g) states to protect a nd improve the natural environment including 
forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures, has 
observed that the Authorities – entrusted with the work of pollution control – 
cannot be permitted to sit back with folded hands on the pretext that they have no 
financial or other means to control pollution and protect the environment.      
The Committee fail to understand pitiable condition of various STPs, 
inspite of strong directions given by the Chairman, CPCB in the backdrop of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court directions.  The Committee strongly emphasize for 
having mechanisms to fix accountability where there is slackness on the part of 
officers/contractors or anybody involved in the implementation of vari ous 

12 
 
works/projects.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by 
the Government in this regard.   
 
O&M of STPs  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
1.14 Many leading hydrologists and other domain experts, who tendered their 
valuable testimony to Committee, felt that the reasons for sub optimal performance of 
STPs and Sewage Pumping Stations (SPS) include non availability of funds for 
Operations & Maintenance (O&M) of sewerage works, Poor supply of electricity, 
unavailability of technical course material and lack of motivation for O&M staff. Further, 
the experts informed that postings to O&M plants are seen as punishment. They also 
admitted that there was dearth of funds for O&M of assets created for pollution control 
works. The repres entatives of MoEF&CC conceded shortages of manpower and their 
inability to  attract qualified human resource despite advertisement of the posts  
due to unattractive pay packages. Since, the O&M services are crucial  
for ensuring optimal performance of STPs and SPSs, the Committee recommended that 
(i) suitable provisions may be made to ensure that it is legally binding  
on the distributor of electricity to supply uninterrupted supply of  
electricity to STPs;  (ii) alternative energy options, such as wind and solar , may be  
explored for running STPs especially in those areas where there  
are frequent outages; (iii) selected parameters need to be monitored through automatic  
monitoring instruments. Such instruments can be online to enable  round the clock 
monitoring; (iv) funds crunch should not be allowed to come in the way of O&M of  
sewage works; and  (v) to perk up the morale of O&M staff and officers and to attract 
new recruits to the posts, suitable attractive pay structure and  adequate posts may be 
created for running the STPs efficiently and round the clock. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.15 Directions were issued by CPCB u/s 5 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 vide 
letter dated 09/10/2015 to municipal authorities/ULBs for management of sewage from 

13 
 
118 towns identified along R. Ganga. In the directions it is stated in Point no. 4 that 
“Existing STPs if any, as applicable shall be properly maintained to comply with the 
proposed standards. At the Inlet and Outlet of the STP, online monitoring devices s hall 
be installed to monitor the consented parameters”.  
The sewerage projects sanctioned under NGRBA are on DBOT mode which 
includes O&M by the successful concessionaire for 10 years. First 5 years O&M cost is 
inbuilt within the project cost whereas for t he next five years the cost is to be borne by 
the State / ULB. 
Under Namami Ganga, the new projects shall be approved under central sector 
scheme with 100% central funding and including the provision for O&M of the assets for 
10-15 years. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.16 The Committee note from the action taken reply that sewerage projects 
sanctioned under NGRBA are on DBOT mode which includes O&M by the 
successful concessionaire for 10 years.   Besides under Namami Gange, there is 
a provision for O&M of th e assets for 10 -15 years for the new projects.    For the 
existing STPs, directions to comply with the proposed standards  and installation 
of online monitoring devices have been issued by CPCB  to Municipal 
Authorities/ULBs.  While appreciating the initiat ives taken for management of 
STPs, the Committee would like to emphasize that   besides issuing directions.  It 
is utmost required to monitor the compliance of the same by CPCB for which 
there is an urgent need to have requisite mechanisms.  The Ministry has not 
responded to part of the recommendations viz (i) making suitable provisions to 
make it legally binding on the distributor of electricity supply for uninterrupted 
supply to STPs; (ii) exploring alternate energy options, such as wind and solar for 
running STPs; (iii) to perk up the morale of O&M staff and officers and to attract 
new recruits to the post s.  The Committee would like the Ministry to act on the 
recommendations of the Committee and apprise the Committee accordingly.    
 

14 
 
Ideal location for STPs  
   Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
1.17 The experts who deposed before the Committee suggested that STPs must be 
located on the sand bed site of the river only as this is the only site where inorganic, 
organic, & microbiological loads will be managed integrally at minimum cost on 
sustainable basis. The potential of the sand bed must be assessed taking example of 
Ganga Yamuna confluence site at Allahabad, where during the Kumbh Mela, pollutant 
load of more than 10 m illion people at a time is managed by the sand bed. Taking note 
of the fact that sand is the nucleus of geology, the Committee recommended that due 
consideration be given to the location and use of sand beds in setting up of  
the STPs. The Committee further recommended that the feasibility of involving  
the corporate sector in setting up, operating and maintaining the sewage  
treatments plants and sewage networks on long term basis may also be  
explored so as to bring greater prof essionalism and efficiency to the working  
of STPs. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.18 The cabinet in its meeting held on 6 th January 2016 approved the adoption of 
Hybrid Annuity based Public Private Partnership (PPP) model for implementation of 
infrastructure projects under ‘NamamiGange’ in a financially sustainable, outcome 
oriented and accountable mode while addressing the  following four requirements  
a) Assurance of desired levels of performance,  
b) Assurance of continued performance over long term,  
c) Distinct accountability at entity level, and  
d) Sustainability, both technical and financial. 
 It is expected that responsible corpor ate entities shall come forward for bidding 
under hybrid annuity based PPP model which would bring in greater professionalism, 
efficient & sustainable operations of the STP. 
 
     

15 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.19 The Committee  note from the action taken reply that the cabinet in its 
meeting held on 6th January 2016 approved the adoption of Hybrid Annuity based 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) model for implementation of infrastructure 
projects under ‘Namami  Gange’.  The Committee hope that  corporate entities  
would come forward for bidding under hybrid annuity based PPP model thereby 
bringing in greater professionalism, efficiency to the working of  STPs.    
 So far as the recommendation of the Committee to set up STPs on the sand 
bed site of the river  being economical and sustainable, the M inistry has not 
responded to this  part of the recommendation.  The Committee would like the 
categorical response of the Ministry in this regard.   
 
Lack of scientific and technical resources 
    
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
 
1.20 The Committee had noted that the responsibility of Operations & Maintenance 
(O&M)of Sewerage works set up in connection with Ganga Rejuvenation rests with the 
State Governments. The Government of Uttar Pradesh admitted that there was 
contamination of water bodies and  there was an urgent need for setting up state-of-the-
art STPs and labs. The Committee had also observed that  number of sanctioned posts 
for technical and scientific personnel are lying vacant in Central Pollution Control Board. 
Asked about the environmental research being carried out by the universities in the 
context of depleting sub -surface and surface water r esources, rising pollutants and 
contamination of water bodies, the Secretary, Environment observed that the 
Committee had 'hit the nail on the head' and conceded the need for such studies given 
the 'enlarging responsibility' of the MoEF&CC. The Committee f urther note d that 
MoEF&CC had requested the Department of Expenditure for carrying out a study to 
assess the adequacy or otherwise of the extant manpower of CPCB in view of its 
enlarging responsibilities. The Committee were also apprised that despite 

16 
 
advertisements for filling up of the posts in CPCB, there is no enthusiastic response 
probably due to the reason that the posts are far from attractive for the talents required 
for recruitment.   The Committ ee had expressed their serious concern over lack of 
sufficient technical and scientific manpower in the Central Pollution Control Board and  
in the State Pollution Control Boards entrusted with the responsibility of  
pollution control, water quality testing, etc. Further, it is still a matter of far  
greater worr y and concern that the posts are lying vacant as the talent  
sought to be recruited find the pay and perquisites attached to the posts far  
from attractive. Considering the level of rising pollution and contamination  
of water bodies and the need for setting up state -of-the-art STPs and labs,  
the Committee had recommended that (a) the parameters and pay and perks for the 
manpower especially  technical for STPs and Labs may be revisited to attract right  
talents; (b) the Department of Expenditure should expedite the study to  
assess the manpower requirements of CPCB in view of its  
enlarging responsibilities and complete the same with in specified  
time and conclusive action be taken for filling up the posts  without delay;  
(c) suitable measures may be taken to ensure  availability of  
appropriately qualified and suitably trained manpower in requisite  
numbers for surveys and investigation, project preparation,  implementation, Operation 
and Maintenance(O&M) of sewerage  works, financial, organisational, legal, regulatory 
implementation and monitoring strategies of the projects; and  (d) the parameters so 
established may also be shared with the States  so that the SPCB also benefit from the 
action taken by the Union Government. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.21 The work study of non-scientific and non -technical posts of Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change has been winded up due to non -submission of 
requisite material/data/information by Ministry of Environment, Fores t & Climate 
Change. As regard the  work measurement s tudy of scientific and technical posts, 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has constituted a Committee with 
a Core Member of SIU. Last meeting of this Committee was held on 2nd February, 2016.  
The report has not yet been finalized.  

17 
 
The status of manpower required, sanctioned and posts lying vacant in the two projects 
‘Pollution Inventorization Assessment and Surveillance’(PIAS) and ‘Strengthening 
of Environmental Regulator- CPCB’ (SER) is as follows:  
Technical/Scientific Manpower required to be engaged in PIAS Project 
Positions Scientist 
‘B’ 
RA     
 (I, II & III) 
SRF JRF DEO Total 
Sanctioned post under 
PIAS 
0 31 31 31 4 97 
Presently available  0 23 6 0 2 31 
Proposed post  30 17 4 10 2 63 
 
 
Technical/Scientific Manpower required to be engaged in SER Project 
Positions Scientist 
‘B’ 
Scientist 
‘C’ 
Scientist 
‘D’ 
Scientist 
‘E’ 
Scientist 
‘F’ 
Taxonomist 
Sanctioned 
post under 
SER 
5 8 6 2 1 2 
Presently 
available  
0 7 4 2 0 0 
 
The reason for 66 post lying vacant under PIAS is as under: 
The CPCB was not allowed to recruit the entire sanctioned post at once accordingly 
phase wise recruitment was carried out, however maximum manpower available was 29 
RA-I & 4 SRF 
The proposal was sanctioned on 29 th Mar, 2011, however the permission for the 
engagement of entire manpower was allowed on April, 2013 and it was again asked not 
to engage remaining manpower on 18 th April, 2015. In between the maximum 30 RA 
were engaged during 2014 -15 and & 16 JRF/SRF in 20 13-14 however they did not 
continue for better opportunity and as on date the manpower available is  31 and that 
has been frozen on 8th Sep, 2016.  

18 
 
The reason for 11 post lying vacant under SER: Applications through advertisement has 
been received and are being processed for engagement. 
 
    Comments of the Committee 
1.22 The Committee highly deprecate that despite huge shortage of manpower 
particularly scientific and technical manpower in CPCB , urgent steps have not 
been taken to fill-up the vacancies.  What is more alarming is that CPCB was not 
allowed to recruit the entire sanctioned posts at once and phase wise recruitment 
was carried out, which was also withdrawn later.   Not only that  the way  work 
studies for non -scientific/non-technical and scientif ic/technical posts are being 
handled is deplorable.   Whereas the work study of non -scientific and non -
technical posts was winded up due to non -submission of requisite data by the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, the report of the Committe e 
constituted for work study of scientific and technical manpower in CPCB is being 
delayed which is evident from the fact that last meeting of this Committee was 
held more than one year before.   What is more worrying is the problem being 
faced in retention of young manpower  being recruited.  The Committee conclude 
from the aforesaid scenario, a sorry state of affairs with regard to recruitment and 
handling of manpower in CPCBs which calls for urgent and immediate action.  
The Committee while reiterating t heir concerns would like the Ministry to take 
action upon their recommendation and apprise the Committee accordingly.   
 
Incentives to Small Scale Industries for ZLD  
   Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
1.23 The Committee had observed that many of the GPIs are small scale in nature but 
employing substantial numb er of people put together. The G overnment is yet to dispel 
the apprehension that these units may be using obsolete technology in their production 
processes which may not be trea ting the effluents resulting in their being discharged 
into the river Ganga or its tributaries. The Committee  were apprehended that if hefty  
penalties were imposed on these small scale units or the units were closed down, many 

19 
 
people will lose their emplo yment and source of livelihood. The Committee therefore 
had recommended that-  
(i) tax and non tax incentives may be offered to the units which are  adopting new 
technologies with considerable amount of investments to become Zero Liquid Discharge 
(ZLD) units; (ii) the availability of easy finance may be ensured at affordable  
rates from the banks and or Interest Subvention and Viability Gap  Funding (VGF) may 
be given exped itiously; and  (iii) these units may be provided technical knowhow from  
Government owned academic and research institutes at  subsidised rates so that they 
become ZLDs. 
    Reply of the Government 
 
1.24 Incentives to Small Scale Industries for ZLD  
To reduce financial liability on SSI, NMCG has proposed a 20 MLD ZLD – based 
CETP for tannery cluster at Jajmau after due consideration of applicable environmental 
regulatory norms, control of O & M mechanism and impact on receiving environment of 
proposed CETP. Further NMCG has completed the process of Diagnostic Study and 
Feasibility Report(DS&F R) for management of wastewater generated from textile 
clusters at Pilkuwa, Farrukhabad, Rooma and Mathura. Process modification cum clean 
technology adoption has been considered in DPR and DS&FR. All financial liability 
arising out of these preparatory st udies are being met through NMCG fund to support 
the SSI. 
Based on inspection of 355 units during the last one year, the waste water 
generation from GPIs has been found reduced by achieving ZLD in 4 units of Pulp and 
paper sector, while 44 out of 67 such units have achieved the prescribed norms of water 
consumptions.  In distillery sector, 17 units out of 32 operational (including two brewery) 
have installed MEE and Bio -composting/ incineration to achieve ZLD.  In sugar sector, 
54 out of 57 operational unit s have provisioned for re -use of treated water for irrigation, 
and of them 52 units have achieved water conservation norms.  Also, 39 sugar units 
have installed mini-cooling tower for recycling of waste water.  
    

20 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.25 While taking note of some of the incentives being given to Small Scale 
Industries for ZLD, which include meeting all the financial liabilities arising out of 
preparatory studies for 20 MLD ZLD and a project for management of wastewater 
generated from textiles clusters through NMCG fund, the Committee would like to 
be apprised about the status of setting up of these projects.  The Committee are 
happy to note the outcome of inspection of 355 units which have installed 
technology to achieve ZLD/achieved prescribed n orms of water 
consumption/achieved water conservation norms , which clearly indicates the 
sensitivity of SSI to the environmental issues  as observed in the Committee’s 
original recommendation.  These Small Scale Industries need more Government 
support as r ecommended by the Committee viz . (i) tax and non tax incentives 
may be offered to the units which are adopting new technologies with 
considerable amount of investments to become Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) 
units; (ii) the availability of easy finance may b e ensured at affordable  
rates from the banks and or Interest Subvention and Viability Gap Funding (VGF) 
may be given expeditiously; and (iii) these units may be provided technical 
knowhow from Government owned academic and research institutes at 
subsidised rates so that they become ZLDs.  The Committee would like to have 
categorical response of the Ministry in this regard.   
 It has been stated in the reply that based on inspection of 355 units during 
the last one year, the waste water generation from GPIs has been found reduced.  
During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee had b een 
apprised that 727 units were inspected during the year 2014 which indicates 
reduced number of inspection s carried on during last year.  The Committee in 
this r egard would like to be apprised of the number of inspection s undertaken 
during each year since 2014 and the reasons for reduction in the number of 
inspections.   
 
 

21 
 
Implementation and status of IMG recommendations on seven rivers 
    Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 
1.26 The Committee had observed that the inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) constituted in 
July, 2012 to study environmental flow of Ganga , noticed that the implementation of all 
the Hydro Electric Power Projects (HEPPs ) on the Bhagirathi and Alakananda will lead 
to 81% of River Bhagirathi and 65% of River Alakananda getting affected with extensive 
implications for other needs of the society and the river itself. The expert Committee 
also noticed that there are a large n umber of projects which have very small distances 
between them leaving little space for river to regenerate and revive. They therefore had 
recommended that seven rivers, including Nayar, Bal Ganga river, Rishi Ganga, Assi 
Ganga, dhauli Ganga ( upper reache s) , birari Gand bhyunde Ganga should be kept in 
pristine form, no further hydropower developments should take place in this region, and 
environmental Upgradation should be taken up in these basins extensively. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the following :–  
(i) acceptance or otherwise of the IMG’s recommendations by the Government of India; 
(ii) specific steps taken to upgrade the environment in the said  basins and the impact of 
these measures on the environment; and 
(iii) approvals granted for hydro power projects, if any, contrary to the recommendations 
of IMG, along with the specific reasons for such approvals. 
Reply of the Government 
1.27 The Ministry in their action taken replies apprised the Committee as follows:- 
(i)  An inter-Ministerial group was set up under the chairmanship of Sh. B.K. Chaturvedi 
Member (Energy), Planning Commission vide MoEF letter no. B -12014/4/2012-
NMCG/NGRBA dated 15.06.2012 for the various objectives including suggesting 
environmental flow requirement for various stretches of Bhagirathi, Alaknanda and other 
tributaries of river Ganga and to review the environmental impacts of projects proposed 
on these tributaries of river Ganga and recommend necessary remedial action. Report 
of the IMG on issues relating  to river Ganga, submitted in April, 2013. Acceptance or 

22 
 
otherwise of IMG’s recommendations is to be replied by Ministry of Environment, Forest 
& Climate Change (MoEF&CC). 
(ii) The Environment & Forest Clearance is accorded to a Hydro Electric Project afte r 
complying all the statutory norms / requirements laid down by MoEF&CC in this regard. 
Each and every project passes through a very elaborate and extensive process of 
environmental clearance. Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of every aspect of 
environment i.e physical, terrestrial and aquatic is carried out for each and every project 
which requires Environmental clearance as per the extant laws. Based on the findings 
of the EIA studies, various Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), be it the 
Catchment Area Treatment for arresting the soil erosion from the degraded catchments; 
Biodiversity Conservation and Management, to conserve the rich biodiversity of the 
area; Fisheries Management for conservation, propagation and replenishment of fish in 
the river  system/reservoir; Restoration of muc h dumping/quarry sites; Landscaping; 
Green Belt Development etc. are formulated and implemented in true form and spirit. 
The stipulation regarding the release of Environmental flows is also being laid down by 
MOEF & CC,  while according environmental clearance to a project. Besides, strict 
monitoring of the implementation of environmental safeguards is required to be 
undertaken regularly by the Central and State regulatory Agencies. 
(iii)  No Hydro Electric Project on riv er Ganga has been concurred by CEA after 
submission of the aforesaid report in the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.28 The Committee  are concerned to note the way,  the Ministry has tried to 
sidetrack the recommendation of the Committee by stating that the issue 
regarding acceptance or otherwise  of the inter -Ministerial Group ’s 
recommendations is to be replied by the Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change.  The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvena tion being the nodal Ministry for water resources and river 
development on their own would have pursued with the MoEF&CC about the 
status of recommendations of the inter-Ministerial Group.  Even when pointed out 
by the Committee, the Ministry in a casual w ay has stated that the issue is be 

23 
 
responded by the Ministry of Environmen t, Forest and Climate Change.  While 
deploring the way, the Ministry has taken the recommendation of the Committee, 
they would like the Ministry to pursue the issues with MoEF&CC  and respond to 
the specific points raised in the original recommendations.   
 
Nirmalta and Aviralta of the river 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
 
1.29 The Committee had noted that in pursuance of Hon’ble Supreme Court’s 
judgment dated 13.08.2013, MoEF&CC constituted an Expert body under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. Ravi Chopra, member, NGRBA and Director, Peoples’ Science 
Institute, Dehradun (i) to make a detailed study as to wheth er Hydro Electric Power 
Projects(HEPPs), existing and under construction, have caused environmental 
degradation and if so, to what extent , (ii) also whether such projects have contributed to 
the tragedy which occurred in the month of June, 2013 in Uttarak hand, and (iii) to 
examine the impact of  the proposed 24 HEPPs on the bio diversity in Alakananda and 
Bhagirathi river basins as identified by Wild Life Institute of India (WII). The Committee 
had noted that having been dammed at Tehri in western Uttarakha nd, the Ganga 
descends onto the plains, only to be robbed of its water by huge diversions through the 
Upper Ganga Canal at Haridwar, which reduces its discharge to mere 15 billion m3/yr 
and then by the Lower Ganga Canal near Aligarh. That leaves so little water in the 
Ganga that the dry -season discharge at Kanpur is merely 90 to 386 m3/ second, at 
Allahabad 279 to 997 m3/ second, and at Varanasi 278 to 1160 m3/second. Despite 
being joined by a number of tributaries, the Ganga is progressively polluted due t o 
heavy discharges at the rate of 3000 million liters per day from towns and cities, despite 
of sewage treatment plants varying from 13.5% in small cities to 27.8 to 50.4% in big 
cities - 329 million kilolitres. Nearly 50% of waste waters are discharged un treated into 
this lifeline of the central Indo -Gangetic Plain. Over 1.3 billion litres of sewage, 260 
million litres of industrial waste, runoff from 6 million tonnes of fertilizers and 9000 
tonnes of pesticides used in agriculture, and very large quantiti es of solid waste are 
daily released into the Ganga. Taking into consideration these facts of pollution, the 
Ganga water can no longer be described as life -giving and holy. On the contrary the 

24 
 
Ganga has been declared as one of the ten most polluted rivers of the world by WWF 
International, Switzerland. Notably,  Secretary Water Resources candidly admitted the 
connect between 'nirmalta  and aviralta' and stated that there could be no 'nirmalta' 
without 'aviralta'. Surprisingly, asked whether damming of the riv er would be useful for  
controlling pollution or it will help aggravate pollution, Secretary,  
Environment was not in a position to give a definitive answer as he felt that  
it would depend on multiple factors. Further, the Government could not  
furnish the de cadal data of the lean and non -lean season flows in the Ganga  
right from 1951. The Committee we re of the considered view that the  
Government in the CWC must collect and compile the data about the decadal  
flow, both of lean and non -lean period, at each stat ion/city including the 
spots from where the water we s diverted/impounded. To a pointed question  
whether the human ashes pollute the river, expert hydrologist made it  
emphatically clear that the burnt human ashes instead purify the river. The  
Committee note d that the expert body, appointed under the direction of the  
Hon'ble Supreme Court, has since submitted its report with regard to the  
impact of HEPP existing and under construction and their impact on  
environment including landslides and biodiversity, they  would like to be  
informed of the action taken or proposed to be taken on each of the  
recommendations and the impact of acceptance & implementation on the  
Nirmalta and also Aviralta of the Ganga within six months of presentation of  
this report. Further, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the decadal data of the 
lean and non -lean season flows in the Ganga right from 1951 from points of  
origins to major towns and sites right up to Haldia. 
    Reply of the Government 
1.30 The decadal data of lean seas on and non -lean season flows in the Ganga from 
the date of opened site to October, 2016 from point of origins to Haldia is given at 
(Annexure - VI).  
 
 

25 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.31 The Committee had desired the Government to furnish the details and 
outcome of the report submitted by expert body appointed under the direction of 
Hon'ble Supreme Court  to find out the environmental degradation, impact of 
HEPPs on environment including landslides and biodiversity. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that the  Ministry has not furnished the information with respect 
to action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations contained in the 
above report.    The Committee in this regard would like to be apprised of the 
status of implementation of each of the recommendations.   In pursuance of the 
other part of the recommendation of the Committee,   the M inistry has furnished 
the decadal data of lean season and non-lean season flows in the Ganga from the 
date of opened site  to October, 2016 from point of origins to Haldia.  The glance 
at the data indicates that at some of the points like Rishikesh, D eoprayag, 
Kanpur, Gandhighat , Farakka and Fat ehgarh particularly at Allahabad  and 
Bhitaura the average monsoon flow has decreased over the years.  Similarly, 
average non -monsoon flow has slightly decreased at Kanpur, Allahabad, 
Hathidah, Azmabad , Bhitaura, S hahzadpir, Varanasi, Fathegarh and Kachla 
Bridge. The Committee emphasize that  the increase/decrease in water flow  and 
the pollution level/pollutants over decades need to be analyzed in detail by the 
experts and the Committee be apprised accordingly.   
 
Arsenic in Ganga basin 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 31) 
 
1.32 The Committee in their 1 st report (16 th Lok Sabha) on  
Occurrence of High Arsenic Content in Ground Water pertaining to M/o WR,RD &GR,  
expressing concern over presence of arsenic in ground water in the Ganga - 
Brahmaputra plain, had recommended that a time bound programme be  implemented 
for identifying the  causes and to find effective remedies in arsenic release. The M/o 
WR,RD&GR in their interim  action taken reply submitted that Inter Ministerial Group 
(IMG) has directed the National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee to take up a study 

26 
 
on the genesis of arsenic occurrence in Ganga-Brahmaputra Basin. The Committee had 
desired to be apprised of time  frame within which the study by NIH, Roorkee regarding 
the genesis of arsenic occurrence in Ganga- Brahmaputra basin would be completed. In 
the interim, the measures taken by the GoI to warn the people in the affected  belts of 
the presence of arsenic in water and the precautions which should  
be taken to help minimise or avoid health hazards be given wide publicity.  
In conclusion,  having regard to the enormity of the challenges and taking  
note of the repeated solemn assertions of the Prime Minister to rejuvena te the  
Ganga and to make a Swatc h Bharat, the Committee  had  reiterated the imperative 
need for setting up an overarching an d all empowered apex authority/body tasked  
exclusively with the responsibility of rejuvenation of the Ganga so as to restore  
its pristine form as expeditiously as possible. Ganga, around which grew Indian  
civilisation and legend, continues to be the lifeli ne of 43 per cent of India's  population 
and a river of faith to millions of devotees within and beyond the  shores of India. The 
rising demographic pressure, growing untamed urbanization  and industrialization, 
continue to aggravate pollution in the Ganga rendering the Ganga not only non-potable, 
unfit for bathing purposes but also extremely  hazardous over long stretches. The 
impounding of river water obstructing its flow, diversion of water for drinking, agricultural 
and industrial purposes and the  pollutant load has rendered the Ganga dry and parch, 
and a sewer over long  stretches in the up -stream areas. Renowned hydrologists and 
experts on river  dynamics and water management testified before the Committee that 
the Ganga bears no comparison with any river of  the world because of its highest point 
of origin, steep gradient, kinetic energy and water quality. Indiscriminate  
anthropogenic interventions including indiscriminate construction of HPPs in the  
upper reaches of the highly fragile Himalayas coupled with 80 to 90 per cent of  
water diversion and discharge of e ffluents by 144 drains and entry of solid waste  
from non point sources have only aggravated the pollutant load of the Ganga.  The 
Committee ardently hope d that the Government would give earnest  consideration to 
their recommendation and implement them expeditiously for  rejuvenation of the Ganga, 
the life line of millions around which India civilization  and culture grew, by July, 2018 
without further time and cost escalation. 
 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
A. Brief Scenario of Arsenic concentration and Arsenic genesis in Ganga -
Brahmaputra-Meghna Basin 
 
1.33 The Ganga-Brahmaputra-Meghna (GBM) river basin, which have an area of 1.7 
million km2  is drained jointly by the River Ganga, River Brahmaputra (also known as 
River Jamuna in Bangladesh), River Meghna and their numerous tributaries and 
distributaries. The GBM basin has population more than 150 million and considered as 
the world largest fluvio-deltaic systems and also as one of the most populous regions of 
the planet. In recent few decades, with the increasing demand of groundwater for 
domestic, irrigation (round the year for food production), industry and the growing 
population led the extensive exploitations of fresh and potable groundwater. Beside this, 
indiscriminate use of the rivers and surface water and the introduction of high -yielding 
dry-season agricultural activities accelerated the demand of irrigation water in the GBM 
basin (Harvey et al. 2005). This led to the shift of water supply policy from surface water 
to groundwater. As a consequence, several million wells (ranging from domestic 
handpump to motor -driven deep tube -well) were installed to meet drinking, irrigation, 
and industrial water demands (Smith et al. 2000; BGS/DPHE/MML 2001; Harvey et al. 
2005; Horneman et al. 2004). However, in the present scenario, a large part of the GBM 
basin, groundwater was determined to have elevated concentrations of arsenic (As) 
more than 10 μ g/l. Regarding the source of such high level arsenic, it has been 
hypothesized that the non -point source, geogenic(As), mostly occurs in the Holocene 
shallow aquifers and probably has been mobilized from the sediments by redox 
reactions (e.g., Saha 1991; B hattacharya et al. 1997; CGWB 1997; Nicksonet al. 1998; 
BGS/DPHE/MML, 2001; McArthur et al. 2001, 2004; Ravenscroft et al. 2001; Harvey et 
al. 2002; Mukherjee 2006). Few previous estimates by researchers showed that more 
than 25% (McArthur et al. 2004) to 33% (Horneman et al. 2004) of the wells had been 
identified as contaminated by (As).  
 
There are a number of hypotheses on sources of Arsenic in groundwater and 
mobilization processes, however, from the researches carried out by investigators 
worldwide, it  was noted that identification of genesis of (As) in Ganga -Brahmaputra 

28 
 
basin and its mobilization processes are still to be established, because a number of 
issues are associated with the geochemical processes.    
 
B. Initiative taken by NIH-Roorkee on Arsenic genesis study  
Based on the  recommendations of Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) for Arsenic 
Mitigation, NIH-Roorkee to undertake “Studies on genesis of arsenic occurrence in 
Ganga-Brahamaputra basin”, in addition to four more R & D areas, had submitted a 
proposal with a budget estimate for Rs. 1785 lakh in the month of February, 2015 to 
MoWR, RD & GR. However, the decision on the approval of the budget allocation to 
NIH is awaited. After receiving fund from MoWR, RD & GR, the work envisaged on the 
study of genesis shall be completed within five years. 
As follow-up action of IMG recommendations, NIH under its internally funded R & 
D activities, has initiated the following two R&D studies, since April 2015. 
a)  Development of Website and e-Portal on "Mitigation and Remedy of Arsenic Menace 
in India". 
b) Alternate water supply management strategies in arsenic affected/vulnerable areas: 
Mapping of Arsenic affected zones/regions in Eastern U.P. (Balia district). 
  
 Limited progress on the first task was made due to non-availabilityof fund; while 
the advancement of the second study is satisfactory and its first phase would be 
completed by end of March, 2017. A brief report on the Arsenic study in the Balia district 
of U.P. is given at (Annexure - VIII). 
 
C. Arsenic genesis study and NIH future plan 
Most of the current hypotheses on As -genesis indicated that arsenic bearing 
sulphide minerals, mainly arsenopyrite (FeAsS) and their alternation products, might 
have been transported from the foothills of the Himalayas in th e geologic past and 
deposited in the alluvium formation of Ganga -Brahmaputra basin. These deposited As -
bearing minerals, under the recent alluvium, have been considered to be responsible for 
occurrence of arsenic in groundwater from the sediment phase by t he process of 
reductive dissolution owing to the in -situ microbial activities under anxious condition. 
The relation between the redox behaviour of arsenic and high arsenic anomaly in 

29 
 
groundwater is a subject that needs thorough investigations and geochemic al analysis. 
Genesis study of arsenic in different parts of Ganga -Brahmaputra basin would involve 
the following course of actions by a number of expert organizations, in addition to NIH: 
 
 Hydro-geochemical and hydro -geological characterization of alluvial sediment at 
the As-affected zones from depth 20 m to100 m bgl along the different piezometric 
transect,  
 Detailed geomorphological and hydrological characterization of the As -affected 
areas, 
 Seasonal hydro geochemical sampling and analysis of groundwater and surface 
water of the arsenic affected areas, 
 Isotopic characterization  of groundwater and sediment samples,  
 Mineralogical characterization of the sediments,   
 Study of retention or mo bility of As under different redox (oxidation –reduction) 
conditions at the interaction zone of different aqueous phase and mineral phases 
in the sediments, 
 The role of natural and anthropogenic activities and their influences on controlling  
the redox conditions in concerned aquifers 
 To study the above aspects in the Ganga basin, NIH together with IIT Kharagpur, 
IIT Kanpur, CGWB, and National Water Mission in collaboration Herriot Watt University, 
Edinburgh-UK, and Queen's University Belfast -UK submitted a Project Proposal, 
entitled "Study of groundwater dynamics and geochemical processes of arsenic 
mobilization in the Middle Ganga aquifers for in-situ arsenic remediation" in the month of 
October, 2015 in response to the Newton-Bhabha project call by Min. of Earth Sciences, 
Govt. of Ind ia and NERC -UK,. However, the project proposal was declined for support 
on administrative ground. Currently, NIH -Roorkee has taken another new initiative with 
a prior consultation, to develop a project proposal on Arsenic study involving potential 
Indian and UK partners and its submission to the forthcoming 'Newton -Bhabha" call on 
Water Quality by DST, India & NERC-UK, which is likely to come. 
 
 
 

30 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.34 The Committee are appalled  to note the way different Arsenic 
Genesis Studies proposals have been dealt with by the Government as is 
apparent from the action taken reply, even when the gravity of the situation has 
been acknowledged.  The proposal submitted by NIH-Roorkee to undertake 
“Studies on genesis of arsenic occurrence in Ganga -Brahamaputra basin”, in 
addition to four more R & D areas, based on the recommendations of Inter -
Ministerial Group (IMG) for Arsenic  Mitigation  is awaiting financial approval  of 
Rs.1785 lakh MoWR, RD & GR since  2015.  Further a  Project Proposal, entitled 
"Study of groundwater dynamics and geochemical processes of arsenic 
mobilization in the Middle Ganga aquifers for in -situ arsenic remediation”, to 
study various aspects identified for arsenic genesis in the Gan ga basin as 
submitted in October, 2015  by NIH together with IIT Kharagpur, IIT Kanpur, 
CGWB, and National Water Mission in collaboration Herriot Watt University, 
Edinburgh-UK, and Queen's University Belfast -UK was declined for support on 
administrative ground.  The Committee also note that limited progress on the task 
regarding development of Website and e -Portal on "Mitigation and Remedy of 
Arsenic Menace in India"  as taken by NIH could be made due to non -availability 
of fund.  The Committee taken exception to the manner different studies are 
denied funds/support by the different Ministries/Departments.  While expressing 
strong concern, the Committee would like the Min istry to convey their concerns 
to the concerned Ministries as well as to Finance Ministry in the strongest terms.  
The response thereto may be communicated urgently as and when received as a 
follow-up to the reiteration of the recommendation by the Committee.   
 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the findings of a study being 
conducted by NIH under its internally funded R&D activities on alternate water 
supply management strategies in arsenic affected/vulnerable areas: Mapping of 
Arsenic affected zo nes/regions in Eastern U.P. (Balia district),  the first phase of 
which was supposed to be completed by the end of March, 2017 as stated in the 
action taken reply.     

31 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Introductory  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The Committee note that two main source tributaries, the Bhagirathi, originating 
from the Gangotri Glacier at "Gaumukh", and the Alaknanda, originating from the 
Satopanth glacier in the Himalayas confluence at Devprayag in Uttarakhand and form the 
Ganga. The Ganga, covering a length of 2525 km, traverses through the States of 
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal passing through 918 
towns and 1649 Gram Panchayats taking the pollutants of all human settlements and 144 
drains. The Yamuna is the largest tributary of the Ganga in terms of drainage area and 
accounts for 46% of the Ganga basin. The Ganga river basin inclusive of its all tributaries, 
is the largest river basin in India co vering a landmass of 8,61,404 sq. km and sustaining 
43 per cent of India's population, besides being the river of eternal faith from time 
immemorial for the people. Apart from providing water for drinking and irrigation, it has 
had great environmental, economic, cultural and religious significance for its water quality 
hailed as ambrosia and life sustainer. 'The story of the Ganga, from her source to sea, 
from old times to new', is indeed 'the story of India's Civilization'. However, with the 
growing uncontrolled urbanization, lopsided industrialization, environmental degradation, 
over drawl of water from the river and draining of polluting domestic sewage, dangerous 
industrial effluents and other hazardous anthropogenic interventions have rendered the 
Ganga as one of the top ten most polluted rivers of the world fuelling the apprehension 
that if urgent and strong prophylactic and preventive measures are not taken, it may 
become a dry -dead river in times not very far off. The Committee also note that 
concerned about the health of the river, the Government of India launched, Ganga Action 
Plan I (GAP I) in 1985. To make up the shortcomings of GAP I, GAP II was launched in 
1993, togethe r incurring an expenditure of ₹4168 crore. Seriously concerned over the 
burgeoning pollution levels, Government of India set up the NGRBA in 2009 for 
conservation of the Ganga and for maintenance of environmental flows through a 

32 
 
comprehensive river basin approach, which again proved far from adequate. The 
Government of India therefo re constituted an Integrated Ganga 151 Conservation 
Mission, called the Namami Gange in 2014 with the resolute will to arrest the pollutants 
entering into the Ganga with component programmes of rehabilitation and upgradation of 
the existing STPs and interc eption and diversion of the drains falling into the river. The 
flagship programme, Namami Gange was approved on May 13, 2015 with a budget of     
₹20,000 crores for the next 5 years, a significant four-fold increase compared to the entire 
expenditure of ₹4168 crore right from the launching of GAP I in 1985. The Namami 
Gange Programme, with a multi -layered and multi-Ministerial monitoring mechanism, is a 
convergence of all existing schemes and new interventions and includes its all tributaries 
including the Yamuna for Ganga rejuvenation. The repeated assertion of the Government 
to rejuvenate the Ganga by July, 2018*, gives a message of hope. The Committee now 
proceed with examination of the ongoing programmes and interventions to rejuvenate the 
Ganga. 
  
 Since it is introductory part, Ministry has not furnished any reply. 
 
Creation of an overarching and empowered authority for Ganga  
rejuvenation 
    Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 The representative of Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) admitted that pollution load in river Ganga has been increasing over the 
years due to rapid urbanization , industrialization and increase in population. Extraction of 
water for irrigation, industrial, drinking purpose, etc. leading to inad equate flows is further 
compounding the problem. There is huge gap in sewage treatment capacity not only on 
the Ganga main stem but also in the entire Ganga basin covering 11 states. The total 
estimated sewage generation in five states (Uttarakhand, Uttara  Pradesh, Bihar, 
Jharkhand and West  Bengal) on the Ganga main stem  is 7301 Million Liters Per day 
(MLD) where as the available treatment capacity is only 2126 MLD. Treatment capacity of 
1188 MLD is under construction  or at approval stage, leaving a gap of 3987 MLD. The 
consortium of Seven IITs which prepared Ganga River basin management Plan estimated  
that total sewage generation of 11 states is 12051 MLD as against the available treatment 
capacity of 5717 MLD leaving a gap of 6334 MLD. There are 764 GPIs such as tanneries, 

33 
 
pulp & paper, sugar , textiles, chemicals,  etc, generating 501 MLD of waste water, 
substantial part of which is being allowed to flow into the Ganga untreated. Eleven Ganga 
Basin states account for 45 % of the total chemical fertilizer consumption amounting to 10 
million tons per year. Such high consumption leads to  disposal of high levels of nitrogen 
and phosphorus which eventually drains into surface and subsurface water which is part 
of the Ganga river system. As per estimates, run off from 
arable lands contains up to 70mg/l of nitrogen and phosphorus ranging from .05 -1.1 mg/l, 
with potential to raise the nutrient level to a considerable degree in stream waters. As per  
2011 census, 33.64 Lacs households in the five main states do not hav e an access to 
toilet facilities and out of these 28.91 Lacs households defecate openly and 4.72 have an 
access to  community toilets. In addition, an estimated 14,000 metric tons per day of 
Municipal Solid Waste generated from Class -I and Class -II cities/towns situated on the 
main stem of Ganga out of which substantial part was being dumped into the Ganga until 
the recent past.  Deeply concerned and worried that the Ganga has become one of the  
top ten most polluted reivers of the world owing to uncontrolled urbanisation, 
lopsided industrialisation over drawl of water from the river and discharge of  
extremely hazardous industrial pollutants and domestic sewage, alrmed due  
to the incalculable damage being caused to the 'Nirmalta' and 'Aviralta' of the  
river; ta king note of the multiplicity of authorities both at the Union and  
States level, and having regard to lack of effective synergy between the  
stakeholders, the Committee recommend that an overarching and fully  
empowered authority, comprising of the represent atives of all the concerned  
Union Ministries and State Governments be set up for securing the 'nirmalta'  
and 'aviralta' of the Ganga by July 2018. The Committee are quite sanguine  
that as assured by the Minister for WR, RD&GR in Parliament and solemnly  
affirmed by the Prime Minister, the Ganga will be reguvenated and restored to  
its prestine form by July 2018.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Towards the objective of rejuvenating & restoring river Ganga to her pristine 
form, the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 21 st September, 2016 approved “ The 
River Ganga (Rejuvenation, Protection and Management) Authorities Order, 2016”  

34 
 
which has since been published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 3 
sub section (ii) dated 7th October, 2016. The earlie r authority, National Ganga River 
Basin Authority (NGRBA), constituted under the provisions of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 has been dissolved with effect from the 7-10-2016.   
The Notification envisages five tier structure at national, state and  district level to take 
measures for prevention, control and abatement of environmental pollution in river 
Ganga and to ensure continuous adequate flow of water so as to rejuvenate the river 
Ganga as below; 
1. National Ganga Council under chairmanship of Hon’ ble Prime Minister of 
India, 
2. Empowered Task Force (ETF) on river Ganga under chairmanship of Hon’ble 
Union Minister of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, 
3. National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG), 
4. State Ganga Committees; and 
5. District Ganga Committees in very specified district abutting river Ganga and 
its tributaries in the states, 
 Further, NMCG has been provided with two tier management structure 
comprising of Governing Council and Executive Committee. Both of them are headed 
by Dire ctor General, NMCG. Executive Committee has been authorized to accord 
approval for all projects up to Rs. 1000 crore. Similar to structure at national level, State 
Programme Management Groups (SPMGs) act as implementing arm of State Ganga 
Committees. Thus the newly created structure attempts to bring all stakeholders on one 
platform to take a holistic approach towards the task of Ganga cleaning and 
rejuvenation.  
 
Consultation with States about mode of execution and speedy approvals 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 The Committee observe that the objective of 'Namami Gange' Programme is to  
arrest the pollution entering into and to rejuvenate the Ganga. In order to achieve the  
objective, the programme proposes to undertake activities such as rehabilitation and  
upgradation of existing STPs; Interception & Diversion of all 114 drains falling into the 

35 
 
river through 5 basin states (Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand & West 
Bengal) and creation of additional treatment c apacity. The Committee also note that the 
programme will be executed in accordance with NGRBA Programme Framework through 
(a) the States in  conventional mode, i.e. in the implementation arrangement (with current 
and other appropriate implementing agencies) and/or (b) PPP mode and/or (c) SPV mode 
with up to 100  percent capital infusion by Government) and/or (d) Central Public Sector 
Undertakings/ Central Government Departments and/or (e) Academic Institutes/Research 
Institutes / Autonomous Bodies or any other appropriate mode for executing the activities 
of this proposal. On being  enquired by the Committee, the State Government of Uttar 
Pradesh, vide their letter dated  26.11.2015, referring to their 23 project proposals sent to 
the ‘National Mission for Clean Ganga’ (NMCG), submitted that the proposals which have 
been sent to the GoI were yet to be approved even after a lapse of six months. The State 
government apprehended that  Government of India was planning to implement these 
projects through PPP Mode which  seems to be a remote possibility in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh. Further, State Government felt that abatement of pollution in river Ganga can be 
achieved with implementation of upgraded  parameters for treatment of sewage schemes 
i.e. including sewage netw ork in all main towns  and with simultaneous upgradation of 
existing sewage treatment units under ‘Namami Gange’. The Committee are concerned to 
note that State Governments’ views  have, apparently, not been taken into consideration 
before finalizing the mode of execution of sewage projects under ‘Namami Gange’ as one 
of the major  states (Uttar Pradesh) is not in favour of execution of the projects through  
PPP Mode. Since the rehabilitation, upgradation and construction of additional  sewage 
treatment projects under ‘Namami Gange’ is a time bound programme,  and the Ganga 
has to be rejuvinated by July 2018, the Committee recommend that the views of the state 
Governments may be taken on board before  deciding on the mode of execution of a 
sewage treatment project with the  sole objective of commissioning of the projects as 
expeditiously as possible.  Further, the proposals submitted by the State Governments 
may be approved  with due dispatch and without further loss of time. Besides, 
simultaneous upgradation of the ex isting sewage works and provision of comprehensive  
sewage schemes including sewage networks in all major towns may be  given urgent 
consideration by the Government of India and urgent and  necessary policy corrections 

36 
 
made under intimation to the Committee within six months of presentation of this report to 
the House. 
Reply of the Government 
 Sewerage management of the town is essentially the mandate of the concerned 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs).  However, it has been observed that ULBs have not been 
able to create adequate Sewerage Infrastructure, primarily because of non-availability of 
adequate funds. Further, it has been observed that significant sewage treatment 
capacity (STP) under earlier schemes such as Ganga Action Plan (GAP) – I, GAP-II, 
National River Conservation Plan (NRCP), etc. are either non -functional or operating at 
sub optimal performance due to poor operation and maintenance of the assets by the 
ULBs. 
 In order to address the issues that acted as road blocks for previous  efforts to 
clean ri ver Ganga, a proposal for putting in place a financial model for execution  of 
infrastructure projects under Namami Gange Programme on Hybrid Annuity based 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) model has been approved  by the Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 6 th January, 2016.  The approved model aims at implementation of 
infrastructure projects under ‘Namami Gange’ in a financially sustainable, outcome 
oriented and accountable mode while addressing the following four requirements 
a) Assurance of desired levels of performance, 
b) Assurance of continued performance over long term, 
c) Distinct accountability at entity level, and 
d) Sustainability, both technical and financial. 
 However, considering the implementation difficulties and taking into account the 
views of the State Governments, sewage infrastructure projects are also being taken up 
under Engineering Procurement and Construction (EPC) / Design Built Operate and 
Transfer (DBOT) mode. 
 As per notification dated 07.10.2016, Executive Committee of NMCG is 
competent to sanct ion projects upto Rs. 1,000 crore. In the two Executive Committee 
meeting held during the month of March, 2017, 19 project have been sanctioned for a 
total amount of Rs. 2,785 crore. The proposals received from States as well as the 

37 
 
proposals based on cond ition Assessment and Feasibility studies done by NMCG are 
being processed expeditiously with a view to sanction them at the earliest. 
 National Mission for Clean Ganga is primarily funding creation of Sewage 
Infrastructure by way of Interception and Divers ion and Sewage Treatment Plants. 
Sewage network is mainly taken up under Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urabn 
Transformation (AMRUT). However, need-based sewage network is also being included 
in the projects being sanctioned by NMCG.  
 
Optimum operation of STPs 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 The Committee note that due to huge gap between the installed capacity and 
actual sub-optimal operation of the STPs in the riparian states of the Ganga, the quantum 
of sewage which the STPs are supposed to have treated, is being allowed to flow into 
river Ganga untreated. Further, the constantly increasing demographic pressure and 
expanding, industrial and commercial activities continue to exacerbate the pollution levels 
as more sewage is allowed to be empti ed into the river Ganga untreated. Taking note of 
the huge gap between the installed capacity and  actual operational capacities of the 
STPs and deeply concerned over the  aggravated pollution levels and the shrinking of the 
river, the Committee  recommend that:- (i) specific reasons may be ascertained for the 
STPs operating at sub optimal capacities and since how long STP -wise and State-wise 
and the measures being taken to bridge the gaps;  (ii) responsibility be fixed for sub -
optimal utilisation of STPs;  (iii) the capacities of existing STPs, SPSs and sewage 
networks may be suitably enhanced or new ones set up to cater to the  increasing 
demographic pressure, expanding urbanisation,  industrialisation and the shrinking river 
with a clear perspective plan for next two decades. (iv) the approximate fund requirement 
to make the STPs  operational at optimal levels and to set up new ones be  worked out 
taking into account the rising pollution of at least  for next two decades; and  
(v) penalties be imposed for violating t he COD and BOD limits by  the polluting 
industries/cities. The Committee should like to be apprised of the tangible action  
taken in the matter within six months of the presentation of this Report.    
     

38 
 
Reply of the Government 
 There are 67 STPs located in various cities/ towns along the river Ganga with an 
installed capacity of 1240 MLD.  Out of these, based on monitoring of 35 STPs carried 
out by CPCB during April -December’2016, 17 were found to be complying with the 
extant standards while 14 were found to be non-operational.  While 4 STPs were found 
to be non-complying.  NMCG in association with State government and its agencies has 
already initiated an exercise to identify the reasons for sub-optimal level of operations of 
these STPs and also reasons fo r a large number of them being non -operational.  Base-
line information so gathered would be utilized to take suitable measures to address 
these causative reasons for non-functionality of STPs as well as their functioning below 
optimum levels. 
During December 2015 to January 2017, 573 inspection have been carried out 
covering 302 GPIs. 141 were complying, 96 were found non complying and 65 were 
found closed. Closure directions were issued to 45 non complying units, show cause 
notices to 37 and letters to 14 non complying units.  
As on 8 th March 2017, 577 GPIs have installed online continuous effluent 
monitoring system (OCEMS) system, out of which, real time reports are being captured 
at dashboard from 384 such installations. 
Directions were issued by CPCB u/s 18 (1) (b) of Water (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1974 vide letter dated 21/04/2015 to all State Pollution Control 
Boards/Pollution Control Committees to make mandatory for local/urban bodies to set up 
STPs o f adequate capacity and provide underground sewerage system to cover the 
entire local/urban areas and to bridge the treatment gap (Annexure - II). 
Directions were issued by CPCB u/s 5 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 vide 
letter dated 09/10/2015 for s ubmission of action plan for management of sewage and 
municipal solid waste generated fr om 118 towns identified along river  Ganga to 
municipal authorities/ULBs. A copy of the directions issued is given in Annexure - III. 
 
 
 

39 
 
Setting up of STPs in all 118 towns, periodic testing of treated  
water and setting up of river hydrology institute 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 The Committee note that Government have planned that the work of sewage 
treatment facilities in all 118 towns on the main stem of the Ganga will be tendered by 
June, 2016 and completed by 2019. It was also submitted that DPRs will be prepared 
for all the 118 priority towns by December, 2015. During field visit, it was brought to the 
notice of the  Committee that there is a serious apprehension about the quality of 
agricultural products from the fields irrigated by treated industrial waste water. There 
have also been reports of the people in certain areas of the riparian States prone to 
specific life-threatening diseases. The experts who deposed before the Committee also  
underlined the need for setting up institutions of river hydrology and dynamics.  Taking 
note of the fact that the work of sewage treatment facilities in  118 towns on the main 
stamp of the Ganga are to be tendered by J une 2016 and completed by 2019 and 
having regard to the assurance of the  Minister for WR, RD&GR, the Commitee would 
like the work of  construciton of sewage treatment projects to be expedited well before  
the deadline of June 2018. The Committee also recomme nd that the  treated waste 
water be tested periodically so as to allay the fear of  farmers and citizens about the 
fitness of the treated water for  agricultural uses. The results of such tests should be 
available in  public domain. Further, taking cognizance of the fact that there is no  
exclusive institution for river hydrology and river dynamics in the country, the Committee 
recommend that a national institute of  hydrology be set up in the Ganga basin and the 
works being done in  this regard in BHU and the Mah amana Institute of river hydrology, 
may be replicated or suitably financed by the Government to help  understand river 
anatomy, river morphology, dynamics, biota and other allied aspects for speedy 
rejuvenation of the Ganga and other rivers of the country. 
Reply of the Government 
National Institute of Hydrology is already functioning as an autonomous 
institution under Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation.  It is one of premier institute in the area of hydrology and water resour ces 
in India established with the main objective of undertaking, aiding, promoting and 

40 
 
coordinating systematic and scientific work in all aspects of hydrology. The Institute has 
its Headquarters at Roorkee (Uttarakhand), four regional centres at Belgaum, J ammu, 
Kakinada and Bhopal and two centres for Flood Management Studies at Guwahati and 
Patna. The Institute is well equipped to carry out computer, laboratory & field oriented 
studies. 
The work of monitoring and performance evaluation of installed STPs in 118 
towns is being carried out by CPCB. The monitoring is being carried out quarterly. The  
findings are tabulated below: 
State 
 
STP Status STPs Monitored 
No. of  
STPs 
State 
Installed 
Capacity 
(MLD)* 
No. of   
STPs 
State 
Installed 
Capacity 
(MLD) 
Utilized 
Capacity 
(MLD) 
S T P s 
Exceeding 
BOD 
Limits 
N o .  o f   
STPs not 
functional 
Uttarakhand 09 99.5 7 88 87 0 0 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
16 466.01 11** 293.6 211.95 3 2 
Bihar 06 153 Not monitored 
West 
Bengal 
36 521.45 17 204.91 35.2 1 12 
Total 67 1239.96     35 586.51 334.15 4  14 
*Not measured capacity given by CPCB 
**Includes Muzaffarnagar STP which is not on main stem of River Ganga 
The STPs, existing as well as being set up under the Namami Gange 
programme, are being provided with facilities of sampling and testing the samples at the 
designated laboratories so as to ensure that the extant standards are met by the 
operating STPs at all times.  There is a provision to equip new STPs with on -line effluent 
water quality monitoring for similar purpose.  The O&M provisions for newly established  
STPs provides that all payments are linked to performance of the STPs through on -line 
monitoring of effluents. 
 
 
 

41 
 
STPs in Bihar 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that CPCB assessment shows that there are 5 STPs in 
Bihar with an installed capacity of 140 Million Liters Per Day (MLD) and the actual 
utilization is 100 MLDs. However, the data furnished by the M/o WR,RD &GR on the 
status of STPs established under GAP I&II (Annexure -VII) shows that there are five 
STPs in Bihar with installed capacity of 120MLD only as against 140MLD stated by 
CPCB in their assessment. The Committee, therefore, ask the MOEF&CC and M/o WR, 
RD and GR to reconcile  the data and furnish the same to the Committee along with 
reasons for such discrepancies and the mechanism established to obviate such 
statistical mismatches which are critical to formulation of pollution control strategy. 
Reply of the Government 
The data of STPs for Bihar has been reconciled.  Discrepancy was noted in the 
data reported by CPCB as 140 MLD installed capacity whereas the MOWR, RD& GR 
reported 120 MLD for STPs in Bihar. The present status of installed capacity of STPs of 
Bihar given by CPCB and MoWR, RD and GR is tabulated below: 
CPCB Data MoWR, RD and GR Data 
S.No. STPs Installed 
Capacity 
(MLD) 
STPs Installed Capacity (MLD) 
1. Pahari, Patna  25 Pahari, Patna  25 
2 Chapara, Patna 2   
3. Beur, Patna 35 Beur, Patna 35 
4. Saidpur, Patna  45 Saidpur, 
Patna  
45 
5. Mattagajpur 33   
6.   Karmalichak 4 
7.   Bhagalpur 11 
 Total 140 Total 120 
 

42 
 
The difference is due to the two STPs i.e. Mattagajpur (33 MLD) and Chapara (2 
MLD) in CPCB data which are replaced by Karmalichak STP (4 MLD) and Bhagalpur 
STP (11 MLD) in MoWR, RD & GR data.  
The capacity of STPs given above in MoWR,RD&GR table is correc t. This has 
been reconciled from the web site of Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad, wh ich is responsible for 
maintaining the STPs in Bihar.   
 
Ideal location for STPs  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 The experts who deposed before the Committee suggested that STPs must be 
located on the sand bed site of the river only as this is the only site where inorganic, 
organic, & microbiological loads will be managed integrally at minimum cost on 
sustainable basis. The potential of the sand bed must be assessed taki ng example of 
Ganga Yamuna confluence site at Allahabad, where during the Kumbh Mela, pollutant 
load of more than 10 million people at a time is managed by the sand bed. Taking note 
of the  fact that sand is the nucleus of geology, the Committee recommend t hat due  
consideration be given to the location and use of sand beds in setting up of  the STPs. 
The Committee further recommend that the feasibility of involving  the corporate sector 
in setting up, operating and maintaining the sewage  treatments plants and sewage 
networks on long term basis may also be  explored so as to bring greater 
professionalism and efficiency to the working of STPs. 
Reply of the Government 
 The cabinet in its meeting held on 6 th January 2016 approved the adoption of 
Hybrid Annuity based Public Private Partnership (PPP) model for implementation of 
infrastructure projects under ‘Namami  Gange’ in a financially sustainable, outcome 
oriented and accountable mode while addressing the  following four requirements  
a) Assurance of desired levels of performance,  
b) Assurance of continued performance over long term,  
c) Distinct accountability at entity level, and  
d) Sustainability, both technical and financial. 

43 
 
 It is expected that responsible corpo rate entities shall come forward for bidding 
under hybrid annuity based PPP model which would bring in greater professionalism, 
efficient & sustainable operations of the STP. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.19 of Chapter - I) 
 
Timeline for securing ZLD by industrial units 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
The Committee observe that  apart from 144 drains spread across Uttarakhand, Uttar 
Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal  discharging 6614 Million Liters Per Day (MLD) of 
waste water into river Ganga, there are 13  drains discharging 853 MLD of waste water 
into tributaries of river Ganga viz. Ramganga and  Kali –East. Further, hundreds of Pulp 
& Paper industries, distilleries, Sugar, textile plants and  tanneries are emptying 
untreated industrial effluents into Ganga. The Committee are deeply  concerned to note 
that 440 tanneries operating in the main stem of Ganga are discharging  about 22 MLD 
of waste water, containing toxic chemical like Chromium (Cr6+), associated  with birth 
defects, and carc inogenic into the river Ganga. As a part of the drive to identify the 
industries discharging untreated industrial  effluents in the Ganga, the Committee 
observe that under NGRBA programme, 764 GPIs have been identified and the Central 
Pollution Control Boar d has completed one round of  inspections of 704 industries and 
has issued suitable directions. Reportedly, action has been  taken against 165 non -
complying industries under The Water (Prevention & Control of  Pollution) Act, 1974 and 
The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. Closure notices have been  issued to 48 GPIs. 
Further, the Committee note that CPCB has issued direction to all the 11  basin SPCBs 
on 5th February, 2014 to ensure that the GPIs install real -time effluent monitoring  
system for effective compl iance through self -regulatory mechanism before discharging  
effluents outside their premises.  The MoEF&CC in their presentation to the Committee 
submitted that distilleries and  textile units discharging untreated effluents into river 
Ganga will be made Zero  Liquid Discharge (ZLD) units by September and December, 
2016 respectively. However, furnishing a  different set of targeted dates for the same 

44 
 
purpose, M/o WR, RD and GR in a written reply  submitted that distilleries and textile 
units will be made ZLD units by March, 2016 and March, 2017 respectively. Similarly, as 
per the action plan furnished by MoEF&CC, tanneries are  proposed to be made ZLD 
units within  2 years from DPR preparation ( July, 2015) which is  different from the 
targeted date (March, 2017) furnished by M/o WR, RD &GR. In respect of polluting pulp 
and paper units both the Ministries stated that by March, 2017 these will be  made ZLD 
units. 
 The Committee also observe that the work on making the polluting units ZLD 
units is  in incipient stage a s the Ministries are still considering and evaluating the 
proposals received for CETPs and identifying the institutes for preparing DPRs for the 
purpose. Further, to  minimize the water consumption and waste water discharge from 
the Pulp and Paper sector and to make them ZLD units , CPCB is still in the process of 
developing protocols in  consultation with technical experts. The Committee find the 
deadlines prescribed  for the grossly polluting units to become ZLD units rather 
unrealistic and far from practical. The Committee, therefore recommend that  (i) both the 
Ministries of EF&CC & WR, RD & GR should jointly have a  relook at the targets set for 
completion of the said works and ensure that both the industries become ZLD by March, 
2017; and  (ii) The evaluati on of the projects be done on regular basis and  
position of the review reflected in the Report of the Ministry laid in  
Parliament annually. The Committee be apprised of the actual progress of the projects 
within six months of submission of this report to Parliament. 
Reply of the Government 
Proposal for ZLD based system for Tannery cluster at Jajmau, Kanpur has been 
prepared and discussed with stakeholders. However, the industrial association have still 
to respond to the proposal for its adoption. 
For Textile, 5 clusters in UP (Phikua, Mathura, Rooma, Bhadoi and Farukabad) 
have been identified. Diagnostic Study and feasibility report for adoption of ZLD based 
system has been completed. The industrial association are yet to give their consent on 
the proposal for its adoption. 
MoEF has notified effluent standards for Textile units (10 Oct 2016) as well as 
CETP (1 Jan 2016). The draft proposal had envisaged ZLD, but the final notification 

45 
 
doesn’t mandate adoption of ZLD based system. This has facilitated th e individual units 
as well as CETP to adhere with the discharge norms instead of adopting the ZLD based 
system, which is optional.  
 Action Plans for water conservation and attaining Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) 
for all the five key sectors have been finali zed and a draft proposal for revision 
standards including stringency of provisions has been submitted by CPCB.  
 
Funding of STPs and O&Ms 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 The Committee note that sewage infrastructure  projects such as STPs, I&D, 
sewage pumping stations, etc., are awarded on the basis of  competitive tenders under 
‘Namame Gange’ programme. However, as stated by Government  of Bihar, the Union  
Government provides funds for these projects on the basis of project  approval cost. 
Further, the Committee note that U.P. Jal Niagam, the Implementing Agency  
for all pollution control works on behalf of Urban Local Bodies in U.P. do not have 
sufficient funds for Operation & Maintenance (O&M) of pollution control works. Similarly, 
the Government o f Bihar stated that purchase of land for STPs and other sewage 
infrastructure works is creating a heavy burden on the state Government. Since the 
STPs and I&D  projects are awarded on the basis of open competitive biddings, the  
Committee recommend that the project proposals may be considered based  
on tendering cost by the Government of India. As any delay in creating  
required sewage infrastructure will result in delay in completion of ‘Namami  
Gange Programme’, the Committee recommend that suitable remedial a ction 
may be taken by the Government of India to address the financial constraints  
faced by the state Governments concerned at the earliest so that the  
laudable objective of the ‘Namami Gange Programme are attained within the  
stipulated timeline, that is by July 2018. 
Reply of the Government 
 With a view to addressing the financial constraints faced by the state government 
concerned, all new initiatives under the Namami Gange Program are being taken up as 

46 
 
Central Sector Projects wherein entire project cost will be borne by the Government of 
India. Restructuring of continuing projects under the NGRBA Program is also in 
progress. After the NGRBA Program restructured entire project cost of all new 
infrastructure projects to be taken up under the World Bank aide d NGRBA Program will 
be borne by the Government of India.  
 
Great rural-urban water divide and the need for bio-digesters  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
 The Committee note the testimony of experts that the toilets being built under 
Swachh/Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan are not being used by the beneficiaries as they lack 
privacy, comfort and generate stinking smell forcing the family members to defecate in 
the open fields thereby defeating the very purpose of provision of the toilets at their 
homes. Further, lack of availability of water in sufficient quantities also seems to be one 
of the reasons for their abandoning the toilets at home and opting for open field 
defecations. The Committee were informed of the availability of biodigester toilets which 
are environmental friendly, long lasting, maintenance free and low cost. The experts 
who testified before the Committee suggested for provision of biodigester toilets in the 
towns /villages along the river Ganga to  ensure that the people in these areas do not 
defecate in the open and thereby save Ganga from pollution. Further and notably, as 
admitted by the experts, the human excreta if thrown in the soil it becomes manure and 
if discharged in water it poisons the water. Toilets need more water to flush the exc reta 
and the flushed excreta pollutes the water in a big way and it involves a huge and 
recurring cost to convert the polluted water into pure or semi -pure water. Further, mass 
scale urbanization in the name of modernization has brought its own attendant 
problems which are likely to assume yawning proportions in the next few years as India 
may become water scarce country. The nation can ill -afford the luxury of water import, 
water being heavier than crude oil. The pace of uncontrolled urbanization has alrea dy 
created a situation where some people, especially poor people and rural folks do not get 
drinking water whereas people living in luxurious urban houses use excessive water for 
flushing, eventually contaminating the water bodies where it is discharged. S uch a 
differential treatment and deprivation in the name of urbanization and mo dernization is 
not acceptable. Bearing in mind the expert testimony that human excreta if burried in 

47 
 
soil, converts into manure and if discharged in the water poisons the water;  taking note 
of the fact that toilets need water to flush and the flushed  excreta pollutes the water in a 
bigway and considering the fact that it  involves huge recurring cost to convert the 
polluted water into pure or semipure water and mindful of the alar ming rural -urban 
disparity in water supply, the Committee recommend that suitable provision may be 
incorporated under ‘Namami Gange’ to provide biodigester toilets in all the villages and  
towns on the banks of Ganga and its tributaries in a time bound mann er. 
Further, futuristic technologies be developed which can process all waste on  site within 
hours at the household, colony, village levels with a view to  eliminate or minimize the 
need for laying expensive trunk lines, STPs, and  other cost prohibitive pol lution control 
infrastructure. The Committee should  like to be apprised of the outcome within six 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
Reply of the Government 
 Task pertaining to rural sanitation which covers; construction of Individual 
Household Latrines (IHHLs), solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM), and IEC, in 
the Gram Panchayats in the riparian states has been assigned to the Ministry of 
Drinking Water an d Sanitation.  The National Mission for Clean Ganga  in very 
beginning requested to MoDWS to adopt appropriate technology option preferably 
based on the concept of bio -digester for construction of IHHLs and other toilets in the 
Gram Panchayats falling unde r high water table along the river Ganga to prevent from 
contamination of nearby water bodies.  
 NMCG had invited EOI in June, 2016 for taking up innovative waste water 
treatment technology as pilot/ demonstration project for treatment of Drains joining ri ver 
Ganga. Till date, around 90 proposals have been received from different parts of the 
Globe. Proposals received are in various stages of scrutiny. There are several small 
packaged modular type treatment systems, which may eliminate or minimize the need 
for laying expensive trunk lines, STPs etc. by bringing about significant reduction in 
pollution load in the drains before they empty into the river. These systems are pre -
fabricated and can be installed in very short time.  
 

48 
 
Use of bio-fertilizers, organic and less water consuming crops 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 The Committee note that conventional irrigation techniques need huge amount of 
water, much of which is lost to evaporation, causing over extraction of the water needed 
to sustain life elsewhere. The representatives of the Government also conceded that the 
runoff from  chemical pesticides and fertilizers into rivers /aquifers is exceedingly 
detrimental to human health and to the already threatened eco system. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that: (i) farmers may be encouraged to avoid cultivation of water 
guzzling variety of crops and incentivized to switch over to less water intensive methods 
of irrigation and less water consuming crops;  (ii) the farmers may be encouraged and 
incentivised by the M/o Agriculture and state governments for erecting dikes so that rain 
water is conserved in the fields;  (iii) optimal use of fertilizers and pesticides should be 
promoted by M/o  Agriculture in consultation with tthe ICAR and excessive use  
avoided; (iv) irrigation subsidies may be gradually eliminated to prevent use of  water 
intensive agricultural practices and water saving techniques  such as drip irrigation, etc 
be propagated and incentivised; (v) organic and less water consuming crops shou ld be 
propagated and  grown in order to help ensure that more water is left in the Ganga  
and other key aquifers;  (vi) all farms located within specific distance of the Ganga and 
other important aquifers should become mandated organic farming  zones. Producer s 
should be incentivized suitably and also be  educated about the advantages of organic 
farming in the long run;  (vii) special subsidies, lending assistance and help in securing 
access to markets, domestic and foreign, which have special interest in  organic goods 
may be given to the farmers who switch over to  organic farming and use drip irrigation  
or similar non water  intensive irrigation technology; and  (viii) the benefits of organic 
fertilizers and the incentives being given to  organic agriculture be effectively publicised 
so that farmers turn to organic agriculture in a big way. 
Reply of the Government 
NMCG has entered into an MOU with Ministry of Agriculture in September 2016. As 
per the MOU, the role of Ministry of Agriculture is  

49 
 
 Development of org anic farming in the villages along Ganga with each Gram 
Panchayat representing a single cluster 
 Promote organic farming through awareness programmes, self help groups, 
mobile apps launched etc. 
 Create awareness about balanced use of chemicals fertilizers and pesticides. 
 Promote micro irrigation for water conservation in Ganga Basin.  
Government of India is implementing Crop Diversification Programme (CDP) in 
Original Green Revolution States viz: Punjab, Haryana and Western Uttar Pradesh as a 
sub scheme of I  RKVYsince 2013 -14 to divert the area of water guzzling paddy to 
alternate crops like pulses, oilseeds, maize, cotton and agro forestry with the objective 
of tackling the problem of declining of soil fertility and depleting water table in these 
states. A b rief note related to avoid water guzzling crops under CDP is enclosed as 
Annexure - V. 
Government of India is providing incentives to the farmers under National Food 
Security Mission (NFSM) and Bringing Green Revolution to Eastern India (BGREI) for 
encouraging efficient and judicious use of irrigation water.  Support is being given to the 
farmers by providing water carrying pipes, pump sets, sprinkler set, mobile rain gun 
under NFSM-Pulses and NFSM -Wheat component.  Similarly, support is given to the 
farmers through BGREI for dug well, bore well, shallow tube well and pump set. 
By carrying out demonstration/ training,  farmers are advised  to use method of 
efficient water use like raised bed, broad bed cultivation, direct seeded rice cultivation, 
zero tillage etc.  These programmes on crop production under NFSM and BGREI are 
implemented through State Agriculture Departments.  
 Under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) -Pulses, use of bio -fertilizers such 
as Rhizobium, Phosphate Solubilizing Bacteria (PSB) in  pulses crop are encouraged 
and assistance is provided to the farmers.  
 
 
 

50 
 
Cost Effective Solid Waste Management and donations for Ganga  
cleaning 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 The Committee note that effective solid waste management is becoming a 
stupendously challenging task in cities and towns. The Solid Waste, if not disposed of 
andtreated properly, enters the water bodies and the rivers. There is, therefore, a 
paramountneed for segregating the metalic, plastic and bio -degradable waste for the ir 
environment friendly disposal and re -use. The solid city waste and its harmful residue 
that enters the Ganga and its tributaries pollutes and chokes the rivers threatening the 
acquatic life. The  Committee note that solid waste management has become a 
stupendouly challenging task in megatowns, which for want of proper segregation and  
disposal, eventually enters, chokes and pollutes the rivers. The Committee,  therefore, 
are of the considered view that treating pollution at source is a  long term and enduring 
solution to combat and control the pollution in the  Ganga. The Committee accordingly 
recommend that: - a) segregation and proper treatment of household and institutional  
waste water /sewage and solid waste at source may be enforced  strictly, if need be, by 
offering subsidy on effective waste  management technology;  b) natural cleaning / 
treatment systems like bioremediation for drains  flowing into rivers may also be tried 
out; c) the crucial task of solid waste management may be taken up on  Mini Mission 
Mode so as to ensure that rivers and water bodies do  not become city waste dumping 
places; and  d) donations for the purpose of Ganga cleaning or setting up of 'Clean  
Ganga Fund' may be treated as permissible activity for Corporates  under Corporate  
Social Responsibility (CSR) to ensure receipt of  sizable sums for the purpose.  Suitable 
action in consultation with M/o Corporate Affairs (MoCA) may  be taken at the earliest 
and the Committee apprised. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to reduce the pollution f rom the solid waste entering into river Ganga 
following initiatives have been taken up : 
1. Provision of mechanical Trash skimmer at Allahabad, Kanpur, Varanasi, Mathura -
Vrindavan and Garmukteshwar to remove the floating trash from the river surface. 

51 
 
2. Ghat cleaning works at Varanasi to ensure arresting the solid waste disposal in 
the river and keeping the ghats neat and clean.  
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs informed that no action arises for Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs as ‘Clean Ganga Fund’ is an en listed activity under item no. (iv) of 
Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013 which  is reproduced below : 
 “ensuring environmental sustainability, ecological balance, protection of flora and 
fauna, animal welfare, agro forestry, conservation of natural resources and maintaining 
quality of soil, air and water including contribution to the ‘Clean Ganga Fund’ set-up 
by the Central Government for rejuvenation of river Ganga” 
 
Environmental Flows 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 The Committee observe that the environmental flow is a  water regime needed to 
maintain the ecological integrity of a river and is essential for survival of river biota from 
onslaught of human interference or river engineering. It helps in  self purification of the 
river, sustains aquatic life and vegetation, recharges ground water and  
supports livelihood. Flows, the Committee note, ar e the soul of the river. A river and its  
biota become extinct if there is no flow, no current. Notably, as early as 1916, the  
Britishers were compelled by Pt. Mahamana Madan Mohan Malviya to secure release of 
1000 cusec  feet per second water continuously a t Haridwar to ensure 'Aviral Ganga' 
(Annexure-XXVI). The river regime – its environment and its eco system – is solely 
dependent on its flow in  different seasons. The Committee also observe that the 
concept of e -flow is still evolving and  there is no unive rsally acceptable norm for 
estimation of environmental flow. Different  institutions / Committees have suggested 
different quantities of e-flows during lean and non  lean seasons for river Ganga without 
any finality by the Government. For instance , IIT  Roorkee , Wild Life Institute of India 
(WII), Inter Ministerial Group (IMG), Prof Ravi Chopra  Committee and CWC have 
recommended 20%, 30%, 30%, 50 % &20 % during lean season and  20-30%, 20%, 
25%,30%&20% during non lean season respectively in river Ganga. Howev er, 
neither the M/o WR, RD&GR nor the M/o Power nor M/o EFCC have specified the e -

52 
 
flow which is being followed currently. The Committee are distressed to note that many  
species of acquatic life have vanished or are on the verge of extinction. The  
dolphins, turtles, trout and gold fish and other vital species have disappeared  
from large parts of the river due to life threatening pollution and obstruction  
in free aquatic movement caused by dams on the river. Notably, the dams  
have adversely affected the spawn ing in fishes of certain types leading to  their 
disappearance. The hydrologists and experts who deposed before the  Committee 
stressed the need for free aquatic movement as a barometer of  the health of the river. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that:  (a) e-flows be fixed for each river and for 
each place where  dams/reservoirs/irrigation canals are built taking into  
consideration the mean figures of the last 50 years of the water  flow during lean and 
non-lean season,  (b) the new dams be so constructed as to facilitate unhindered  
aquatic movement; (c) the approved e-flows be measured by the CWC during lean and  
non-lean seasons at all stations including the places where the  rivers have been 
dammed or where water is diverted and the  reports submitted to Parli ament as part of  
the annual report of the  M/o WR, and  (d) a detailed report be submitted to the 
Committee about the  presence of each reverine specie like dolphine, turtles, gold fish,  
trout and others every six month; and  (e) a third Party assessment of e -flows may also 
be considered periodically.    
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Water Resources, River Development &  Ganga Rejuvenation has 
constituted a Committee consisting of representatives of Central Water Commission, 
National Institute of Hydrology (NIH) and IIT, Delhi to prepare a policy paper on 
implementation of environmental flows.  The report of the committee is awaited.   
 A meeting with IIT Consortium and other experts has been proposed to finalize 
the recommendations on e-flows particularly the approach and methodology to be used 
for assessing the e-flows for any river reach. 
 For Aqualife conservation of G anga, NMCG has entrusted projects to Wildlife 
Institute of India (WII), Dehradun for the conservation of higher aquatic vertebrates and 
central Inland Fishery Research Institute (CIFRI), Barrackpoor for the restoration of 

53 
 
indigenous fish species in Ganga.  These institutes will also be recording the status of 
the Aqualife of Ganga. 
 The report submitted by the above said institute will be submitted to the Estimate 
Committee, Lok Sabha for information.  
 
Decision of Government on construction of new Dams in Uttarakhand 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
The Committee take a serious note of the casual and evasive reply furnished by the M/o 
WR, RD &GR to the following important points contained in the memorandum submitted 
by the NGO Ganga Aahvan: (i) acceptance vide the affidavit submitted to Supreme court 
of the findings of  Ravi Chopra Committee that irredeemable damages has been caused 
due to  dam projects in the Himalayan regions of Ganga and that dam projects were  
directly/indirectly responsible  for the June 2013 disaster;  (ii) surprising change in the 
attitude of the MOEF&CC after filing the affidavit in  December 2014. It points out the 
intervention of Prime Minister Office in the  matter. A meeting held on 13th January, 2015 
chaired by PMO chief  Secretary and attended by all chief / other secretaries, Ministry of 
Power, Ministry of  Environment, representatives of Uttarakhand Government. It goes 
further to  say that it was decided that the Government would lobby in favor of the  
power projects citin g energy requirement of the co untry as a priority, putting  
aside the aviralta -nirmalta aspect of Ganga rejuvenation, sought more time  from the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court; (iii) Hon'ble SC directing the Centre to decide on 6 dams (out of 
24 proposed dam  projects recommended for closure/cancellation by the teams of 
experts); (iv) Central Government's stance was exposed on 17 February 2015, when the  
Attorney General's made a statement to the Hon'ble court that the Centre can  
go ahead with the construction of the 6 dams, quoting the findings of another  
4-member committee which was constituted in the end of December 2014;  
(v) Decision of the MOEF&CC forming another Expert Group (DAS -Committee) in  
June 2015 to explore means to give go -ahead to these E -dam projects igno ring prior 
studies and reports;  (vi) Committee submitting its report justifying the construction of 
these 6 dam projects. The Centre submitted an affidavit to the Hon'ble court in November  
2015 in favor of the report and submitted that inter -ministerial gr oup will soon  

54 
 
decide on it; and  (vii) MOEF&CC submitted an affidavit giving the green signal for 
construction of dams on river Ganga in January 2016.”  The Committee are anguished to 
note that the reply submitted by the  Ministry to the Committee, simply sta ted that NMCG, 
which is mandated to  fund and execute pollution abatement measures in river Ganga, 
does not  directly deal with the issues raised in the memorandum as it is mainly  
concerned with the decision of the Government on construction of dams on  river Ganga. 
Deprecating the casual reply, the Committee ask the Ministry to submit point wise replies, 
if necessary by collecting the information, to them  within six month of the presentation of 
this report. 
Reply of the Government 
 No study has clearly established that dam/hydro power projects were responsible 
for June, 2013 Uttarakhand disaster.  As per study carried out by Central Water 
Commission and Central Electricity Authority, a joint report was submitted to Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change in April, 2014, wherein it is stated that there is 
no link (direct or indirect) between the development of hydro power project with 
Uttarakhand tragedy.  Alaknanda and Bhagirathi rivers in Uttarakhand have 
experienced  similar catastrophes in the past also.   This is due to the inherent 
geological and geo-morphological character of the area and has nothing to do with the 
structures needed for dam/hydropower projects.  
 
Preservation and construction of water bodies in the catchment areas 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
 The Committee observe that water bodies such as lakes, ponds, tanks and 
streams, play an important role in rejuvenating the rivers. These water bodies accumulate 
rain water, recharge the groundwater and  the ground water in turn charges the river in 
lean months. A  renowned activist (Shri Anupam Mishra) working in the field of water 
management and  rejuvenation of water bodies testified that there were 25 to 30 lakh 
ponds before the British came to India. The Indian irrigation system was based on sound 
traditional water  management techniques as there were no engineering colleges or 
certified hydro -engineers those days. The Committee were informed that excessive 
withdrawal of water from rivers  for irrigation, industry and domestic use has depleted the 

55 
 
flow of rivers and has also  contaminated the rivers as all used/polluted water is 
discharged into the rivers. It was  asserted that a lopsided, recurringly cost prohibitive 
system can’t clean the rivers. The  experts emphasized that the pure rain water must be 
stored into lakes, ponds and local  water bodies, known variously in different parts of the 
country. An expert especially referred to the ancient system of water preservation in ‘tals’ 
’khals’ and ‘chals’ etc. in the Himalayan  regions which collected rainwater, met local 
needs round the year, created forest cover and  charged the ground water and, were a 
steady source of water to the tributaries of the Ganga.  The expert also referred to 
examples of community work  to revive these traditional water  bodies of Pauri Garhwal 
district of Uttarakhand which revived the ‘Gad Ganga’ which was  extinct for 70-80 years. 
Prof. Tare, IIT Kanpur, a renowned hydrologist was also of the  considered view that all 
tanks, lakes and water bodies are an integral part of a perennial source of water supply to 
the river. These water bodies must be restored and conserved as  all water bodies in the 
entire catchment basin are closely inter -linked and rejuvenate the  river especially during 
the l ean period. Besides, these water bodies serve the drinking water  and irrigational 
needs of the surrounding towns and villages and also help controlling the  effects of the 
floods. Having regard to the fact that the traditional time tested  methods of water 
conservation like the lakes, ponds, tals, zheels, baolis,  wetlands and flood plains have 
been abandoned or encroached upon; mindful  of the f act that the Government's focus 
mostly remains on managing the droughts  and floods and considering the fact that the 
surface and subsurface water are an integral part of the hydrological cycle, the 
Committee recommend that; (a) all big and small water bodies in the catchment areas of 
the rivers including the Ganga must be restored and n ew water bodies constructed with a 
view to harvesting water;  (b) all such water bodies must be inventorised district -wise as 
part of  integral national strategy to conserve and augment water supply  on perennial 
basis to local settlements, environment, aquif ers and  the rivers; and  (c) a massive 
programme of rejuvenation of water bodies and aquifers  be undertaken after consulting 
the premier national organisations  like CWC, CGWB, National Institute of Hydrology and 
also the district gazetteers about the ancien t ponds, lakes, tals and baolis  so that all the 
traditional water bodies are rejuvenated in a  mission mode with the help of schemes like 
MNREGA or such or  similar schemes. They further stress that suitable measure may be 
taken urgently to  protect and resto re water related eco systems including the forests,  

56 
 
wetlands, lakes, ponds, taals, zheels, etc. in the Ganga catchment basin as  this will 
contribute in a big way to the perennial rejuvenation of the Ganga  and the ground water 
which is an integral subsurfac e and surface part of the  hydrological cycle. Further, a 
massive programme of rejuvenation of water  bodies and aquifers be under taken after 
consulting the district gazetteers and  even schemes like MNGRA should be in mission 
mode. 
Reply of the Government 
a):- GOI is implementing the Scheme for Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
(RRR) of water bodies which has multiple objectives like Comprehensive improvement 
and restoration of water bodies thereby increasing tank storage capacity, ground water 
recharge, increased availability of drinking water, improvement in agriculture/horticulture 
productivity, improvement of catchment areas of tank commands, environmental 
benefits through improved water use efficiency; by promotion of conjunctive use of 
surface and gro und water, community participation and self -supporting system for 
sustainable management for each water body, capacity building of communities in 
better water management and development of tourism, cultural activities, etc. This is a 
continuing scheme sinc e X Plan and is presently being implemented during XII Plan 
also.  
The scheme of RRR of Water Bodies in XII Plan envisages to take up RRR 
works in 10,000 water bodies (9000 water bodies from Rural areas and 1000 water 
bodies from Urban areas) with a Centra l Assistance of Rs. 6235 crore covering 
Culturable Command Area of 6.235 lakh ha. The Scheme is a continuation scheme and 
has been approved by Cabinet Committee on Economics Affairs on 20.09.2013 and the 
new Guidelines were circulated by MOWR to all the St ate Governments during October 
2013. Rural water bodies having an original CCA up to 2000 ha with minimum water 
spread area of 5 ha and above and Urban water bodies having water spread from 2 ha 
to 10 ha are eligible to be included under the scheme. RRR of  water bodies scheme in 
rural areas is proposed to be implemented in convergence with Integrated Water 
Management Programme (IWMP) so that the catchment area of the selected water 
bodies are located either where the IWMP programme is implemented OR selecte d for 
implementation of IWMP in the next year OR two. Further, as para 4.2.6 of Guidelines 

57 
 
of RRR of Water Bodies, in case, the scheme of IWMP is being considered for 
implementation in the state based on IWMP programme, the water bodies of such area 
will also be included in the scheme received upto March, 2013. A certificate from State 
Government will be required for speedily implementation of IWMP in those areas. This 
will ensure that the catchment area treatments shall be implemented on all catchment 
areas of water bodies which are proposed to be taken up for central funding under the 
RRR of water bodies scheme. The scheme covers only public and community owned 
water bodies and private owned water bodies are not covered. 
As per the guidelines, the State Go vernment needs to take necessary steps for 
declaring the water body boundary through a GO and to ensure removal of 
encroachments in the water body spread area/water body boundary before submitting 
the proposal for 2nd installment release. 
XI plan: 
Under the scheme of RRR of water bodies with Domestic Support, 3341 water 
bodies were taken up and so far, works of 2801 water bodies have been completed. 
The works of 499 water bodies are still in progress.  
 
Under the scheme of RRR  of water bodies with External Assistance, 8747 water 
bodies were taken up and so far, works of 8054 water bodies have been completed. 
The works of 693 water bodies are still in progress.  
XII plan: 
Empowered Committee (EC) of MOWR,RD &GR in its 5 meetings held has so far 
cleared a total of 1354 water bodies from 9 states to include under the scheme of RRR 
of water bodies. Works of 1236 water bodies were taken up and so far, 506 water 
bodies have been restored. The works in 730 water bodies are in progress.  
So far as construction of new water bodies is concerned, it is not covered under 
the present scheme. However, the State Govts. can construct  new water bodies with a 
view to harvesting water with the help of schemes like MNREGA or such or similar 
schemes.  

58 
 
Jal Kranti Abhiyan  is being celebrated to consolidate water conservation and 
management in the country through a holistic and integrated approach involving all 
stakeholders, making it a mass movement.  
The objectives of Jal Kranti Abhiyan are :-  
1. Strengthening grass root involvement of all stakeholders including Panchayati 
Raj Institutions and local bodies in the water security and development schemes 
(e.g.Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM));  
2. Encouraging the adoption/utilization of traditio nal knowledge in water resources 
conservation and its management;  
3. To utilize sector level expertise from different levels in government, NGO’s, 
citizens etc; and  
4. Enhancing livelihood security through water security in rural areas.  
 
The activities/components being undertaken in the Abhiyan are :-  
1.   Jal Gram Yojana 
2.   Development of Model Command Area  
3.   Pollution abatement  
4.   Mass Awareness Programme 
5.   Other Activities  
 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY): 
Under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), RRR of Water Bodies 
scheme is a sub-component under Har Khet ko pani. 
PMKSY has been formulated amalgamating ongoing schemes viz. Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) of the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR,RD&GR), Integrated Watershed 
Management Programme (IWMP) of Department of Land Resources (DoLR) and the 
On Farm Water Management (OFWM) of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
(DAC). PMKSY has been approved for impl ementation across the country with an 
outlay of Rs. 50,000 crore in five years. 

59 
 
b)  As per the guidelines, the State Government will also undertake census of water 
bodies and allot Unique code for all the water bodies.  So far, total 3782 proposals of 
water bodies have been received from 2 1 states for their inclusion under RRR scheme 
of water bodies during XII Plan. Out of 37 82 proposals, 1354 water bodies have been 
approved for their inclusion under the scheme while remaining 2428 water bodies are in 
process of th eir inclusion under the scheme following the “Guidelines for the 
Continuation of Scheme on Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies  
in XII Plan”. 
Further, as per the 4 th Minor Irrigation (MI) census which was conducted with 
reference year 2006 -07 across all over the country, there are about 6 lakh tanks and 
storages under surface flow. Out of these 6 lakh, 5 lakh schemes are in use and 
remaining 1 lakh schemes are not in use for various reasons. The 5th MI census is being 
conducted with reference year 2013-14. The details of water bodies are proposed to be 
collected in the 6th MI census.  
Moreover, Under India-WRIS project, 7,98,908 water bodies of size more than 
0.01 ha h ave been mapped using satellite imageries of 2009 -10. The details are 
available on website (URL -www.india-wris.nrsc.gov.in).  As part of Jal Kranti Abhiyan, 
one of the activity would to be undertaken is allotting Unique Identification number to 
every water body from data available on WRIS (use of space technology for mapping of 
water). 
c):-   The steps taken for recharging and rejuvenation of aquifers include - 
 CGWB has prepared a conceptual document entitled “Master Plan for Artificial 
Recharge to Ground W ater in India” during the year 2013, which envisages 
construction of different types of Artificial Recharge and Rainwater Harvesting 
structures in the country including the States covering Ganga basin by 
harnessing surplus monsoon runoff to augment ground water resources. The 
Master Plan has been circulated to all states for implementation. 
 The National Water Policy (2012), which has been forwarded to all State 
Governments/UTs and concerned Ministries/Departments of Central 

60 
 
Government for appropriate action , also highlights the need for augmenting the 
availability of water through direct use of rainfall.  
 MoWR, RD & GR has also launched ‘Jal Kranti Abhiyan’ (2015 -16 to  
2017-18) in order to consolidate water conservation and management in the 
country through  a holistic and integrated approach involving all stakeholders, 
making it a mass movement. 
 CGWB has been organizing mass awareness programmes in the country to 
promote rain water harvesting and artificial recharge to ground water 
 Water conservation and artificial recharge to ground water are being undertaken 
by the States/ Union Territories under various schemes including Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), Watershed 
Development Component (WDC) of the Pradhan Mantri Krishi S inchayee 
Yojana (PMKSY) etc.  
 National Groundwater Management Improvement Scheme (NGMIS) aimed at 
sustainable management of ground water with emphasis on demand side 
management measures through community participation is under consideration 
of the Government. The key objectives of the program include i mproving  
investments and management actions for addressing ground water depletion 
and degradation, strengthening  institutional capacity and framework for 
effective groundwater management , i ncentivizing communities  to sustainably 
manage groundwater  and c onvergence with ongoing Government programs . 
Supply side management measures including artificial recharge and water 
conservation will also form part of the scheme. The scheme is proposed to be 
taken u p in parts of seven States viz. Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Uttar 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Karnataka. 
 
Impact of navigation on, and navigability of, the Ganga 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
 On being enquired, the Committee were apprised by the Ministry of Shipping that 
navigation is a nonconsumptive use of water and therefore navigation would neither be 
helpful nor harmful for  rejuvenation of the Ganga. The Ministry also stated that 
maintenance dredging undertaken  by IWAI for nav igation purpose in totality does not 

61 
 
affect significantly the hydromorphological parameters of the Ganga. Asked whether the  
Government would be able to  make Ganga navigable in the stretch between Varanasi 
and Haldia, the representative of the  Ministry could not give any definitive answer but 
informed that the World Bank aided Jal  Marg Vikas Project, a consultancy, is exploring 
the feasibility of developing reliable navigation  channel for commercially viable cargo 
vessels and the outcome of the study would b e available by mid 2016. According to one 
memorandum submitted to the Committee by an  NGO, the movement of barges/inland 
vessels in the rivers improves the BOD by agitation of  the water. The Committee would  
like the definitive reply of the Ministry of  Shipping as to the stretches of the Ganga they 
wish to make navigable  throughout the year and time frame thereof and the water draft 
that would be  needed and the assurance that the spillage would not affect the water  
quality or the biota adversely. The Committ ee would also like to be apprised  
of the navigationable stretch of the Ganga prior to independence. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under Phase-I of the Jal Marg Vikas Project on river Ganga, the main objective is 
augmentation of navigation facilities including fairway development between Haldia and 
Varanasi (1380 kms) by providing an assured depth of 2.2 meters to 3.0 meters and 
bottom channel width of 45.0 meters for at least 330 days in a year. This shall make the 
stretch of river Ganga navigable for vessels u p to 2000 DWT capacity. The stretch wise 
chainage in kms and the Least Available Depth (LAD) in meters are tabulated below: 
Stretch Chainage (in kms) LAD (in m) 
Haldia – Barh 35-891 3.0 
Barh – Ghazipur 891-1178 2.5 
Ghazipur - Varanasi 1178-1311 2.2 
 
The timelines for various activities under the Jal Marg Vikas Project is seven 
years from September, 2016-17 to August, 2022-23. 
Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) will undertake necessary measures to 
mitigate the effects of spillage (if any) durin g the navigation on Ganga under Jal Marg 
Vikas Project.  

62 
 
In order to ensure safe navigational activities, IWAI has undertaken a detailed 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the proposed components to identify the 
environmental issues associated with the project and prepared an elaborate 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP). 
 Opportunities for environmental enhancement were incorporated in the project 
design, such as (i) supporting introduction of ‘cleaner’ vessels which will follow 
international standards for discharge of ballast, wastewater, and use of cleaner more 
efficient fuel (ii) conservation of protected aquatic areas; (iii) the highest health and 
safety standards for operation of terminal facilities and navigation operations  and (iv) 
and state-of-art river information systems which will minimize the chances of accidents 
and also provide available LAD to obviate risks of collision. 
The following mitigation measures have been proposed for the protection of 
water quality and aquatic ecology during navigation period: 
(a) All wastewater and solid waste or maintenance waste will be disposed at 
the designated barge maintenance facility.  
(b) Material having potential to generate the dust will be transported under 
covered conditions to minimize dust gene ration and its settlement on river 
surface. Terminals will have facility to control dust pollution during barge 
loading and unloading actions. 
(c) Immediate/quick clean-up of oil/other spills will be undertaken in case of 
accidental release. 
(d) Vessel speed will be restricted in Vikramshila Gangetic Dolphin Sanctuary 
and Kashi Turtle Sanctuary areas to reduce the noise generation from 
propeller. Provision of propeller guards with vessel to minimize injury to 
the aquatic fauna. 
(e) Barge/vessel movement will be restricted to the designate route only over 
the Sanctuary areas to minimize disturbance of Aquatic life. 

63 
 
In addition, IWAI also proposes to develop an Emergency Preparedness and 
Response Strategy which shall outline the potential foreseeable emergency  scenarios, 
classification, resources, incident command structure, and a documented emergency 
management plan encompassing prevention, control, recovery and remediation 
measures to deal with any emergency event that may occur within the National 
Waterway-1 (NW-1) during construction and operation phase under Jal Marg Vikas 
Project. 
Oil Spill Contingency Management Plan has been prepared for NW -1.  Also, the 
Terms of References for the proposed Disaster Management Plan (DMP) for NW -1 is 
under finalization.  After detailed DMP is prepared, IWAI will be equipped to handle 
emergency risks on NW -1.  The proposed DMP program will have the following 
components as well: 
 Protocol for speed control, monitoring and vessel tracking. 
 Protocol of waste management for barg e operations and terminals 
management. 
 Bio-diversity protection including accident reporting with aquatic 
mammals. 
 Oil spills reporting and control and remediation. 
 Lessons learned and corrective actions programme. 
 Risk assessment procedures to assess and manage risks to personnel, 
vessels and the environment. 
 Internal and external audit procedures and frequency. 
IWAI was established in 1986 and it does not possess data on the navigable 
stretch of the Ganga prior to independence. 
 
River front development and check on sand mining  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 25) 
 The Government of Bihar stated that the current practices of sand mining in the 
river Ganga and its tributaries  are seriously damaging the aquatic flora and fauna. 
Accordingly, they suggested that sand mining policy for Ganga and its tributaries should 

64 
 
be clearly defined and effectively enforced.  The Committee note that MoUD has a 
programme for river front development and  beautification. An apprehension was raised 
about the possible aspect of cemented long  embankment of the river.  The 
representative of IIT, Kanpur (Prof. Vinod Tare) when asked his view for  channelizing of 
river Ganga, stated that there was no programme to channelize the river  Ganga. He 
opined that the Ganga should flow in its natural  form and as far as possible we should 
channelize Ganga in short spans. He further clarified that channelizing means plastering 
of river Ganga, you can plaster small sections of the river but it will not good for  the 
health of river to plaster its banks completely. The Committee were further informed that 
channelization will not be able to maintain natural flow of the river helps in natural  
purification when the flowing water comes in touch with natural sand and gravel  
embankments. Keeping in view the considered advice of experts based on empirical  
studies that natural sand and gravel embankments help cleanse the river, the  
Committee wish to caution and counsel the Government especially the  Ministries of 
Urban Development, Tourism and the municipal authorities to  ensure that the natural 
sand embankments and the flood plains are not  altered, damaged or encroached upon. 
The protection of flood plains from  any encroachment, sand extraction and 
channelisation of the river must b e prohibited at all cost to safeguard the natural  
cleansing and rejuvenation of the river. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Tourism has noted the recommendations of the Committee for 
compliance.  
 Ministry of Urban Development informed that there is no  programme called River 
Front Development & Beautification with them.  As per the recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry is not involved in altering the flood plains etc. Also, the matters 
of sand mining and prevention of encroachments are looked af ter by the respective 
State Government and the Municipal Authorities.  
 Through the Swachh Bharat Mission and the AMRUT Programmes, the Ministry 
is involved in creating public awareness for sanitation as well as for capacity building of 
State and municipal  authorities through training, guidelines, Manuals etc.  Ministry of 

65 
 
Urban Development peruse and approve the comments above for forwarding the same 
to the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change and the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation.  
 
Impact of dams on water quality of Ganga 
   Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 26) 
 The Committee note that the  energy potential of the Ganga river system is unique 
since the Ganga originates from the  highest point as compared to the origin point of all 
rivers of the world. An expert referred to the difference of 75 km between the origin points 
of the Ganga and the Yamuna and the  material difference in the colour of their waters, 
Ganga water completely ‘whitish’ and the  Yamuna water ‘blue’ and therefore asserted 
that this signifies that the quality, quantity and  dynamics of every river system like the 
human system is different. His lament was that dams  have been built without adequate 
knowledge of the anatomy, morphology, cross section of the river, etc. The Committee 
note that the Himalayan rocks are sedimentary, fragile and the  region has steep slopes. 
For example, the height of the three Gorges Dam (TGD) in China is  181 meters and the 
Tehri Dam is 260.5 meters but the reservoi r of TGD is 660 kms and of  
Tehri Dam – 44 kms. The Himalayan slopes are 18 times more steep than the slopes  of 
TGD. According to domain experts, slope defines energy but due to high degree of  
sedimentation and landslides in the Himalayas, the energy generation is much less that is 
800 Megawatt in Tehri as against 900 Megawatt in TGD. The Committee were informed 
that the  recurring landslides and the high rate of sedimentation reduce the storage 
capacity of the  reservoir very fast. Besides, the Committee were  apprised that due to 
sedimentation of the dam reservoir, the density of water increases, it changes the colour 
of the water and reduces,  more markedly, its oxygen content deteriorating the water 
quality – the ‘nirmalta’ of the  Ganga it was known for and r evered from hoary past. Also, 
creation of huge water bodies in  active seismic zone of the Himalaya further induces 
seismicity, posing threat to the structure  as well as to the human settlements both 
upstream and downstream.  Another closely related issue of  serious worry is about the 
proposed construction of  450 big and small hydro power projects in the State of 
Uttarakhand, a matter of constant  concern in Parliament. The representative of non -
governmental organization, namely Ganga  Ahwaan, in their presenta tion before the 

66 
 
Committee pointed construction of bumper to  bumper hydro projects and long dry stretch 
of the river bed due to water diversion. It was  claimed that 53 per cent of river Bhagirathi 
is completely affected, impacted and gone,  despite the assurance of ecological flow and 
‘aviralta’ (continuity) of the Ganga. The  representatives expressed grave anxiety and 
trepidation due to ongoing cutting, crushing,  blasting, tunneling, mining in the sensitive -
fragile Himalayas doing incalculable and  irretrievable damage to the Himalayan ecology 
and sending shivers down the spine of local  residents whose houses have developed 
cracks or have been pulverized by blasting of the  Loharinath-Pala, Pala -Maneri and 
Bhairon Ghaati projects. Besides, due to blasting, the  water springs have disappeared, 
aggravating water scarcity in the hills. The witness also  quoted from the affidavit filed in  
the Supreme Court by the Government containing the  findings of an expert Committee 
appointed by the Union Government under the dire ction of  the Supreme Court. It was 
submitted that, according to such findings, ‘the construction of  hydro power projects in 
‘Ganga, Bhagirathi and Alaknanda basins has overburdened the local  ecology’ and that 
there are ‘clear sightings of irreversible dama ges of environment in terms  
of loss of forest, degraded water quality, geological and social impact’ and that these 
hydro power projects’ enhance landslides and other disasters.’ Further, in the context of 
the imperative need to maintain the ‘nirmalta’ con tingent upon the ‘aviralta’ of the Ganga, 
the Committee were shocked to learn from the testimony of the NGO who deposed before 
them that ‘115’ kms of the Ganga has been diverted into tunnels and lakes, depriving the 
people of the glimpse of the Ganga over such stretches. It was also their lament that 
people have to plead with the construction companies to release some water so that they 
could perform the last rites of their deceased dear ones or perform other sacred religious 
ceremonies. They also  submitted that by tampering with the waters right at the source, 
the most important, significant quality of the Ganga is being destroyed and therefore the 
Ganga jal after Rishikesh  is no longer the same jal that we were consuming since 
centuries. However, the Minis try of  Power submitted to the Committee that survey 
conducted by HNB Garhwal University, Botanical Survey of India and NEERI indicate that 
Tehri reservoir has no adverse impact on  the ecology of the surrounding area. Having 
regard to the testimony of exper ts and the views of the local people and the submissions 
made by the Government  representatives, the Committee recommend that:  (a) 
construction of new hydro projects in the Himalayas may be halted, given the holocaust of 

67 
 
Kedarnath, till the judgement of  the Supreme Court and the entire hydro policy with 
respect to  construction of hydro projects in the seismically active  Himalayan zone be 
revisited; (b) in order that the Ganga flows incessantly and eternally, every  dam must 
release water at least in the same  ratio as enshrined in the agreement of 1916 between 
Pt. Mahamana Madan Mohan  Malviya and the Britishers. The GoI must abide by the 
agreement of 1916 which guarantees uninterrupted flow of Ganga, an  agreement still in 
force in view of Article 363 of the Co nstitution; (c) the flow of river must be measured 
during lean and non -lean seasons at all stations where the Ganga water including its  
tributaries is impounded or diverted, before and after such  incidence and reported to 
Parliament annually by the  MoWR,RD&GR; (d) the water quality must be monitored 
during lean and non -lean season at all such locations before and after impounding and  
diversion; and (e) the pollution caused in the cities and towns must also be  measured 
city/town wise before and after drainin g of  sewer/affluent and the statistics placed in 
Parliament annually  and the monitoring being done on regular basis for preventing  
pollution of the river.  
Reply of the Government 
 The point (26 -a) has been noted and circulated to concerned Directorate of 
Central Water Commission (CWC) for compliance. However the following facts are 
submitted for consideration. 
1. In case of Uttarakhand there is ban for taking up any further constructions in 24 
Hydel Projects by the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide Judgment dated: 0 7.05.2014. 
The matter is under sub-judice.   
2. Further ,for taking up any hydro project costing above Rs.1000 crore, clearance is 
given by CEA  after exhaustive examination and vetting through related 
ministries/apprising agencies like, MoWR,RD&GR, CWC, GSI,  CSMRS, MoEF&CC, 
MOTA etc. Accordingly all important aspects including hydrological, geological, 
Dam/Barrage design, project general layout, hydel civil design, construction material, 
power potential studies, interstate/ international aspects etc. are being  examined 
thoroughly for optimum development of the hydropower projects.  

68 
 
3. Projects costing below Rs. 1000 crore are being cleared by the respective state 
governments. Small hydro projects (less than 25 MW) are being handled by Ministry 
of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) or respective state governments. 
4. It is also submitted that as per the study carried out by CWC and CEA a joint report 
was submitted to MoEF&CC in April, 2014, wherein it is stated that there is no link, 
direct or indirect, between the develo pments of hydropower projects with 
Uttarakhand tragedy. Alaknanada and Bhagirathi rivers in Uttarakhand have 
experienced similar catastrophes in the past also. This is due to the inherent 
geological and geo -morphological character of the area and has nothi ng to do with 
structures needed for dam / hydropower projects. 
 
The point (26-b) has been noted and circulated to concerned Directorate of CWC for 
compliance. However it is submitted that the Minimum flow considerations are taken 
care of during DPR stage. Further regulation of flow during operation is not regulated by 
CWC. 
The point (26-c) has been noted and circulated to concerned Directorate of CWC for 
compliance. However the network details of CWC are furnished below. 
1. At present, CWC is operating a netwo rk of 283 hydrological observation stations in 
Ganga River Basin to collect (i) Water Level (Gauge), (ii) Discharge, (iii) Water 
Quality and (iv) Silt. Out of which, 80 stations are Gauge, 73 stations Gauge & 
Discharge,  8 stations Gauge, Discharge & Silt, 91 stations Gauge, Discharge, Silt & 
Water Quality, 28 stations Gauge, Discharge & Water Quality and 2 stations Gauge 
& Water Quality.  Amongst above, 218 stations are used for Flood Forecasting 
activities in Ganga River Basin. The total WQ monitoring sta tions maintained by 
CWC are 121 in Ganga Basin. The hydrological data collected from sites are 
scrutinized, validated and published in the form of Water Year Book, Water Quality 
Year Book and Sediment Year Book, etc. by CWC. 
CPCB has identified 144 drains discharging into river Ganga having flow of effluent 
of 6614 MLD with organic load of 426 TPD;  4 drains discharging into river Ramganga 
carrying effluent of 258 MLD and organic load of 53 TPD and 9 drains discharging into 
river Kali-East having effluent o f 595 MLD and organic load of 165 TPD. The effluent 

69 
 
being discharged through these drains carry both domestic sewage and industrial 
effluent. The monitoring of these drains is being carried by CPCB twice a year.  
 
Need for framing Silt Management Policy 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 27) 
 The Government of Bihar stated  that on the one hand, intensive deforestation in 
the catchment area of Ganga has resulted  in increased inflow of silt, on the other hand, 
the adverse impact on outflow of silt due to  Farakka barrage has resulted in rise of bed 
level, reduction in carrying capacity, rise of  meandering and breading tendencies and 
formation of shoals in the Ganga. The change in  morphology of the Ganga due to 
Farakka barrage and deposition of silt in the u pstream has also resulted in increase of 
flood fury in North Bihar. Hence, they suggested to develop an  effective Silt 
Management Policy at the national level, which will help in silt management of  not only 
of the Ganga but also of other rivers which would  contribute towards maintenance  
of "Aviralta" and "Nirmalta" of the rivers. The Government of Bihar have also informed 
that despite their raising the issue for so many years , the Government of India are yet 
to frame such a policy. The Committee are in con currence with the views of the Bihar  
Government and accordingly recommend that Government of India frame  suitable 
National Silt Management Policy for the Ganga. 
Reply of the Government 
 MoEF has issued sustainable Sand Mining Management Guidelines 2016 which 
has been prepared with extensive consultations with states and other stakeholders. The 
guidelines amongst its other objectives are also aimed at : 
a. Ensuring conservation of the river equilibrium and its natural environment by 
protection and restoration of the ecological system, 
b. Ensuring that the rivers are protected from bank and bed erosion beyond its 
stable profile, 
c. Avoiding pollution of river water leading to water quality deterioration, 
d. Maintaining the river equilibrium with the application of sedi ment transport 
principles.  

70 
 
 Further, a committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of Dr. M.A. 
Chitale with Secretary (MoWR, RD&GR) and Secretary (MoEF) as Members to study 
the problem of silt deposits in river Ganga owing to Farakka Dam.  The r eport titled 
“Report of the Committee constituted for preparation of guidelines for works on desiltat  
ion from Bhimgauda (Uttarakh and) to Farakka (West Bengal) “ has been submitted 
whose recommendations are attached at (Annexure - VII) 
 
Community participation and publicity campaign 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 28) 
 The Committee find lack  of effective and sustained community participation as 
one of the main reasons for not so  encouraging success of GAP I&II. Community 
participation enhances the long term sustainability of a mission and enables people to 
feel connected and motivated towards  working for the common goals. The experts who 
testified before the Committee also  emphasized the importance of community 
participation on a  sustained basis for the success of the massive and long term 
Programme of Ganga  Rejuvenation. The Secretary W/R  conceded that effective and 
sustained participation of the community leaders and the  representatives of the people 
was a sine qua non for the success of the programme.  Considering the importance of 
mass scale participation of the community in  Ganga Rejuvenation, the Committee 
recommend that an effective awareness  generation programme for stakeholders be 
devised and duly publicised. The awareness generation should be efficacious enough to 
sensitise the officials in the towns and cities covered under NGRBA programme such as 
sarpanches of the Panchayats, City mayors, councilors, corporators,  municipal officers, 
Town planners, officials of Urban Local bodies(ULBs) and  associations of citizens. The 
objective of such a programme should be creation of public awareness and an informed 
civil society, in particular  active involvement of the political leadership and the 
bureaucracy in the  Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), that will p articipate in and own the 
rejuvenation programmes, aware of the objectives of National Mission for Clean Ganga  
and new developments in technology that can be used efficiently and effectively. 
 
 

71 
 
Reply of the Government 
While the ecological damage caused to river Ganga over the years could be 
rectified and subsequently restrained through scientific methods and by employing new 
technologies, the reverence this 2525 -kilometer flowing lifeline for millions of people 
deserves, can only be garnered through social mobilization. Ridding the Ganga of its 
impurities and restoring its bio -diversity may be a time -bound task, which NMCG, now 
an Authority,is leaving no stone unturned to achieve, but, indisputably, it is far more 
important to arouse a social movement to ensure long lasting Aviral and Nirmal flow of 
our national river Ganga. Simply put, cleaning Ganga is rather a continuous process, 
than a momentary one that requires unceasing public support more than anything else. 
This exactly makes Namami Gange Programme’s Public Outreach and Awareness 
segment of unparalleled importance. To cover the ground between Namami Gange 
activities and local dwellers/visitors, the need for a targeted and effective awareness 
campaigns engendering clean Ganga consciousness is indispensable. Equally pre -
requisite is to evoke public participation for amelioration of the condition of the polluting 
waters of the holy Ganges.  
In view of the foregoing considerations, a slew of measures viz -a-viz Information, 
Education and Communication (I.E.C) activities for Namami Gange Programme have 
been taken by NMCG. Whereas national dialogues like Ganga Manthan (2014) and 
Ganga Gramin Sehbhagita  (2016) were organised over the years to encourage 
ruminations on a cleaner Ganga involving all stakeholders, word about Namami Gange 
Programme was spread through scores of I.E.C activities and exhibitions in locations 
along the river, especially during occasions of cultural importance (ArdhKumbh, 
MaghMela etc.). Dissemination of information was ensured not only through distribution 
of pamphlets, posters, brochures etc. but also by handing out subject -specific booklets 
like Ganga RahiPukar to school children in rural areas, attempting to inculcate clean 
practises in the young. H ere, in the National Capital, in 2016 alone, NMCG participated 
in as many as three exhibitions to popularize Namami Gange Programme - (India Water 
Week (April), International Trade Fair (November) and India International Science 
Festival (December)- among variety of stake holders. A special emphasis was laid on 
showcasing activities for river surface cleaning through trash skimmers.At least three 

72 
 
market conferences since the inception of NMCG to sensitize the market about Hybrid 
Annuity-PPP model for sewage  treatment infrastructure has helped immensely in 
building private -public partnerships. Several seminars and workshops were also 
organised by NMCG to instigate people’s participation. The launch of 231 projects in 
July 2016 at various locations generated m uch enthusiasm about Namami Gange 
Programme.  
In August 2016, Ganga Gram Yojana  was launched, aimed at making villages 
along the river Open Defecation Free (ODF), abate direct discharge of untreated liquid 
waste water from these villages into the river and  develop proper solid waste disposal 
facilities. Based on Sant Balbir Singh’s Seechewal village model, the Ganga Gram 
Yojana envisages educating 1,657 Gram Panchayats along Ganga representing 5,216 
villages. So far, more than 300 Gram Panchayats have been included in under this 
Yojana for development. 
Jan Samvaad , a comprehensive media strategy and action plan for public 
outreach 2016 -17 also got an in -principle approval from Hon. Minister of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. An all -encompassing 
blueprint, Jan Samvaad  lists the pre -eminence of outdoor publicity, mass awareness 
through TV/Radio/Social Media, media to “strike a spark”. Involvement of NGOs and 
religious leaders in bringing the people together was also stressed upon in the media 
plan.  
Because supervision should be followed by proper monitoring, a Nirikshan 
Abhiyaan was initiated by the Hon. Minister for Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation at two locations (Garh Mukhteshwar and Anup Sahar) in 
January 2016 to inspect, review and assess the on-going projects. More such exercises 
are lined up in the coming months to ensure effective implementation of Namami Gange 
Programme.  
Project for involvement of Youth in villages has been approved and Nehru Yuva 
Kendra Sangathan shall mobilise volunteers in 29 districts f or next 3 years from April 
2017. These volunteers will mobile and sensisitise Sarpanch, councillors, influencer. 
They will also organise public awareness activities. 

73 
 
In addition to this the following events were organized by NMCG pertaining to 
Communication, public outreach, consultation and monitoring. 
 Ganga Manthan: One-day national dialogue on Ganga Rejuvenation was 
organised at Vigyan Bhawan in New Delhi on 7th July 2014.  
 Hon. Minister’s Meetings with State Chief Ministers: Between December 
2014 and February 2015. 
 Nirikshan Abhiyan: Hon. Minister for Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation flagged -off an inspection programme from 
GarhMukhteshwar on 4th January, 2016. It was followed by a subsequent visit to 
Anup Sahar on 5th January, 2016. 
 Ganga Gramin Sehbhagita: Yet anothernational policy dialogue was organised 
at Talkatora stadium in New Delhi on 30th January 2016.  
 Namami Gange Theme song: Trichur Brothers” (Ram Kumar Mohan & Sri 
Krishna Mohan) Renowned south Indian Musicians has of fered Namami Gange 
Theme song - a music video, to National Mission for Clean Ganga. The music 
video was produced by National Film Development Corporation and funded by 
State Bank of India. 
 Market Conference on Hybrid Annuity -PPP Model: The first market 
conference on Hybrid Annuity -PPP model for sewage treatment infrastructure 
took place at Vigyan Bhawan in New Delhi on 24th February 2016 to sensitize the 
market about this model.    
 Awareness activities and Photo Exhibition during MaghMela, Allahabad 
and ArdhKumbh, Haridwar:  
 Ganga Gram Yojana: It was launched on 10th March 2016. 
 India Water Week Exhibition -2016: NMCG participated in India Water Week 
exhibition in April 2016 in New Delhi. The forum was used as a platform to induce 
interest in Hybrid Annuity -PPP model and showcase river surface cleaning 
activities through trash skimmers.  
 Launch of Projects: To give a major fillip with a renewed impetus to expedite 
progress of the Namami Gange Programme, various projects were launched on 
7th July, 2016 with main  function held at Haridwar, Uttarakhand and 

74 
 
simultaneous launch of 231 projects including Entry -level activities focusing on 
river surface cleaning, Ghat& crematoria development, Ganga Grams, 
afforestation and bio-diversity, environment literacy and STP re habilitation worth 
more than INR 1500 crore were launched at various locations in five riparian 
States of Ganga Basin 
 Sarpanch Sammelan: This programme was conducted in Allahabad on 20 th 
August 2016 during which Hon. Minister for Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation addressed 1651 Sarpanchs of villages 
along river Ganga. During this programme, Seechewal village model was 
adopted for waste water management in villages along the river.  
 NMCG pavilion at International Trade Fair -2016: In a nattempt topopularise 
NamamiGange programme and showcase the activities and steps taken to 
cleanse river Ganga, a pavilion was put up at International Trade Fair in 
November 2016 in New Delhi. 
 India International Science Festival -2016: NMCG also participat ed in IISF in 
December 2016 in New Delhi. 
 PravasiBharatiya Divas -2017: NMCG participated in the PravasiBharatiya 
Divas in January 2017 in Bangalore. 
 Market Conference on Hybrid Annuity -PPP Model: The second market 
conference, a consultative meeting, was organised on 18th January 2017 to invite 
prospective developers to invest in sewage treatment infrastructure for projects 
(Haridwar and Varanasi) approved under HybridAnnuity-PPP model.  
 CSR workshop: A CSR workshop on Ganga Rejuvenation was conducted on 
19th January 2017, which was attended by representatives of PSUs, banks and 
corporate.  
 
Formation of GPS  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 29) 
 The Committee also recommend that the  Government consider forming Ganga 
Protection Societies (GPS) at the ward level in urban areas and the gram sabha level in 
rural areas involving  participation of men and women and students with specific 

75 
 
functions assigned to them. Besides suitable and catchy advertisement campaigns in  
local languages in print and visual med ia, may be launched. Jingles for  broadcasting in 
All India radio and FM radio may also be done. Further,  publicly accessible and well 
publicized time tables and a daily updated  website, featuring videos, photos, and 
peoples own stories regarding the  revitalization of the ganga River system may be 
formulated and given regular publicity with the objective of Ganga rejuvenation as a test 
case. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Within the Information, Education and Communication segment, several activities 
were taken up to enhance the involvement of people living in Ganga basin states in 
NamamiGangeprogramme. Scores of persons were educated about the river’s bio -
diversity, ecolog y through rallies, pad -yatras, Ganga chaupals, cleanliness drives, 
competition for children, shramdaan, adoption of ghats, talk shows, dialogues etc. To 
reach the masses, mediums like TV/Radio, advertisements, publication of special 
featured articles, advertorials were resorted to.  
 
Need for legislative framework for integrated river basin  
management 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 30) 
 The Committee observe that as mentioned elsewhere in the report,  
there were inordinate delays in setting up of STPs ,  laying of sewage lines, putting  
up of sewage pumping stations, etc at many places in the basin states along the  
river Ganga under Ganga Action Plan -I and II, which resulted in huge cost  
escalation. The reasons stated for delay include delay in acquisition  of land,  
obtaining statutory approvals, adverse climatic conditions, etc. These problems  
could have been well addressed had there been a robust coordination mechanism  
having representation from all the stakeholders. Realizing the need for such a body,  
the Committee observe that Government of India created National Ganga River  
Basing Authority (NGRBA) on 20 February, 2009 under section 3(3) of the  Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 with a mandate for planning, financing,  
monitoring and coordinating with the  Centre and State Governments in connection  

76 
 
with Ganga rejuvenation. However, even after the formation of NGRBA, the delay in  
the afore mentioned sewage works continued, putting a question mark on the  
efficacy of the NGRBA for Ganga rejuvenation. The Commi ttee also observe that  
many activities of Ganga rejuvenation fall under the domain of not only different  
Ministries/ Departments of the Central Government but also under the domain of  
state Governments. Further, and more important, many vital aspects of ri ver 
management, the paramount need for securing the purity of river water, its  
continuous environmental flow, definition of environmental flow, protection of  
river biota and its unhindered movement in the length and breadth of the river  
including construct ion of river passes, protection of river ecology, maintenance of  
ground water table and its connect with the river water, regulation of water  
withdrawal for industrial, agricultural and human use, imposition of fines on the  
polluters, impounding of river w ater, navigation protection of flood plains, etc.  
need to be regulated by law by Parliament in exercise of the legislative power  
conferred by article 246 read with entry 56, List I of the Seventh Schedule to the  
Constitution. The Ministry of Environment, F orests & Climate Change admitted that  
the existing laws of pollution control, whether it is the Water (Prevention of Control  
Pollution) Act, 1974 and ‘the Air (Prevention of Control Pollution) Act 1981 or the EP  
Act, 1986, they are a little weak with regar d to enforcement provisions. However,  
the M/o Water Resources, River Development and Ganga rejuvenation furnishing a  
different view stated that the afore mentioned enactments have adequate  
provisions to deal with industrial pollution control. Further, the Committee also note that 
MoEF&CC are working to make the penal provisions of the afore  mentioned acts more 
stringent by way of criminalization of violation and also  imposition of deterrent financial 
penalties. Mindful of the fact that the  gargantuan task o f Ganga rejuvenation, being a 
problem of life and  development, cannot be accomplished through a piecemeal  
fragmented approach, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of  MoWR,RD&GR 
take appropriate action expeditiously so that a strong,  comprehensive and  credible 
legislative framework is put in place  envisaging, among others, the creation of an 
empowered overarching authority to deal with all aspects of the Ganga for ensuring that  
the Ganga remains 'nirmal' and flows incessantly. The Committee should  like to be 
apprised of the outcome within next six months of the presentation of this report. 

77 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Towards the objective of rejuvenation & restoring river Ganga to her Pristine 
forum, the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 21 st September, 2016 approved “ The 
River Ganga (Rejuvenation, Protection and Management) Authorities Order, 2016”  
which had since been published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 3 
sub section (ii) dated 7th October, 2016. The earlier autho rity, National Ganga River 
Basin Authority (NGRBA), constituted under the provisions of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 had been dissolved with effect from the 7-10-2016.   
 The Notification envisages five tier structure at national, state and distr ict level to 
take measures for prevention, control and abatement of environmental pollution in river 
Ganga and to ensure continuous adequate flow of water so as to rejuvenate the river 
Ganga as below; 
1. National Ganga Council under chairmanship of Hon’ble Pr ime Minister of 
India, 
2. Empowered Task Force (ETF) on river Ganga under chairmanship of Hon’ble 
Union Minister of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, 
3. National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG), 
4. State Ganga Committees; and 
5. District Ganga Committees in very specified district abutting river Ganga and 
its tributaries in the states, 
 Further, NMCG has been provided with two tier management structure 
comprising of Governing Council and Executive Committee. Both of them are headed 
by Director G eneral, NMCG. Executive Committee has been authorized to accord 
approval for all projects up to Rs. 1000 crore. Similar to structure at national level, State 
Programme Management Groups (SPMGs) act as implementing arm of State Ganga 
Committees. Thus the newly created structure attempts to bring all stakeholders on one 
platform to take a holistic approach towards the task of Ganga cleaning and 
rejuvenation.  
  

78 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
         -NIL- 
  

79 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Delay in setting up STPs 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee observe that the setting up of STPs at Badrinath and Karanprayag 
with a capacity of 3.0 and 1.4 MLD was sanctioned on 22.08.2008  and 24.12.2008 with 
an outlay of ₹4.62 and ₹3.49 crore respectively. However, construction of the same could 
not be commenced and not even a  single rupee was spent even after a  lapse of about 
seven years reportedly due to adverse weather conditions, natural disasters, dispute over 
lands, etc. Similarly, the projects for I&D of the sewage at Badrinath, Deoprayag,  
Karanprayag, Rudraparyag, Joshi math, were sanctioned in 2008/ 2009 /2010, the 
physical progress of these projects range from 13 - 40% only even after about 7 years 
due to delay in  obtaining permission from the Border Road Organization (BRO), natural 
calamities, delay inland acquisition,  etc. Even EAP such as JICA assisted Ganga Action 
Plan Phase - II project at  Varanasi, witnessed massive delays. The project, though 
sanctioned on  14.07.2010, could not  be completed even after about five years. 
Surprisingly, the physical progress of the project was 22 % only as at the end June, 2015 
and no further progress was reported to the  Committee. Similarly, the project - Sewage 
System & STP Works (Phase-II) at Kannauj, though sanctioned on 24.02.2011 , has seen 
physical progress of 22% only even afte r four years. Asked to furnish the reasons for the 
extremely tardy progress of these projects, the  Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, merely stated that  original date of completion of 
JICA assisted Varanasi project and the  sewerage system & STP  works at Kannauj were 
31.07.2015 and 31.03.2016 respectively  and the cost escalation, if  any, due to delay 
would be borne by the Government of Uttar Pradesh without intimating  the Committee 
about the latest progress in the matter. Fu rther, the projects for Sewer  network, Sewage 
Pumping stations (SPS) and STP, funded by World Bank, at Begusarai,  Buxar, Hajipur, 
Munger despite getting the sanction in 2010 as EAPs, could not be completed  even after 
5 years. Disturbingly, the physical pro gress of the projects range from 21 -45%. Despite 
such a slow progress, the M/o WR, RD &GR assured that these projects are likely to  be 

80 
 
completed during 2015-16 and 2016-17. The ministry attributed the delays due to delays 
in land acquisition, court cases, introduction of new land acquisition bill and thereby 
changes of compensation eligibility of land owners, etc. The additional cost, if any, due to 
delay would  be borne by the State Government.  The Committee note that without 
assessing the ground realities in acquiring the land for setting up of sewerage projects, 
sanctions/ approvals were given and funds allocated and allowed to lapse. Unfortunately,  
this is not confined to one/two projects but across the states such as Bihar, Uttar Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that for want of approval 
from BRO, a sewer  project got delayed badly. Such avoidable delays, the Committee 
believe, are due to absence of close coordination in keeping with the salutary principle of 
cooperative federalism and want of regular interventions by the authorities concerned.  
Undoubtedly, had there been effective coordination and synergy  between the multiple 
authorities, delays in completion of the projects  could have been avoided or overcome. 
Further, the committee were informed that many projects are scheduled to be completed/ 
to have  been completed during 2015 -16. The Committee would like to be  
apprised of the status of these projects within next six months, Statewise, STP wise  
indicating clearly the cost and time overruns alongwith the reasons for delays, the revised 
timelines for their completion and the authorities which would bear such escalated costs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A State -wise statement indicating the projects completed, ongoing along with 
requisite details viz., sanctioned cost, nature of works, progress and time lines is 
enclosed as Annexure-I. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.10 of Chapter - I) 
 
Cost escalation in setting up STPs  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 The Committee deplore that unconscionable inordinate delays in completion of the 
sewer projects resulted in continued emptying of untreated hazardous sewer into river 
Ganga. Further, the cost of the projects might have gone up manifold increasing the 
financial burden of the states already reeling under financial crunch. For instance, the 

81 
 
State Government of Uttar Pradesh informed the Committee that implementing body (UP 
Jal Nigam) is already facing financial stress. Hence, the Committee are of the consi dered 
view that states may not be able to meet the cost of escalation of the projects thereby 
casting shadow on the completion of these projects. Some of these ongoing works fall 
under Component ‘A’ of the ‘Namami Gange Programme’ and are funded as Central  
Sector Scheme with contribution of GoI and States in the ratio of 70:30. The Committee  
note that in order to ensure that the 'nirmalta' and the 'nirantarta' or  'aviralta' of the Ganga 
is attained by July, 2018, the GoI have made the Ganga Rejuvenation a Hundred Percent 
Central Sector Scheme as stated in reply to a supple mentary to SQ.No. 61 in Lok Sabha 
on 28.04.2016. The Committee, therefore, recommend that M/o WR,RD&GR may explore 
the possibility of treating the uncompleted projects as new  initiatives an d fund them 
entirely as Central Sector scheme under  component ‘B’ of the 'Namami Gange' for the 
success of the Programme.  Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
expenditure incurred so far and to be incurred year -wise and State -wise during  the 
years 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-20 (December). 
Reply of the Government 
 There are 80 projects continuing under erstwhile NGRBA framework and are 
being continued under Namami Gange programme.  The detailed statement is given at 
Annexure - I.  As is seen from the Statement, 66 ongoing projects are scheduled for 
completion during next two years.  3 projects were reconsidered for revised sanction 
based on the requests received from the State governments. The recommendations of 
the Committee have been noted for future consideration by the government. 
Funds released to the States till 2015-16 &2016-17(30.11.2016)                                 
(Rs. In crore) 
States 2015-16* 2016-17* Grand Total 
Bihar 120.23 5.83 126.06 
Jharkhand 27.83 34.15 61.98 
Uttar Pradesh 147.58 465.75 613.33 
Uttarakhand 30.26 6.55 36.81 
West Bengal 185.79 6826 254.05 

82 
 
Haryana 30.00 37.00 67.00 
Delhi 4.96  4.96 
Environmental Planning & 
Coordination Organisation, Jabalpur 
3.39  3.39 
Grand Total 550.04 617.54 1,167.58 
*Rs.578 crore releases to Ministry of Drinking Water for Swach  Bharat  Rural), Rs. 263 
crore in the year 2015-16 and Rs. 315 crore in the year 2016-17. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.10 of Chapter - I) 
 
Gap between installed and actual utilization capacity of STPs 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 The Committee observe that in the state of West Bengal STPs were set up at 31 
locations in the cities/ towns situated along the River Ganga with a capacity to treat 355 
Million Liters pe r day (MLD) under Ganga Action Plan -I&II. Out of these 31 STPs, two 
STPs with a capacity of 11.86 MLD are operating at 100%, 13 are operating at 50%, 4 are 
operating at less than 50% of the installed capacity. Five STPs are not commissioned at 
all and one STP has stopped functioning. As a result, out of 355MLD installed treatment 
capacity, operational / working capacity is 166 MLD (approx). In other words, the 
operational capacity is less than 50% of the installed capacity. The inescapable 
conclusion is tha t more than 50% of sewage, which the STPs are supposed to treat, is 
being allowed to flow into Ganga due to less than optimal functioning of these STPs. 
Similarly, in Bihar, the five STPs established at Beur, Saidpur, Pahari, Karmalichak and 
Bhagalpur under GAP I &II with an installed capacity of 120 MLD are operating at 65MLD 
(approx 50%) of the installed capacity. The Central Pollution Control Board carried out 
third party assessment of 51 STPs sanctioned by Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change (MoEF&CC) in Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal. The  
Committee note that the assessment by CPCB revealed that (i) as  against the installed 
capacity of 1009 MLD, the actual capacity  utilization is 602 MLD which is 59%, (ii) STPs 
are violating BOD parameters, 1 STP exceeded the COD for discharge and 14 STPs are 

83 
 
found non operational. Surprisingly, the assessment is conspicuously silent  as to the 
reasons for substantial underutilization of installed  capacities, exceeding the COD and 
BOD limits and non operationalisation of 14 STPs. The Committee therefore, recommend 
that the specific reasons for sub optimal performance of these STPs  may be ascertained 
and the problems rectified and the action taken in  this regard may be intimated to the 
Committee within six months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 There are 67 STPs located in various cities/ towns along the river Ganga.  Out of 
these, based on monitoring of 35 STPs carried out by CPCB during April -
December’2016, 17  were found to be complying with the extant standards while 14 
were found to be non -operational. While 4 STPs were found to be non -complying.  
NMCG in association with State government and its agencies has already initiated an 
exercise to identify the reas ons for sub -optimal level of operations of these STPs and 
also reasons for a large number of them being non -operational.  Base -line information 
so gathered would be utilized to take suitable measures to address these causative 
reasons for non-functioning of STPs as well as their functioning below optimum levels. 
Besides, CPCB has taken various measures for management of sewage and 
operation of STPs: 
 CPCB has issued directions in April, 2015 under section 18 (1) (b) of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Po llution) Act, 1974 to the State Pollution Control 
Boards (SPCBs) of the five Ganga basin states (Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar, Jharkhand & West Bengal) and asked to direct concerned municipalities 
and other concerned authorities in the State responsib le for treatment and 
disposal of sewage for treatment of sewage and to evolve methods of utilization 
of sewage and suitable trade effluents in agriculture (Annexure - II). 
 
 CPCB has also issued directions under Section 5 of Environment (Protection) 
[E (P)] Act, 1986 on October, 2015 to the Commissioner/Mayor/Chief Executive 
Officer of Nagar Nigam/Palika/Panchayat of 118 towns located on the main 

84 
 
stem of River Ganga and regarding treatment and utilization of sewage for 
restoration of water quality of river (Annexure - III) and also directed that  
o Untreated sewage shall not be disposed into the river or any other 
recipient system. 
o The local urban body shall set STPs of adequate capacity and 
provide sewerage system to cover the entire local/urban area and to 
ensure the complete treatment of sewage generated.  
 
 CPCB has issued directions in March, 2017 under section 18 (1) (b) of the 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 to the State Pollution 
Control Boards (SPCBs) of the five Ganga basin states (Uttarakhand, Uttar 
Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand & Wes t Bengal) and asked to monitor the STPs 
discharging into river Ganga  on monthly basis and to direct STPs operators for 
continuous operation of STPs without breakdown and to file prosecution against 
the STP operators, if STPs are found to be non-compliant or not being operated 
for a long time without justifiable reasons. (Annexure - IV) 
 In addition, due to under utilization of the STPs in few States like Bihar, new 
projects are sanctioned to take care of the existing sewage load as well as future 
demands i ncluding necessary Operation and Maintenance facility for 10 years.  The 
existing STP capacities have also been upgraded with enhanced treatment capacity in 
Patna as per the details given below: 
S. 
No. 
Treatment  Plant Zone Existing 
treatment 
capacity 
(MLD) 
Proposed 
Treatment 
Capacity 
(MLD) 
Present Status 
1 Pahari-Patna 25 60 Revised Administrative 
Approval is being issued.  
2 Beur-Patna 35 43 Works awarded. Work to 
commence soon. 3 Saidpur-Patna 45 60 
4 Karmalichak-Patna 4 37 
 

85 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.13 of Chapter - I) 
 
O&M of STPs  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 Many leading hydrologists and other domain experts, who tendered their 
valuable testimony to Committee, felt that the reasons for sub optimal performance of 
STPs and Sewage Pumping Stations (SPS) include non availability of funds for 
Operations & Maintenance (O&M) of sewerage works, Poor supply of electricity, 
unavailability of technical course material and lack of motivation for O&M staff. Furt her, 
the experts informed that postings to O&M plants are seen as punishment. They also 
admitted that there was dearth of funds for O&M of assets created for pollution control 
works. The representatives of  MoEF&CC conceded shortages of manpower and their 
inability to  attract qualified human resource despite advertisement of the posts  
due to unattractive pay packages. Since, the O&M services are crucial  for ensuring 
optimal performance of STPs and SPSs, the Committee  recommend that  
(i) suitable provisions may be made to ensure that it is legally binding  on the distributor 
of electricity to supply uninterrupted supply of  electricity to STPs;  
(ii) alternative energy options, such as wind and solar, may be  explored for running 
STPs especially in those areas whe re there  are frequent outages;  
(iii) selected parameters need to be monitored through automatic  monitoring 
instruments. Such instruments can be online to enable  round the clock monitoring;  
(iv) funds crunch should not be allowed to come in the way of O&M o f sewage works; 
and (v) to perk up the morale of O&M staff and officers and to attract new  
recruits to the posts, suitable attractive pay structure and  adequate posts may be 
created for running the STPs efficiently and round the clock. 
Reply of the Government 
 Directions were issued by CPCB u/s 5 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 vide 
letter dated 09/10/2015 to municipal authorities/ULBs for management of sewage from 
118 towns identified along R. Ganga. In the directions it is stated in Point no. 4 that  

86 
 
“Existing STPs if any, as applicable shall be properly maintained to comply with the 
proposed standards. At the Inlet and Outlet of the STP, online monitoring devices shall 
be installed to monitor the consented parameters”.  
The sewerage projects sanction ed under NGRBA are on DBOT mode which 
includes O&M by the successful concessionaire for 10 years. First 5 years O&M cost is 
inbuilt within the project cost whereas for the next five years the cost is to be borne by 
the State / ULB. 
Under Namami Gange, the new projects shall be approved under central sector 
scheme with 100% central funding and including the provision for O&M of the assets for 
10-15 years. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.10 of Chapter - I) 
 
Lack of scientific and technical resources 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 The Committee note that the responsibility of Operations & Maintenance 
(O&M)of Sewerage works set up in connection with Ganga Rejuvenation rests with the 
state Governments. The Government of Uttar Pradesh ad mitted that there was 
contamination of water bodies and that there was an urgent need for setting up state-of-
the-art STPs and labs. The Committee also observe that the number of sanctioned 
posts for technical and scientific personnel are lying vacant in C entral Pollution Control 
Board. Asked about the environmental research being carried out by the universities in 
the context of depleting sub -surface and surface water resources, rising pollutants and 
contamination of water bodies, the Secretary, Environmen t observed that the 
Committee had 'hit the nail on the head' and conceded the need for such studies given 
the 'enlarging responsibility' of the MoEF&CC. The Committee further note that 
MoEF&CC requested the Department of Expenditure for carrying out a stud y to assess 
the adequacy or otherwise of the extant manpower of CPCB in view of its enlarging 
responsibilities. The Committee were also apprised that despite advertisements for 
filling up of the posts in CPCB, there is no enthusiastic response probably due  to the 

87 
 
reason that the posts are far from attractive for the talents required for recruitment.  
The Committee expresses their serious concern over lack of sufficient  
technical and scientific manpower in the Central Pollution Control Board and  
in the State Pollution Control Boards entrusted with the responsibility of  
pollution control, water quality testing, etc. Further, it is still a matter of far  
greater worry and concern that the posts are lying vacant as the talent  
sought to be recruited find the pay an d perquisites attached to the posts far  
from attractive. Considering the level of rising pollution and contamination  
of water bodies and the need for setting up state -of-the-art STPs and labs,  the 
Committee recommend that  (a) the parameters and pay and perks for the manpower 
especially technical for STPs and Labs may be revisited to attract right  
talents; (b) the Department of Expenditure should expedite the study to  assess the 
manpower requirements of CPCB in view of its  enlarging responsibilities and c omplete 
the same with in specified  time and conclusive action be taken for filling up the posts  
without delay;  (c) suitable measures may be taken to ensure availability of  
appropriately qualified and suitably trained manpower in requisite  numbers for surve ys 
and investigation, project preparation,  implementation, Operation and 
Maintenance(O&M) of sewerage  works, financial, organisational, legal, regulatory 
implementation and monitoring strategies of the projects; and  (d) the parameters so 
established may also be shared with the States  so that the SPCB also benefit from the 
action taken by the Union Government. 
Reply of the Government 
 The work study of non -scientific and non -technical posts of Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change has been winded up due to non -submission of 
requisite material/data/information by Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate 
Change. As regard to work measurement study of scientific and technical posts, 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has constituted a  Committee with 
a Core Member of SIU. Last meeting of this Committee was held on 2nd February, 2016.  
The report has not yet been finalized.  

88 
 
The status of manpower required, sanctioned and posts lying vacant in the two projects 
‘Pollution Inventorization Assessment and Surveillance’(PIAS) and ‘Strengthening 
of Environmental Regulator- CPCB’ (SER) is as follows:  
Technical/Scientific Manpower required to be engaged in PIAS Project 
Positions Scientist 
‘B’ 
RA     
 (I, II & III) 
SRF JRF DEO Total 
Sanctioned post under 
PIAS 
0 31 31 31 4 97 
Presently available  0 23 6 0 2 31 
Proposed post  30 17 4 10 2 63 
 
Technical/Scientific Manpower required to be engaged in SER Project 
Positions Scientist 
‘B’ 
Scientist 
‘C’ 
Scientist 
‘D’ 
Scientist 
‘E’ 
Scientist 
‘F’ 
Taxonomist 
Sanctioned 
post under 
SER 
5 8 6 2 1 2 
Presently 
available  
0 7 4 2 0 0 
 
The reason for 66 post lying vacant under PIAS is as under: 
 The CPCB was not allowed to recruit the entire sanctioned post at once 
accordingly phase wise recruitment was  carried out, however maximum manpower 
available was 29 RA-I & 4 SRF. 
 The proposal was sanctioned on 29 th Mar, 2011, however the permission for the 
engagement of entire manpower was allowed on April, 2013 and it was again asked not 
to engage remaining man power on 18 th April, 2015. In between the maximum 30 RA 
were engaged during 2014 -15 and & 16 JRF/SRF in 2013 -14 however they did not 
continue for better opportunity and as on date the manpower available is  31 and that 
has been frozen on 8th Sep, 2016.  

89 
 
 The reason for 11 post lying vacant under SER: Applications through 
advertisement has been received and are being processed for engagement. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.22 of Chapter - I) 
 
Incentives to Small Scale Industries for ZLD  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 The Committee observe that many of the GPIs are small scale in nature but 
employing substantial number of people put together. The government is yet to dispel 
the apprehension that these units may be using obsolete technology in their production 
processes which may not be treating the effluents resulting in their being discharged 
into the river Ganga or its tributaries. The Committee are apprehensive that if hefty 
penalties are imposed on these small scale  units or t he units are closed down, many 
people will lose their employment  and source of livelihood. The Committee therefore 
recommend that- (i) tax and non tax incentives may be offered to the units which are  
adopting new technologies with considerable amount of  investments to become Zero 
Liquid Discharge (ZLD) units;  (ii) the availability of easy finance may be ensured at 
affordable rates from the banks and or Interest Subvention and Viability Gap  
Funding (VGF) may be given expeditiously; and  (iii) these units may be provided 
technical knowhow from  Government owned academic and research institutes at  
subsidised rates so that they become ZLDs. 
Reply of the Government 
 Incentives to Small Scale Industries for ZLD  
To reduce financial liability on SSI, NMCG has propose d a 20 MLD ZLD – based 
CETP for tannery cluster at Jajmau after due consideration of applicable environmental 
regulatory norms, control of O & M mechanism and impact on receiving environment of 
proposed CETP. Further NMCG has completed the process of Diagn ostic Study and 
Feasibility Report(DS&FR) for management of wastewater generated from textile 
clusters at Pilkuwa, Farrukhabad, Rooma and Mathura. Process modification cum clean 

90 
 
technology adoption has been considered in DPR and DS&FR. All financial liabil ity 
arising out of these preparatory studies are being met through NMCG fund to support 
the SSI. 
Based on inspection of 355 units during the last one year, the waste water 
generation from GPIs has been found reduced by achieving ZLD in 4 units of Pulp and 
paper sector, while 44 out of 67 such units have achieved the prescribed norms of water 
consumptions.  In distillery sector, 17 units out of 32 operational (including two brewery) 
have installed MEE and Bio -composting/ incineration to achieve ZLD.  In sugar sector, 
54 out of 57 operational units have provisioned for re -use of treated water for irrigat ion, 
and of them 52 units have achieved water conservation norms. Also, 39 sugar units 
have installed mini-cooling tower for recycling of waste water.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.25 of Chapter - I) 
 
Implementation and status of IMG recommendations on seven rivers 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 The Committee observe that the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) constituted in July, 
2012 to study environmental flow of Ganga , noticed that the implementation of all the 
Hydro Electric Power Projects (HEPPs) on the Bhagirathi and Alakananda will lead to 
81% of River Bhagirathi and 65% of River Alakananda getting affected with extensive 
implications for other needs of the society and the river itself. The expert Committee 
also noticed that there are a large number of projects which have very small distances 
between them leaving little space for river to regenerate and revive. They therefore had 
recommended that seven rivers, including Nayar, Bal Ganga river, Rishi Ganga, Assi 
Ganga, dhauli Ganga ( upper reaches) , birari Gand bhyunde Ganga should be kept in 
pristine form, no further hydropower developments should take place in this region, and 
environmental Upgradation should be taken up in these basins extensively. The 
Committee would lik e to be apprised of the - (i) acceptance or otherwise of the IMG’s 
recommendations by the  Government of India;  (ii) specific steps taken to upgrade the 
environment in the said  basins and the impact of these measures on the environment; 

91 
 
and (iii) approvals granted for hydro power projects, if any, contrary to the  
recommendations of IMG, along with the specific reasons for such approvals. 
Reply of the Government 
Implementation and status of IMG recommendations on seven rivers: 
 The Committee observe that the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) constituted in July, 
2012 to study environmental flow of Ganga, noticed that the implementation of all the 
Hydro Electric Power Projects (HEPPs) on the Bhagirathi is and Alakananda will lead to 
81% of River Bhagirathi and 65% of river Alakananda getting affected with extensive 
implications for other needs of the society and the river itself.  The expert committee 
also noticed that there are a large number of projects which have very small distances 
between them leaving little space for river to regenerate and revive.  They therefore had 
recommended that seven rivers, including Nayar, Bal Ganga river, Rishi Ganga, Assi 
Ganga, Dhauli Ganga (upper reaches), Birhi and Bhyunder Ganga should be kept in 
pristine form, no further hydropower developments should take place in this region, and 
environmental upgradation should be taken up in these basins extensively. The 
Committee is apprised of the following:- 
(i)  An inter-ministerial group was set up under the chairmanship of Sh. B.K. Cha turvedi 
Member (Energy), Planning Commission vide MoEF letter no. B -12014/4/2012-
NMCG/NGRBA dated 15.06.2012 for the various objectives including suggesting 
environmental flow requirement for various stretches of Bhagirathi, Alaknanda and other 
tributaries of river Ganga and to review the environmental impacts of projects proposed 
on these tributaries of river Ganga and recommend necessary remedial action. Report 
of the IMG on issues relating to river Ganga, submitted in April, 2013. Acceptance or 
otherwise of IMG’s recommendations is to be replied by Ministry of Environment, Forest 
& Climate Change (MoEF&CC). 
(ii) The Environment & Forest Clearance is accorded to a Hydro Electric Project after 
complying all the statutory norms / requirements laid down by Mo EF&CC in this regard. 
Each and every project passes through a very elaborate and extensive process of 
environmental clearance. Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of every aspect of 
environment i.e. physical, terrestrial and aquatic is carried out for each and every 
project which requires Environmental clearance as per the extant laws. Based on the 
findings of the EIA studies, various Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), be it the 

92 
 
Catchment Area Treatment for arresting the soil erosion from the degraded catchments; 
Biodiversity Conservation and Management, to conserve the rich biodiversity of the 
area; Fisheries Management for conservation, propagation and replenishment of fish in 
the river system/r eservoir; Restoration of muck dumping/quarry sites; Landscaping; 
Green Belt Development etc. are formulated and implemented in true form and spirit. 
The stipulation regarding the release of Environmental flows is also being laid down by 
MOEF & CC, while ac cording environmental clearance to a project. Besides, strict 
monitoring of the implementation of environmental safeguards is required to be 
undertaken regularly by the Central and State regulatory Agencies. 
(iii)  No Hydro Electric Project on river Ganga has been concurred by CEA after 
submission of the aforesaid report in the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.10 of Chapter - I) 
 
Nirmalta and Aviralta of the river 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
 The Committee note that in pursuance of Hon’ble Supreme Court’s judgment 
dated 13.08.2013, MoEF&CC constituted an Expert body under the Chairmanship of Dr. 
Ravi Chopra, member, NGRBA and Director, Peoples’ Science Institute, Dehradun (i) to 
make a detailed  study as to whether Hydro Electric Power Projects(HEPPs), existing 
and under construction, have caused environmental degradation and if so, to what 
extent , (ii) also whether such projects have contributed to the tragedy which occurred in 
the month of June, 2013 in Uttarakhand, and (iii) to examine the impact of the proposed 
24 HEPPs on the bio diversity in Alakananda and Bhagirathi river basins as identified by 
Wild Life Institute of India (WII). The Committee note that having been dammed at Tehri 
in western Uttarakhand, the Ganga descends onto the plains, only to be robbed of its 
water by huge diversions through the Upper Ganga Canal at Haridwar, which reduces 
its discharge to mere 15 billion m3/yr and then by the Lower Ganga Canal near Aligarh. 
That leav es so little water in the Ganga that the dry -season discharge at Kanpur is 
merely 90 to 386 m3/ second, at Allahabad 279 to 997 m3/ second, and at Varanasi 278 
to 1160 m3/second. Despite being joined by a number of tributaries, the Ganga is 

93 
 
progressively polluted due to heavy discharges at the rate of 3000 million liters per day 
from towns and cities, despite of sewage treatment plants varying from 13.5% in small 
cities to 27.8 to 50.4% in big cities - 329 million kilolitres. Nearly 50% of waste waters 
are discharged untreated into this lifeline of the central Indo -Gangetic Plain. Over 1.3 
billion litres of sewage, 260 million litres of industrial waste, runoff from 6 million tonnes 
of fertilizers and 9000 tonnes of pesticides used in agriculture, and very l arge quantities 
of solid waste are daily released into the Ganga. Taking into consideration these facts of 
pollution, the Ganga water can no longer be described as life -giving and holy. On the 
contrary the Ganga has been declared as one of the ten most pol luted rivers of the 
world by WWF International, Switzerland. Notably, Secretary Water Resources candidly 
admitted the connect between 'nirmalta  and aviralta' and stated that there could be no 
'nirmalta' without 'aviralta'.  Surprisingly, asked whether dammi ng of the river would be 
useful for controlling pollution or it will help aggravate pollution, Secretary,  Environment 
was not in a position to give a definitive answer as he felt that  it would depend on 
multiple factors. Further, the Government could not  furnish the decadal data of the lean 
and non -lean season flows in the Ganga  right from 1951. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the  Government in the CWC must collect and compile the data 
about the decadal flow, both of lean and non -lean period, at each station/city including 
the spots from where the water is diverted/impounded. To a pointed question  
whether the human ashes pollute the river, expert hydrologist made it emphatically clear 
that the burnt human ashes instead purify the river. The  Committee note that the expert 
body, appointed under the direction of the  Hon'ble Supreme Court, has since submitted 
its report with regard to the  impact of HEPP existing and under construction and their 
impact on  environment including landslides and biodiver sity, they would like to be  
informed of the action taken or proposed to be taken on each of the  recommendations 
and the impact of acceptance & implementation on the  Nirmalta and also Aviralta of the 
Ganga within six months of presentation of  this report. Further, the Committee may be 
furnished the decadal data of the  lean and non -lean season flows in the Ganga right 
from 1951 from points of origins to major towns and sites right up to Haldia. 
 
 

94 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The decadal data of lean season and non-lean season flows in the Ganga from 
the date of opened site to October, 2016 from point of origins to Haldia is given at 
(Annexure - VI).  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.31 of Chapter - I) 
 
Arsenic in Ganga basin 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 31) 
 The Committee in their 1st report (16th Lok Sabha) on  
Occurrence of High Arsenic Content in Ground Water pertaining to M/o WR,RD &GR,  
expressing concern over presence of arsenic in ground water in the Ganga - 
Brahmaputra plain, had recommended that a time bound programme be implemented 
for identifying the  causes and to find effective remedies in arsenic release. The M/o 
WR,RD&GR in their interim  action taken reply submitted that Inter Ministerial Group 
(IMG) has directed the National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee to take up a study 
on the genesis of arsenic occurrence  in Ganga -Brahmaputra Basin. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of time  frame within which the study by NIH, Roorkee 
regarding the genesis of  arsenic occurrence in Ganga - Brahmaputra basin would be 
completed. In the  interim, the measures taken by the GoI to warn the people in the 
affected belts of the presence of arsenic in water and the precautions which should  
be taken to help minimise or avo id health hazards be given wide publicity.  
In conclusion, having regard to the enormity of the challenges and taking  
note of the repeated solemn assertions of the Prime Minister to rejuvenate the  
Ganga and to make a Swatch Bharat, the Committee reiterate t he imperative need  
for setting up an overarching and all empowered apex authority/body tasked  
exclusively with the responsibility of rejuvenation of the Ganga so as to restore  
its pristine form as expeditiously as possible. Ganga, around which grew Indian  
civilisation and legend, continues to be the lifeline of 43 per cent of India's  population 
and a river of faith to millions of devotees within and beyond the  shores of India. The 

95 
 
rising demographic pressure, growing untamed urbanization  and industrializati on, 
continue to aggravate pollution in the Ganga rendering the Ganga not only non-potable, 
unfit for bathing purposes but also extremely  hazardous over long stretches. The 
impounding of river water obstructing its flow, diversion of water for drinking, agricultural 
and industrial purposes and the  pollutant load has rendered the Ganga dry and parch, 
and a sewer over long  stretches in the up -stream areas. Renowned hydrologists and 
experts on river  dynamics and water management testified before the Committee t hat 
the Ganga bears no comparison with any river of the world because of its highest point 
of origin, steep gradient, kinetic energy and water quality. Indiscriminate  
anthropogenic interventions including indiscriminate construction of HPPs in the  
upper reaches of the highly fragile Himalayas coupled with 80 to 90 per cent of  
water diversion and discharge of e ffluents by 144 drains and entry of solid waste  
from non point sources have only aggravated the pollutant load of the Ganga.  The 
Committee ardently hope that the Government would give earnest consideration to their 
recommendation and implement them expeditiously for  rejuvenation of the Ganga, the 
life line of millions around which India civilization and culture grew, by July, 2018 without 
further time and cost escalation. 
Reply of the Government 
A. Brief Scenario of Arsenic concentration and Arsenic genesis in Ganga -
Brahmaputra-Meghna Basin 
 
The Ganga -Brahmaputra-Meghna (GBM) river basin, which have an area of 1.7 
million km2  is drained jointly by the River Ganga, River Brahmaputra (also known as 
River Jamuna in Bangladesh), River Meghna and their numerous tributaries and 
distributaries. The GBM basin has population more than 150 million and considered as 
the world largest fluvio-deltaic systems and also as one of the most populous regions of 
the planet. In recent few decades, with the increasing demand of groundwater for 
domestic, irrigation (round the year for food production), industry and the growing 
population led the extensive exploitations of fresh and potable groundwater. Beside this, 
indiscriminate use of the rivers and surface water and the introduction of high -yielding 
dry-season agricultural activities accelerated the demand of irrigation water in the GBM 
basin (Harvey et al. 2005). This led to the shift of water supply policy from surface water 

96 
 
to groundwater. As a consequence, several million wells (ranging from domestic 
handpump to motor -driven deep tube -well) were installed to meet drinking, irrigation, 
and industrial water demands (Smith et al. 2000; BGS/DPHE/MML 2001; Harvey et al. 
2005; Horneman et al. 2004). However, in the present scenario, a large part of the GBM 
basin, groundwater was determined to have elevated concentrations of arsenic (As) 
more than 10 μ g/l. Regarding the source of such high level arsenic, it has been 
hypothesized that the non -point source, geogenic(As), mostly occurs in the Holocene 
shallow aquifers and probably has been mobilized from the sediments by redox 
reactions (e.g., Saha 1991; B hattacharya et al. 1997; CGWB 1997; Nicksonet al. 1998; 
BGS/DPHE/MML, 2001; McArthur et al. 2001, 2004; Ravenscroft et al. 2001; Harvey et 
al. 2002; Mukherjee 2006). Few previous estimates by researchers showed that more 
than 25% (McArthur et al. 2004) to 33% (Horneman et al. 2004) of the wells had been 
identified as contaminated by (As).  
There are a number of hypotheses on sources of Arsenic in groundwater and 
mobilization processes, however, from the researches carried out by investigators 
worldwide, it was noted that identification of genesis of (As) in Ganga -Brahmaputra 
basin and its mobilization processes are still to be established, because a number of 
issues are associated with the geochemical processes.    
B. Initiative taken by NIH-Roorkee on Arsenic genesis study  
Based on the recommendations of Inter -Minstrel Group (IMG) for Arsenic 
Mitigation, NIH-Roorkee to undertake “Studies on genesis of arsenic occurrence in 
Ganga-Brahamaputra basin”, in addition to four more R & D areas, had submitted a 
proposal with a budget estimate for Rs. 1785 lakh in the month of February, 2015 to 
MoWR, RD & GR. However, the decision on the approval of the budget allocation to 
NIH is awaited. After receiving fund from MoWR, RD & GR, the work envisaged on the 
study of genesis shall be completed within five years. 
As follow-up action of IMG recommendations, NIH under its internally funded R & 
D activities, has initiated the following two R&D studies, since April 2015. 
a)  Development of Website and e-Portal on "Mitigation and Remedy of Arsenic Menace 
in India". 
b) Alternate water supply management strategies in arsenic affected/vulnerable areas: 
Mapping of Arsenic affected zones/regions in Eastern U.P. (Balia district).  

97 
 
 Limited progress on the first task was made due to no n-availabilityof fund; while 
the advancement of the second study is satisfactory and its first phase would be 
completed by end of March, 2017. A brief report on the Arsenic study in the Balia district 
of U.P. is given at (Annexure - VIII). 
 
C. Arsenic genesis study and NIH future plan 
Most of the current hypotheses on As -genesis indicated that arsenic bearing 
sulphide minerals, mainly arsenopyrite (FeAsS) and their alternation products, might 
have been transported from the foothills of the Himalayas in the geologic past and 
deposited in the alluvium formation of Ganga -Brahmaputra basin. These deposited As -
bearing minerals, under the recent alluvium, have been considered to be responsible for 
occurrence of arsenic in groundwater from the sediment phase by  the process of 
reductive dissolution owing to the in -situ microbial activities under anxious condition. 
The relation between the redox behaviour of arsenic and high arsenic anomaly in 
groundwater is a subject that needs thorough investigations and geochem ical analysis. 
Genesis study of arsenic in different parts of Ganga -Brahmaputra basin would involve 
the following course of actions by a number of expert organizations, in addition to NIH: 
 
 Hydro-geochemical and hydro -geological characterization of alluvial sediment at 
the As-affected zones from depth 20 m to100 m bgl along the different piezometric 
transect,  
 Detailed geomorphological and hydrological characterization of the As -affected 
areas, 
 Seasonal hydro geochemical sampling and analysis of groundwater and surface 
water of the arsenic affected areas, 
 Isotopic characterization  of groundwater and sediment samples,  
 Mineralogical characterization of the sediments,   
 Study of retention or mo bility of As under different redox (oxidation –reduction) 
conditions at the interaction zone of different aqueous phase and mineral phases 
in the sediments, 
 The role of natural and anthropogenic activities and their influences on controlling  
the redox conditions in concerned aquifers 

98 
 
 To study the above aspects in the Ganga basin, NIH together with IIT Kharagpur, 
IIT Kanpur, CGWB, and National Water Mission in collaboration Herriot Watt University, 
Edinburgh-UK, and Queen's University Belfast -UK submitted a  Project Proposal, 
entitled "Study of groundwater dynamics and geochemical processes of arsenic 
mobilization in the Middle Ganga aquifers for in-situ arsenic remediation" in the month of 
October, 2015 in response to the Newton-Bhabha project call by Min. of Earth Sciences, 
Govt. of India and NERC -UK,. However, the project proposal was declined for support 
on administrative ground. Currently, NIH -Roorkee has taken another new initiative with 
a prior consultation, to develop a project proposal on Arsenic stud y involving potential 
Indian and UK partners and its submission to the forthcoming 'Newton -Bhabha" call on 
Water Quality by DST, India & NERC-UK, which is likely to come. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.34 of Chapter - I) 
 
  

99 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                    Dr. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI, 
14 December, 2017                                                                                CHAIRPERSON, 
23 Agrahayana, 1989 (Saka)                                                 ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

100 
 


101 
 


102 
 


103 
 


104 
 


105 
 


106 
 


107 
 


108 
 


109 
 


110 
 


111 
 


112 
 


113 
 


114 
 


115 
 


116 
 


117 
 


118 
 


119 
 


120 
 


121 
 


122 
 


123 
 


124 
 


125 
 


126 
 


127 
 


128 
 


129 
 


130 
 


131 
 


132 
 


133 
 


134 
 


135 
 


136 
 


137 
 


138 
 
APPENDIX - I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 (2017-18) 
The Committee sat on  Tuesday, the  8th August, 2017  from 1 500 hrs. to         
1640 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
                                          Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
  2 Shri George Baker 
  3 Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
  4 Shri Dushyant Chautala 
  5 Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
  6 Col. (Retd.) Sona Ram Choudhary 
  7 Shri Ramen Deka 
  8 Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
9 Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
10 Smt. Raksha Khadse 
11 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
12 Shri Rajesh Pandey 
13 Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
14 Shri Nanabhou Falgunrao Patole 
15 Dr.  Bhagirath Prasad 
16 Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy 
17 Shri Janardhan Singh Sigriwal 
18 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
 19 Shri Ganjendra Singh Shekhawat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

139 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Smt  Sudesh Luthra         -     Additional Secretary  
          2. Shri  N. C Gupta              -     Joint Secretary 
        3.      Shri Vipin Kumar          -      Director 
       
   2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Report(s):- 
(i) *** *** *** 
(ii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 15 th Report of the Committee on Estimates       
(2016-17) on the subject "Ganga Rejuvenation" pertaining to Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation; and 
(iii) *** *** *** 
4. *** *** *** With regard to Draft Report on (ii) Ganga Rejuvenation, the Committee 
desired that critical data/information furnished in the Appendices of the Action Taken 
Replies of the Report may be analysed a nd incorporated in this Report. With the 
aforesaid modification/addition, the Committee adopted *** the Report(s) and authorised 
the Chairperson to finalise  the Report(s) in the light of factual verification from the 
Ministry concerned and present the same to Lok Sabha.   
5. *** *** *** 
 The Committee then adjourned with vote of thanks to the Chair. 
____________________________________________________________________ 
*** Matter not related to this Report 

140 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations   
   
31 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,7,8,9,11,15,16,17,18,19,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29 and 30           
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 22 
 
 
 
 70.97% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply Percentage of total 
recommendations 
 
Percentage of total recommendations                                                
         Nil 
       
      
      
Nil 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee  
Sl. No. 4,5,6,10,12,13,14,20,21 and 31 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
9 
 
 
 
29.03% 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of 
Government is still awaited.   
 
Percentage of total recommendations  
Nil 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 