 
 
18 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2016-17) 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 


 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT  
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on  11 August, 2016) 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
      
________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 


 
 
EC No.  1503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price Rs.____ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2016 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press, Minto Road, 
New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE ON PANCHAYATI RAJ (2015-16)                            (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITEE ON ESTIMATES (2016-17).....................................    (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................................  (vi) 
 
 
PART I  
Chapter I Introductory 
 
1 
Chapter II Allocation - Panchayati Raj Scheme 
 
8 
Chapter III Finances of Panchayati Raj 
  
16 
Chapter IV Reservation of seats for disadvantaged sections in Panchayats 
 
26 
Chapter V Capacity Building  
 
30 
  
PART II 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
 
 
39 
 APPENDICES 
 
49 
(i) Details of constitution of First, Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth SFCs, 
submission of Report and submission of Action Taken Report 
49 
 
 
(ii) Letter of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to Chief Secretaries of All 
States/UTs 
 
54 
(iii) Role of PRIs in some centrally sponsored schemes as given in the 
respective scheme guidelines of the concerned Ministries 
 
56 
(iv) The latest available information on taxes levied by Panchayats 
 
58 
(v) Functions/roles assigned to Gram Sabhas by some major States in 
their State Panchayati Raj Acts 
64 
 
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
(i) Minutes of the First Sitting of Sub -Committee on Panchayati Raj of 
Committee on Estimates (2015-16) held on 09.09.2015 
 
65 
(ii) Minutes of the Second Sitting of Sub -Committee on Panchayati Raj 
of Committee on Estimates (2015-16) held on 05.10.2015 
 
67 
(iii) Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of Committee on Estimates (2016 -17) 
held on 29.07.2016 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB -COMMITTEE ON PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2015-16) 
 
1. Shri K. H. Muniyappa       Convenor 
 
2. Shri P. Kumar                Co-Convenor 
 
3. Shri Ganesh Singh 
 
4. Shri Kalyan Bannerjee 
 
5. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
 
6. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
 
7. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
 
8 Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 
9 Shri Jay Prakash Narayan Yadav 
 
10. Shri J. C. Divakar Reddy 
 
11. Shri Anil Shirole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2016-17) 
 
 
 
         Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________________________
_ 
*Elected Vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part -II No. 3908 dated 28.07.2016 vice Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
appointed as Minister. 
 
 
 
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed 
3. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan  
4. Shri George Baker  
5. Shri Kalyan Banerjee  
6. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
7. Shri Ashok Shankarrao Chavan  
8. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
9. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
10. Col. Sonaram Choudhary 
11. Shri Ramen Deka 
12. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
13. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
14. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
15. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla 
16. Shri P. Kumar  
17. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
18. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
19. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
20. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey  
21. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
22 *Shri Bhagirath Prasad  
23. Shri Konakalla Narayan Rao 
24. Md. Salim  
25. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant  
26. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
27. Shri Gajendra  Singh Shekhawat 
28. Shri Anil Shirole 
29. Shri Rajesh Verma  
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav 
 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh ___ Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Vipin Kumar ___ Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda ___ Additional Director 
4. Shri R.S. Negi ___ Under Secretary 
5. Shri Gurpreet Singh ___ Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Eighteenth 
Report  on the subject 'Panchayati Raj' pertaining to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
 
2. Panchayats are local Governments mandated in the Constitution of India. As 
per the Constitution, three tiers of Panchayats are to b e constituted, through 
elections every five years, except in States with population less than 20 lakhs, where 
Panchayats at two tiers may be created. The Constitution envisages that Panchayats 
will function as institutions of local Government and prepare p lans and implement 
schemes for economic development and social justice, but leaves the precise 
devolution of powers and authority to Panchayats to the States. The Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) have differential performance based on size, staff availab le, 
functions exercised, resource available, capacity built, leadership and in spite of 
constraints and limitations, there are many outstanding performances among 
Panchayats all over the country. To build models and to nurture schools of practice, 
such Panchayats need to be identified and encouraged.  
 
3. In the above backdrop, the Committee (2015 -16) selected this subject for 
indepth examination and Report.  The Sub -Committee on Panchayati Raj was 
constituted in September, 2015 to get a comprehensive perspective of the subject.  
 
4. The Sub-Committee on Panchayati Raj of Committee on Estimates took oral 
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj on  9 September, 2015 
and 5th October, 2015. The draft Report was considered and adopted by th e 
Committee on Estimates (2016-17) at their sitting held on 29th July, 2016. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj for furnishing material, written replies to list of points and 
tendering evidence before them.  
 
 

 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in Bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI 
7 August,  2016 
Shravana 16, 1938 (saka) 
Chairperson, 
Committee on Estimates.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Part I 
Chapter I 
 
Introduction 
 
 Panchayats are local self governments as mandated in the Constitution of 
India. As per the Constitution, three tiers of Panchayats are to be constituted, 
through elections every five years, except in States with population less than 20 
lakhs, where Panchayats at two tiers may be created. The constitution envisages 
that the panchayats will function as institutions of local government and prepare 
plans and im plement schemes for economic development and social justice, but 
leaves the precise devolution of powers and authority to Panchayats to the States. 
 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj, which was set up in May 2004 env isons to 
attain decentralized and participa tory local self -government through Panchayats or 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). The vision of the Ministry is to make PRIs an 
effective, efficient and transparent vehicle for local governance, social change and 
public service delivery mechanism and en couraging States (i) to devolve powers 
(Functions, Functionaries and Finance i.e. 3Fs) to PRIs, (ii) Capacity Building of 
PRIs and (iii) Creation of a vibrant interface between PRIs and the rural people 
through Gram Sabhas. 
The following are the functions of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 (i) to oversee the implmentation of Part IX of the Constitution; 
 (ii) support States to build capacities of Panchayats; 
 (iii) devolve powers to Panchayats - Funds, Functions, Functionaries; 
(iv) promote decentralized planning and strengthen District Planning 
Committees; 
 (v) promote e-governance in Panchayats; 
 (vi) strengthen Gram Sabhas; 
(vii) promote accountability through up -to-date and accurate accounts, 
disclosure, regular audit and social audit; and 

 
 
(viii) implementation of Panchayats (extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 
1996 (PESA). 
 With a view to carrying out the functions, the schemes mainly administered by 
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj till 2014 -15 included Backward Regions Grant Fund 
(BRGF), Rajiv Gandh i Panchayati Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA), Media and 
Publicity and Action Research and Research Studies Scheme. From 2015 -16, the 
schemes of BRGF and RGPSA have been delinked from support from the Centre 
except for the National component of RGPSA. It is up to the States to continue these 
schemes from the higher share of transferred resources and from funds to be 
transferred to the Panchayats as per recommendations of the 14 th Finance 
Commission. The National component of RGPSA, Media and Publicity, Action 
Research Studies are proposed to be continued during 2015-16. 
 
I. Implementation of 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 
 The basic provisions of the Constitution (Seventy Third) Amendment Act, 
1992 are divided into compulsory and voluntary provisions. The provisions which the 
state statutes will have to provide for are (i) conducting of Panchayats elections  at 
regular intervals  (once in five years), (ii) creation of State Election Commission to 
conduct elections for Panchayati Raj institutions (PRIs), (iii) setting up of State 
Finance Commission for five years,(iv) creation of three tier Pa nchayati Raj  
structure,(v) the minimum age for co ntesting elections to PRIs, (vi ) reservation of 
women in Panchayats  and reservation of seats for SC/STs in panchaya ts in 
proportion to their population, etc.  
1.2 When asked as to whether all the States /UTs, in compliance with the 
mandatory provisions of  the Constitution (Seventy Third) Amendment Act, 1992 
have enacted legislations for establishing / setting  up stru ctures/ systems / 
processes, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has furnished the following reply: 
 ”73rd Constitutional Amendment Act (CAA), 1992 incorporated as the Part IX 
of the Constitution included the following as compulsory/ mandatory provision: 
-  
(i) Three tiers of Panchayats are to be constituted except in States with 
population below  20 lakhs.(Article 243-B); 
 

 
 
(ii)  Direct election to seats at all three tiers of Panchayats (Article 243C); 
(iii) Indirect elections for chairpersons of Block and District Panchayats 
(Article 243C); 
(iv) Reservation in seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
in proportion to their respective population (Article 243D);  
(v) Reservation of not less than one third seats and offices of chairpersons 
for women including within SC and ST reservations. Article 243D; 
(vi)  Election to Panchayats every five years (Article 243 E); 
(vii) Constitution of State Finance Commissions every five years to review 
the financial position of Panchayats and make recommendations to 
Governor regarding distribution betwe en the State and Panchayats of 
taxes, duties, tolls etc.   (Article 243I); 
(viii) Setting up of State Election Commission (SEC) and vesting the 
superintendence, directions and control of the preparation of electoral 
rolls for and the conduct of all election to th e Panchayats in SEC 
(Article 243K). 
 
 The minimum age for contesting elections to PRIs is not mandated in the Part 
IX, but in the respective State Panchayat Raj Act. The minimum age 
mandated for contesting election to a seat in State Legislative Assembly i s 25 
years in terms of the Article 173 of the Constitution. This has been mostly 
adopted by States as the minimum age for contesting elections to PRIs.  
However, a State may prescribe minimum age below 25 years but not below 
18 years which is the bench mar k of adult suffrage , e.g. in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh minimum age of 21 year is permissible for contesting PRI election.   
      States have generally complied with the Constitutional provisions. However, in 
Puducherry, elections to Panchayats have not been held. In the past there 
have also been instances of elections not being held to Panchayats in Andhra 
Pradesh and Jharkhand. These matters have been taken up in Court.   
 Out of 29 States, 26 States (except Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland) have 
constituted State Finance Commissions (SFCs) to comply Art. 243 I of the 
Constitution which provides that the Governor of a State shall, as soon as 
may be within one year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-
third Amendment) Act, 1992, and thereafte r at the expiration of every fifth 
year, constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial position of the 
Panchayats. A statement showing State -wise SFCs constituted along with 
date of constitution, period covered, date of submission of Reports and Action 
Taken Report is at Annexure I.  
 
Considering that SFCs play a very crucial role in fiscal decentralization and 
ensuring greater stability and predictability to the transfer mechanism and also 
for taking a view on various fiscal aspects of the local bodies, Ministry of 

 
 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) organized an Interactive meeting on SFCs on issues 
and options on 23 -01-2009 and draft guidelines for SFCs for ensuring 
minimum benchmark were issued to all States on 27 -4-2009. Subsequently, a 
meeting on “Local Bo dies Finances and State Finance Commissions” was 
held on 27 -6-2011 which were attended by Chairpersons & Members of 
various State Finance Commissions, representatives of Central/ State 
Governments, International Agencies, eminent Experts on fiscal 
decentralization and other stakeholders." 
 
II. Compulsory conduct of Elections 
 Article 243E of the Constitution states that every Panchayat, unless sooner 
dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue for five years from 
the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer.  Further, an election to 
constitute a Panchayat shall be completed before the expiry of its duration or before 
the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution.  As per Article 
243K of the Constitution, superintendence, direction and control of all elections to the 
Panchayats is vested in a State Election Commission consisting of a State Election 
Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor. 
1.3 When asked as to whether all the states  / UTs have conducted elections at 
the intervals /frequency specified in the Act,  the Ministry of MoPR have stated as 
follows:  
  "Elections to Panchayats are generally held as stipulated in the Constitution. 
Election to Panchayats have not been held in Puduchery.  Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj has taken up this issue with the Union Territory.  Moreover, in 
case of delays in elections in Jharkhand and Andhra Pradesh previously, M/o 
PR had continuously urged the State Governments to hold elections.  Andhra 
Pradesh could not hold PRI elections due in 2011 due to Court cases.  The 
elections were held in 2013 -14.  Uttrakhand also could not hold elections due 
in Sept., 2013 due to natural calamities, which were subsequently held in 
June, 2014." 
1.4 On being enquired about the  reasons for not conducting timely elections to 
Panchayats in some States and also the correct measures taken by the 
governments, the representatives of MoPR submitted before the Committee during 
oral evidence as under: 

 
 
 "There was one very  long instance i n Jharkhand where  elections were not 
conducted. Basically the whole thing was sub judice. The Ministry played a 
very proactive role at that time. So, elections were ultimately conducted in 
Jharkhand. Similarly, in Andhra Pradesh also for some time, again o ver the 
question of reservations and court cases elections were not conducted. Again 
there was a lot of pressure , the grants were stopped, etc. and elections were 
conducted. Now, Puducherry remains the only place where they have 
infringed on this. Again th ere is a court case going on but the Ministry is 
constantly pressurizing. Otherwise, we do not find that elections are not 
conducted. That is not the rule. Usually elections are being conducted as per 
the stipulated timetable." 
 
 During evidence the Commit tee desire to know the States in which 
election at district level and block level are held o n party line. A representative 
of the Ministry stated as follow:- 
 "I do not have the exact figure but we will give it to you later.  But I know that 
in most States, a large number of States have district level and block level.  
But Madhya Pradesh does not have; Chhattisgarh does not have; Bihar does 
not have. Broadly most States have gone in for block and district level 
participation of MLAs.  But, for instanc e, Maharashtra does not have; Kerala 
does not have.  In the Constitution it is possible but it is left to the State. And it 
is governed by the State Act.  So, a Constitution Amendment is required."   
 
III. Supersession of Panchayats 
1.5 On being asked  whether the state Governments ha ve the powers to 
supersede PRIs, MoPR have submitted the following reply:  
 "State Governments have made provision in their respective Panchayati Raj 
Acts to dissolve Panchayats. Usually, the provisions provide for dissolution of 
Panchayats if in the opinion of the Government, a Panchayat abuses its 
powers or is not competent to pe rform etc. The provisions in various State 
Acts in major States are as below:-  
Sl. 
No 
State/UT Section of the State Panchayati 
Raj Act 
Competent Authority to 
dissolve Panchayats  
1.  Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands 
Gram Panchayat, Panchayat 
Samiti or Zilla Parishad may be 
dissolved respectively  under 
sections 50(1), 141(1) and 183(1) 
 Administrator 
2.  Andhra Under Section 250 of the State State Government 

 
 
Pradesh Panchayat Act PRI 
3.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Under Section 142(2) of the State 
Panchayat Act Gram Panchayat / 
Anchal Samiti/ Zilla Parishad may 
be dissolved. 
State Government  
4.  Assam Under Section 125 of the State 
Panchayat Act Graon Panchayat / 
Anchal Samiti/ Zilla Parishad may 
be dissolved. 
State Government  
5.  Bihar Under Section 151 of the State 
Panchayat Act Gram Panchayat / 
Anchal Samiti/ Zilla Parishad may 
be dissolved. 
State Government 
6.  Chattisgarh - - 
7.  Goa Under Sections 200 & 231 of the 
State Panchayat Act Gram 
Panchayat / Anchal Samiti/ Zilla 
Parishad may be dissolved. 
State Government 
8.  Gujarat - - 
9.  Haryana Under Section 52(1), 110 and 158 
(1) of the State Panchayat Act 
Gram Panchayat / Panchayat 
Samiti /  Zilla Parishad respectively 
may be dissolved. 
State Government 
10.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
Under Section 140 of the State 
Panchayat Act Gram Panchayat / 
Panchayat Samiti /  Zilla Parishad 
respectively may be dissolved. 
State Government 
11.  J&K - - 
12.  Jharkhand Under Section 107 of the State 
Panchayat Act Gram Panchayat / 
Panchayat Samiti /  Zilla Parishad 
respectively may be dissolved. 
State Government 
13.  Karnataka Under Section 268 of the State 
Panchayat Act Gram Panchayat / 
Taluk Panchayat /  Zilla Parishad 
respectively may be dissolved. 
State Government 
14.  Kerala Under Section 193 of the State 
Panchayat Act Gram Panchayat / 
intermediate Panchayat / Zilla 
Panchayats respectively may be 
dissolved. 
State Government 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
15.  Maharashtra Under Section 145, 146, 260 and 
296 of the State Panchayat Act 
Gram Panchayat / Panchayat 
Samiti /  Zilla Parishad may be 
dissolved. 
State Government 
16.  Orissa Under Section 41 (1) and 28 (1) of 
the State Panchayat Act 
Panchayat Samiti /  Zilla Parishad 
respectively may be dissolved. 
State Government 
17.  Punjab Under Section 29, 114, and 178 of 
the State Panchayat Act Gram 
Panchayat / Panchayat Samiti /  
Zilla Parishad respectively may be 
dissolved. 
State Government 
18.  Rajasthan Under Section 94 of the State 
Panchayat Act Gram Panchayat / 
intermediate Panchayat / Zilla 
Panchayats may be dissolved. 
State Government 
19.  Tamil Nadu  Under Section 214, 215, and 216 
of the State  Panchayat Act Gram 
Panchayat / Panchayat Samiti /  
Zilla Parishad respectively may be 
dissolved. 
State Government 
20.  Tripura Under Section 194 of the State 
Panchayat Act Panchayats may be 
dissolved. 
State Government 
21.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
Under Section 95 (f) of the State 
Panchayat Act, Panchayats may 
be dissolved. 
State Government 
22.  Uttarakhand Under Section 95 (f) of the State 
Panchayat Act, Panchayats may 
be dissolved. 
State Government 

 
 
Chapter II 
Allocation − 
Panchyati Raj Schemes 
 
 The major scheme-wise 12th Five Year Plan (2012 to 2017) outlay as well as 
budget estimates and expenditure during annual plans (2012 -13, 2013-14, 2014-15 
& 2015-16) are given below:- 
(Rs. In crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
scheme  
12th Five 
year plan 
 
(2012-
17) 
outlay 
Annual Plan 
 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 
B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. 
1 BRGF 
 
29306.00 5050.00 3734.00 3720.00 6500.00 2800.00 2800.00 5900.00 2837.00 2837.00 0.00 
2 RGPSA 
 
11270.00 50.00 50.00 42.92 655.00 655.00 629.58 1050.00 527.00 525.64 60.00 
3 Other 
Schemes 
 
277.00 250.00 216.00 173.43 45.00 45.00 31.65 50.00 36.00 27.06 34.00 
 Total 
 
40853.00 5350.00 4000.00 3936.35 7200.00 3500.00 3461.23 7000.00 3400.00 3389.70 94.00 
 
 
I. Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) 
2.2 The Committee noted that a s against the budgetary allocation of Rs. 272 
crore for Capacity Building Grant (CBG) out of Backward Regions Grant Fund 
(BRGF), an amount of Rs. 58 crore only is stated to have  been released  during 
2014-15.  When asked about the specific reasons for releasing 1/5th of the funds only 
vis-a-vis budgetary allocations for the purpose, the MoPR have stated as follows:  
 "The overall budgetary allocation of Rs. 6500 crore under BRGF Programme 
during 2014-15 got reduced to Rs. 2837 crores at Revised Estimate stage and 
this affected the overall release including Capacity Building. The actual 
release under Capacity Building Grant during 2014 -15 was Rs. 57.59 crores. 
BRGF is a process oriented and demand driven programme  implemented by 
the PRIs. During 2014-15, the pace of releases had been slow in the first two 
quarters.  This was due to late submission of proposals by many States and 
also on account of the non - submission of capacity building plans/ 
discrepancies in req uisite documents like Utilisation Certificates, physical & 
financial progress reports and audit reports. States had been generally slow in 
reporting expenditure against the previous releases. The standard procedure 
of deduction of unspent balance of previo us years from releases made during 
the year, also affected releases." 
II. Allocation and Utilisation of funds under Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) 

 
 
 
2.3 The Committee w hen asked about the utilisation of funds under RGPSA 
scheme for the  financial year 2013 -14, the Ministry have furnished the following 
written reply:  
 "It is stated that the utilization figure of Rs.629.59 crores out of BE of Rs.655 
crores  for RGPSA for the year 2013 -14 was inclusive of release of funds to 
UTs of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli in the month of March, 2014. 
However, it was later found out that the above funds could not be transferred 
in the accounts of respective UTs and the same was lapsed. Hence, there 
was discrepancy which has since been reconciled." 
 The Committee pointed out that under the national component of RGPSA the 
activities undertaken are stated to be the performance assessment and 
incentivisation of Panchayats through a rigorous process, support to resource 
agencies for innovative activities and technical support to states.  
2.4 On being asked by the Committee to specify the nature of innovative activities 
undertaken and also the technical support given to S tates so far  under RGPSA , 
MoPR stated as under:    
 "Innovative Projects Under RGPSA, States may include innovative proposals 
up to Rs.2.00 crores annually in their plan.  The Ministry has approved the 
innovation proposals contained in the proposals of some States under 
RGPSA during 2014-15 as under: 
a) Innovative practice relating to “Stre ngthening of Gram Panchayats 
Organizations in Mulbagal Taluka”in Karnataka 
The proposal of the State Government of Karnataka regarding Innovative 
practice relating to “Strengthening of Gram Panchayats Organizations in 
Mulbagal Taluka” costing Rs. 1.19 cror e in Karnataka has been approved in 
the month of July 2014. The proposal is based on the experience of a Gram 
Panchayat Organization Development (GPOD) intervention of Arghyam, 
aimed at strengthening of Gram Panchayats through a process intervention to 
enhance citizen participation and improve delivery services. The project has 
created cabinet portfolios within the GP, facilitated collective visioning 
exercises, improved both gram sabha participation and the quality of public 
services rendered within a very short time span. 
b) “ManaVooru – ManaPranalika” (Our Village-Our Plan): 

 
 
Funds to the tune of Rs. 7.8 Crores have been sanctioned for training of 
Sarpanchies& Panchayats Secretaries of Gram Panchayats of Telangana for 
the programme namely “ManaVooru – ManaPranalika” (Our Village -Our 
Plan). This programme is designed to prepare plan of Gram Panchayats, 
Mandals and Districts and incorporated in state plan for strengthening the 
planning system with people participation. Further it seeks to make the 
functionaries of different sectors responsible to Panchayats for delivering the 
services and also prioritize the aspirations of the elected PRI’s and their 
suggestions for ensuring through processes of participatory ownership.As 
regards, the Technical support giv en to States, the same has been brought 
out in detail in the item Capacity Building." 
 
III. Utilization of funds under Other Schemes 
2.5 The Committee have noted actual utilization of allocations made for ‘Other 
Schemes’ fell far short of not only budget estimates but also sharply reduced 
allocations made at RE stage during 2012 -13, 2013-14 and 2014-15. When asked to 
furnish the reasons for under utilization of all ocated amounts, the MoPR have given 
the following reply: 
  "The “Other Schemes”  as indicated in paras 26 include Secretariat Economic 
Service Management Cell,( Plan), International Cooperation, UN Agencies, 
Media & Publicity, Action Research, Panchayat Ma hila Evam Yuva Shakti 
Abhiyan (PMEYSA), Rural Business Hubs (RBH), Panchayat Empowerment 
and Incentive Scheme (PEAIS), e Panchayats, Resource Support  to States 
and  Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojna ( RGSY).  The schemes of PMEYSA, 
PEAIS, RGSY, Resource Support   to States,  e Panchayats, which were 
separate schemes till 2012 -13,  became components of the main Scheme, 
Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) from 2013 -14. No 
allocations were made for these schemes from 2013 -14 under the Head, “ 
Other Schemes”. As far as Secretariat Economic Service (Management Cell,( 
Plan) is concerned, this is actual amount depending upon salaries and other 
connected expenditure.  Under Action Research, the reasons for low 
expenditure during the two years was due to n on-completion of large number 
of sanctioned research studies during the previous years since for most of the 
studies sanctioned the pace was much slower than anticipated.  The 
organizations had taken in -between extension of time for the completion of 
the study.  Further to make the scheme more meaningful and result oriented, 
it has been decided that projects will only be sanctioned under the scheme 
which assist the Ministry in framing appropriate policies and schemes and the 
learning from the action researc h will be better utilized for strengthening 
capacity building programmes.  Apart from the aforesaid reasons, due to the 

 
 
shortage/non-receipt of meaningful proposals on the themes identified by the 
Ministry, funds could not be disbursed.  The Ministry has n ow taken steps to 
get the studies completed and funds are being released. 
Under Media & Publicity Scheme, the reasons for low utilization of funds in 
the year 2014 -15 was due to (i) Production of 35 short films for training 
purpose commissioned by the Mini stry during the year were at different 
stages of production and evaluation hence the full money was not released to 
the agencies and (ii) the commemorative celebrations of National Panchayati 
Raj Day 2014 and any awareness generation activities could not be organized 
due to implementation of Model code of conduct for Lok Sabha elections.  The 
“Other Schemes”  as indicated in para  27 include, among others,  Panchayat 
Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan (PMEYSA), Panchayat Empowerment and 
Incentive Scheme (PEAIS) , e Panchayats, Resource Support  to States and  
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojna ( RGSY).  The schemes of PMEYSA, PEAIS, 
RGSY, Resource Support  to States and  e- Panchayats, which were separate 
schemes till 2012 -13, became components of the Scheme, Rajiv Gand hi 
Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) from 2013 -14. Hence, from 
2013-14, no allocations were made for the above schemes and proportionally 
allocations under “Other schemes” show reduction from 2013 -14 onwards, 
compared to 2012-13." 
 
IV. SATCOM (Satellite Communications) facility to States                                           
2.6 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj during evidence dated 09.09.2015 has 
informed that they are partnering with ISRO to provide SATCOM facilities to States 
where these do not exist.  
 The Committee further asked the Ministry regarding the number of 
Panchayats provided SATCOM facilities  (State-wise), the manner in which the 
challenges like lack of electricity/internet connectivity in the rural areas, the progress 
made towards developing offline versions of PES applications and adoption of model 
Gram Panchayats for its implementation  and coordination with  M/o New and 
Renewable Energy sources in exploring the possibility of providing solar /wind power 
where conventional power is not available, the MoPR have stated as under: 
 "MoPR is still in the process of discussion with ISRO and the States for 
finalizing the support to be provided to States for universalization of SATCOM 
facilities at Panchayat level. However, SATCOM fac ility is already being used 
by Panchayats in eight States. Though f unds have also been sanctioned 
under RGPSA to Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala 

 
 
and Tripura for setting up SATCOM facilities for Panchayats, the States have 
not yet bee n able to utilize these funds due to various reasons.  States with 
shortage of power and broadband at Panchayat level have been advised to 
make data entry in online applications from the nearby Panchayats where 
power and internet connectivity is available. To overcome the shortage of 
power (electricity), the matter is being pursued with Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy. Broadband connectivity is also being provisioned for 
Panchayats under BharatNet, being implemented by the Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT).  Offline versions of PES applications are in 
various stages of development. The Ministry has advised all States to identify 
Gram Panchayats as models in the implementation of e -Panchayat. 
Furthermore, the MoPR has identified five Panchayats as mod els in the 
implementation of ePanchayat by December, 2015. Detailed guidelines in this 
regard have also been shared with States in advance.  MoPR is submitting a 
proposal to Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (under the National Clean 
Energy Fund) for ele ctrification of un -electrified Panchayats using Solar 
energy. The proposal will cover about 17,500 Gram Panchayats (with own 
buildings) identified by the State Governments as un -electrified to provide the 
following:  
 10 KW power packs for each GP 
 The GP bhawan + 6 street lights (LED bulbs) + solar powered drinking 
water pump 
 5 year AMC (maintenance) 
 The Gram Panchayat will train at least one person (Suryamitra) for a 
period of three months who would ensure maintenance of the solar 
power system. 
 Cost approx. Rs. 17.5 lakhs per GP 
 
V. Panchayat Sashaktikaran Puraskar (PSP)  
 Management Information System ( MIS) for Panchayat Sashaktikaran 
Puraskar (PSP) is stated to be under revamp mode to enable online data from 
Panchayat level to determine the best performing panchayats in states. Further, 
some thematic areas are also stated to have been identified for award purpose.  
2.7 When asked to furnish the progress achieved i n this regard, the MoPR have 
stated as under: 
 "The requisite MIS for Panchayat Awards has been operationalized. All the 
States/ UTs have been informed in this regard and have been requested to 
furnish their nominations for best performing Panchayats online on the portal 
in a time bound manner. The nomi nations for PSP for 2016 will be received 

 
 
for general and eight thematic categories of  sanitation,  civic services   
(drinking   water,   street   light, infrastructure), natural resource management, 
marginalized    section   (women, SC/ST,  disabled, sen ior citizen),    social   
sector   performance,  disaster    management, CBOs/ Individuals taking 
voluntary actions to support Gram Panchayats  and   innovation     in   
revenue    generation. One -third of the total PSP awards are proposed in the 
categories of thematic awards. Copy of the letter dated 28 th September, 2015 
addressed to all the States/ UTs in this regard is placed at Annex-II." 
 
VI. Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan (PMEYSA)   
2.8  A Central Sector Scheme viz. “Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti 
Abhiyan”(PMEYSA) was under implementation in the country during 2007 -08 upto 
2012-13 for empowerment of Elected Women Representatives (EWRs) and Elected 
Youth Representatives (EYRs). Under the  scheme, financial assistance was 
provided to the States/UTs including Maharashtra for holding District/Divisional level 
sammelans, State level Sammelans, special sensitization/training courses, 
establishing States support Centres etc., The scheme was late r subsumed under 
“Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashakitkaran Abhiyan”.  Funds to the tune of Rs. -14.52 
cr. had been released under PMEYSA to the States.  
 
VII. Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme (PEAIS) 
2.9 PEAIS, a Central Sector Scheme, being implemented by M/o Panchayati R aj 
aims at encouraging states to adequately empower Panchayats and put in place 
systems for bringing about accountability of PRIs. When asked about the 
achievements of stated objectives of the PEA I scheme since its i nception in 2005 -
06, the strateg y followed and the incentives offered to encourage the states to 
empower Panchayats systems put in place for bringing about accountability of PRIs, 
the MoPR have stated as under: 
 "The Panchayat Empowerment &  Accountability Incentive Scheme, which 
became a component of RGPSA from 2013 -14, is aimed at (a) encouraging 
States to adequately empower Panchayats or Panchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs) and (b) put in place systems for bringing about accountability of th e 
PRIs. Under the PEAIS, awards are given to States for best in the devolution 
of 3Fs to PRIs and also to Gram Panchayats for performing best in certain 
aspects. Performance of States is measured through a Devolution Index (DI) 
by an independent agency and  token awards are given to the States which 

 
 
rank high on DI. Performance of Panchayats is measured in terms of putting 
in place system to bring about accountability.  In the current year,  the 
nominations for Panchayat Sashaktikaran Puraskar (PSP)  will be received 
for General and eight thematic categories of Sanitation, Civic Services 
(Drinking Water, Street Light, Infrastructure), Natural Resource Management, 
Marginalized section (women, SC/ST, disabled, senior citizen), Social Sector 
performance, Disaster  Management, CBOs/ Individuals taking voluntary 
actions to support Gram Panchayats and Innovation in Revenue Generation. 
One-third of the total PSP awards are proposed in the categories of thematic 
awards." 
 
VIII. Role of Panchayats in enabling the reach of anti poverty programmes 
2.10 The Committee also wanted to know the role played by Panchayati Raj set up 
in enabling the reach of anti poverty programmes. In this regard, the following 
information has been provided by the MoPR: 
 The role of Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs), as envisaged in the 73rd 
Amendment of the Constitution, goes beyond the traditional civic functions. PRIs are 
made responsible for economic development and social justice, to be achieved 
through participatory planning process. A list of twenty nine subjects has been 
devolved under the Eleventh Schedule of the constitution which is indicative of the 
prominent role envisaged for the Panchayats. To comply with Article 243G read with 
the Eleventh Schedule of the Co nstitution for delineation of role and responsibilities 
of PRIs in the planning, implementation and monitoring of centrally sponsored 
schemes, implementing Ministries/ Departments in the G overnment of India have 
been reviewing the operational guidelines of  their schemes to provide roles and 
responsibilities to Panchayats in the planning, implementation and monitoring of 
schemes.  
 While in all the major centrally sponsored schemes, the guidelines recognize 
the role and responsibilities of Panchayats under t he respective schemes, its 
implementation by the State governments varies, since the level of devolution varies 
vastly between States.  
  
 A note indicating the role of PRIs in some centrally sponsored schemes, as 
given in the respective scheme guidelines of the concerned Ministries is given in 
Annexure-III.  

 
 
Chapter III 
Finances of Panchayati Raj 
I. Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC) Grants  
 During evidence before the Committee on 09.09.2015, the Ministry informed 
that FFC has recommended the grant of ₹ 2,00,292.2 crore to Panchayats for the 
period 2015-20 and this entire amount of funds would go to Gram Panchayats. Out 
of this 90 per cent will be the basic grant and 10 per cent will be the performance 
grant. The Committ ee when desired to know the difference b etween the 
recommendations of 13  and 14 Finance Commissions for giving grants to 
Panchayats, reaction of States and the manner in which the Block Panchayats and 
Zila Parishads will meet their development expenditure in the absence of Central 
Grants, the MoPR stated as under:  
 "The formula adopted/followed for giving grants to Panchayats as per 
recommendations of Thirteenth Finance Commission (FC XIII): 
 Weight allotted to criteria for Grants to Local Bodies 
 
 (b) The formula adopted/followed for giving grants to Panchayats as per 
recommendations of Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC) 
 The Grants to States have been recommended as per the following formula:-  
Population - 90%  
Area –          10% 
Total            100%   
Criterion Weights allotted  
Population     50 
Area  10 
Distance from highest per capita 
sectoral income 
 10 
Index of devolution  15 
SC/STs proportion in the population  10 
FC local body grants utilization index    5 
Total            100 

 
 
 However, so far as inter -se distribution of grants to GPs within a State is 
concerned, it will be done on the basis of formula recommended by SFC. 
Where SFC formula is not available, the FFC formula of 90:10 will be 
adopted. 
 (ii) (a) The Fourteenth Fina nce Commission have recommended that  
the grants should go to gram panchayats, which are directly responsible for 
the delivery of basic services, without any share for other levels. The 
Commission has further observed that the State Governments are expecte d 
to take care of the needs of the other levels. The recommendations have 
been accepted by the Government of India in toto.   
 (b) The Ministry has received requests from a few quarters to provide 
funds to the other two tiers of panchayats, in addition to the funds meant for 
GPs. Representatives of State Governments have also expressed concern 
over non -recommendation of grants to Block & District panchayats in their 
meeting held in New Delhi on 8.5.2015. Ministry of Panchayati Raj has written 
to States inter-alia suggesting that – (i) SFCs wherever are functional, to bring 
the fact to the notice through a modified ToR so that they can take a judicious 
view on the allocation to be given to District Panchayats from State resources; 
(ii) Wherever the recommenda tions have been submitted and a final decision 
has not been taken, Department of Panchayati Raj and the Finance 
Department could work out a suitable solution and; 
 (c)     In other cases, the possibility to giving special grants to them may be 
considered o r at least certain schemes could be entrusted to the District 
Panchayats to make up for the reduction. 
 (iii) Funds made available by the FFC are an additionality and are only one 
of the sources of funds for panchayats. Block Panchayats & Zilla Parishads 
have access to the funds from other sources such as State Finance 
Commission awards, tax collection, State grants, etc. Funds are also made 
available under various Centrally Sponsored Schemes, State Schemes from 
time to time. States have also devolved fund s of certain departments to the 
PRIs." 
 
II. Pre conditions for funds transfer to panchayats   
3.2 When asked as to whether there are any pre -conditions set by the centre for 
transferring funds to Panchayats, the MoPR stated as under: 
 "The grants have been recommended only to duly constituted gram 
panchayats in each State. As such gram panchayats constituted on the basis 
of elections is one basic condition. Transfer of funds by States to the gram 

 
 
panchayats within 15 days of their credit  in their accounts by the Union 
Government is another pre condition. In case of delay State Governments are 
required to release instalment with penal interest.  To draw their entitled share 
of these grants, States have to comply with the following eligibility conditions: 
(i) The Gram Panchayats will have to submit audited accounts that relate 
to year not earlier than two years preceding the year in which the Gram 
Panchayats seek to claim the performance grant. 
 
(ii) The Gram Panchayats will have to show an increase in their own 
revenues over the preceding year as reflected in the audited accounts.   
 In addition, certain stipulations regarding furnishing of UC for the previous 
instalment drawn, design of detailed proc edure for disbursal of performance 
grants, certification from MoPR that the finalized scheme, conforms to FFC 
recommendations, maintenance of books of accounts as recommended by 
FFC, continuation of TG&S arrangement from C&AG and timely audit of 
accounts. 
 Basic Grant & Performance Grant is to be utilized for the designated purpose 
as recommended by the FFC only." 
 
III. Finances of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) – Flow of funds 
3.3 During evidence dated 09.09.2015, the Committee when asked about the 
mechanism of funds to Panchayats from the Central Government, the Secretary, M/o 
Panchayati Raj stated as follows: 
“The Money will go from the Ministry of Finance from the consolidated fund of 
India to the State Consolidated fund and within 15 days of receipt they will 
have to release it to the gram panchayats, preferably directly. For example, 
Karnataka has an electro nic transfer. They can give it from the State to the 
Gram Panchayat within 15 days. Some give it through the District, but it has to 
reach the gram panchayat within 15 days failing which the State has to give 
interest to the Gram Panchayats. So that is the  award of the 14 th Finance 
Commission.”     
 
3.4 When asked about the instances where the State Governments have paid 
interest to panchayats for delay in releasing the funds received from the Central 
Government, the Ministry of MoPR have state as under: 
"These Grants are released by the Ministry of Finance. So far only the first 
instalment of Basic Grants for the current financial year 2015 -16 has been 

 
 
released to twenty five State Governments (except Uttar Pradesh) by the 
Ministry of Finance.  Details rega rding any delay in the transfer of these 
Grants to the gram panchayats is not available with the Ministry. However,  
while  implementing the Thirteenth Finance Commission award,  subsequent 
instalments of these grants  to panchayats were released by the Mi nistry of 
Finance to State Governments such as Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh 
& Uttar Pradesh only after the  State Government had  released the previous 
instalment along with the penal interest at RBI rate for a period of delay 
beyond the stipulated period 
 
(i) The FFC have recommended that State Governments should release  
these grants to the gram panchayats within fifteen days of it being credited  to 
their account by the Union Government. There is no stipulation in these   
recommendations that State Governments should  transfer funds to the 
panchyats through electronic transfer only.  However, the Ministry agrees that 
such stipulation of direct transfer of funds to panchayats is more speedy and 
efficient.    
 
(ii) The current financial year being the first year of the award period of 
Fourteenth Finance Commission and only the first instalment of the Basic 
Grants being released so far, data regarding States which are directly 
transferring the funds to panchayats and those through districts is not  readily 
available in the Ministry. " 
 
3.5 When asked about the role played by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 
ensuring the implementation of relevant recommendat ions of the Finance 
Commissions, the MoPR have stated as under: 
 "As per the guidelines dated 08.10.2015 issued by the Ministry of Finance, 
MoPR has  been given the following roles in the implementation of the FFC 
recommendations-  
 (i)  Performance grant for 2015-16 for rural local bodies will be released by the 
D/o Expenditure in October on certification from the MoPR that the Scheme  
framed by the States for disbursal of Performance  Grants(including quantum 
of incentive and operational criteria)  has been received from the States and it 
conforms to the recommendations  of the FFC. Performance Grants for the 
subsequent years will be released   on furnishing of the UC to the MoPR and 
certification from the MoPR   to this effect.  
 (ii) State Governments will develop state specific time bound action plans to 
address the is sues highlighted by the FFC for the States may work closely 
with the MoPR  

 
 
 (iii)  Further, a Committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of 
Secretary, Panchayati Raj for providing guidance and support to State Govts. 
and rural local bodies on th e implementation of recommendation of FFC XIV 
listed in para 24 of the guidelines. The Committee will have the following 
broad terms of reference-  
 (i) Suggest measures to facilitate that all the recommendations of the 14 th 
Finance Commission relating to local bodies are operationalized 
 (ii) Sort out operational issues which are brought to the notice of the 
committees by the State Governments 
 iii) Facilitate inter-ministerial coordination at the Central level 
iv) Monitor the progress of expenditure of the grants by the local bodies and 
suggest remedial measures, if needed 
 
IV. Sources of revenue for panchayats  
3.6 Furnishing the details about the sources of revenue generated by Gram 
Panchayats   in different states, the MoPR have state as under:  
 "The latest available information on taxes levied by Panchayats is given as 
Annex-IV. The normal Panchayat taxes are – House or Property Tax, 
Profession Tax, Entertainment Tax, Surcharge on Stamp Duty, Tax on Goods 
sold in markets, Tax on Community Services, Water Tax, etc. There is a huge 
variation across States in the type of local taxes, rates and level of collection. 
Panchayats also generate resources through various types of fees and 
assets.  
 
 12th Finance Commission in their report made following conditions regarding 
own revenue generation by panchayats; 
 
 Levy of certain major taxes and exploitation of non -tax revenue sources be 
made obligatory for the panchayats. The minimum rates for all such levies be 
fixed by the State Governments; 
 
 A minimum revenue collection from the panchayat taxes be insisted; 
 
 Incentive grants relates to revenue collection  beyond a prescribed minimum 
be introduced by the State Government; 
 
 User charges be made obligatory levies; 
 

 
 
 All commo n property resources vested in the village panchayats may be 
identified, listed and made productive of revenue; 
 
 Valuation of taxable lands and buildings should be done by a separate cell in 
the Panchayati Raj Department of the State Governments and not left to the 
panchayats; 
 
 Powers to levy a tax/surcharges/cess on agricultural holdings should be given 
to the intermediate or district panchayats; 
 
(a) 13th  Finance Commission in their report have recommended that the 
State Governments should incentivize rev enue collection by local bodies 
through methods such as mandating some or all local taxes as obligatory at 
non-zero rates of levy; by deducting deemed own revenue collection from 
transfer entitlements of local bodies or through a system of matching grants.  
13th Finance Commission also made levy of propert y tax by panchayats as 
one of the six mandatory conditions for drawl of performance grants.   
(b) 14th Finance Commission: improvement in own source revenue 
generation is one of the two mandatory conditions fo r drawal of Performance 
Grants (applicable from 2016 -17 onwards). Extracts from FFC Report on the 
subject are given in the following paragraphs: 
 “A common issue raised by most SFCs is that their work was hampered by 
lack of reliable data on receipts and e xpenditure at the local body level.  The 
studies commissioned by us on panchayats and municipal finances faced 
similar problems.  We note that despite the last three Finance Commissions 
raising the issue of reliable data and accounts and providing grants to address 
the issue, not much has happened.  In our opinion, this is not a satisfactory 
state of affairs. Therefore, we are providing performance grants to address 
the following issues: (i) making available reliable data on local bodies' receipt 
and expend iture through audited accounts; and (ii) improvement in own 
revenues. In addition, the urban local bodies will have to measure and publish 
service level benchmarks for basic services. These performance grants will be 
disbursed from the second year of our a ward period, that is, 2016 -17 
onwards, so as to enable sufficient time to State Governments and the local 
bodies to put in place a scheme and mechanism for implementation. The 
details of the performance grants are given in the paragraphs that follow. 
 To b e eligible for performance grants, the gram panchayats will have to 
submit audited annual accounts that relate to a year not earlier than two years 
preceding the year in which the gram panchayat seeks to claim the 
performance grant. It will also have to sh ow an increase in the own revenues 
of the local body over the preceding year, as reflected in the audited 
accounts.  To illustrate, the audited accounts required for performance grants 

 
 
in 2016 -17 will be for the year 2014 -15; for performance grants in 2017 -18, 
the audited accounts will be for the year 2015 -16; for performance grants in 
2018-19, the audited accounts will be for 2016-17; and for performance grants 
in 2019-20, the audited accounts will be for 2017-18. 
 
 The ToR mandates us to identify and reco mmend measures needed to 
augment the Consolidated Fund of States.  In addition to the grants that we 
have recommended, we have suggested the actionable measures that the 
State Governments and the local bodies can take to improve their own 
revenues, based on our examination of SFC reports. There is certainly a need 
to streamline revenue administration in the States in order to improve own 
resources of panchayats and municipalities. 
 
 States have classified levies assigned to local bodies as compulsory or 
optional.  However, the classification is different across States.  Per capita 
income from both tax and non -tax sources also varies widely. In the case of 
own revenue collections by local bodies, the bulk of overall collections were 
accounted for by local bod ies in a few States. We notice that there is 
considerable scope for the local bodies to improve revenues from own 
sources by taking steps as recommended by the SFCs and the Finance 
Commissions.  In our view, States need to take the measures illustrated 
below to further augment the resources at the State and local bodies' level. 
 The reports of some SFCs revealed the fact that panchayats reported low 
income from advertisement in cases where it was being collected by the 
district administration for passing on to the panchayats. Even in cases where 
the panchayats were empowered to co llect the tax, most of them were not 
doing so. In the case of urban local bodies, the tax had two components - tax 
on hoardings and the tax on advertisements on buses, cars, lamp posts and 
compound walls.   The SFCs also pointed out that in some States, re levant 
legislation allowed the municipal corporations to collect advertisement tax, but 
did not give powers to the Tier II and III municipalities to levy the tax.  We are 
of the view that there is no reason why the incomes of local bodies from 
advertisement tax cannot increase significantly.   
 
 In this context, we suggest that States may like to consider steps to empower 
local bodies to impose this tax and improve own revenues from this source. 
It will also have to show an increase in the own revenues over  the preceding 
years as reflected in the audited accounts”.   
 

 
 
3.7 The Committee during evidence dated 09.09.2015 desired to know the main 
sources to generate the own revenue generation of Gram Panchayats.  The 
Secretary MoPR stated as under: 
 "From nationa l experience, one of the sources is property tax or house tax.  
Then States like Tamil Nadu, Kerala and others give the entertainment tax 
from cinemas to them.  Then the 14th Finance Commission has recommended 
what is called profession tax.  It is like the income tax on any profession.  For 
example, a Government servant may be liable to give Rs 2500 as profession 
tax to the Gram Panchayat. Maybe a factory worker will have to g ive only Rs 
500.  This is not done in many States.  This is there in all the States but they 
are not collecting it.  So, we are now trying to motivate the States to collect 
this.  Telangana is a very good example where they increased their own 
revenue from Rs 90 crore to Rs 250 crore just in one year without increasing 
the tax. That is a very good example which we are now trying to point out to 
others." 
 
V. Financial Accountability  
3.8  When asked about the existing provisions on ensuring the financial 
accountability of Panchayats is in different states, the MoPR have stated as under: 
 "Article 243J provides for the legislature of a State to make provisions with 
respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Panchayats and the auditing of 
such accounts. 
 The State Governments have made necessary provisions in the State 
Panchayati Raj Acts and Rules for proper maintenance of accounts and 
auditing of such accounts through the offices of Director (Local Audits) as well 
as through the office of Accountant General . The State Governments have 
prepared necessary budgeting, accounting and auditing manuals. 
 
 While recommending devolution of funds to the rural local bodies, the Union 
Finance Commissions have also laid down certain conditions for financial 
accountability of the Panchayats. The provisions mentioned by 13 th and 14 th 
Union Finance Commission are given below: 
 
 (I). Ministry of Finance (MoF) had framed detailed guidelines regarding 
release and utilization of grants recommended by the Thirteenth Finance 
Commission (FC XIII) for Rural Local Bodies vide their letter dated 
23.09.2010.  
 

 
 
 In terms of guidelines, 
 FC XIII recommended grants in- aid to local bodies as a percentage of 
the previous year’s divisible pool of taxes (over and above the share of 
States), af ter converting this share to grant -in-aid under Article 275 of the 
Constitution of India. 
 The grants recommended are untied to expenditure conditions.  
 
 Every State shall constitute a High Level Monitoring Committee 
(HLMC) headed by the Chief Secretary to the State Government and will 
include Finance Secretary and Secretaries of the concerned Departments as 
members. HLMC shall be responsible for ensuring adherence to the specific 
conditions in respect of each category of grant, wherever applicable. 
 
 The exp enditure to Local Bodies is also subject to audit by the 
concerned State Government Agencies. 
 
 (II) MoF has issued Guidelines for implementation of recommendations of 
Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC) with regard to Local Bodies Grants 
(RLBs & ULBs) vide letter dated 8-10-2015.  
 
 In terms of these guidelines,  
 The Comptroller and Auditor General of India will audit the release and 
transfer of the grant -in-aid. C& AG may also conduct audit of expenditure in 
selected Panchayats in accordance with the Technical Guidance and Support 
(TG&S).  
 
 It is suggested that the publishing of service level data and preparation and 
audit of accounts will provide the necessary trans parency and accountability 
for release of funds. 
 
 It is also recommended that stern action should be ensured if irregularities in 
the application of funds are noticed or pointed out, for the prevention of which 
appropriate third party audit mechanism may be put in place by March, 2017. 
  
 For monitoring and concurrent evaluation, the States may constitute High 
Level Monitoring Committee (HLMC) headed by Chief Secretary and including 
the Finance Secretary and other concerned Departmental Secretaries to 
monitor and carry out concurrent evaluation of the Local bodies receiving 
grants to ensure that funds are utilized for the purpose recommended by the 
FFC. 
 
 At the level of Union Government, a Committee will be constituted under the  
Ministry of Panchayati R aj to provide guidance and support to the State 

 
 
Governments and local bodies on implementation of recommendations of 
FFC which inter -alia monitor the progress of expenditure of the grants by the 
local bodies and suggest remedial measures, if needed. 
 
 To as sist the States to ensure proper financial accountability of the Gram 
Panchayats, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has awarded the work of 
preparation of States specific manuals for budgeting, accounting and auditing 
of Panchayat Accounts to an independent a gency called Institute of Public 
Audit of India. This institute is working with the State Government for 
preparation of state specific manuals. 
  

 
 
Chapter IV 
I. Reservation of seats for disadvantaged sections in Panchayats 
 Article 243 D of the Constitution  of India provides for (i)  the  reservation of 
seats  for the S cheduled Castes and Schedu led Tribes in every Panchayat ( at all 
levels) in proportion of their population in the Panchayat area and  also the women   
  The Committee during evidence on 09.09.2015 when asked to clarify the 
implementation guidelines for reservations and rotation of reserved seats after two 
terms. The representatives of Ministry stated as under:- 
 ""+ÉÉ{ÉxÉä ªÉc ¤ÉcÖiÉ ºÉcÉÒ BÉEcÉ ÉÊBÉE {Éxp c ®ÉVªÉÉå àÉä 
àÉÉÊcãÉÉ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEä ÉÊãÉA BÉE®ÉÒ¤É 50 |ÉÉÊiÉ¶ÉiÉ 
ÉÊ®VÉ´Éæ¶ÉxÉ cÉä MÉªÉÉ cè +ÉÉè® ¤ÉÉBÉEÉÒ ®ÉVªÉÉå àÉå 
+É£ÉÉÒ £ÉÉÒ 33 |ÉÉÊiÉ¶ÉiÉ cè* càÉ +É{ÉxÉÉÒ iÉ®{ÉE ºÉä ABÉE 
BÉEèÉÊ¤ÉxÉä] xÉÉä] àÉÚ´É BÉE® ®cä cé* càÉ ABÉE |ÉºiÉÉ´É 
BÉE® ®cä cé ÉÊBÉE ºÉÆÉÊ´Év ÉÉxÉ BÉEÉä ¤ÉnãÉÉ VÉÉªÉä 
ÉÊBÉE c® VÉMÉc 50 |ÉÉÊiÉ¶ÉiÉ ÉÊ®VÉ´Éæ¶ÉxÉ cÉä* càÉÉ®ÉÒ 
BÉEÉäÉÊ¶É¶É ®cäMÉÉÒ ÉÊBÉE AäºÉÉ cÉä* nÚºÉ®É, +ÉÉ{ÉxÉä 
BÉEcÉ ÉÊBÉE VÉcÉÆ BÉEÉä<Ç £ÉÉÒ ]ÅÉ<¤ÉãÉ xÉcÉÓ cè, iÉÉä 
´ÉcÉÆ BÉDªÉÉ cÉäMÉÉ? ºÉÆÉÊ´ÉvÉÉxÉ àÉå ABÉE |ÉÉ´ÉvÉÉxÉ cè 
ÉÊBÉE ÉÊ®V É´Éæ¶ÉxÉ ¤ÉÉªÉ ®Éä]ä¶ÉxÉ cÉäMÉÉ, ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ 
<ºÉBÉEä ÉÊb]äãb ÉÊxÉªÉàÉ º]ä]ÂºÉ cÉÒ ¤ÉxÉÉiÉä cé* ´Éc º]ä] 
MÉ´ÉxÉÇàÉé] BÉEä cÉÒ >ó{É® ÉÊxÉ£ÉÇ® ®ciÉÉ cè* ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ 
+ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉ BÉEcxÉÉ ºÉcÉÒ cè ÉÊBÉE ªÉc ABÉE <¶ªÉÚ cè* ºÉ®, 
®Éä]ä¶ÉxÉ iÉÉä c® VÉMÉc cè, BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉ E ´Éc ºÉÆÉÊ´ÉvÉÉxÉ 
àÉå cè* ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ ÉÊBÉEºÉ iÉ®c ºÉä ®Éä]ä¶ÉxÉ cè, ªÉc ®ÉVªÉ 
]Ú ®ÉVªÉ ´Éä®ÉÒ BÉE®iÉÉ cè* càÉ <ºÉ ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå º]bÉÒ 
BÉE®åMÉä ÉÊBÉE BÉEcÉÆ ÉÊBÉEºÉ iÉ®c ºÉä cè, BÉDªÉÉ +ÉSUä 
ÉÊxÉªÉàÉ cé +ÉÉè® BÉDªÉÉ +ÉSUä ÉÊxÉªÉàÉ xÉcÉÓ cé* 
+ÉÉ{ÉxÉä ABÉE ¤ÉcÖiÉ <à{ÉÉä]ë] ÉÊ¤ÉxnÖ BÉEcÉ cè*"" 
 The Committee asked as to whether all the S tate Governments are adhering 
to the provision of Article 243D and 243D(3), the MoPR have stated as under:   
  "Reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes a t all 
levels of Panchayat is a mandatory provision and generally the State 
Governments have complied with this by making a provision in their 
respective Panchayati Raj Acts. A third party audit has not been conducted in 
this regard. 

 
 
 Reservation of one third seats (including the seats reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes) by rotation is a mandatory provision and the 
State Governments have already made provision in this regard.  Some of the 
State Governments, as per details below, have made provision for reservation 
of 50% of seats for women at PRIs. 
i. Assam 
ii. Andhra Pradesh  
iii. Bihar  
iv. Chhattisgarh 
v. Himachal Pradesh  
vi. Jharkhand 
vii. Kerala 
viii. Karnataka  
ix. Madhya Pradesh  
x. Maharashtra  
xi. Odisha  
xii. Rajasthan 
xiii. Tripura  
xiv. Telengana 
xv. Uttarakhand  
xvi. West Bengal. 
 
 During evidence the Committee desire d to know the names of States 
which have direct elections to the three tier system for the post of 
Chairperson. The representative replied as under: 
 "These points are very important about direct and indirect elections. The 
Ministry is a little con strained because the Constitution provides for 
indirect elections at the block and district Panchayats. Since the H on. 
Committee has pointed out this issue, we will again take it up in our 
Ministry. It would require consultation with t he States, taking them on 
board, it would require a Constitution amendment. So, we cannot 
immediately act on this issue because of the constitutional provisions in 
that sense but certainly we will take up this whole issue with the States." 
 

 
 
II. Association of MPs and MLAs at block level / Panchayat Samithi  
4.2 The Committee further desire to know the provision of participation of public 
representatives MPs and MLAs in the Block/Panchayat Samiti/Zila Parishads, the 
Ministry in their written reply  stated that a s per Article 243 C (3) (c) & (d) of the 
Constitution, a State may provide for representation of MPs and MLAs in block and 
district Panchayats. Various State Governments, as given below for major States, 
have made provision for representation  of MLAs and MPs in PRIs as members/ 
associate members: 
SI. 
No 
State/UT Provision for 
Intermediary (Block) 
Panchayat 
Provision for District  
Panchayat 
MP MLA MP MLA 
1.  Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands 
    
2.  Andhra Pradesh Yes Yes Yes Yes 
3.  Arunachal Pradesh Yes Yes Yes Yes 
4.  Assam Yes Yes Yes Yes 
5.  Bihar Yes Yes Yes Yes 
6.  Chhattisgarh   Yes Yes 
7.  Goa     
8.  Gujarat No Yes No Yes 
9.  Haryana Yes Yes Yes Yes 
10.  Himachal Pradesh Yes Yes Yes Yes 
11.  Jharkhand No No No Yes 
12.  Karnataka Yes Yes Yes Yes 
13.  Kerala Yes Yes Yes Yes 
14.  Madhya Pradesh No Yes Yes Yes 
15.  Maharashtra No No   
16.  Orissa Yes Yes Yes Yes 
17.  Punjab No Yes Yes Yes 
18.  Rajasthan No Yes Yes Yes 
19.  Sikkim   Yes Yes 
20.  Tamil Nadu Yes Yes Yes Yes  
21.  Tripura No Yes Yes Yes 
22.  Uttar Pradesh Yes Yes Yes Yes 
23.  Uttarakhand Yes Yes Yes Yes 
24.  West Bengal Yes Yes Yes Yes 
During the course of evidence, the representatives of MoPR further 
elucidated the Committee on the issue of association of MPs/MLAs to 
panchayats as under: 
 "......in Panchayat elections, again there are State  specific variations. In most 
States, they do not encourage participation of political parties at least at the 

 
 
level of village Panchayats. But in many States, they do not encourage 
participation of political parties at any level.We note that point also fo r our 
future action. 
 Similarly about reservation, it does happen especially in Madhya Pradesh 
also, I am aware that even when there is a one SC family and ST family, the 
seats rotate. These rules are also decided by the States. Some States have 
made these rules so that this ki nd of an anomaly does not arise. What we will 
try and do now that the hon. Committee has pointed this out is, we will collect 
the best practices from the States, how States have tried to rotate in a manner 
which is fair and also rational. So, we will attem pt to collect the best practices 
from the States and circulate. Then, the rotational rules also keep changing. It 
is not that States adopt one kind of rule and follow that. They also change it 
from time to time. But this is an area of work that this Ministry has identified, to 
find out what are the most rational practices that have been adopted by the 
States. 
 These were the important issues which were raised by the Members. We take 
very serious note of these issues. As the topic itself is about the 73 rd 
Constitution Amendment, many of them are concerned with constitutional 
provisions. We have to deliberate and we have to look at what is possible in 
the constitutional structure. So, we take note of all these issues." 
 
 
 
  

 
 
Chapter V 
I. Capacity Building  
 The Ministry has informed the Committee that the manpower and 
infrastructure sanctioned form Gram Panchayats under RGPSA till 2014 -15 are 
under:- 
Administrative and Technical Support to Gram Panchayats sanction in RGPSA 
Activity  
 
2013-14 2014-15 Total  
No. of Account cum DEOs sanctioned for Gram 
Panchayats: 
 
54753 55295 110048 
No. of Panchayat Sachiv / PDOs sanctioned for 
Gram Panchayats: 
 
15290 110001 26291 
No. of JE / Technical staff sanctioned: 
 
2570 8247 10817 
Others 
 
- 876 876 
Total no. of personnel  sanctioned under RGPSA so 
far: 
 
  148032 
 
Construction & repair of Gram Panchayat buildings sanctioned in RGPSA 
Activity  
 
2013-14 2014-15 Total  
No. of new Panchayats bhavan sanctioned: 
 
3128 2037 5165 
No. of repair sanctioned 
 
7727 7856 15583 
Computer infrastructure to gram panchayats 
 
22506 19741 42247 
 
The number of trainings of Elected Representatives and functionaries that has been 
sanctioned under RGPSA during 2013-14 and 2014-15 is given as under: 
 2013-14 2014-15 
Total no. of ERs and functionaries training sanctioned 
under RGPSA 
 
1096825 1670581 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 The institutions sanctioned at various levels are as follows: 
 2013-14 2014-15 
State Panchayat Resource Centres sanctioned 
 
13 19 
District Panchayat Resource Centres 
sanctioned 
 
136 189 
Block Panchayat Resource Centres sanctioned 
 
338 851 
Faculty support to SPRC 
 
16 16 
SATCOM support provided 
 
0 7 
Upgrade of ETC 
 
30 34 
 
 To gauge the impact of the scheme and also to track the meaningful utilization 
of funds, the scheme was monitored through following measures: 
(a) While submitting their Annual Plan proposals, the States had to submit before 
the CEC the status of Devolution of 3Fs, completion of other activities sanctioned for 
them under the scheme, status of utilisation of funds, aud it reports etc. other 
measures taken for empowering the Gram Panchayats, Gram Sabhas, etc. 
(b) Obtaining the Quarterly Progress Report (QPR): the first regular instalments 
under RGPSA, on the basis of Annual Plans were released only in the latter half of 
financial year 2013-14. 21 States have submitted QPR for 1st and 2nd quarter 2014. 
(c) Conduct of reviews and video conference: detailed reviews, zonal meetings 
and video conference were held and interactions with SIRDs conducted to monitor 
implementation of the programme. 
 The Committee w hen asked about the strategic action plan of the 
Government to strengthen/ improve capacity to ensure that all members and elected 
representatives are adequately trained to perform their roles and responsibilities 
effectively, to understand programmes, pra ctices, procedures and systems  and its 
impact on the functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions , the MoPR have stated as 
under: 
 "MoPR has supported the Capacity Building and Training (CB&T) of 
Panchayat ERs and fu nctionaries, as well as other stakeholders in several 
ways as under:- 

 
 
 i) Schematic Interventions:  MoPR, along with States, has successfully 
addressed the challenge of large numbers for training by deploying the 
cascade mode of training as well as distance education. Under RGPSA as 
well as the CB grant of BRGF, substantial support has been provided to set 
up the training infrastructure, and to provide training. Around 15 lakh 
Panchayat Elected Representatives and functionaries are trained every year.  
In addition, MoPR arranges experience sharing across States and also 
supports knowledge based activitie s as described below.  Several training 
institutes have also innovated with interesting modes of training, such as on 
the spot training, work books, help desks, street plays etc. Exposure visits of 
Elected Representatives to well -performing Panchayats have  also been 
organized. The range of stakeholders to be trained has also expanded 
considerably, to include various technical functionaries, Gram Sabhas, school 
children etc.  Very strong efforts have been undertaken under RGPSA to 
strengthen the institutional structure for training.  
 
 W.e.f. the year 2015-16, it has been decided that the funds under RGPSA will 
primarily be released for supporting States to meet their Capacity Building 
obligations under FFC Award particularly training support for Gram Panchay at 
Development Plan (GPDP).   
 The impact of training on the governance capability of PRIs has been mixed. 
While trainings have had an immediate impact of the knowledge level of ERs, 
in the absence of adequate resources, it has been difficult for PRIs to d eliver 
on the ground. This is sought to be addressed through the FFC award, and 
participatory planning process at grassroots, which in itself is a capacity 
building exercise.  
 ii). National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) : The National 
Capability Bui lding Framework 2014 has been prepared after iterative 
consultations to provide a definitive framework for capacity building for elected 
representatives of the three tiers of panchayati raj and for panchayat 
functionaries and other stakeholders that would enable the panchayats to 
provide local governance solutions and become drivers of local development 
and social justice. 
 iii). Active Panchayat Series   To equip the Gram Panchayats and the Gram 
Sabha to play an active and meaningful role in various spheres, reading 
materials suitable for Gram Panchayats and Gram Sabha have been 
prepared under Active Panchayats and Active Gram Sabha series of 
publication.. The following books have been prepared and made available to 
States: 
 
 Sanitation in Gram Panchayats 

 
 
 Drinking Water in Gram Panchayats 
 Governance in Gram Panchayats 
 Gram Sabha reader on Sanitation or Resource Book for Panchayats 
 Animal Husbandry in Gram Panchayats 
 Child Development in Gram Panchayats 
 Resource Book and Trainers manual on sanitation 
 Community mobilization in PESA Areas 
 Methodology and questionnaire for Gram Panchayats to undertake 
survey on sanitation. 
 
 iv). National Plan for Technical Assistance : A National Plan for Technical 
Assistance (NPTA) is approved on an annual basis which enables the Ministry 
to take up strategic activities in line with the National Capability Building 
Framework (NCBF) and with emerging imperatives for empowerm ent of 
panchayati raj institutions, under the  central component of RGPSA. Some 
activities taken up under the NPTA for the current year are listed below: 
1. Panchayat Incentivization Thematic awards to Panchayats 
2. Development of Beacon Panchayats as Peer Learning Centres 
3. Developing financial and administrative operating systems as relevant 
to individual States for roll out of the FFC Award 
4. Support to the school of local governance in NIRD &PR 
5. Faculty development of SIRD 
6. Thematic modules for grassroots training  
7. E-governance support to PRIs 
8. Knowledge repository on Panchayati Raj 
 v.) Strategic Workshops:  
 Various consultations and Workshops for developing strategies and solutions 
relevant to improving the quality and reach of local governance  have been 
organised by the Ministry as per details below:- 
 
a) National level consultative workshop with SIRDs/States for peer 
learning:-  A national conference on Capacity Building & Training (CB&T) was 
held  with states and SIRDs with a view to understand and discuss the iss ues 
on preparedness of SIRDs for conduct of trainings, training strategies, sharing 
training methodologies that can be identified as best practices, review of 
adaptation of modules developed by the Ministry, review the action taken for 

 
 
carrying forward the  recommendation of the NCBF document and discuss 
interventions and strategies for Swachh Bharat Abhiyan.   
 
 b)      A National Peer learning workshop on Own Source Revenue 
Generation by Panchayats was held by MoPR at NIRD & PR on 11 -13th June 
2015 which provided a platform for sharing of OSR practices at Gram 
Panchayat level across the country. The Workshop was attended by 
participants from 24 States comprising Senior Officers from State/SIRD 
facilities, SFC Members, ERs of GPs, External Experts. This also facilitated 
development of states specific time bound road map regarding policy and 
operational issues of OSR mobilization, capability development and 
devolution of power. Especially in the wake of the FFC award, there has been 
a noticea ble increase in engagement on issues pertaining to OSR by both 
State Governments and PRIs. 
 c)      A National Write shop for GP Development Plan through Participatory 
Planning in the context of 14 th finance Commission was held by Ministry at 
KILA during 8 th -13th July, 2015. The Writeshop was attended by the 
participants from 27 States comprising Senior Officers from State/SIRD 
facilities. The participants were oriented to concepts and methods of 
decentralized participatory planning and had field visit  to  Gram Panchayat to 
see the process of planning followed. The Writeshop facilitated cross learning 
and also learning from fields level experiences thereby facilitating clarity in GP 
development planning.  States have been following up on this excersie to 
finalize guidelines for GP Development Plan. 14 States have finalized the 
guidelines for participatory planning by GPs.  
 d)      A 3 day workshop in Guwahati on GPDP for the North Eastern States 
was held during 28 -30th September, 2015. This was to address specific 
concerns of the north eastern states in regard to putting institutional structures 
in place for facilitating grass roots planning exercises. 
 e)     The Ministry has also been facilitating State level workshop s for 
developing strategies for the effective implementation of the FFC award. The 
States thus supported include Assam, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand.  
 
II. Capacity Building in Scheduled V Areas 
5.2 Capacity building of Gram Sabhas in Scheduled V Areas is one  of the major 
thrust areas of the Ministry. The Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan 
(RGPSA), addresses the major issues concerning awareness about rights of the 
people in Schedule V Areas. Funds have been provided to the ten States to 
strengthen Gram Sabhas in Fifth Schedule areas under the component of Capacity 

 
 
Building & Training and Special Support for PESA. It provides for deployment of one 
Mobiliser in each Gram Sabha and one Coordinato r at Block/District levels. Funds 
have been provided for orienting Gram Sabha on PESA related issues and States 
can involve NGOs, if required, in process. All these activities have been integrated in 
the overall programme of capacity building undertaken by  the States in coordination 
with their State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs).  Training module for 
capacity building of elected representatives and officials of the State Governments 
has been prepared by the respective SIRD. 
        All the PESA States have been provided funds for 2013 -14 and 2014-15 for the 
purpose. They have initiated the process of deployment of Mobilisers/Coordinators, 
which are expected to be in place soon. The activities sanctioned (in nos.) for PESA 
so far under RGPSA are: 
 
Activity 2013-14 2014-15 Total 
Gram Sabha mobilizers 24849 11153 36002 
Support for Gram Sabha orientation 31049 8915 39964 
Support to Gram Panchayat with low 
resource base 
5794 5558 11352 
 
 
III. Transparency  
5.3 In reply to the written query regarding transparency in the functioning of the 
panchayats and third party audit of the Panchayats, the MoPR have stated as under:  
 "Ministry of Panchayati Raj has urged Panchayats to display information on 
their buildings and notice boards, and also provide infor mation in Gram 
Sabhas. Under MGNREGA, social audit is mandatory.  Further to facilitate 
transparency and accountability in the maintenance of accounts of 
Panchayats, MoPR has launched a software application, PRIASoft which 
captures receipt & expenditure det ails through voucher entries and 
automatically generates cash book, registers, etc. Panchayats have been 
encouraged to put this information on-line. 
  
 
 

 
 
IV. Infrastructure Constraints. 
5.4 During evidence the Ministry informed that 50,000 Gram Panchayats (GPs) 
do not  have any building. When asked as to how in the absence of basic 
infrastructure Gram Panchayats fulfill their responsibilities and also the specific 
steps taken to address this basic infrastructure requirement , the MoPR have stated 
as under:     
  "It is imperative that for the effective functioning of the Gram Panchayats 
basic infrastructure facilities like pacca GP building, provision for water, 
electricity etc. are the pre -requisite.  To strengthen the infrastructure fa cilities 
in GPs, MoPR provided assistance to the State Governments under RGPSA 
for new GP buildings, repairs of the existing buildings, construction of toilet 
blocks, electricity and water supply for the GPs, provision of computers to 
panchayats etc. Howev er, funds under RGPSA have been substantially 
reduced. States can use MGNREGS funds to construct Panchayats 
buildings." 
 
V. Gram Sabha 
5.5 Article 243A provides that a Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and 
perform such functions at the village level as the legislature of a State may, by law, 
provide. Powers assigned to the Gram Sabha, therefore, vary from State to State. 
Gram Sabha is key to the self -governance and transparent and accountable 
functioning of the Gram Panchayat. The Gram Sabha is the forum  that ensures 
direct, participative democracy. It offers equal opportunity to all citizens including the 
poor, the women and the marginalised to discuss and criticize, approve or reject 
proposals of the Gram Panchayat (the executive) and also assess its performance.  
5.6 When asked about the functioning of Gram Sabha and the role played by it in 
the achievement of objectives of Panchayati Raj System, the MoPR stated as under: 
 "Gram Panchayat is accountable to Gram Sabha.  Also bottom - up planning 
starts from Gram Sabha to make it an inclusive planning in terms of the Article 
243 ZD regarding district planning. Selection of beneficiaries, sites, social 
audit etc. in connection with various welfare and developmental programmes 
should be done by Gram Sabha. As  per Article 243A, it is upto the States to 
decide on the powers of Gram Sabhas.  Functions/roles assigned to Gram 
Sabha by some major States in their State Panchayati Raj Acts are given in 
Annexure-V. 
 

 
 
 Ministry of Panchayati Raj regularly encourages State Governments to 
strengthen  the functioning of Gram Sabha and also to involve Gram Sabha in 
the decision making process at PRIs by issuing Guidelines for 
conducting/organizing Gram Sabha meetings at regu lar intervals and on 
special occasions like Independence Day, Gandhi Jayanti, National 
Panchayati Raj Day etc., ensuring quorum, participation of marginalized 
sections of the society, recording of minutes of meetings and follow - up on 
actions to be taken o n the recommendations in the Gram Sabha meetings. 
The functioning of Gram Sabhas is studied in periodic “State of Panchayati 
Raj” Report published by the Ministry." 
 
5.7 Apprising the Committee on 09 September, 2015 of the efforts made including 
instituting the awards to best performing Gram Sabhas, by M/o Panchayati Raj to 
encourage State Governments to make Gram Sabhas effective and the result 
thereof, a representative of the Ministry appearing before the Committee  stated as 
follows:   
           “ ... This is an award that is given to gram panchayats  which make their Gram 
sabhas really active and vibrant as you are saying.  While we do not have any 
sort of direct way of forcin g certain things on gram sabhas , but we do try and 
highlight the achievements o f Gram sabhas. These awards are a way and 
also from time to time we take it up with the states that they should empower 
these Gram Sabhas the results are not as good as we would have liked.”   
5.8 When asked about the role played by the Gram Sabha in selection of 
beneficiaries under various Central/State Schemes, the Secretary MoPR submitted 
as under: 
 "Sir, it is not a direct measure.  Two things are happening.  One is done by the 
Ministry of Rural Development.  Under the MNREGA, last year they starte d 
this activity.  This year, it is being intensified.  We are also closely in 
coordination with them but basically it is being done by them.  In 2532 Blocks, 
they have formed village/Block planning teams which will go and mobilize the 
Gram Sabha for preparing the labour budget under MNREGA.  It is only under 
NREGA but at least the Gram Sabha will be mobilized to some extent.  At 
least people who are interested in working will come to the Gram Sabha.  This 
is one significant development which has taken place recently. 
 What we are now going to do for these Rupees two lakh crore is, we can not 
direct the State Governments but we are working with the State Governments 
to prepare participatory plans for GPs.  So, the first level of plan preparation 
will be at the Gram Sabha.  All the States will have to mandatorily consult the 

 
 
Gram Sabhas and discuss what they want.  Then the Panchayat will prepare 
the plan.  That we are putting in the guidelines. The guidelines have not yet 
been issued.  So, these are two measure s which we thought may help in 
activating the Gram Sabhas. 
 In addition, there is one more activity, but that is limited to the States where 
the 5th Schedule is in operation, where the Gram Sabhas have more powers 
than Gram Sabhas elsewhere and those power s are given by the Panchayats 
(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act.  There we are giving coordinators.  The 
Ministry itself under RGPSA is funding coordinators but that is limited to the 
5th Schedule districts only." 
 During the course of evidence, the representative further added as under: 
 "From our Ministry, we have constantly stressed on the issue of Gram Sabha. 
In most States, they have mandatory minimum number of Gram Sabhas. In 
many States we find that even the number of mandatory Gram Sabha 
meetings m ay not be taking place and the Gram Sabha meeting may take 
place and it may be attended by a very few people or the beneficiary selection 
may not be done as per the rules. So, what we have done is, we have 
constantly emphasized the importance of the Gram Sabha with the States and 
secondly, we have also identified ways in which Gram Sabha participation can 
be increased. For instance, many States have put up a quorum for 
participation of women. In Maharashtra they have a Mahila Sabha before the 
Gram Sabha. From our Ministry, we have encouraged other States to put this 
provision in their Acts so that women's issues are discussed in Mahila Sabha 
first and then put up before the Gram Sabha. In Kerala for instance, they have 
laid down a good process and we have al so constantly emphasized that all 
beneficiaries shall be selected in the full Gram Sabha and they shall be 
approved in the Gram Sabha. But it does need constant work. We also 
provide funds for training of Gram Sabha." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Part-II 
Observations / Recommendations 
 
1. Timely Conduct of Elections : Panchayati Raj system in India refers to 
the system of local self governance introduced by the Constitution (Seventy -
Third Amendment) Act,  1992.  Article 243 E(1) unambiguously stipulates that 
every Panchayat, unless sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in 
force, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting 
and no longer. The Committee, however , note with deep dismay that despite 
the constitution al directive , there  have been instances in some states where 
elections to the Panchayats were postponed for decades. For instance,  in 
Jharkhand, elections were held after a long gap of about 32 years.  In the 
undivided Andhra Pradesh, the elections to Panchayats were po stponed for a 
considerable time and  in Puduchery, Panchayats elections were yet to be 
Conducted. The Committee were apprised by the Government that in order to 
ensure timely conduct of elections, Backward Region Grant Fund Scheme 
funds were not given to the Sta tes till the elections were held. However, as the 
funds were small, the scheme failed to bring in compliance on the part of the 
states.  
  The Committee feel that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MOPR) has a 
very important constitutional obligation to ensure conduct of Panchayat 
elections within the stipulated period of five years .  The ways and means for  
timely election are to be evolved  by the  Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MOPR) in 
coordination with respective State/ U.T Governments and other concerned  
authorities. The Committee, therefore strongly recommend that earnest efforts 

 
 
should be made by the MOPR to ensure conduct of periodic elections as per 
the provision of the 73 rd Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992 to Panchayats at 
all levels in all the Sta tes/UTs so as to strengthen the grass root level 
democracy throughout the length and breadth of the country . Further, having 
regard to periodic complaints, the Committee recommend that the government 
need to examine the desirability of laying down certain essential qualifications 
for various posts in the lowest rung of democracy so that elected functionaries 
discharge their duties efficiently, effectively and independently. 
 
2. Reservation for Women : The Commi ttee note that rotation of one third 
seats is a  mandatory provision. Further, so far s ixteen States have made 
provision for 50% reservation of the seats for women in  the Panchayati Raj 
Institutions in the total number of seats, offices of chairpersons and in the 
seats reserved for Scheduled Caste s and Scheduled Tribes across the three 
tiers, position has been raised from the existing provision of  'not less than 
one-third' to 'not less than one -half'.  Further, it has been stated that the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MOPR) has prepared a Cabinet note an d moved for 
Constitutional Amendment to provide for fifty percent reservation for women 
in the remaining States / U.Ts .  The Committee urge that the proposed 
legislation should be enacted at the earliest without further delay and the 
Committee be apprised in this regard. 
 
 
3. Rotation System of Reservation : In order to usher in social equality and 
political justice, the Constitution provides for rotation of seats reserved for 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes and Women in almost 

 
 
all elections from Panchayats to State and national level elections. However, 
Committee observe that in actual practice at Panchayat level, some 
shortcomings have been noticed in this system of reservation. For example, in 
Jharkhand, it was reported that seats  were reserved even for two or three 
Scheduled Caste / Scheduled Tribe families. The representative of Ministry 
assured to study the rotation system of reservation in such areas. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that it is high time to re -look into the 
existing system of rotation in the light of demographic composition of the 
areas concerned so that necessary corrective measures are taken to remove 
the shortcomings and the Committee apprised. 
 
 
4. Need for Direct Elections to the Posts of Chairpersons of  Block and 
District Panchayats : The Committee note that Article 243 (C) inserted by the 
73rd Constitution (Amendment) Act provides for direct election to seats at all 
three tiers of Panchayats and indirect election for Chairpersons of Block and 
District Panchayats. The Committee further note that the existing provision of 
indirect elections for the post of Chairpersons of Block and District 
Panchayats has been promoting electoral corruption. The representative of the 
Ministry stated that it would involve a mendment to the Constitution and 
therefore they would hold consultations with the States. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to hold consultation with the States so that 
necessary amendment is made in the Constitution expeditiously for providing  
direct elections to the post of Chairpersons of Block and District Panchayats. 
The Committee are of the considered view that holding of direct elections to 

 
 
these posts would reduce the dubious role of money and muscle power and 
go a long way to strengthen our grass root level democracy.   
 
5. Infrastructure Constraints  : The Committee are dismayed to find that 
about fifty thousand Gram Panchayats are stated to be operating without any 
building. To make the things worse, funds under Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan, have been substantially reduced from 2015 -16. States 
can now use MGNREGA funds for constructing Panchayat Buildings. The 
Committee wonder how in the absence of basic infrastructure facilities , Gram 
Panchayats can fulfill their various responsibilities. Besides, there is shortage 
of adequate manpower a t all levels of Panchayats in majority of the States 
particularly in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh , etc. The Committee note 
that approx. 50,000 Gram Panchayats do not have any buildings. The 
Committee feel that due to lack of adequate manpower and b asic 
infrastructure facilities like Gram Panchayat Buildings, the functioning of 
Panchayats at levels would be adversely affected. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the construction of Panchayat Buildings should be 
taken on priority basis a nd the matter be taken up with the concerned States 
and authorities at the highest level. The MoPR need to take urgent measures to 
augment the existing manpower for optimal delivery of various services by the 
Panchayats and the Committee be apprised within  six months about the 
progress made in this direction.  
6. Computerisation of Panchayats  : The Committee note that MoPR 
propose to provide SATCOM (Satellite Communications) facility to all the State 
Institutes of Rural Development (SIRD) in the States where it does not exist. 
The Committee ha ve been informed that MoPR is still in the process of 

 
 
discussion with ISRO and the States for universalisation of SATCOM facilities 
at P anchayat level. As per the information provided to the Committee , 
SATCOM facility is already being used by Panchayats in eight States. Many 
States have not utilise d the earmarked funds due to vari ous reasons. The 
Committee are unhappy to find that Panchaya ts in most of the States have not 
been equipped with requisite level of computerisation. The Committee further 
observe that the Government have been proposing broad-band connectivity to 
Panchayats across the country. The Committee note that the Ministry ha s 
submitted a proposal to Ministry of New & Renewable Energy for electrification 
of un -electrified panchayats using solar energy.  The Committee , therefore, 
desire that status report of computerisation of Panchayats be furnished to the 
Committee at the ear liest. They further recommend that the Ministry expedite 
electrification of all un -electrified Panchayats in a time bound manner and 
apprise the Committee in due course. In the meanwhile till all villages are 
electrified, offline versions of PES applicatio ns, which are stated to be in 
various stages of development, may be used for ensuring transparency in the 
functioning of Panchayats. 
 
7. Award of Grants by Fourteenth Finance Commission  : The Committee 
note that as per the Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC) Award, grants will 
go to Gram Panchayats, which are directly responsible of basic services 
without any share for other levels i.e. Block and District Panchayats within 
fifteen days failing which the State has to give interest to the Gram 
Panchayats. This money can be spent by Gram Panchayats only for basic 
services which have been defined by the F ourteenth Finance Commission like 

 
 
water supply, sanitation, streetlights, roads, burial grounds and crematorium , 
etc. The Committee are dismayed to observe t hat the FFC award has created 
pitiable situation for the Block and District Panchayats. As far as State Finance 
Commissions (SFCs) are concerned, the Committee find that out of 29 States, 
only 6 States namely Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Odisha, Rajast han 
and Sikkim have furnished details of submission and acceptance of the 
recommendations made by their SFCs. Keeping this in view, the Committee 
are apprehensive as to how the financial needs of Block and District 
Panchayats will be met. The Committee, therefore, recommend that MoPR help 
expedite timely allocation of funds by the States Finance Commission to 
Panchayats and a concrete schedule be made with proper monitoring for such 
allocations. 
 
8. Devolution of  Functions, Finances and Functionaries  : Art icle 243(G) 
clearly provides that subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the 
Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers 
and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions 
of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of 
powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject 
to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to (a) the 
preparation of plans for economic development an d social justice; and (b) the 
implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as 
may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in 
the Eleventh Schedule. 
 The Committee note that the devolution of functions, finance and 
functionaries or 3Fs falls under the discretionary provisions of the Seventy 

 
 
Third Constitution Amendment Act.  From the information provided to the 
Committee by MoPR, it is observed that Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Goa, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat , etc 
have transferred some sub jects in varying degrees to Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) .  However  it is saddening to note that no information or 
data has been provided to the Committee about the actu al empowerment of 
PRIs.  The Committ ee are of the considered view that the MoPR has the 
constitutional obligation for ensuring devolution of more powers to the 
Panchayats across the country in a time bound manner, otherwise the issue of 
devolution of power s to Panchayats may continue to elude .  The holding of 
yearly award distribution ceremony alone is far from adequate  to compel 
States to implement c onstitutionally ma ndated provisions relating to 
devolution of Functions, Finance and Functionaries.  The Com mittee strongly 
recommend that , if necessary for devolution of powers to Panchayats, the 
MoPR should move constitutional amendment for doing away with the 
discretionary powers of State legislatures without compromising the spirit of 
federalism enshrined in Constitution. 
 
9. Revitalisation of Gram Sabha s : The Committee are dismayed to note 
the candid admission by the representative of MoPR before the Committee that 
the functioning of Gram Sabha s in many States is not satisfactory at all. 
Although the MoPR have been making efforts for past several years to prevail 
upon the State/UT Governments to empower Gram Sabha s and make their 
functioning more vibrant and participatory yet the results of such initiatives 
have not brought requisite empowerment of the Gram Sabhas. The committee 

 
 
feel that Gram Sabha is the bed -rock of our democratic edifice. As a robust 
institutional mechanism , the Gr am Sabha can mount close vigil on the 
implementation of developmental programmes and eliminate mis-use of funds. 
Apparently, laxity on the part of MoPR and the respective State/UT 
Governments is largely responsible for sluggish empowerment of Gram 
Sabhas across the country. Though Panchayati Raj is a State subject , yet the 
MoPR need to make efforts to chalk out a programme in coordination with 
State/UT Governments for purposeful and effective empowerment of Gram 
Sabhas. The necessary guidelines, which the MoPR propose to put in place for 
compulsory consultation with Gra m Sabha s in preparing participatory plans 
for Gram Panchayats, should be issued to the States/UTs at the earliest along 
with other proposed measures that may help in activating the Gram Sabhas. 
Further, the m onitoring system must be strengthened to oversee the number 
of members enrolled, meetings held, number of members attending meetings, 
committees formed, targets achieved, etc. 
 
10. Depoliticisation of Local Elections and Need for Simultaneous Elections  
: The Committee note that there is no unifor mity in regard to elections at 
district level and block level with respect to affiliation of candidates to political 
parties. Some States like Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar do not have 
party line elections for district level and block level. The Mini stry agreed that 
there may be uniformity in regard to participation and vote of MPs and MLAs in 
district level and block level as per the enabling provision of Article 243(C). 
The Committee therefore recommend that the Government may initiate 
necessary act ion to make provision in the Constitution so that there is 

 
 
uniformity in elections to local bodies and there is depoliticisation of elections 
to these bodies. The Committee also note that there are occasional demands 
that elections to local bodies, assembl ies and the Lok Sabha should be held 
simultaneously for greater national good. The desirability of such a demand 
needs to be examined, appropriate decision taken on balance of consideration 
and the Committee apprised.  
 
11. Audit and Accountability of Panc hayati Raj Institution : The Committee 
note that over the time the thrust of successive Governments has been to 
strengthen the Panchayati Raj Institutions, the very edifice of our democracy 
by devolving more powers and funds to them. The Committee note that though 
some States Governments/ Legislatures have made provision for monitoring 
the works done by the PRIs, the system of audit and accountability of PRIs 
remains far from satisfactory. The Committee recommend that the whole 
system of monitoring, audit an d accountability of the PRIs be revisited and 
strong audit and accountability mechanism be put in place. Further, the 
Committee may also be apprised of the guidelines so evolved. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI 
7 August,  2016 
Shravana 16, 1938 (saka) 
Chairperson, 
Committee on Estimates.  
 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
Refer to para No. 1.2 
 


 
 


 
 
 
  


 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 
 
Annexure-III 
Refer to para No. 2.10 
 
1. Scheme : Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Gurantee Act (MGNREGA) 
 
 The Act formally declares Panchayats at the three levels as “principal authorities for planning and implementation of 
schemes”  made under the Act. 
 
 Specific roles and responsibilities of Gram/Ward Sabhas, Gram Panchayats, Intermediate Panchayats and District 
Panchayats are given in the Act  
 
2. Scheme: National Rural Health Mission 
The broad institutional mechanisms at various levels in NRHM in which the role of PRIs is specified include:- 
 
 Committees at village, Gram Panchayats, Block and District levels for preparation and approval of district health plans 
and for monitoring. 
 Village Health and Sanitation Committee (at Village level) comprising Panch ayat representatives, ANM/MPW, 
Anganwadi Worker, Teacher, ASHA, Community Health Volunteers. 
 Gram Panchayat/Sub-Health Centre level Committee of Panchayat. 
 Block level PRI Committee for approval of Block Health Plan. 
 Zilla Parishad approval of District Health Plan. 
 Independent Monitoring Committees at block, district and national level. 
 Hospital Management Commttee/Rogi Kalyan Samiti for Community Management of Public Hospitals. 
 Selection and functioning of ASHA. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
3.  Scheme: Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)  
Role envisaged for PRIs in the Programme guidelines are as below:  
 Monitoring and supervision of working of Anganwadi Centre (AWC) ensuring delivery of services. 
 Monitoring and supporting distribution of supplementary food (hot -cooked meals, Take Home Ration (THR) and 
Snacks) and its quality acceptance by community.  
 Organization of the monthly joint meetings health and ICDS (village and sanitation committees. 
 Helping in the monthly observance of Village Health and nutrition days (VHNDs). 
 Checking of availability of prescribed records and registers at the AWC etc.  
 Representation in the Selection Committees of Aganwadi Workers (AWWs) and Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs). 
 Making available site for construction of AWCs. 
 Construction of AWCs and maintenance.  
 Community mobilization by motivating people to participate in ICDS.  
 Monitoring of payment of honoraria to AWWs/AWHs.   
 
4. Scheme : Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 
 
SSA Framework issued in March, 2011 has incorporated following roles of PRIs:- 
 
 Creating an enabling environment of rights of children under the Right to Education Act through mass mobilization 
campaigns; 
 Initiating action plans for opening new schools; 
 Identifying out-of-school children and motivating parents to send them to school; 

 
 
 
 
 Identifying and providing support to differently-abled children; 
 Monitoring teacher vacancies and attendance; 
 Teacher training; 
 Improving school infrastructure with their own funds; 
 Setting up of Grievance Redressal Committees headed by the chairpersons of PRIs/Standing Committee 
 Setting up Education Committees for operationalization of the RTE Act, comprising elected representatives, experts, 
parents etc. 
 
5. Scheme : Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana:   
Roles of the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
  
 The operational guidelines of RKVY includes an activity mapping  for various levels of government  
 
 Districts Agriculture Planning Unit (DAPU) may be actively associated i n formulation of Comprehensive District 
Agriculture Plans.  
 
 Block/Taluka Agriculture Planning Unit (BAPU/TAPU) may be associated in providing inputs for DAP.  
 
 Village Agriculture Planning Unit (VAPU) may be associated in identifying clusters/selection of beneficiaries. 
 
 District Panchayat will be associated in selection of site/location of projects in consultation with implementing 
agencies. Block Panchayat will be associated in selection of locations/villages for implementation of projects.  
 
 Gram Panchayat will be associated in selection of beneficiaries based on cluster approach  
 
 District and Block panchayats will be involved in monitoring of the RKVY interventions.  
 
 Social audit will be done at Gram Sabha level. 
 

 
 
 
 
Annexure-IV 
Refer to para No. 3.6 
Empowerment and Collection of own revenue in DP - 2015 
Code Source 
Assam 
Chhattisgarh 
Haryana 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Maharashtra 
Punjab 
Rajasthan 
Sikkim 
Tamil Nadu 
Telangana 
Uttar Pradesh 
West Bengal 
1 House or Property 
Tax      E.N.     E.C.  
2 Surcharge on House 
or Property Tax E.N.            
3 Tax on agriculture 
land for specific 
purpose  E.C.           
5 Surcharge on 
additional stamp duty        E.N.  E.N.   
6 Tax on professions, 
trades, calling, etc.        E.N.   E.C.  
8 Entertainment Tax        E.N. E.N.    
9 Pilgrim tax or fees E.C.     E.C.       
10 Tax on 
advertisements     E.C.        
12 Tolls            E.C. 
13 Tax on goods sold in 
a market, haat fair etc E.N.    E.C.      E.C.  
14 Vehicle Tax      E.N.       
15 Cattle Tax     E.C.        

 
 
 
 
17 Lighting Rate            E.C. 
18 Water rate E.N.    E.C.  E.N.     E.C. 
20 Special Tax for 
community civic 
services or works            E.C. 
22 Minor Minerals Tax          E.C.   
23 Pond/Tank Lease  E.C. E.N.  E.C.       E.C. 
24 Village Land Lease   E.N.  E.C.     E.C.   
25 Shops Lease  E.C. E.N. E.C. E.C. E.C.    E.C. E.C. E.C. 
26 Any Other E.C.  E.C.  E.C.      E.C.  
E.N.: Empowered but not collected,      E.C.: Empowered and collected 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
Empowerment and Collection of own revenue in BP -2015 
Source 
Id Source Name 
Assam 
Chhattisgarh 
Haryana 
Himachal Pradesh 
Karnataka 
Madhya Pradesh 
Punjab 
Rajasthan 
Tamil Nadu 
Telangana 
Tripura 
West Bengal 
1 House or Property Tax             E.N.       E.N.   
2 Surcharge on House or Property 
Tax                     E.N.   
3 Tax on agriculture land for specific 
purpose   E.N.       E.N.         E.N.   
4 Cess on Land Revenue or 
Surcharge E.C. E.N.                     
5 Surcharge on additional stamp duty   E.N.     E.C.         E.N.     
6 Tax on professions, trades, calling, 
etc. E.N.         E.C.   E.N.     E.N. E.C. 
8 Entertainment Tax   E.C.       E.C.   E.N. E.N. E.N.     
9 Pilgrim tax or fees E.C.           E.C.         E.C. 
11 Education Cess               E.N.         
12 Tolls E.N. E.C.         E.N.       E.C. E.C. 
13 Tax on goods sold in a market, haat 
fair etc E.C. E.C.         E.C.       E.N.   
14 Vehicle Tax             E.N.       E.N. E.C. 
15 Cattle Tax                     E.N.   
16 Conservancy rate                       E.C. 

 
 
 
 
17 Lighting Rate E.N.                   E.C. E.C. 
18 Water rate E.N.                   E.N. E.C. 
20 Special Tax for community civic 
services or works                     E.N. E.C. 
22 Minor Minerals Tax   E.C.               E.C.     
23 Pond/Tank Lease   E.C. E.N.               E.C. E.C. 
24 Village Land Lease     E.N.             E.C.     
25 Shops Lease   E.C. E.N. E.C.     E.C. E.N.   E.C. E.C. E.C. 
26 Any Other E.C.   E.C.         E.N.         
E.N.: Empowered but not collected,      E.C.: Empowered and collected 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Empowerment and Collection of own revenue in GP -2015 
Row Labels 
Source Name 
Andhra Pradesh 
Assam 
Chhattisgarh 
Gujarat 
Haryana 
Himachal Pradesh 
Jammu and Kashmir 
Karnataka 
Kerala 
Madhya Pradesh 
Maharashtra 
Odisha 
Punjab 
Rajasthan 
Sikkim 
Tamil Nadu 
Telangana 
Tripura 
Uttar Pradesh 
West Bengal 
1 House or Property Tax E.C. E.C. E.C. E.C. E.C. E.C. E.N. E.C. E.C. E.C. E.C. 
 
E.N. E.N. E.C. E.C. E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
2 Surcharge on House or 
Property Tax  
E.N. E.C. E.C. E.N. E.N. E.N. 
 
E.C. E.C. 
  
E.C. 
 
E.C. E.C. E.C. E.C. 
  
3 Tax on agriculture land for 
specific purpose 
E.N. E.N. 
 
E.C. E.N. E.N. E.N. 
     
E.C. 
   
E.N. E.C. 
  
4 Cess on Land Revenue or 
Surcharge    
E.C. 
 
E.C. E.N. E.C. 
      
E.C. 
 
E.N. 
   
5 Surcharge on additional stamp 
duty  
E.N. 
            
E.N. 
 
E.N. 
   
6 Tax on professions, trades, 
calling, etc. 
E.N. E.C. E.C. E.C. E.N. 
 
E.N. E.C. E.C. E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
 
E.N. E.C. E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
7 Octroi E.N. 
   
E.N. 
 
E.C. 
   
E.C. E.C. 
   
E.N. 
    
8 Entertainment Tax  
E.N. E.C. E.C. E.N. 
 
E.N. E.C. E.C. 
 
E.N. 
   
E.N. E.N. E.N. 
 
E.N. 
 
9 Pilgrim tax or fees E.N. E.C. 
  
E.N. 
 
E.N. E.C. 
  
E.C. 
 
E.C. E.N. 
 
E.C. 
   
E.C. 
10 Tax on advertisements E.N. 
   
E.N. 
 
E.C. E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
    
E.C. E.C. 
  
E.C. 
11 Education Cess    
E.C. 
   
E.C. 
       
E.C. 
    
12 Tolls E.N. 
 
E.C. 
 
E.N. 
 
E.C. 
        
E.C. 
 
E.C. 
 
E.C. 
13 Tax on goods sold in a market, 
haat fair etc 
E.N. E.N. E.C. 
 
E.N. 
  
E.C. 
  
E.C. 
 
E.C. 
 
E.N. E.C. E.C. E.C. E.C. E.C. 
14 Vehicle Tax E.N. E.N. 
  
E.N. 
  
E.C. 
  
E.C. E.C. E.N. E.N. 
  
E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. 

 
 
 
 
Row Labels 
Source Name 
Andhra Pradesh 
Assam 
Chhattisgarh 
Gujarat 
Haryana 
Himachal Pradesh 
Jammu and Kashmir 
Karnataka 
Kerala 
Madhya Pradesh 
Maharashtra 
Odisha 
Punjab 
Rajasthan 
Sikkim 
Tamil Nadu 
Telangana 
Tripura 
Uttar Pradesh 
West Bengal 
15 Cattle Tax E.N. E.N. E.C. 
 
E.N. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
  
E.C. E.C. E.C. 
   
E.C. E.N. 
  
16 Conservancy rate           
E.C. 
      
E.C. 
 
E.C. 
17 Lighting Rate E.N. E.N. E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
 
E.C. 
  
E.C. E.N. E.C. 
   
E.C. 
  
E.C. 
18 Water rate E.N. E.N. E.C. E.C. E.N. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
  
E.C. E.C. E.N. 
  
E.C. E.C. E.C. E.N. E.C. 
19 Drainage rate E.N. E.N. E.N. E.C. E.N. E.C. 
    
E.C. E.C. E.N. 
   
E.C. 
  
E.C. 
20 Special Tax for community civic 
services or works 
E.N. 
 
E.N. 
 
E.N. 
  
E.C. 
  
E.C. 
     
E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
21 Surcharge on any tax imposed 
by Gram Panchayat 
E.N. E.N. E.N. 
 
E.N. 
  
E.C. 
       
E.C. 
    
22 Minor Minerals Tax   
E.C. 
  
E.C. 
    
E.C. 
 
E.N. 
  
E.C. E.C. 
   
23 Pond/Tank Lease E.N. E.N. E.C. 
 
E.N. 
  
E.C. 
  
E.C. E.C. E.C. 
  
E.C. E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
24 Village Land Lease E.N. E.N. 
  
E.C. 
  
E.C. 
  
E.C. E.C. E.C. 
  
E.C. E.C. 
   
25 Shops Lease E.N. E.N. E.C. 
 
E.N. E.C. 
 
E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. E.C. E.C. E.N. 
 
E.C. E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
26 Any Other E.N. E.C. 
  
E.C. 
  
E.C. E.C. 
 
E.C. 
         
 
E.N.: Empowered but not collected,      E.C.: Empowered and collected 
 
 

 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
Refer to para no. 5.6 
Examples of Functions/roles assigned to Gram Sabhas by various State Governments in their State Panchayati Raj Acts 
 
A&N Islands 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Assam 
Bihar 
 
Goa 
 
Gujarat 
 
Haryana 
 
HP 
Jharkhand 
 
Karnataka 
 
Kerala 
 
Orissa 
 
Punjab 
 Rajasthan 
 
Sikkim 
 TN 
Tripura 
 Uttar 
Pradesh 
 Uttarakhand 
 
Placement of annual statement of accounts & Audit Y Y Y  Y Y  Y      Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 
Report on Administration Y Y   Y Y               
Approval of Development Programme for the year  Y Y Y Y Y  Y Y  Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y   
Proposal for fresh and enhancement of taxation  Y    Y               
Selection of schemes, beneficiaries & Locations   Y    Y  Y  Y Y Y   Y       
promotion of unity and harmony among all 
sections of society 
   Y     Y Y Y Y  Y Y Y   Y Y 
Reports of Vigilance Committee    Y                 
Budget     Y  Y   Y Y   Y Y Y  Y Y   
organising community service, voluntary labour or mobilization of the 
local people for any specific work 
     Y   Y  Y Y  Y Y      
seek clarifications from the Pradhan, Up-Pradhan and members of the 
GP about any particular activity, scheme, income and expenditure 
        Y     Y Y      
Managing natural resources such as land, water, forest         Y      Y      
Sanitation and conservancy         Y  Y          
Construction, repair and maintenance of public wells and ponds         Y            
promote programme of adult education           Y   Y Y Y   Y Y 
assist the public health activities           Y Y  Y Y      
 
********** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Appendix (i) 
 
MINUTES OF FIRST SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON PANCHAYATI RAJ OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2015-16) 
 
The Sub-Committee sat on Wednesday, the 9th September, 2015 from 1 500 hrs. to 1 630 hrs. in Room No. '53' , 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
   
      PRESENT 
     
   
 
 
    SECRETARIAT 
                      1.    Shri Vipin Kumar  - Director 
          2.    Shri Srinivasulu Gunda            - Additional Director 
          3.    Shri U.C. Bharadwaj            - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
1. Shri K.H. Muniyappa Convenor 
2. Shri P. Kumar Co-Convenor 
3. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary   
4. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey   
5. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar   
6. Shri Anil Shirole  

 
 
 
 
          WITNESSES 
       MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Convenor welcomed the Members to the First Sitting of the Sub -Committee. He then 
directed that the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj be called in.  
  
3. The Hon'ble Convenor welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and drew their attention to 
Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.  
 
4. Thereafter, the representative of Ministry of  Panchayati Raj gave power-point presentation on the subject. The main 
points related to allocation of financial resources to Panchayats in the backdrop of deli nking of Backward Regions Grant 
Fund (BRGF) scheme from the supp ort of the Centre, financial outlays of various schemes like BRGF, Rajiv Gandhi 
Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan and other schemes being administered by the Ministry  and their physical financial 
performance; fixing accountability and ensuring transparency in the functioning of Panchayats at all the levels; holding timely 
elections to the Panchayats after completion of tenure; need to review and re -look at existing pattern of reservations in 
rotation system in some States; expediting the process of providing 50 % reservation to women in Panchayats at all levels; 
S.No. Name of the Official Designation 
1. Shri S.M. Vijayanad Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Goyal Addl. Secretary  
3. Smt. Rashmi Shukla Addl. Secretary 
4. Smt. Rugmini S Parmar Sr. Advisor 
5. Shri Sarada G. Muraleedharan Joint Secretary 

 
 
 
 
providing adequate and trained manpower  to the Panchayats; proper coordination with States to implement various projects 
and schemes; expediting e -Panchayat Programme to deepen e -governance at grass ro ot level; and orientation programme 
for the elected representatives and Powers and other related things of Panchayats explained in the 73 rd Amendment of the 
Constitution of India, etc. 
 
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj elucidated the Sub -Committee on the aforesaid issues. The 
Sub-Committee also desired that the written replies to the unanswered points/queries be sent to the Committee Secretariat 
within a week. 
 
6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Sub-Committee were kept on record. 
 
 The Sub-Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
 
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix  (ii) 
 
 
MINUTES OF SECOND SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON PANCHAYATI RAJ OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES (2015-16) 
 
The Sub-Committee sat on Monday, the 5th October, 2015 from 1 500 hrs. to 1620 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   
      PRESENT 
     
   
 
    SECRETARIAT 
                      1.    Shri Vipin Kumar  - Director 
          2.    Shri Srinivasulu Gunda            - Additional Director 
           
1. Shri K.H. Muniyappa Convenor 
2. Shri P. Kumar Co-Convenor 
3. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary   
4. Shri Sudheer Gupta  

 
 
 
 
 
          WITNESSES 
       MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the C onvenor welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Sub -Committee. He then directed that the 
representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj be called in.  
 
 
3. The Convenor welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and drew their attention to Direction 
55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.  
 
4. Thereafter, the representative of Ministry of  Panchayati Raj gave power-point presentation on the  salient features of 
73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 . The main highlights included implementation of mandatory and discretionary 
provisions of the 73 rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 by the States; devolution of powers by the States to the 
S.No. Name of the Official Designation 
1. Smt. Rashmi Shukla Addl. Secretary  
2. Smt. Rugmini S Parmar Sr. Advisor 
3. Shri Dvijendra Kumar Sharma Joint Secretary 
4. Smt. Neerja Shekhar Joint Secretary  
5. Shri Sarada G. Muraleedharan Joint Secretary 

 
 
 
 
Panchayats as enshrined in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution; steps undertaken so far by the government for 
ushering in transparency and accountability in the functioning of the Panchayats; need to review and relook the system of 
indirect election for the post of Chairperson at block and district Panchayats; association of local MPs and MLAs with the 
Panchayats at Block and District levels; need for overhauling the rotation based reservation system, progress made so far by 
the States to provide 50 % reservation to women in Pancha yats; need to strengthen the role of Gram Sabha in the 
functioning of Panchayat; steps taken so far against the States which failed to conduct timely periodic elections as per 
Constitutional provision to the Panchayats, selection of beneficiaries by Pancha yat under various social welfare 
programmes, etc. 
 
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj further elucidated the issues in reply to the queries of the 
Members. The Sub-Committee also desired that written replies to the unanswered points/q ueries be sent to the Committee 
Secretariat within 15 days. 
 
6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Sub-Committee were kept on record. 
 
 The Sub-Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
 
 
 
Appendix (iii) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2016-17)  
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 29th July, 2016 from 1500 hrs to 1615 hrs. in Room No. '62', Parliament House , 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
4. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
5. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
6. Shri Ramen Deka 
7. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
8. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
10. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
11. Shri Bhagirath Prasad 
12. Shri Arvind Sawant  

 
 
 
 
13. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
14. Shri Anil Shirole 
15. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Devender Singh – Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda – Additional Director 
3. Shri R. S. Negi  – Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee.  Thereafter, the Chairperson 
apprised the Committee of the election of a new member Shri Bhagirath Prasad to the Committee.  The Committee then 
welcomed the newly elected member. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports:-  
 
 (i) xxx                            xxx                                 xxx                        xxx 
 

 
 
 
 
 (ii) Draft Report on the subject 'Panchayati Raj' pertaining to the Ministry of  Panchayati Raj. 
 
4. The Committee after consideration adopted the above Reports with minor modifications and authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the light of fact ual verification from the Ministries concerned and present the same to 
Lok Sabha.  
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned with vote of thanks to the Chair. 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________ 
xxx      Matter not related to this Report 