1
14
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
Regulatory Mechanism of Protection of Interests of the Depositors of Non-
Banking Financial Companies (NBFC) - An Overview
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in Fifth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2015-16)
FOURTEENTH REPORT
_____________________________________________________________________
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

2
FOURTEENTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2015-16)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in Fifth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]
Presented to Lok Sabha on   24.02. 2016
_____________________________________________________________________
                     
          
Lok Sabha Secretariat
New Delhi
February, 24, 2016 / 5 Phalguna, 1937(Saka)

3
E.C. No. ________
Price : ₹ _____
© 2016 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government 
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi – 110002.

4
CONTENTS
       PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16) 
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER I Report
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by  Government
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 
08.01.2016
II. Analysis of the action taken by government on the 
recommendations contained in the fifth report of the 
committee on estimates (sixteenth lok sabha) 

5
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2015-16)
 Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5. Shri Anil Shirole
6. Shri Om Birla 
7. Shri Ashok Chavan 
8. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
9. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
10. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo
13. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
14. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar
15. Shri Sudheer Gupta
16. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
17. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
18. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla
19. Shri Vinod Khanna 
20. Shri P. Kumar 
21. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
22. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
23. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
24. Shri K N Ramachandran 
25. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy 
26. Md. Salim 
27. Shri Arvind Sawant 
28. Shri Ganesh Singh 
29. Shri Rajesh Verma 
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav

6
 MEMBERS

7
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar - Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Savdha Kalia - Committee Officer
 

8
INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 14 Report on action 
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report of Estimates Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Regulatory 
Mechanism of Protection of Interests of the Depositors of Non-Banking Financial 
Companies (NBFC) - An Overview' pertaining to the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services).
2. The Fifth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 29, April 
2015. Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations pertaining to the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) were received by 18 August, 
2015. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee on Estimates 
(2015-16) at their sitting held on the 8th January, 2016. 
3. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fourteenth Report of the Committee on Estimates (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix II. 
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
20 February, 2016
1 Phalguna, 1937 (saka)
Chairperson,
Committee on Estimates. 

9
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Regulatory Mechanism of Protection of Interests of the Depositors of Non-Banking 
Financial Companies (NBFCs) - An Overview' pertaining to the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services).
1.2 The Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 
29.04.2015. It contained 12 observations/recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all 
these observations/recommendations were received from the Ministry of Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) on 18.08.2015.
1.3 Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 11 and 12                                                                   (Total 7)
     (Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of Government’s reply:
Sl. Nos.        Nil     (Chapter-III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s replies have not 
been accepted by the Committee:
Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7 & 8                    (Total 05)
    (Chapter IV)

10
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of Government is still 
awaited:
Sl. Nos.        Nil                                                                                                     (Total 05) 
                                                                                                                            (Chapter V)
1.4.  The Committee desire that response to the comments contained in Chapter I 
of this Report should be furnished to them expeditiously.
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.
A. Definition of ‘Principle Business’ 
Observation/ Recommendation no. 1
1.6    With a view to ensuring that no entity engaged in the business of finance is left out 
of the regulations, the Committee recommended that the term 'Principal Business’ be 
defined in RBI Act, 1934 itself giving much needed statutory clarity so as to remove 
ambivalence / misgivings.
1.7.   The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), referring to the RBI’s 
views stated as under : 
‘‘Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is agreeable to the proposed recommendation 
and has suggested suitable amendments in the RBI Act, 1934. RBI has 
indicated that all companies carry on some financial activities in the nature of 
lending / investment to determine the principle Business of the Company, RBI 
is applying the twin criteria of assets and income .If 50 % of the total assets is 
financial asset and 50 % of the total income is from financial assets, the 
company is regarded as a NBFC. This is proposed to be incorporated in the 
statute.” 


11
B. Inclusion of Limited Liability Partnerships (LLPs) under the definition of 
NBFCs 
Observation/ Recommendation No. 2
1.8   As LLPs are not included in section 45 I (e) which defines the term ‘Non Banking 
Finance Company’ since they are neither companies,  nor corporations nor co-operative 
societies, and also not covered under Chapter III B of the RBI Act, 1934, dealing with 
prohibition of acceptance of deposits by Unincorporated Bodies i.e. individuals, firms or 
association of Individuals , the committee recommended that necessary amendment 
may be carried out at the earliest to include LLPs as "unincorporated bodies" for the 
purpose of prohibition from acceptance of deposits under Chapter III C of RBI Act, 
1934.
1.9  The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) , referring to the  reply 
of RBI, stated that Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is agreeable to the proposed 
recommendation and has suggested suitable amendments to the RBI Act, 1934. 
Accordingly, Definition of deposit is proposed to be modified to cover certain moneys 
collected in the name of advance for goods and services for without having wherewithal 
to provide the same. Further, only RBI regulated entities will be allowed to accept 
deposits. Deposits collected from members having no voting rights  will be treated as 
public deposits.
C. Definition of Deposit 
Observation/ Recommendation No. 3
1.10.   Taking cognizance of rampant acceptance of deposits by unscrupulous entities 
from the gullible public in camouflaged manner as advance for goods or services, the 
Committee recommended that the RBI Act be amended expeditiously to cover such 
deposits within the ambit of "deposit"
1.11    The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) , referring to the reply 
of RBI , stated as under : 

12
“Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is agreeable to the proposed recommendation 
and has suggested suitable amendments to the RBI Act, 1934. RBI has 
suggested that definition of deposit should be modified to cover certain 
money collected in the name of advance for goods and services without 
having wherewithal to provide the same.  RBI regulated entities will be 
allowed to accept deposits.  Deposits collected from members having no 
voting rights will be treated as public deposits. RBI has also suggested to 
provide for greater flexibility in defining what constitutes deposit which, may 
be provided in the legislation to take care of innovative ways in which deposit 
is collected.”
1.12.  The Committee are pleased to note that RBI have accepted the three 
recommendations - incorporation of the definition of the term Principle Business 
in the RBI Act itself, inclusion of Limited Liability Partnerships (LLPs) as 
‘unincorporated bodies’  for the purposes of prohibition from acceptance of 
deposits, change the definition of ‘Deposits’ to cover the Deposits taken as 
advance for goods or services and has suggested suitable amendments to RBI 
Act, 1934. The Committee hope that the Ministry of Finance would take necessary 
steps to bring in the required changes in the RBI Act, 1934 at the earliest so that 
the gaps in regulation of the NBFCs  are addressed  and the smooth functioning 
of the sector is ensured. 
D. NEED FOR CONTINUANCE OF NBFCS-D
Observation/ Recommendation No.  4
1.13 In view of (i) high concentration of commercial banks in urban and semi Urban 
areas leaving substantial number of villages/ hamlets either uncovered or under 
covered by formal banking channels even after four decades of nationalization of the 
banks, compelling the people of these villages to approach NBFCs for their savings and 
credit needs, (ii) the ease at which NBFCs can be approached for availing credit and 
deposit facilities vis-a vis commercial banks, convenience of doorstep banking, 
customization of the product to suit the requirements of the customers, driving many 
savers to deposits their monies and avail credit facilities from NBFCs , (iii) reluctance of 
the banks to extend credit to the first time borrowers due to lack of  credit history and 
low end borrowers for buying equipment, one or two vehicles, etc thereby forcing them 
to approach alternative channels of credit and deposits such as NBFCs (iv) the capacity 

13
to  reach the lowest common denominator  (last mile connectivity in terms of financial 
services) ,  the Committee recommended that   RBI in consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance, explore the possibility of allowing registrations of deposit taking NBFCs with 
stringent Regulations so that the needy persons in far flung areas across the country 
can avail safely the services of the NBFCs. 
 
1.14 The Ministry of Finance ( Department of Financial Services) in their Action Taken 
Replies submitted as under::
“The deposit taking should be a responsibility of the banking system because 
it has its own credentials and the regulatory mechanism to ensure the safety 
of public funds. To ensure that saving vehicles are provided to un served and 
underserved sections of the population, RBI will be granting licences to ‘Small 
Finance Banks’ which will be allowed to accept deposits. Existing NBFCs, 
MFIs have a choice of conversion into ‘Small Finance Banks’.
It is stated in Para 4 of the recommendations that “RBI categorically stated 
that default in repayment of deposits committed by NBFCs is due to lack of 
regulation”. RBI has clarified that this was stated in the context of defaults that 
had occurred in repayment of deposits in 1960s to 1990s and is not reflective 
of the current position. In fact, regulations were introduced for NBFCs and 
these are even more stringent for deposit accepting NBFCs. The cases of 
default in repayment of deposits pertain to only those legacy companies. 
In addition banks are now also permitted to appoint Banking Correspondents 
(BCs) and majority of the villages are now covered by these BCs. Populace in 
far flung areas is being served by these entities which are under oversight 
from the banks as their principal.” 
1.15  The Committee take a serious note of the casual reply furnished by RBI/ 
Ministry stating that  the introduction of ‘Small Payment banks’ and Banking 
Correspondents with the objective of mobilizing small savings  from  people left 
out of the ambit of the formal banking channels obviates the need for fresh 
registration of NBFCs-D (NBFCs empowered to accept public deposits).  
However, the Committee find that the mandate of neither small payment banks, 
whose main objective is to provide payment and remittance services nor banking 
correspondents include lending / providing credit facilities to the individuals, tiny 
and small businesses / low end customers who are neglected by formal banking 
channels. It may, therefore, be seen that Small payment banks and banking 
correspondents may address concerns of mobilization of savings from the 

14
targeted segments but the lending part is not addressed by either  Small payment 
banks or banking correspondents. More over the Committee also believe that 
small payment banks may not compete with the NBFCs in terms of ease at which 
the NBFCS can be approached for availing deposit facilities, their reach in terms 
of providing financial services at the doorstep of the customers and also the 
facility of customization of the product. In fact the RBI had itself acknowledged 
the contribution of NBFCs in providing last mile connectivity for development of 
financial sector. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation  that 
RBI in consultation with Ministry of Finance should explore the possibility of 
allowing registrations of deposit taking NBFCs  with stringent regulations so that 
the needy persons in far flung areas across the country can avail safely the 
services of NBFCs. 
E. DEPOSIT INSURANCE 
Observation/ Recommendation No. 5
1.16 While taking note of the RBIs’ view that deposit acceptance should be in the 
realm of banks alone as they are more stringently regulated who can also avail deposit 
insurance to repay the depositors and the deposit insurance should not be extended to 
NBFCs due to moral hazard and regulators discomfort, the Committee felt that the risk 
involved in extending the deposit insurance can be addressed by instituting stringent 
regulations by the regulators and accordingly recommended that insurance cover may 
be extended to the deposits of NBFCs either within the DICGC framework  by amending 
the relevant legislation or through creation of separate entity as favoured by RBI for 
offering deposit insurance 
1.17 In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry have stated that RBI is not in favour of 
bringing deposits of NBFCs under the ambit of DICGC on account of inherent weakness 
of the sector, lack of market discipline and dichotomy observed in case of premium paid 
by commercial banks and benefits availed by Urban cooperative banks and Rural 
cooperative banks for DICGC claims. There is no need for deposit insurance for NBFCs 
as they accept only term deposits.

15
1.18 The Committee note that due to inherent weaknesses of the sector, lack of 
market discipline and dichotomy observed in case of premium paid by the 
commercial banks, RBI is not in favour of extending insurance cover to the 
deposits of NBFCs.  Further, the reply of RBI/Ministry also states that deposit 
insurance was not required for deposits of NBFCs as they accept only term 
deposits. However, in the considered view of the Committee, these concerns of the 
RBI in respect of NBFCs can be addressed by instituting effective and stringent 
regulations. Notably, the RBI proposes to do so by empowering themselves with 
punitive powers and also by suitably amending the RBI Act 1934 for plugging the 
gaps hampering the development of the sector. The Committee, therefore, believe 
that once these proposed changes are put in place, insurance cover for deposits of 
NBFCs either within the DICGC framework or outside of it, as favoured by RBI 
initially, can be introduced. The Committee are quite sanguine that these proposed 
amendments and changes aimed at strengthening the NBFC sector will go a long 
way in attracting serious players and discouraging fly-by-night operators. The 
representative of RBI appearing before the Committee on 25 March, 2015 stated 
that RBI is recommending separate insurance guarantee corporation for the NBFC 
category.  In their latest reply RBI / Ministry, however, have stated that there is no 
need for deposit insurance as they accept only term deposits. It is, therefore, 
apparent, that RBI itself does not have clarity on the issue. The Committee reiterate 
their recommendation that insurance cover may be extended to the deposits of 
NBFCs. 
F. Unclaimed Deposits
                    Recommendation / Observation No. 6 
1.19  Taking note of the data furnished by RBI,  the Committee observed that an amount 
of ₹ 556 crore is lying unclaimed with 24 deposit taking NBFCs ( NBFCs-D) and the same 
has not been transferred to Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) as required 

16
under section 205 of the Companies Act, 2013 and recommended that Govt./ RBI specify 
in unambiguous terms  whether the huge amount of ₹ 556 crore deposits  lying unclaimed 
with 24 NBFCs has actually been transferred to IEPF and the details thereof , and;  if not 
the reasons there for.  
1.20   The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) referring to the action 
taken reply furnished as under:
“RBI has informed that as on March 31, 2015, 22 companies did not have any 
deposits eligible to be transferred to the IEPF (a deposit is due for transfer to 
IEPF if it remains unclaimed for 7 years). 
One company is under court ordered liquidation. In respect of a PSU, i.e. 
Tamil Nadu Transport Development Finance Corporation Ltd, only an amount 
of ₹ 5,22,375 has not been transferred to IEPF due to some legal disputes. 
The company has transferred all other unclaimed deposits held for more than 
7 years.’’
1.21 The Committee note that the reply furnished by RBI/ Ministry does not   
specify whether unclaimed deposits of ₹ 556 crore lying with 24 deposit taking 
NBFCs (NBFCs-D), as furnished by them and as mentioned at Appendix - IX of the 
original report, have been  transferred to Investor Education and Protection Fund 
(IEPF) as required under section 205 of the Companies Act, 2013. They therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation that RBI specify in unambiguous terms whether       
₹ 556 crore of deposits lying unclaimed till 2014 have actually been transferred to 
IEPF and if not, the reasons therefor.  
F. EXCEPTION REPORT FROM AUDITORS 
Observation/ Recommendation No. 7 
1.22    As  Reserve Bank of India could not take up the issue of non submission of 
exception reports  by the auditors of  50 NBFCs, operating without  registration  or 
violating relevant provisions of the RBI Act, 1934, under NBFCs Auditors’ Report             
(Reserve Bank of India Directions, 2008), either with defaulter auditor or in the 

17
Coordination mechanism with the Institute of Chartered Accountants  of India (ICAI), the 
Committee sought the reasons for the same from RBI.  The Committee also 
recommended that a proper code of ethics and conduct be formulated for the statutory 
auditors of NBFCs about the requirement of submitting Exception Reports to RBI for 
defaulting entities. Further, the committee also urged the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services) to amend the RBI Act to empower RBI to remove or 
replace auditors in cases where they fail to inform the RBI of any violations committed 
by the NBFCs detected during the course of their audit under the said directions. In the 
event of such occurrences , the Committee recommended that  the  matter pertaining to 
Statutory Auditors be discussed with ICAI to ensure that suitable action is taken against 
them.
1.23 The Ministry of Finance ( Department of Financial Services) in their Action Taken 
Replies submitted as under:
“RBI had deliberated on the issue of violations by statutory auditors at the 
Board level and recommended action by way of penalising them for violating 
the guidelines laid down by the Bank such as not submitting exception 
reports.
Further, RBI is also conducting seminar/events specifically related to NBFC 
Audit in collaboration with the local chapter of ICAI detailing various Rules 
and Regulations relating to NBFCs. This platform is being used to highlight 
commonly observed deficiencies in audit report and sensitizing the auditors 
about impending penal action in case of non-submission of exception reports. 
It is also being used to request Auditors to report inadequacies beyond the 
strict contours of the NBFCs Auditor’s Report (Reserve Bank) Directions, 
2008.
RBI is shortly inviting national level office bearers of ICAI to apprise them of 
the concerns relating to Audit reports for NBFCs.
Further, RBI has suggested suitable amendments to the RBI Act to empower 
RBI to impose penalties without approaching a court on auditors of NBFCs.   
Non Payment of Penalty imposed by RBI will be an offence. To recover 
penalty, RBI may issue garnishee orders” 
1.24 The Committee observe that the reply furnished by the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services) is conspicuously silent as to why  the non 
submission of exception reports  by the auditors of  50 NBFCs, operating without  
registration  or violating relevant provisions of the RBI Act, 1934, under NBFCs 
Auditors’s Report (Reserve Bank of India Directions, 2008), could not be taken up 

18
by RBI   either with defaulter auditors or in the Coordination mechanism with the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants  of India (ICAI).  Further, it appears that RBI 
deliberated the issue at the Board level only after the issue was raised by the 
Estimates Committee and sought the reasons for not taking the required action 
against the said auditors. The Committee,  would therefore like to be apprised of 
the action taken against such auditors.  
      The Committee are pleased to note that the RBI, in pursuance of the 
Committee’s recommendation, has  taken  steps for  conducting seminars/ events 
to bring efficiency in the working of auditors by highlighting their deficiencies 
and sensitizing them about penal actions to be taken against them in case of non 
submission of exception reports and also decided to invite national level office 
bearers of ICAI to apprise them of the concerns of the Committee in the matter. 
The Committee desire that the proposed meet be expedited and appropriate steps 
be taken to bring further efficiency in the working of statutory Auditors and the 
Committee apprised in due course of the tangible outcome of the steps initiated 
by the RBI.
   The Committee also note that RBI has suggested suitable amendments to 
the RBI Act to empower them to impose penalties without approaching court of 
law, on auditors of NBFCs making an offence. Also non Payment of Penalty 
imposed by RBI would be an offence and allow RBI to issue garnishee orders for 
recovery of penalty. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
to effect necessary amendments in the RBI Act. 
G. MASS AWARENESS CAMPAIGN
Observation/ Recommendation No. 8
1.25 The Committee while noting that many investors, especially in small towns and 
villages, lured by high interest rates  offered , deposit their  hard earned savings in the 
schemes floated by unscrupulous and fly-by-night operators / firms, mostly unregistered 
NBFCs and unincorporated bodies, without  assessing  the risk involved  therein. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommended:

19
 (i) Mass awareness campaigns be conducted not only in electronic media but 
also in print media especially in vernacular languages at regular intervals to 
create the desired impact;
 (ii) The other channels of mass communication such as radio jingles, banners 
in public places and on public transport should be used to curb and eliminate 
such unscrupulous entities from the money market;
 (iii) A part of the amount lying in unclaimed deposits with NBFCs which are 
required to be transferred to Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) may 
be used for educating the investors and creating awareness among them about 
the risks involved in investing in fly-by-night firms. 
 (iv) The Investors' awareness and education programmes may be included as 
an activity eligible for spending money under ‘Corporate Social Responsibility’; 
       (v) Lists of the type of firms eligible and ineligible for acceptance of deposits 
from the public and also  of firms banned from accepting deposits from public  
may be published in English , Hindi and vernacular Dailies  to  ensure that people 
make informed  investment decisions; and
 (vi) Every entity advertising/representing/soliciting customers, must indicate 
their PAN/Registration number so that the activities of fake/fly-by-night operators 
are checked and the gullible public are not duped. 
1.26 In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry while submitting on each of the above 
stated:
(i)&(ii) RBI will soon be commencing a Nationwide Investor Awareness Programme to 
make the public aware of the perils and pitfalls of investing their money in 
unregulated entities, and fraudulent/ dubious schemes. It will be using print 
media, televisions, radio, banners etc for this campaign.
(iii)&(iv) The points relate to Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(v) The list of NBFCs allowed by RBI to accept public deposits, and the list of 
NBFCs prohibited from accepting public deposits is given on the RBI website. 
The advertisements published by the RBI will provide a link to the list of such 
NBFCs. 

20
(vi) Registered NBFCs are required to comply with prescribed Advertisement Rules 
while issuing any advertisement.
The non-NBFCs will fall under the jurisdiction of Ministry of Corporate Affaris 
(MCA), who may consider the recommendations of the Estimates Committee to 
prescribe such norms, and penalties for violation thereof.
1.27 The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation, the Ministry of 
Finance and the RBI will soon be initiating Nationwide Investor Awareness 
Programme using various channels of mass media for educating the public. 
Further, a  link to list of NBFCs prohibited from accepting deposits is also being 
published in advertisements. However, the reply of the Ministry is silent on use of 
Hindi and other vernacular languages for better reach of such awareness 
campaigns. Regrettably, the Ministry of Finance did not coordinate with the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs regarding the recommendation of the Committee for 
using part of unclaimed deposits lying with NBFCs  and are required to be 
transferred to IEPF to be used for educating investors and creating awareness 
about the risks involved in investing through the fly-by-night operators and also 
allowing such awareness  campaigns to be covered as an activity eligible under 
'corporate social responsibility.' While deploring the lack of initiative on part of the 
Ministry of Finance to coordinate with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the 
Committee reiterate that matter be taken up with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in 
right earnest so that necessary steps can be taken and the Committee  apprised of 
the same.
H. NEED FOR SEPARATE REGULATOR/ LEGISLATION
Observation/ Recommendation no.12
1.28 Expressing serious concern at the  lack of willingness of RBI  to empower 
themselves so as to punish defaulting NBFCs and ensuring repayment of the deposits 
expeditiously and also to address the shortage of skills required for the  effective 
regulation of  NBFCs , the Committee recommended  that the RBI Act should be 
amended to empower RBI  with punitive powers such as  imposition of  penalties and 
/or direct refund of deposits in case of non repayment on the due date,  attach and sell 
the movable and immovable assets of the defaulting NBFCs to recover penalties and  

21
secure payments of deposits,  freeze the Assets/bank accounts of such defaulters as 
well as to take action against Directors and key management personnel ,etc.  
 Further, in the light of RBI's reluctance to empower themselves to effectively 
regulate NBFCs, the Committee recommended that Government may also consider 
enacting a separate legislation for regulating all deposit accepting entities (other than 
commercial banks).
1.29 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies stated  as under : 
“In this connection, RBI has submitted that it has been progressively 
tightening up its regulatory and supervisory ambit over NBFCs. In the recent 
past, certain entities may have exploited certain regulatory gaps, which 
largely arise on a narrow definition of the term “deposits”. However, RBI has 
taken initiatives in plugging these gaps on two fronts, through an expanded 
role for the State Level Coordination Committee and strengthening Market 
Intelligence. Detailed information on these aspects have been submitted to 
the Committee. 
The RBI is further agreeable to the proposed recommendations of the 
Committee to grant it enforcement powers for search and seizure etc, as has 
been granted to SEBI. 
The provisions of Chapters IIIB, IIIC and V are quite elaborate. With the 
amendments proposed above, certain existing gaps would be removed and 
the RBI Act would be comprehensive with a wide range of powers to the RBI 
to effectively regulate and supervise the sector, obviating the need of a 
separate legislation.
There is no reluctance on the part of RBI to regulate the NBFC Sector. There 
is certainly a need to fill in the gaps as detailed above and bring in some 
enabling provisions as detailed hereinabove to make such Regulation and 
Supervision more effective.” 
1.30 The Committee note that the RBI and the Ministry of Finance, with a view to 
bridge the regulatory gaps, is agreeable to the proposed recommendation of the 
Committee to grant enforcement powers for search and seizure to the RBI as has 
been granted to SEBI. The Committee are also given to understand that these 
steps shall tighten the regulatory and supervisory ambit of RBI over NBFCs 
thereby obviating  the need of a separate legislation. Despite the reply of the 
Ministry stating that there is no reluctance on the part of RBI to empower itself 
effectively, the Committee are constrained to note that no tangible initiative has 
been taken by the RBI in this direction all these years. Further, deprecating this 
casual approach of the Ministry, the Committee note that the matter of absence of 

22
enforcement powers with RBI, the regulator for NBFCs, should have been 
effectively taken up long ago. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendations and urge the Ministry to empower the RBI on lines of SEBI by 
amending the RBI Act suitably without any further delay. The Committee should 
like to be apprised of the Action Taken in the matter within one month of the 
presentation of this Report to Lok Sabha.         

23
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation no. 1
 With a view to ensuring that no entity engaged in the business of finance is left 
out of the regulations, the Committee recommended that the term 'Principal Business’ 
be defined in RBI Act, 1934 itself giving much needed statutory clarity so as to remove 
ambivalence / misgivings.
Reply of the Government
 The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), referring to the RBI’s 
views stated as under : 
‘‘Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is agreeable to the proposed recommendation 
and has suggested suitable amendments in the RBI Act, 1934. RBI has 
indicated that all companies carry on some financial activities in the nature of 
lending / investment to determine the principle Business of the Company , 
RBI is applying the twin criteria of assets and income .If 50 % of the total 
assets is financial asset and 50 % of the total income is from financial assets, 
the company is regarded as a NBFC. This is proposed to be incorporated in 
the statute.” 
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.12 of Chapter-I)
Observation/Recommendation No. 2
 Necessary amendment may be carried out at the earliest to include LLPs as 
"unincorporated bodies" for the purpose of the prohibition from acceptance of deposits 
under Chapter III C of RBI Act, 1934 and the Committee be apprised.
Reply of the Government
 Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is agreeable to the proposed recommendation and 
has suggested suitable amendments to the RBI Act, 1934. Definition of deposit is 

24
proposed to be modified to cover certain moneys collected in the name of advance for 
goods and services for without having where withal to provide the same only RBI 
regulated entities will be allowed to accept deposits. Deposits collected from members 
having no voting rides will be treated as public deposits.
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.12 of Chapter-I)
Observation/ Recommendation No. 3
 Taking cognizance of rampant acceptance of deposits by unscrupulous entities 
from the gullible public in camouflaged manner as advance for goods or services, the 
Committee recommend that the RBI Act be amended expeditiously to cover such 
deposits within the ambit of "deposit".
Reply of the Government
 Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is agreeable to the proposed recommendation and 
has suggested suitable amendments to the RBI Act, 1934. RBI has suggested that 
definition of deposit should be modified to cover certain money collected in the name of 
advance for goods and services without having wherewithal to provide the same.  RBI 
regulated entities will be allowed to accept deposits.  Deposits collected from members 
having no voting rights will be treated as public deposits. RBI has also suggested to 
provide for greater flexibility in defining what constitutes deposit which, may be provided 
in the legislation to take care of innovative ways in which deposit is collected.
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.12 of Chapter-I)
Observation/ Recommendation No. 9
 Considering the vital importance of robust market intelligence in maintaining vigil 
over the financial market and the uncanny modus operandi used for collection of 
deposits, the Committee, recommend that urgent and effective steps should be taken to 
improve the intelligence gathering apparatus of the Regulator to check effectively illegal 
collection of deposits. The Committee should like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard in due course.
Reply of the Government

25
 Market Intelligence (MI) structure in RBI is revitalized through instructions issued 
to the RBI’s Regional Offices (ROs) on October 08, 2014. MI Cells in 16 ROs of RBI 
were constituted with officers assigned these duties. These MI officers were also given 
training with specialized agencies like the IB, CEIB, SEBI, EOW, etc. besides in- house 
experts of RBI. Unlike the traditional MI work of collecting of news items from the 
dailies, the source of MI has now widened. Inputs are now also taken from RIA queries, 
communication from other regulators and agencies (both within the State Level 
Consultative Committee (SLCC) and outside the SLCC framework) including 
Intelligence Bureau, SEBI, and Ministry of Finance etc. RBI has also revamped the 
State Level Consultative Committee (SLCC) by bringing it under the Chairmanship of 
Chief Secretaries of the States/ UTs. This forum consisting of relevant regulators and 
agencies not only facilitates sharing of information but also deliberate on actions to be 
taken especially on illegal collection of deposits. It is further suggested that when RBI 
provides such inputs to Law Enforcement Authorities, it may be given suitable legislative 
mandate for prompt registration of the complaint, so that further necessary action can 
be done by Law Enforcement Authorities.
Observation/ Recommendation No. 10
 (i) A grievance redressal mechanism on the lines of the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India (SEBI) Complaints Redressal System (SCORES), should be set up 
and suitable IT platforms be developed to enable lodging of e-complaints as well.
(ii) An all India toll free call centre in major and regional languages be set up for 
convenience of the depositors;
(iii) A dedicated web portal may be created for lodging of complaints and answering 
web queries on the RBI site, which should also be translated and made available in 
various regional languages; and
(iv) The Department of Financial Services need to look into the feasibility of creating an 
ombudsman on the lines of banking ombudsman for NBFC sector as well for 
effective reach to the last mile depositor and for redressal of his grievance.
Reply of the Government
 RBI has constituted an Internal Committee to study the entire gamut of 
complaints received by it and suggest appropriate redress. Suggestions of the 

26
Estimates Committee have been noted and shall be factored into in the report of the 
Internal Committee as well as the decisions arising from it. RBI is in an advanced stage 
of setting up a website for the SLCC members. This website will also have a provision 
for accepting complaints pertaining to any consumer of financial services which shall be 
forwarded/ addressed by the appropriate regulator/agency since the complainant may 
not be aware of jurisdiction of each agency. The envisaged system will also support 
report of complaints over telephone. RBI will examine the feasibility of setting an 
ombudsman for NBFC sector.
Observation/ Recommendation No. 11
(i) The Frequency of the meetings of the SLCCs be suitably fixed to facilitate   
effective   periodic   coordination   so   that   necessary corrective / remedial 
action is taken on time; and
(ii) Income Tax Authorities and Enforcement Directorate be also associated with the 
SLCC so as to facilitate sharing of vital information and timely action against 
unauthorized financial entities.
Reply of the Government
(i) At the behest of Financial Stability and Development Council– Sub–Committee 
(FSDC- SC), the frequency of the SLCC meetings has been increased to 
quarterly as against half yearly earlier and it is now being chaired by the Chief 
Secretary/Administrator of the concerned States / UTs. Further, Sub-Committees 
of SLCCs have also been formed in various States which meet at regular 
intervals to discuss the operational matters, Market Intelligence, share 
information on specific cases.
(ii) The SLCCs are being asked to invite Income Tax (IT) authorities as participants 
to the SLCC.
Observation/ Recommendation No. 12
 In the considered view of the Committee, the RBI Act should be amended to 
empower RBI to impose penalties and /or direct refund of deposits in case of non 
repayment on the due date. In order to recover the penalties and secure repayment of 
deposits, RBI should be able to attach and sell the movable and immovable assets of 

27
the defaulters. RBI should also be allowed to conduct searches, both within and outside 
the country, in respect of defaulting entities, freeze the assets/bank accounts of such 
defaulters as well as to take action against Directors and key management personnel. 
Further, in the light of RBI's reluctance to empower themselves to effectively regulate 
NBFCs is reflected in their lack of action on one pretext or the other all these years. The 
Committee recommend that Government may also consider enacting a separate 
legislation for regulating all deposit accepting entities (other than commercial banks).
Reply of the Government
 In this connection, RBI has submitted that it has been progressively tightening up 
its regulatory and supervisory ambit over NBFCs. In the recent past, certain entities may 
have exploited certain regulatory gaps, which largely arise on a narrow definition of the 
term “deposits”. However, RBI has taken initiatives in plugging these gaps on two fronts, 
through an expanded role for the State Level Coordination Committee and 
strengthening Market Intelligence. Detailed information on these aspects have been 
submitted to the Committee. The RBI is further agreeable to the proposed 
recommendations of the Committee to grant it enforcement powers for search and 
seizure etc, as has been granted to SEBI. The provisions of Chapters IIIB, IIIC and V 
are quite elaborate. With the amendments proposed above, certain existing gaps would 
be removed and the RBI Act would be comprehensive with a wide range of powers to 
the RBI to effectively regulate and supervise the sector, obviating the need of a 
separate legislation. There is no reluctance on the part of RBI to regulate the NBFC 
Sector. There is certainly a need to fill in the gaps as detailed above and bring in some 
enabling provisions as detailed hereinabove to make such Regulation and Supervision 
more effective. 
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.30 of Chapter-I)

28
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
 -Nil- 
     

29
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Observation/ Recommendation No. 4
RBI in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, should explore the possibility of 
allowing registrations of deposit taking NBFCs with stringent Regulations so that the 
needy persons in far flung areas across the country can avail safely the services of the 
NBFCs.
Reply of the Government
The deposit taking should be a responsibility of the banking system because it 
has its own credentials and the regulatory mechanism to ensure the safety of public 
funds. To ensure that saving vehicles are provided to un served and underserved 
sections of the population, RBI will be granting licences to ‘Small Finance Banks’ which 
will be allowed to accept deposits. Existing NBFCs, MFIs have a choice of conversion in 
to ‘Small Finance Banks’. It is stated in Para 4 of the recommendations that “RBI 
categorically stated that default in repayment of deposits committed by NBFCs is due to 
lack of regulation”. RBI has clarified that this was stated in the context of defaults that 
had occurred in repayment of deposits in 1960s to 1990s and is not reflective of the 
current position. In fact, regulations were introduced for NBFCs and these are even 
more stringent for deposit accepting NBFCs. The cases of default in repayment of 
deposits pertain to only those legacy companies. In addition banks are now also 
permitted to appoint Banking Correspondents (BCs) and majority of the villages are now 
covered by these BCs. Populace in far flung areas is being served by these entities 
which are under oversight from the banks as their principal. 
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.15 of Chapter-I)
Observation/ Recommendation No. 5

30
The insurance cover may be extended to the deposits of NBFCs either within the 
DICGC framework by amending the relevant legislation or through creation of separate 
entity as favoured by the RBI for offering deposit insurance.
Reply of the Government
RBI is not in favour of bringing deposits of NBFCs under the ambit of DICGC on 
account of inherent weakness of the sector, lack of market discipline and dichotomy 
observed in case of premium paid by commercial banks and benefits availed by Urban 
cooperative banks and Rural cooperative banks for DICGC claims. There is no need for 
deposit insurance for NBFCs as they accept only term deposits.
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.18 of Chapter-I)
Observation/ Recommendation No. 6
Government / RBI specify in unambiguous terms whether the huge amount of 
unclaimed deposits lying with 24 NBFCs have actually been transferred to IEPF and if 
so, the details thereof ( NBFC wise) and if not the reasons thereof be submitted to the 
Committee within three months of presentation of this report.
Reply of the Government
RBI has informed that as on March 31, 2015, 22 companies did not have any 
deposits eligible to be transferred to the IEPF (a deposit is due for transfer to IEPF if it 
remains unclaimed for 7 years). One company is under court ordered liquidation. In 
respect of a PSU, i.e. Tamil Nadu Transport Development Finance Corporation Ltd, only 
an amount of Rs. 5,22,375 has not been transferred to IEPF due to some legal 
disputes. The company has transferred all other unclaimed deposits held for more than 
7 years.
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.21 of Chapter-I)
Observation/ Recommendation No. 7
In terms of NBFCs auditor’s report (Reserve Bank directions, 2008, statutory 
auditor are require to submit to the RBI directly exception reports in the event of Non 
Compliance by NBFC to the provision of the chapter III B of the RBI Act, 1934 and 

31
direction issued by RBI regarding deposit acceptance and prudential norms. The RBI 
furnish 50 cases of NBFCs-D operating without registration or violating relevant 
provisions of the RBI Act, 1934 or the directions issued there under, to refund the 
deposits collected from the public. Surprisingly, Non of the auditors of these NBFCs 
furnish exceptions reports to the RBI. The Committee are perturbed to note that the RBI 
has neither cared to take up the issue with the defaulter auditor nor they seem to have 
discussed in the co-ordination mechanism with the institute of Charter Accountants of 
India (ICAI) the regulatory body for auditors.  The Committee seek reasons for not 
taking up the matter of non submission of exception reports with RBI with the NBFCs or 
ICAI and also the action taken or proposed to be taken against the firms for failing to 
send the exception reports in the said cases. The Committee also recommend that a 
proper code of ethics and conduct be formulated for the statutory auditors of NBFCs 
about the requirement of submitting Exception Reports to RBI for defaulting entities. It 
also urge the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) to amend the RBI 
Act to empower RBI to remove or replace auditors in cases where they fail to inform the 
RBI of any violations committed by the NBFCs detected during the course of their audit 
under the said directions. Further, in the event of such occurrences, the matter 
pertaining to Statutory Auditors be discussed with ICAI to ensure that suitable action is 
taken against them.
Reply of the Government
RBI had deliberated on the issue of violations by statutory auditors at the Board 
level and recommended action by way of penalising them for violating the guidelines 
laid down by the Bank such as not submitting exception reports. Further, RBI is also 
conducting seminar/events specifically related to NBFC Audit in collaboration with the 
local chapter of ICAI detailing various Rules and Regulations relating to NBFCs. This 
platform is being used to highlight commonly observed deficiencies in audit report and 
sensitizing the auditors about impending penal action in case of non-submission of 
exception reports. It is also being used to request Auditors to report inadequacies 
beyond the strict contours of the NBFCs Auditor’s Report (Reserve Bank) Directions, 
2008. RBI is shortly inviting national level officer bearers of ICAI to apprise them of the 
concerns relating to Audit reports for NBFCs. Further, RBI has suggested suitable 

32
amendments to the RBI Act to empower RBI to impose penalties without approaching a 
court on auditors of NBFCs.   Non Payment of Penalty imposed by RBI will be an 
offence.   To recover penalty, RBI may issue garnishee orders. 
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.24 of Chapter-I)
Observation/ Recommendation No. 8
(i) Mass awareness campaigns be conducted not only in electronic media but also 
in print media especially in vernacular languages at regular intervals to create the 
desired impact;
(ii) The other channels of mass communication such as radio jingles, banners in 
public places and on public transport should be used to curb and eliminate such 
unscrupulous entities from the money market;
(iii) A part of the amount lying in unclaimed deposits with NBFCs which are required 
to be transferred to Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) may be used 
for educating the investors and creating awareness among them about the risks 
involved in investing in fly-by-night firms.
(iv) The Investors' awareness and education programmes may be included as an 
activity eligible for spending money under 'Corporate Social Responsibility';
(v) Lists of the type of firms eligible and ineligible for acceptance of deposits from the 
public and also of firms banned from accepting deposits from public may be 
published in English, Hindi and vernacular Dailies to ensure that people make 
informed investment decisions; and
(vi) Every entity advertising / representing / soliciting customers, must indicate their 
PAN / Registration number so that the activities of fake / fly- by-night operators 
are checked and the gullible public are not duped.
Reply of the Government
(i)&(ii) RBI will soon be commencing a Nationwide Investor Awareness Programme to 
make the public aware of the perils and pitfalls of investing their money in 
unregulated entities, and fraudulent/ dubious schemes. It will be using print 
media, televisions, radio, banners etc for this campaign.
(iii)&(iv) The points relate to Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 

33
(v) The list of NBFCs allowed by RBI to accept public deposits, and the list of 
NBFCs prohibited from accepting public deposits is given on the RBI website. 
The advertisements published by the RBI will provide a link to the list of such 
NBFCs. 
(vi) Registered NBFCs are required to comply with prescribed Advertisement Rules 
while issuing any advertisement.
 The non-NBFCs will fall under the jurisdiction of Ministry of Corporate 
Affaris (MCA), who may consider the recommendations of the Estimates 
Committee to prescribe such norms, and penalties for violation thereof.
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.27 of Chapter-I)
CHAPTER V
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
                             2016
                            1937 (saka)
Chairperson,
Committee on Estimates. 

34
MINUTES OF TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 8th January, 2016 from 1200 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Room 
No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
        Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson
Members
2. Shri Anil Shirole
3. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
4. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar
7. Shri Sudheer Gupta
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shri P. Kumar
10. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy 
 SECRETARIAT
          1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
 2. Shri Vipin Kumar - Director

35
      3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director
      
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following Reports:-
 (i) ***** ***** *****
 (ii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 5th Report of the Committee on 
Estimates (2014-15) (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Regulatory Mechanism of 
Protection of Interests of the Depositors of Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) - 
An Overview' pertaining to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services).
4. The Committee after consideration adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
same to Lok Sabha.
5. ***** ***** *****
6. ***** ***** *****
 The Committee then adjourned with vote of thanks to the Chair.

36
MINUTES OF TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 8th January, 2016 from 1200 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Room 
No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
        Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson
Members
2. Shri Anil Shirole
3. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
4. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar
7. Shri Sudheer Gupta
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shri P. Kumar
10. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy 
 SECRETARIAT
          1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
 2. Shri Vipin Kumar - Director

37
      3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director
      
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following Reports:-
 (i) ***** ***** *****
 (ii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 5th Report of the Committee on 
Estimates (2014-15) (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Regulatory Mechanism of 
Protection of Interests of the Depositors of Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) - 
An Overview' pertaining to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services).
4. The Committee after consideration adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
same to Lok Sabha.
5. ***** ***** *****
6. ***** ***** *****
 The Committee then adjourned with vote of thanks to the Chair.