25
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF 
PANCHAYATI RAJ
 
 
 
 
 
PANCHAYATI RAJ
 
 
 
[
Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
Eighteenth
 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
 
of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
(201
7
-
1
8
)
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH R
EPORT
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 

TWENTY FIFTH
 
REPORT
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
(201
7
-
18
)
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
MINISTRY OF 
PANCHAYATI RAJ
 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recomm
endations contained in 
Eighteenth
 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]
 
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 December, 2017)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
December, 2017/ 
Agrahayana, 1939
 
(Saka)
 
 
 

CONTENTS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
PAGE
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2017
-
18
)
 
 
 
    
  
iii
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
(vii
)
 
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
Report
 
 
1
-
15
 
CHAPTER II
 
Observations
/Recommendations
 
which have been 
accepted by Government
 
16
-
20
 
CHAPTER III
 
Observations
/Recommendations
 
which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies
 
21
-
24
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Observations
/Recommendations
 
in respect of which 
replies of Government’s replies have not been accepted 
by the Committee
 
25
-
35
 
CHAPTER V
 
Observations
/
 
Recommendations
 
in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited
 
36
 
 
                            
ANNEXURES
 
 
 
(i) 
  
Views of States about "Timely Conduct of Election" in
 
      
Panchayats 
 
 
37
-
40
 
 
(ii)  States/UTs
 
position on Constitution Amendments Bill
 
      
to Amend Article 243 D
 
 
41
 
 
(iii)  States/ UTs position on Constitution Amendment Bill 
 
       
to Amend Article 243 D
 
 
42
 
 
(iv)  Views of states about rotation of reserved seats in
 
       
PRIs in the light of demographic composition of 
 
      
concerned Panchayat Areas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43
-
48
 

 
(v)  Status of provisions for direct/indirect elections of 
 
      
Chairperson of Gram Panchayat  
 
 
49
 
 
(vi)  Views of States about need for direct election to posts
 
       
of Chairpersons of Block and District Panchayats
 
       
(Para 4 of the Estimates Committee)
 
 
50
-
56
 
 
(vii)  Eleventh Schedule of Article 243 G
 
 
57
 
 
(viii)  Status of devolution of departments/ subjects with
 
        
funds, functions and functionaries to the PRIs by 
 
        
States/UTs
 
 
58
-
62
 
 
APPENDICES
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee on 
 
     
Estimates held on 08.08.2017 
 
 
63
-
64
 
 
(ii) Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee on        
Estimates held on 10.10.2017
 
 
65
-
67
 
 
(iii) Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of
 
the Committee 
on Estimates held on 01.11.2017
 
 
68
-
69
 
 
(iv)  Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government 
 
       
on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
 
       
in the Eighteenth  Report of the Committee  on 
 
       
Estimates (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
 
 
70
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2017
-
18)
 
 
         
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
–
 
Chairperson 
 
 
Members
 
 
 
 
      
 
% 
  
2.
 
Vacant 
 
 
 
 
3. 
 
Shri A. Arunmozhithevan 
 
 
 
 
4. 
 
Shri George Baker 
 
 
 
 
5. 
 
Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
 
 
 
       
@
 
6. 
 
Vacant 
 
 
 
 
7. 
 
Shri Dushyant Chautala 
 
 
 
 
8. 
 
Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
 
 
 
 
9. 
 
Col. Sonaram Choudhary 
 
 
 
 
10. 
 
Shri Ramen Deka 
 
 
 
 
11. 
 
Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
 
 
 
 
12. 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 
 
 
    
    
 
13. 
 
Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri 
 
 
 
 
14. 
 
Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntala 
 
 
 
           
  
15. 
 
Smt. Raksha Khadse 
 
 
 
           
  
16. 
 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 
 
 
 
17. 
 
Shri P. Kumar 
 
 
 
 
18. 
 
Shri Rajesh Pandey 
 
 
 
 
19. 
 
Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
 
 
 
       
#
 
20. 
 
Vac
ant 
 
 
 
        
 
21. 
 
Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
 
 
 
        
 
22. 
 
Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
 
 
 
 
23. 
 
Shri Konakalla Narayan Rao 
 
 
 
        
 
24. 
 
Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy 
 
 
 
 
25. 
 
Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 
 
 
        
 
26. 
 
Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
 
 
 
        
 
27. 
 
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
 
 
 
 
28. 
 
Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
 
 
 
       
@  
 
29. 
 
Vacant 
 
 
 
 
30. 
 
Shri Jay Prakash Narayan Yadav
 
 
______________________________________________
_______________________________
 
 
% Consequent upon sad demise of Shri Sultan Ah
med, MP on 4
th
 
September, 2017 vide 
Notification No. 21/4(3)/2017/T(B) dated 10 October, 2017.
 
 
@ Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon 
his induction in the Council of Ministers on 3 September, 2017 vide 
Notification No. 
21/1(3)/2017/T(B) dated 14 December, 2017.
 
 
# Resignation of Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole from Lok Sabha accepted w.e.f. 14 
December, 2017 vide Notification No. 21/1(3)/2017/T(B) dated 14 December, 2017.
 
 
@ Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat 
ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent 
upon his induction in the Council of Ministers on 3 September, 2017 vide notification No. 
21/1(3)/2017/T(B) dated 14 December, 2017.
 
 
 
 

 
                                  
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Smt Sudesh Luthra
 
 
-
 
Additional Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri N.C Gupta
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
3
.
 
Shri Vipin Kumar
 
 
-
 
Director 
 
4.
 
Shri R.S Negi
 
 
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
5.
 
Shri Gurpreet Singh
 
 
-
 
Sr. Executive Assistant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson 
of Committee on Estimates (2016
-
17)
 
having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on
 
their behalf, do present this Twenty
-
fifth 
Report on  action taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee (2016
-
17) on the 
subject 
'Panchayati Raj'  pertaining to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
 
 
2.
 
The Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on   
11 August, 2016.  Action Taken Notes on observations/ recommendations from the 
Ministry of Panchayati Ra
j were received on 05 April, 2017.  The Committee would like 
to thank the representatives of Niti Aayog who deposed before the Committee in the 
context of award of grants to Panchayats by Fourteenth Finance Commission. The Draft 
Report was considered and a
dopted by the Committee on Estimates (2017
-
18) at their 
sitting held on 01 November, 2017. 
 
 
3.
 
An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee is given in 
Appendix 
IV.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;
 
DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
 
17 November
, 201
7
 
26 kartika, 1939 (Saka)
 
CHAIRPERSON,
 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE.
 
 
 

CHAPTER I
 
REPORT
 
 
    
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in 
the Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Pan
chayati Raj' pertaining to the “
Ministry of Panchayati Raj
”
.
 
 
 
1.2
 
The Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 
11.0
8
.2016. It contained 11 observations/recommendat
ions. Action Taken Notes on all 
these observations/recommendations were received from the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
on 05.04.2017.
 
 
1.3
 
Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:
-
 
 
(i) R
ecommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
 
 
Sl. Nos.   9 & 10
        
 
                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
       
(Total
 
-
 
2
)
 
     
(Chapter
-
II)
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations w
hich the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of Government’s reply:
 
Sl. Nos. 
3, 5 & 8
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
(Total
 
-
 
3
)
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
    
(Chapter
-
III) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s replies have not 
been accepted by the Committee:
 
Sl. Nos.  
1, 2, 4, 6, 7 & 11
  
 
 
 
 
                                     
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
(Total
 
-
 
6
)
 
    
(Chapter
-
IV)
 
 
 

(iv) 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of Government is 
still a
waited:
 
Sl. No. 
Nil
 
 
                                             
                      
(Chapter
-
V)
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4. 
 
The Committee desire that response to the comments contained in Chapter I of 
this Report should be furnished to them expeditiously.
 
 
1.5
 
The Comm
ittee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation 
(Para 
No.1
)
 
 
Timely Conduct of 
Elections
 
 
 
The Committee in their original report had recommended that
 
Panchayati Raj 
system in India
 
refers to the system of local self governance introduce
d by the 
Constitution (Seventy
-
t
hird Amendm
ent) Act, 1992. Article 243 E
 
unambiguously 
stipulates that every Panchayat, unless sooner dissolved under any law for the time 
being in force, shall continu
e for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting 
and no longer. The Committee, however, noted with deep dismay that despite the 
constitutional directive, the
re have been instances in some S
tates where elections to 
the Panchayats were postpone
d for decades. For instance, in Jharkhand, elections 
were held after a long gap of about 32 years. In the undivided Andhra Pradesh, the 
elections to Panchayat were postponed for a considerable time and in Puduchery, 
Panchayats elections were yet to be cond
ucted. The Committee were apprised by the 
Government that in order to ensure timely conduct of elections, Backward Region Grant 
Fund Scheme funds were not given to the States till the elections were held. However, 
as the funds were small, the scheme failed
 
to bring in
 
compliance on the part of the 
S
tates.
 
 
The Committee felt that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MOPR) has a very 
imp
ortant C
onstitutional obligation to ensure conduct of Panchayat elections within the 
stipulated period of five years. The ways a
nd means for timely election are to be 
evolved by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MOPR) in coordination with respective State/ 

U.T Governments and other concerned authorities. The Committee, therefore strongly 
recommended that earnest efforts should be mad
e by the MOPR to ensure conduct of 
periodic elections as per the provision of the 73
rd
 
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992 
to Panchayats at all levels in all the States/UTs so as to strengthen the grass root level 
democracy throughout the length and breadth of the country. Further, having regard to 
periodic complaints, the Committee recommen
ded
 
that the G
overnment need to 
examine the desirability of laying down certain essential qualifications for various posts 
in the lowest rung of democracy so that elected functionaries discharge their  duties 
efficiently, effectively and independently. 
 
 
 
1.7
 
The Ministry in their Action Taken reply has stated that 
e
lections to Panchayats 
have been held in all the States/UTs covered under Part IX, except UT of Puducherry. 
In the UT of Puducherry where the elections have been due since July 2011 as the 
matte
r is sub judice. Presently, it is pending before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
Similarly, in Tamilnadu , the Panchayat Elections were due in  November, 2016, and in 
September, 2016 notification  for next election was also  issued by the State Election 
Commiss
ion. However, this notification has been challenged in the High Court. The 
matter is still sub
-
judice due to which the Panchayat Election were still not held.
 
 
As regards prescribing minimum qualifications for Elected Representatives 
(ERs), the States have
 
been empowered to prescribe the same under Article 243F(b). 
States like Rajasthan and Haryana have already prescribed minimum educational 
qualifications as an eligibility criteria for contesting elections to PRIs.
 
 
 
In line with the recommendations of the
 
Hon’ble Committee, the matter is being 
pursued with the States/UTs consistently to (i) ensure the Panchayat elections 
processes as laid down in the Constitution’s mandatory provisions of Article 243E and 
also where elections are due, they have been asked 
for providing information about 
preparedness for the Panchayat election process, (ii) to ensure the functioning of State 
Election Commission in letter and spirit by the States/UTs as per Article 243K of the 
Constitution & (iii) to provide legislative provi
sions of the States about disqualifications 
for membership of Panchayats as per the Article 243F of the Constitution and with 
justification for such disqualification.
 

Till date, the States of Rajasthan, Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Tripura, Sikkim 
and 
Odisha & UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli have responded. Responses of these 
States/UTs are at Annex
ure
-
I
.
 
 
1.8
 
The Committee take cognizance of the initiative
s
 
taken
 
by the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) to pursue matter with the S
tates
/UTs to ensure timely 
conduct and completion of Panchayat elections, functioning of State Election 
Commissions in letter and spirit 
by the States/UTs as per Article 243K of the 
Constitution and to provide legislative provisions about disqualifications for 
membership of Panchayats as per the Article 243F of the Constitution. 
The 
Committee
 
note that only seven States / UTs viz 
Rajasthan, Karnataka, Himachal 
Pradesh, Tripura, Sikkim and Odisha & Dadra & Nagar Haveli have responded
 
to 
the above said initiatives
 
of the MoPR. On perusal of the information provided by 
the Ministry, the Committee find 
that 
only Rajasthan and Haryana have provided 
for minimum education
al
 
qualification as an eligibility for contesting elections to 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). 
T
he Committee desire that MoPR should 
vigorously pursue the matter with other States also so as to ensure timely 
conduct of elections, providing legislative provision about disqualification of 
membership of 
Panchayats
 
etc.
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation 
(Para 
No.2
)
 
 
Reservation for Women
 
 
 
1.9
 
The Committee
 
had
 
noted that rotation of one third seats is a mandatory 
provision. Further, so far sixteen States have made provision for 50% reservation of the 
seats for women in the Panchayati Raj Institutions in the to
tal number of seats, offices 
of chairpersons and in the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
across the three tiers, position has been raised from the existing provision of ‘not less 
that one
-
third’ to ‘not less that one
-
half’. Further,
 
it has been stated that the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MOPR) has prepared a Cabinet note and moved for Constitutional 
Amendment to provide for fifty percent reservation for women in the remaining States / 
U.Ts. The Committee urged that the proposed legis
lation should be enacted at the 
earliest without further delay and the Committee be apprised in the regard. 
 

1.10
 
The Ministry in their a
ction 
t
aken reply has stated that Article 243D of the 
Constitution of India provides that the offices of Chairpersons i
n the Panchayats at the 
Village or any other level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes and Women in such manner as a legislature of a State may, by law provide. The 
number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for Scheduled Caste
s and Scheduled 
Tribes in the P
a
nchayats at each level in any States shall bear, as nearly as may be, 
the same proportion to the total number of such offices in the Panchayats at each level 
as the population of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in the 
States. It is further 
provided that not less than one third of the total number of offices of Chairpersons in the 
Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women. 
 
 
The Ministry has also 
submitted that by now 19 major States (Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, 
Assam, Bihar, Tamil Nadu and Telengana) have already made provision for reservation 
of 50% sea
ts for women in PRIs. 
 
A summary statement of States/UTs on their current 
status vis
-
à
-
vis this provision and responses on the proposed amendment 
as furnished 
by the Ministry 
is given at
 
Annex
ure
-
II. 
 
 
 
 
It has also been stated in the action taken note
 
that 
a Cabinet note on 
‘Amendment of Article 243D of the Constitution of India’, was sent to the Cabinet 
Secretariat in January, 2016. In this regard a meeting of 
the Committee of Secretaries 
(CoS) meeting 
was
 
held on 05.08.2016 wherein it is recommended 
that Ministry may re
-
examine the need for the amendment proposing 50% reservation for women in PRIs.
 
1.11
 
Th
e Committee note that 19 
States
 
have already
 
made provision for 
reservation of 50% s
eats for woman in PRIs.
 
T
he Ministry in their Action Taken 
reply has stated that a Cabinet note on ‘Amendment of Article 243D of the 
Constitution of India’, was sent to the Cabinet Secretariat in January, 2016. In this 
connection
 
a meeting of 
the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) was
 
held on 
05.08.2016 wherein it is recommended that 
the
 
Ministry may re
-
examine the need 
for the amendment proposing 50% reservation for women in PRIs. The Committee 
are unable to comprehend the reasons/rationale
 
behind the decision of 
Committee 

of Secretar
ies
 
whereby it is recommended
 
to 
the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj  to re
-
examine the need for the amendment proposing 50% reservation for women in 
PRIs 
particularly 
when majority of States have 
already 
 
provided 
for 50% 
reservation for women and 
some other S
tates have agreed to do the same.  
 
The 
Committee, 
therefore, 
reitera
te their earlier recommendation and
 
emphasize for 
early introduction of the legislative proposal in Parliament in this regard
.
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation 
(Para 
No.4
)
 
 
Need for Direct 
Elections to the Posts of Chairpersons of Block and District 
Panchayats
 
 
1.12
 
The Committee noted that Article 243 (C) inserted by the 73
rd
 
Constitution 
(Amendment) Act provides for direct election to seats at all three tiers of Panchayats 
and indirect election for Chairpersons of Block and District Panchayats. The Committee 
further noted that the existing provision of indirect elections for 
the post of Chairpersons 
of Block and District Panchayats has been promoting electoral corruption. The 
representative of the Ministry stated that it would involve amendment to the Constitution 
and therefore they would hold consultations with the States. Th
e Committee, therefore, 
desired the Ministry to hold consultation with the States so that necessary amendment 
is made in the Constitution expeditiously for providing direct elections to the post of 
Chairpersons of Block and District Panchayats. The Committ
ee were of the considered 
view that holding of direct elections to these posts would reduce the dubious role of 
money and muscle power and go a long way to strengthen our grass root level 
democracy. 
 
 
1.13
 
The Ministry in their Action Taken reply has state
d that in terms of the Article 
243C (5) (b) of the Constitution, Chairperson of Panchayat at the Block Panchayat or 
District Panchayat, shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members 
thereof.
 
 
In respect of the election of Chairperson of Gram P
anchayat prescribing direct 
or indirect elections has been left to the discretion of the State Legislature. The status of 
direct/indirect elections to Chairpersons of Gram Panchayats in different States is given 
at Annex
ure
-
V. 
 
 

The Ministry in the action 
taken note has also stated that i
n the light of the 
recommendation, the States/UTs have been requested to offer their comments on the 
Committee’s recommendation. But despite Ministry’s continuous efforts only the States 
of Bihar, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh a
nd Jharkhand have responded and expressed 
their opinion in favour of indirect elections for the posts of Chairpersons of Block & 
District Panchayats.
 
 
UTs of Chandigarh and Andaman & Nicobar Islands have 
responded in favour of direct elections. Responses o
f these States/UTs are at Annex
-
VI. 
 
 
1.14
 
The Committee note that in the light of the
ir
 
recommendation, the MoPR 
has requested States/UTs to offer their comments regarding need for providing 
direct elections to the p
osts of Chairpersons of Block and D
istrict panchayats to 
reduce dubious rol
e of money and muscle power in P
anchayats elections.  
However, it is sadden
ed
 
to note that despite Minis
try's continuous efforts, only 
S
tates of Bihar, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Jharkhand and UTs of Chandigarh 
& A
&N Islands have responded. While reiterating their earlier recommendation, 
the Committee desire th
e
 
Ministry to earnestly keep pursuing the matter with the 
remaining States/UTs who have not responded so far 
and take the action as 
recommended and the Commit
tee be kept apprised.
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation 
(Para 
No.6
)
 
 
Computerisation of Panchayats
 
 
1.15
 
The Committee noted that MoPR propose to provide SATCOM (Satellite 
Communications) facility to all the State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRD) in the 
St
ates where it does not exist. The Committee have been informed that MoPR is still in 
the process of discussion with ISRO and the States for universalisation of SATCOM 
facilities at Panchayat level. As per the information provided to the Committee, 
SATCOM f
acility is already being used by Panchayats in eight States. Many States 
have not utilised the earmarked funds due to various reasons. The Committee were 
unhappy that Panchayats in most of the States have not been equipped with requisite 
level of computeri
sation. The Committee further observed that the Government have 
been proposing broad
-
band connectivity to Panchayats across the country. The 

Committee noted that the Ministry had submitted a proposal to Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy for electrificatio
n of un
-
electrified panchayats using solar energy. 
The Committee, therefore, desired that status report of computerisation of Panchayats 
be furnished to the Committee at the earliest. They further recommended that the 
Ministry expedite electrification of a
ll un
-
electrified Panchayats in a time bound manner 
and apprise the Committee in due course. In the meanwhile till all villages are 
electrified, offline versions of PES applications, which were stated to be in various 
stages of development, may be used for
 
ensuring transparency in the functioning of 
Panchayats.
 
 
1.16
 
The Ministry in their Action Taken reply has stated that c
onsidering the need to 
provide training to a large number of Elected Panchayat Representatives &
 
Panchayat 
Functionaries, support to States for appropriate SATCOM was under consideration in 
2015
-
16 but due to techno
-
economic reasons of 2
-
way interactive terminals at District 
and Block level this could not be finalized. The discussions were continued 
in 2016
-
17 
with Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) for establishing video 
connectivity through terrestrial network and also with Bhaskaracharya Institute for 
Space Applications and Geoinformatics (BISAG), Gujarat and Doordarshan for
 
exploring economically feasible training medium and for   telecasting informative 
programmes relating to Panchayati Raj over a free
-
to
-
air Direct
-
To
-
Home (DTH) 
channel. Based on these discussions, it emerged that there would be a need for 
technical suppor
t up to Block level to maintain the equipment procured for SATCOM 
facilities, as envisaged by ISRO and Doordarshan could provide viable solutions.  
 
       
 
 
As per information available with the Ministry, about 1.36 lakh Panchayats have 
computers and the 
level of their usage of software applications varies significantly 
across Panchayats in the country, based on their level of preparedness. Furthermore, 
the Department of Telecommunications has now embarked on the ambitious BharatNet 
programme with great ea
rnest and plans to provide broadband connectivity to 1.5 lakh 
GPs by March, 2018.
 
The electrification of Panchayats is covered under the Deendayal Upadhyaya 
Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) scheme of Ministry of Power, Government of 

India. Rural Electrification 
Corporation (REC) is facilitating availability of 
electricity for rural and semi
-
urban population for accelerated growth and for 
enrichment of quality of life. As per reports of REC, out of 597,464 Census 
villages, 590,028 villages have been electrified ti
ll now and rest are under 
process. The previously envisaged partnership with Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy did not solicit any interest/demand from the States, despite 
follow
-
up by the Ministry.
  
To overcome the unavailability of power and internet,
 
the affected Panchayats are generally visiting the nearby electrified and internet
-
equipped Panchayats for their data entry needs. Certain offline features have 
also been enabled in the PES applications to bridge this gap.
 
1.17
 
The Committee note from the
 
action taken reply that the programme 
envisaged for providing training to a large number of Panchayat representatives 
and functionaries
 
viz. Support to States for appropriate SATCOM and 
establishing video connectivity could not be finalized/made operation
al due to 
techno economic reasons and lack of  technical support upto Block level.  It has 
emerged from the action taken note that providing broadband connectivity and 
computerization of panchayats is the pre
-
requisite for training programmes being 
conceiv
ed by the Ministry. While reiterating their recommendation, the Committee 
re
-
emphasize for broadband connectivity and electrification of the remaining 
villages.  In this regard, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj need to pursue with the 
Department of Telecommu
nication for expeditious implementation of Bharat Net 
Programme meant to provide broadband connectivity to 1.5 lakh GPs by March 
2018, and with Ministries of Power and New and Renewable Energy for rural 
electrification. Till full computerization and electr
ification is achieved, more focus 
share to be given for enabling offline features in the PES applications to bridge 
the gap. The concrete action should be taken in this regard and the Committee 
apprised at the final action taken stage.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation 
(Para 
No.7
)
          
 
 
Award of Grants by Fourteenth Finance Commission
 
 
1.18
 
The Committee
 
had
 
note
d
 
that as per the Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC) 
award, grants will go to Gram Panchayats, w
hich are directly responsible 
for
 
basic 
services without any share for other levels i.e. Block and District Panchayats within 
fifteen days failing which the State has to give interest to the Gram Panchayats. This 
money can be spent by Gram Panchayats only for basic services which have 
been 
defined by the Fourteenth Finance Commission like water supply, sanitation, street 
lights, roads, burial grounds and cre
matorium, etc. The Committee were
 
dismayed to 
observe that the FFC award has created pitiable situation for the Block and District 
Panchayats. As far as State Finance Commissions (SFCs) 
are concerned the 
Committee noted
 
that out of 29 States, only 6 States namely Assam, Himachal 
Pradesh, Kerala, O
disha, Rajasthan and Sikkim had
 
furnished details of submission and 
acceptance of the rec
ommendations made by their SFCs. Kee
ping in view, the 
Committee expressed apprehension 
as to how the financial needs of Bl
ock and District 
Panchayats women
 
be met. The Committee, therefore, recommend
ed
 
that MoPR help 
expedite timely allocation of funds by 
the States Finance Commission to Panchayats 
and a concrete schedule be made with proper monitoring for such allocations. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
1.19
 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in the Action Taken note has stated that 
Fourteenth Finance 
Commission (FFC) has recommended grants only to Gram 
Panchayats constituted under Part IX of the Constitution
 
as they are directly 
responsible for delivery of basic services without any share for other levels. The 
Government has accepted the recommendation
s of the FFC and funds are being 
released as per the recommendations.
 
 
 
It has also been stated that 
The Finance Commission have, 
inter
-
alia
, also 
observed that the State Governments are expected to take care of the needs of the 
Taluk and Zila Panchayats a
nd it is incumbent upon the State Governments to utilize 
the enhanced fiscal space made available to the States by the FFC on account of 
higher devolution from 32% to 42% of the Centre’s net tax receipts. 
 

 
 
The Ministry has further stated that the 
Secretary, Panchayati Raj on July 31, 
2015 has also written to the Ch
ief Secretary of all State Government
 
suggesting 
measures so that the States could take to devolve funds to the two left out tiers of 
Intermediate and District level Panchayats. 
 
Being no
t satisfied with the replies of the Ministry, the Committee decided to take 
evidence of the representatives of NITI Aayog. 
 
NITI Aayog in the written document furnished to the Committee 
has 
stated that 
one of the terms of reference of Fourteenth Finance 
Commission was to make 
recommendations on the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a 
State on the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of the 
State. The Commission submitted its Report in December, 2014. The FFC has wo
rked 
out the total size of the grant to be Rs. 2,87,436 crore for the period 2015
-
20, 
constituting an assistance of Rs.488 per capita per annum at an aggregate level for the 
local bodies to carry out their duties of providing basic services. Of this, the g
rant 
recommended to Panchayats is Rs.2,00,292.2 crore and that to municipalities is 
Rs.87,143.8 crore. These local bodies grants are released by the Ministry of Finance on 
the recommendations of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to the concerned State 
Governm
ents for redistribution of resources at lower levels of Panchayats. 
 
NITI Aayog in the written views has also stated that the constitution of the State 
Finance Commission is a State subject and FFC has not given clear cut instructions as 
regards flow of FF
C funds to Block and District Panchayats. As the issue has not been 
addressed by the Fourteenth Finance Commission, this issue has to be flagged by the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the States in their deposition before the Fifteenth 
Finance Commission. I
n the meantime, the States would have to ensure that the 
recommendations of the State Finance Commissions in this regard are implemented. 
 
When asked about the views of NITI Aayog on the issue, CEO, NITI Aayog 
during the course of oral evidence stated that
 
NITI Aayog is clearly of the view that 
allocations should also be made for middle level Panchayats.  
 

1.20
 
The Committee note from the action taken reply of the Ministry and the 
information furnished by NITI Aayog that the Fourteenth Finance Commission 
an
d the Union Government have left the matter of devolution of funds to 
Intermediate and District Level Panchayats to the State Finance Commissions. 
From the information furnished by the Ministry at Annexure VIII, the Committee 
note that some of the State Go
vernments viz. Andhra Pradesh, Chattisgarh, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal have also 
transferred funds only to Gram Panchayats thereby making the position of 
Intermediate and District Level Panchayats worse. Uttar Pradesh
 
is the only State 
where all three tiers have the powers to collect taxes and Lakshadweep is the 
only Union Territory where funds are transferred to both District and Village 
Panchayats. The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that with 
allocati
on of Fourteenth Finance Commission grants only to Gram Panchayats, 
Intermediate and District Panchayats have been left on their own to handle their 
responsibilities as per the Constitutional mandate.
 
1.21
 
The Committee observe that as per Article 243B, in
 
the States having 
population above twenty lakhs, Panchayats shall be constituted at the village, 
intermediate and district levels, and in the States having a population not 
exceeding twenty lakhs, Panchayats are to be constituted at the village and 
distri
ct levels only. The Committee fail to understand how the intermediate and 
district level Panchayats, particularly in the backward districts would fulfil their 
Constitutional obligations in the absence of devolution of funds. Not only that 
this put pressure
 
on the members local area development fund. The Committee 
would like to emphasise that the Union Government cannot shift the 
responsibility entirely to the State Governments particularly when it is a question 
of implementation of provisions made in the Co
nstitution. Now when NITI Aayog 
has concurred with the concerns of the Committee, the Committee while 
reiterating their recommendation would like Government to look into the issue of 
devolution of funds to all the three tiers of Panchayats for the balanced
 
development of a village to achieve the vision of transformation of rural India into 
smart rural India. As rightly stated by NITI Aayog, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
and States need to flag this issue before the Fifteenth Finance Commission at the 

appro
p
riate time. The Committee in this
 
regard would also like to be apprised 
about the status of allocation and utilisation of Fourteenth Finance Commission 
Funds by the Gram Panchayats in various States.
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation 
(Para 
No.11
)
 
 
Audit and Ac
countability of Panchayati Raj Institutions
 
 
1.22
 
The Committee noted that over the time the thrust of successive Governments 
has been to strengthen the Panchayati Raj Institutions, the very edifice of our 
democracy by devolving more powers and funds to them. The Committee noted that 
though some States Go
vernments/Legislatures have made provision for monitoring the 
works done by the PRIs, the system of audit and accountability of PRIs remains far from 
satisfactory. The Committee recommended that the whole system of monitoring, audit 
and accountability of t
he PRIs be revisited and strong audit and accountability 
mechanism be put in place. Further, the Committee may also be apprised of the 
guidelines so evolved. 
 
 
 
1.23
 
The Ministry their Action Taken reply has stated that t
o facilitate simplifying and 
improv
ing the system of basic accounts keeping in Panchayats, MoPR had assigned 
the work of preparation of State/UT (except Delhi)
-
specific budget, accounts and audit 
manuals for Panchayats to Institute of Public Auditors of India (IPAI). The draft Manuals 
prepa
red by IPAI have been forwarded by IPAI to all 35 States/UTs (except Delhi) for 
adoption in their legal framework. So far five States namely, Maharashtra, Manipur, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka and Punjab have adopted the Manuals.
 
 
Under Fourteenth Finance 
Commission (FFC) for the award period 2015
-
20, 
grants to the tune of Rs. 2,00,292.20 crore for the period from 2015 to 2020 are being 
devolved to Gram Panchayats constituted under Part IX of the Constitution ,amounting 
to an assistance of Rs. 488 per capit
a per annum at an aggregate level for 26 States for 
delivering basic services, creation of reliable data base of local bodies’ receipts & 
expenditure through audited accounts and for improvement of own source revenue of 
the Gram Panchayats.  90 percent of 
the Grants are the Basic Grants and 10 percent 

will be Performance Grant (applicable from 2016
-
17). The Commission has 
recommended grants for Gram Panchayats as they are directly responsible for delivery 
of basic services without any share for other levels
.
 
 
Performance grants are designed to serve the purpose of ensuring reliable 
audited accounts and data of receipt and expenditure and improvement in own 
revenues and are based on submission of audited annual accounts and increase in own 
revenues by the GPs. N
o additional conditions need to be imposed by GOI or State 
Govts. 
 
 
 
The FFC has followed a trust based approach towards the local bodies as 
institutions of local self
-
governance while awarding the grants. 
Ministry of Finance 
(MoF) guidelines dated 08.10.2
015 for implementation of FFC recommendations for 
local bodies enjoin upon States to constitute a High Level Monitoring Committee 
(HLMC) headed by Chief Secretary for monitoring and concurrent evaluation of local 
bodies. Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) h
as constituted a Coordination Committee 
headed by Secretary, Panchayati Raj to inter
-
alia guide and support States and local 
bodies in the implementation of FFC recommendations, monitor progress of expenditure 
of grants by local bodies and suggest remedial
 
measures as per the MoF Guidelines. 
State Governments are also mandated to put in place third party audit mechanism. 
 
 
 
MoPR has developed Panchayat Enterprise Suite (PES) constituting 11 common 
core applications which cover the entire gamut of core gover
nance functions of 
Panchayats. These application together foster transparency and accountability in the 
functioning of Panchayats.
 
 
 
 
Online Dashboard has been provisioned under the PlanPlus Application to 
facilitate better monitoring of release of the FFC
 
funds to Gram Panchayats and to track 
sector wise expenditure incurred by the Gram Panchayats. Rashtriya Gram Anudaan 
Evam Vikas (RAGAV) mobile application has also been developed for above said 
purpose.  
So far eight States for FY 2015
-
16 namely, Chhatti
sgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, 
Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh and three States namely, 
Gujarat, Jharkhand and Uttarakhand for FY 2016
-
17 have started uploading Sector
-
wise expenditure on the Dashboard. States of Assam, Himachal Prad
esh, Jammu & 

Kashmir, Maharashtra, Sikkim, Telangana & Uttar Pradesh for FY 2015
-
16 and 
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
Telangana, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh have also started  uploading the GP
-
wise 
detail on the
 
Dashboard
.
 
 
1.24
 
The Committee note that some measures are being taken to put in place 
robust audit and accountability mechanism for monitoring and audit of PRIs, 
which include draft model manuals sent to States/UTs for adoption in their legal 
framework, 
grants to the tune of Rs.2,00,292.20 crore for the period from 2015
-
2020 under Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC), constitution of a 
Coordination 
Committee headed by Secretary, Panchayati Raj to inter
-
alia guide and support 
States and local bodies in the 
implementation of FFC recommendations, monitor 
progress of expenditure of grants by local bodies
, as well as developing a 
Panchayat Enterprise Suite (PES) constituting 11 common core applications 
which cover the entire gamut of core governance functions of
 
Panchayats
.  So far 
as the outcomes of these efforts are concerned, the action taken notes indicate 
that action still needs to be taken by many of the States.  With regard to adoption 
of draft Manuals, so far only 
five States namely, Maharashtra, Manipur,
 
Arunachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka and Punjab have adopted the Manuals.
  
Online Dashboard 
provisioned under the Plan
 
Plus Application to facilitate better monitoring of 
release of the FFC funds to Gram Panchayats and to track sector wise 
expenditure 
incurred by
 
the Gram Panchayats, is still to be used by all the 
States/UTs.  The Committee conclude from the above that much needs to be done 
to persuade the State Governments to take benefit of the initiatives taken by the 
Union Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  The init
iatives on the lines suggested above as 
well as in the original recommendation may be taken and the Committee apprised 
accordingly. 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER
-
II
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.9)                  
 
 
Revitalisation of Gram Sabhas
 
 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note the candid admission by the representative 
of MoPR before the Committee that the Functioning of Gram Sabhas in many States is 
not satisfactory 
at all. Although the MoPR have been making efforts for past several 
years to prevail upon the State/UT Government to empower Gram Sabhas and make 
their functioning more vibrant and participatory yet the results of such initiatives have 
not brought requisit
e empowerment of the Gram Sabhas. The Committee feel that Gram 
Sabha is the bed
-
rock of our democratic edifice. As a robust institutional mechanism, 
the Gram Sabha can mount close vigil on the implementation of developmental 
programmes and eliminate mis
-
us
e of funds. Apparently, laxity on the part of MoPR and 
the respective State/UT Governments is largely responsible for sluggish empowerment 
of Gram Sabhas across the country. Though Panchayati Raj is a State subject, yet the 
MoPR need to make efforts to cha
lk out a programme in coordination with State/UT 
Governments for purposeful and effective empowerment of Gram Sabhas. The 
necessary guidelines, which the MoPR propose to put in place for compulsory 
consultation with Gram Sabhas in preparing participatory p
lans for Gram Panchayats, 
should be issued to the States/UTs at the earliest along with other proposed measures 
that may help in activating the Gram Sabhas. Further, the monitoring system must by 
strengthened to oversee the number of members enrolled, meet
ings held, number of 
members attending meetings, committees formed, targets achieved, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
(i)
 
This Ministry has always been seized of the crucial role that the Gram Sabha 
plays in the robust and vibrant functioning of Panchaya
ti Raj system and also the fact 
that Planning, implementation and monitoring of the Schemes/Programmes of the 
Government in desired and pointed manner can be possible only with the pivotal 
involvement of Gram Sabhas. However,
 
Panchayat being a State subjec
t, States have 

to crystallize the powers and responsibilities of the Gram Sabhas under their domain 
through their Statutes/Regulations and thus enable the Gram Sabhas function as per 
their mandated role. To sensitize the State Govts, Panchayats and Gram Sa
bhas about 
different facets of their empowered positions, roles and duties, this Ministry had 
observed Gram Sabha Year from 2.10.2009 to 2.10.2010 in consultation with the State 
Governments and other stake holders.
 
 
Exhaustive advisory was
 
also issued to t
hem for 
undertaking relevant activities. Subsequently another advisory about ensuring 
videography of the proceedings of the Gram Sabhas was also issued to States, so that 
the Panchayats performed their mandated duties and function in accountable and 
transp
arent manner. This would also ensure that the Gram Panchayat were responsive 
to the Gram Sabha and did not violate the approvals and decisions of Gram Sabha. 
Besides, this Ministry has been consistently advocating with line Ministries/Departments 
about pro
viding a central role to Gram Panchayat/ Gram Sabha in identification of 
beneficiaries and as far as possible, in implementation of the schemes, directing the 
officials of
 
concerned
 
line
 
departments for making voluntary disclosures before Gram 
Sabhas and e
nsuring the social audit of their Schemes with the assistance of Gram 
Sabhas. 
 
The huge devolution of funds to Gram Panchayat under FFC award has provided 
a significant opportunity to revitalize Gram Panchayat, especially the Gram Sabha since 
it requires i
nvolvement/approval of Gram Sabha in formulation of priorities and projects 
in the course of Participatory Plan preparation. The MoPR has been working in close 
coordination with State Government for developing State level guidelines for 
development and Imp
lementation of Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP) 
through a process of planning through Gram Sabha. The model guidelines for GPDP 
have been finalized and shared with States.  
MoPR has also developed a manual for 
preparation of GPDP.  Under the manual, 
MoPR advised to States to conduct at least 
three gram sabhas as initial Gram Sabha for awareness creation about the plan 
preparation, Visioning and priotitization Gram Sabha and approval of GPDP Gram 
Sabha.  MoPR  has also provided funds to states for cond
ucting trainings on the various 
aspects of GPDP.  Since 2015
-
16, GPDP trainings have been sanctioned  for 3516025 
stakeholders of Panchayats. 
All part IX States have finalized their respective GPDP 
guidelines which reaffirms the role of Gram Sabha in formu
lation/approval of projects for 

development of Panchayats out of FFC grant and other funds at disposal of Gram 
Panchayat. 
 
(ii) 
 
Further, during the year 2015
-
16, MoPR celebrated National Panchayati Raj Day 
by organizing 
the ‘
Gramoday Se Bharat Uday 
Abhiyan
’ in all the Panchayats of the 
country from 14
th
 
April to 24
th
 
April 2016.
 
The 
Objective of Gramodaya se Bharat Uday Programme was:
 

 
Strengthen the Panchayati Raj system and through it,
 

 
Promote social harmony,
 

 
Foster farmers’ welfare and livelihoods 
of the poor,
 

 
Support rural development.
 
 
During the eleven days intensive campaign, various programmes were 
conducted at all the three levels of Panchayati Raj Institutions as well as at State 
headquarters level. Special Gram Sabhas were convened and vario
us issues of 
common concern & overall development were discussed during the meetings of the 
Gram Sabha which was, at several places, attended by the officials from Central / State 
Governments. General rural masses were made aware of various pro
-
poor/ pro
-
f
armer/ 
pro
-
people Centrally Sponsored Schemes so that the benefit of the Schemes run by the 
Government of India could reach the last mile as well as the targeted/ deserving/ bona
-
fide beneficiaries. 
 
Gramodaya se Bharat Uday Abhiyan created awareness about
 
importance of 
73
rd
 
CAA and more importantly provide a forum to grassroot people for celebrating and 
showcasing their achievements.
 
 
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.10)                
 
 
Depoliticisation of Local Elections and need for Simultaneous 
Elections
 
 
The Committee note that there is no uniformity in regard to elections at district 
level and block level with respect to affiliation of candidate to political parties. Some 
States like Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar do not have party line el
ections for 
district level and block level. The Ministry agreed that there may be uniformity in regard 
to participation and vote of MPs and MLAs in district level and block level as per the 

enabling provision of Article 243(C). The Committee therefore reco
mmend that the 
Government may initiate necessary action to make provision in the Constitution so that 
there is uniformity in elections to local bodies and there is depoliticisation of elections to 
these bodies. The Committee also note that there are occasi
onal demands that 
elections to local bodies, assemblies and the Lok Sabha should be held simultaneously 
for greater national good. The desirability of such a demand needs to be examined, 
appropriate decision taken on balance of consideration and the Commit
tee apprised. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
(i) 
De
-
politicisation of local body elections
: 
Part IX of the Constitution on the Panchayats 
does not contain any specific provision in this regard. It does not either prohibit or direct 
contesting election to 
Panchayats on political party affiliations.  State Governments are 
empowered to decide on this issue and the position varies from State to State. In some 
States like West Bengal, Karnataka, Kerala, Tripura and Punjab local elections are 
known to be held on
 
political party basis.
 
  
 
 
(ii) 
Exploring the desirability of holding elections to Local Bodies, State Assemblies and 
the Lok Sabha simultaneously
:
 
Provisions with regard to conduct of elections to the 
Parliament and State Assembles are contained in Article 324 to 328 of the Part XV of 
the Constitution.
 
 
 
Recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been shared with the Union 
Ministry of Law & Justi
ce (MoL&J), Election Commission of India (ECI), all State 
Governments/State Election Commissions (SECs) and the Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD) inviting their comments/views in this regard. 
 
On the issue of simultaneous elections to local bodies, Stat
e Assemblies and Lok 
Sabha ECI has furnished that 
–
 
 
‘
The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievance, Law and Justice, has gone into issue of holding simultaneous 
elections to the House of People (Lok Sabha) and Stat
e Legislative Assemblies and has 
already submitted a Report (its 79
th
 
report) to the Government. As regards local bodies’ 
elections, the same are conducted by the concerned State Election Commission, which 

is a separate Constitutional authority. The Commis
sion has no specific views on the 
proposal for de
-
politicisation of the Local Bodies elections.’
 
 
 
 
MoUD in their response has stated that there is no such proposal under 
consideration in the Ministry of Urban Development.
 
 
 
The Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) has responded that 
since no specific legal issue has been formulated for consideration, no comments 
offered at this stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER
-
III
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
 
 
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.3)                      
 
 
Rotation System of Reservation
 
 
In order to usher in social equality and political justice, the Constitution provides 
for rotation of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward 
Classes and Women in almost all elections from Panchayats to State and national level 
elec
tions. However, Committee observe that in actual practice at Panchayat level, some 
shortcomings have noticed in this system of reservation. For example, in Jharkhand, it 
was reported that seats were reserved even for two or three Scheduled Caste / 
Schedule
d Tribe families. The representative of Ministry assured to study the rotation 
system of reservation in such areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that it is 
high time to re
-
look into the existing system of rotation in the light of demographic 
composi
tion of the areas concerned so that necessary corrective measures are taken to 
remove the shortcomings and the Committee apprised. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Article 243D of the Constitution of India provides for (i) the reservation of seats 
for the Sch
eduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in every Panchayat (at all levels) in 
proportion of their population in the Panchayat area and also for the women. It does not 
provide the precise modalities for rotation of reserved seats and therefore are left to the 
St
ates to decide.  The modalities for rolling out this mandatory provision are prescribed 
by the States in their respective State Panchayati Raj Acts and vary from State to State.
 
 
States/UTs have been consulted on the proposed amendment of Article 243D. 
A 
summary of the current status on this provision and response of the States on the 
proposed amendment is given at
 
Annexe
-
III.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further, in the 
recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee, MoPR was shared by 
MoPR with the States and also requested Stat
es to provide their comments. Till date 

the State of 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, 
Telegana and UT of Chandigarh
 
have responded. Responses of these States/UTs are 
at 
Annex
-
IV
.
 
 
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.5)  
                  
 
 
Infrastructure Constraints
 
 
The Committee are dismayed to find that about fifty thousand Gram Panchayats 
are stated to be operating without any building. To make the things worse, funds under 
Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan, have been substantially reduced from 
2015
-
16. 
States can now use MGNREGA funds for construction Panchayat Buildings. 
The Committee wonder how in the absence of basic infrastructure facilities, Gram 
Panchayats can fulfill their various responsibilities. Besides, there is shortage of 
adequate manpower a
t all levels of Panchayats in majority of the States particularly in 
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, etc. The Committee note that approx. 50,000 
Gram Panchayats do not have any buildings. The Committee feel that due to lack of 
adequate manpower and b
asic infrastructure facilities like Gram Panchayat Buildings, 
the functioning of Panchayats at levels would be adversely affected. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the construction of Panchayat Building should be 
taken on priority basis an
d the matter be taken up with the concerned States and 
authorities at the highest level. The MoPR need to take urgent measures to augment 
the existing manpower for optimal delivery of various services by the Panchayats and 
the Committee be apprised within 
six months about the progress made in this direction.
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Panchayati Raj being a State subject, providing infrastructure and manpower in Gram 
Panchayats is primarily the responsibility of the respective State Governments. However, 
this Ministry has been implementing a few Schemes to strengthen the Panchayati Raj 
system across the Country by assisting the States towards strengthening of Panchayats, 
which also included support for construction/repair of Panchayat Ghars and Administrative 
&Technical support at GP level. To give further boost to strengthening of Panch
ayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs), the Ministry had implemented the Scheme of Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat 
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSA) during 2012
-
13 upto 2015
-
16. Under the scheme, 
substantive funds were provided for construction and repair of Panchayat Ghars and
 

Administrative &Technical support at GP level as proposed by States in their respective 
Annual plans, up to 2014
-
15. The number of Panchayats without buildings is now reduced.  
However in the backdrop of delinking of state component of the scheme from cen
tral 
support in the context of FFC award to Gram Panchayats and meagre funds being available 
under the scheme w.e.f 2015
-
16, the support for these activities was discontinued. The 
states were exhorted upon to undertake these critical activities from their 
enhanced 
allocation of funds, post FFC. 
In the meeting of Principal Secretaries Conference held on 
8.05.2015, it was advised to states to construct the GP buildings through converging funds 
from FFC, SFC and MGNREGS. The above issue has also been discussed
 
in various fora 
viz CEC meetings and states have been informed about the above proposition.
 
 
As regards Administrative and Technical manpower at Gram Panchayat level, 
the Panchayats can supplement the support from State Government towards this end, 
by poo
ling the 10% allocation of FFC grant towards administrative expenditures.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.8)
 
 
Devolution of Functions, Finances and Functionaries
 
 
Article 243(G) clearly provides that subject to the provisions of this Constitution, 
the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and 
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as instituti9ons of Self
-
governm
ent and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and 
responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriate leve, subject to such conditions as 
may be specified therein, with respect to (a) the preparation of plans for economic 
development
 
ans social justice, and (b) the implementation of schemes for economic 
development and social justice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation 
to the mattes listed in the Eleventh Schedule. 
 
 
The Committee note that the devolution of functi
ons, finance and functionaries of 
3Fs falls under the discretionary provisions of the Seventy Third Constitution 
Amendment Act. From the information provided to the Committee by MoPR, it is 
observed that Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh
, Himachal 
Pradesh, Goa, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, etc have transferred some subjects in 

varying degrees to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). However it is saddening to note 
that no information or data has been provided to the Committee about the actu
al 
empowerment of PRIs. The Committee are of the considered view that the MoPR has 
the constitutional obligation for ensuring devolution of more powers to the Panchayats 
across the country in a time bound manner, otherwise the issue of devolution of powers
 
to Panchayats may continue to elude. The holding of yearly award distribution 
ceremony alone is far from adequate to compel States to implement constitutionally 
mandated provisions relating to devolution of Functions, Finance and Functionaries. 
The Commit
tee strongly recommend that, if necessary for devolution of powers to 
Panchayats, the MoPR should move constitutional amendment for doing away with the 
discretionary powers of State legislatures without compromising the spirit of federalism 
enshrined in Co
nstitution.
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
Article 243G empowers the States to endow the Panchayats with such powers 
and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self
-
government. 
Illustrative list of 29 subjects mentioned in the Eleventh Schedule of the 
Constitution is at 
(Annex
-
VII)
.
 
 
The process, content and even the very pace of 
devolution of functions, finances and functionaries (3Fs) are vested entirely in State 
Legislature
. M
inistry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) as the nodal Ministry in respect of PRIs 
oversees the implementation of various provisions in the Part IX. Accordingly, this 
Ministry is actively engaged in advocacy with the States for Devolution of Powers to 
PRIs. The pro
file of devolution of powers by the States to PRIs is indicated in 
Annexe
-
 
VIII.
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER
-
IV
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.1)
 
 
Timely Conduct of Elections 
 
 
 
The Committee in their original report had recommended that Panchayati Raj 
system in India refers to the system of local self governance introduced by the 
Constitution (Seventy
-
third Amendment) Act, 1992. Article 243 E unambi
guously 
stipulates that every Panchayat, unless sooner dissolved under any law for the time 
being in force, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting 
and no longer. The Committee, however, noted with deep dismay that despi
te the 
constitutional directive, there have been instances in some States where elections to 
the Panchayats were postponed for decades. For instance, in Jharkhand, elections 
were held after a long gap of about 32 years. In the undivided Andhra Pradesh, the
 
elections to Panchayat were postponed for a considerable time and in Puduchery, 
Panchayats elections were yet to be conducted. The Committee were apprised by the 
Government that in order to ensure timely conduct of elections, Backward Region Grant 
Fund Sc
heme funds were not given to the States till the elections were held. However, 
as the funds were small, the scheme failed to bring in compliance on the part of the 
States.
 
 
The Committee felt that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MOPR) has a very 
important 
Constitutional obligation to ensure conduct of Panchayat elections within the 
stipulated period of five years. The ways and means for timely election are to be 
evolved by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MOPR) in coordination with respective State/ 
U.T Gove
rnments and other concerned authorities. The Committee, therefore strongly 
recommended that earnest efforts should be made by the MOPR to ensure conduct of 
periodic elections as per the provision of the 73
rd
 
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992 
to Panchayats
 
at all levels in all the States/UTs so as to strengthen the grass root level 
democracy throughout the length and breadth of the country. Further, having regard to 
periodic complaints, the Committee recommended that the Government need to 

examine the desir
ability of laying down certain essential qualifications for various posts 
in the lowest rung of democracy so that elected functionaries discharge their  duties 
efficiently, effectively and independently. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
 
The Ministry in the
ir Action Taken reply has stated that elections to Panchayats 
have been held in all the States/UTs covered under Part IX, except UT of Puducherry. 
In the UT of Puducherry where the elections have been due since July 2011 as the 
matter is sub judice. Presen
tly, it is pending before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
Similarly, in Tamilnadu ,
 
the Panchayat Elections were due in  November, 2016, and in 
September, 2016 notification  for next election was also  issued by the State Election 
Commission. However, this notification has been challenged in the High Court. The 
matter is still sub
-
judice
 
due to which the Panchayat Election were still not held.
 
 
As regards prescribing minimum qualifications for Elected Representatives 
(ERs), the States have been empowered to prescribe the same under Article 243F(b). 
States like Rajasthan and Haryana have a
lready prescribed minimum educational 
qualifications as an eligibility criteria for contesting elections to PRIs.
 
 
In line with the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee, the matter is being 
pursued with the States/UTs consistently to (i) ensure the Pan
chayat elections 
processes as laid down in the Constitution’s mandatory provisions of Article 243E and 
also where elections are due, they have been asked for providing information about 
preparedness for the Panchayat election process, (ii) to ensure the fu
nctioning of State 
Election Commission in letter and spirit by the States/UTs as per Article 243K of the 
Constitution & (iii) to provide legislative provisions of the States about disqualifications 
for membership of Panchayats as per the Article 243F of th
e Constitution and with 
justification for such disqualification.
 
Till date, the States of Rajasthan, Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Tripura, Sikkim 
and Odisha & UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli have responded. Responses of these 
States/UTs are at Annexure
-
I.
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No.1.8 of the Chapter
-
I)
 

 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.2)                      
 
 
Reservation for Women
 
 
The Committee note that rotation of one third seats is a mandatory provision. 
Further, so far sixtee
n States have made provision for 50% reservation of the seats for 
women in the Panchayati Raj Institutions in the total number of seats, offices of 
chairpersons and in the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
across the three tiers, pos
ition has been raised from the existing provision of ‘not less 
that one
-
third’ to ‘not less that one
-
half’. Further, it has been stated that the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MOPR) has prepared a Cabinet note and moved for Constitutonal 
Amendment to provide 
for fifty percent reservation for women in the remaining States / 
U.Ts. The Committee urge that the proposed legislation should be enacted at the 
earliest without further delay and the Committee be apprised in the regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
Article 243D of the Constitution of India provides that the offices of Chairpersons 
in the Panchayats at the Village or any other level shall be reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Women in such manner as a legislature of a State 
ma
y, by law provide. The number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Pnchayats at each level in any States shall bear, as 
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such offices in the 
Panchay
ats at each level as the population of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes 
in the States. It is further provided that not less than one third of the total number of 
offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women. 
 
 
It
 
is, however, submitted that by now 19 major States (Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, 
Assam, Bihar, Tamil Nadu 
and Telengana) have already made provision for reservation 
of 50% seats for women in PRIs. 
 
A summary statement of States/UTs on their current 
status vis
-
à
-
vis this provision and responses on the proposed amendment is given at
 
Annex
-
II. 
 
 

 
 
It is further submitted that 
a Cabinet note on ‘Amendment of Article 243D of the 
Constitution of India’, was sent to the Cabinet Secretariat in January, 2016. In this regard a 
meeting of 
the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) meeting held on 05.08.2016 wherein
 
it is 
recommended that Ministry may re
-
examine the need for the amendment proposing 50% 
reservation for women in PRIs.
 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of the Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.4)                     
 
 
Need for Direct Elections to the Posts of Chairpersons of Block and District 
Panchayats
 
 
 
The Committee note that Article 243 (C) inserted by the 73
rd
 
Constitution 
(Amendment) Act provides for direct electio
n to seats at all three tiers of Panchayats 
and indirect election for Chairpersons of Block and District Panchayats. The Committee 
further note that the existing provision of indirect elections for the post of Chairpersons 
of Block and District Panchayats 
has been promoting electoral corruption. The 
representative of the Ministry stated that it would involve amendment to the Constitution 
and therefore they would hold consultations with the States. The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Ministry to hold consul
tation with the States so that necessary amendment is 
made in the Constitution expeditiously for providing direct elections to the post of 
Chairpersons of Block and District Panchayats. The Committee are of the considered 
view that holding of direct electi
ons to these posts would reduce the dubious role of 
money and muscle power and go a long way to strengthen our grass root level 
democracy. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
In terms of the Article 243C (5) (b) of the Constitution, Chairperson of Panchayat 
at the Block Panchayat or District Panchayat, shall be elected by, and from amongst, 
the elected members thereof.
 
 
In respect of the election of Chairperson of Gram 
Panchaya
t prescribing direct or indirect elections has been left to the discretion of the 

State Legislature. The status of direct/indirect elections to Chairpersons of Gram 
Panchayats in different States is given at 
Annex
-
V
. 
 
 
In the light of the recommendation, the States/UTs have been requested to offer 
their comments on the Committee’s recommendation. But despite Ministry’s continuous 
efforts only the States of Bihar, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Jharkhand have 
responded and 
expressed their opinion in favour of indirect elections for the posts of 
Chairpersons of Block & District Panchayats.
 
 
UTs of Chandigarh and Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands have responded in favour of direct elections. Responses of these 
States/UTs are at 
Annex
-
VI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of the Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.6)             
 
 
Computerisation of Panchayats
 
 
The Committee note that MoPR propose to provide SATCOM (Satellite 
Communications) 
facility to all the State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRD) in the 
States where it does not exist. The Committee have been informed that MoPR is still in 
the process of discussion with ISRO and the States for universalisation of SATCOM 
facilities at P
anchayat level. As per the information provided to the Committee, 
SATCOM facility is already being used by Panchayats in eight States. Many States 
have not utilised the earmarked funds due to various reasons. The Committee are 
unhappy to find that Panchaya
ts in most of the States have not been equipped with 
requisite level of computerisation. The Committee further observe that the Government 
have been proposing broad
-
band connectivity to Panchayats across the country. The 
Committee note that the Ministry ha
s submitted a proposal to Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy for electrification of un
-
electrified panchayats using solar energy. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that status report of computerisation of Panchayats be 
furnished to the Committee at the earl
iest. They further recommend that the Ministry 
expedite electrification of all un
-
electrified Panchayats in a time bound manner and 
apprise the Committee in due course. In the meanwhile till all villages are electrified, 

offline versions of PES application
s, which are stated to be in various stages of 
development, may be used for ensuring transparency in the functioning of Panchayats.
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
        
Considering the need to provide training to a large number of Elected Panchayat 
Represen
tatives & Panchayat Functionaries, support to States for appropriate SATCOM 
was under consideration in 2015
-
16 but due to techno
-
economic reasons of 2
-
way 
interactive terminals at District and Block level this could not be finalized. The 
discussions were c
ontinued in 2016
-
17 with Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) for establishing video connectivity through terrestrial network and 
also with Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applications and Geoinformatics (BISAG), 
Gujarat and Doorda
rshan for exploring economically feasible training medium and for   
telecasting informative programmes relating to Panchayati Raj over a free
-
to
-
air Direct
-
To
-
Home (DTH) channel. Based on these discussions, it emerged that there would be a 
need for technic
al support up to Block level to maintain the equipment procured for 
SATCOM facilities, as envisaged by ISRO and Doordarshan could provide viable 
solutions.  
 
       
 
As per information available with the Ministry, about 1.36 lakh Panchayats have 
computers 
and the level of their usage of software applications varies significantly 
across Panchayats in the country, based on their level of preparedness. Furthermore, 
the Department of Telecommunications has now embarked on the ambitious BharatNet 
programme with 
great earnest and plans to provide broadband connectivity to 1.5 lakh 
GPs by March, 2018.
 
 
The electrification of Panchayats is covered under the Deendayal Upadhyaya 
Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) scheme of Ministry of Power, Government of India. Rural 
Electrification Corporation (REC) is facilitating availability of electricity for rural and 
semi
-
u
rban population for accelerated growth and for enrichment of quality of life. As 
per reports of REC, out of 597,464 Census villages, 590,028 villages have been 
electrified till now and rest are under process. The previously envisaged partnership 
with 
Minis
try of New and Renewable Energy
 
did not solicit any interest/demand from the 
States, despite follow
-
up by the Ministry.
 

 
To overcome the unavailability of power and internet, the affected Panchayats 
are generally visiting the nearby electrified and interne
t
-
equipped Panchayats for their 
data entry needs. Certain offline features have also been enabled in the PES 
applications to bridge this gap.
 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of the Chapter
-
I)
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.
7)
 
 
Award of Grants by Fourteenth Finance Commission
 
 
 
The Committee had noted that as per the Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC) 
award, grants will go to Gram Panchayats, which are directly responsible for basic 
services without any share for other levels i.e. Block and District Panchayats within 
fifteen day
s failing which the State has to give interest to the Gram Panchayats. This 
money can be spent by Gram Panchayats only for basic services which have been 
defined by the Fourteenth Finance Commission like water supply, sanitation, street 
lights, roads, buri
al grounds and crematorium, etc. The Committee were dismayed to 
observe that the FFC award has created pitiable situation for the Block and District 
Panchayats. As far as State Finance Commissions (SFCs) are concerned the 
Committee noted that out of 29 Sta
tes, only 6 States namely Assam, Himachal 
Pradesh, Kerala, Odisha, Rajasthan and Sikkim had furnished details of submission and 
acceptance of the recommendations made by their SFCs. Keeping in view, the 
Committee expressed apprehension as to how the financ
ial needs of Block and District 
Panchayats women be met. The Committee, therefore, recommended that MoPR help 
expedite timely allocation of funds by the States Finance Commission to Panchayats 
and a concrete schedule be made with proper monitoring for such
 
allocations. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in the Action Taken note has stated that 
Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC) has recommended grants only to Gram 
Panchayats constituted under Part IX of the Constitution
 
as they are directly 
responsible for delivery of basic services without any share for other levels. The 

Government has accepted the recommendations of the FFC and funds are being 
released as per the recommendations.
 
 
 
It has also been stated that The Finan
ce Commission have, 
inter
-
alia
, also 
observed that the State Governments are expected to take care of the needs of the 
Taluk and Zila Panchayats and it is incumbent upon the State Governments to utilize 
the enhanced fiscal space made available to the State
s by the FFC on account of 
higher devolution from 32% to 42% of the Centre’s net tax receipts. 
 
 
 
The Ministry has further stated that the Secretary, Panchayati Raj on July 31, 
2015 has also written to the Chief Secretary of all State Government suggesting
 
measures so that the States could take to devolve funds to the two left out tiers of 
Intermediate and District level Panchayats. 
 
 
Being not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry, the Committee decided to take 
evidence of the representatives of NITI 
Aayog. 
 
NITI Aayog in the written document furnished to the Committee stated that one of 
the terms of reference of Fourteenth Finance Commission was to make 
recommendations on the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a 
State on the basis of 
the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of the 
State. The Commission submitted its Report in December, 2014. The FFC has worked 
out the total size of the grant to be Rs. 2,87,436 crore for the period 2015
-
20, 
constituting an assistance of Rs.488
 
per capita per annum at an aggregate level for the 
local bodies to carry out their duties of providing basic services. Of this, the grant 
recommended to Panchayats is Rs.2,00,292.2 crore and that to municipalities is 
Rs.87,143.8 crore. These local bodies 
grants are released by the Ministry of Finance on 
the recommendations of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to the concerned State 
Governments for redistribution of resources at lower levels of Panchayats. 
 
NITI Aayog in the written views has also stated that 
the constitution of the State 
Finance Commission is a State subject and FFC has not given clear cut instructions as 
regards flow of FFC funds to Block and District Panchayats. As the issue has not been 
addressed by the Fourteenth Finance Commission, this i
ssue has to be flagged by the 

Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the States in their deposition before the Fifteenth 
Finance Commission. In the meantime, the States would have to ensure that the 
recommendations of the State Finance Commissions in this regard a
re implemented. 
 
When asked about the views of NITI Aayog on the issue, CEO, NITI Aayog 
during the course of oral evidence stated that NITI Aayog is clearly of the view that 
allocations should also be made for middle level Panchayats.  
 
 
 
Comments of the C
ommittee
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 and 1.21 of the Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observation/
Recommendation (Para No.11)                      
 
 
Audit and Accountability of Panchayati Raj Institutions
 
 
The Committee note
 
that over the time the thrust of successive Governments has 
been to strengthen the Panchayati Raj Institutions, the very edifice of our democracy by 
devolving more powers and funds to them. The Committee note that though some 
States Governments/Legislatur
es have made provision for monitoring the works done 
by the PRIs, the system of audit and accountability of PRIs remains far from 
satisfactory. The Committee recommend that the whole system of monitoring, audit and 
accountability of the PRIs be revisited a
nd strong audit and accountability mechanism 
be put in place. Further, the Committee may also be apprised of the guidelines so 
evolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 

 
To facilitate simplifying and improving the system of basic accounts keeping in 
Panchayat
s, MoPR had assigned the work of preparation of State/UT (except Delhi)
-
specific budget, accounts and audit manuals for Panchayats to Institute of Public 
Auditors of India (IPAI). The draft Manuals prepared by IPAI have been forwarded by 
IPAI to all 35 Sta
tes/UTs (except Delhi) for adoption in their legal framework. So far five 
States namely, Maharashtra, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka and Punjab have 
adopted the Manuals.
 
 


 
Under 
Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC) for the award period 2015
-
20, grants
 
to 
the tune of Rs. 2,00,292.20 crore for the period from 2015 to 2020 are being devolved to 
Gram Panchayats constituted under Part IX of the Constitution ,amounting to an 
assistance of Rs. 488 per capita per annum at an aggregate level
 
for 26 States for 
d
elivering basic services, creation of reliable data base of local bodies’ receipts & 
expenditure through audited accounts and for improvement of own source revenue of 
the Gram Panchayats.
  
90 percent of the Grants are the Basic Grants and 10 percent 
will b
e Performance Grant (applicable from 2016
-
17). The Commission has 
recommended grants for Gram Panchayats as they are directly responsible for delivery 
of basic services without any share for other levels.
 
 

 
Performance grants are designed to serve the purpo
se of ensuring reliable audited 
accounts and data of receipt and expenditure and improvement in own revenues and 
are
 
based on submission of audited annual accounts and increase in own revenues by 
the GPs. No additional conditions need to be imposed by GOI 
or State Govts. 
 

 
The FFC has followed a trust based approach towards the local bodies as institutions of 
local self
-
governance while awarding the grants. 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) guidelines 
dated 08.10.2015 for implementation of FFC recommendations for lo
cal bodies enjoin 
upon States to constitute a High Level Monitoring Committee (HLMC) headed by Chief 
Secretary for monitoring and concurrent evaluation of local bodies. Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has constituted a Coordination Committee headed by Se
cretary, 
Panchayati Raj to inter
-
alia guide and support States and local bodies in the 
implementation of FFC recommendations, monitor progress of expenditure of grants by 
local bodies and suggest remedial measures as per the MoF Guidelines. State 
Governmen
ts are also mandated to put in place third party audit mechanism. 
 
 

 
MoPR has developed Panchayat Enterprise Suite (PES) constituting 11 common core 
applications which cover the entire gamut of core governance functions of Panchayats. 
These application 
together foster transparency and accountability in the functioning of 
Panchayats.
 
 
 


 
Online Dashboard has been provisioned under the PlanPlus Application to facilitate 
better monitoring of release of the FFC funds to Gram Panchayats and to track sector 
wise
 
expenditure incurred by the Gram Panchayats. Rashtriya Gram Anudaan Evam 
Vikas (RAGAV) mobile application has also been developed for above said purpose.
 
 

 
So far eight States for FY 2015
-
16 namely, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Sikkim, 
Tamil Nadu, 
Tripura, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh and three States namely, Gujarat, 
Jharkhand and Uttarakhand for FY 2016
-
17 have started uploading Sector
-
wise 
expenditure on the Dashboard. States of Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Maharashtra, Sikkim, Tela
ngana & Uttar Pradesh for FY 2015
-
16 and Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttarakhand 
and Uttar Pradesh have also started  uploading the GP
-
wise detail on the Dashboard
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
 
 
(P
lease see Para No. 1.24 of the Chapter
-
I)
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER
-
V
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
NIL
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI
;
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
          
DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
 
17 
NOVEMBER, 2017
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
CHAIRPERSON,
 
26 KARTIKA
, 1939 (SAKA)
 
 
 
         
           
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annex
-
I
 
Views of States about “Timely Conduct of Election” in Panchayats (Para 1 of the Estimates 
Committee)
 
Sl.
 
 
 
No
 
Name of 
State/UT
 
Ensure the Panchayat 
election process as laid 
down in the Constitution 
of India 
 
Ensure the functioning 
of State Election 
Commission (SEC) in 
the spirit and letter of 
the Article 243K of the 
Constitution of India 
 
To provide legislative 
provisions of the 
S
tate/UT about 
disqualifications for 
members of Panchayats 
 
1
 
Rajasthan
 
The Panchayat Election 
process is as per the 
provisions of Constitution 
of India. In the State of 
Rajasthan Panchayat 
elections are held after 5 
years.
 
 
 
The State Election 
Commission (SEC) is 
functioning as per the 
spirit of Constitution of 
India 
 
Disqualifications for 
membership of Panchayats 
have been categorically 
defined in the Section 19 
of Rajasthan Panchayati 
Raj Act. 1994. Among 
other disqualificat
ion 
criteria, 
the following 
educational criteria have 
been provisioned: 
 
Provided (i) in case of a 
member of Zilla Parishad 
or a Panchayat Samiti, 
has not passed secondary 
school examination of the 
Board of Secondary 
Education, Rajasthan or 
of an equivalen
t Board;
 
(ii) in case of a Sarpanch 
of a Panchayat in a 
Scheduled Area has not 
passed Class V from a 
School and 
 
(iii) in case of a Sarpanch 
of a Panchayat other than 
in a Scheduled Area has 
not passed class VIII from 
a School. 
 
 
 
 
 

Sl.
 
 
 
No
 
Name of 
State/UT
 
Ensure the Panchayat 
election process as 
laid down in the 
Constitution of India 
 
Ensure the functioning of State 
Election Commission (SEC) in 
the spirit and letter of the 
Article 243K of the Constitution 
of India 
 
To provide legislative 
provisions
 
of the 
State/UT about 
disqualifications for 
members of Panchayats 
 
2
 
Karnataka 
 
Karnataka State is 
conducting the 
election from time to 
time to PRIs through 
the State Election 
Commission as per the 
rules.
 
The State Election Commission is 
working 
independently in the 
spirit of Article 243K of the 
Constitution of India.
 
Provision for 
disqualification for the 
PRI members is provided 
in Karnataka Gram 
Swaraj &
 
 
Panchayat
 
 
Raj 
Act under Section 43A 
(for Gram Panchayat 
members), Section 136 
(For Taluku 
Panchayats 
members) to disqualify 
from Membership of 
Panchayats. 
However, as 
per the Act, no 
educational criteria 
have been provisioned.
 
3
 
Himachal Pradesh 
In this State, elections 
to the Panchayati Raj 
Institutions are 
conducted within the 
stipulated 
period of 
five years in 
accordance with the 
provisions laid down in 
the Constitution of 
India.
 
The State Elections is functioning 
in this State in the spirit and letter 
of the article 243K of the 
Constitution of India 
 
There already exist the 
provisions for 
disqualification for the 
HP Panchayati Raj, 1994. 
However, as per the Act, 
no educational criteria 
have been provisioned
.
 
4.
 
Tripura
 
As per the provision of 
the 73
rd
 
Amendment of 
the Constitution of the 
Tripura Panchayats 
Act, 1993 has been 
enacted. As per Act 
elections are being 
held regularly in 
Tripura. 1
st 
Election 
was held in 1994 
thereafter in 199, 2004, 
2009 and 2014. Next 
Election will be in 
2019.
 
In Tripura S
tate Election 
Commission is functioning 
properly. Election Commission is 
being appointed under sub section 
(4) of section 76 of the Tripura 
Panchayat Act, 1993. Regular 
Elections are being conducted by 
the State election Commission 
under this proper superi
ntendence, 
direction and control. Separate 
rule has also been framed by the 
Government in this regard style as 
Tripura Panchayats (Constitution 
of State Panchayat Election 
Commission) Rules, 1993.
 
Sub section (1) of the 
Section 15 of the Tripura 
Panchayats
 
Act, 1993 
provides general 
disqualification for 
membership of gram 
panchayat and sub section 
(1) of section 16 of the 
Tripura Panchayats Act, 
1993 provides 
disqualification on the 
ground on defecation. 
However, as per the Act, 
no educational criteria 
have
 
been provisioned.
 
 
 
 
 

Sl.
 
 
 
No
 
Name of 
State/UT
 
Ensure the Panchayat 
election process as 
laid down in the 
Constitution of India 
 
Ensure the functioning of State 
Election Commission (SEC) in 
the spirit and letter of the 
Article 243K of the Constitution 
of India 
 
To provide legislative 
provisions of the 
State/UT about 
disqualifications for 
members of Panchayats 
 
5
 
UT of Dadra 
and Nag
ar 
Haveli 
 
In the
 
 
UT of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli, 
Panchayat Election 
process is carried out 
as laid down in the 
Constitution of India 
 
Not application as UT of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli is without 
Legislature 
 
Disqualification criteria 
have been provisioned in 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
Panchayat Rules 2014. 
However, as per rule, no 
educational criteria have 
been provisioned
.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sikkim
 
The preparations for 
2017 Panchayat 
Elections are being 
done in accordance to 
section 103 of the 
Sikkim Panchayat 
(amendment) Act 
2007. 
 
 
There is no such 
educational qualification 
required for contesting 
Panchayat Election in 
the State of Sikkim
. 
However, candidates 
aspiring to contest 
Panchayat Election are to 
own and use sanitary 
toilets vide sec 16 of 
Sikkim Panchayat Act 
1993. 
 
 
 
Odisha
 
The State Election 
Commission have 
issued Notification on 
27
th 
December 2016 
for election of PRI 
represent
atives in 
respect of Zilla 
parishads, Panchayats 
Samitis and Gram 
Panchayats on 
13/15/17/19/21 feb 
2017. 
 
The model code of 
conduct in the state 
with effect from 
27.12.2016 till 
21.2.2017 notified by 
the State Election 
Commission, Odisha. 
 
 
 
Section11 and 25 of OGP 
Act 1964, Section 45 of 
Odisha Panchayat Samiti 
Act 1959 and Section 33 
of OGP Act
 
 
1991
 
provide the qualification 
and disqualification for 
membership in the Gram 
Panchayat, Panchayat 
Samitis and Zilla 
Parishads respectively. 
However, as per the Act, 
no educational criteria 
have been provisioned
.
 

The State Elect
ion 
Commission have 
already conducted 
conference of 
collectors and SPs to 
impress upon them for 
smooth conduct of 
election and 
maintenance of law 
and order.Nomination 
of PRI members has 
already completed. 
Observes have been 
appointed in respect of 
all the 
districts to 
supervise the process 
of election.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annex
-
II
 
 
States/UTS 
position on Constitution Amendments Bill to Amend Article 243 D
 
Sl 
No.
 
State/UT
 
50% reservation for Women in seats/offices of 
chairpersons
 
Provision already 
exists
 
Agreed/ Not Agreed
 
1
 
Andhra Pradesh 
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
2
 
Arunachal Pradesh
 
-
 
Not agreed
 
3
 
Chhattisgarh 
 
Yes
 
Agreed
 
4
 
Gujarat
 
Yes 
 
No comments
 
5
 
Himachal Pradesh
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
6
 
Jharkhand
 
Yes
 
Agreed
 
7
 
Karnataka
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
8
 
Kerala 
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
9
 
Maharashtra
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
10
 
Odisha
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
11
 
Punjab
 
-
 
No comments
 
12
 
Rajasthan
 
Yes
 
Agreed
 
13
 
Sikkim
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
14
 
Tripura
 
Yes
 
Agreed
 
15
 
Uttarakhand
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
16
 
West Bengal
 
Yes
 
Agreed
 
17
 
Puducherry
 
-
 
Agreed
 
18
 
Madhya Pradesh
 
Yes
 
Agreed
 
19
 
Manipur
 
No comments
 
Agreed
 
20
 
Assam
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
21
 
Bihar
 
Yes 
 
Agreed
 
22
 
Goa 
 
No comments
 
Agreed
 
23
 
Tamil Nadu
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
24
 
Telangana
 
Yes
 
No comments
 

Annex
-
III
 
States/UTs position on Constitution Amendment Bill to Amend Article 243D
 
Sl No.
 
State/UT
 
Rotation of seats/ offices of chairpersons after a 
minimum of two terms
 
Provision already 
exists
 
Agreed/ Not Agreed
 
1
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
 
 
-
 
Agreed
 
2
 
Arunachal Pradesh
 
-
 
No comments
 
3
 
Chhattisgarh 
 
Yes
 
Agreed
 
4
 
Gujarat
 
-
 
No comments
 
5
 
Himachal Pradesh
 
Yes
 
Agreed
 
6
 
Jharkhand
 
-
 
No comments
 
7
 
Karnataka 
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
8
 
Kerala 
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
9
 
Maharashtra
 
-
 
Not agreed
 
10
 
Odisha
 
Yes
 
No comments
 
11
 
Punjab
 
-
 
Agreed
 
12
 
Rajasthan
 
-
 
Agreed
 
13
 
Sikkim
 
-
 
Agreed
 
14
 
Tripura
 
-
 
Agreed
 
15
 
Uttarakhand
 
-
 
Not Agreed
 
16
 
West Bengal
 
-
 
Not Agreed
 
17
 
Puducherry
 
-
 
Not Agreed
 
18
 
Madhya Pradesh
 
-
 
No comments
 
19
 
Manipur
 
No comments
 
Agreed
 
20
 
Assam
 
No
 
No comments
 
21
 
Bihar
 
Yes
 
Not Agreed
 
22
 
Goa 
 
No comments
 
Agreed
 
 
 
 
 

Annex
-
IV
 
Views of States about rotation of reserved seats in PRIs in the light of demographic 
composition of concerned Panchayat Areas (Para 3 of the Estimates Committee)
 
 
Sl.
 
No
 
Name of 
State/UT
 
Whether rotation 
rule is applicable 
to all seats 
irrespective of 
density of 
population of 
respective 
reserved 
categories in a 
Panchayat area 
i.e, whether 
a 
minimum 
percentage/propor
tion of population 
of respective 
category has been 
fixed
 
(i)
 
In case reply to 
(i) is in the 
negative, please 
clarify how 
reservation of 
seats by way of 
rotation may be 
practically 
enforced in a 
Panchayat Area 
having 
insignificant
 
or 
no population 
belonging to a 
particular 
reserved 
category
 
(ii)
 
Difficulties 
faced in 
implementation 
of the existing 
provisions for 
rotation of 
reserved seats 
and how they 
have been 
addressed/ 
overcome
 
(iii)
 
Best practices 
followed in the 
matter
 
(iv)
 
Ac
tionable 
suggestions of 
the State 
Government/ 
UT 
Administration 
in the light of 
recommendatio
ns of the 
Estimates 
Committee
 
(v)
 
1
 
Andhra 
Pradesh
 
As per Sections 
9,15,152,153,180,
181 and 242 D of 
the APPR Act 
1994 and Andhra 
Pradesh 
Panchayat Raj 
(Reservation of 
Seats and offices 
of Gram 
Panchayats, 
Mandal Parishads 
and Zilla 
Parishads, 2006) 
as amended from 
time to time, 
reservations of 
seats (Memb
ers) 
and officers 
(Chairpersons) in 
Panchayat Raj 
Bodies for ST, 
SC, BC and 
women and also 
rotation of 
Does not arise
 
Rotation of 
reserved seats is 
being followed 
as per the 
existing 
provisions 
without any 
difficulty.
 
Does not arise
 
Does not arise
 

reserved seats and 
offices among 
different 
constituencies and 
Panchayats 
respectively for 
every five years is 
being 
implemented in 
Andhra Pradesh 
(extrac
ts of the 
Act and Rules 
enclosed)
 
2
 
Karnataka
 
Yes. The 
Reservation has 
been fixed as per 
the principle of 
rotation & it has 
to be proportion 
to the population 
of different 
category in the 
state. Provision is 
provided that 
alteast I seat each 
shell be reserved 
in Zilla 
Panchayat/Taluk 
Panchayat/ 
Grama 
Panchayat. 
Annexure
-
A
 
Does not arise 
as replyed to Q
-
1.
 
No s
uch 
difficulties have 
been arrived. 
However if any 
such problem is 
arrived, the 
Court direction 
will be 
Implemented 
(Annexure
-
B).
 
In Karnataka, 
the period of 
reservation for 
the all the 
three tier (PRI) 
is fixed for ten 
year (two 
periods).(Anne
xure
-
C)
 
 
3
 
Maharashtra
 
Yes, Maharashtra 
Zilla Parishad 
and Panchayat 
Samitis (Manner 
of Rotation of 
Reservation of 
Seats) Rules, 
1996 and the 
Maharashtra 
Village 
Panchayats 
(Number of 
Members, 
Divisions in 
towards and 
Reservation of 
Not applicable 
 
While rotating 
the reserved 
seats the 
boundaries of 
wads and 
population of 
the said wad has 
been taken in to 
consideration. 
So there is no 
any difficulty in 
implementation.
 
While 
rotating 
the reserved 
seats the above 
practices is 
best practice.
 
Nil
 

Seats) Rules, 
1996 are 
applicable 
for the 
reservation and 
rotation of seats. 
(Copy attached)
 
4
 
Telangana
 
Yes 
 
Does not arise
 
-
Nil
-
 
-
Nil
-
 
No suggestion
 
5
 
Punjab
 
Yes. However 
one seat is 
reserved for 
backward classes 
in Panchayat at 
village, block and 
district level in 
case 
population is 
not less than 20% 
of the total 
population of the 
Panchayat area.
 
Not applicable
 
No difficulty
 
Rotation of 
reserved seats 
is being made 
as per Act and 
Rules
 
No suggestion
 
6
 
Himachal 
Pradesh
 
Yes please. The 
reservation is 
made in 
proportion to
 
the 
population of SC 
and ST
 
In view of the 
position 
indicated at 
Column (i), no 
comments
 
As per the 
existing 
provisions of the 
Act and Rules, 
the reservation 
of to the 
category of SC 
and ST is made 
in proportion to 
the population 
of these 
categories. 
When the 
reservation to 
the seat for the 
above categories 
is made for the 
first time in the 
co
nstituency/wa
rd, the seat goes 
to the 
ward/constituen
cy where the 
population of 
the SC or ST is 
on the higher 
side. But when 
the rotations of 
the reserved 
The provisions 
for the 
reservations of 
the seats and 
rotation of the 
reserved seats 
as per the
 
provisions of 
the HP PR Act 
and Rules are 
followed 
strictly after 
every five year 
for conducting 
the election of 
the PRIs
 
It is suggested 
that the 
rotation of the 
seats for the 
SC and ST is 
done after 
every 
delimitations 
of ward on the 
basis of the 
census
 
population 
instead of after 
five years as is 
also done in 
case of the 
reservations to 
the MPs and 
MLAs
 

seats is made 
further in the 
next election 
such seats are 
reserved for the 
ward/constituen
cies having
 
the 
lowest 
percentage of 
the SC and ST 
due to the 
provision of 
rotation of seats 
after every 
election. As 
such the 
ward/constituen
cy where the 
population of 
the SC and ST is 
higher get open. 
In this regard, it 
is submitted that 
the delimitation 
of 
ward/co
nstituen
cy of PRIs is 
done after every 
five years. 
Therefore 
instead of 
determining the 
reservations 
through rotation 
to these 
categories every 
five years, it 
would be 
appropriate that 
reservation be 
rotated to these 
categories after 
every 
delimitations of
 
wards 
constituency in 
view of the 
census 

populations so 
that the seats 
where the 
population of 
SC and ST is 
higher get 
reserved as in 
the case of the 
MP and MLA
 
7
 
UT of 
Chandigarh
 
Yes in respect of 
Schedule Castes 
and Women 
categories 
because the 
figures of Census 
of India in respect 
pf Chandigarh do 
not carry the 
population figures 
of Scheduled 
Tribes and 
Backward 
Classes. 
 
Not commented 
in view of reply 
to (i) above
 
Constraint is 
felt 
at the time of 
reservation of 
seats for SC 
category, when 
a relevant 
Panchayat 
Constituencies 
carries quite low 
population of 
SC category. 
Therefore, from 
the very 
inception of the 
Punjab 
Panchayati Raj 
Act 1994 1994 
in U.T., 
Chandigarh, the 
reservati
on of 
seats for SC 
category was 
fixed in the 
Panchayat 
constituencies 
carrying largest 
SC population , 
the next lower 
taken in the 
second election 
and so on and so 
forth
 
In U.T., 
Chandigarh, 
there is only 
one Block 
Panchayat and 
one District 
Panchayat. The
 
offices of 
Chairperson 
and Vice
-
Chairperson in 
both the 
Panchayats 
carry the 
provision of 
reservation for 
SC and women 
category. In 
order to 
overcome the 
constraints 
faced in 
reservation for 
SC and women 
category, all 
the 4 offices of 
BP and DP are 
taken 
together. 
Since about 33 
1/3 reservation 
is to be 
provided for 
women 
category and 
about 15% to 
SC category in 
U.T., 
Chandigarh, 
the one office 
The contents of 
reply to (iv) 
may be 
considered as a 
practical 
suggestion in 
the matter of 
rotation of 
reservation of 
seats in the 
Panchayats
 

in DP and one 
in BP is 
reserved for 
SC and women 
category in 
every General 
Election. The 
reservation is 
rotated i
n the 
next General 
Elections.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annex
-
V
 
Status of provisions for direct/indirect elections of Chairperson of 
Gram Panchayat
 
 
S. No.
 
State/UT
 
Direct/Indirect
 
1.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands
 
 
2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
Direct
 
3.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arunachal Pradesh
 
Indirect
 
4.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assam
 
Direct
 
5.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bihar
 
Direct
 
6.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chattisgarh
 
Direct
 
7.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Goa
 
Indirect
 
8.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gujarat
 
Direct
 
9.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Haryana
 
Direct
 
10.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Himachal Pradesh
 
Direct
 
11.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J&K
 
Direct
 
12.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jharkhand
 
Direct
 
13.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Karnataka
 
Indirect 
 
14.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kerala
 
Indirect
 
15.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Madhya Pradesh
 
Direct
 
16.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maharashtra
 
 
17.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Manipur
 
Direct
 
18.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Orissa
 
Direct
 
19.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Punjab
 
Direct
 
20.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajasthan
 
Direct
 
21.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sikkim
 
Indirect
 
22.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tamil Nadu 
 
Direct
 
23.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Telangana
 
Direct
 
24.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tripura
 
Direct
 
25.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uttar Pradesh
 
Direct
 
26.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uttarakhand
 
Direct
 
27.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
West Bengal
 
Direct
 
28.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daman & Diu
 
Indirect
 
29.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Puducherry 
 
 
30.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lakshadweep
 
Indirect
 
31.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chandigarh
 
Direct
 
32.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli
 
 
 
 
 

Annex
-
VI
 
Views of States about need for direct election to posts of Chairpersons of Block and District 
Panchayats (Para 4 of the Estimates Committee)
 
Sl. 
No
 
Name of 
State/UT
 
Merits/demerits of 
holding direct 
elections to posts of 
Chairpersons of 
Block Panchayats 
and District 
Panchayats
 
(i)
 
Whether in favour 
of Constitutional 
Amendment in the 
Article 243C(5)(b) 
to make direct 
election to posts of 
Chairpersons in 
Block Panchayats 
and District 
Panchayats, 
mandatory
 
(ii)
 
If not in favour of 
the Constitutional 
Amendment for 
direct election to 
posts of 
Chairperson of 
Block Panchayats 
and District 
Panchayats, the 
precise reason for 
the same
 
(iii)
 
Relevant 
prevailing 
Sections of the 
State Panchayati 
Raj Act/Rule
s as 
to the election to 
the posts of 
Chairperson of 
Block 
Panchayats and 
District 
Panchayats
 
(iv)
 
1
 
Bihar
 
The basic rural 
development schemes 
are implemented at 
the Gram Panchayat 
level. The 
Chairperson of the 
Gram Pnchayat is 
directly elected by the 
voters. However, the 
Panchayat Samiti 
(Intermediate level) 
and Zila Parishad 
(District Panchayats) 
have been en
trusted 
only with limited 
responsibility in rural 
development and they 
are mostly, of 
regulatory nature. The 
Chairperson of these 
bodies are not directly 
responsible to the 
people. In these 
circumstances for 
these posts direct 
election by the people 
has no
 
relevance. 
Furthermore on an 
average there are 2 to 
As per the 
clarification made 
under Column I the 
State
 
Government 
is not in a favour of 
Constitutional 
Amendment in the 
Article 243C(5)(b) 
to make direct 
election to posts of 
Chairpersons in 
Block Panchayats 
and District 
Panchayats 
mandatory
.
 
As per reasons 
given under 
Column I.
 
Section’s 40 and 
67 of Bihar 
Panchayat Raj 
Act, 2006 provide 
for indirect 
election to 
Chairpersons of 
BP and ZP.
 

3 blocks in a 
Legislative Assembly 
constituency and the 
whole district 
generally constitute a 
Parliamentary 
constituency. In such 
a scenario the direct 
election to these post 
may trigger an 
unhealthy com
petition 
for one
-
upmanship 
among these 
representatives and 
the MLAs/MPs, 
which may become a 
stumbling block in the 
development work of 
the district. There is 
also the practical 
problem of managing 
so many different 
types of ballots, 
totalling eight (8) in 
numbers, in case of 
direct elections to 
these posts. Lastly 
there is no guarantee 
that direct elections 
will curtail muscle 
and money power as 
direct elections are no 
remedy for electoral 
corruption.
 
 
 
2
 
Himachal 
Pradesh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 
holding of the indirect 
election of the 
Chairpersons of 
Panchayat Samiti and 
Zila Parishads 
provides the 
opportunity to the 
elected members from 
the different 
constituencies to elect 
one of the 
Chairpersons amongst 
In view of the 
position mentioned 
in Column I, it will 
not be appropriate 
to favour the direct 
election to the posts 
of Chairpersons of 
Panchayat Samitis 
and Zila Parishads. 
However, the 
matter is to be 
decided at the 
hig
her level
.
 
As has been 
mentioned at 
Column I that no 
problem has been 
reported for 
conducting the 
indirect election of 
the Chairpersons 
of Zila Parishads 
and Panchayat 
Samitis. Moreover, 
direct election will 
require lot of man 
The relevant 
provisions of the 
Act and Rules 
provide for 
indirect elections 
to Chairpersons 
of IP and ZP.
 

themselves.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hol
ding of the direct 
elections will require 
lot of man power to 
conduct the elections 
to the Chairpersons 
and election of the 
Vice Chairpersons 
will also have to be 
conducted directly, 
thus there will be lot 
of requirement for 
election machinery, 
besides fin
ancial 
resources.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Already, there is 
direct election of the 
Pradhan, UP
-
Pradhan, 
members of Gram 
Panchayats, 
Panchayat Samiti and 
Zila Parishads as such 
also there will be 
requirement of 
additional election 
machinery/material 
for conduc
ting the 
direct election of the 
Chairpersons of the 
Zila Parishad.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presentl
y, there is not any 
problem reported in 
conducting the 
indirect election of 
the Chairpersons of 
Panchayat Samitis 
and Zila Parishads.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Besides 
above direct elections 
of Chairpersons of 
Zila Parishads and 
Panchayat Samitis 
will create 
complications in No 
Confidence Motion if 
power and 
financial 
resources
.
 

these office bearer do 
not perform as per 
wishes of the people. 
The role of the Zila 
Parishad and 
Panchayat Samiti 
M
embers would be 
almost negligible.
 
3
 
Punjab
 
Existing system of 
indirect election is 
more democratic 
because the 
Chairpersons remains
 
answerable to other 
members of the Block 
Panchayat (Panchayat 
Samiti) and District 
Panchayats (Zila 
Parishad)
.
 
No. The present 
system of direct 
elections is working 
well
.
 
The present system 
of direct elections 
to the posts of 
chairpersons of 
Panchayat 
Samitis 
and Zila Parishads 
is working well 
and the Panchayat 
Samitis and Zila 
Parishads are also 
working efficiently 
and lawfully.
 
Relevant 
provisions of the 
Punjab 
Panchayati Raj 
Act 1994 provide 
for indirect 
election to posts 
of Chairpersons 
in BP and DP
.
 
4
 
Jharkhand
 
Direct election for the 
post of Chairpersons 
of Block Panchayat 
and District 
Panchayat will reduce 
corruption in election 
process. Whereas 
Constituencies of the 
Block Panchayat and 
District Panchayat 
might become bigger 
than MLA and MPs 
Constituencies. Direct 
Election for the post 
of Chairpersons of 
Block Panchayat and 
District Panchayat 
will be better in the 
interest of Grass Root 
Democracy.
 
Yes
 
As stated above.
 
Section 39 of 
Jharkhand 
Panchayat Raj 
Act, 2001 deals 
with election of 
Pramukh and UP
-
Pramukh/Block 
Panchayat which 
is as under:
-
 
“The prescribed 
Authority as soon 
as practicable 
after election of 
members of the 
Panchayat Samiti, 
shall convene a 
meeting of 
elected and 
nominated 
members of the 
Panchayat Samiti 
to elect a 
Pramu
kh and an 
UP
-
Pramukh”
 
Section 54 of 
Jharkhand 

Panchayat Raj 
Act, 2001 deals 
with election of 
Adhyaksha and 
Upadhyaksha Zila 
Parishad/District 
Panchayats which 
is as under:
-
 
“The prescribed 
Authority as soon 
as possible after 
the election of the 
members of 
the 
Zila Parishad 
shall convene a 
meeting of the 
elected and 
nominated 
members of the 
Parishad to elect 
its Adhyaksha 
and 
Upadhyaksha”
 
5
 
Chandigarh 
(UT)
 
i)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chairper
son of the Block 
Panchayats or District 
Panchayats shall be 
directly 
responsible to 
the electorate and it 
will work as easy 
access of the voter to 
the Chairperson.
 
ii)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reductio
n in horse
-
trading, 
role/money and 
muscle power.
 
iii)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reductio
n in the number of 
incident of No 
Confidence Motion 
again
st the 
Chairperson of Block 
Panchayats or District 
Panchayats.
 
iv)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 
tenure of Chairperson 
of Block Panchayat 
Yes, in
 
favour of 
Constitutional 
Amendment of 
Article 243C(5)(b) 
to make direct 
election to 
Chairpersons in 
Block and District 
Panchayats, 
mandatory
.
 
No, in view of 
reasons/position 
indicated at 
Column I.
 
The relevant 
provisions of 
Punjab 
Panchayati Raj 
Act, 1994
 
(as 
applicable to 
U.T., Chandigarh) 
and the 
Chandigarh 
Panchayat 
Election Rules 
1994 provide for 
indirect election 
of Chairpersons 
of ZP and IP.
 

and District 
Panchayat starts from 
the date of first 
meeting of the 
concerned Panchayat, 
which is called and 
presided over by the 
Chairperson. It has 
been noted that after 
their election as 
Chairperson by 
indirect election, the 
Chairpersons take 
months together in 
calling the first 
meeting of Block 
Panchayat and 
District Panchayat 
and delay and 
bottlenecks are faced 
in the next elect
ion of 
the Block Panchayat 
and District 
Panchayat. Thus the 
direct election of 
Chairperson of Block 
Panchayat and 
District Panchayat 
will smoothen the 
election process also 
which will lead to 
strengthen the 
democratic setup at 
the grass
-
root level.
 
6
 
Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands (UT)
 
Merits of holding 
direct election
 
a)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This will 
remove personal 
influences and 
indifferent opinion of 
the Members elected 
by direct election 
among whom the 
Chairperson is elected 
that is by indirect 
election. Panchayati 
Raj Department of 
Andaman & Nicobar 
Yes, this UT 
administration is in 
favour of 
Constitutional 
Amendment in the 
Article 
243(C)(5)(b) to 
make direct 
election to the posts 
of Chairpersons in 
Block Panchayats 
and District 
Panchayats 
mandatory
.
 
Since this UT 
administration is in 
favour of 
Co
nstitutional 
Amenment in the 
Article 243(C)(b) 
to make direct 
election to the 
posts of 
Chairpersons in 
Block Panchayats 
and District 
Panchayats 
mandatory, point 
For Block 
Panchayat
-
 
Section 112 of 
A&N Islands 
(Panchayats) 
Regul
ation, 1994, 
and
 
For District 
Panchayat
-
 
Section 150 of the 
A&N Islands 
(Panchayats) 
Regulation, 1994, 

Islands 
Administrat
ion is 
repeatedly receiving 
suggestions from the 
PRI members for 
‘hand raising’/ ‘hand 
showing’ instead of 
using ballot boxes for 
the election of 
Chairpersons of 
District Panchayats 
(Zilla Parishad) and 
Block Panchayats 
(Panchayat Samiti). 
The demand of PR
I 
members will 
automatically be 
resolved with the 
procedure of direct 
election.
 
b)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This will 
take away money and 
muscle power of the 
members participate 
in the indirect 
election.
 
c)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 
tenure of the 
Chairpersons of Block 
Panchayats shall 
automatically be 
expanded for five 
years instead of the 
prevailing tenure (one 
year) which will 
enable their institution 
to execute the planned 
schemes/works within 
their tenure. The same 
is the long pending 
demand of elected 
representativ
es.
 
no. (iii) is not 
applicable.
 
provide for 
indirect election 
to posts of 
Chairpersons in 
ZP and BP.
 

 
 
Annex
-
VII
 
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
 
(Article 243G)
 
1.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, including agricultural extension. 
 
2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, land 
consolidation and soil conservation. 
 
3.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minor irrigation, water management and watershed development. 
 
4.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Animal h
usbandry, dairying and poultry. 
 
5.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries.
 
 
 
6.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social forestry and farm forestry. 
 
7.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minor forest produce. 
 
8.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Small scale industries, including food processing industries. 
 
9.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Khadi, village and cottage indust
ries. 
 
10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rural housing. 
 
11.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drinking water. 
 
12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fuel and fodder. 
 
13. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means 
of
 
 
 
communication. 
 
14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity. 
 
15. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non
-
conventional energy sources. 
 
16. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Poverty alleviation programme. 
 
17. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Education, including primary and secondary schools. 
 
18. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical training and vocational education. 
 
19. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adult and non
-
formal education. 
 
20. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Libraries. 
 
21. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cultural activities. 
 
22. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Markets and fairs. 
 
23. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centers 
and dispensaries. 
 
24. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Family welfare. 
 
25. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Women and child development. 
 
26. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social 
welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally 
retarded. 
 
27. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 
 
28. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public distribution system. 
 
29. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maintenance of community assets. 
 

Annex
-
VIII
 
 
Status of devolution of departments/subjects with funds, functions and functionaries 
to the PRIs by States/UTs
 
SI.
 
No
 
State/UT
 
No. and names of the Departments/subjects Transferred to Panchayats 
with
 
respect to
 
Funds
 
Functions
 
Functionaries
 
1
 
Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands
 
Grant
-
in
-
aid is released 
to PRI’s to discharge 
their functions
 
All the functions (29 
subjects) have been 
transferred to the PRIs
 
639 functionaries of 
various departments 
have been 
transferred to 
the PRIs.
 
2
 
Andhra 
Pradesh
 
Only Gram Panchayats 
(GPs) are empowered 
to collect taxes. 
Governments Orders 
(GOs) issued for 
devolving funds of 10 
departments. 
 
22 GOs issued during 
1997
-
2002. Further, 10 
line departments have 
devolved certain
 
powers 
to PRIs.
 
Functionaries are under 
the administrative 
control of their 
respective line 
departments but they 
are partially 
accountable to PRIs. 
 
3
 
Arunachal 
Pradesh
 
PRIs do not collect 
taxes. Transfer of funds 
by departments has not 
taken place. 
 
29 subjects have been 
devolved. GOs covering 
20 departments have 
been issued, but not yet 
implemented.
 
 
 
PRIs can exercise the 
powers of supervision 
and monitoring the 
implementation of plans 
in respect of all subjects 
coming under their 
respective jurisdi
ction.
 
Functionaries have not 
been transferred. 
 
4
 
Assam
 
PRIs are empowered to 
collect taxes but cannot 
enforce. Main source of 
revenue is lease rent 
from markets, river 
banks and ponds.
 
Activity
-
mapping done 
for 23 subjects. But GOs 
have been issued only for 
7 subjects by 6 
departments. 
 
There has been very 
minimal devolution of 
functionaries. Officials 
continue to report to 
departments. 
 
5
 
Bihar
 
No taxes are collected 
by PRIs. 
 
Activity
 
Mapping of 20 
Departments have been 
completed regarding the 
29 subjects listed in the 
11
th
 
Schedule of the 
Constitution and 
accordingly, all 
concerned Departments 
have issued orders 
delegating powers to the 
Panchayats.
 
 
 
Departmental staff is 
answerable t
o 
departments. 
Angandwadi workers, 
teachers and health 
workers are appointed 
by PRIs.
 
 
 

SI.
 
No
 
State/UT
 
No. and names of the Departments/subjects Transferred to Panchayats 
with respect to
 
Funds
 
Functions
 
Functionaries
 
6
 
Chhattisgarh
 
GP is authorized to 
collect various types of 
taxes. Funds for 12 
departments have been 
devolved. 
 
Activity Mapping of 27 
matters has been 
undertaken. GOs not 
issued.
 
Panchayat make 
recruitments for 9 
departments. 
 
7
 
Goa
 
Panchayats levy 11 
types of taxes. Untied 
funds are given to 
Panchayats. 
 
 
18 matters are devolved 
to GPs, while 6 are 
devolved to ZPs. 
 
PRIs have their own 
core staff for the 
execution of works. 
 
8
 
Gujarat
 
8 major taxes are 
collected by PRIs. In 
2008
-
09, 13 
departments allocated 
funds to PRIs. 
 
14 functions have been 
completely devolved and 
5 are partially devolved. 
 
GOs have been issued 
for devolution of 
functionaries for 14 
functions. 
 
9
 
Haryana
 
GPs generate revenue 
from lease of Panchayat 
land, liquor cess and 
rental of Panchayat 
premises.
 
 
 
Panchayati Raj Act 
devolves 29 functions. 
GOs have been issued for 
10 deptts. 
 
There is no significant 
devolution of 
functionaries.
 
 
 
10
 
Himachal 
Pradesh
 
Only GP is empowered 
to levy taxes. Funds 
have not been 
transferred. 
 
27 out of 29 subjects 
have been devolved to 
PRIs. 
 
Functionaries have not 
been transferred to 
PRIs.
 
11
 
J&K
 
State Govt. has issued GO notifying activity mapping. Funds have been 
devolved in a limited sense. Functionaries have been identified in the Activity 
Mapping document who will assist Panchayats in carrying out assigned 
functions but have not been transferr
ed.
 
12
 
Jharkhand
 
Elections to PRIs were held in November
-
 
December 2010 for the first time 
since 73
rd
 
CAA came into force. Three departments, namely, Agriculture, 
Social Welfare and Primary Education have devolved functions to PRIs by 
Departmental Notific
ation. 
 
13
 
Karnataka
 
PRIs collect 7 types 
of taxes.
 
 
Panchayati 
Raj Act provides the 
mandatory transfer 
for untied funds to 
PRIs. 
 
Karnataka has delegated 
all 29 subjects to PRI by 
notifying Activity 
Mapping. 
 
All Panchayat 
employees function 
under dual control of the 
Deptts concerned and 
the PRIs. 
 
14
 
Kerala
 
GPs have tax domain 
of 9 types of taxes.
 
Untied funds and 
funds for specific 
purposes by deptts 
are given to PRIs. 
 
Activity mapping for all 29 
functions done and 
activities devolved to 
Panchayats. 
 
PRIs have full 
managerial and part 
disciplinary control over 
transferred 
functionaries.
 
 
 
 
 
 

SI.
 
No
 
State/UT
 
No. and names of the Departments/subjects Transferred to 
Panchayats 
with respect to
 
Funds
 
Functions
 
Functionaries
 
15
 
Madhya 
Pradesh
 
GPs are empowered 
to collect 
taxes.
 
 
Funds for 13 
departments covering 
19 matters are 
released to PRIs.
 
GOs containing the 
Activity Mapping in 
respect of 25 matters 
pertaining to 22 deptts. 
have been issued. 
 
Functionaries for 13 
departments have been 
transferred to the PRIs. 
 
There is a State 
Panchayat Service. 
 
16
 
Maharashtra
 
ZP and GP collect 
taxes. 
Grants for 11 
departments are 
transferred to PRIs.
 
11 subjects have been fully 
devolved. For 18 subjects, 
schemes are implemented 
by PRIs. 
 
Class III and Class IV 
employees at all levels 
are Zilla Parishad 
employees. 
 
17
 
Manipur
 
Five Departments 
have 
issued GOs 
transferring funds to 
PRIs.
 
 
GOs have been issued 
devolving functions related 
to 22 departments. 
 
5 Departments have 
issued GOs transferring 
functionaries to PRIs.
 
18
 
Orissa
 
PRIs collect 6 types 
of taxes. There is no 
clear devolution of 
untied funds. 
 
11 departments have 
devolved 21 subjects. 
 
Officials of 11 
departments are 
accountable to PRIs. 
 
19
 
Punjab
 
Main source of 
income of GP is from 
auction of Panchayat 
land. There is no 
clear devolution of 
funds. 
 
The devolution of 7 key 
departments relating to 13 
subjects approved. 
 
No functionaries have 
been transferred to PRI 
by line departments. 
 
20
 
Rajasthan
 
5 departments have 
issued GOs 
transferring funds to 
PRIs up to district 
level. 10% untied 
fund to PRIs.
 
Five Departments have 
transferred all functions up 
to district level to PRIs. 
Fresh Activity Mapping of 
above 5 Departments has 
been done.
 
5 departments
 
have 
transferred all 
functionaries upto 
district level to PRIs. 
 
21
 
Sikkim
 
PRIs do not collect 
taxes. Funds are 
being transferred by 
17 departments.
 
 
10% 
of total fund of each 
department is given 
to Panchayats. Untied 
funds are given to 
PRIs.
 
All 29 subjects are 
devolved as per legislation. 
Activity Mapping has been 
conducted for 20 subjects 
covering 16 departments. 
 
Employees are under 
the control of PRIs, but 
Panchayats exercise 
limited control over 
them. 
 
 
 

SI.
 
No
 
State/UT
 
No. and names of 
the Departments/subjects Transferred to Panchayats 
with respect to
 
Funds
 
Functions
 
Functionaries
 
22
 
Tamil Nadu 
 
Only village 
Panchayats have
 
the 
power to levy taxes. 
9% of the States own 
tax revenue devolved 
to Local Bodies, of 
which rural local 
bodies will receive 
58% share. 
 
Government of Tamil 
Nadu has delegated 
supervision and monitoring 
powers of 29 subject to 
PRIs
 
There is no significant 
devolution of 
functionaries. 
 
23
 
Telengana
 
Certain Powers have been delegated to PRIs in respect of 10 Departments 
namely: Agriculture & Agriculture Extension, Animal Husbandry Dairy &
 
Poultry, Fisheries, Rural Development, Drinking Water & Sanitation, Primary 
Secondary & Adult Education, Health PHC Dispensaries & Family Welfare, 
Social Welfare, Backward Class Welfare and Women & Child 
Development.
 
 
 
 
 
24
 
Tripura
 
Part funds related to 
PWD Department, 
primary schools and 
Social Welfare and 
social education 
department and 
pension funds have 
been transferred to 
the Panchayats. 
Untied funds are also 
transferred to PRIs. 
 
So far GOs have been 
issued devolving irrigation 
schemes, primary scho
ols 
and activities related to 
adult and non
-
formal 
education, women and 
child development and 
social welfare. 
 
Functionaries of 5 
subjects for which 
functions have 
devolved, have been 
transferred to 
Panchayats. 
 
25
 
Uttar Pradesh
 
All 3 tiers have the 
power to collect 
taxes. 
 
16 subjects relating to 12 
departments have been 
devolved to PRIs.
 
PRIs do not have 
control over 
functionaries. 
 
26
 
Uttarakhand
 
Only ZPs collect 
taxes. Funds are 
made available to 
PRIs for activities for 
only 3 functions. 
 
Master GO on transferring 
financial and 
administrative powers on 
14 subjects has been issued 
in 2003. 
 
Supervisory role over 
functionaries related to 
14 subjects
. 
 
27
 
West Bengal
 
GPs can impose and 
realize taxes.
 
 
Untied 
funds are allocated 
under the TFC grant 
as well as SFC grant. 
5 departments have 
opened Panchayat 
Window in their 
budgets. 
 
State Govt. agrees with 
transfer of these 28 
subjects. 14 departments 
have so far issued 
matching GOs transferring 
27 subjects. 
 
The Panchayat 
employees have been 
made into different 
district cadres. Other 
than the posts created in 
the Panchayat bodies, 7 
departments of the State 
Govt. have devolved 
functionaries 
 
 
 

SI.
 
No
 
State/UT
 
No. and names of the Departments/subjects Transferred to Panchayats 
with respect to
 
Funds
 
Functions
 
Functionaries
 
28
 
Daman & Diu
 
Not available 
 
12 subjects are fully 
devolved and 10 subjects 
are partially devolved. 
 
Functionaries for 13 
departments have been 
transferred to PRIs.
 
29
 
Puducherry 
 
Panchayats collect 
taxes and receive 
funds from the state 
budget under the 
community 
development sector.
 
22 functions have been 
devolved to the PRI. 
 
Devolution of 
functionaries has not 
been done yet.
 
30
 
Lakshadweep
 
Entire Plan and Non 
Plan budget required 
for Schemes and 
Programs being 
implemented by 5 
departments viz 
Education, Medical & 
Health Services, 
Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry, and 
Agriculture is 
transferred to the 
District Panchayat 
and Village (Dweep) 
Panchayats.
 
All Schemes and 
programmes being 
implemented by five major 
departments, viz 
Education, Medical & 
Health Services, Fisheries, 
Animal Husban
dry, and 
Agriculture have been 
transferred to the PRIs 
w.e.f 1
st
 
April 2010. 
 
Entire establishments 
of
 
 
five major 
departments, viz 
Education, Medical & 
Health Services, 
Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry, and 
Agriculture except 
Director and few staff 
have been t
ransferred to 
District Panchayat and 
Village (Dweep) 
Panchayats. 
 
31
 
Chandigarh
 
 
A committee constituted 
by the Chandigarh 
Administration 
recommended transfer of 
some functions of 12 
Departments. However, the 
State Govt. felt that such 
an exercise of 
devolving 
the functions to PRIs 
would only be an interim 
measure because fast 
urbanization would result 
in villages becoming part 
of Municipal Corporation 
in near future.
 
 
Note: 
Mizoram, Meghalaya and Nagaland are exempt.
 
 
 
 
 
Delhi has no 
Panchayats.
 
 
 
 
 
Information is not available 
for UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli.
 
 

MINUTES OF 
THE EIGHTH
 
SITTING OF THE
 
COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES
 
 
(2017
-
18)
 
 
The Committee sat on
 
Tuesday
, the
 
8
th
 
August, 2017
 
from 1
500 hrs. to         
1640 
hrs. in 
Committee Room 
'C'
, Parliament 
House Annexe, 
New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
 
 
    
 
                           
    
     
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
 
–
 
C
hairperson
 
 
Members
 
 
  
2
 
Shri George Baker
 
  
3
 
Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
 
  
4
 
Shri Dushyant Chautala
 
  
5
 
Shri 
Ram Tahal Choudhary
 
  
6
 
Col. 
(Retd.) 
Sona
 
R
am Choudhary
 
  
7
 
Shri 
Ramen Deka
 
  
8
 
Shri
 
Sanjay Dhotre
 
9
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
 
10
 
S
mt. Raksha Khadse
 
11
 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
 
12
 
Shri 
Rajesh Pandey
 
13
 
Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
 
14
 
Shri Nanabhou Falgunrao Patole
 
15
 
Dr.  
Bhagirath Prasad
 
16
 
Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy
 
17
 
Shri Janardhan Singh Sigriwal
 
18
 
Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
 
 
19
 
Shri Ganjendra Singh Shekhawat
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
       
 
 
  
1
.
 
S
mt 
 
Sudesh Luthra
 
       
 
-
 
    
Additional 
Secretary 
 
      
 
 
 
 
2
.
 
Shri  N
. C Gupta     
 
        
-
 
    
Joint 
Secretary
 
    
 
 
  
3.      Shri Vipin Kumar 
 
        
-
      
Director 
 

1.2
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.
 
3.
 
The Committee then took up for consideration the following d
raft Reports:
-
 
(i)
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
(ii)
.
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
(iii).
 
Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 18
th
 
Report of the Committee on 
Estimates (2016
-
17) on the subject ‘Panchayati Raj’ pertaining of Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj.
 
4.
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
5.
 
With regard to Draft Action Taken Report on (iii) ‘Panchayati Raj’ while the 
Committee agreed to co
mments/categorization of Action Taken replies, with regard 
recommendation at Para no. 7 of the original (18
th
) Report, it was decided to hear the 
views of the Niti Aayog in the context of award of Grants to Panchayats by Fourteenth 
Finance Commission.
 
 
The
 
Committee then adjourned
 
with vote of thanks to the Chair
.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________
 
 
***
 
Matter not related to this Report
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF 15
th
 
SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2017
-
18)
 
The Committee
 
sat on Tuesday, the 10
th
 
October, 2017 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 
hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
–
 
Chairperson
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
 
2. 
 
Shri George Baker 
 
 
 
 
3. 
 
Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
 
 
 
 
4. 
 
Col. Son
aram Choudhary 
 
 
 
 
5. 
 
Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
 
 
 
 
6. 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 
 
 
 
7. 
 
Smt. Raksha Khadse 
 
 
 
 
8. 
 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
 
 
 
 
9. 
 
Shri P. Kumar 
 
 
 
 
10. 
 
Shri Rajesh Pandey 
 
 
 
 
11. 
 
Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
 
 
 
 
12. 
 
Shri Nanabhou Falgunrao Patole 
 
 
 
 
13. 
 
Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
 
 
 
 
14. 
 
Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy 
 
 
 
 
15. 
 
Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 
 
 
 
16. 
 
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
 
 
 
 
17. 
 
Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1.
 
Smt. Sudesh Luthra
 
 
 
–
 
 
Additional Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri N.C. Gupta 
 
 
–
  
 
Joint Secretary
 
3.
 
Shri Vipin Kumar
 
 
–
 
 
Director
 
 
 
 
 

WITNESSES
 
NITI AAYOG
 
 
 
        
 
1.
 
Shri Amitabh Kant
 
 
 
-
 
C.E.O.
 
 
        
 
2.
 
Shri Rameshwar Prasad Gupta
 
-
 
Addl. Secretary
 
 
        
 
3.
 
Shri Vikram Singh Gaur
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
      
 
4.
 
Smt. Deepika L
ohia Aran
 
 
-
 
Director (DP)
 
 
 
5.
 
Shri Rakesh Ranjan
 
 
 
-
 
Sr. Consultant
 
 
 
        
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and apprised them about 
the agenda for the sitting of the Committee i.e. 
to take evidence of 
the representatives 
of Niti
 
Aayog on the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj at Para No. 
7 relating to Award of Grants by 
Fourteenth Finance Commission 
and   xxx  xxx  xxx  
xxx  xxx
. After a brief internal discussion, the representatives of Niti Aayog were called 
in.
 
3.
 
The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and drew their attention to Direction 
55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ about the confidentiality of the 
proceedings of the Committee.
 
4.
 
The Chairperson directed Shri Amitabh Kant, C.E.O. Niti Aa
yog to elucidate on 
the recommendation of Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC) for devolving funds to 
Gram Panchayats without any share of funds to intermediary i.e. Block and District 
Panchayats. The Committee pointed out that final grants to Panchayati Ra
j Institutions 
by 
Fourteenth Finance Commission
 
has created pitiable situation for Block and District 
Panchayats as compared to award of grants by the previous Finance Commissions. 
Shri Kant concurred with the views of Committee that the financial needs of
 
the Block 
and District Panchayats need to be readdressed and strengthened. He also put forth his 
views that the State Governments need to be encouraged to provide adequate 
budgetary support to all levels of Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
 
 
The Committee als
o emphasized on the importance of Gram and District 
Panchayats in achieving the goal of transforming of rural areas into smart villages and 
the need to provide adequate budgetary support as per provisions of Constitution 
mandated to Panchayati Raj Institut
ions. 
 

 
5.
 
The Members raised queries and sought clarifications from the witnesses to 
which they duly responded. 
 
 
 
The points on which the representatives could not readily respond, the 
Chairperson directed that written replies be furnished within a week.
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
6.
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________
 
 
xxx
 
Matter not related to this Report
 
 
 

MINUTES OF 17
th
 
SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2017
-
18)
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 01 November, 2017 from 1500 hrs. to 
1625 hrs. in Committee Room '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
–
 
Chairperson
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
 
2. 
 
Shri A. Arunmozhithevan 
 
 
 
 
3. 
 
Shri George Baker 
 
 
 
 
4. 
 
Col. Sonaram Choudhary
 
 
 
 
5. 
 
Shri Sanjay Dhotre
 
 
 
 
6. 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 
 
 
 
 
7. 
 
Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntala
 
 
 
 
8. 
 
Shri P. Kumar
 
 
 
 
9. 
 
Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
 
 
 
 
10. 
 
Shri Nanabhou Falgunr
ao Patole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. 
 
Shri Y.V. Subba Reddy
 
 
 
 
12. 
 
Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
 
 
 
 
13. 
 
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
 
 
 
 
14. 
 
Shri Jay Prakash Narayan Yadav
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Smt. Sudesh Luthra
 
 
 
–
 
 
Additional Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Shri N.C. Gupta 
 
 
–
  
 
Joint Secreta
ry
 
 
3.
 
Shri Vipin Kumar
 
 
 
–
 
 
Director
 
 
 
 
 

2.
 
The Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt two reports viz.
 
xxx
 
xxx
 
xxx
 
xxx
 
xxx 
and ATR on ‘Panchayati Raj’.
 
 
 
3.
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
4.
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
***
 
 
5.
 
The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Report on 
the observations/recommendations contained in the 18
th
 
Report of the Committee on 
Estimates (2016
-
17) on ‘Panchayati Raj’. The Hon’ble Chairperson apprised that 
Committee at their sitting held on 08 August, 2017 while considering the draft Report 
had decided to take evidence of NITI Aayog in the context of ne
ed for allocating 14
th
 
Finance Commission Grants to all the three tiers of Panchayats in respect of Para 7 of 
original report of the Committee. The Committee in this regard have taken evidence of 
NITI Aayog at their sitting held on 10 October, 2017 whereby
 
CEO, NITI Aayog 
concurred with the views of the Committee that 14
th
 
Finance Commission allocations 
which are made only to Gram Panchayats, should also be made to middle level of 
Panchayats also. The Hon’ble Chairperson then stated that Para No. 7 has acco
rdingly 
been categorised under not accepted category and comments incorporated in the 
Report. The Committee then adopted the report without any modification. The 
Committee authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above said two reports.
 
 
The Committee th
en adjourned.
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________
 
 
***
 
Matter not related to this Report
 

APPENDIX 
-
 
IV
 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTHY
-
FIFTH 
RE
PORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(i)
 
Total number of recommendations/observations 
 
 
 
 
 
11
 
(ii)
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
(Sl. Nos. 9 and 10) 
 
 
Percentage of total recommendations
 
 
2
 
 
 
 
 
18.18%
 
 
(iii)
 
Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply Percentage of total 
recommendations
 
(Sl. No. 3,5 and 8)
 
 
 
Percentage of total recommendations                                               
 
         
3
 
      
 
     
 
     
 
 
     
27.27%
 
 
(iv)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7 and 11) 
 
 
Percentage of total recommendations
 
 
06
 
 
 
 
54.55%
 
 
(v)
 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of 
Government is still awaited.  
 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
Nil
 
 
 
Nil
 
 
 
 
 
 
 