16
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION 
EVALUATION OF RURAL DRINKING WATER PROGRAMMES
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the Second 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2016-17)
SIXTEENTH REPORT
_____________________________________________________________________
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

SIXTEENTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2016-17)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in Second 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2016)
_____________________________________________________________________
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2016 / Shravana, 1938 (Saka)

E.C. No. ________
Price : ₹ _____
© 2016 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government 
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi – 110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER I Report 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by Government
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government’s replies have not been accepted 
by the Committee
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited
APPENDICES
(i)    Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee on  
Estimates held on 20.05.2016...............................                                      
(ii)  Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government 
on the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the Second Report of the Committee  on 
Estimates (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)..............................

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2016-17)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
MEMBERS
* Elected Vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II No. 3908 dated 28.07.2016 vice Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal appointed as 
Minister.
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
4. Shri George Baker
5. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
6. Shri Ashok Shankarrao Chavan 
7. Shri Dushyant Chautala
8. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
9. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
10. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
13. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
14. Shri Sudheer Gupta
15. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla
16. Shri P. Kumar 
17. Smt. Poonam Mahajan
18. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
19. Shri Rajesh Pandey
20. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
21. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil
*22 Shri Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri Konakalla Narayan Rao
24. Md. Salim 
25. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
26. Shri Gajendra  Singh Shekhawat
27. Shri Anil Shirole
28. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
29. Shri Rajesh Verma 
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar - Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director 
4. Shri R. S. Negi - Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Sixteenth Report on 
action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Second Report of Estimates Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Evaluation of Rural Drinking Water Programmes' pertaining to the Ministry of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation.
2. The Second Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 April, 
2015. Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations pertaining to the 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation were received by 18 December, 2015.The 
Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee on Estimates (2016-17) at 
their sitting held on the 20 May, 2016.
3. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in
the Second Report of the Committee on Estimates (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix II. 
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
04 August, 2016
13 Shravana, 1938 (saka)
Chairperson,
Committee on Estimates. 

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Evaluation of Rural Drinking Water Programmes' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation.
1.2 The 2nd Report (16th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on April 28, 2015. It 
contained 13 observations/recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all these 
observations/recommendations were received from the Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation on 18.12.2015.
1.3 Replies to the observations and recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 13      (Total 10 )
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of Government’s reply:
Sl. No. 1 (Total 1 )
(Chapter-III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s replies have not 
been accepted by the Committee:
Sl. Nos. 2 and 11 (Total 2 )
(Chapter IV)

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of Government is still 
awaited:
Sl. Nos.        Nil (Total ) 
(Chapter V)
1.4.  The Committee desire that response to the comments contained in Chapter I 
of this Report should be furnished to them expeditiously.
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.
Coverage of Rural Habitations under National Rural Drinking Water Programme 
(NRDWP)
(Recommendation Para No.2)
1.6 The Committee noted that despite bestowed with sources of surface water in 
abundance, most of it is contaminated or allowed to go waste in the sea and the country 
faces chronic drinking water shortage. They further noted that the problem of drinking 
water has aggravated by the competing pressures of the eco-systems, the agriculture, 
industry and energy sectors. The Committee note that having regard to the magnitude 
of the problem, the Union Government pro-actively supplements and coordinates the 
efforts of the State Governments. To tackle the problem of safe drinking water in the 
rural areas of the country, the first water supply and sanitation programme was 
introduced in social sector in 1954. Thereafter, a major intervention of Government of 
India started in 1972-73 through the Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme 
(ARWSP) to accelerate the coverage of drinking water. ARWSP was modified and 
renamed as the ‘National Rural Drinking Water Programme’ (NRDWP) and a separate 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation was set up in the year 2011. 
1.7 While examining the Outcome Budget of the Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation, the Committee observed that despite a massive investment of more than 
₹1,64,700 crore in the rural water supply sector by the Central and State Governments 

since the first Five Year Plan, only 75% of the total rural habitations have been covered 
with adequate potable water. As per the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), 
upto December 2012 only 88.5% of rural households had access to drinking water from 
protected sources whereas 11.5% households were yet to have access to safe drinking 
water. However, according to the Ministry after adding 3,68,463 rural habitations which 
are partially covered, the total percentage of habitations which have access to safe 
drinking water reaches 95.34% as per the data entered by States as on 1 April, 2014 on 
Integrated Management Information System (IMIS).
1.8 They further noted that the Environment Hygiene Committee (Bhor Committee) 
had in 1949 recommended a very reasonable and achievable target of providing 
drinking water to 90% of the population of the country in 40 years i.e. by 1989. The 
Committee are deeply dismayed that even after 67 years of independence, the basic 
objective of a Welfare State to provide adequate and safe drinking water to all its 
citizenry specially those living in rural/remote/hard areas whose economic conditions 
are compelling is yet to be achieved despite infusion of a massive investment of ₹ 1.65 
lakh crore. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Government fix the norms 
of potable water availability for semi urban and rural areas and the timeline by which the 
envisaged quality and quantity of potable water would be made available to all rural 
parts and regions of the country. 
1.9 In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry have stated that in its guidelines of 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), norms of 40 liters per capita per 
day of potable drinking water to the rural population has already been fixed.  The States
have, however, been given flexibility to increase this norm based on the demand and 
availability of water and the resources available with the States.  Once the service 
delivery level of 40 lpcd (Liters per capita per day) is achieved, the norm can be 
gradually increased to 55 lpcd, and thereafter to 70lpcd or more. As on 14.12.2015 a 
total of 12,91,947 rural habitations with a population coverage of 6594.39 lakhs is 
getting 40  lpcd or more of potable drinking water which is 72.95 % of the total rural 
population in the country. If the norm is taken as 55 lpcd, then a total of 7,76,280  rural 
habitations with a population coverage of 3779.08 lakhs are getting drinking water which 

is 41.80 % of the total rural population in the country.  The fixation of norms for semi 
urban areas is not done separately as they are primarily rural areas adjacent to urban 
towns/ cities. 
1.10 Regarding the timeline by which the envisaged quality and quantity of potable 
water (40lpcd) could be achieved throughout the country without any exception, it is 
submitted that providing the drinking water to the rural population is ongoing and 
continuous process and the Government both at the State and Centre have to contend 
with various issues and constraining factors while executing the programme.  A large 
number  of the slippages of fully covered habitations to the status of partially covered is 
happening due to reduction in yield of tube wells /hand pumps and due to depletion of 
ground water level which is  caused essentially by inadequate rainfall. Scanty and 
irregular rainfall in many parts of the country is a phenomenon which has been 
happening in considerable parts of the country since last many years. The source 
security of drinking water can be achieved on a 100% basis only when our entire rural 
drinking water supply is based on water grids with water intake from perennial surface 
water sources is ensured throughout the year. As of now about   85% of our current 
rural water supply schemes are based on groundwater sources and as recharge of 
groundwater is primarily through adequate rainfall, the slippages of habitations to 
partially covered status would continue to some extent and cannot be eliminated 
altogether.
1.11 The Committee take a serious note of the casual reply furnished by the 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation.  In course of examination of the 
Outcome Budget, the Committee were informed that 75 % of the total rural 
habitations had adequate potable water supply.  After adding 3,68,463 rural 
habitations which were partially covered,  the total percentage of rural habitations 
which have access to safe drinking water reaches 95.34% as per the data entered 
by the States as on 1 April, 2014 on Integrated Management Information System 
(IMIS). However, in the Action Taken reply it is stated that as on 14.12.2015, a total 
of 12,91,947 rural habitations with a population coverage of 6594.39 lakhs is getting 

40 lpcd or more of potable drinking water which is 72.95% of the total rural 
population in the country. The Committee would therefore like to have a 
clarification as to how the percentage of rural population has declined by 22.39% 
as on 14.12.15 vis-a-vis the percentage of population covered as on 1.4.14. If the 
norm is taken as 55 lpcd, then a total of 7,76,280 rural habitations with a population 
coverage of 3779.08 lakhs are getting drinking water which is 41.80% of the total 
rural population in the country. The fixation of norms for semi urban areas is not 
done separately as they are primarily rural areas adjacent to urban towns/ cities.  
The Committee are not convinced how the country will become open defecation 
free and emerge a Swatch Bharat with so little per capita water supply barely able 
to meet drinking and other domestic needs.  The Committee further note that the 
security of drinking water can be achieved on a 100% basis only when the entire 
rural drinking water supply is based on water grids and water intake from perennial 
surface water sources throughout the year.  They therefore, recommend that the 
norms for allocation of potable water in rural habitations be amended suitably and 
expeditiously and also the work on development of entire rural drinking water 
supply based on water grids and water intake from perennial surface water sources 
be taken up in a time bound manner considering the fact the right to have adequate 
and safe drinking water is an integral part of the fundamental right to life. 
Drinking Water Supply Programmes
(Recommendation Para No. 3)
1.12 The Committee had deplored that the programme(s) meant for drinking water 
supply in rural areas and allocating resources was renamed without addressing 
responsibility and accountability issues so vital for the success of these programme(s). 
The examination by the Committee had established that the continued failure of the 
successive schemes for provision of drinking water to rural areas is attributable to lack 
of proper planning, coordination and control on the part of the Union Government. They 
were of the considered view that mobilization of resources, their allocation, release to 
States and sustained monitoring are an integral part of any developmental architecture. 
More so, a scheme of such a magnitude requires continuous monitoring, constant 

supervision and coordination by the Union Government as the implementing agencies 
belong to the States. The Committee were surprised how the Union Government, the 
major contributor towards funding of all the schemes pertaining to drinking water in rural 
areas, remained oblivious to the stark ground situation. This indifference of the 
Government was evident from the way the Integrated Management Information System 
data was being got verified. The Committee noted that an independent evaluation study 
was commissioned by the Union Government for the purpose in 2011-12 but there was
no trace of the report more than three years later. Keeping in view the dismal potable 
water supply scenario, the depleting water table and the rising dark blocks, acute power 
shortages affecting water supply and the unreliable system of collecting and monitoring 
the vital data regarding the drinking water supply programme, the Committee had
recommended that a complete reorientation of the role and strategy of the Union 
Government was essential to make the scheme a success. Further, a system of 
concurrent and continuous monitoring and evaluation was needed to be put in place 
without any delay and the Committee was to be apprised of the same within three 
months.
1.13 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that they are of the view that 
the NRDWP or its earlier version Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme
(ARWSP)    has not been a failure. With the available resources, both human and 
financial, at its disposal, the Ministry has made   significant if not outstanding 
achievements to showcase. It is true and much is being spoken and written about the 
total investments of Rs. 1,64,700 crores in this sector since last 67 years . In per capita 
terms, considering a total rural population of 9038.94 lakhs, it comes to a mere Rs.272 
per capita per year which in the view of the Ministry is not adequate. The Ministry takes 
all efforts to monitor the ground realities of rural drinking water supply situation in the 
country by having field visits of Area Officers, video-conferencing, surprise-checks in the 
villages etc.  The Government monitors the execution of the Programme through 
National Level Monitors also who submit their report to the Ministry of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation.  The Ministry has an online Integrated Management Information System 
(IMIS) in which data related to various components of the programme upto the 

habitation level are being captured and maintained. It is dynamic system in which   
overview and the current status of the programme are reflected and is in public domain 
for everyone to see. 
With respect to the recommendations regarding the complete reorientation of the 
scheme it is submitted that as per the recommendations, the scheme guidelines are 
being looked into for necessary modifications / improvements.
1.14 The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Government that 
with the available resources at its disposal, both human and financial, that made 
significant achievements. Apparently, despite being aware of the shortcomings 
in implementation of NRDWP and APWSP, timely corrective measures for the 
success of these programmes were not taken. However, as the Government have 
agreed to look into the NRDWP scheme for necessary 
modification/improvements, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
modifications made and their likely impact. The Committee also wish to reiterate 
that citizenship being a Union subject and that the citizens have an inalienable 
right to have adequate and safe drinking water, the Union Government must 
evolve a sound policy on allocation of water for drinking, irrigation, industrial and 
other purposes within a definitive time frame and the Committee be apprised.
Availability of Water
(Recommendation Para No.4)
1.15 The Committee note that no holistic and comprehensive mapping of all sources 
of water in the country has been done. Further, there is sheer want of effective 
coordination between the Union Ministries inter se and the Union and the State 
Governments and there is no vision document on water availability and usages, the 
Committee, therefore, recommend that:
(i) A comprehensive water mapping of all sources of water be done to facilitate 
rational allocation and distribution of water to agriculture, industry, drinking water 
and other sectors in a well-prioritized manner;

(ii) A close watch be kept on the allocation, distribution and usage of water by the 
competing sectors so that concurrent and effective remedial measures could be 
taken in any situation without any loss of time;
(iii) The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation should make this a well-coordinated and continuous affair on the 
lines of ‘State of Agriculture in India’ Report being annually brought out by the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) and bring out 
a Report on ‘State of Water in India’ and in like manner present it to Parliament 
every year during the Budget Session;
(iv) Further, the Government should also come up with a ‘White Paper’ on their 
efforts made so far in the light of recommendations made by Bhor Committee, 
1949 so that not only the problematic areas are clearly identified and understood 
but also the hugely belated course correction is put in place at once to ensure 
universal availability and accessibility of drinking water in rural areas at least by 
the end of Twelfth Plan.
(v) The Government should come up with a Vision Document on water 
availability and its usage in various sectors so that the much needed balance in 
the demands of various competing sectors is restored and maintained; and 
(vi) The independent evaluation study of the data entered into IMIS by the States 
which is lingering on since 2012-13 be completed without any further delay. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of its findings and action taken thereupon by 
the Union Government within three months of the presentation of this Report.
1.16 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply has stated that the holistic and 
comprehensive mapping of sources of water in the country essentially fall under the 
domain of Ministry or Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. 
However, the point wise response of the Ministry are given below:
(i) The Central Water Commission of the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has developed a web-enabled Geographic 
Information System (GIS) called Water Resources Information System (WRIS) which 
monitors surface water availability in various sources across the country.  Since 85% of 

the drinking water sources are based on groundwater, the Ministry of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation in collaboration with National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), 
Hyderabad has completed 4,898 groundwater prospect maps based on hydro 
geomorphology (HGM) using GIS and satellite data.  These maps have been shared in 
the WRIS portal as well as in the Bhuvan portal maintained by NRSC, Hyderabad.  
Using these two systems, conjunctive use of surface water and groundwater for various 
sectors like agriculture, drinking and industry, etc. can be planned.  The digital data on 
groundwater prospect maps have also been shared with Central Ground Water Board 
(CGWB) through a tripartite Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, CGWB and NRSC, Hyderabad for the 
purpose of National Aquifer Mapping.
(ii) The National Water Policy has been prepared by the Ministry of Water 
Resources, RD & GR.  Though the policy specify first charge on all sources is for 
drinking and domestic purposes, specific allocations for various competing sectors need 
to be assessed concurrently and monitored closely.
(iii) The matter pertains to Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR.
(iv) The major aim of the Bhore Committee was to survey the existing position 
regarding the health conditions and the health organizations of the country and to make 
recommendations for development in order to improve public health system in India with 
specific focus on rural India. In this regard, the Ministry of Water Resources shall have 
to take a concerted view with related Ministries like Health & Family Welfare, Drinking 
Water and Sanitation, Urban Development, Environment & Forests, etc. We agree that 
in order to provide focus on drinking water availability in rural areas, there is a necessity 
to map the social, economic and health indicators given in the National Health Profile 
brought out by Central Bureau of Health Intelligence, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare on WRIS data and groundwater prospect maps.
(v) The overall mandate of water management in the country is with the Ministry of 
Water Resources, RD& GR.  In their Vision Document, clear emphasis shall have to be 

provided for conjunctive use of surface water, groundwater and rain water so that 
demands for competing sectors are balanced in specific regions of interest.
(vi) The third party independent evaluation on data entry made by the States into the 
online Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) of the Ministry of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation has been completed and the final report has been received.  The 
Ministry is presently deputing teams of officials from the Ministry to cross-verify the data 
analysis given in the Evaluation Report and the actual field conditions.  After this 
exercise is completed, the key recommendations along with observations of the Ministry 
will be submitted to the Committee.
It may be kept in mind that drinking water constitutes a minuscule portion of the 
total fresh water availability in the country.  With competing demands of agriculture and 
industry on the available water resources in the country, any improvement in the overall 
management of water in the country would definitely have a positive impact on the 
drinking water availability and vice-versa. 
1.17 The Committee note that as per demarcation of responsibility of Ministries,
the M/o DWS  has the responsibility to make arrangements of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation for rural habilitations in the country and for execution of their 
responsibility they have  to take up the matter with all concerned. Simply 
responding to the Committee that the matter pertains to Ministry of WR, RD and 
GR that the overall mandate of water management in the country is with the M/o 
WR, RD & GR is not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee had clearly 
indicated the areas where the matter was to be taken up with the Ministry of WR, 
RD and GR but the fact remains that the Government is one and indivisible and 
the Ministry of DW & S had a duty to collect the information and furnish the action 
taken replies. They, therefore, ask the M/o DW & S to take up the matter with the 
concerned Ministries/Departments and furnish comprehensive reply to the 
Committee within six months of the presentation of this Report.
The Committee also note that independent evaluation on data entry made 
by the States into the online Integrated Management Information System of the 

Ministry has been completed and the Ministry has been deputing teams to cross 
verify the data analysis contained in the Evaluation Report.  The Committee 
desire the Ministry to complete the cross verification process expeditiously in a 
time bound manner and apprise the Committee of the outcome within six months.
Slippage of covered habitations and sustainability of water sources
(Recommendation Para No.5)
1.18 While noting that as per the IMIS data entered by the States as on 1 April, 2014, 
out of the 16,96,664 rural habitations in the country 12,49,695 (73.6%) habitations are 
fully covered (on the basis of 40 lpcd norm), 3,68,463 (21.17%) are partially covered 
and 78,506 (4.6%) are quality affected. The number of covered habitations slipping 
back to partially covered/quality affected habitation status is quite alarming as on an 
average approximately 1.4 lakh habitations per year have slipped back during the last 
seven years or so. The Ministry has attributed reasons for this slippage to over 
dependence of rural water supply schemes on ground water, indiscriminate extraction of 
ground water for irrigation, uncontrolled pollution of surface water, erratic pattern of 
rainfall, natural calamities and erratic/non-availability of power, etc. They observed that
upto 67% of the allocation to States under NRDWP were earmarked for covering water 
quality affected habitations. Apart from this, from the year 2012, 5% of allocation at the 
national level  provided to States having chemical contamination as well as to States 
with high incidence of Japanese Encephalitis and Acute Encephalitis Syndrome cases. 
Similarly, 10% of the funds under NRDWP were provided to States on 100% Central 
share basis to be spent on ensuring sustainability of drinking water sources by 
constructing structures for recharge of ground water. In addition, States were also
provided 15% funds under NRDWP for Operation & Maintenance activities to ensure 
sustainable service delivery and the Ministry asked the States Governments to seek 
participation of local Panchayats so that schemes once installed do not slip back in 
terms of service delivery.
1.19 The Committee further found that the Ministry had written to States to identify the 
surface water reservoirs in their respective States for sourcing water for new piped 

water supply schemes. They had also written to the Union Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation to allow/reserve a certain percentage of 
water from these reservoirs for being used in drinking water supply schemes. However, 
surprisingly, beyond writing the letters, the nodal Ministry did not care to conduct any 
study of the recurring phenomenon of significant slip backs. The Committee also 
observed that only a few States have shown their interest in creating sustainability 
structures and a continuous decline in total sustainability structures has been noticed. 
This shows either the States have not been fully sensitized to the importance and 
pivotal role of the sustainability structure or there are some inherent bottlenecks or 
constraints in creation of these structures. Having regard to the fact that sustainability 
structures are a sine qua non for ensuring universal availability of drinking water in the 
rural areas, the Committee felt strongly that it is incumbent upon the Ministry to take 
immediate corrective measures so that the creation of sustainability structures gathers 
the requisite momentum without any further loss of time.
1.20 The Ministry in their Action Taken reply has stated that the provision of rural 
drinking water supply is a continuous process and as more than 85% of our rural 
drinking water supply schemes are based on ground water, the phenomena of 
slippages would continue to exist and it cannot be eliminated completely.  It can be 
reduced significantly only when the entire rural drinking water system switches over to 
secured perennial surface water sources. The sustainability of ground water based 
drinking water supply scheme is dependent on rejuvenation of ground water with rain 
water.  As the phenomena of recurrent drought has been witnessed in the country since 
last many years, the creation of sustainability structures throughout the country have 
also not yielded desired results.
1.21 The Ministry has been imploring States continuously through video-conference to 
give utmost importance to sustainability component of the Programme by dovetailing 
funds from MNREGS / Watershed Development Projects, etc.  and has urged them to 
gradually shift rural drinking water supply schemes to perennial ,  secured ,  surface 
water sources so that the problem of slippages is brought down to a minimum ,  if not 
totally eliminated.  However, this would require massive investment in rural drinking 

water supply sector as such schemes would require creation of large water supply grids 
and transportation of water over long distances. This   is a highly capital intensive 
programme for which the commensurate resources have not been made available to 
this Ministry. In fact the budget for the programmer is reducing gradually as more funds 
have gone to States through Fourteenth Finance Commission grants. However, the 
Ministry have asked the States to take External funding for water grid from domestic 
lending agencies like NABADRD, HUDCO or from international lending agencies like 
World Bank, JICA, etc.
The Ministry also stated that States like Telangana and Madhya Pradesh have 
started making arrangement of funds for water grid. The State of Madhya Pradesh has 
also formed a separate agency namely Madhya Pradesh Jal Nigam to carry out piped 
drinking water supply to its rural population and has approached World Bank and JICA 
to fund these projects on a large scale.  
1.22 The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry for 
sustainability component of the programme by dovetailing funds from MNREGS/ 
Watershed Development Projects, etc. for shifting rural water supply schemes to 
perennial, secured, surface water sources to reduce slippage problem. The 
Committee note that for implementation and creation of large water supply grids,
a massive investment would be required. The Committee would like the Ministry 
to furnish a status note with respect to drinking water supply position in each 
State, State-wise and the funding of such water grids and the timelines by which 
the work would be completed.
Focus and Objective of XII Plan
(Recommendation Para No.8)
1.23 The Committee observed that the Strategic Plan (2011-2022) of the Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation ensures that every rural person in the country have 
access to 70 lpcd within their household premises or at a horizontal or vertical distance 
of not more than 50 meters from the household without barriers of social and financial 
discrimination. However, subsequently the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-2017) 

envisaged 55 lpcd from the present limit of 40 lpcd. The Committee were apprehensive 
over the compatibility of the targets of Strategic Plan (2011-2022) chalked out by the 
nodal Ministry and the XII Plan (2012-2017).
1.24 The Committee observed that while water sources and Water Policy came under
the exclusive domain of the Ministry of Water Resources, the drinking water aspect in 
respect of rural areas be assigned to the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
which has no control over water sources and has no independent policy on drinking 
water for rural areas. They therefore, recommended establishment of permanent
standing machinery for effective coordination and cooperation for all matters related to 
Rural Drinking Water Supply. Further, the Committee also desired to know as to how 
the target of piped water supply would be met when the Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation has first and foremost, to ensure supply of adequate water from the available 
water sources which were exclusively administered by the Ministry of Water Resources 
and fall within the legislative jurisdiction of respective State(s).
1.25 The Ministry in their Action Taken reply has stated that the execution of rural 
drinking water supply schemes is within the mandate of the respective State 
Governments.  Issues relating to sourcing and availability of water for rural drinking 
water supply schemes would be served effectively if there is a linkage of State/Regional 
offices of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
with that of the rural drinking water supply executing bodies (PHEDs) of the respective 
State Governments.
The Ministry has already requested the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation in July 2014, to supply to this Ministry, state 
wise, spare/ additional capacity available in various dams and reservoirs which could be 
tapped through pipe lines for taking drinking water to various villages and the capacity 
of each such source which could be utilized for drinking water, so that States could be 
sensitized to plan drinking water scheme through pipe lines.  

1.26 The Committee note that the Ministry had requested the Ministry of Water 
Resource, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation in July, 2014 to supply 
state-wise, spare/additional capacity available in various dams and reservoirs 
which could be tapped through pipe line for taking drinking water to various 
villages and the capacity of each such source which could be utilized for drinking 
water.  The Committee would therefore like the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation and the Ministry of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation to apprise the Committee about the action taken in this regard by 
both the Ministries, separately, within six months of the presentation of their 
Report.
Jurisdictional and related matters
(Recommendation Para No. 9)
1.27 The Committee took note of the competing jurisdictions of various
ministries/departments on water related matters, the performance of the Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation, the mission mode nature and the time bound 
implementation schedule of the scheme being handled by the Ministry, the enhanced 
devolution of funds to the States following the recommendation of the Fourteenth 
Finance Commission and the consequent effect on the role and responsibility of the 
Ministry, the human resources shortage besetting the Ministry and affecting its effective 
functioning. The Committee also carefully examined the mandate of the Ministry, their 
intrinsic linkage with the mandate of the Ministry of Rural Development, the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation and the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development. The Committee felt that in the extant scenario, the 
Government ought to give a serious consideration to retaining the Ministry as a 
standalone entity or bring the Ministry again within the more cohesive ambit of the 
Ministry of Rural Development.
1.28 The Ministry in their Action Taken reply have stated that Swachh Bharat Mission 
– Gramin (SBM-G) has been launched by the Government on 2 nd October, 2015 and a 

goal has been set to achieve 100% sanitation by 2 nd October,2019 for which this 
Ministry is the coordinating Ministry. Lot of activities are going on in the Ministry to 
achieve the goal set by the Government. At this juncture, it is the view of Ministry that it 
will not be appropriate to reduce the Ministry to a Department under the Ministry of 
Rural Development.
1.29 The Committee accept the submission of the Ministry to maintain the 
status quo. However, they would like to be apprised the firm timeline, State-wise, 
by which safe tapped water would be supplied to every household across the 
country.
Achievement under NRDWP
(Recommendation Para No. 11)
1.30 While noting the utilization of funds earmarked for NRDWP during the Eleventh 
Plan and the first two years of Twelfth Plan viz 2012-13 and 2013-14 was almost cent 
per cent. During the Eleventh Plan, the R E allocation was ₹ 39199 crore and the actual 
expenditure was ₹ 39210 crore. The Committee further noted that during the year 2008-
09, against a target of providing drinking water to 217898 habitations the achievement 
was 152990, that is 70 odd per cent. The allocation of Rs. 7298.78 crore was almost 
utilized for this 70% achievement.  In the year 2009-10, out of 158589 habitations to be 
covered, 148879 (93.88%) habitations were covered, involving the actual expenditure of 
Rs. 7989.72 crore. In the year 2010-11 against a target of 135000, the achievement 
was 88.45% at 119401 habitations. To achieve this, out of the BE/RE Rs. 9000 crore, 
Rs. 8986.74 crore were actually spent. During the year 2011-12 against an aggregate 
target of 145169 habitations 138367 habitations (95.31%) were covered. The amount 
spent during the year was Rs.8493.15 crore from RE amount of Rs.8500 crore. During 
2012-13 and 2013-14 against the RE allocation of ₹ 10500 crore and ₹ 9700 crore, 
sums of ₹ 10489.05 crore and ₹ 9691.29 crore respectively were actually incurred. 
Inexplicably, however, the physical achievements have not been commensurate with 
the expenditure incurred. During 2012-13, against a physical target of 91750 partially 

covered habitations the achievement was merely 77388 habitations which is 
approximately 84% of the targets fixed. During 2013-14, the figures under this category 
were 53657 (target) and 51823 (achievement) respectively. For the quality affected 
habitations against a target of 28642, only 19402 i.e. just 68% habitations were covered 
in 2012-13. In 2013-14, against a target of 21771 only 16649 i.e. 76% habitations were 
covered. As regards habitations with piped water supply against the target of 63297 
habitations, only 52021 i.e. 82% habitations were covered. During 2013-14 against 
64342 habitations 56384 habitations i.e. 88% were covered under this category. The 
Committee distressed to note the under achievement in physical target vis-a-vis the 
expenditure incurred. They, therefore, desired that the reasons for this mismatch may 
be studied in depth and corrective measures put in place without any further loss of 
time. They also wanted to be apprised of the outcome of such a study and also the 
measures initiated within three months of presentation of this Report to Lok Sabha.
1.31 The Ministry in their Action Taken reply has stated that under the NRDWP , a 
portion of the annual allocation to the States is released at the  fag end of the financial 
year in the months of  February and March every year in the form of second 
installments / additional installments as States do not submit their required documents 
in time and this allocation  remains  utilized  in that financial year and is carried forward 
to the next year and thus the effective availability of funds for execution of schemes with 
the States is less in a year vis a vis actual releases  in a year which results in less 
physical achievement  and its subsequent reflection on the IMIS. Moreover, many 
States in recent past are taking up surface water based mega piped water schemes for 
which the gestation period is 3 to 4 years, hence funds spent in a year are not resulting 
in actual coverage of habitations. Similarly, in quality affected habitations, ground water 
is contaminated and water is made available from distant sources which is taking time.  
However, this Ministry has been asking the States through video conferencing, review 
meetings, etc. to achieve their physical targets as envisaged in the Annual Action Plan. 
It may be seen that States have been improving their physical achievements year after 
year.  

1.32 The Committee are surprised that the Ministry have furnished expenditure 
figures for the years 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 without indicating the physical 
achievements in the implementation of NRDWP. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate that the physical achievements made year-wise and State-wise vis-a-vis 
expenditure incurred on implementation of NRDWP be furnished to the 
Committee within next six months. Further, since the programme is an on going
one, the Ministry must collect the requisite statistics indicating the expenditure 
and physical achievements and submit the same to Parliament through their 
Annual Reports on regular basis.

CHAPTER  II
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
Rural Drinking Water Programme
The Committee deplored that the Government merely kept on renaming the
programme(s) meant for drinking water supply in rural areas and allocating resources 
without addressing responsibility and accountability issues so vital for the success of
these programme(s). The examination by the Committee has established beyond any 
manner of  doubt  that the continued failure of the successive schemes for provision of 
drinking water to rural areas is attributable to lack of proper planning, coordination
and control on the part of the Union Government. The Committee are of the
considered view that mobilisation of resources, their allocation, release to States and 
sustained monitoring are an integral  part  of any developmental architecture. More so, 
a scheme of such a magnitude requires continuous monitoring, constant supervision
and coordination by the Union Government as the implementing agencies belong to
the State Governments. It is beyond comprehension as to how the Union Government, 
the major contributor towards funding of all the schemes pertaining to drinking water in 
rural areas, remained oblivious to the stark ground situation. This indifference of the
Government is evident from the way the Integrated Management information System 
data is being got verified. The Committee note that an independent evaluation study
was commissioned by the Union Government for the purpose in 2011-12 but there  is 
no trace  of the report more than  three years  later. Keeping  in view the dismal potable 
water supply scenario, the depleting water  table  and  the  rising dark blocks, acute
power shortages affecting water supply and the unreliable system of collecting and 
monitoring the vital data regarding the  drinking  water  supply  programme, the
Committee recommend that a complete reorientation of the role and strategy of the
Union Government is essential to make the scheme a success. Further, a system of
concurrent and continuous monitoring and evaluation needs to be put in place without 
any delay and the Committee be apprised of the same within three months.

Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee with regard to the continued failure of
successive schemes for provision of drinking water to rural areas is attributable to lack 
of proper coordination, planning and control on the part of the Union Government is not 
true. The Ministry is of the view that the NRDWP or its earlier version Accelerated Rural
Water Supply Programme (ARWSP) has not been a failure. With the available 
resources, both human and financial, at its disposal, the Ministry has made significant if 
not outstanding achievements to showcase. It is true and much is being spoken and 
written about the total investments of Rs. 1,64,700 crores in this sector since last 67 
years . In per capita terms, considering a total rural population of 9038.94 lakhs, it 
comes to a mere Rs.272 per capita per year which in the views of the Ministry is not 
adequate. The Ministry takes all efforts to monitor the ground realities of rural drinking 
water supply  situation  in  the  country by having field visits of Area Officers, video-
conferencing, surprise-checks in the villages etc. The Government monitors the 
execution  of  the  Programme  through  National Level Monitors also who submit their 
report to this  Ministry.  The  Ministry  has  an online Integrated management 
Information System (IMJS) in which data related to various components of the
programme upto the habitation level are being captured and maintained. It is dynamic 
system in which overview and the current  status  of  the  programme are reflected  and 
is in public  domain for  everyone  tosee.
With respect to the recommendations regarding the complete reorientation of the
scheme it is submitted that as per the recommendations, the scheme guidelines are  
being looked  into for  necessary modifications I improvements.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
Availability of Water
The Committee note that no holistic and comprehensive  mapping  of all  sources 
of water in the country has been done. Further, there is sheer want of effective 

coordination between the Union Ministries inter se and the Union and the  State  
Governments  and  there  is no vision document on water availability and usages,  the  
Committee,  therefore, recommend that:
The Committee note that no holistic and comprehensive  mapping  of all  sources 
of water in the country has been done. Further, there is sheer want of effective 
coordination between the Union Ministries inter se and the Union and the  State  
Governments  and  there  is no vision document on water availability and usages,  the  
Committee,  therefore, recommend that:
(i) A comprehensive water mapping of all sources of water be done to
facilitate rational allocation and distribution of water to agriculture, industry,
drinking water  and other sectors in a well-prioritized manner;
(ii) A close watch be kept on the allocation, distribution and usage of water by the
competing sectors so that concurrent  and  effective remedial  measures  could 
be taken in any situation without any loss of time;
(iii) The Ministry  of Water  Resources,  River  Development  and Ganga 
Rejuvenation should  make  this  a  well-coordinated  and  continuous  affair  on
the lines  of  'State  of Agriculture  in  India'   Report   being   annually   brought   
out   by the   Ministry   of Agriculture  (Department  of Agriculture  and  
Cooperation) and bring out a Report on 'State of Water in India' and in like
manner present it toParliament every year during the Budget Session;
(iv) Further, the Government should also come up with a 'White Paper' on their
efforts made so far in the light of recommendations  made by Bhor  Committee, 
1949 so that not only the problematic areas are clearly  identified  and 
understood  but also the hugely belated course correction is put in place at once 
to ensure universal availability and accessibility of drinking water in rural areas 
at least by the end of Twelfth Plan.
(v) The Government should come up with a Vision Document on water availability
and its usage in various sectors so that the much needed balance in the 
demands of various  competing sectors is restored  and maintained; and
(vi) The independent evaluation study of the data entered into IMIS by the States 
which is lingering on since 2012-13 be completed without any further delay. The
Committee would like to be apprised of  its findings  and  action  taken  
thereupon by the Union  Government  within three months  of the presentation  
of this Report.
Reply of the Government
As regards recommendations of the Committee with regard to the holistic and
comprehensive mapping of sources of water in  the country it is stated that the
recommendations essentially fall under the domain of Ministry or Water Resources,

River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. However, the point wise response  of the 
Ministry on the recommendations  of the committee  are given below:
(i) The Central Water Commission of the Ministry of Water  Resources, River
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has  developed  a  web-enabled 
Geographic Information System (GIS) called Water Resources  Information  
System  (WRIS) which monitors surface water availability in various sources
across the country. Since 85% of the drinking water sources are based on 
groundwater, the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in collaboration with 
National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), Hyderabad has completed 4,898
groundwater prospect maps based on hydro geomorphology (HGM) using GIS 
and satellite data. These maps have been shared in the WRIS portal as well as 
in the Bhuvan portal  maintained  by NRSC,  Hyderabad.  Using these  two 
systems,  conjunctive use of surface -water and groundwater for various sectors 
like agriculture, drinking water and industries, etc. can be planned. The digital 
data on groundwater  prospect  maps  have also been shared with Central
Ground Water Board (CGWB) through a tripartite Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between the  Ministry  of Drinking  Water and  Sanitation, 
CGWB and NRSC, Hyderabad for the purpose of National Aquifer Mapping.
(ii) The National Water Policy has been prepared  by the Ministry  of  Water 
Resources, RD & GR. Though the policy specify first charge  on  all  sources  is 
for  drinking and domestic purposes, specific allocations for various competing 
sectors need to be assessed concurrently and monitored closely.
(iii) The matter pertains to Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR.
(iv) The major aim of the Bhore Committee was to survey the existing position 
regarding the health conditions and the health organizations of the country and 
to make recommendations for development in order to improve public health 
system in India with specific focus on rural India. In this regard, the Ministry of 
Water Resources  shall  have to take a concerted view with related Ministries
like Health & Family Welfare, Drinking Water and Sanitation, Urban 
Development, Environment & Forests, etc. We agree that in order to provide 
focus on drinking water availability in rural areas, there  is a  necessity to map 
the social, economic and health  indicators  given  in  the  National  Health 
Profile brought out by Central Bureau of Health  Intelligence,  Ministry  of  
Health  and Family Welfare on WRJS data and groundwater prospect maps.
(v) The overall mandate of water management in the country is  with  the  Ministry 
of Water Resources, RD& GR. In their Vision Document, clear emphasis shall
have to be provided for conjunctive use of surface water, groundwater and
rain water so that demands for competing sectors are balanced in specific 

regions of interest.
(vi) The third party independent evaluation on data entry made by the  States  into 
the online Integrated Management Information System ( IMIS) of the Ministry 
of Drinking Water and Sanitation has been completed and the final report  has  
been  received. The Ministry is presently deputing teams of officials from the 
Ministry to cross-verify the data analysis given in the Evaluation Report and the 
actual field conditions. After this exercise is completed, the key 
recommendations along with observations of the Ministry will be submitted  to 
the Committee.
It may be kept in mind that drinking water constitutes  a  minuscule  
portion  of the total fresh water availability in the country. With competing 
demands of agriculture and industry on the available water resources in the 
country, any improvement in the overall management of water in the country 
would definitely have a positive impact on the drinking water availability  and
vice-versa.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
Slippage of covered habitations and sustainability  of water  sources
The Committee note that as per the IMIS data entered  by the  States as on 1 
April, 2014, out of the 16,96,664 rural habitations in the country 12,49,695 (73 .6%) 
habitations are fully covered (on the basis of 40 lpcd norm), 3,68,463 (21.17%) are 
partially covered and 78,506 (4.6%) are quality affected. They further note that the
number of covered habitat ions slipping back to partially covered/quality affected 
habitation status is quite alarming as on an average approximately 1.4 lakh habitations
per year have slipped back during the last seven years or so. The Ministry has
attributed reasons for this slippage to over dependence of rural water supply schemes 
on ground water, indiscriminate extraction of ground water for irrigation, uncontrolled 
pollution of  surface  water,  erratic  pattern  of rainfall, natural calamities and 
erratic/non-availability  of power,  etc. The Committee  observe  that up to 67% of the 

allocation to States under NRDWP are earmarked for covering water quality affected 
habitations. Apart from this, from the year 2012, 5% of allocation at the national level 
is provided to States having chemical contamination as well as to States with high
incidence of Japanese Encephalitis and Acute  Encephalitis  Syndrome  cases.  
Similarly, 10% of the funds under NRDWP are provided  to  States on  100% Central  
share basis  to be spent on ensuring sustainability  of drinking  water  sources  by 
constructing  structures  for recharge of ground water. In addition, States are also 
provided 15%  funds  under  NRDWP for Operation & Maintenance activities to
ensure sustainable service delivery and the Ministry has been asking the States
Governments to seek participation of local Panchayats so that schemes once installed  
do not slip back  in terms of service delivery.
The Committee further find that the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has
written to States to identify the  surface  water  reservoirs  in their  respective  States for
sourcing water for new piped water supply schemes. The Ministry has also written to
the Union Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation to
allow/reserve ascertain percentage of water from these reservoirs for being used in
drinking water supply schemes. However, surprisingly, beyond writing the letters, the 
nodal Ministry did not care to conduct any study of the recurring phenomenon of 
significant slip backs. The Committee further observe that only a few States have 
shown their interest in creating sustainability structures and a continuous decline in 
total sustainability structures has been noticed 29217 in 2011-12 vis-a-vis that 36870 of 
2010-11 and 25057 in2013-14 vis-a-vis that 48281 of 2012-13. Apparently, this shows
either the States have not been fully sensitized to the importance and pivotal role of
the sustainability structure or there are some inherent bottlenecks or constraints in
creation of these structures. Having regard to the fact that sustainability structures 
are a sine qua non for ensuring universal availability of drinking water in the rural areas, 
the Committee feel strongly that it is incumbent upon the Ministry to take immediate 
corrective measures  so  that  the  creation of sustainability structures gathers the 
requisite momentum  without  any further  loss of time. The Committee  would like to 
be apprised of the specific interventions of the Ministry in  this regard  at the earliest but 
positively within three months of the presentation  of this Report.
Reply of the Government
With regard to the observations regarding phenomena of  significant  slippages
of rural habitations from fully covered status to partially covered it is submitted that the
provision of rural drinking water supply is a continuous process and as more  than 85% 

of our rural drinking water supply schemes are based on ground water, the phenomena
of slippages would continue to exist and it cannot be eliminated completely. It can be
reduced significantly only when the entire rural drinking water system switches over to
secured perennial surface water sources. The sustainability of ground water based 
drinking water supply scheme is dependent on rejuvenation of ground water with rain 
water. As the phenomena of recurrent drought has been witnessed in the country
since last many years, the creation of sustainability structures throughout the country  
have  also  not yielded desired results.
The  Ministry  has  been  imploring  States  continuously  through  video-
conference to give utmost importance to sustainability component of the Programme
by dovetailing funds from MNREGS I Watershed Development Projects etc. and has
urged them to gradually shift rural drinking water supply schemes to perennial,
secured, surface water sources so that the problem of slippages is brought down to a
minimum, if not totally eliminated. However, this would require massive investment
in rural drinking water supply sector as such schemes would require creation of
large water supply grids and transportation of water over long distances. This is a
highly capital intensive programme for which the commensurate resources have not
been made available to this Ministry. In fact the budget for the programmer is
reducing gradually as more funds have gone to States through Fourteenth Finance
Commission grants. However, the Ministry have asked the States to take External 
funding for water grid from domestic lending agencies like NABADRD, HUDCO or  
from  international lending agencies like World Bank, JICA etc.
Here, the Ministry wants to highlight that States like Telangana  and Madhya
Pradesh have started making arrangement of funds for water grid. The State of Madhya
Pradesh has also formed  a separate agency namely Madhya Pradesh Jal Nigam to 
carry out piped drinking water supply to  its  rural population  and  has  approached  
World Bank and JICA  to find  these projects  in a large scale.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter I )

Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
Sustainability of Water Sources
Besides, creation of sustainability structure, the sustainability of water sources 
has been a serious challenge and impediment in view of the unabated and 
indiscriminate use of underground water and unchecked huge release of water 
contaminating effluents therein including surface water. The examination by the 
Committee reveals that adequate concerted and  conducive efforts have not been made 
by the Government to tackle this gargantuan problem. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the reasons  for  pollution of both surface as well as 
underground water, depletion in level of ground  water  in various parts of the country 
including the Tea Gardens in Assam, and rising incidence of natural calamities leading 
to slip-back problem of already covered habitations, etc. need to be revisited on priority 
basis and remedial measures initiated with full fidelity and alacrity. Further, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps being taken to recharge ground water, 
to rejuvenate water bodies through check dams and other methods also taking into
account the highly reliable old water systems which were created, charged  and also
interlinked. The Committee would like to be apprised of the same within six months of
the presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee that sustainability of water sources has been
a serious challenge in view of indiscriminate use of underground water and unchecked
huge use of water contaminant affluent therein it is submitted that the mandate of 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation is ve1y limited as far as containment of the
effluents in water sources is concerned. A concerted action is required on the part of the 
different Ministries under the umbrella of Ministry of Water Resources to see how this 
can be prevented and sustainability of water sources is achieved by dovetailing of funds
from Rural Development I Agriculture I Department of Land Resources to take up large 
scale check dams and to rejuvenate watersources.
However, on water bodies it is submitted that majority of the schemes are
administered by Ministry of water Resources. The pollution of surface water bodies is
due to large scale release of industrial effluents and is under the Ministry of 

Environment and Forests and Climate Change (Central Pollution Control Board). The 
pollution  in ground water is geogenic in nature and hence water quality layer mapping 
has been started and states have been advised to tap water from  safe aquifers.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
Per Capita Availability of Safe Drinking Water
The Committee note that the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has 
prepared a Strategic Plan (2011-2022) which stipulates to cover 50% of all rural 
households with piped water supply and 35% with household tap connections up to
2017. By 2022 the goal is to cover 90% rural households with piped water supply and  
80%  with  household tap connection to ensure safe drinking water @70 liter per
capita per day (lpcd) instead of 40 lpcd being provided for the last four decades. The 
NRDWP Guidelines, 2013 has fixed an interim norm of 55 lpcd to meet the water
requirement under this Strategic Plan. However, the Secretary Ministry of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation deposed before the Committee that in some urban areas the limit 
of availability of this water per person has been found in the range of 100-135 lped. 
They further notice that the Ministry has already issued NRDWP Guidelines-2013 
(updated) to implement piped water supply schemes and accordingly issued a manual 
for preparation of Detailed Project Report of piped water supply schemes along with
the request to formulate their own' State Pipe Policy'. As a result, the States like Tamil
Nadu, Kerala, Rajasthan, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, etc. have prepared their own Pipe
Policy and published the same. Apart from this, the Committee also note that  piped  
water supply has been ensured up to 47% of the total rural households including 15% 
through household tap connections. The Committee, therefore, urge the MDWS to 
pursue vigorously with the remaining States who have not formulated and published 
their own Pipe Policy / drinking water policy and to expedite the same and keep the 
Union Government apprised. The Government also need to ensure that each 
household gets assured and safe supply of 70 liter water per capita per day(70 IPCD). 
Further, any consumption  beyond  the permissible ceiling must be made prohibitive so 
as to discourage extravagant usage of water. In their considered view, the Committee 
feel that there is an imperative need for enunciating a National Policy on water usage 
and water charges.

Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has written to all States and has been
pursuing vigorously to formulate their own Pipe Policy/drinking water policy. The States
have been asked to give a higher level of drinking water delivery beyond 40 lpcd if they
are able to do so based on the availability of water in their States. The Ministry has 
asked the States that wherever piped drinking water is being supplied, collection of user 
charges be made mandatory and a part of the O&M of the rural drinking water supply 
infrastructure be met through the user charges thus collected. This has been happening 
in many States, as has been observed  during the  field  visits of the officers to the 
States.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
Focus and Objective of XII Plan
The Committee observe that the Strategic Plan (2011-2022) of the 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation ensures that every rural person in the 
country will  have access to 70 lpcd within their household premises or at a 
horizontal or vertical distance of not more than 50 meters from the household 
without barriers of social and financial discrimination. However, subsequently the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-2017) envisaged 55 lpcd from the present limit of 
40 lpcd. The Committee  are, however,  apprehensive over  the  compatibility of 
the targets of Strategic Plan (201 1-2022) chalked out by the nodal Ministry and 
the XII Plan (2012-2017).
Having examined the drinking water perspective from all dimensions, the
Committee observe that while water sources and Water Policy are in the exclusive 
domain  of the Ministry of Water Resources, the drinking water aspect in respect of 
rural areas has been assigned to the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation which 
has no control over water sources and has no independent policy on drinking water for 
rural areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend establishment of a permanent 
standing machinery for effective coordination and cooperation between the Ministry of 
Water Resource and the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation for all matters related 
to Rural Drinking Water Supply. Further, the Committee would also like to be apprised
as to how the target of piped water supply would be met when the Ministry of Drinking

Water and Sanitation has first and foremost, to ensure supply of adequate water from 
the available  water  sources which are being exclusively administered by the Ministry 
of Water Resources and fall within the legislative jurisdiction  of respective State(s).
Reply of the Government
With regard to the recommendation for establishment of permanent standing
machinery for effective coordination and cooperation between the Ministry of Water
Resources River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation and Ministry of Drinking Water
& Sanitation for all matters relating to rural drinking water supply , it is submitted that the
execution of rural drinking water supply schemes is within the mandate of the
respective State Governments. Issues relating to sourcing and availability of water for 
rural drinking water supply schemes would be served effectively if there is a linkage of
State/Regional offices of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation with that of the rural drinking water supp61 executing bodies (PHEDs) of 
the respective State Governments.
The Ministry has already requested the Ministry of Water Resources, River
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation in July 2014, to supply to this Ministry, state
wise, spare/ additional capacity available in various dams and reservoirs which could
be tapped through pipe lines for taking drinking water to various villages and the
capacity of each such source which could be utilized for drinking water, so that States 
could be sensitized to plan  drinking water scheme  through pipe lines.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
Jurisdictional and Related Matters
The Committee have also taken note of the competing jurisdictions of various
ministries/departments on water related matters, the performance of the Ministry of           

Drinking Water and Sanitation, the mission mode nature and the time bound 
implementation schedule of the scheme being handled by the Ministry, the enhanced 
devolution of funds to the States by the Fourteenth Finance Commission and the 
consequent effect on the role and responsibility of the Ministry, the human resources 
shortage besetting the Ministry and affecting its effective functioning. The Committee 
have also carefully examined the mandate of the Ministry, their intrinsic linkage with the 
mandate of the Ministry of Rural Development., the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation and the Ministry  of Human Resource 
Development. The Committee feel that in the extant scenario, the Government ought 
to give a serious consideration to retaining the Ministry as a standalone entity or bring 
the Ministry again within the more cohesive ambit of the Ministry of Rural Development. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the considered views of the Government in 
the matter within three months of the presentation of this Repo1t to Lok Sabha.
Reply of the Government
Swachh Bharat Mission - Gramin (SBM-G) has been launched by the Government on 
2nd October, 2015 and a goal has been set to achieve 100% sanitation by 2nd October,
2019 for which this Ministry is the coordinating Ministry. Lot of activities are going  on in
the Ministry to achieve the goal set by the Government. At this juncture, it is the view of
Ministry that it will not be appropriate to reduce the Ministry to a Department under the
Ministry of Rural Development.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
Water Quality Testing Infrastructure
The Committee note that out of the aggregate 16,96,664 rural habitations,
78,506 habitations (4.62%) are water quality affected.  However,  there  are  

conflicting reports regarding the exact numbers as the NSSO survey conducted 
up to July 2012 shows that 88.5% of total rural habitation shave access of 
drinking water from protected sources and the remaining 1 1.5% are yet to have 
access of drinking water from protected sources. This Committee have 
extensively dealt with arsenic contamination in their First Report on Occurrence 
of High Arsenic Content in Ground Water presented to Lok Sabha on 11
December, 2014. The Committee further note that the achievements under  
coverage of quality affected habitations has been 68%and 76% during the year 
2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively. While the corrective measures are obviously 
sluggish, the Committee observe that the identification machinery for monitoring  
of water quality testing  infrastructure is also in a pathetic state, thereby, raising a 
big question mark on the veracity of the statistics collected pertaining to water 
quality affected areas and the efforts being made by the Government to address 
the situation. The Committee are ill at ease to find that there are approximately 
2300 labs in the country to check the drinking water quality of about 58 lakh
sources of water(out of which 70% are hand pumps) in the Country. Out of these
nearly halt {30 lakhs) of the water sources are tested regularly, though, even by
the admission of the Ministry ideally 66,24,000 samples should be tested 
annually @ 3000  sample per  lab per year. Furthermore, this very less number 
of laboratories is compounded by the low salary (between  <'  8000and  <'  
12000) being  paid  to  the  personnel  manning  them.  Thus, there is always a 
perennial shortage of manpower in these laboratories. The equipments 
available in these laboratories, as per the Ministry's own admission is not of 
international standards for want of adequate funds and training to the staff.
The Committee are dismayed over the fact that a paltry 3% of the  NRDWP funds
are allocated for the component of WQ Monitoring and Surveillance. The real issue in 
the opinion of the Committee is the paltry 3%funds that are allocated under NRDWP for
setting up water quality monitoring and surveillance mechanism including wages for
technical manpower in laboratories, field test kits, refills for chemical testing, etc. Given
the immense significance of testing and quality control of drinking water, the 
Committee strongly recommend:
(i) that the amount allocated for Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
may be augmented to not less than 5%  of NRDWP funds;
(ii) the International Centre for Drinking Water Quality (ICDWQ) which has
been
recently opened at Kolkata be made fully  functional without any further delay;
(iii) additional water quality laboratories of international standards may be
established across the country as per necessity or the existing ones be upgraded 
at strategic locations within the shortest timeframe. These regional laboratories 

may be networked with the Centre at Kolkata which apart from testing purposes 
may also be utilized for training and capacity building of the technical personnel;
(iv) a simple test kit be developed expeditiously by the CSIR which  can  be  
used by the common people easily to test the drinking water quality, these kits 
may be distributed to begin with free of charge in the fluoride affected tribal 
belts; and
(v) considering the fact that the water quality of surface and ground water sources 
available in the country is being monitored  by  different  organisations  / 
agencies under  different  administrative  Departments  /Ministries  leading  to 
avoidable overlapping, duplication of efforts and wasteful expenditure, a single
body/agency/authority ought to be assigned the exclusive task to address the
different aspects related to water supply quality, efficiency and economy.
Reply of the Government
(i)      The Ministry  appreciates  the concerns  of the  Committee for  recommending
increase of allocation for water quality monitoring and  surveillance  (WQMS)  to 
not  less than 5% of the National Rural Drinking  Water Programme  (NRDWP) 
funds. Erstwhile, under NRDWP, 3% of the fi111ds allocated to the States under  
NRDWP were earmarked for WQMS and the 100% Central  share  basis.  With  
effect from 01.04.2015, the fund sharing pattern /or WQMS has been changed to 
60:40 between Centre and State. This means that the States have to
contribute matching 2% funds for the purpose  thereby making the overall  
availability  of funds  for   WQMS raised  to 5%.
(ii) The design and construction work of international Centre for Drinking Water
Quality (JCDWQ) has been awarded to Central Public Works Department
(CPWD), Kolkata. The Committee  might be aware  that land admeasuring  8.72 
acre is already in the possession of the ICDWQ Society. To  start  functioning  of  
JCDWQ immediately, six posts including that of Director, ICDWQ has  already  
been created and will be recruited shortly.
(iii) As on 15 December 2015,  30 proposals from various Water Quality  
Testing Laboratories across   the country   have   already   been  
submitted to  National Accreditation Board for Testing  and  Calibration
Laboratories (NABL) for its accreditation, w hich follows international

Standard of IS017025. States have been advised to get all the Laboratories 
accredited in a phased manner from NABL.  The Ministry would like to   
inform  the Committee  that networking  of professional organizations
including Water Quality Testing Laboratories is one of the objectives of the
JCDWQ. Capacities  of manpower  working in State, District and Sub­ 
Divisional   Water Quality Testing Laboratories will be built by the JCDWQ
in a phased manner.
(iv) Various CSJR institutions and other Government organizations like Baba
Atomic Research Centre (BARC), NEER] (National Environmental 
Engineering Research Institute), Indian Institute of Toxicology Research 
(IITR) have already developed technologies for development of field test 
kits, technology of which have been transferred to various private organizations 
which are already providing such kits. The Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation would like to inform the Committee that the distribution of field 
testing kits (chemical) and refills along with bacteriological veils to all  Gram 
Panchayats is one of the activities  being taken up by the Ministry under Water 
Quality Monitoring and Surveillance through the respective State Departments 
dealing with Rural Drinking Water Supply.
(v) The Ministry submits to the Committee that Rural Water Supply is a State 
Subject and water quality availability and assurance for water quality is the 
responsibility of the State Governments. The Ministry would render financial  
and  technical  assistance to the concerned State Departments dealing  with 
Rural  Drinking Water Supply, while the Ministry coordinate with other 
concerned Ministries like Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation; Environment, Forest  and  Climate Change; Health  & Family 
Welfare, etc.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 12)
Externally Funded Projects
The Committee were apprised that the Government  do not maintain the 
data regarding the proposals to finance drinking water projects which are 
undertaken by the different States/UT Governments out of their own resources 
other than the ones being undertaken under NRDWP. The Committee find this 
totally unacceptable as any holistic planning in the subject matter is 
inconceivable without factoring in the works being done for similar purposes 
under other schemes and programmes. Apart  from this, the  Committee  also

find that eight high value externally aided major projects/schemes in eleven 
States have been unde1taken by the respective States/UTs. Some of these 
projects also have sanitation components as well. Notably, the total external 
funding involved in these projects is 1776.47million dollars (approx. 1 1046 
crore) for the period 2006-15 to 2019-2020. The Committee find that a 
substantial number of villages/habitations  have been/are being covered under 
these externally funded Schemes/Programmes. Taking note of the fact that there 
is no central data as regards the drinking water projects unde1taken  by  the 
States without the aid of NRDWP funds and the high value externally aided
drinking water projects executed by eleven States, the Committee recommend
that
(i) a central data base must be maintained of all drinking water projects at district
and State level, year-wise; and
(ii) a comprehensive statement be submitted to the Committee with in three months
of the presentation of this Report indicating the achievements/targets of the
externally aided Schemes/Projects, State-wise and the physical targets and
achievements and the financial commitments of the Union Government and the  
concerned State Government (s) under their respective Schemes/Projects 
during the corresponding period in the areas where these externally funded 
Schemes/Projects are being implemented.
Reply of the Government
• As Rural Drinking water supply is a State subject, the State Governments are 
vested with powers to implement drinking water supply schemes. Ministry of Drinking 
Water & Sanitation through National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) 
supplement s the efforts of States to provide drinking water to rural population by 
providing technical & financial assistance.
• Government of India has made a Strategic Plan for providing drinking water supply
in rural areas in the country for the period 2011-2022. The interim goal  till  2017  is to
cover 50% of all rural households with piped water supply and by 2022, the goal is to
cover 90% of rural households -with piped water supply.
• For expeditious coverage of rural population with pipe water supply, states need
more funding than what MDWS can provide to them. As such many states went for
external assistance J,-0111 the agency like World Bank and Japan International Co-
operation Agency (JICA). For this, they submit their proposal to Department of 
Economic Affairs (DEA) directly or through MDWS.

• Drinking water schemes I projects of the States do not come  to MDWS for
approval. States have State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee (SLSSC) which  
approves the rural drinking water supply project s to be taken up in the State.
• Although MDWS does not monitor the progress of such externally aided project,
this Ministry in its Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) started maintaining
a data base of such schemes. As reported by the States  in the !MIS,  state-wise, 
district­ wise detail is in Annexure- I &II.
• For some States (having least coverage of pipe water supply) which didn 't come 
forward for such externally aided projects such as Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand & UP, 
MDWS took the project Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low-Income 
States, RWSSP­ LJS, with the assistance of World Bank. These projects are being 
progressed  directly by the States and monitored by MDWS. State-wise, district-wise 
detail is in Annexure-III.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.13)
Progress of World Bank funded projects in the Punjab
The Committee also note that under the World Bank funded Punjab Rural Water
and Sanitation Project executed between March 2007 and December, 2014 
achievements under various components of the Project have exceeded the targets by  
35.6%  and 57% respectively. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
strategy and approach adopted for the execution of the projects leading to substantial 
over achievements. The Committee would also like to be informed about the exact 
timelines for various stages of execution in respect of the remaining seven externally 
aided projects within three months of the presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
• Punjab Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project
1. The main objectives of this project is as under:

a. Coverage of habitations
b. Individual House Connections
c. Performance improvement in water supply schemes
d. Sewerage Development
2. The Strategy & approach adopted for the execution of the Project are as
under:
a. Provide Universal access of safe drinking water through individual water
connections point to each household.
b. Set up exemplary !role model villages. Provision of water taps on each
water connection points  to check wastage of water.
c. Supply of water minimum two times in a day and for more than 10 hours
water supply in 50 schemes.
d. Supply of good quality of water to minimize water borne diseases.
e. Disclosure of information on Project website to enhance transparency as 
well as to Gram Panchayat Water and Sanitation Committee (GPWSC)
f Tele-calling  system   introduced   in  which  each  District   Project 
Management Committee (DPMC) seeks feedback from 5 GPWSCs on 
daily basis  to expedite the redressal of water supply related complaints if
any.
g.   To enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the water supply scheme, all 
single village scheme as well as intra village distribution system of a multi
village scheme were transferred to GPWSC.
h. Power to sanction schemes costing up to Rs. 30  lakhs  decentralized  at district
level through committee system.
i. Reduction  in illegal tapping of water was achieved.
j. Full financing   of  O&M  expenditure  through  user  charges  in  more  than 
50% schemes done.
k. Selection of source of water /technology to be adopted  and  localities  to be
covered with distribution system were decided by GPWSC.
3. The original plan was  based  on the preliminary feasibility  reports  (PFR). 
However the project was executed through various schemes based on the actual 
Detailed Project Reports (DPR). The variation in the original plan and the achievement
is because of this reason.
• Timelines of the other externally aided projects is in Annexure IV
Observation/Recommendation
The sum, up the Committee find that ensuring universal availability of drinking 
water in rural areas has been a priority area for the successive Governments almost 
from the time of Independence. Regrettably, however, the achievements over  the  last  

six  decades  are far from commensurate with the huge amount of physical  efforts  and  
money  (Rs. 1,65,000 crore) spent. The Rural Area Drinking Water Programme has  
continued  under  one or the other name for all these years though  universal  
availability  of  drinking  water in many rural areas still remains elusive. Surprisingly,
according to the Strategic Plan for rural drink ing water for the period 2011-22, the 
stated interim goal is to cover 50% of rural households with piped water supply by2017 
and 35% of  rural  households  with tap connection and to cover 90% of rural 
household with proper water supply and 80% with tap connection by2022. The 
Committee are startled to observe want of effective coordination between the
concerned Union Ministries and the State Governments. That water is a State subject 
cannot be a tenable ground for absolving the Union Government  of its responsibility to 
provide drinking water with tap connection to every household since citizenship is a 
Union subject and it is the Fundamental Right of every citizen to l live with dignity. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the  Government  take  an  early  and holistic 
view of the competing demands on water from industry, agriculture and growing 
urbanization; the availability of water in the rivers and all water bodies, the need for 
ensuring minimum and constant flow of water in the rivers; the need for checking all 
kind of contaminations entering into the water  bodies  and the  ground  water;  the  
reasons for shrinking water bodies and depleting ground water table;  over exploitation  
of ground water and rising dark blocks; the need for creating participatory approach
among all stakeholders for efficient conservation and  management  of water  including  
compulsory  water harvesting, so as to provide safe and adequate water with tap 
connection to every household. If felt necessary, the Government may consider to
bring an overarching federal law for efficient water conservation, management including 
distribution of safe and adequate drinking water to every household.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has carefully noted the summary of Recommendations of the 
Committee of Estimates regarding universal availability of drinking water in rural areas,
competing usage of water in various sectors, contamination of water resources, need 
for improvement in physical pe1formance, participatory approach, over-exploitation of 
groundwater and coordination between State and the Centre as well as among various 
related Ministries. In this regard, the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation intend to
take appropriate action which are as below:-
(i) Coordination with Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation for universal availability of water, rationalizing water for

various competing sectors, mapping of water quality hotspots in conjunction
with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and Ministry of Environment, Forest 
& Climate Change and promote conjunctive use of surface water,  rain  water  
and groundwater. Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation will also request 
the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation and Ministry of Rural Development (MGNREGA) for bringing in 
more improvements in de -silting of all surface water bodies including Ml 
(Minor Irrigation) tanks along with streamlining broken supply channels to 
these water bodies.
(ii) The Committee is aware that a large number of water supply projects are half-
way in commissioning  because  of paucity  of fund . This is especially true in 
case of coverage of water quality affected habitations ·where safe surface
water bodies are at a distance and the project cost is reasonably high. This 
will be higher than the other projects. In this regard, the Ministry will also 
advise all the State Governments to rope in more State budgets to complete 
all these projects. Participatory approach will be followed in all water supply 
projects, including Panchayati Raj institutions, so that inter-village distribution 
network are maintained properly by the Gram Panchayats and operation and 
maintenance expenditure be met from the 14 Finance Commission funds 
provided to them. About 80% of the water is used for agriculture and 
horticulture and therefore, the Ministry of Agriculture will be requested to 
provide more focus on use of drip and sprinkler irrigation methods instead of 
conventional flooding irrigation.
(iii) The Ministry will advise all the State Governments to concretize up-gradation of
all water quality testing laboratories, follow the uniform drinking  water quality 
monitoring protocol  published  by the Ministry  and  then seek  NABL  
accreditation in a phased manner so that  the water  quality  data generated  by  
the  Laboratories gets its due credibility.
(iv) Finally, the Ministry contemplates to achieve the strategic goals of providing
piped water supply to 90% rural households of the  country  by  the  year  2022.  
In this regard, the Ministry urges the Committee  of  Estimates  to  recommend 
the Government to provide adequate budgetary support for achieving these
goals.

CHAPTER III
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's reply
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.1)
Rural Drinking Water Programme
General
The Committee note that water is the primordial source of life  on  earth  and is virtually 
the umbilical cord for all life forms. Humankind since time  immemorial has venerated it 
as a symbol of divinity and purity. The scriptures  including the Vedas expound the 
virtues and importance of water and its sources, viz. rains, rivers,  streams  and other
bodies and hail water  as 'ambrosia',  'nourisher  of life' and 'bestower  of bliss'. Article 
21 of the Constitution proclaims 'Protection to Life' implicitly taking care of these
basic needs without which life is impossible. Besides, Article 47, enshrining one of
the Directive Principles of State Policy, enjoins upon the  State the duty to raise the  
level  of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health. The
Committee note that even before the Constitution was adopted, enacted and given to 
'We, the  people',  the Environment Hygiene Committee (Bhor Committee) had 
recommended in  1949  safe  water  supply to cover 90 percent of India's population
in a time frame of 40 years i.e. by I 989.The Committee,  however,  note that  after 
considerable  delay the Government  could announce on 1 April, 2011 that no identified 
habitation remained  uncovered.  The Committee's examination shows in the 
succeeding paragraphs that the provision of safe and adequate drinking water to the 
rural people still remains  a daunting task.
Reply of the Government
General observations  of the  Committee  and hence no comments.

CHAPTER IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government's replies have 
not been accepted by the Committee
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
Coverage of Rural Habitations under National Rural Drinking Water Programme 
(NRDWP):-
India has been facing chronic problem of drinking water shortage, stress 
and scarcity in different parts due to its vast and varied geographical and 
topographical  conditions. Though the country is bestowed with sources of 
surface water in abundance,  most  of  it is contaminated or allowed to go waste 
in the sea. The situation, the Committee note, has been further aggravated by
the competing pressures of the eco-systems, the agriculture, industry and
energy sectors. Although rural drinking water supply is a State subject and
has been included in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution amongst the 
subjects that may be entrusted to Panchayats by the State, the Committee  note  
that  having  regard  to the magnitude of the problem, the Union Government
pro-actively supplements and coordinates the efforts of the State
Governments. To tackle the problem of safe drinking water in the rural areas
of the country, the first water supply and sanitation programme was
introduced in social sector in 1954. Thereafter, a major intervention of 
Government of Ind ia started in 1972-73 through the Accelerated Rural Water 
Supply Programme (ARWSP) to accelerate the coverage of drinking water.
ARWSP was modified and renamed as the 'National Rural Drinking Water
Programme' (NRDWP) and a separate Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation was set up in the year 2011.
While examining the Outcome Budget of the Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation,   the   Committee   observe   that   despite   a   massive   investment   of   
more than Rs. 1, 64,700 crore in the rural water  supply sector by the Central  and  
State Governments  since the first Five Year Plan, only 75% of the total rural 
habitations have been covered with adequate potable water. As per the National 
Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), up to December 2012 only 88.5% of rural
households had access to drinking water from protected sources whereas 1 1.5% 
households were yet to have access  to  safe  drink ing water. However, according to 
the Ministry after adding  368,463  rural  habitations  which are partially covered, the 
total percentage of habitations which  have  access  to  safe drinking water reaches

95.34% as per the data entered by States as on 1 April, 2014 on Integrated
Management  Information  System (IMIS).
The Committee further note that the Environment Hygiene Committee (Bhor 
Committee) had in 1949 recommended a very reasonable and achievable target of 
providing drinking water to 90% of the population of the country in 40 years i.e. by  
1989. The Committee are deeply dismayed that even  after  67  years  of  
independence,  the basic objective of a Welfare State to provide adequate and safe
drinking water to all its citizenry specially those living in rural/remote/hard areas
whose economic conditions are compelling is yet to be achieved despite infusion of a 
massive investment of 1.65 lakh crore. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government fix the norms of potable water availability for semi urban and rural areas 
and the timeline  by  which  the envisaged quality and quantity of potable water would 
be made available to all rural parts and regions of the country.
Reply of the Government
As regards recommendations of the Committee asking the Government to fix 
norms of potable drinking water in semi-urban and rural areas, it is stated that the 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in its guidelines of National Rural Drinking
Water Programme (NRDWP) has already fixed norms of 40 liters per capita per day of
potable drinking water to the rural population. The States, however, been given flexibility 
to increase this norm based on the demand and availability of water and the resources
available with the States. Once the service delivery level of 40 lpcd (Liters per capita
per day) is achieved the norm can be gradually increased to 55lpcd, and thereafter to 
70 lpcd or more. As on 14.12.2015 a total of 12,91,947 rural habitations with a
population  coverage of 6594.39 lakhs is getting 40 lpcd or more of potable drinking 
water which is 72.95 % of the total rural population in the country. If the norm is taken 
as 55 lpcd, then a total of 7, 76,280 rural habitations with a population coverage of 
3779.08 lakhs are getting drinking water which is 41.80 % of the total rural population in 
the country. The fixation of norms/or semi urban areas is not done separately as they 
are primarily rural areas adjacent to urban towns/ cities.
Regarding the timeline by which the envisaged quality and quantity of potable
water (40lpcd) could be achieved throughout the country without any exception, it is
submitted that providing the drinking water to the rural population is ongoing and 
continuous process and the Government both at the State and Centre have to contend
with various issues and constraining factors while executing the programme. A large 

number  of the slippages of fully covered habitations to the status of partially covered is 
happening due to reduction in yield of tube wells I hand pumps and due to depletion of 
ground water level which is caused essentially by inadequate rainfall . Scanty and 
irregular rainfall in many parts  of the country is a phenomenon which has been 
happening in considerable parts of the country since last many years. The source 
security of drinking water can be achieved on a 100% based only when our entire rural
drinking water supply is based on water grids with water intake from perennial surface 
water sources is ensured throughout the year.  As  of now about 85% of our current 
rural water supply schemes are based on groundwater sources and as recharge of 
groundwater is primarily through adequate rainfall, the slippages of habitations to 
partially covered status would continue to some extent and cannot be eliminated 
altogether. To avoid this , the Ministry is now focusing on surface water based piped 
water schemes which will reduce the contamination and slippage  problem now being
faced due to over dependence on ground water. This will also red e the health related
problems.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation  (Sl. No.11)
Achievement  under NRDWP
The Committee note that the utilization of funds earmarked for NRDWP during
the Eleventh Plan and the first two years of Twelfth Plan viz 2012-13and 2013-14 was
almost cent per cent. During the Eleventh Plan, the RE allocation was ₹ 39199 crore
and the actual expenditure was ₹ 39210 crore. The Committee further note that during 
the year 2008-09, against a target of providing drinking water to 217898 habitations the 
achievement was 152990, that is 70 odd per cent. The allocation of Rs. 7298.78 crore 
was almost utilized for this 70% achievement. In the year 2009-10, out of 
158589habitations to be covered, 148879 (93.88%) habitations were  covered,  
involving the actual  expenditure  of Rs. 7989.72 crore. In   the   year   2010-1l against   
a   target   of   135000,   the   achievement   was   88.45%  at 119401 habitations. To 
achieve this, out of the BE/RE  Rs.  9000  crore, Rs. 8986.74crore were actually spent. 
During the year 2011-12 against an aggregate target  of 145169 habitations 138367 
habitations (95.31%) were covered. The amount  spent  during  the year was ₹ 8493.15 
crore from RE amount of  ₹ 8500 crore. During 2012-13  and 2013-14 against the RE 
allocation of ₹ 10500crore and ₹ 9700 crore, sums of ₹ 10489.05 crore and ₹ 9691.29 
crore respectively were actually incurred. Inexplicably, however, the physical 
achievements have not been commensurate with the expenditure incurred. During
2012-13, against a physical target of 91750 partially covered habitations  the 

achievement was merely 77388 habitations which is approximately 84% of the targets 
fixed. During 2013-14, the figures under this category were 53657 (target) and 51823
(achievement) respectively. For the quality affected habitations against a target of
28642, only 19402 i.e. just68% habitations were covered in 2012-13. In 2013-14, 
against a target ot21771 only 16649 i.e. 76% habitations were covered. As regards 
habitations with piped water supply against the target of 63297 habitations, only 
52021i.e. 82%  habitations  were covered. During 2013-14 against 64342 habitations 
56384 habitations i.e. 88% were  covered under this category. The Committee are 
distressed to note the under achievement in physical target vis-a-vis the expenditure 
incurred. They, therefore, desire that the reasons for this mismatch may be studied in
depth and corrective measures be put in place without any further loss of time. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the outcome of such a study and also the 
measures initiated within three months of presentation of this Report to Lok Sabha.
Reply of the Government
Under the NRDWP , a portion of the annual allocation to the States is released at
the fag  end of the financial  year  in the months of  February and March every year  in 
the form of second installments I additional installments as States do not  submit  their 
required documents in time and this allocation remains utilized in that financial year
and is carried forward to the next year and thus the effective availability of funds for
execution of schemes with the States is less in a year vis a vis actual releases in a
year which results in less physical achievement and its subsequent reflection on the 
IMIS. Moreover, many States in recent past are taking up surface water based mega 
piped water schemes for which the gestation period is 3 to 4 years , hence funds spent 
in a year is  not  resulting  in actual coverage of habitations . Similarly in quality affected 
habitations ground  water is contaminated and water is made available from distant 
sources which is  taking time. However, this Ministry has been asking the States
through video conferencing, review meetings etc. to achieve their physical targets as
envisaged in the Annual Action Plan. It may be seen that States have been
improving their physical achievements year after year.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter I )

CHAPTER  V
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of Government is 
still awaited
N I L
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
04 August, 2016
13 Shravana, 1938 (saka)
Chairperson,
Committee on Estimates. 

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2016-17)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 20 th May, 2016 from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Room 
No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson
Members
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar - Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Committee on Estimates (2014-15) (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Evaluation of Rural 
Drinking Water Programmes' pertaining to the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation.  The 
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri George Baker
4. Shri Dushyant Chautala
5. Shri Ashok Shankarrao Chavan
6. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
7. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
8. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
9. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar
10. Shri P. Kumar
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
12. Shri Rajesh Pandey
13. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
14. Shri Md. Salim
15. Shri Arvind Sawant
16. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
17. Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat

Committee expressed their dissatisfaction over the action taken replies submitted by the 
Government on the recommendations made in the 2nd Report of the Committee. The Committee
adopted the draft Report with some modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalise and 
present the same to Lok Sabha.
4. xxx                                                xxx                                            xxx                        
The Committee then adjourned.
_______________________________________________________________
xxx     Matter not related to this Report.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 13
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
(Sl Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6,7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 13)
Percentage of total recommendations
10
77%
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do no desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's reply
(Sl. No. 1)
Percentage of total recommendations
01
9.53%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
Government's replies have not been accepted by the Committee
(Sl. Nos. 2 &11)
Percentage of total recommendations
02
15%
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of 
the Government is still awaited
Percentage of total recommendations 
Nil
Nil