1
13
MINISTRY OF TOURISM
        &
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in Thirty Fifth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2015-16)
THIRTEENTH REPORT
_____________________________________________________________________
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

2
 THIRTEENTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2015-16)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF TOURISM
&
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in Thirty Fifth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]
Presented to Lok Sabha on        24.02. 2016
_____________________________________________________________________
                     
          
Lok Sabha Secretariat
New Delhi
February 24, 2016 /  05 Phalguna, 1937(Saka)

3
E.C. No. ________
Price : ₹ _____
© 2016 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government 
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi – 110002.

4
 CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)      (ii)
INTRODUCTION      (iv)
CHAPTER I Report 1-13
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by  Government
14-33
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies
34-35
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee
36-43
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited
44-47
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Sub-Committee on Action 
Taken Replies of Committee on Estimates held on 
05.10.2015
48-49
II. Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates 
held on 08.01.2016
50-51
III. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirteenth 
Report of Committee on Estimates (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
52

5
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2015-16)
 Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed 
3. Shri Kirti Azad 
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5. Shri Anil Shirole
6. Shri Om Birla 
7. Shri Ashok Chavan 
8. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
9. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
10. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo
13. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
14. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar
15. Shri Sudheer Gupta
16. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
17. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
18. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla
19. Shri Vinod Khanna 
20. Shri P. Kumar 
21. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
22. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
23. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
24. Shri K N Ramachandran 
25. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy 
26. Md. Salim 
27. Shri Arvind Sawant 
28. Shri Ganesh Singh 
29. Shri Rajesh Verma 
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav

6

7
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar - Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director 
4. Shri R.S. Negi - Under Secretary
5. Shri Gurpreet Singh - Sr. Executive Assistant
 

8
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 13th Report on action 
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty 
Fifth Report of Estimates Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Development 
of Tourism' pertaining to the Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Culture.
2. The Thirty Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on     
18 February, 2014. Action Taken Notes on observations/recommendations from 
Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Culture were received on 30 September, 2014 and 
15 April, 2015 respectively. The Sub-Committee on Action Taken Replies considered 
the replies during the sitting held on 05.10.2015 and asked the reasons for inordinate 
delay in furnishing replies by the Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Culture. Both the 
Ministries admitted that there was delay on their part and requested the Sub-Committee 
to condone the delay and assured that such delay will not recur in future. The Sub-
Committee also desired updation of Action Taken Replies from both the Ministries. The 
updated Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations were received 
on 16 October, 2015. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee 
on Estimates (2015-16) at their sitting held on 08 January, 2016.
3. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Thirty Fifth Report of the Committee on Estimates (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix III. 
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
20 February, 2016
1 Phalguna, 1937 (saka)
Chairperson,
Committee on Estimates. 

9
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘Development of Tourism' pertaining to the Ministry of Tourism 
and Ministry of Culture.
1.2 The Thirty Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 February, 2014. It 
contained 18 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes on 
Observations/Recommendations excluding 9 and 10 were received from the Ministry of 
Tourism on 30 September, 2014 and for Observations/Recommendations 9 and 10 on 
15 April, 2015 from the Ministry of Culture. 
1.3 The Sub-Committee on Action Taken Replies considered the replies during the 
sitting held on 05.10.2015 and asked the reasons for inordinate delay in furnishing 
replies by the Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Culture. Both the Ministries admitted 
that there was delay on their part and requested the Sub-Committee to condone the 
delay and assured that such delay will not recur in future. The Sub-Committee also 
desired updation of Action Taken Replies from both the Ministries. The updated Action 
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations were received on 16 October, 
2015. 
1.4 Replies to the Observations and Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17    (Total - 10) 
    (Chapter II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s reply:
Sl. Nos. 2 and 18     (Total - 2)
 (Chapter III)
     
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies have 
 not been accepted by the Committee:

10
Sl. Nos. 3, 5, 8, 11, and 12         (Total - 5)
 (Chapter IV)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of Government is 
still awaited:
Sl. No 10         (Total - 1)
  (Chapter V)
1.5 The Committee hope and trust that the Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by Government would be implemented expeditiously. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and Final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.   
1.6 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their Recommendations.
A. Redressal of Major Constraints for Tourism Developments or Decline in 
Foreign Tourist Arrivals and Foreign Exchange Earnings
 (Recommendation Para No. 1)
1.7 As there had been successive decline in percentage of growth in Foreign Tourist 
Arrivals (FTAs) as well as Foreign Exchange Earnings (FEEs) in terms of US Dollar, the 
Committee emphasized upon the need to address various major constraints for tourism 
development in the country such as safety of tourist’s particularly foreign tourists, 
shortage of skilled manpower, inadequacy of accommodation, lack of cleanliness in 
tourist sites, meagre plan outlay, lack of convergence of efforts and resources for 
tourism development from various Central Ministries, stakeholders and private 
investors. 
1.8 The Ministry of Tourism in its updated Action Taken Notes have submitted as 
under:

11
 "Though the growth rate of FTAs and FEEs are low during the specified period, 
there has been an increasing trend in the number of FTAs and FEEs during 2010-14. 
The annual growth rates of Foreign Tourists Arrivals (FTAs) and Foreign Exchange 
Earnings (FEEs) during 2010 to 2014 and January-September 2015 over the previous 
periods are given below:
Year FTAs (In 
Million)
Growth  
Rate
FEEs (Rs 
in Crore)
Growth 
Rate
FEEs (In 
US$ Billion)
Growth 
Rate
2010 5.78 11.8% 64,889 20.8% 14.193 27.5%
2011 6.31 9.2% 77,591 19.6% 16.564 16.7%
2012 6.58 4.3% 94,487 21.8% 17.737 7.1%
2013 6.97 5.9% 1,07,671 14.0% 18.445 4.0%
2014 7.68 10.2% 1,23,320 14.5% 20.236 9.7%
Jan-Sep, 
2015
5.61 4.6% 91,731 3.2% 14.453 -1.5%
 In 2014 the growth rate has shown an upward increase.  By recording growth 
rate of 10.2% in Foreign Tourist Arrivals India has exceeded the world average of 4.2% 
in the year 2014 in international Tourist Arrivals.  In 2014 India was at 15th position in the 
world in terms of Foreign Exchange Earnings (FEEs) and 8th position in Asia and Pacific 
Region in terms of FEEs.  
Tourism has been acknowledged as a key driver for economic development and 
employment generation across the world. The sector can contribute to faster, 
sustainable and more inclusive growth particularly for women and youth. Lack of 
hygiene and cleanliness at tourist destinations has negatively impacted tourism in India. 
To tackle this problem Ministry of Tourism launched the Campaign Clean India on 
20.12.2011 with a vision to ensure acceptable levels of cleanliness and hygiene 
practices at various tourist destinations.
ii. This initiative is voluntary and there is no budget allocation made by the Ministry 
of Tourism for this campaign.
iii. This campaign is sustained through adoption and involvement of private and 
public sector  stakeholders as a part of their corporate social responsibility (CSR). The 
Ministry of Tourism has been trying hard to pursue various PSUs and the corporate 
sector units to adopt important monuments and tourist destinations under the initiative.
iv.    The Ministry has signed an MOU with the Ministry of Railways on 6th July 2012 
and the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 21st March 2012 for the above purpose.
v. India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) has adopted Qutab Minar, New 
Delhi as a Pilot Project under Campaign Clean India. Various works undertaken by 
ITDC under the project include repair of toilets, proper signages in and around Qutab 
Minar, garbage bins, repair/replacement of light covers and painting of railings and 
deployment of staff for regular maintenance. 

12
vi. Various State Governments/UT Administrations have been requested to 
persuade the Public Sector Undertakings and private enterprises to adopt some of the 
important destinations in their States/Union Territories. 
 Ministry of Tourism has released creatives highlighting the importance of 
maintaining cleanliness as part of the Social Awareness campaigns which were 
released in television channels and online.
 The National Tourism Minister’s Conference was held on 21st August, 2014. In 
the said conference the promotion of Safe and Honourable Tourism for all tourists with 
special emphasis on safety and security of women tourists was discussed. All the State 
Governments/UT Administrations resolved to continue to ensure the safety and security 
of all the tourists specially the women tourists.  
 With a vision to ensure an acceptable level of cleanliness at tourist destinations 
for maintaining cleanliness at tourist spots the Ministry of Tourism has taken following 
initiatives under Swachh Bharat Abhiyan:
i. Swachh Bharat- Swachh Smarak
 This is an initiative to see a cleaner India for protecting and preserving the 
sanctity of monuments of national heritage. To aid this, Ministry of Tourism launched a 
special e-poster with the Prime Minister’s message requesting the tourists and the 
people of the nation to wholeheartedly engage themselves in the cleanliness of their 
surroundings and help create a Swachh Bharat - Swachh Smarak.
ii. Swachh Bharat - Swachh Paryatan:
Ministry of Tourism has requested all States/UTs to assess the requirement of toilet 
facilities at all popular tourist sites, provide a list of existing non-functional toilets already 
constructed, frame specific project proposals for toilets under Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA), identify an agency for construction and maintenance and follow the 
standardized model on the lines of Build and Operate pattern for construction of 
wayside amenities.
iii. ‘Swachh Bharat - Swachh Pakwan’ (Hunar Zaika): 
The street food vendors constitute a significant percentage of the hospitality service 
providers and have a pan India presence. ‘Hunar Zaika’ program is aimed at 
upgrading the skills and hygiene standards of Street Food Vendors, so that they 
become a distinctive aspect of the Indian tourism. The Ministry of Tourism has 
partnered with the National Association of Street Vendors of India (NASVI) for the 
specific purpose of orientation, skill testing and certification of the vendors. 
 Further, Ministry of Tourism is implementing 2 new Plan Schemes of Swadesh 
Darshan for integrated development of theme-based circuits and National Mission for 

13
Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Augmentation Drive (PRASAD) from 2014 – 15. 
Under these schemes the Ministry provides CFA to States/UTs for Infrastructure 
development including wayside amenities, garbage bins, sewerage/drainage, use of 
clean energy etc."
1.9 The Committee take cognizance of various measures initiated by the 
Ministry to address bottlenecks coming in the way of development of tourism 
such as launching of Clean India Campaign, involvement of private and public 
sector stakeholders, Swachh Bharat - Swachh Smarak, Swachh Bharat - Swachh 
Paryatan, Swachh Bharat - Swachh Pakwan, etc. The Committee expect that all 
the measures being undertaken / contemplated will be taken to their logical end 
within the stipulated timelines so as to achieve the desired objective. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the achievements made so far under 
these initiatives and under the campaign through adoption and involvement of 
private and public sector stakeholders under corporate social responsibility since 
inception of Clean India Campaign. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress of implementation of two new Plan Schemes viz. Swadesh Darshan 
for integrated development of theme-based circuits and National Mission for 
Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Augmentation Drive (PRASAD). The 
Committee hope that this new scheme would be implemented in a time bound 
manner.
B. Timely Completion of Ongoing Sanctioned Projects
 (Recommendation Para No. 3)
1.10 While noting that the (i) funds sanctioned for 7 mega destinations/circuits and 39 
projects taken up during 2002-03 to 2012-13 remain under utilized even after lapse of 
many years, and ; (ii) 21 mega destinations/circuits identified during the last five years 
are yet to be sanctioned,  the Committee sought the reasons for inordinate delay in 
implementation of these projects and recommended to take suitable measures for 
ensuring completion of the projects in a time bound manner. Further, the Committee 
had stressed that to maximize the impact of investment in these destinations, proper co-
ordination with other Ministries and State Governments is vital. Further, the Committee 

14
also recommended that spirit of tourism ought to be inculcated at every level for positive 
results. 
1.11 The Ministry of Tourism in their Action Taken Reply stated as under:
 "Though the development and promotion of various tourist destinations and 
products is primarily the responsibility of the respective State Government/Union 
Territory (UT) Administrations, the Ministry of Tourism, provides Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA) to the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for 
tourism projects identified in consultation with them, subject to the availability of funds, 
inter-se-priority and adherence to Scheme Guidelines.
 The Ministry holds regular interaction with the State Governments/UT 
Administrations regarding development of Tourism infrastructure in their respective 
States/UTs in accordance with scheme guidelines of the Ministry of Tourism.  The issue 
of timely implementation and completion of the sanctioned projects is also taken up with 
the States/Union Territories on a regular basis.
 Ministry of Tourism has been stressing upon the timely completion of various 
Mega Destination and Circuits so that the creation of world class tourism infrastructure 
can be achieved.  Till 31st March, 2014 MOT has sanctioned/identified 79 Mega Tourism 
Destinations and Circuits out of which 64 Mega Projects were sanctioned.  However, 
the scheme under which the Mega Destination Projects have been sanctioned, i.e. 
PIDDC, has been delinked from Union support from the current Financial Year (2015-
16), pursuant to the recommendations of the Fourteenth Finance Commission. 
 The Ministry of Tourism launched the Swadesh Darshan scheme for Integrated 
Development of Tourist Circuits around Specific Themes pursuant to the Budget 
announcements of 2014-15.
Under Swadesh Darshan, integrated development of theme based circuits has 
been taken up for holistic and inclusive development which can provide engaging and 
complete tourism experience to both domestic and foreign tourists. The Scheme 
envisage enhancement of tourist attractiveness in a sustainable manner by developing 
world class infrastructure in the circuit destination.
The following projects have been sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan scheme: 
(Rs. in Crore)
2014-15
Sl. 
No
Name of 
the 
Circuit
State Name of Project Amt. 
Sanctioned
Amt. 
Released
1 Coastal 
Circuit
Andhra 
Pradesh
Development of Kakinada 
Hope Island Konaseema as 
World class coastal & Eco 
Tourism Circuit in Andhra 
Pradesh
69.83 13.96 
2. North 
East 
Circuit
Arunachal 
Pradesh
Bhaulpong – Bomdila – Twang 
in Arunachal Pradesh
50.00 10.00

15
3. Buddhist 
Circuit
Bihar Cultural Centre, Bodhgaya 33.17 6.63
153.00 30.59
(Rs. in Lakh)
2015-16
Sl. 
No.
Name of 
the 
Circuit
Name of the Project Amt. 
Sanctioned
Amount 
Released
1. North-East 
Circuit
Development of Tourist Circuit in Manipur: 
Imphal-Moirang- Khongjom-Moreh. 
7182.30 1436.46
2 North-East
Circuit
Development of Tourist Circuit linking 
Rangpo (entry) – Rorathang-Aritar-
Phadamchen- Nathang-Sherathang-
Tsongmo- Gangtok-Phodong-Mangan- 
Lachung-Yumthang-Lachen- Thangu-
Gurudongmer-Mangan- Gangtok-Tumin 
Lingee-Singtam (exit) in Sikkim
9804.54 1960.90
3 Eco Circuit Integrated Development of Eco-Tourism, 
Adventure Sports, Associated Tourism 
related Infrastructure for Development of 
Tehri Lake & Surroundings as New 
Destination-District Tehri, Uttarakhand
8037.34 1607.46
4 Desert 
Circuit
Development of Sambhar Lake Town and 
Other Destinations under Desert Circuit in 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme
6396.37 1279.27
31420.55 6284.09
The scheme provides for active co-ordination with the Central Ministries and the 
States. The National Steering Committee (NSC) which steers the Scheme 
implementation is an eighteen member body and comprises of senior representatives 
from Ministries of Tourism, Culture, Urban Development, Housing & Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, Civil Aviation, Skill Development, Road Transport & Highways, Shipping, 
Power, Environment & Forests, Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, Rural Development and Railways, and ASI. Other Ministries, if required, 
may also be represented as invitee members on case-to-case basis.
The Mission Directorate which is the nodal point for implementation of the 
projects under the scheme comprises of the Senior Representatives of the Ministry of 
Tourism, concerned States, and concerned Central Ministries.
The Inter Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism Sector (IMCCTS) has 
been re-constituted under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary. The first meeting 
of the reconstituted Committee took place on 5th October, 2015. Several important 
issues were discussed in this meeting."

16
1.12 The Committee take a serious note of the casual and perfunctory reply 
furnished by the Ministry on the fact that the action taken reply of the Ministry of 
Tourism does not contain specific reply to the Committees' recommendation for 
ascertaining the reasons for not utilizing the funds sanctioned to 7 mega 
destination / circuit during 2002-03 to 2007-08 and 39 projects during the 
succeeding five years from 2008-09 to 2012-13.  Similarly, the reply is also silent 
on inordinate delay in implementation of these projects. The reply is also not 
clear as to the continuity or otherwise of Projects/Infrastructure Development for 
Destinations / Circuits (PIDDC) scheme under which the above mentioned 
projects have been sanctioned as PIDDC has been delinked from union support 
from the current financial year (2015-16) and a new scheme 'Swadesh Darshan' 
Scheme for integrated development of tourist circuits around specific themes 
introduced in 2014-15. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire specific response from the Ministry at the earliest. 
C. Need for Augmenting Accommodation Infrastructure
 (Recommendation Para No. 5)
1.13 Expressing doubt on the efforts of the Ministry in attaining the targeted addition of 
1.9 lakh classified and 21.5 lakh unclassified hotel rooms by 2016 due to under 
utilisation of the funds for the scheme 'Incentive to accommodation infrastructure' 
(meant for creation of additional hotel room capacity) during the entire Eleventh Five 
Year Plan and also during the year 2012-13, the Committee sought (i) the additional 
capacity created during 2012 and 2013 and (ii) the steps taken or proposed to be taken 
to achieve the targeted capacity by 2016.
1.14 The Ministry of Tourism in their Action Taken Replies have stated that 
construction of hotels is primarily a private sector activity. However, in order to augment 
the budget accommodation at tourist destinations in the country, subsidy scheme 
“Incentive to Accommodation Infrastructure” was envisaged by the Ministry of Tourism. 
The scheme was effective for the first year of the 11th Five Year Plan i.e. up to 31st 
March 2008 on an experiment basis. However, provision of funds was made during the 
years of Eleventh Five Year Plan for release of balance amount of subsidy to hotels 
already sanctioned. The funds were re-appropriated from the scheme of “Incentive to 

17
Accommodation Infrastructure” to other schemes of the Ministry where funds were 
required.
1.15 The reply of the Ministry does not contain specific replies to the 
Committee's recommendations regarding additional hotel rooms created during 
2012 and 13 and also the steps taken or proposed to be taken to achieve the 
targets set for addition of classified and unclassified hotel rooms by 2016. 
Further, provision of ₹ 10 crore made for the scheme during 2012-13 (out of which 
₹ 4.5 crore only was spent) goes against their stated position that scheme was 
effective for the first year of the 11th Five Year Plan i.e. up to 31st March 2008 on 
an experiment basis and the provision of funds was made during the remaining 
years of Eleventh Fife Year Plan for release of balance amount of subsidy to 
hotels  already sanctioned and subsequently funds were re appropriated to other 
schemes of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their earlier 
recommendation in this regard seek the clarification on the basis of allocation of 
budgetary provisions under the scheme for the year 2012-13.
D. Need to Revaluate Large Revenue Generating Project Scheme
 (Recommendation Para No. 8)  
1.16 Referring to the dismal under utilisation of funds meant for ‘Large Revenue 
Generating Project Schemes’ like tourist trains, cruise vessels, golf courses etc, during 
Eleventh Five Year Plan and also in 2012-13, the Committee had desired that the MoT 
should have a fresh look at the scheme and redesign it in such a manner as it achieves 
the intended objectives.
1.17 The Ministry of Tourism in its Action Taken Notes have stated that the Plan 
Scheme under Central Sector namely, ‘Large Revenue Generating Project (LRGP)’ had 
a lukewarm response from the State Governments, Private Entrepreneurs and other 
promoter of Tourism.  The said Scheme is to ensure Public Sector and Private Sector 
Partnership in development of tourism infrastructure in the country by attracting techno-
managerial efficiencies and resources of the Private Sector and providing congenial and 
conductive atmosphere with liberalized policies by the Public Sector.  

18
 However, Ministry of Tourism is encouraging various Stakeholders to send 
project proposal under the Scheme so that the tourism project under PPP Mode can be 
sanctioned and more investments in tourism sector is available for infrastructure 
development. During 2014-15, 1 project  has been sanctioned for Manipur under LRGP.
1.18 The Committee are concerned to note that it took more than five years to 
the Ministry of Tourism to realize that the Large Revenue Generating Project 
Scheme had lukewarm response from the State Governments, private 
entrepreneurs and other promoters of Tourism, etc. It shows that there is no 
proper feedback mechanism available with the Ministry to carry out course 
correction in implementing large projects which resulted in underutilisation of 
allocated funds during the eleventh five year plan. Despite such lukewarm 
response from the concerned Ministry seems to have not bothered to revisit the 
scheme as has been recommended by the Committee. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that MoT should have fresh look at the 
scheme and redesign it in such a manner so that the intended objectives are 
achieved and attracted more revenue out of the scheme. 
E. Difficulties faced by Hotel Projects
 (Recommendation Para No. 11)
1.19 With a view to address the difficulties faced by hotel projects such as delay in 
getting multiple clearances from the Central and State Government Agencies, problem 
of land acquisition, huge costs, etc., the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) had reportedly 
advised the State Governments / UTs to set up 'Hospitality Development and Promotion 
Board' to facilitate expeditious clearances and approvals besides setting up of similar 
Board at the Center in January, 2011. The Committee in their report sought the results 
achieved by these boards in the States / UTs and at the Centre during each of the last 
three years and also the progress and prospects in achieving the creation of additional 
hotel capacity targeted for the year 2016.
1.20 The Ministry of Tourism in their Action Taken Reply submitted as under: 
 "With a view to bring in more transparency and accountability, the Ministry of 
Tourism had launched a web based Public Service Delivery System (PSDS) on 

19
03.04.2013 for Hotel project approval, Classification / reclassification status to 
functioning hotels and approval for related services.
 With the help of this system, all applicants seeking approval for hotels projects, 
classification / reclassification and related services will be able to track the progress of 
their applications online on a real time basis. The Ministry of Tourism endeavours to 
communicate the final decision on all such applications, which are received complete in 
all respect, within 90 days of the receipt.
 The Ministry of Tourism w.e.f. 01.06.2015 has introduced digitization of 
application for classification / reclassification /  project approval of hotels. The software 
(http://hotelcloud.nic.in) for online submission of application for classification / 
reclassification / project approval of hotels has been made operational."
1.21 The reply furnished by the Ministry merely states the digitization of the 
approval process for hotel projects without apprising the Committee of the 
results achieved by the Hospitality Development and Promotion Boards' at the 
State / UT level and also at the centre in addressing the difficulties faced by the 
hotel projects and also the prospects in achieving the creation of additional hotel 
capacity targeted for the year 2016. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the 
said information sought by the Committee should be provided to them.
F. Delay in release of funds for eco tourism projects
 (Recommendation Para No. 12)
1.22 As Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to 41 Eco Tourism projects could not be 
fully released even after a lapse of considerable time, the Committee sought the 
reasons for such a prolonged delay in releasing CFA. The Committee had also urged 
that there should be effective monitoring by Ministry of Tourism in respect of projects for 
which CFA has been sanctioned and it should be ensured those bottlenecks, if any, in 
their implementation are overcome and the projects are completed without time overrun.
1.23 The Ministry of Tourism in its Action Taken Notes have stated that the 
development and promotion of various tourism destination and products is primarily the 
responsibility of the respective State Government/Union Territory (UT) Administration. 
The Ministry of Tourism has been providing Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to the 
State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for tourism projects including 
Eco Tourism projects identified in consultation with them, subject to the availability of 

20
funds, inter-se-priority and adherence to Scheme Guidelines. A number of tourism 
projects with a focus on Eco Tourism were sanctioned for various States/UTs during 
11th Plan and 12th Plan under the PIDDC scheme. Two Eco-Tourism project during 
2012-13, four Eco-tourism projects during 2013-14 and two projects during 2014-15 
were sanctioned by Ministry of Tourism. 
 From the Financial year 2015-16, the PIDDC scheme has been delinked from 
Union support for State Plan by the Min of Finance in pursuance of the 
recommendations of the Fourteenth Finance Commission.
1.24 The Committee note that the reply furnished by the Ministry of Tourism 
does not contain specific reply to either the reasons sought for prolonged delay 
in fully releasing the sanctioned amounts out of Central Financial Assistance 
(CFA) to 41 Eco Tourism projects or the effective monitoring of eco tourism 
projects funded through Central Financial Assistance. It is also not clear as to 
whether with the delinking of Project / Infrastructure Development for Destination 
and Circuits (PIIDC) Scheme from union support for state plan form 2015-16 
deprive the Eco Tourism projects for which partial funds have already been 
released of further funds. In view of the aforementioned, the Committee reiterate 
their recommendation made earlier in this regard.

21
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT
 
 Observation/Recommendation no. 1
 The Committee are concerned to note that there has been successive decline in 
percentage of growth in Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) as well as Foreign Exchange 
Earnings (FEEs) from the year 2011. The growth rate of FTAs over the previous year 
declined from 11.8 per cent in 2010, to 9.2 per cent in 2011, 4.3 per cent in 2012 and 
2.6 per cent during the first half of 2013. Similarly, the growth rate of Foreign Exchange 
Earnings in terms of US$ over the previous year declined from 24.6 per cent in 2010 to 
16.7 per cent in 2011 and 7.1 per cent in 2012. The major constraints for tourism 
development in the country are safety of tourist’s particularly foreign tourists, shortage 
of skilled manpower, inadequacy of accommodation, lack of cleanliness in tourist sites, 
meagre plan outlay and lack of convergence of efforts and resources for tourism 
development from various Central Ministries, stakeholders and private investors. The 
Committee note that tourism sector has targeted to double the tourist arrivals of 2011 by 
2016. The Committee hardly need to emphasise that in order to achieve this target, the 
aforesaid constraints should be expeditiously addressed. These are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
 Reply of the Government
Though the growth rate of FTAs and FEEs are low during the specified period, 
there has been an increasing trend in the number of FTAs and FEEs during 2010-14. 
The annual growth rates of Foreign Tourists Arrivals (FTAs) and Foreign Exchange 
Earnings (FEEs) during 2010 to 2014 and January-September 2015 over the previous 
periods are given below:
Year FTAs (In 
Million)
Growth  
Rate
FEEs (Rs 
in Crore)
Growth 
Rate
FEEs (In 
US$ Billion)
Growth 
Rate
2010 5.78 11.8% 64,889 20.8% 14.193 27.5%
2011 6.31 9.2% 77,591 19.6% 16.564 16.7%
2012 6.58 4.3% 94,487 21.8% 17.737 7.1%

22
2013 6.97 5.9% 1,07,671 14.0% 18.445 4.0%
2014 7.68 10.2% 1,23,320 14.5% 20.236 9.7%
Jan-Sep, 
2015
5.61 4.6% 91,731 3.2% 14.453 -1.5%
 In 2014 the growth rate has shown an upward increase.  By recording growth 
rate of 10.2% in Foreign Tourist Arrivals India has exceeded the world average of 4.2% 
in the year 2014 in international Tourist Arrivals.  In 2014 India was at 15th position in the 
world in terms of Foreign Exchange Earnings (FEEs) and 8th position in Asia and Pacific 
Region in terms of FEEs.  
Tourism has been acknowledged as a key driver for economic development and 
employment generation across the world. The sector can contribute to faster, 
sustainable and more inclusive growth particularly for women and youth. Lack of 
hygiene and cleanliness at tourist destinations has negatively impacted tourism in 
India. To tackle this problem Ministry of Tourism launched the Campaign Clean India on 
20.12.2011 with a vision to ensure acceptable levels of cleanliness and hygiene 
practices at various tourist destinations.
ii. This initiative is voluntary and there is no budget allocation made by the Ministry 
of Tourism for this campaign.
iii. This campaign is sustained through adoption and involvement of private and 
public sector  stakeholders as a part of their corporate social responsibility (CSR). The 
Ministry of Tourism has been trying hard to pursue various PSUs and the corporate 
sector units to adopt important monuments and tourist destinations under the initiative.
iv.    The Ministry has signed an MOU with the Ministry of Railways on 6th July 2012 
and the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 21st March 2012 for the above purpose.
v. India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) has adopted Qutab Minar, New 
Delhi as a Pilot Project under Campaign Clean India. Various works undertaken by 
ITDC under the project include repair of toilets, proper signages in and around Qutab 

23
Minar, garbage bins, repair/replacement of light covers and painting of railings and 
deployment of staff for regular maintenance. 
vi. Various State Governments/UT Administrations have been requested to 
persuade the Public Sector Undertakings and private enterprises to adopt some of the 
important destinations in their States/Union Territories. 
 Ministry of Tourism has released creatives highlighting the importance of 
maintaining cleanliness as part of the Social Awareness campaigns which were 
released in television channels and online.
 The National Tourism Minister’s Conference was held on 21st August, 2014.  In 
the said conference the promotion of Safe and Honourable Tourism for all tourists with 
special emphasis on safety and security of women tourists was discussed.  All the State 
Governments/UT Administrations resolved to continue to ensure the safety and security 
of all the tourists specially the women tourists.  
 With a vision to ensure an acceptable level of cleanliness at tourist destinations for 
maintaining cleanliness at tourist spots the Ministry of Tourism has taken following initiatives 
under Swachh Bharat Abhiyan:
i. Swachh Bharat- Swachh Smarak
This is an initiative to see a cleaner India for protecting and preserving the sanctity of 
monuments of national heritage. To aid this, Ministry of Tourism launched a special e-
poster with the Prime Minister’s message requesting the tourists and the people of the 
nation to wholeheartedly engage themselves in the cleanliness of their surroundings 
and help create a Swachh Bharat - Swachh Smarak.
ii. Swachh Bharat - Swachh Paryatan:
Ministry of Tourism has requested all States/UTs to assess the requirement of toilet 
facilities at all popular tourist sites, provide a list of existing non-functional toilets already 
constructed, frame specific project proposals for toilets under Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA), identify an agency for construction and maintenance and follow the 
standardized model on the lines of Build and Operate pattern for construction of 
wayside amenities.

24
iii. ‘Swachh Bharat - Swachh Pakwan’ (Hunar Zaika): 
The street food vendors constitute a significant percentage of the hospitality service 
providers and have a pan India presence. ‘Hunar Zaika’ program is aimed at 
upgrading the skills and hygiene standards of Street Food Vendors, so that they 
become a distinctive aspect of the Indian tourism. The Ministry of Tourism has 
partnered with the National Association of Street Vendors of India (NASVI) for the 
specific purpose of orientation, skill testing and certification of the vendors. 
 Further, Ministry of Tourism is implementing 2 new Plan Schemes of Swadesh 
Darshan for integrated development of theme-based circuits and National Mission for 
Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Augmentation Drive (PRASAD) from 2014 – 15. 
Under these schemes the Ministry provides CFA to States/UTs for Infrastructure 
development including wayside amenities, garbage bins, sewerage/drainage, use of 
clean energy etc.
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.9 of Chapter-I)
 Observation/Recommendation no. 4
 In order to overcome the aspect of seasonality and to promote India as a 365 
days destination and to ensure repeat visits for the products in which India has a 
comparative advantage, MoT has identified a number of niche tourism products for 
development, like golf, polo and sports tourism, wild and eco tourism, Cruise Tourism, 
Adventure Tourism, Medical Tourism, Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Exhibition 
(MICE) etc. To meet the increasing dynamic needs of price and service conscious 
tourists and build capability, new strategies need to be devised. The Committee feel that 
for developing the niche tourism products, the Ministry will need to innovatively improve 
the value proposition to tourists to ensure repeat visits. The Committee desire that every 
possible effort needs to be made to ensure that the niche products are developed within 
a prescribed timeframe and the Committee be informed of the steps taken in this 
regard.
 Reply of the Government
Initiatives of Ministry of Tourism to Promote Niche Products:

25
 The Ministry of Tourism has issued guidelines for the approval of 
Adventure Tour Operators, which is a voluntary scheme, open to all bona-
fide Adventure Tour Operators. 
 The Ministry of Tourism has also formulated a set of guidelines on Safety 
and Quality Norms on Adventure Tourism as BASIC MINIMUM 
STANDARDS FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM ACTIVITIES. These 
guidelines cover Land, Air and Water based activities which include 
mountaineering, trekking hand gliding, paragliding, bungee jumping and 
river rafting.
 Central Financial Assistance is being extended to various State 
Governments / Union Territory Administrations for development of 
Tourism Infrastructure in destinations including Niche Tourism Products/ 
Adventure Tourism destinations.
 The Ministry of Tourism has issued guidelines for promotion of Golf as a 
niche tourism product.  
 The guidelines have also been issued for Wellness and Medical Tourism 
as niche tourism products.
Indian Institute of Skiing & Mountaineering (IISM), Gulmarg, J&K
 The Indian Institute of Skiing & Mountaineering (IIS&M) has been made fully 
operational in Gulmarg from January 2009. This institute now has its own building and 
all modern equipments and training facilities for Adventure Sports.
 777 days of the Indian Himalayas
A campaign titled “777 Days of the Incredible Indian Himalayas” aimed at 
promoting the Himalayas, internationally was launched by the Hon’ble Minister of State 
for Tourism (I/C) Dr. K. Chiranjeevi on 27th September 2013. The campaign has a 
twofold objective, one to attract more international tourists to India during the lean 
summer season and second, to remind the world that 73 % of the Himalayan region is 
in India. The Ministry of Tourism has decided to meet 50% of Peak fee chargeable by 
Indian Mountaineering Foundation (IMF) from the climbing expeditions during the period 
of 777 days of the campaign.

26
The Ministry also launched a map of Himalayan States and a Directory of Events 
that contains the activities to be undertaken during this period of “777 days of the 
Incredible Indian Himalayas” campaign. A book on safety regulations brought out by 
ATAOI was also released on the occasion. The Ministry also released two short films 
titled “Greatest Show on the Earth” and “Life Altering Journey”. Dr. Conrad Anker, a 
noted mountain climber with experience of more than 25 years of climbing expeditions 
in the Himalayan region shared his experiences of the area. The Adventure Travel 
Association of India (ATAOI) is collaborating with the Ministry of Tourism in this 
campaign and they have designed special adventure programmes running over the next 
777 days.  
 Observation/Recommendation no. 6
 Any adverse perception about tourist safety and security has very serious 
implications for international tourist arrivals and its long term sustainability. The 
Committee note in this connection that only 13 States have deployed tourist police in 
one form or other. It is not clear as to how many States have formed Tourist Facilitation 
and Security Organisations in pursuance of MoT’s guidelines of 2008. The Committee 
desire that the matter regarding deployment of tourist police and forming of Tourist 
Security Organisations be pursued with the State Governments under intimation to the 
Committee and ensure that safety and security of tourists, particularly foreign tourists, 
are not compromised in any respect.
 Reply of the Government
The subject of Law and Order including safety of tourists is primary the 
responsibility of the State Governments.  However, the Ministry of Tourism has been 
very sensitive on the subject and has time and again followed up with the State 
Governments and Union Territories to ensure  the safety and security of tourists.   The 
National Conference of State Tourism Ministers was held in New Delhi on 21st August 
2014 wherein the issue regarding safety and security of tourists was deliberated in 
detail and the State Governments / Union Territories were once again requested to 
deploy Tourist Police and form Tourist Facilitation and Security Organisation. In the said 
conference the promotion of Safe and Honourable Tourism for all tourists with special 
emphasis on safety and security of women tourists was discussed.  All the State 

27
Governments/UT Administrations resolved to continue to ensure the safety and security 
of all the tourists specially the women tourists. 
The Ministry of Tourism has also formulated the guidelines of Safety and Security 
of Tourists for State Governments and Union Territories and Tips for Travellers in 
August 2014. These guidelines are offered to the State Governments / Union Territories 
and other relevant authorities to stress the importance of safety and risk management, 
assist in identifying Best Practices and encourage closer cooperation.  The Tips to 
Travellers have been designed to make their visit to incredible India a memorable 
experience.  
 The Ministry of Tourism has launched a 24 hour ‘Incredible India Helpline’ in 
December 2014 to provide the tourists valuable information and to guide them during 
emergencies. It is intended to provide a sense of security to the tourists. The service is 
available toll free on telephone number 1800111363 or on short code 1363.
 The Ministry of Tourism has launched ‘Welcome Booklet’ for distribution at 
immigration counters to tourists arriving at International airports. The booklet contains 
information on ‘Dos and Don’ts’ for tourists, contact details of Indiatourism domestic 
offices and ‘Tourist Helpline’ number. This is expected to be a helpful aid to the foreign 
tourists, given immediately on arrival. 
 The Ministry of Tourism has released Social Awareness campaigns wherein the 
importance of good behaviour towards tourists has been emphasized among other 
topics.
 Observation/Recommendation no. 7
 The Cleanliness and quality and the extent of tourist amenities, sewerage and 
drainage system, waste management and sanitation arrangements in and around a 
number of monuments/tourist sites in the Country are far below the international 
standards and is a major dissuading factor for tourists into paying repeat visits. This is 
evident from the survey conducted in this regard in five tourist destinations by MoT in 
2008-09. MoT has reportedly launched ‘Campaign Clean India’ in December, 2012 for 
improving cleanliness at various destinations with the help of private stakeholders and 
State Governments/UTs. Oil & Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) has reportedly 
adopted Taj Mahal in Agra, Ellroa Caves and Elephanta Caves in Maharashtra, Red 

28
Fort in Delhi, Golconda Fort in Hyderabad and Monuments at Mahaballipuram. The 
Committee suggest that pro-active steps should be taken by MoT to involve all 
Corporate bodies both in the public and private sector to maintain tourist sites as part of 
their Corporate Social responsibility.
 Reply of the Government
(i) Tourism has been acknowledged as a key driver for economic development and 
employment generation across the world. The sector can contribute to faster, 
sustainable and more inclusive growth particularly for women and youth. Lack of 
hygiene and cleanliness at tourist destinations has negatively impacted tourism in 
India. To tackle this problem Ministry of Tourism launched the Campaign Clean India on 
20.12.2011 with a vision to ensure acceptable levels of cleanliness and hygiene 
practices at various tourist destinations.
ii. This initiative is voluntary and there is no budget allocation made by the Ministry 
of Tourism for this campaign.
iii. This campaign is sustained through adoption and involvement of private and 
public sector  stakeholders as a part of their corporate social responsibility (CSR). The 
Ministry of Tourism has been trying hard to pursue various PSUs and the corporate 
sector units to adopt important monuments and tourist destinations under the initiative.
iv.    The Ministry has signed an MOU with the Ministry of Railways on 6th July 2012 
and the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 21st March 2012 for the above purpose.
v. India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) has adopted Qutab Minar, New 
Delhi as a Pilot Project under Campaign Clean India. Various works undertaken by 
ITDC under the project include repair of toilets, proper signages in and around Qutab 
Minar, garbage bins, repair/replacement of light covers and painting of railings and 
deployment of staff for regular maintenance. 
vi. Various State Governments/UT Administrations have been requested to 
persuade the Public Sector Undertakings and private enterprises to adopt some of the 
important destinations in their States/Union Territories. 

29
With a vision to ensure an acceptable level of cleanliness at tourist destinations 
for maintaining cleanliness at tourist spots the Ministry of Tourism has taken following 
initiatives under Swachh Bharat Abhiyan:
 i. Swachh Bharat- Swachh Smarak
This is an initiative to see a cleaner India for protecting and preserving the sanctity of 
monuments of national heritage. To aid this, Ministry of Tourism launched a special e-
poster with the Prime Minister’s message requesting the tourists and the people of the 
nation to wholeheartedly engage themselves in the cleanliness of their surroundings 
and help create a Swachh Bharat - Swachh Smarak.
ii. Swachh Bharat - Swachh Paryatan:
Ministry of Tourism has requested all States/UTs to assess the requirement of toilet 
facilities at all popular tourist sites, provide a list of existing non-functional toilets already 
constructed, frame specific project proposals for toilets under Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA), identify an agency for construction and maintenance and follow the 
standardized model on the lines of Build and Operate pattern for construction of 
wayside amenities.
iii. 'Swachh Bharat - Swachh Pakwan’ (Hunar Zaika): 
The street food vendors constitute a significant percentage of the hospitality service 
providers and have a pan India presence. ‘Hunar Zaika’ program is aimed at 
upgrading the skills and hygiene standards of Street Food Vendors, so that they 
become a distinctive aspect of the Indian tourism. The Ministry of Tourism has 
partnered with the National Association of Street Vendors of India (NASVI) for the 
specific purpose of orientation, skill testing and certification of the vendors. 
 Further, Ministry of Tourism has launched 2 new Plan Schemes of Swadesh 
Darshan and PRASAD in 2014 – 15. Under these schemes the Ministry provides CFA 
to States/UTs for Infrastructure development including wayside amenities, garbage bins, 
sewerage/effluent disposal, use of clean energy etc.

30
 The Ministry of Tourism has released creatives highlighting the importance of 
maintaining cleanliness as part of the Social Awareness campaigns which were 
released in television channels and online.
 Observation/Recommendation no. 9
 It is the fundamental duty of Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) to preserve the 
protected monuments of national importance for posterity and for offering the citizens of 
this country and to international visitors travelling to India a glimpse into India’s rich and 
myriad culture, traditions and tangible remains of the past. There are 3678 protected 
monuments of national importance, which are reportedly ‘maintained’ and ‘kept in 
presentable condition’ by ASI. The Committee have been informed that only in 
monuments, which receive large number of visitors, basic amenities have been 
upgraded during the last five years.  Similarly, only in important monuments, signages 
to explain history and architecture of the monuments installed. In Committee’s view, the 
number of visitors should not be the criterion for providing basic amenities and 
signages. In fact, only when there are basic amenities and signages, tourists will tend to 
visit monuments and the number of visitors will increase. The Committee, therefore, 
urge that basic amenities and signages explaining the history of the monuments should 
be installed in all protected monuments of national importance, irrespective of the 
number of visitors. The Committee would like to know the outcome of the restructuring 
exercise of ASI aimed at adequate funding and meeting manpower requirements. 
Further there is a need to devise a scheme to extend financial assistance for 
maintenance of historical palaces and houses of eminent national leaders/personalities, 
owned by individual/private bodies with a view to preserving them for posterity and also 
to showcase them to tourists.
 Reply of the Government
 All efforts have been made to provide basic amenities in the monuments where 
there is tourism potential and the number of visitors is high. The Govt. of India has 
allotted Rs. 100 crores for Cultural Heritage for the financial year 2014-15. Besides, 
Archaeological Survey of India is also in consultation with the Ministry of Tourism for 
providing tourist amenities in Centrally Protected Monuments. Further, ASI has already 
initiated to provide the amenities in the State of Maharashtra in collaboration with 

31
Tourism Department, Govt. of Maharashtra. It is also mentioned here that ASI is in 
collaboration with ONGC and Ministry of Tourism has launched a programme ‘Clean 
India Campaign’ under which basic amenities will be provided in selected monuments 
i.e. Taj Mahal, Agra, Red Fort in Delhi, Sun Temple, Konark, Golkunda Fort, 
Hyderabad, Mahabalipuram, Chennal, Ajanta and Ellora Caves, Elephanta Caves in 
Maharashtra. ASI have identified 25 ‘Adarsh Monuments’ for providing all basic 
amenities viz. toilets, signages, cloak room, cafeteria, interpretation centre etc. Also, E-
ticketing has been started as a pilot project in Taj Mahal and Humanyun’s Tomb during 
2014 and keeping in view its tremendous response, it is proposed to introduce E-
ticketing in all the ticketed monuments of ASI by December, 2015. 
 ASI has prepared a detailed restructuring proposal for the enhancement of 
strength of all cadres (technical and non-technical). Changes suggested by the Ministry 
of Finance are being incorporated in the proposal. 
The observation of the committee regarding providing signages which includes 
PNB and NB and also public amenities at protected monuments shall be taken up by 
Archeological Survey of India through its field offices. These facilities are made 
available at all World Heritage and ticketed monuments. Further, these facilities are also 
provided at a few selected monuments where tourist frequency is high. Wherever such 
facilities are available, after due assessment up-gradation is taken up as per the 
requirement and wherever not available, steps are taken up to provide such facilities in 
phased manner. Providing these facilities at protected monuments is a continuous 
phenomenon. 
 Directions in this regard to provide basic tourist amenities and signages at all 
centrally protected monuments have been circulated to the field offices of the 
Archaeological Survey of India for initiating action in this regard.
 Observation/Recommendation no. 13
 The Committee note with dismay that surveys commissioned by MoT reveal 
mushrooming of resorts, hotels, lodges, campuses and guest houses in and around 
Corbett National Park, Kaziranga National Park, Kanha National Park, Bandavgarh 
National Park, Pench Tiger Reserve and Madumalai Wild Life Sanctuary. This has led 
to blocking of wildlife corridors and lack of eco-friendly practices in management of 

32
many of these establishments. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests has finalised comprehensive guidelines for tiger conservation 
and tourism in October, 2012. The Committee desire that a copy of these guidelines be 
provided to them. The committee would also like to be informed of MoT’s views on 
these guidelines and the status of their implementation.
 Reply of the Government
 The Ministry of Tourism was represented in the Committee constituted for 
framing a comprehensive set of guidelines for Tourism in and around Tiger Reserves 
under the aegis of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.  This Ministry has conveyed 
the following mandate to the Ministry of Environment and Forests before finalization of 
the guideline.
 The Ministry of Tourism is in favour of regulated tourism in Protected Areas of the 
country. Tourism should be based on scientific carrying capacity and sustainability 
principles.  The Ministry of Tourism does not favour a total ban in Protected Areas 
including Tiger Reserves.  Best International / National practices should be taken into 
consideration by the Ministry of Environment and Forests while finalizing eco-tourism 
guidelines for Protected Areas.  Regulated and controlled tourism in Protected Areas is 
found to be generally helpful globally in conservation efforts for wildlife in different 
countries.
 The Ministry of Environment & Forests has finalized the ‘Comprehensive 
guidelines for tiger conservation and tourism’ on 15th October, 2012. The guidelines now 
allow a conservation fee from the tourism industry for eco development and local 
community upliftment work based on bed capacity of each accommodation unit with 
tariff charges.  This is a desirable clause for the hospitality industry.
 The guidelines now also supports conduct of tourism activity in the Core Areas 
and has recorded that current tourism zones where only tourist visits are permitted and 
there are no consumptive uses, tiger density and recruitment does not seem to be 
impacted.  For this reason, permitting up to 20% of the Core Critical habitat as tourism 
zone should not have an adverse effect on the tiger biology needs subject to adherence 
to all the prescription made in these Guidelines.

33
 The Ministry of Tourism sees this guideline as path of co existence of tourism 
and wildlife and urges the State Governments and all stakeholders to adhere to the 
guidelines in letter and spirit for overall development of ecotourism.
 Observation/Recommendation no. 14
 Rural tourism is an attractive proposition not only for foreign tourists but also for 
people in urban areas within our country. Regrettably, out of projects at 186 villages in 
29 States/UTs sanctioned since inception of the scheme in 2002-03, projects at only 90 
sites have reportedly been completed by December, 2012. Under the for physical 
infrastructure and Rs.20 lakh for capacity building is sanctioned for rural tourism site. 
According to MoT, one reason for unsatisfactory progress of the scheme was 
inadequate efforts of State Governments. During the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the 
scheme is stated to have been replaced with the scheme of ‘Rural Tourism Cluster’ 
having 5-7 villages with core competency in tradition, culture, crafts, environment, 
wildlife, etc. The Committee feel that rural tourism, to be successful, should have sites 
which can accommodate tourists (both foreign and domestic) for a few days to enable 
them to bask in rural life. This is possible only if there is simple and decent 
accommodation in such sites. Publicity of rural tourism sites giving all related details is 
another area which requires immediate attention. The Committee hope that these 
aspects will be taken note of while taking measures to make the scheme successful. 
The Committee would await the measures taken in this regard.
 Reply of the Government
 The Ministry of Tourism is promoting Rural Tourism through its print and 
electronic media publicity and various field offices located in India and Abroad.  
Information on Rural Tourism sites is available on the Incredible India website of the 
Ministry.  The Ministry of Tourism proposes to translate the contents available on this 
link into 8 international languages so as to make the information available to the 
prospective travelers in their native languages for promoting Rural Tourism in major 
source markets around the globe. Hence, MoT has given due importance for promotion 
of Rural Tourism in the country. The Rural tourism Projects were being sanctioned by 
the Ministry of Tourism under the PIDDC Scheme. 15 Rural Tourism project during 

34
2012-13, 17 Rural tourism projects were sanctioned during 2013-14 and 4 Rural tourism 
projects were sanctioned during 2014-15.
 From the Financial year 2015-16 the PIDDC scheme has been delinked from 
Union support in pursuance of the recommendations of the Fourteenth Finance 
Commission.  
 However, keeping in view the importance of touristic infrastructure in rural areas, 
the Ministry of Tourism has identified Rural Circuit under newly launched Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme for integrated development of theme-based circuits. The State 
Governments may now submit Rural Tourism Projects under the theme based Rural 
Tourism Circuit under Swadesh Darshan Scheme.
 Observation/Recommendation no. 15
 Tourism is one of the largest labour intensive sectors for employment of 
unskilled, low and semi-skilled workers. The MoT has launched a ‘Hunar Se Rozgar’ 
(Skill creation) programme to create employable skills amongst unemployed youth 
belonging to economically weaker strata of society, with vocational options and the 
number of youths trained under this programme was 12,191 in the year 2011-12 as 
against the target of 10,000 and 38,741 in 2012-13 as against the target of 33,632. The 
Committee are curious to know whether all these trained youths have been gainfully 
employed in the tourism sector.
 Reply of the Government
1. An HSRT pass-out has multiple options to move ahead:
i. To get employed in the sector:
ii. to get self –employed:
iii. to undergo training for higher skills: and
iv. seek no occupation or no new occupation
The institutes of Hotel Management and Food  Craft institutes, which largely 
sustain the implementation of the programme, are teaching institutes  with no 
mandate to secure employment to the HSR pass-outs. They are however under 
advice to facilitate their employment in consultation with the Hotel industry. The 
institutes are also under advice to track the first employment of the pass-outs. 
But it cannot possibly keep a track of these of these self-employed.

35
2. Further, in order to open up higher training avenues, the Ministry of Tourism has 
launched a six-mouth programme of training in hospitality trades exclusively for 
the HSRT pass-outs. Thus, a percentage of the pass-outs will not seek 
employment but opt for higher training.
3. Apart from the mentioned hospitality related trades, the HSRT now offers training 
to provide for driving skills.  Enabling dispensations are also available for training 
to :
(a) revive the languishing skill of heritage conservation and stone 
masonry; 
(b) impart skills to befit a Golf Caddy; 
(c) impart skills in skin care & spa therapy;
(d) bring up :
- Escorts and volunteers to accompany / guide tourists on identified 
Heritage Walk Stretches,
- Tourist Facilitators,
-     Security Guards,
- Event Facilitators, and 
(e)    Tour Assistants, Transfer Assistants and Office Assistants.
4. Keeping in view the fact that the MoT’s flagship programme, namely Hunar Se 
Rozgar Tak allows convergence of two important thrust areas of the Government 
– skilling India and the promotion of tourism – the MoT expanded the programme 
out-reach and likely output by also allowing its implementation by certain private 
bodies / industrial units. This expansion is a part of the HSRT initiative under a 
distinct title Badhte Kadam. This sub-initiative admits private implementation in 
four hospitality trades namely, Food Production, Food & Beverages, Bakery & 
Pattiessire & Housekeeping Utility.
5. In order to carry forward the momentum, the MoT has decided to further open up 
the HSRT initiative to certain private bodies for its implementation in non-
hospitality trades to bring up Event Facilitators, Tourist Security Guards, Tour 
Assistants, Transfer Assistants and Office Assistants, Skin Care Therapists. This 
second opening up will go by the name Badhte Kadam II.

36
6. This expansion is important in as much as it makes a minimum 75% placement 
of the passouts, a prerequisite to further funding of the effort.
7. By the close of FY 2014-15, about 1.94 lakh persons were trained since the 
inception of the programme.
 Observation/Recommendation no. 16
 The Committee have been informed that there is likely gap of 8.10 lakh 
manpower in the hospitality sector by the end of Twelfth Five Year Plan.  In order to 
reach the skill gap, a multi-pronged strategy including efforts to expand the institutional 
infrastructure and starting craft courses has reportedly been put in place. The 
Committee desire that institutes of Hotel Management and Food Craft Institutions 
should preferably be set up in the underdeveloped regions of the country to provide 
necessary skills to the employable youth of these regions in tourist industry. Besides, 
the Committee expect the National Council for Hotel Management and Catering 
Technology (NCHMCT), the regulator of academics in these institutes, to design 
courses with a futuristic vision so as to improve the employability of students coming out 
of these institutes.
 Reply of the Government
 The Ministry of Tourism plays an important role of creating infrastructure and 
imparting training to create employable skills to aspiring and existing service 
providers. Ministry of Tourism is in the process of setting up of IHMs/SIHMs/FCIs 
throughout the country and preferably in the underdeveloped regions of the country. 
Accordingly, the MOT’s is committed to sanction a State IHM/FCI in each of the 
States in the North East Region. The list of IHMs already operational and those 
under construction in the north eastern region are at Appendix.
 NCHMCT has entered into a CONSULTING AGREEMENT with Lausanne 
Hospitality Consultancy (LHC) which is a division of world famous ECOLE 
HOTELIERE DE LAUSANNE (Lausanne Hotel School). As per this agreement, LHC 
will help us review and revise the Curriculum and train the faculty members for 
improved delivery of contents. 

37
CURRICULUM: LHC has already sent us their observations on the curriculum. A 
team has been formed to revise the curriculum in tune with the LHC 
recommendations. The new curriculum is planned to be introduced for the batch 
beginning in 2015.
DELIVERY: LHC has designed a 10 days training program, titled QUALIFIED 
LEARNING FACILITATOR. This 10 days program is being conducted in 2 phases. 
The level 1 (5 days) of the program is conducted in India by Lausanne trainers. Level 
2 (5 Days) of the program is conducted in Lausanne, Switzerland. The participants 
appear in a series of assessments including a final written examination. Successful 
participants are certified as “Qualified Learning Facilitator”.
IMPLEMENTATION: The implementation as above, will result in improved 
management oriented curriculum tuned to industry’s requirements and enhanced 
facilitating skills for the faculty. Thus vast improvements are expected both in content 
s and delivery, coming very close to industry’s needs.  With this initiative the profile 
of the graduate will move from Skilled Professional to Business Manager. The 
approach will move from teaching to facilitating learning. This will naturally result in 
improved employability immediately and accelerated growth later, for the students.
 To overcome the skill deficit at the base level/ lower rungs of service, the Ministry of 
Tourism had launched a programme in the year 2009, namely- Hunar Se Rozgar 
Tak. This is a fully funded programme of the Govt, open to persons who are at least 
8th pass and in the age group of 18-28 years. The hospitality trades covered are – 
Food Production, Food & Beverage Service, Housekeeping Utility and Bakery & 
Patisserie. Additionally demand driven training courses have also been organised in 
certain other trades/ areas. As of 31/3/2014, the number of persons trained stands at 
131169.
 Further, to up-skill the sector, a programme that provides for the testing and 
certification of the existing service providers was launched in the year of 2009. As of 
31/3/2014, the number of persons skill certified stands at 49153.
 Observation/Recommendation no. 17
 When tourist inflows multiply, a well informed tourist guide force is essential in 
the tourist sector. The country does not have adequate tourist guide force as of now. 

38
MoT is reportedly revising the guidelines for selection and grant of licenses to Tourist 
Guides in order to streamline the system. The Committee are curious to know the 
salient features of the changes to be introduced in the guidelines and desire to be 
apprised of the same. The Committee also urge MoT to get a dedicated 
certificate/diploma course designed and run by the Indian Institute of Tourism and 
Travel Management (IITTM) to get appropriately trained tourist guides
 Reply of the Government
The selection and training of guides is done as per the Ministry of Tourism 
guidelines for Selection and Grant of Guide license to Regional Level Tourist Guides 
(RLG) – 2011 and is a continuous process. The revision of the guidelines is in process 
and has not been completed yet.  The Ministry of Tourism takes in to cognizance the 
suggestion made by the Committee to get a dedicated Certificate Diploma Course 
design and run by the Indian Institute of Tourism & Travel Management.  However, in 
order to enable such candidates who have certificate / diploma to guide in the centrally 
protected monuments, there is a requirement of amendment of the Ancient Monuments 
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Rule 1959 which stipulates requirement of 
license for guiding in the centrally protected monuments.  The Ministry of Tourism has 
proposed for amendment of the said Act.  
The Process of amendment in the Guidelines for Selection and Grant of Guide license 
to Regional Level Tourist Guides (RLG) – 2011 is still ongoing. The suggested changes 
broadly touch upon various aspects like:  
• Enhancement of renewal period from present period of 3 years
• Simplification in the selection process of linguistic guides
• Updation of skill and knowledge base of guides through refresher course
• Augmentation of Regional Level Tourist Guides strength in NE through other 
neighboring region.
• Revision of code of conduct for guides
• Liberalization of entrée fee into monuments and museums for the Regional Level 
Tourist Guides.
 On the suggestion of the Committee regarding introduction of dedicated 
Certificates/Diploma course designed and run by IITTM to get appropriately trained 
guides it is to be noted that the Indian Tourism Product is primarily oriented towards 

39
showcasing of the heritage of India which also includes the Ancient monuments and  
almost all the itineraries of tourists both domestic and international cover the Centrally 
protected monuments, which need to be covered by the guides. Therefore, introduction 
of dedicated Certificates/Diploma course designed and run by IITTM to get 
appropriately trained guides has to be examined in the ambit of the Ancient Monuments 
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Rule 1959 Clause 8 that deals with Prohibiting 
certain acts within monuments and Part (d) including showing a visitor around the 
monument for monetary consideration without license granted by Archaeological 
Officer.  Therefore, having a dedicated Certificate / Diploma course for tourist guides by 
IITTM will not fully meet the requirement of the industry under present provision of the 
Rule.
 We had taken up the issue of amendment of AMASR Rules 1959 with ASI in 
September 2014. However, no response has been received.  The matter is being 
followed up.

40
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
 Observation/Recommendation no. 2
 Though meagre plan allocation is stated to be one of the constraints faced by the 
sector, the Committee observe that as much as Rs. 241 crore was not utilized from the 
plan allocation during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. During the two years 2010-2012, 
shortfall in utilization was Rs. 124 crore under four schemes viz. Computerisation and 
Information Technology, Overseas Promotion Publicity, Incentives to Accommodation 
Infrastructure and Assistance to Large Revenue Generating Projects. The Committee 
are unable to accept the explanation of Ministry of Tourism that under utilization was 
due to unforeseen reasons like non-receipt of complete project proposals, non-receipt of 
utilization certificates, invoices from private parties, etc. In Committee’s view, these 
factors could have been addressed with effective monitoring and co-ordination. The 
Committee in this connection note that MoT is yet to implement the Central Plan 
Monitoring System (CPSMS), devised by the Controller General of Accounts. The 
Committee urge that the CPSMS should be implemented forthwith to ensure effective 
monitoring of the various ongoing schemes/projects.
 Reply of the Government
It is submitted that the initial allocation of the Schemes mentioned in the Report 
viz. Computerization and Information Technology, Overseas Promotion Publicity, 
Incentives to Accommodation Infrastructure and Assistance to Large Revenue 
Generating Projects were revised at the Revised Estimate Stage. The final allocation 
and expenditure under the relevant Schemes during the year 2010-2011 and 2011-2012 
are given below:-
Name of the Schemes 2010-11 2011-12  
Allocation Exp. Allocation  Exp.
Overseas Promotion and 
Publicity including Market 
Development Assistance
250.00 249.02 238.50 243.06

41
Incentives to Accommodation 
Infrastructure 
1.50 0.50 0.01 0.01
Computerization and Information 
Technology  
2.75 2.75 8.26 8.25
Assistance for Large Revenue 
Generating Projects
9.20 9.20 0.17 0.17
Regarding implementation of Central Plan Monitoring System (CPSMS) it is 
submitted that the said system has been implemented and are in use in the Ministry of 
Tourism. Various Program Divisions are using the said system while booking the 
expenditure for various States/UTs. The Sanction IDs are generated through this 
system only and the same is required for release of fund to the States/UTs.  
 Observation/Recommendation no. 18
 The taxes on hotel tariff in our country are reportedly on the higher side as 
compared to other countries. For instance, in China and Japan, it is only 5 per cent 
whereas in Malaysia, it is 6 per cent and in Singapore and Thailand 7 per cent. 
Whereas in India, taxes on hotel tariff vary from 20 to 30 per cent, depending on the 
States. In this regard, MoT has suggested that taxes on hotel tariff should be unified, 
rationalized and made globally competitive and that GST for tourism should not be more 
than 8 per cent. Since, the question of introduction of Goods and Services Tax (GST) 
uniformly in all States is under active consideration of the Government, the Committee 
desire that MoT’s suggestion pertaining to tourism be considered and a decision 
thereon taken expeditiously by the Ministry of Finance. 
 Reply of the Government
 The Ministry of Tourism take up the issue of taxation from time to time with the 
Ministry of Finance.

42
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 Observation/Recommendation no. 3
 The Committee find that precious little has been done during the last one decade 
to create a world class infrastructure in the Country, as envisaged in the Tourism Policy 
formulated in 2002. The Policy laid emphasis on developments of travel circuits as 
International Standard destinations. It is observed from the information furnished to the 
Committee that 7 mega destinations/circuits were sanctioned during the five year period 
from 2002-03 to 2007-08 and 39 projects during the succeeding five years from 2008-09 
to 2012-13. The Committee regret to find that funds sanctioned to none of these 
destinations/circuits has been fully utilised even after lapse of many years. Similarly, 21 
mega destinations/circuits identified during the last five years are yet to be sanctioned. 
The Committee urge MoT to ascertain the reasons for inordinate delay in 
implementation of these projects and take remedial measures to ensure that the 
projects are completed in a time bound manner, under intimation to the Committee. The 
Committee stress that in order to maximize the impact of investment in these 
destinations, proper co-ordination with other Ministries and State Governments is vital. 
The Committee hope that with the setting up of Inter-Ministerial Co-ordination 
Committee in January, 2012 for tourism sector under the Principal Secretary to the 
Prime Minister, development of tourism will get necessary impetus. What is critical in 
development of tourism is the spirit of tourism which ought to be inculcated at every 
level for positive results.
 Reply of the Government
  Though the development and promotion of various tourist destinations and 
products is primarily the responsibility of the respective State Government/Union 
Territory (UT) Administrations, the Ministry of Tourism, provides Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA) to the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for 
tourism projects identified in consultation with them, subject to the availability of funds, 
inter-se-priority and adherence to Scheme Guidelines.

43
 The Ministry holds regular interaction with the State Governments/UT 
Administrations regarding development of Tourism infrastructure in their respective 
States/UTs in accordance with scheme guidelines of the Ministry of Tourism.  The issue 
of timely implementation and completion of the sanctioned projects is also taken up with 
the States/Union Territories on a regular basis.
 Ministry of Tourism has been stressing upon the timely completion of various 
Mega Destination and Circuits so that the creation of world class tourism infrastructure 
can be achieved.  Till 31st March, 2014 MOT has sanctioned/identified 79 Mega Tourism 
Destinations and Circuits out of which 64 Mega Projects were sanctioned.  However, 
the scheme under which the Mega Destination Projects have been sanctioned, i.e. 
PIDDC, has been delinked from Union support from the current Financial Year (2015-
16), pursuant to the recommendations of the Fourteenth Finance Commission. 
 The Ministry of Tourism launched the Swadesh Darshan scheme for Integrated 
Development of Tourist Circuits around Specific Themes pursuant to the Budget 
announcements of 2014-15.
Under Swadesh Darshan, integrated development of theme based circuits has 
been taken up for holistic and inclusive development which can provide engaging and 
complete tourism experience to both domestic and foreign tourists. The Scheme 
envisage enhancement of tourist attractiveness in a sustainable manner by developing 
world class infrastructure in the circuit destination.
The following projects have been sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan scheme: 
(Rs. in Crore)
2014-15
Sl. 
No
Name of 
the 
Circuit
State Name of Project Amt. 
Sanctioned
Amt. 
Released
1 Coastal 
Circuit
Andhra 
Pradesh
Development of Kakinada 
Hope Island Konaseema as 
World class coastal & Eco 
Tourism Circuit in Andhra 
Pradesh
69.83 13.96 
2. North 
East 
Arunachal 
Pradesh
Bhaulpong – Bomdila – Twang 
in Arunachal Pradesh
50.00 10.00

44
Circuit
3. Buddhist 
Circuit
Bihar Cultural Centre, Bodhgaya 33.17 6.63
153.00 30.59
(Rs. in Lakh)
2015-16
Sl. 
No.
Name of 
the 
Circuit
Name of the Project Amt. 
Sanctioned
Amount 
Released
1. North-East 
Circuit
Development of Tourist Circuit in Manipur: 
Imphal-Moirang- Khongjom-Moreh. 
7182.30 1436.46
2 North-East
Circuit
Development of Tourist Circuit linking 
Rangpo (entry) – Rorathang-Aritar-
Phadamchen- Nathang-Sherathang-
Tsongmo- Gangtok-Phodong-Mangan- 
Lachung-Yumthang-Lachen- Thangu-
Gurudongmer-Mangan- Gangtok-Tumin 
Lingee-Singtam (exit) in Sikkim
9804.54 1960.90
3 Eco Circuit Integrated Development of Eco-Tourism, 
Adventure Sports, Associated Tourism 
related Infrastructure for Development of 
Tehri Lake & Surroundings as New 
Destination-District Tehri, Uttarakhand
8037.34 1607.46
4 Desert 
Circuit
Development of Sambhar Lake Town and 
Other Destinations under Desert Circuit in 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme
6396.37 1279.27
31420.55 6284.09
The scheme provides for active co-ordination with the Central Ministries and the 
States. The National Steering Committee (NSC) which steers the Scheme 
implementation is an eighteen member body and comprises of senior representatives 
from Ministries of Tourism, Culture, Urban Development, Housing & Urban Poverty 

45
Alleviation, Civil Aviation, Skill Development, Road Transport & Highways, Shipping, 
Power, Environment & Forests, Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, Rural Development and Railways, and ASI. Other Ministries, if required, 
may also be represented as invitee members on case-to-case basis.
The Mission Directorate which is the nodal point for implementation of the 
projects under the scheme comprises of the Senior Representatives of the Ministry of 
Tourism, concerned States, and concerned Central Ministries.
The Inter Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism Sector (IMCCTS) has 
been re-constituted under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary. The first meeting 
of the reconstituted Committee took place on 5th October, 2015. Several important 
issues were discussed in this meeting. 
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.12 of Chapter-I)
 Observation/Recommendation no. 5
 In order to accommodate additional 4.79 million FTAs targeted for the year 2016, 
an additional 1.9 lakh classified and 21.5 lakh unclassified hotel rooms would be 
needed. The Committee note in this connection that out of the allocated outlay of Rs. 
64.01 crore during the entire Eleventh Five Year Plan under the scheme ‘Incentive to 
Accommodation Infrastructure’, only Rs. 45.80 crore was utilised. In the year 2012-13, 
only Rs. 4.94 crore was utilised as against the allocation of Rs. 10 crore. Given the 
tardy utilisation of funds for incentives to accommodation infrastructure, the Committee 
wonder whether the targeted creation of additional capacity of accommodation would be 
achieved by the year 2016. The Committee would like to know the additional capacity 
created in this regard during 2012 and 2013 and the steps taken/proposed to achieve 
the targeted capacity by the year 2016.
 Reply of the Government
 Construction of hotels is primarily a private sector activity. However, in order to 
augment the budget accommodation at tourist destinations in the country, subsidy 
scheme “Incentive to Accommodation Infrastructure” was envisaged by the Ministry of 
Tourism. The scheme was effective for the first year of the 11th Five Year Plan i.e. up to 
31st March 2008 on an experiment basis. However, provision of funds was made during 

46
the years of Eleventh Five Year Plan for release of balance amount of subsidy to hotels 
already sanctioned. The funds were re-appropriated from the scheme of “Incentive to 
Accommodation Infrastructure” to other schemes of the Ministry where funds were 
required.
 Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.15 of Chapter-I)
 Observation/Recommendation no. 8
 Tourism industry is essentially driven by the private stakeholders and the Ministry 
of Tourism reportedly assists the private sector in the development of infrastructure 
under the PPP mode through its ‘Large Revenue Generating Project Schemes’ covering 
projects like tourist trains, cruise vessels, golf courses etc. However, from the 
information furnished to them, the Committee note that the assistance under the 
scheme dropped sharply from Rs. 40 crore in 2007-08 to Rs. 0.17 crore in 2011-12. 
During 11th Plan also, the total allotment for the same was a meagre sum of Rs. 69.37 
crore out of which the expenditure was mere Rs.26.57 crore. From the Outcome Budget 
(2013-14), the Committee note that inspite of the allocation of Rs. 40 crore for the same, 
funds could not be released as no suitable project was received. Considering the dismal 
performance of the scheme during the Eleventh Plan and in 2012-13, the Committee 
desire that the MoT should have a fresh look at the scheme and redesign it in such a 
manner as it achieves the intended objectives.
 Reply of the Government
 The Plan Scheme under Central Sector namely, ‘Large Revenue Generating 
Project (LRGP)’ had a lukewarm response from the State Governments, Private 
Entrepreneurs and other promoter of Tourism.  The said Scheme is to ensure Public 
Sector and Private Sector Partnership in development of tourism infrastructure in the 
country by attracting techno-managerial efficiencies and resources of the Private Sector 
and providing congenial and conductive atmosphere with liberalized policies by the 
Public Sector.  
 However, Ministry of Tourism is encouraging various Stakeholders to send 
project proposal under the Scheme so that the tourism project under PPP Mode can be 

47
sanctioned and more investments in tourism sector is available for infrastructure 
development.
During 2014-15, 1 project  has been sanctioned for Manipur under LRGP.
 
 Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.18 of Chapter-I)
 Observation/Recommendation no. 11
 Hotel projects face a number of difficulties such as delay in getting multiple 
clearances from the Central and State Government Agencies, problem of land 
acquisition, huge cost etc. To obviate these difficulties, the MoT has reportedly advised 
the State Governments/UT Administrations to set up ‘Hospitality Development and 
Promotion Board’ (HDPB) to facilitate expeditious clearances and approvals, besides 
setting up a similar Board at the Centre in January, 2011. It has been stated that Hotels 
are State/UT specific activity. The Committee would like to know the results achieved by 
these Boards in the States/UTs and at the Centre during each of the last three years 
and the progress and prospects in achieving the creation of additional hotel capacity 
targeted for the year 2016.
 Reply of the Government
With a view to bring in more transparency and accountability, the Ministry of 
Tourism had launched a web based Public Service Delivery System (PSDS) on 
03.04.2013 for Hotel Project Approval, Classification/Re-classification and related 
Services for granting approvals for Hotel Projects, Hotel classification/re-classification 
status to functioning hotels and approval for related services.
With the help of this system, all applicant seeking approval for hotel projects, 
classification/re-classification and related services will be able to track the progress of 
their applications online on a real time basis. The Ministry of Tourism endeavours to 
communicate the final decision on all such applications, which are received complete in 
all respect, within 90 days of the receipt. 
 The Ministry of Tourism w.e.f. 01.6.2015 has introduced digitization of application 
for classification/re-classification/project approval of hotels. The software 
(http://hotelcloud.nic.in) for online submission of application for classification/re-
classification/project approval of hotels has been made operational.

48
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter-I)
 Observation/Recommendation no. 12
 During the Eleventh Five Year Plan, there were 52 Eco-tourism projects for which 
Central Financial Assistance (CFA) of Rs. 284.4 crore was sanctioned. The Committee 
observe that in as many as 41 projects CFA has not been fully released even after 
lapse of considerable time. The CFA yet to be released varies from Rs.4.01 lakh to 
Rs.25 crore. The Committee would like to know the reasons for such prolonged delay in 
releasing CFA. The Committee also expect that there should be effective monitoring by 
MoT in respect of projects for which CFA has been sanctioned and it should be ensured 
those bottlenecks, if any, in their implementation are overcome and the projects 
completed without time overrun.
 Reply of the Government
 The development and promotion of various tourism destination and products is 
primarily the responsibility of the respective State Government/Union Territory (UT) 
Administration. The Ministry of Tourism has been providing Central Financial Assistance 
(CFA) to the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for tourism 
projects including Eco Tourism projects identified in consultation with them, subject to 
the availability of funds, inter-se-priority and adherence to Scheme Guidelines. A 
number of tourism projects with a focus on Eco Tourism were sanctioned for various 
States/UTs during 11th Plan and 12th Plan under the PIDDC scheme. Two Eco-
Tourism project during 2012-13, four Eco-tourism projects during 2013-14 and two 
projects during 2014-15 were sanctioned by Ministry of Tourism. 
 From the Financial year 2015-16, the PIDDC scheme has been delinked from 
Union support for State Plan by the Min of Finance in pursuance of the 
recommendations of the Fourteenth Finance Commission.
 The MoT has launched a new plan scheme – Swadesh Darshan for development 
of theme based circuits, Eco Circuit is one of the circuits identified for development 
under this Scheme. One project in the State of Uttarakhand has been sanctioned under 
this Scheme during the current financial year. The sheme has in-built provisions for 
monitoring and implementation.
Comments of the Committee

49
 (Please see Para No. 1.24 of Chapter-I)

50
 CHAPTER V
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
 Observation/Recommendation no. 10
 The ASI has engaged Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage 
(INTACH) for preparation of model heritage Bye-laws for each category of monuments 
which may serve as model for replication for other monuments identified under the 
concerned category. The draft model Heritage Bye-laws submitted by INTACH for some 
of the monuments are reportedly under scrutiny and examination. The Committee 
desire that examination of the model Heritage Bye-laws be completed for expeditious 
implementation and it should be ensured that no protected monuments either by the 
Centre or by the States remains neglected, in future.
 Reply of the Government
 As per Section 20E (5) of 'The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010' (AMASRA, 2010), National 
Monuments Authority has been mandated to approve the heritage bye-laws of the 
protected monuments and protected areas declared as of national importance, 
forwarded by the competent authority notified under Section 20E of AMASRA, 2010. 
Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH), as notified under section 
20E (1), drafted heritage bye -laws for 13 typologies and later forwarded to NMA by the 
then competent authority notified by the Government under section 20E i.e. the 
Additional Director General (Archaeology), Archaeological Survey of India. Since the 
draft heritage bye- laws were not found in conformity with First Schedule and Second 
Schedule of 'The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Framing 
of Heritage Bye-laws and Other Functions of the Competent Authority) Rules, 2011', 
notified by the Government on 23rd August, 2011, some of the draft heritage bye-laws 
prepared by the INTACH were discussed several times and amended from time to time 
in consonance with the provisions envisaged in First Schedule and Second Schedule. 
The present status of the draft heritage bye-laws prepared by INTACH, in the NMA, is 
as under:-
SI. 
No. 
Name of the Monuments Status of the Heritage Bye Laws 

51
1. Shershah Gate and Khairul 
Manazil Mosque, New Delhi
Legislative Department, Ministry of 
Law, returned the file with some 
observations 
on 27.03.2015 . The file is likely to be 
re- submitted to them through MOC by 
15th April, 2015.
2. Farukhnagar Baoli, Farukhnagar, 
Haryana 
Reworked by NMA; Site Plan is 
awaited 
from Survey of India, Dehradun
3. Begumpuri Mosque, New  Delhi Reworked by NMA; Site Plan is 
awaited from Survey of India, 
Dehradun
4. Jugal Kishore Temple, Vrindavan, 
U.P. 
Awaiting Finalization by INTACH after 
incorporating comments of NMA 
5. Currency Bldg, St. James Church 
and Metcalfe Hall at Kolkata, West 
Bengal 
Awaiting Finalization by INTACH after 
incorporating comments of NMA. 
6. Gwalior Fort, Gwalior, M.P. Awaiting Finalization by INTACH after 
incorporating comments of NMA 
7. Churches and Convents, Old Goa, 
Goa
Awaiting Finalization by INTACH after 
incorporating comments of NMA 
8. Charminar, Hyderabad, Telangana Revised version is awaited from 
INTACH Not in conformity with First 
Schedule and Second Schedule
9. Sarkhej Roja, Ahmedabad, Gujarat Revised version is awaited from 
INTACH Not in conformity with First 

52
Schedule and Second Schedule
10. Dwarkadhish Temple, Dwarka, 
Gujarat 
Presentation to be made at NMA by 
INTACH on 20.04.2015 Not in 
conformity with First Schedule and 
Second Schedule
11. Pataleshwar Caves, Pune, 
Maharashtra
Presentation to be made at NMA by 
INTACH on 20.02.2015 Not in 
conformity with First Schedule and 
Second Schedule 
12. Siva Temple, Patambi, Kerala Presentation to be made at site by 
INTACH in second week of May, 2015 
Not in conformity with First Schedule 
and Second Schedule
13. Melukote Temple, Karnataka Presentation to be made at site by 
INTACH in second week of May, 2015 
Not in conformity with First Schedule 
and Second Schedule 
As far as the point relating to ensure that no protected monuments either by the Centre 
or by the States remains neglected in future is concerned, National Monuments 
Authority has only been mandated to approve the heritage bye-laws, regulate the 
construction activities in the prohibited area and regulated area and to categorize, only 
centrally protected monuments and protected areas, not state protected 
monuments.
 As per the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958, 
Heritage Bye-laws are to be framed with respect to all centrally protected monuments 
and sites to regulate construction related activities within the prohibited and regulated 

53
areas near monuments. As per the Act, the Heritage Bye-laws so far framed by INTACH 
(Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage) are to be examined and approved 
by the National Monuments Authority with the help of Competent Authority notified for 
the purpose.
 As such the para is related to National Monuments Authority which is a separate 
office, and not with Archaeological Survey of India. The NMA has been advised to 
submit a status report to the Committee. 
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
20 February, 2016
1 Phalguna, 1937 (saka)
Chairperson,
Committee on Estimates. 

54
MINUTES OF THIRD SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON ACTION TAKEN REPLIES
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)
The Sub-Committee sat on Monday, the 5th October, 2015 from 1200 hrs. to 
1300 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
     PRESENT
1. Shri Sanjay Dhotre Convenor
2. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh
3. Shri Md. Salim
4. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
 
 
     SECRETARIAT
                    1.    Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary  
           2.    Shri Vipin Kumar - Director
          3.    Shri Srinivasulu Gunda           - Additional Director
        WITNESSES
           MINISTRY OF TOURISM
S.No. Name of the Official Designation
1. Shri Vinod Zutshi Secretary
2. Dr. R.K. Bhatnagar ADG (T)
3. Shri Suman Billa JS (T)
4. Dr. Preeti Srivastava JS
       
           MINISTRY OF CULTURE
S.No. Name of the Official Designation
1. Shri K.K. Mittal Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Tewari DG (ASI)

55
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Sub-
Committee on Action Taken Replies and directed that representatives of the Ministry of 
Tourism and Ministry of Culture be called in. 
3. Thereafter, the Members took up for consideration the Action Taken Replies 
furnished by the government on the recommendations / observations contained in the 
35th report of the Committee on Estimates (15th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
'Development of Tourism'. The Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Culture were asked 
to furnish reasons for inordinate delay in submitting Action Taken Replies. Both the 
Ministries admitted that there was delay on their part and requested the Sub-Committee 
to condone the delay and assured that such delay will not recur in future. The main 
points discussed by the members in the sitting related to latest progress made in 
signing MoUs with the States and Public Sector Undertakings for preservation and 
conservation of historical monuments; shortage of manpower and financial resources in 
the ASI; development of dedicated portal to overcome delays in correspondence with 
different authorities; ushering in more transparency and accountability for utilisation of 
earmarked funds; steps taken for increasing foreign exchange earnings and domestic 
tourist arrivals, introduction of new tourist circuits by including lesser known 
destinations, etc. 
4. The Convenor asked both the Ministries to furnish update Action Taken Replies 
within a fortnight.
5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Sub-Committee were kept on 
record.
 The Sub-Committee then adjourned.
 
MINUTES OF TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 8th January, 2016 from 1200 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Room 
No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT

56
        Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson
Members
2. Shri Anil Shirole
3. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
4. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar
7. Shri Sudheer Gupta
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shri P. Kumar
10. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy 
 SECRETARIAT
          1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
 2. Shri Vipin Kumar - Director
      3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director
      
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following Reports:-
 (i) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 35th Report of the Committee on 
Estimates (2013-14) (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Development of Tourism' 
pertaining to the Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Culture'; and

57
 (ii) ***** ***** *****
4. The Committee after consideration adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
same to Lok Sabha.
5. ***** ***** *****
6. ***** ***** *****
 The Committee then adjourned with vote of thanks to the Chair.

58
APPENDIX - III
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 
 
18
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17) 
Percentage of total recommendations
10
55.55%
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply Percentage of total 
recommendations
(Sl. Nos. 2 and 18)
Percentage of total recommendations
2
11.12
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
(Sl. Nos. 3, 5, 8, 11, and 12) 
Percentage of total recommendations
05
27.78%
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of 
Government is still awaited. 
(Sl. No. 10) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
01
5.55%