19
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT 
AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
OCCURRENCE OF HIGH ARSENIC CONTENT IN GROUNDWATER
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the First 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2016-17)
NINETEENTH REPORT
_____________________________________________________________________
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

NINETEENTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2016-17)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT 
AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in First Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2016)
_____________________________________________________________________
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2016 / Shravana, 1938 (Saka)

E.C. No. ________
Price : ₹ _____
© 2016 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government 
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi – 110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2016-17) (iii)
INTRODUCTION (v)
CHAPTER I Report 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by Government
21
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies
38
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government’s replies have not been accepted 
by the Committee
39
CHAPTER V
ANNEXURES
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited
APPENDICES
(i)    Minutes of the Tenth Sitting (Committee on Estimates 
2015- 16) and Eighth Sitting of the Committee on 
Estimates 2016 -17............................................  48                                                                             
(ii)   Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government 
on the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the First Report of the Committee  on 
Estimates (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)..............................52
45

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2016-17)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson 
MEMBERS
* Elected Vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II No. 3908 dated 28.07.2016 vice Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal appointed as 
Minister.
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
4. Shri George Baker
5. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
6. Shri Ashok Shankarrao Chavan 
7. Shri Dushyant Chautala
8. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
9. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
10. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
11. Shri Ramen Deka
12. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
13. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
14. Shri Sudheer Gupta
15. Smt. Kavitha Kalvakuntla
16. Shri P. Kumar 
17. Smt. Poonam Mahajan
18. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
19. Shri Rajesh Pandey
20. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey 
21. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil
22 *Shri Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri Konakalla Narayan Rao
24. Md. Salim 
25. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
26. Shri Gajendra  Singh Shekhawat
27. Shri Anil Shirole
28. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
29. Shri Rajesh Verma 
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar - Director 
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Rachna Saxena - Executive Officer

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Occurrence of High Arsenic Content in Ground Water' pertaining to the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation.
1.2 The First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 11.12.2014. 
It contained 28 observations/recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all these 
observations/recommendations were received from the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on 10.08.2015.  However, on scrutiny, some 
of the replies were found to be generic or perfunctory in nature. In respect of some there 
were no  specific replies.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation were requested to furnish specific and relevant 
replies to the Committee.
1.3 The updated ATR to the recommendations on which the Ministry did not furnish 
specific replies were received on 25.04.2016. Replies to the observations and 
recommendations contained in the Report have broadly been categorized as under:-
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1,3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10,11, 12, 16, 17,18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 (Total 20)
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of Government’s reply:

Nil            (Total -Nil)
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s replies have not 
been accepted by the Committee:
Sl. Nos. 6,8,13,14,23 (Total 05)
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of Government is still 
awaited:
Sl. Nos. 2,15,&22 (Total 03)                         
(Chapter V)
1.4 The Committee desire that response to the comments contained in Chapter I of 
this Report should be furnished to them expeditiously.
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.
A.  Need for Comprehensive and Reliable Data 
(Observations/Recommendation Serial No. 2)
1.6 Referring to not only the absence of comprehensive, reliable, centralized data  
but also the varying nature of the data on the number of districts / states affected by 
arsenic contamination  submitted by different ministries - Ministry of Water Resources,
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (M/o WR, RD & GR) showed that 86 
Districts in 10 States have Arsenic contamination exceeding the permissible limit, the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) had, listed out only 71 
Districts in 09 States having Ground Water Arsenic contamination and the Department 
of Science and Technology (DST) came out with yet another list of affected districts and 

States due to arsenic contamination of ground water and the magnitude of population 
exposed to arsenic contamination at 70.4 million spread across 35 districts in six states, 
the Committee deplored such casual attitude and emphasized that dependable, 
accurate and regular update of data were essential for providing perspectives with 
regard to public health, agriculture and other purposes.  They accordingly desired that 
immediate steps should be taken to draw up a central data base about Arsenic affected 
districts/States not only for drinking water segment but also for irrigation and the data 
of human population, animals and crops exposed to Arsenic.
1.7 The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply (ATR) stated that 
(I)  M/o Consumer Affairs have informed that amendment to IS 10500:2012 has 
been finalized and Extra-Ordinary Gazette Notification has been sent for 
issuance. Thus, the process of revision of limit of Arsenic from 0.05 mg/l to 
0.01 mg/l has been completed.  With this modification, the existing data will 
undergo a major change and may include more States/ Districts/ Population 
affected by Arsenic.
(ii) Task Force constituted by M/o Health & Family Welfare will work out 
modalities of doing a robust mapping of areas affected by high Arsenic 
content in ground water.
(iii) Inter Ministerial group (IMG) has asked Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) 
to compile data on habitations affected by Arsenic contamination of ground 
water for (a) 0.01 to 0.05 ppm and (b) more than 0.05 ppm.  Chairman, IMG 
advised that all the State Governments may provide data to CGWB at the 
earliest
(iv) The ‘Inter-Ministerial Group’ on ‘Arsenic Mitigation’ constituted vide Order 
dated 22nd December, 2014 has been made a Standing Group, which will (a) 
over-see the implementation of Action Plan of the various 
Ministries/Departments; (b) reconcile data; (c) guide the entire program 
and; (d) coordinate the efforts of all Stakeholders.
1.8 The Committee are pleased to note that pursuant to their recommendation, the 
process of limit of arsenic contamination from 0.05 mg/l to 0.01 mg/l has been 
completed and notification has been issued. However, with this modification, the 
existing data will undergo major change. Further, the Committee hope that the Task 

Force under Ministry of Health and Family Welfare would work out the modalities for 
meticulous mapping of arsenic affected areas so that the revised and reliable data 
becomes available at the earliest and the Committee apprised.
B. Minimizing Use of Arsenic Rich Ground Water for Irrigation
(Observations/Recommendations Serial No. 3)
1.9 The Committee in the original report, referring to the vision document of National 
Institute of Hydrology (NIH) and Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) , noted  that 
investigators consider water-soil-crop-food transfer, cooking water and direct ingestion of 
Arsenic contaminated water as the major exposure pathways of Arsenic. As the people 
take contaminated water along with contaminated food, the chances of damage become 
greater. The domestic animals in Arsenic affected areas regularly consume Arsenic laden 
drinking water, fish and food. Consumption of meat from such infected animals, causes 
Arsenic intake. All these show the great danger of Arsenic spread and call for urgent steps 
to ensure proper Ground Water management to minimize use of Arsenic rich ground 
water for irrigation purposes. The Committee, therefore,  stressed that remedial 
measures should be taken in this regard without loss of time.
1.10 The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply  ATR)  stated that Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) had stated that under All India Coordinated Research Project 
(AICRP), on Irrigation Water Management,  a project viz. “Studies of Arsenic contamination 
and management in soil-plant-water in shallow tube well irrigated farming areas of Nadia 
district (West Bengal)” has been initiated at Gyeshpur centre, West Bengal. The project will 
study reduction of Arsenic accumulation in plants, humans and animals including cattle.
1.11 The Committee while appreciating the action initiated by ICAR desire that the 
project study of arsenic contamination in Nadia district of West Bengal be completed 
expeditiously and shared with the Departments / Ministries concerned to enable them 

to initiate appropriate action to address the arsenic contamination in food and animal 
products.  
C. Sources of Arsenic Contamination 
(Observations/Recommendations Serial No. 4)
1.12 As the source of arsenic in ground water through natural processes in Ganga 
Brahmaputra plain has not been fully established during the last four decades, the 
Committee recommended that a time bound programme be implemented for 
identifying sources to conclusively establish the mobilization process which helps in 
Arsenic release from minerals to ground water.
1.13 The Ministry of  Water Resources , River Development  and Ganga  Rejuvenation 
in their Action Taken Reply stated that  Inter ministerial group (IMG)  has directed that  
National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee to take up a study on genesis of Arsenic
occurrence in Ganga Brahmaputra basin. 
1.14 The Committee note with some satisfaction that pursuant to their 
recommendation, the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) has directed the National 
Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee, to take up a study on genesis of Arsenic 
occurrence in the Ganga Brahmaputra basin. The Committee, however, urge the 
Ministry to ensure that the study is completed within a stipulated time frame by 
taking up the matter with the NIH at regular intervals and keep the Committee 
informed of the progress made in this regard. 
D.    Collection of Relevant Data and National Programme on Arsenic Mitigation and 
water quality related Health problems 

(Observations/Recommendations Serial No. 6&14)
1.15.  Expressing serious concern  at the lack of centralized data on the adverse impact 
of arsenic intake on the health of the people despite experts’ informing the Committee 
of  large number of confirmed cases of serious ailments like hyper pigmentation, 
keratosis, anaemia, swelling of legs, liver fibrosis, chronic lung diseases , gangerene, 
neuropathy, cancer, etc. and also deaths  due to arsenic  poisoning, the Committee 
pointed ( recommendation no. 6) also at the failure of the Ministry to launch national 
programme  on Arsenic Mitigation and treatment as recommended by the Working of 
Group of NITI Aayog ( erstwhile Planning Commission). The Committee recommended 
that at least now, a national programme be launched by M/o Health and Family Welfare 
and by Departments of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries respectively.  
1.16 (i) The M/o WR,RD &GR , in the ATR stated inter- alia that :
“(i) The Task Force constituted by M/o Health & Family Welfare will work out 
modalities of doing a robust mapping of areas affected by high Arsenic content 
in ground water.
(ii) In the first meeting of  IMG, Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has been 
asked to compile data on habitations affected by Arsenic contamination of 
ground water for  (a) 0.01 to 0.05 ppm and  (b) more than 0.05 ppm.
Chairman, IMG advised that all the State Governments may provide data to 
CGWB at the earliest.  Arsenic concentration  data should also contain the 
latitude and longitude details of the wells  from where samples were collected  
so that GIS based maps can be prepared. This will now be coordinated by IMG 
which has been made into standing group.
(iii) The ‘Inter-Ministerial Group’ on ‘Arsenic Mitigation’ constituted vide Order 
dated 22nd December, 2014 has been made into Standing Group, which will (a) 
over-see the implementation of Action Plan of the various 
Ministries/Departments; (b) reconcile data; (c) guide the entire program and ; 
(d) coordinate the efforts of all Stakeholders.”
1.17 As the Action Taken report furnished by the M/o WR,RD &GR  had not given any 
specific response to the Committee’s recommendation for formulation of National Plan 
for tackling Arsenic contamination , the Ministry were requested to furnish the specific 
reply . The M/ oWR , RD & GR, furnished the following replies from the Ministries 
concerned:

“Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have constituted a Task Force for 
countering ill effects of Arsenic in Ground Water and a Committee/Expert Group 
to review the currently-available treatments for Arsenic related diseases and to 
suggest areas for future focused research.  The reports are awaited.
Similarly, ICAR has initiated a project to reduce Arsenic accumulation in plant-
human-animal including cattle, the results of which are awaited. Ministry of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation have also shared their plans for long term and short 
term solutions for Arsenic mitigation. The consolidation of all these efforts 
would lead to formulation of a National Plan on Arsenic mitigation. 
Further, as informed by D/o Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, the 
department is implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely “Assistance 
to States for Control of Animal Diseases (ASCAD), under which the funds are 
provided for Information, Education & Communication (IEC) campaign including 
training of veterinarians and para-veterinarians. 
The Department vide their letter dated 31 st July, 2015 had already issued the 
advisories to the States requesting them to give wider publicity to the matter of 
Arsenic Contents in water through IEC campaigns, trainings, seminars conducted 
under ASCAD.”
1.18. In the updated ATRs, the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, furnishing 
the data on the arsenic affected rural habitations and the number of people, submitted 
that:
“there are 1490 Arsenic affected rural habitations where 23.98 lakh people are 
at risk.  IMIS 2015 data indicates that there are only 6 Arsenic affected States –
West Bengal, Assam, Bihar, UP, Karnataka and Punjab.
In the first alternative, when the maximum permissible limit of Arsenic is 
maintained at 0.05mg/l, an outlay of Rs. 268 Crore for short term solution (by 
providing community water purification plant including seven years O&M) and 
Rs. 1262.69 crores for long term & sustainable solution (taking up water supply 
projects) i.e. nearly Rs. 1530 Crores is required.
Total Cost : Rs.. 1530 Crores (Arsenic limit at 0.05mg/l)
The no. of Arsenic affected habitations is 10028 if maximum permissible limit of 
Arsenic is considered at 0.01mg/l.  An amount of Rs. 1805.04 Crores for short 
term (by providing community water purification plant including seven years 
O&M) and Rs. 6319.56 Crores for long term solution (taking up water supply 
projects) i.e., nearly Rs. 8124 Crores is required.
Total Cost : Rs. 8124 Crores (Arsenic limit at 0.01mg/l)”

1.19 The Ministry in their updated ATR submitted further as follows:  
“It has been stated that Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation have 
informed that there are 1490 arsenic affected rural habitations where 23.98 lakh 
people are at risk.
The updated reply indicates that the number of arsenic affected habitations is 
100028 if maximum permissible limit of arsenic is considered at 0.01 mg/l.
On initiating appropriate diagnostic and curative measures, the Ministry 
informed that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have constituted a Task 
Force for countering ill effects of arsenic in ground water and a 
Committee/Expert Group to review the currently-available treatments for 
arsenic related diseases as also to suggest areas for future focused research. The 
reports are awaited. 
Similarly, ICAR has initiated a project to reduce arsenic accumulation in plant-
human-animal including cattle, the results of which are awaited.
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation have also shared their plans for long 
term and short term solutions for arsenic mitigation.
The Ministry has stated that the consolidation of all these efforts would lead to 
formulation of a National Plan on arsenic mitigation” 
1.20 The Committee in the original report ( Recommendation no. 14) had expressed 
displeasure at the fact that no national health programme has so far been formulated 
for ground water quality related health problems as suggested by the working group of 
Planning Commission in the year 2011. Deposing before the Committee, a 
representative of the M/o Health & Family Welfare emphasized the need to formulate a 
national programme in this regard and assured that a task force would be constituted to 
look into Arsenic issues and would be asked to submit its report by February, 2015. The 
Committee expected that action is taken in this regard promptly as promised, with 
sufficient budgetary provision. The Committee also desired that a detailed report should 
be made to Parliament regularly every six months (say April and November) bringing out 
the efforts made and progress achieved state-wise in treatment of Arsenic affected 
people under the proposed National Health Programme.
1.21 The M/o WR,RD &GR in their action taken reply stated as follows: 
“The symptoms of diseases which may be caused due to Arsenic contamination 
of drinking water usually manifest after consumption of contaminated water over 

a prolonged period of time.  The impact of Arsenic contamination will 
consequently not be visible immediately upon drinking of Arsenic contaminated 
water. The relevant diseases, moreover, may also be caused by factors other than 
Arsenic contamination.   It is not easy to segregate cases of the said diseases 
where cause and effect it specifically linked.  Separate diagnostic tests to confirm 
that disease is caused due to drinking of Arsenic contaminated water may not be 
easily available. 
A National Programme for a particular disease should normally meet the 
requirement of all patients suffering from the said disease.  For example, a 
patient suffering from cancer or liver disease will need to be treated irrespective 
of whether the cause of the said disease was due to drinking Arsenic 
contaminated water over a prolonged period of time or due to some other 
reasons.  A National Programme, therefore, should focus on providing clean 
drinking water to prevent Arsenic contamination related diseases.  
Simultaneously, the health systems need to be strengthened to meet the 
healthcare requirements of all persons and to get correct diagnosis and 
treatment for all diseases, including Arsenic related diseases.
Consequently, for the cohort of persons who have been drinking Arsenic 
contaminated water and for whom diseases or symptoms may be already visible 
or emerge in the coming years, practical approach would be to strengthen the 
health infrastructure in the relevant districts for which suitable funding can be 
envisaged under National Health Mission (NHM).  The affected States would need 
to assess their requirements and reflect the same in the Project Implementation 
Plans (PIPs).  Based on the above, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare will be in a 
position to project the incremental fund requirement under NHM.
However, an Expert Group under the Director General of Health Services has 
been constituted to prepare guidelines for detection and management of 
Arsenicosis in India.  The Expert Group has formulated draft guidelines, which 
upon finalization will be shared with the State Governments and other 
stakeholders for necessary action.
It has been decided by the Group of Officers in a meeting held on 13.07.2015 
that M/o Health and Family Welfare will issue an advisory to the Arsenic affected 
States through NHM on the health aspects of Arsenic.
Agree to comply with the suggestion of furnishing a detailed report to the 
parliament every six months or as decided by the Committee of secretaries”  

1.22.   In written reply to a query as to why the option of  frequency of laying the 
reports bringing out the efforts made and the progress achieved state wise in 
treatment of arsenic affected people under the proposed National Health Programme, 
before the Parliament be given when the Committee had specifically recommended 
that the reports should be laid before Parliament every six months (say April and 
November) regularly, the  M/o WR,RD &GR  submitted as under-
“Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that the Guidelines “Detection, 
Prevention and Management of Arsenicosis in India – A Field Guide” have been 
finalized by the expert Committee and sent to the Arsenic affected States.  
Concerned State Governments were advised to strengthen 
District/Community/Health Center infrastructure for early diagnosis, management 
and treatment of Arsenic affected cases and for this purpose seek necessary 
support in the State Programme Implementation Programmes submitted under 
NHM.”
1.23 The Committee are pleased to note that pursuant to their recommendations, 
the concerned Ministries have initiated a variety of steps to address and mitigate 
arsenic related problems. Notably, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have
constituted a task force  for countering ill effects of arsenic in ground water and set
up a committee /Expert Group to review the currently-available treatments for 
Arsenic related diseases and to suggest areas for future focused research. The ICAR 
has initiated a project to reduce Arsenic accumulation in plant-human-animal 
including cattle. The plans formulated by M/o Drinking water and sanitation also 
envisage to mitigate arsenic impact. Likewise, steps have been taken by D/o Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, etc.,  to give wide publicity to the hazards of 
Arsenic. All these efforts, the Committee have been assured, would lead to 
formulation of a consolidated national plan on Arsenic Mitigation.   The M/o H&FW 
have submitted, inter- alia, that a National Programme for a particular disease should 
normally meet the requirement of all patients suffering from the said disease.  For 
example, a patient suffering from cancer or liver disease will need to be treated 

irrespective of whether the cause of the said disease was due to drinking Arsenic 
contaminated water over a prolonged period of time or due to some other reasons.  
Considering the severely debilitating effect of arsenic on human beings and animals 
covering 12 States and 96 districts impacting over 70 million people , the Committee 
reiterate that the concerned Ministries must coordinate their efforts and formulate a 
consolidated National Programme to combat and overcome the wide spread human 
sufferings caused by arsenic. 
1.24. The Committee had recommended in their original report that a detailed report 
should be presented  to Parliament regularly every six months ( say April and 
November)    bringing out the efforts made and the progress achieved, state wise, in 
treatment of arsenic affected people under the proposed National Health 
Programme.  However, the M/o Health and family Welfare agreed to comply with the 
suggestion of furnishing a detailed report to the Parliament every six months or as 
decided by the Committee of Secretaries. In written reply to a query as to why the 
option of frequency of laying the reports before the Parliament under the proposed 
National Health Programme be given to Committee of Secretaries, when the 
Committee had specifically recommended that the reports should be laid before 
Parliament every six months (say April and November) regularly, the Ministry could 
not provide any specific reply. The Committee find little justification to refer the 
matter to the Committee of secretaries and therefore reiterate their earlier
recommendation in this behalf. 
1.25 The M/o H&FW in their action taken replies have submitted that an Expert 
Group under the Director General of Health Services has been constituted to prepare 
guidelines for detection and management of Arsenicosis in India and the Group has 
formulated draft guidelines, which upon finalization will be shared with the State 
Governments and other stakeholders for necessary action. The Committee would like 

to be apprised within three months of the presentation of this report about the 
finalisation or otherwise of the guidelines and sharing of the same with the State 
Governments.
1.26 The Committee also would like to be informed of the advisories, if any, issued
to the Arsenic affected States through National Health Mission (NHM) on the health 
aspects of Arsenic, as decided by M/o H&FW in a meeting held on 13 July, 2015. 
E. NABL Accreditation  
(Observations/Recommendations Serial No. 8)
1.27 The Committee, in the original Report had observed that the process of 
accreditation of CGWB laboratories by National Accreditation Boar for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) was initiated in April 2011 and only 03 out of 16 
chemical laboratories of CGWB (Lucknow, Chandigarh & Hyderabad) have been 
accredited so far. Further, there was proposal to target five more labs for NABL 
accreditation during the 12th Plan. The Committee urged that serious efforts should be 
made to get NABL accreditation for all the remaining 13 labs of CGWB before the end of 
12th Plan.
1.28 The M/o WR, RD&GR in their action taken reply stated as  follows:
“The labs of CGWB at Southern region , Hyderabad; Northern region , Lucknow &
North Western region , Chandigarh have been accredited by NABL. The remaining 
labs at Western Region, Jaipur; South Eastern Region, Bhubaneswar; Central region , 
Nagpur; West Central Region, Ahmedabad ; & North Eastern Region ,Guwahati, are 
in the process of getting NABL accreditation during XII Plan.  The remaining regions 
have also been advised to obtain NABL accreditation in a time bound manner.”
1.29 As no time limit has been set for the remaining labs for getting  NABL accreditation, 
despite the Committee’s recommendation to obtain NABL accreditation for all the 
remaining 13 labs of CGWB before the end of 12th Plan, the Ministry were requested to
furnish a clarification in this regard . the Ministry accordingly, submitted that –

“the lab requires minimum 4 chemists for getting the NABL Accreditation. Since 
adequate number of chemists is not available in CGWB as of now the timeline  has 
not been indicated. A Committee has been constituted to study the working of the 
chemical laboratories in CGWB; to identify gaps and suggest corrective measures 
which will help in seeking NABL accreditation”
1.30 The Committee, in the original Report had urged the Ministry to make serious 
efforts for obtaining accreditation for all the remaining 13 labs of CGWB before the 
end of 12th Plan. The M/o Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation 
(M/o WR,RD &GR) in their initial action taken reply submitted that the remaining labs 
have also been advised to obtain NABL accreditation in a time bound manner. 
However, in the updated replies, the Ministry submitted that each lab requires 
minimum 4 chemists for getting the NABL Accreditation and since adequate number 
of chemists are not available in CGWB as of now, the timeline has not been indicated. 
Taking a serious note of the delay in providing 52 posts of chemists, the Committee 
wonder how these labs would get accreditation from NABL by the end of the 12 th Five 
Year Plan. The Committee therefore, reiterate that suitable action must be initiated by 
the CGWB to ensure that the remaining regions get NABL accreditation by the end of 
12th Plan. Further, the Committee have been apprised that a Committee has been 
constituted to study the working of the chemical laboratories in CGWB, to identify 
gaps and suggest corrective measures which will help in seeking NABL accreditation. 
The details regarding the Committee constituted to study the working of chemical labs 
in CGWB, the time frame for submitting the report and the finding, if any,  the effort 
made to fill the sanctioned vacancies and to make the posts attractive enough must 
be shared with the Committee in the action taken statement. The Committee hope all 
these measures would be completed and vacancies filled within a year of presentation 
of this report.

F. Monitoring Arsenic build up in Soils, Crops and Vegetables
(Observation /Recommendation Serial No. 12)
1.31 (i)  In view of the lack of clarity on the issue of whose responsibility is it to 
monitor arsenic build up in soils crops and vegetables, the Committee recommended 
that Cabinet Secretary should sort out the issue.  The Committee also recommended 
that National Sample Survey should be conducted to ascertain all water quality 
problems and an appropriate remedial plan devised. The Committee further 
recommended that there should be a mechanism for constant monitoring of 
contamination levels in water and soil throughout the country for taking timely 
corrective measures
1.32 The Ministry in their initial ATR had simply stated that the matter is under 
consideration of Ministry of Agriculture. 
1.33 In the updated action taken replies, however, the Ministry of WR, RD & GR 
submitted as under: 
“As per information received from Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and 
farmers Welfare (DAC&FW), it has been agreed that Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) will take up monitoring of arsenic contamination in soils in 
collaboration with its Regional Institutes, State Agricultural Universities and Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras with financial support of DAC&FW. Besides, States have been 
advised to formulate proposals for monitoring as well as adoption of preventive 
measures for funding under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana Scheme (RKVY).
ICAR has informed that a meeting under the Chairmanship of Secretary (A&C) was 
organized by DAC&FW and as per request of DAC&FW, a team of scientists from 
ICAR and State Agriculture University (Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya) 
visited arsenic affected villages of West Bengal on 17.08.2015 followed by a wrap-
up meeting on 18.08.2015 and suggested modalities along with the tentative 
budget estimate to carry out monitoring work.
1.34 The Committee are pleased to note that pursuant to their recommendation, 
responsibility for monitoring arsenic build up in  soils, crops, and vegetables to a  
particular Ministry/ Institution has been entrusted to the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR). The Committee however reiterate that National Sample Survey 
should be conducted to ascertain all water quality problems and an appropriate 
remedial plan devised. The Committee, therefore urge the Ministry to furnish the 

concrete action taken / proposed to be taken in this regard including on the findings 
of the ICAR. 
G. Arsenic Removal Devices 
(Recommendation Serial No. 13)
1.36 As the Ministry of WR, RD & GR, informed that most of the Arsenic removal 
devices had failed to produce satisfactory results mainly due to shortcomings in 
operations and maintenance (O&M), the Committee recommended that appropriate 
steps should be taken to enlist community participation to operate and maintain the 
Arsenic removal devices in the Arsenic contaminated areas. The Committee also 
recommended that  further R&D efforts need to be undertaken to address the problems 
relating to O&M and Arsenic testing kits  should be distributed for free in affected areas.
1.37 The Ministry in the ATR informed that M/o Drinking Water & Sanitation reserves 
3% of National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) allocation to all the States for 
water quality monitoring and surveillance activities, which, inter-alia, also includes 
procurement of Field Test Kits (FTKs) for regular testing of contamination of drinking 
water sources.  However, FTKs do not include detection of Arsenic contamination. 
Arsenic is measured separately with hydride generation method using Arsenic Test Kit 
i.e., Arsenator, in the field.  Arsenic Test Kits are relatively very costly (as compared to 
FTKs, which are used for testing of general parameters) and also require certain degree 
of skill.  In States such as West Bengal, where Arsenic contamination is more 
pronounced, Arsenic testing is done in block level water testing laboratories.
1.38 The Committee in the original Report had recommended for free distribution of 
arsenic testing kit in affected areas and had urged the Ministry to take appropriate 
steps to enlist community participation to operate and maintain arsenic removal 
devices in contaminated areas. The Ministry, instead of initiating appropriate action 
for  implementing the recommendation , has simply shifted the onus on the Ministry 

of Drinking Water and Sanitation stating that 3% of national Rural drinking water 
programme (NRDWP) allocation to all States are reserved for water quality monitoring 
and surveillance activities which also include procurement of Field testing Kits (FTKs). 
Notably, FTK do not include Arsenic contamination and that the Arsenic Testing Kit are 
stated to be very costly. The plea that the Arsenic Testing Kits are very costly is not 
acceptable to the Committee since it is a serious question of life, health and livelihood 
of arsenic affected people. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry must 
take up the matter with other concerned Ministries and State Governments and 
apprise them of the steps taken in this regard. Further, the matter may be taken up 
with the Ministry of Finance for allocation of more funds so that necessary FTKS 
become available to the effected people.
H National Water Policy 
(Observations/Recommendations Serial No. 22)
1.39 The Committee in the orginal Report found that the problem of ground water 
Arsenic contamination, in spite of being very grave, has not received deserved attention 
due to lack of its focus in the National Water Policy-2012. The Arsenic contamination in 
ground water was first reported almost four decades ago and presently spread over 96 
districts in 12 States. In view of the seriousness of the problem, the Committee had 
urged that there should be a specific focus in the National Water Policy to address this 
humongous problem, by appropriate addendum to the National Water Policy-2012.
1.40 The M/o WR, RD &GR in their ATR simply stated that concern of the Hon’ble 
Committee has been noted and the matter is under consideration of the Ministry.

1.41 The Committee note that the  inclusion of  ground water arsenic contamination 
in the  National Water Policy-2012 is under consideration of the Ministry The 
Committee are optimistic that a positive view would be taken in the matter in view of 
the seriousness and magnitude of the problem and they would be apprised in due 
course.
I. Separate Budgetary Head
(Observations/Recommendations Serial No. 23)
1.42 As there is no separate budgetary allocation for Arsenic related issues or for that 
matter for any water quality issues the Committee strongly recommended that there 
should be a separate budgetary head of expenditure for water quality with a sub-head 
for Arsenic contamination in order to adequately meet the fund requirements. There 
should be separate budgetary head for the proposed National Programme  for Ground 
Water related Health Problems with sufficient funding. 
1.43 Referring to the existence of (i) provision for spending up to 67 % of the funds 
under  National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), for tackling water quality 
problems in the Country and (ii) 5% of the NRDWP funds (over and above 67%) for 
Water Quality in those states with habitations affected by excess chemical 
contamination (highest priority to Arsenic and Fluoride) and with high priority districts 
affected by Japanese Encephalitis/ Acute Encephalitis Syndrome, (iii)  a scheme on 
installation of Community Water Purification plants as short term measure in all 
remaining Arsenic affected habitations by March, 2017 for providing 8-10 lpcd (litres per 
capita per day) of safe water for drinking and cooking purposes, the Ministry  replied 
that   there is no need of creation of a separate budgetary head for Arsenic mitigation at 
this stage, as this will also require change in NRDWP Guidelines.
1.44 In the updated ATR, as mentioned elsewhere in the report ,the Ministry have 
stated that when the maximum permissible limit of arsenic is maintained at 0.05 mg/l, 
an outlay of ₹ 268 crores for short term solution (by providing community water 

purification plant including seven years O&M) and ₹ 1268.69 crores for long term and 
sustainable solution (taking up water supply projects) i.e., nearly ₹ 1530 crores is 
required. However, if maximum permissible limit of as is considered at 0.01 mg/l, an 
amount of ₹ 1805.04 crores for short term (by providing community water purification 
plant including seven years O&M) and ₹ 6319.56 crores for long term solution (taking up 
water supply projects) i.e. nearly ₹ 8124 crores is required.
1.45 The M/o H&FW (Department of Health)  informed that Indian Council of Medical 
Research (ICMR) has constituted an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. D.N. 
Guhamajumdar, and that this Group is scheduled to meet on 01.06.2015 in ICMR to 
review the currently available treatments for arsenic related diseases and to suggest 
areas for future focused research.Therefore, an action plan and the likely financial 
implications in implementation of the said plan can be formulated and quantified only 
after the Group meets and submits its report.
1.46 In view of the prevalence of arsenic contamination of ground water in 12 states 
covering 96 districts and impacting adversely the life and livelihood of 70 million 
people for a long time, the Committee had recommended a separate budgetary head 
for tackling arsenic contamination of groundwater and its impact on population and 
the animals. Since the Ministry seems to be content with the extant provision of 
NRDWP for addressing water quality issues, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that a separate budget head should be created for arsenic for 
monitoring effectiveness of expenditure to combat the menace of arsenic.     
1.47 The Committee find that Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has 
constituted an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. D.N. Guhamajumdar. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the dates of the meetings held by the expert 
Committee and the outcome thereof.

J. Awareness Campaign  
(Observations/Recommendations Serial No. 25)
1.48 The Committee in the original Report observed that public awareness campaigns 
to make people aware about Arsenic contamination in ground water and its impact on 
human health do not appear to have created sufficient awareness about the problem. 
CGWB has reportedly organized several awareness generation programmes regularly in 
the form of mass awareness programme, painting competition, water management and 
training programme wherein students are one of the targeted groups. The Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation provides funds through NRDWP to focus on awareness 
generated activities in Arsenic affected habitations. The Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, however, have not undertaken any specific awareness raising activity in health 
effects of Arsenic contaminated water despite the recommendation of a Task Force of 
Planning Commission in the year 2007. DARE has claimed that farmers’ awareness 
programme, workshop, training programme and medical check-ups have been 
organized to educate people of affected areas under the National Agricultural 
Innovation Project (NAIP) on ‘Arsenic in Food Chain: Cause, Effect & Mitigation’ between 
2008-12. The Committee felt that frequent and sustained campaigns through print and 
electronic media would also be necessary in addition to other local progammes 
mentioned above, for effective awareness campaign.
1.49 A joint campaign with Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has already been 
agreed to. However, incremental funding is required for this, since existing IEC budget is 
limited.
1.40 In response to Committee's recommendation for frequent and sustained 
campaigns through print and electronic media in addition to existing ones 
implemented by various Ministries, the Committee have been informed that a joint 
campaign with MDWS has been agreed which requires incremental funding. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to take up the matter of funding at appropriate forums 

and ensure effective joint awareness campaign with Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation to achieve the desired results.

CHAPTER  II
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
High Arsenic content in ground water is of great concern to the Committee as it affects the 
human/animal/soil/plants system and has caused over one lakh deaths and 2 to 3 lakhs of 
confirmed cases of illness. The Committee’s examination of “Occurrence of High Arsenic 
Content in Ground Water” reveals that as many as 96 districts in 12 States have been affected 
by Arsenic contamination in ground water with Arsenic level of more than 3mg/l in one State as 
against the permissible limit of 0.01mg/l. 70.4 million people have been exposed to Ground 
Water Arsenic contamination in 35 districts of six States alone. Abnormalities have been 
detected in 40% of animals in Arsenic affected areas. The Committee are shocked to learn that 
in spite of the severity of Arsenic contamination and its spread in different States over the last 
three decades, there have been no coordinated efforts to tackle the menace and there is no 
centralized authority to address the issues concerning Arsenic contamination. There are no data 
from Government sources about the Arsenic diseased people, animals and plants. There are 
serious gaps in monitoring and also in research efforts. There is no reference to Arsenic 
contamination in National Water Policy 2012. There is no separate budgetary allocation to deal 
with Arsenic issues. Though a Vision Document entitled “Mitigation and Remedy of Ground 
Water Arsenic menace in India” was prepared by the National Institute of Hydrology (NIH) and 
the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) in the year 2010, no concerted action is visible. The 
Succeeding paragraphs of the Report deal with these issues in detail.
Reply of the Government
(i)  For coordinated approach, an ‘Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG)’ on ‘Arsenic Mitigation’ has 
been constituted under the Chairmanship of Mission Director, National Water Mission, 
MoWR, RD & GR. IMG has members from concerned Ministries/Departments as well as 
representatives from affected States. 
It was decided by IMG that all Ministries/ Departments would submit their Action Plan along 
with budgetary requirements for Arsenic Mitigation.  Action Plan from six Ministries / 
Departments and seven States have been received which are enclosed as Annexure.  
IMG has now been made into Standing Group, which will (a) over-see the implementation 
of Action Plan of the various Ministries/ Departments; (b) reconcile data; (c) guide the 
entire program and; (d) coordinate the efforts of all Stakeholders.
(ii) Desirability of modification in National Water Policy, 2012 to bring in more focus on 
Arsenic mitigation is under consideration.
(iii) M/o Health & Family Welfare have constituted a Task Force, Chaired by the DG, 
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) having members from M/o WR, RD & GR, M/o 
Drinking Water & Sanitation; AIIMS; Planning Commission; NCDC; CBHI etc. with following 
Terms of Reference:
(a) to workout modalities of doing a robust mapping of areas affected by high Arsenic 
content in ground water.

(b) to suggest an intervention strategy to address health issues arising out of high 
Arsenic content in ground water, including treatment protocols.
(c) to suggest methods for carrying out intensive awareness rising activities with regard to 
drinking Arsenic contaminated water.
(d) to suggest methods of working with allied departments, like that of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation on how to bring about concerted action to contain the ill effects of Arsenic 
poisoning.
Further, ICMR has constituted a seven member Expert Group comprising experts from various 
fields to discuss the available modalities of the treatment alongwith discussions on the current 
gaps and areas, where future medical research can be directed to find medical cure for the 
Arsenic related disease. It is expected that at least 3-5 areas would be identified, wherein, 
research can be focused.  Budget of Rs. 1.5–2 crore may be required for each area.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
According to the finding of Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), more than 90 per 
cent of the total ground water in Arsenic affected areas is used for irrigating crops. Many 
investigators consider water-soil-crop-food transfer, cooking water and direct ingestion of 
Arsenic contaminated water as the major exposure pathways of Arsenic as reported by the vision 
document of NIH and CGWB. As the people take contaminated water along with contaminated 
food, the chances of damage become greater. The food crops sold off to inhabitants of 
uncontaminated regions lead to their consumption of Arsenic contaminated food. The domestic 
animals in Arsenic affected areas regularly consume Arsenic laden drinking water, fish and food. 
Consumption of meat from such infected animals, causes Arsenic intake. All these show the 
great danger of Arsenic spread and call for urgent steps to ensure proper Ground Water 
management to minimize use of Arsenic rich ground water for irrigation purposes. The 
Committee stress that remedial measures should be taken in this regard without loss of time.
Reply of the Government
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) have stated that under All India Coordinated 
Research Project (AICRP), on Irrigation Water Management,  a project viz. “Studies of Arsenic 
contamination and management in soil-plant-water in shallow tube well irrigated farming areas 
of Nadia district (West Bengal)” has been initiated at Gyeshpur centre, West Bengal. The project 
will study reduction of Arsenic accumulation in plants, humans and animals including cattle.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)

The Committee are dismayed to learn that source of Arsenic in ground water through natural 
processes in Ganga-Brahmaputra Plain has not been fully established during the last almost 
four decades.
According to the M/o WR, RD & GR, elevated level of Arsenic in ground water is caused largely 
by natural process and partly due to anthropogenic activities like application of fertilizers, 
burning of coal, leaching from coal-ash tailings and from mining activity. There are several 
hypotheses propounded by scientists for the mechanism of release of Arsenic into ground water 
by natural as well as anthropogenic activity, as described in section 2 - Chapter 01 of this 
Report. It has been, stated that sources of Arsenic in Ganga-Brahmaputra plain is mostly 
sediments having Arsenic bearing minerals. However, the process of release of Arsenic into 
ground water particularly the local variation in the concentration of Arsenic is yet to be fully 
understood, as it depends on various factors such as physico -chemical conditions, hydro-
geological characteristics of aquifers, dynamic nature of aquifers, presence of Arsenic bearing 
minerals in the sediments, etc. necessitating micro level studies. The Committee hardly need to 
stress that identifying the geogenic source of contamination is necessary to identify appropriate 
mitigation methods. It is not clear why no attempt has been made to identify the real cause of 
Arsenic in ground water. No geogenic cause has been pointed out for the Arsenic contamination 
in ground water. The Committee recommend that a time bound programme be implemented for 
identifying sources to conclusively establish the mobilization process which helps in Arsenic 
release from minerals to ground water.
Reply of the Government
IMG has directed National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee to take up a study on 
genesis of Arsenic occurrence in Ganga Brahmaputra basin. 
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
The Committee hold that there is no scientific basis for the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) to 
prescribe the maximum permissible limit for Arsenic in drinking water as 0.05mg/l higher than 
the World Health Organisation’s (WHO) standard of 0.01mg/l. BIS has pleaded that relaxed 
standard of Arsenic limit was effected in view of abundance of Arsenic in ground water in 
several areas of the country and non-availability of alternate sources. The Committee do not 
accept this stand and would caution that there should be no compromise on the health of the 
people. It is the duty of the State to improve the public health which includes the provision of 
safe drinking water as enshrined in Article 47 of the Directive Principles of the State Policy of 

the Constitution of India. The Committee, therefore, urge that the relaxed Arsenic permissible 
limit of 0.05mg/l in drinking water should be done away forthwith and acceptable limit of 
0.01mg/l ensured.
Reply of the Government
M/o Consumer Affairs have informed that the amendment to IS 10500:2012 has been 
finalized and Extra-Ordinary Gazette Notification has been sent for issuance. Thus, the process 
of revision of limit of Arsenic from 0.05 mg/l to 0.01 mg/l has been completed. 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
No convincing reasons have been given by the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) as to why 
4,504 out of its 12,946 water quality monitoring stations have been located disproportionately in 
just four states viz. Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra & Karnataka. The CGWB monitors 
ground water quality through a network of 12,946 ground water observation wells with the 
objective of, inter-alia, periodic monitoring of geogenic contamination of ground water. The 
Committee, in this connection note that water quality monitoring is done not only by CGWB but 
also by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), States Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs), 
Central Water Commission (CWC) and National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD). The 
Committee emphasize that there should be no duplication of water quality monitoring efforts. 
The Committee desire that additional water quality monitoring stations being set up by CGWB 
should be located in such places as to conform to a rationalized and optimized network of water 
quality monitoring stations.
Reply of the Government
It is proposed to establish 35000 numbers of additional monitoring wells during the Twelfth Plan 
Period. Till June 2015, 7790 number of additional wells have been established which will also 
be used for water quality monitoring once in a year.
The number of observation wells in a State is arrived at the end of an optimizing exercise.
The four States of Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Karnataka are amongst the 
largest States in the Country and have varied hydro-geological conditions, which necessitate a 
large number of observation wells.
35,000 additional wells will also be established after an optimizing exercise and will be 
concentrated in States/Regions, where the numbers of observation wells are less.
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) have 
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) which, inter-alia, enjoins both the 
organizations to avoid repetition of quality monitoring of observation wells.
The observation of the Committee is noted and additional water quality wells will be located so 
as to conform to a rationalized and optimized network of water quality monitoring stations.

Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
It transpired during the examination of the subject that the functioning of CGWB is constrained 
by paucity of staff. As against its sanctioned strength of 4195 personnel, 1170 posts are lying 
vacant. It is obvious that no organization can function efficiently and effectively unless there is 
optimum manpower. The Committee recommend that necessary steps should urgently be taken 
to ensure that CGWB has full complement of staff at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
As on 1st March, 2015, the total number of sanctioned posts are 4160 (filled-2908 and 
vacant-1252).  A proposal for revival of 435 posts is under consideration in the Ministry. 98 
posts have been revived with the approval of the Ministry of Finance vide order dated 
16.01.2015.
Recruitment process for the vacant posts has been initiated.
The Ministry in the updated replies stated as under :-
As on 1 st March, 2015, out of 1233 vacant posts, 660 are numbers of Direct Quota vacancies, 
568 are numbers of promotion quota vacancies and 5 numbers Ex-Cadre vacancies. 
For Direct Quota vacancies, out of 660, 435 posts were proposed for revival as remaining 225
posts were not lying vacant for more than one year at that time.
Details of action taken with respect to filling up of posts as on 1 st March, 2015 is given as 
Annexure Ia.
As on 1st April, 2016, out of 1167 vacancies, 706 are number of Direct Quota vacancies, 453 are 
number of promotion quota vacancies and 8 numbers of Ex-Cadre vacancies. 
For Direct Quota vacancies, 249 posts are proposed for revival and matter is under submission 
for approval of M/o Finance. Remaining 450 posts in different categories are lying vacant due to 
some administrative reasons.
Details of action taken with respect to filling up of posts as on 1 st April, 2016 is given as 
Annexure Ib.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
The Committee are startled to hear from the Ministry of Environment & Forests that 
monitoring of water quality over the years by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) at 
2500 locations (covering 445 rivers, 45 drains, 807 ground water stations etc. spread over all 
the 29 States and 06 Union Territories) does not reflect any detectable presence of Arsenic 
contamination at any of the monitoring locations. The Committee suspect that the information 
displayed in the CPCB’s website as on 20-11-2014 suggests a different story.
Arsenic parameter is nowhere in the list of chemical analyses of CPCB, as evident from the list 
of NABL accredited analytical parameters displayed in the website. Obviously, CPCB’s 
monitoring cannot show any Arsenic contamination. The Committee strongly recommend that 
there should be an immediate relook at the testing parameters by the M/o EFCC / CPCB and 
the lacuna, if any, in this regard should be addressed. The Committee need to be apprised of 
the factual position and action proposed in this regard.

Reply of the Government
(i) Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) had conducted monitoring of Arsenic affected 
areas during the year 2005-2006 and reported the Arsenic problems and assessed 
measures taken for removal of Arsenic from drinking water in the States of West Bengal 
and Bihar.
(ii) It has been decided by the Group of Officers (GoO) in a meeting held on 13.07.2015 that 
CPCB (MoEFCC) will issue clear instructions to State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) for 
testing of Arsenic in soil, water and effluents. 
(iii) The existing network of 807 ground water quality monitoring stations of CPCB does not 
cover Arsenic affected areas; hence Arsenic contamination was not reported.  The 
monitoring network of CPCB is not adequate to represent entire ground water quality in the 
Country; hence CPCB is collaborating with CGWB, who has a monitoring network of more 
than 18000 stations in the Country to compile the data pertaining to ground water quality in 
the Country.
(iv) CPCB Labs are NABL accredited (15/09/2014 to 14/09/2016) for analysis of Arsenic (AAS 
method based on APHA (22nd edition) 3114 B: 2012 with detection limits (0.005 mg/l to 2.0 
mg/l).  CPCB Labs are also IS 18001: 2007 certified by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
for Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems (11/12/2014 to 10/12/2017).
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
Precious little has been done by Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) constituted in the 
year 2001 to deal with, inter-alia, any environmental issue concerning surface and ground water 
quality and reviewing the status of quality of natural water resources. One of the achievements 
of WQAA is stated to be regarding “minimum environmental flows in Indian rivers”. However, on 
closer scrutiny, it is observed that there is hardly any worthwhile progress during the last 11 
years except for constituting a working group in the year 2003 which took four years to submit 
its report in 2007, followed by constitution of a committee for implementing the working group’s 
recommendations which submitted its report in 2009. Eventually, the recommendations of the 
Committee have not been accepted by WQAA in its meeting held on 30th May, 2013. Strangely, 
WQAA’s mandate excluded quality issues arising due to geogenic aspect. This lacuna has been 
corrected only recently by revision of its mandate. The Committee suggest that WQAA should 
focus on monitoring and assessment of water quality of surface water/ground water and 
address all related aspects holistically. For this purpose, the Committee recommend that 
sufficient budgetary provisions be made available for equipping WQAA with sophisticated 
equipments and trained human resource. This would bring in more efficient functioning of 
WQAA.
Reply of the Government
For rationalization of its Terms of References, WQAA constituted a Sub-Committee for ‘Re-
evaluation of Powers and Mandates of WQAA’ under the Chairpersonship of Advisor, NRCD, 
MoEFCC. The Sub-Committee recommended that WQAA should focus on monitoring and 
assessment of water quality and address all the related aspects holistically and accordingly, 
suggested modifications in the Authority’s powers, mandate and the composition. Authority in its 
11th meeting, referred the matter to its Executive Committee (EC) headed by Special Secretary, 
MoEFCC for review. The EC in its 2 nd meeting held on 13 th March, 2015 agreed to the 
recommendations of the above Sub-Committee and decided that the same be put-up in the next 

meeting of WQAA for approval.  The draft notification regarding revaluation of composition 
mandate and powers of WQAA will be sent to M/o Law & Justice for vetting.
WQAA does not analyze the water quality samples. The samples are analyzed by the technical 
departments such as Central Water Commission (CWC), CGWB and CPCB.  Based upon the 
information received from them, the Authority takes action as per its mandate.  So, budgetary 
provisions are not required by the Authority for equipping it with sophisticated equipment and 
trained human resource.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No.12)
Unfortunately, no monitoring of Arsenic build-up in soil, crops and vegetables has been 
undertaken by any organisation. DARE has stated that ICAR is not monitoring the Arsenic build-
up in soils. DAC claimed that M/o WR, RD & GR is mandated for periodical assessment of 
Arsenic contamination in ground water including Arsenic build-up in soils. The M/o WR, RD & 
GR have informed that soil analysis for Arsenic contamination is not carried out by CGWB. M/o 
EFCC and CPCB have not done any study on the build-up of Arsenic in soil, crops and 
vegetables. The Committee never expected that their queries on issues of national importance 
would be shuttled from one Ministry to another without yielding desired information. The 
Committee desire that the Cabinet Secretary should sort-out the issue and intimate the 
Committee as to whose responsibility is it to monitor Arsenic build-up in soils, crops and 
vegetables and ensure that necessary steps are taken in this regard under intimation to the 
Committee. The Committee further desire that a special National Sample Survey should be 
conducted to ascertain all water quality problems and to devise an appropriate remedial plan. 
The Committee recommend that there should be a mechanism for constant monitoring of 
contamination levels in water and soil throughout the country for taking timely corrective 
measures.
Reply of the Government
Matter is under consideration of Ministry of Agriculture.
In the updated replies the Ministry stated as under:-
As per information received from Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare 
(DAC&FW), it has been agreed that Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) will take up 
monitoring of Arsenic contamination in soils in collaboration with its Regional Institutes, State 
Agricultural Universities and Krishi Vigyan Kendras with financial support of DAC&FW. Besides, 
States have been advised to formulate proposals for monitoring as well as adoption of 
preventive measures for funding under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana Scheme (RKVY).
ICAR has informed that a meeting under the Chairmanship of Secretary(A&C) was organized by 
DAC&FW and as per request of DAC&FW, a team of scientists from ICAR and State Agriculture 
University (Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya) visited Arsenic affected villages of West 
Bengal on 17.08.2015 followed by a wrap-up meeting on 18.08.2015 and suggested modalities 
along with the tentative budget estimate to carry out monitoring work.  As a follow-up action, 

officials from DAC&FW visited West Bengal during 29 th September to 1st October, 2015 to take 
stock of the situation.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.34 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 16)
The Committee recommends that there should be an annual conference of Health Ministers of 
all States to discuss and decide about ways and means to address water quality related health 
problems and decide appropriate remedial measures. This forum can also be used for annual 
assessment of progress and the results achieved.
Reply of the Government
M/o Health & Family Welfare has agreed to discuss the issue of Arsenic related diseases in an 
Annual Conference of Health Ministers. However, to be more meaningful, such a Conference 
should have participation of Ministers of Health Department, alongwith other Departments 
responsible for providing clean drinking water.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 17)
The Committee appreciate the commendable work done by the Department of Science and 
Technology (DST) and the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in promoting a 
network of Researchers from leading R&D/academic institutions working in the area of Arsenic. 
The work done by CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute (NBRI) in identifying Arsenic safe 
rice genotype CN1794- 2CSIR-NBRI deserves a special mention. This variety is proposed to be 
released for cultivation in vast Arsenic affected belts of West Bengal. The Committee also note 
that the DST’s promotion of research efforts initiated in 2007 have resulted in development of 07 
different devices for Arsenic removal. The Committee in this connection would suggest that 
DST/CSIR should explore collaboration with global R&D institutions in Arsenic related areas 
particularly for in-situ remediation of Arsenic from aquifer system for which no R&D work has 
been taken up by any Indian Institute.
Reply of the Government
∑ A 10000 litre per day Pilot Plant at Dhapdhapi High School near Kolkata based on Electro 
Coagulation Arsenic Remediation (ECAR) technology developed by  Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory (LBNL) in participation with Luminous Industries and Jadavpur 

University  is complete and under commissioning. The plant would benefit 2800 people 
including school children. 
∑ Lehigh University in Pennsylvania has developed an efficient adsorbent HAIX-Zr or HIX-
Nano-Zr, with a cosmetically   anion exchanger, inside which zirconium oxide nano-
particles have been dispersed.  Zirconium is innocuous with no adverse impact on human 
health and is unregulated in drinking water. The adsorbent is now being made in India and 
a Pilot plant based on this technology has been set up at Ashok Nagar by Rite Water 
Solutions, Nagpur and an NGO, Society with Human Face (SHF).    Possibilities of 
collaboration with Dutch institutions are also being explored. A Dutch delegation 
comprising of Small and Medium Industries and knowledge institutions is expected to visit. 
∑ A compendium of R&D initiatives of D/o Science & Technology regarding Arsenic has 
been finalized, printed and disseminated.
∑ A capacity building programme for young water professionals with University of Nebraska, 
Lincoln (UNL) has been launched to handle water related challenges.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 18)
The Committee find that in the areas of medical curative treatment and the causes, there has 
been no centralized research. A representative of the M/o H&FW admitted during his oral 
evidence before the Committee that medical research of Arsenic causes and treatment has 
been inadequate. The Committee need not over emphasis that there should be a focused 
research for medical cure of Arsenic diseases. The Committee are sure that any discovery of 
cost effective medicine and treatment procedure will be well received not only in our country but 
also in other Arsenic affected countries, as there is huge population of Arsenic affected people 
world-wide.
Reply of the Government
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has constituted a seven member expert group 
comprising experts from various fields including dermatology, oncology and tropical medicine to 
discuss the available modalities of the treatment along with discussions on the current gaps and 
areas where the future medical research can be directed to find medical cure for the Arsenic 
related disease. It is expected that at least 3-5 areas would be identified, wherein, research can 
be focused.  Budget of Rs. 1.5–2 crore may be required for each area. 
ICMR is in touch with the Arsenic affected States and has requested the States to forward 
available information of the districts identified to have Arsenic contamination between 0.01-0.05 
mg/1. Once the information is available for 2-3 States, a multi-site study would be planned to 
survey the representative population for sign and symptoms of disease due to Arsenic 
exposure.  As of now, only Bihar and Punjab have provided this information to plan the study.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 19)
The Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) has pointed out the need for a 
systematic search for phyto-accumulating or phyto-excluding plant species to identify species 
which effectively detoxifies within the plant body by its metabolic process. By way of remedial 
options to combat Arsenic problem, DARE has suggested, among other things, conjunctive use 
of ground and surface water, recharge of ground water by rain water harvesting, increased use 

of farmyard manure and cost effective phyto-remediation options. Unfortunately, it appears that 
DARE has not pro-actively promoted these measures and generated an awareness about the 
Arsenic impact on agriculture. So much so even the Secretary, Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation was not aware of Arsenic impact on plants and vegetations. The Committee are 
unhappy that so far no comprehensive strategies have been worked out to ensure that Arsenic 
laden agricultural produce is not consumed by human beings and live stock. The Committee 
exhort DARE that in consultation with the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and other 
concerned Ministries, appropriate strategies should be worked out and implemented within three 
months of presentation of the report under intimation to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
Indian Council of Agricultural Research(ICAR) have stated that the Council through Gyeshpur 
center of All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Water Management is engaged in 
research to develop remedial measures to ensure safe use of ground water for agricultural use 
in Arsenic affected areas of the Country. 
DARE/ICAR have also stated that “D/o Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) may intimate 
concerned State Agriculture Department to take appropriate action in this regard based on the 
remedial measures suggested by DARE.”
ICAR under AICRP on Irrigation Water Management has already initiated a project “Studies of 
Arsenic Contamination and Management in Soil-Plant-Water in Shallow Tube Well Irrigated 
Farming Areas of Nadia District (West Bengal)” at Gyeshpur centre, West Bengal so as to 
reduce Arsenic accumulation in plants/ humans/ animals including cattle.
Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (CSSRI), Karnal is working on microbial bio-remediation 
of Arsenic in waste water.  The centre may take up research programme on phyto-accumulating 
or phyto-excluding plant species to detoxify Arsenic within plant. Once the process is 
developed, ICAR will work out appropriate strategies in consultation with DAC and other 
concerned Ministries for its implementation.
Department of Animal Husbandry & Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture, have stated that Action 
Plan alongwith Budgetary requirements for the revised permissible limits of the Arsenic in water 
should be sought from M/o Drinking Water & Sanitation for availability of drinking water for 
animals and for the affects of Arsenic water on animals under the revised permissible limits from 
the Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
It has been decided by the Group of Officers (GoO) in a meeting held on 13.07.2015 that D/o 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries will launch Information, Education & Communication 
(IEC) campaign to make public aware of the effects of Arsenic in livestock.
DAC have stated that they have already taken various interventions, namely, discouraging 
cultivation of boro-rice, dwarf variety of rice and leafy vegetables in Arsenic affected areas 
under its on-going programmes. In addition, DAC is promoting Integrated Farming System (IFS) 
and On Farm Water Management (OFWM) for rain water conservation/harvesting and use of 
micro-irrigation system coupled with practice of organic farming, use of vermin compost/ FYM/ 
green manure for prevention of Arsenic contamination in food chain. ICAR has also been 
requested for development of Arsenic resistant crop varieties, low water requiring crops, 
technology for replacement of boro-rice cultivation etc. 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 20)
The Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation was candid in his admission that the 
Department had so far not thought of the ground water Arsenic impact on agriculture and 

promised to adopt such agricultural practices as to promote crop varieties which are less 
susceptible to uptake of Arsenic and other measures which would minimize Arsenic in 
agricultural produce. It is a matter of satisfaction to the Committee that the Committee could 
create awareness at very high level about ground water Arsenic impact on the agricultural 
sector. The Committee recommend that the remedial measures suggested by DARE should be 
incorporated in the crop husbandry programme and the measures vigorously promoted to 
minimize the Arsenic impact.
Reply of the Government
Response from DAC is awaited.
The Ministry in the  updated replies stated as under :-
DAC&FW has advised Arsenic affected States to take up measures recommended by ICAR 
such as discouraging cultivation of boro-rice, dwarf variety of rice, leafy vegetables in Arsenic 
affected areas under its on-going programmes.  Besides, DAC&FW is promoting Integrated 
Farming System (IFS), On Farm Water Management (OFWM) for rain water conservation, use 
of micro irrigation system under Prime Minister Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) coupled with 
practices of organizing farming under dedicated scheme, namely, Paramparagat Krishi Vikas 
Yojana, use of vermin compost/ FYM/ green manure for prevention of Arsenic contamination in 
food chain.  States have been advised not to allow construction of shallow tube-wells in Critical 
and Semi-Critical areas and use of irrigation water from tube-wells of more than 80 meter depth. 
Rice Research Station, Chinsurah, West Bengal has developed Arsenic tolerance rice variety 
i.e., IET 4786 (Shatabdi) for which large scale field demonstrations are being organized before 
releasing the variety to end users.  In addition, local Doordarshan and All India Radio are 
regularly broadcasting interviews of scientists of BCKV on ill effects of Arsenic contamination 
and its management in food cycle.  Also, DAC&FW had organized a video conference chaired 
by Additional Secretary, inviting Arsenic affected States on 24.09.2015, wherein problems and 
solutions of Arsenic contamination in soil were discussed.  In this video conference most of the 
States were present and were categorically advised for in-situ rain water conservation and its 
utilization and, if required, tube-well water, only in Safe zone other than Dark/Grey zone, as 
notified by CGWA, could be used coupled with promotion of micro irrigation systems.  States 
have agreed for promotion of cultivation of Arsenic resistant rice variety i.e., IET-4786 
(Shatabdi).
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 21)
According to an expert, Arsenic has affected over 150 million people worldwide through 
consumption of Arsenic contaminated drinking water. It is learnt that as many as 38 countries 
including, USA, UK, Canada, Australia and China have been affected by high Arsenic in ground 
water. DARE has pointed out that Arsenic concentration in ground water is of great concern to 
the world since it affects the soil, plants, animals-human systems. The Committee feel that India 
can render possible help to other Arsenic affected countries with remediation technologies, 
Arsenic removal devices and Arsenic safe crop genotypes, etc. and would urge the Government 
to take suitable steps in this regard.
Reply of the Government

Noted for Compliance.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 24)
The M/o EFCC have reportedly notified general standards for environmental pollutants which 
include industrial effluents also for various recipients sources, inter-alia, land for irrigation. The 
limit for discharged Arsenic in waste water has been defined for all the sources as 0.2mg/l. As 
already stated in a preceding paragraph, the Water Quality Assessment Authority has done 
nothing so far to ensure minimum environmental flows. The Central Population Control Board 
has not included ‘Arsenic’ in their chemical analyses for testing of waste water. The Committee 
in this connection note that analytical testing of effluents of leather tanneries conducted by IIT 
Kanpur in the year 2002 showed alarming levels of Arsenic, cadmium, mercury and other heavy 
metals. The Arsenic level of tannery effluent at Unnao was as high as 5.07 mg/l as against the 
prescribed limit of 0.2 mg/l. Thus, anthropogenic causes of Arsenic content in ground water and 
in soils have remained unaddressed. The Committee view this failure seriously and urge the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests to immediately look into the shortcomings and take urgent 
remedial steps to ensure that anthropogenic sources of Arsenic in water and soil are plugged. 
The Committee also recommend that there should be a survey of all industries on the river side 
to check the quality of their effluents and adherence to environmental standards. They should 
be closed if they fail to adhere to effluent standards besides being imposed heavy penalty. Huge 
amount of pesticides and chemical fertilizers also leach into the groundwater and river and their 
contents in soil and in river water should be carefully studied to take appropriate preventive 
steps.
Reply of the Government
Regarding studying the presence of pesticides and fertilizers in river water, CPCB has 
requested the five Ganga basin States to collect and submit samples to CPCB, Delhi Office for 
analysis of 9 trace metals and 15 pesticides as per the monitoring protocol on all the monitoring 
locations of river Ganga:
(i) MoEFCC has notified industry specific discharge standards for Arsenic for Fertilizers, 
Pesticide manufacturing & Formulation industries and Organic Chemical industries as 0.2 
mg/l and for Bullion Refining as 0.1 mg/l.
Further, general discharge standards for Arsenic have also been notified for various 
recipient sources i.e., surface water, public sewerage, marine coastal areas and land for 
irrigation as 0.2 mg/l.
(ii) Tanneries use only Chromium in tanning process, in the form of Basic Chromium Sulphate, 
and the unabsorbed Chromium is discharged as the effluent.  Arsenic is not used by 
tanneries in tanning process. Tanneries are required to provide special treatment for 
Chromium in their effluent through recovery and treatment so as to meet the prescribed 
standards for Chromium concentration already notified by MoEFCC.
During April 2012, CPCB conducted ground water sampling at 51 locations in Unnao 
district. Results of the analysis indicated that concentration of Chromium (Hexavalent) at all 
locations was below detectable level, i.e., conforming Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
limit. Concentration of Chromium (Total) was also below detectable level at all locations 
except for one location, where it was observed as 0.175 mg/l.
CPCB on 28.10.2014 issued directions under Section 18 (1) (b) of the Water Act, 1974 to 
Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board to keep under close watch all tanneries in Unnao 

and Kanpur region for ensuring regular compliance of prescribed norms, apart from 
directions to upgrade CETP/ PETPs.
(iii) Reply awaited from MoEFCC.
(iv) CPCB has setup a mechanism called Environmental Surveillance programme (ESS) with a 
purpose for carrying out surprise inspections of industrial units through its Zonal Offices. 
The above surprise inspections are being carried out to assess the adequacy of pollution 
control systems adopted by these industries and check the compliance status of pollution 
control standards. Based on the violation severity, action is initiated on the defaulting 
industries either under Sec 5 of The Environment Protection Act, 1986 or to the State 
Pollution Control Board (SPCB) under Sec 18(1)(b) of Air/Water Act.
(v) Regarding studying the presence of pesticides and fertilizers in river water, CPCB has 
requested five Ganga basin States to collect and submit samples to CPCB Delhi Office for 
analysis of 9 trace metals and 15 pesticides as per the monitoring protocol on all the 
monitoring locations of river Ganga.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 25)
The Committee observe that public awareness campaigns to make people aware about Arsenic 
contamination in ground water and its impact on human health do not appear to have created 
sufficient awareness about the problem. CGWB has reportedly organized several awareness 
generation programmes regularly in the form of mass awareness programme, painting 
competition, water management and training programme wherein students are one of the 
targeted groups. The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation provides funds through NRDWP 
to focus on awareness generated activities in Arsenic affected habitations. The Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare, however, have not undertaken any specific awareness raising activity 
in health effects of Arsenic contaminated water despite the recommendation of a Task Force of 
Planning Commission in the year 2007. DARE has claimed that farmers’ awareness 
programme, workshop, training programme and medical check-ups have been organized to 
educate people of affected areas under the National Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP) on 
‘Arsenic in Food Chain: Cause, Effect & Mitigation’ between 2008-12. The Committee feel that 
frequent and sustained campaigns through print and electronic media would also be necessary 
in addition to other local progammes mentioned above, for effective awareness campaign.
Reply of the Government
A joint campaign with Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has already been agreed to. 
However, incremental funding is required for this, since existing IEC budget is limited.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.40 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 26)

It is a matter of serious concern that in spite of grave multidimensional Arsenic problem being 
faced by vast parts of the country for the past decades, the Govt. have not thought it fit to 
identify a Central agency to tackle the Arsenic menace. Repeated queries to M/o WR, RD & GR 
as to who is responsible for abatement of Arsenic contamination at the Central level have not 
yielded any specific information. The M/o WR, RD & GR attempted to shift the responsibility by 
simply stating that abatement of Arsenic contamination in drinking water is in the domain of 
State Governments. The Committee do not approve of this stand. The very fact that the problem 
of Arsenic contamination is spread over 96 districts in 12 different States with huge human and 
animal population having been affected by Arsenic poisoning calls for immediate Central 
intervention. At the Central level, there are as many as seven Ministries / Departments and a 
number of Central organizations which are required to handle this problem, besides State 
Governments and their agencies. These are Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation, Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, Min. of Science & 
Technology, Central Ground Water Board, Central Ground Water Authority, Water Quality 
Assessment Authority, Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research, National Botanical Research Institute, Indian Council of Medical Research, etc. 
There should be a single authority at the Centre to look at the issue of Arsenic problem 
holistically and take appropriate coordinated corrective measures. The Ministry have failed to 
convince the Committee of any concrete action taken by them. It is callous negligence on the 
part of the Government that they had not taken any action in the past in this regard. It is only 
after the matter has been taken up by the Committee, a Core Committee headed by the 
Director, NIH has recommended in its report submitted on 15 October, 2014, that each of the 
affected States should have an ‘Arsenic Task Force’ spearheaded by the model ‘National 
Arsenic Mission Task Force’ (NAMTF) at Central level. It is indeed intriguing as to why the 
ministries and departments of the Government of India remained oblivious of the said Core 
Committee while deposing before the Committee. The Committee deprecate the lapse on the 
part of the representatives of ministries/departments concerned who appeared before them. The 
Minutes of the meeting of the Core Committee should be furnished to the Committee. The 
Committee urge the Government to ensure functioning of the Core Committee on war footing. 
Results of the action taken should be made available to the Committee within 3 months.
Reply of the Government
(i) An ‘Inter Ministerial Group (IMG)’ on ‘Arsenic Mitigation’ consisting of representatives of M/o 
Drinking Water & Sanitation, M/o Environment, Forests & Climate Change, M/o Agriculture,   
M/o Consumer Affairs, M/o Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Urban Development and 
Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR has been constituted under the chairmanship of 
Mission Director, National Water Mission, MoWR, RD & GR.  The Group also has 
representation from the Arsenic affected States viz. Assam, Punjab, West Bengal, Bihar, 
Haryana, Jharkhand, Manipur, UP, Chhattisgarh and Karnataka. 
(ii) IMG has now been made into Standing Group which will (a) over-see the implementation of 
Action Plan of the various Ministries/ Departments; (b) reconcile data; (c) guide the entire 
program and; (d) coordinate the efforts of all Stakeholders.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 27)
It was enquired from the Cabinet Secretary as to whether there is any comprehensive approach 
with an integrated policy, action plan and coordination for tackling different aspects of Arsenic 
contamination. In response, a vague reply was received on 15 October, 2014 stating that a 
more active engagement by different Ministries/Departments of the Central Government and 

State Governments would lead to an integrated approach and action plans for mitigation of 
adverse impact of Arsenic on human, plant and animal health by effectively eliminating Arsenic 
from drinking water and food supply chain. Not satisfied with the reply, the Committee enquired 
whether any specific action is proposed in this regard. The Cabinet Secretariat responded on 
3rd November, 2014 by stating that as regards planning of integrated approach, it has been 
decided to convene meeting of Committee of Secretaries with concerned 
Ministries/Departments soon to discuss the matter. It is strange that Cabinet Secretariat has not 
taken the cognizance of the existence of the Core Committee. The Committee desire that the 
Committee of Secretaries including those of the Ministries/Departments mentioned in the 
preceding para of this report should consider the matter and ensure that an integrated policy 
and effective co-ordination mechanism is in place for planning and implementation of all Arsenic 
related issues and the removal of Arsenic contamination should be taken on a Mission mode.
Reply of the Government
(i)  An ‘Inter Ministerial Group (IMG)’ on ‘Arsenic Mitigation’ consisting of representatives of M/o 
Drinking Water & Sanitation, M/o Environment, Forests & Climate Change, M/o Agriculture,   
M/o Consumer Affairs, M/o Health and Family Welfare, M/o Urban Development and M/o 
Water Resources, RD & GR has been constituted under the chairmanship of Mission 
Director, National Water Mission, MoWR, RD & GR. The Group also has representation 
from the Arsenic affected States viz. Assam, Punjab, West Bengal, Bihar, Haryana, 
Jharkhand, Manipur, UP, Chhattisgarh and Karnataka. IMG has now been made into 
Standing Group which will (a) over-see the implementation of Action Plan of the various 
Ministries/ Departments; (b) reconcile data; (c) guide the entire program and; (d) coordinate 
the efforts of all Stakeholders.
(ii) Action Plan from various stakeholders have been received.  Report of IMG is under 
preparation.
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 28)
The Committee have dealt with Arsenic related issues in detail in this report. Other major 
contaminants viz. fluoride, iron, nitrate, salinity and other heavy metals in water are no less 
serious as they impact the health of millions of people. The Committee are of the view that 
water quality issues demand focused attention. This can be achieved only if there is a separate 
department for the purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a separate department 
of water quality issues should be created within the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has a full-fledged Water Quality Section, which is headed by Deputy Advisor(WQ) 
and comprises of Consultant (Water Quality), Under Secretary(WQ), Section Officer and other 
supporting staff.
The Ministry in the  updated replies stated as under :-

As informed by Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation (MoDWS), they have decided to 
establish 'International Centre for Drinking Water Quality (ICDWQ) at Kolkata.
Setting up of ICDWQ has been approved by the Government of India and the same has been 
registered as a Society under the 'Societies Registration Act, 1860'.  The ICDWQ would be fully 
funded and administered, under the overall guidance of MoDWS.
The basic aim of ICDWQ is to work in the area of identification, mitigation and management of 
drinking water quality related problems in India and abroad with focus on Arsenic and Fluoride; 
and to provide inputs for policy level decision making  under the National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme (NRDWP) and in the rural drinking water sector in general.
The Centre will focus mainly on research and development activities, assessment of various 
treatment technologies, training, networking with all related organizations, promoting doctoral 
and post-doctoral studies on drinking water quality issues etc.  It will cater both to rural and 
urban areas in India.  The Centre will also cater assistance to other countries on demand.
The ICDWQ campus will have modern facilities following GRIHA green building norms for its 
Administrative building, full fledged R&D centre, library, auditorium, training centre and other 
ancillary buildings along with staff quarters, etc.
The Centre will become functional in two or three  years, required for completion of the 
construction of buildings being taken up by the CPWD.  However, it is pertinent to mention that 
the post of Director, ICDWQ and five more supporting posts have already been posts have 
already been created and the Centre will start functioning from New Delhi till the infrastructure at 
Kolkata is fully established.
The Current dispensation of this Ministry will adequately support ICDWQ in giving focused 
attention to Drinking Water Quality Problems. 

CHAPTER III
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's reply
NIL

CHAPTER IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government's replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
The Committee are distressed to learn that there is no centralized data regarding the number of 
people affected by Arsenic poisoning and it shows the casual attitude on the part of the 
Government. The Committee have been informed that Centralised data is collected by the 
Central Bureau of Health Intelligence (CBHI) in relation to only the national programmes on 
various diseases.
Arsenic intake causes serious ailments like hyper pigmentation, keratosis, anaemia, swelling of 
legs, liver fibrosis, chronic lung disease, gangrene, neuropathy, cancer, etc. According to one 
expert, there are 2 to 3 lakhs of confirmed cases of illness and over one lakh deaths due to 
Arsenic poisoning. In animals too, the Arsenic poisoning causes many abnormalities. It has 
been stated that Arsenic is one of the most toxic elements to fish and acute exposure results in 
immediate death. The Committee express their strong displeasure as to why in spite of such 
serious diseases caused to human beings and animals, no steps were taken to collect relevant 
data or initiate appropriate diagnostic and curative measures. Considering the fact that there are 
as many as 12 Arsenic affected States and huge population affected by Arsenic poisoning, the 
Committee fail to understand as to why no national programme on Arsenic mitigation and 
treatment has been launched as recommended by the Working Group of Planning Commission. 
The Committee recommend that at least now, a national programme be launched in this regard 
and immediate steps taken to ensure regular collection of relevant data and providing 
appropriate diagnostic and curative measures both for human beings and for cattle by the M/o 
H&FW and by the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries respectively. The 
Committee should be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
(i) M/o Consumer Affairs have informed that the amendment to IS 10500:2012 has been 
finalized and Extra-Ordinary Gazette Notification sent for issuance. Thus, the process of 
revision of limit of Arsenic from 0.05 mg/l to 0.01 mg/l has been completed.  With the 
modification of the limit, the existing data will undergo a major change and may include 
more States/ Districts/ Populations affected by Arsenic.
(ii) The Task Force constituted by M/o Health & Family Welfare will work out modalities of 
doing a robust mapping of areas affected by high Arsenic content in ground water.

(iii) In the first meeting of  IMG, Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has been asked to 
compile data on habitations affected by Arsenic contamination of ground water for  (a) 0.01 
to 0.05 ppm and  (b) more than 0.05 ppm.
Chairman, IMG advised that all the State Governments may provide data to CGWB at the 
earliest.  Arsenic concentration data should also contain the latitude and longitude details of 
the wells from where the samples were collected so that GIS based maps can be prepared. 
This will now be coordinated by IMG which has been made into Standing Group.
(iv) The ‘Inter-Ministerial Group’ on ‘Arsenic Mitigation’ constituted vide Order dated 22 nd
December, 2014 has been made into Standing Group, which will (a) over-see the 
implementation of Action Plan of the various Ministries/Departments; (b) reconcile data; (c)
guide the entire program and ; (d) coordinate the efforts of all Stakeholders. 
The Ministry in the  updated replies stated as under :-
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have constituted a Task Force for countering ill effects of 
Arsenic in Ground Water and a Committee/ Expert Group to review the currently-available 
treatments for Arsenic related diseases and to suggest areas for future focused research. The 
reports are awaited.
Similarly, ICAR has initiated a project to reduce Arsenic accumulation in plant-human-animal 
including cattle, the results of which are awaited. 
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation have also shared their plans for long term and short term 
solutions for Arsenic mitigation.
The consolidation of all these efforts would lead to formulation of a National Plan on Arsenic 
mitigation.
Further, as informed by D/o Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, the department is 
implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely “Assistance to States for Control of 
Animal Diseases (ASCAD), under which the funds are provided for Information, Education & 
Communication (IEC) campaign including training of veterinarians and para-veterinarians. 
The Department vide their letter dated 31 st July, 2015 had already issued the advisories to the 
States requesting them to give wider publicity to the matter of Arsenic Contents in water through 
IEC campaigns, trainings, seminars conducted under ASCAD.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.23, 1.24, 1.25 & 1.26 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation  (Sl. No.8)
Accreditation by National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) 
recognizes the technical competence of laboratories. The process of accreditation of CGWB 
laboratories was initiated in April 2011 and only 03 out of 16 chemical laboratories of CGWB 
(Lucknow, Chandigarh & Hyderabad) have been accredited so far. The accreditation process 

involves fulfilling the requirements of standards as prescribed by NABL. The Committee see no 
reason why only five more labs have been targeted for NABL accreditation during the 12th Plan. 
The Committee urge that serious efforts should be made to get NABC accreditation for all the 
remaining 13 labs of CGWB before the end of 12th Plan.
Reply of the Government
The labs of CGWB at Southern Region, Hyderabad;   Northern Region, Lucknow & North 
Western Region, Chandigarh have been accredited by NABL.  The remaining labs at Western 
Region, Jaipur; South Eastern Region, Bhubaneswar; Central Region, Nagpur; West Central 
Region, Ahmedabad & North Eastern Region, Guwahati are in the process of getting NABL 
accreditation during XII Plan.  The remaining Regions have also been advised to obtain NABL 
accreditation in a time bound manner.
The Ministry in the  updated replies stated as under :-
The lab requires minimum 4 chemists for getting the NABL Accreditation. Since adequate 
number of chemists are not available in CGWB as of now the timeline has not been indicated.
A Committee has been constituted to study the working of the chemical laboratories in CGWB; 
to identify gaps and suggest corrective measures. These efforts will help in seeking NABL 
accreditation
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.30 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation  (Sl. No.13)
There are a number of Arsenic removal devices, developed by various organizations based on 
different scientific propositions. These devices vary in cost, size, filtering mechanisms and 
mechanisms of operations as summarized in Chapter III of this report.
The Committee have been informed that most of the Arsenic removal devices have failed to 
produce satisfactory results mainly due to shortcomings in operations and maintenance (O&M). 
The Committee agree with the M/o WR, RD & GR that Arsenic removal devices, whose O&M 
aspects are managed by community participation, could produce satisfactory performance. The 
Committee hope that appropriate steps will be taken to enlist community participation to operate 
and maintain the Arsenic removal devices in the Arsenic contaminated areas. The Committee 
would also recommend that Arsenic testing kits should be distributed free in affected areas. The 
Committee feel that further R&D efforts need to be undertaken to address the problems relating 
to O&M.
Reply of the Government
M/o Drinking Water & Sanitation reserves 3% of National Rural Drinking Water Programme 
(NRDWP) allocation to all the States for water quality monitoring and surveillance activities, 
which, inter-alia, also includes procurement of Field Test Kits (FTKs) for regular testing of 
contamination of drinking water sources.  However, FTKs do not include detection of Arsenic 
contamination. Arsenic is measured separately with hydride generation method using Arsenic 
Test Kit i.e., Arsenator, in the field.  Arsenic Test Kits are relatively very costly (as compared to 
FTKs, which are used for testing of general parameters) and also require certain degree of skill.  

In States such as West Bengal, where Arsenic contamination is more pronounced, Arsenic 
testing is done in block level water testing laboratories.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.38 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation  (Sl. No.14)
The Committee are displeased to note that no national health programme has so far been 
formulated for ground water quality related health problems as suggested by the working group 
of Planning Commission in the year 2011. During his deposition before the Committee, a 
representative of the M/o Health & Family Welfare emphasized the need to formulate a national 
programme in this regard and assured that a task force would be constituted to look into Arsenic 
issues and would be asked to submit its report by February, 2015. He also assured that funds 
would be provided to State Governments under National Rural Health Mission for diagnostic 
facilities, treatment and medicine for Arsenic diseases. The Committee expect that action is 
taken in this regard promptly as promised, with sufficient budgetary provision. The Committee 
also desire that a detailed report should be made to Parliament regularly every six months (say 
April and November) bringing out the efforts made and progress achieved state-wise in 
treatment of Arsenic affected people under the proposed National Health Programme.
Reply of the Government
The symptoms of diseases which may be caused due to Arsenic contamination of drinking 
water usually manifest after consumption of contaminated water over a prolonged period of 
time.  The impact of Arsenic contamination will consequently not be visible immediately upon 
drinking of Arsenic contaminated water.  The relevant diseases, moreover, may also be caused 
by factors other than Arsenic contamination.  It is not easy to segregate cases of the said 
diseases where cause and effect it specifically linked.  Separate diagnostic tests to confirm that 
that disease is caused due to drinking of Arsenic contaminated water may not be easily 
available. 
A National Programme for a particular disease should normally meet the requirement of all 
patients suffering from the said disease.  For example, a patient suffering from cancer or liver 
disease will need to be treated irrespective of whether the cause of the said disease was due to 
drinking Arsenic contaminated water over a prolonged period of time or due to some other 
reasons.  A National Programme, therefore, should focus on providing clean drinking water to 
prevent Arsenic contamination related diseases. Simultaneously, the health systems need to be 
strengthened to meet the healthcare requirements of all persons and to get correct diagnosis 
and treatment for all diseases, including Arsenic related diseases.
Consequently, for the cohort of persons who have been drinking Arsenic contaminated water 
and for whom diseases or symptoms may be already visible or emerge in the coming years, 
practical approach would be to strengthen the health infrastructure in the relevant districts for 
which suitable funding can be envisaged under National Health Mission (NHM).  The affected 
States would need to assess their requirements and reflect the same in the Project 

Implementation Plans (PIPs).  Based on the above, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare will be 
in a position to project the incremental fund requirement under NHM. 
However, an Expert Group under the Director General of Health Services has been constituted 
to prepare guidelines for detection and management of Arsenicosis in India.  The Expert Group 
has formulated draft guidelines, which upon finalization will be shared with the State 
Governments and other stakeholders for necessary action.
It has been decided by the Group of Officers in a meeting held on 13.07.2015 that M/o Health 
and Family Welfare will issue an advisory to the Arsenic affected States through NHM on the 
health aspects of Arsenic.
Agree to comply with the suggestion of furnishing a detailed report to the Parliament every six 
months or as decided by the Committee of Secretaries.  
The Ministry in the  updated replies stated as under :-
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that the Guidelines “Detection, Prevention and 
Management of Arsenicosis in India – A Field Guide” have been finalized by the expert 
Committee and sent to the Arsenic affected States.  Concerned State Governments were 
advised to strengthen District/Community Health Center infrastructure for early diagnosis, 
management and treatment of Arsenic affected cases and for this purpose seek necessary 
support in the State Programme Implementation Programmes submitted under NHM.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.23, 1.24. 1.25 & 1.26 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation  (Sl. No.23)
The Committee regret to note that there is no separate budgetary allocation for Arsenic related 
issues or for that matter for any water quality issues. At present, funding for water quality is 
made only through the National Rural Drinking Water Programme under the Ministry of Drinking 
Water & Sanitation. The Committee strongly recommends that there should be a separate 
budgetary head of expenditure for water quality with a sub-head for Arsenic contamination in 
order to adequately meet the fund requirements. Similarly, there is no specific budget allocation 
for Arsenic related diseases under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. Now that a National 
Programme for Ground Water related health problems is proposed to be formulated by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, there should be a separate budgetary head for the new 
national programme with sufficient funding.
Reply of the Government
Under the National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), upto 67% of the funds can be 
spent on coverage and tackling water quality problems in the Country. M/o Drinking Water & 
Sanitation has given highest priority to Arsenic and Fluoride mitigation among all the 
parameters.  Over and above, 5% of the NRDWP funds are earmarked for Water Quality and 
allocated to those States with habitations affected by excess chemical contamination (highest 
priority to Arsenic and Fluoride) and with high priority districts affected by Japanese 
Encephalitis/ Acute Encephalitis Syndrome.  Further, physical and financial progress on water 

quality for all the States is reviewed by Secretary, MoDWS on regular basis. The Ministry has 
also started a scheme on installation of Community Water Purification plants as short term 
measure in all remaining Arsenic affected habitations by March, 2017 for providing 8-10 lpcd 
(litres per capita per day) of safe water for drinking and cooking purposes. Since the matter is 
already reviewed regularly and the present system is working well, there is no need of creation 
of a separate budgetary head for Arsenic mitigation at this stage, as this will also require change 
in NRDWP Guidelines.
The Ministry in the  updated replies stated as under :-
(i) MoDWS have informed that there are 1490 Arsenic affected rural habitations where 23.98 
lakh people are at risk.  IMIS 2015 data indicates that there are only 6 Arsenic affected States –
West Bengal, Assam, Bihar, UP, Karnataka and Punjab.
In the first alternative, when the maximum permissible limit of Arsenic is maintained at 0.05mg/l, 
an outlay of `268 Crores for short term solution (by providing community water purification plant 
including seven years O&M) and `1262.69 Crores for long term & sustainable solution (taking up 
water supply projects) i.e., nearly `1530 Crores is required.
Total Cost : `1530 Crores (Arsenic limit at 0.05mg/l)
The no. of Arsenic affected habitations is 10028 if maximum permissible limit of Arsenic is 
considered at 0.01mg/l.  An amount of `1805.04 Crores for short term (by providing community 
water purification plant including seven years O&M) and `6319.56 Crores for long term solution 
(taking up water supply projects) i.e., nearly `8124 Crores is required.
Total Cost : `8124 Crores (Arsenic limit at 0.01mg/l)
(ii) D/o Health Research has informed that Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has 
constituted an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. D.N. Guhamajumdar, and that this 
Group is scheduled to meet on 01.06.2015 in ICMR to review the currently available treatments 
for Arsenic related diseases and to suggest areas for future focused research.
Therefore, an action plan and the likely financial implications in implementation of the said plan 
can be formulated and quantified only after the Group meets and submits its report.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.46 & 1.47 of Chapter I )

CHAPTER  V
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of Government is still awaited
Observation/Recommendation  (Sl. No.2)
The Committee are at a loss to understand as to why there is no comprehensive data about 
affected districts/States and the magnitude of population exposed to Arsenic, even thirty-eight 
years after first Arsenic contamination incident came to notice in Chandigarh. The information 
furnished by the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
(M/o WR, RD & GR) shows that 86 Districts in 10 States have Arsenic contamination exceeding 
the permissible limit. The Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) has, 
however, listed out only 71 Districts in 09 States having Ground Water Arsenic contamination. 
The Department of Science and Technology (DST) has come out with yet another list of 
affected districts and States. Collation of information furnished by different Ministries shows that 
there are 96 districts in 12 States affected by ground water Arsenic. According to the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), 70.4 million people have been identified with ground 
water Arsenic contamination in 35 Districts in six States. The figure of affected population will be 
much higher if data about affected people in all the 96 districts are collected. All these conflicting 
data show that there had been no attempt to collect reliable data by any central agency. The 
Committee deplore such casual attitude and hardly need to emphasize that dependable, 
accurate and regular update of data are essential for providing perspectives with regard to 
public health, agriculture and other purposes. The Committee, therefore, desire that immediate 
steps should be taken to draw up a central data base about Arsenic affected districts/States not 
only for drinking water segment but also for irrigation and the data of human population, animals 
and crops exposed to Arsenic.
Reply of the Government
(i) M/o Consumer Affairs have informed that amendment to IS 10500:2012 has been finalized 
and Extra-Ordinary Gazette Notification has been sent for issuance. Thus, the process of 
revision of limit of Arsenic from 0.05 mg/l to 0.01 mg/l has been completed.  With this 
modification, the existing data will undergo a major change and may include more States/ 
Districts/ Population affected by Arsenic.
(ii) Task Force constituted by M/o Health & Family Welfare will work out modalities of doing a 
robust mapping of areas affected by high Arsenic content in ground water.
(iii) IMG has asked Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) to compile data on habitations 
affected by Arsenic contamination of ground water for (a) 0.01 to 0.05 ppm and (b) more 
than 0.05 ppm.  Chairman, IMG advised that all the State Governments may provide data 
to CGWB at the earliest.  Arsenic concentration data should also contain the latitude and 
longitude details of the wells from where the samples were collected so that GIS based 
maps can be prepared.
(iv) The ‘Inter-Ministerial Group’ on ‘Arsenic Mitigation’ constituted vide Order dated 22 nd
December, 2014 has been made a Standing Group, which will (a) over-see the 
implementation of Action Plan of the various Ministries/Departments; (b) reconcile data; (c)
guide the entire program and; (d) coordinate the efforts of all Stakeholders.

Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter I )
Observation/Recommendation  (Sl. No.15)
Arsenic affected people are economically backward and loose their earthly possession in the 
process of Arsenic treatment. The Committee feel that it is the duty of the State to provide them 
relief. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Arsenic affected people should be provided 
treatment and medicines free-of-cost. They should also be provided with health insurance and 
life insurance with the cost of premium borne by the Government.
Reply of the Government
Health is a State subject.  It is expected that State Governments through their respective health 
system would provide medicines for all diseases, including Arsenic related diseases, free of cost 
or at subsidized rates. This would especially hold for Below Poverty Line (BPL) and poor 
patients. 
As far as life insurance is concerned, this subject does not fall in the realm of M/o Health & 
Family Welfare.
Regarding health insurance for Arsenic affected people, the affected State Governments could 
explore this option.  Ministry of Finance may also have views on the subject. Normally health 
insurance, which is based on the principle of risk pooling, would be more successful where 
numbers are very large.  Moreover, for the person who is being insured, health insurance would 
be appealing for all illnesses rather than only for Arsenic related diseases.  As already 
mentioned, symptoms for Arsenic related diseases may be visible after extended periods of 
time.  It may be difficult to persuade the population in the affected area to pay a insurance 
premium.
The Ministry in the  updated replies stated as under :-
MoWR, RD & GR has written D.O letter & Reminders to Ministry of Finance to obtain the 
comments/views, which are awaited.  Since the matter is serious and pecuniary in nature, we 
may wait for the views of M/o Finance.
Observation/Recommendation  (Sl. No.22)
The Committee find that the problem of ground water Arsenic contamination, in spite of being 
very grave, has not received deserved attention due to lack of its focus in the National Water 
Policy-2012. The Arsenic contamination in ground water was first reported almost four decades 
ago and presently spread over 96 districts in 12 States. The population identified with Arsenic 
contamination is as much as 70.4 million and 2 to 3 lakhs of confirmed cases of Arsenic illness. 
In view of the seriousness of the problem, the Committee urge that there should be a specific 
focus in the National Water Policy to address this humongous problem, by appropriate 
addendum to the National Water Policy-2012.
Reply of the Government

Concern of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted and the matter is under consideration of the 
Ministry.
Comments of the Committee
( Please see Para No. 1.41 of Chapter I )
New Delhi; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
09 August, 2016 Chairperson,
18 Shravana, 1938(Saka) Committee on Estimates.

MINUTES OF TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 8 th January, 2016 from 1200 hrs. to 1 300 hrs. in Room 
No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson
Members
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar - Director
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Additional Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
2. Shri Anil Shirole
3. Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey
4. Col. Sonaram Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar
7. Shri Sudheer Gupta
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shri P. Kumar
10. Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy 

5. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration Memorandum No. 7 regarding 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 1 st
Report of the Committee on Estimates (2013-14) (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
'Occurrence of High Arsenic Content in Groundwater'. The Committee expressed their 
dissatisfaction with the action taken by the Government and desired that the comments of the 
Ministry of Finance, Cabinet Secretariat and other concerned Ministries may be sought at the 
first instance. Thereafter, they may be called for evidence before the Committee.
6. *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned with vote of thanks to the Chair.

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2016-17) 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 8th August, 2016 from 1500 hrs to 1545 hrs. 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi – Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Shri Sultan Ahmed
3. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
4. Shri George Baker
5. Shri Dushyant Chautala
6. Shri Ashok Shankarrao Chavan
7. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
8. Shri Col. Sonaram Choudhary
9. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
10. Shri P. Kumar
11. Shri K. H. Muniyappa
12. Shri Ravindra Kumar Pandey
13. Shri Raosahed Danve Patil
14. Shri Md. Salim
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
16. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh – Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar – Director
3. Shri R. S. Negi – Under Secretary

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum No. 4 regarding 
draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 1st Report of the Committee on 
Estimates (2014-15) on the subject 'Occurrence of High Arsenic Content in 
Groundwater' pertaining to the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation.
4. The Committee after consideration adopted the above Report with minor 
modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report and present the 
same to Lok Sabha. 
The Committee then adjourned with vote of thanks to the Chair.

APPENDIX - II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON ESTIMATES (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 28
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1,3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10,11, 12, 16, 17,18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 
27, 28)
Percentage of total recommendations
20
71%
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply Percentage of total 
recommendations
Percentage of total recommendations
NIL
NIL
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
(Sl. Nos. 6,8,13,14  and 23) 
Percentage of total recommendations
05
18%
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of 
Government is still awaited.  
(Sl. Nos. 2,15 and 22)
Percentage of total recommendations 
03
11%