iii 
 
36 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
Performance of the National Action Plan on Climate Change 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the 30 th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
THIRTY- SIXTH REPORT  
 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 

iv 
 
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
Performance of the National Action Plan on Climate Change 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the 30th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.02.2024 February 2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024/   Magha, 1945 (Saka) 

v 
 
                  CONTENTS                       Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2023-24)       
 
Introduction 
       
CHAPTER-I  Report                     1-23  
 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted                24-97         
 by the Government                
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not            98-112    
 desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply  
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which                               113-114   
 Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee  
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies             115-117 
 of Government are still awaited 
 
     
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the 17th Sitting of the Committee on estimates                                  118-119 
held on 01.02.2024 
 
 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the                                             120 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 30th Report  
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Shri Dilip Saikia 
8. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
9. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
10. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
13. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
14. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
15. Shri Pinaki Misra 
16. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
17. Shri Jual Oram 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
20. Dr. K.C. Patel 
21. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
22. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
23. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
24. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
25. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
26. Shri Prathap Simha 
27. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
28. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
29. Shri R. K. Singh Patel *  
30. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati # 
 
*   Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 7096 dated 28th  
    July, 2023 
#  Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 7764 dated 19th    
    December, 2023 
 

vii 
 
Secretariat                            
  
1. Shri Santosh Kumar                             Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  Muraleedharan. P 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja                                                                                                    
Director 
                Deputy Secretary  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

viii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2023-24) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 36th  
Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
30th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subjec t “Performance of the 
National Action Plan on Climate Change” pertaining to the Ministry  of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change.  
2.  The 30 th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 13th December 2018. The Government furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in the 30 th Report on 
13th September, 2021, 28 th October, 2021, 18 th July, 2023 and 24 th August, 2023. The 
draft Report was considered and approved on 1st February, 2024, by the Committee.  
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 30th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee  on Estimates is 
given in Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI             DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
    February  2024        CHAIRPERSON 
    Magha 1945 (Saka)     COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I  
INTRODUCTORY 
1. This Report of the Committee on Estimates deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations /Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 30th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Performance of 
the National Action Plan on Climate Change” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 
 
2. The 30 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha), was presented to Lok Sabha on 13th 
December, 2018  contained 4 8 Observations/Recommendations. The Action 
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been 
received from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change on 13th 
September, 2021, 28th October, 2021, 18th July, 2023 and 24th August, 2023. 
 
3. Action Taken Note to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report have broadly been categorised as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para No. 2-6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16-23, 27-29, 31, 33-35, 37, 38, 41-43, 
45-48  
          Total – 33 
                                                                                     (Chapter – II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
Para No. – 7, 14, 15, 24, 25, 26, 30, 32, 36, 40 & 49                                                          
          Total – 11 
                                                                                          (Chapter – III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Para No. – 8 & 9 
                                                                                                   Total – 2 
                                                                                 (Chapter – IV) 
  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: 
Para No. – 39 & 44 
                        Total –2 
                                                                                          (Chapter – V) 
 

 
2 
 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final Action 
Taken Notes in respect of the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to them at  the 
earliest. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
Delay in submission of Action Taken Notes 
 
6. The Committee observe that as per procedure, ATNs on the 
recommendations containe d in Original Report are required to be 
furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned to the Committee 
within six months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament. 
The Committee are concerned to note that the 30 th Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) of t he Committee on the subject “Performance of the National 
Action Plan on Climate Change” was presented to Parliament on 13 th 
December, 2018. The MoEF&CC was required to furnish the ATNs on the 
observations/recommendations as contained therein by 12 th June, 2019. 
The Committee note that the first set of requisite ATNs have been 
received by them  with a long delay i.e. on 13th September, 2021 (Para 
Nos. 2,3,5,6,11 to 15, 23 to 25, 33 to 39), the second set of ATNs on Para 
Nos. 16 -22 were received on 28th October, 2021 . Further, after issuing 
reminders for furnishing the remaining Action Taken Notes the 
MoEF&CC have furnished the Action Taken Notes on Para Nos. 4 and 7 
to 10 on 18th July, 2023 and Action Taken Notes on Para Nos. 26-32 have 
been received on 24th August, 2023. The Committee take serious note of  
this/unprecedented prolonged delay on part of the Ministry and desire a 
robust monitoring mechanism for timely submission of ATNs to the 
Committee, failing which, responsibility of the officials concerned for 
the delay may be fixed for delays in future.  
 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 2) 
 
7. Recognising the need of inter-ministerial coordination and laying of six monthly 
Report to Parliament on each mission , the Committee had recommended as 
under: 
“The Committee find that the Government is implementing the National Action 
Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), which includes eight national Missions 
covering solar energy, enhanced energy efficiency, agriculture, water, 
sustainable habitat, Green India, Hima layan ecosystem and Strategie 
Knowledge for Climate Change, apart from various other initiatives. Each 
Mission is administered by a Ministry/Department which is responsible for its 

 
3 
 
 
implementation and lays down the budget provisions and actionable prioritie s 
for it. The broad policy initiatives of the Central Government are 
supplemented by actions at the sub -national levels by the State 
Governments/UTs. The National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD) has been appointed as National Implementi ng Entity (NIE) 
responsible for implementation of adaptation projects under the National 
Adaptation Fund for Climate Change (NAFCC). Besides, research and 
scientific institutions provide scientific inputs for framing various policies on 
climate change. 
Some of the experts who deposed before the Committee raised the issue of 
fragmented approach and  lack of coordination amongst various  
Ministries/Stakeholders. The Committee find that the activities covered by 
various Missions are inter -related and the develop ments in a Mission in an 
area has bearing on the other Missions. NAPCC being a multi -tiered structure 
with various Ministries/ Departments administering various Missions 
supplemented by actions at the States/UTs level, the objectives of the action 
plan for  climate change can only be achieved through collective action and 
partnerships for which integrated approach and coordination amongst various 
Ministries, State Government/Union Territories and all other implementing 
agencies is utmost necessary. The Minis try of Environment and Forests & 
Climate Change (MoEF&CC) being the main coordinating Ministry has to take 
the desired initiatives. For inter -Ministerial coordination, the Committee 
recommend for setting up of an inter -Ministerial entity to quarterly revie w the 
performance of each implementing agency. Besides, MoEF&CC should have 
a public information portal displaying up -to-date data/information about 
mandate, targets as well as achievements of each of the Missions under 
specific heads so as to enable the s takeholders to track what is happening in 
different areas concerning climate change. Besides, the information about the 
adverse effects of climate change should be displayed in the portal so as to 
sensitize and involve the public at large on this important  issue. The 
Committee would also like to recommend that six monthly report of each 
Ministry/Department administering the specific Missions) giving the status of 
implementation on various parameters should be laid in Parliament.” 
 
8. In their Action Taken N ote, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change has submitted as under: 
• “The "India Climate Change Knowledge Portal" was launched on 27 
November 2020. This web portal provides information on the different climate 
initiatives taken by various Line Ministries enabling users to access updated 
status on these initiatives. 
• The eight major components included in the knowledge portal are: 
1. India's Climate Profile  

 
4 
 
 
2. ⁠National Policy Framework 
3. India's NDC goals 
4. Adaptation Actions 
5. Mitigation Actions 
6. Bilateral and Multilateral Cooperation 
7. International Climate Negotiations 
8. Reports & Publications 
• The Web Portal can be accessed at: https://www.cckpindia.nic.in/ 
• Meetings of the Executive Committee on Climate Change (ECCC) have 
been regularly held (Seventh Meeting of the ECCC was held on 3 February, 
2021 and Eighth Meeting of the ECCC was held on 1 st September, 2021), 
chaired by Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister.” 
 
9. The experts, deposing before the Committee  had raised the issue of 
fragmented approach and lack of coordination amongst v arious 
Ministries/Stakeholders and therefore, the Committee had recommended for 
setting up of an inter-Ministerial entity to quarterly review performance of each 
implementing agency . However, there is no mention of inter -ministerial 
coordination entity in the Action Taken Note as furnished by MoEF&CC , which 
is required to play a crucial role in the development /progress of Missions and 
cohesive and synchronised effort by Ministries. T he Committee reiterates its  
original recommendation to establish  inter-Ministerial entity promptly to 
ensure the performance of each implementing agency  to focus on addressing 
the issues of fragmented approaches and lack of coordination among various 
Ministries/Departments. 
 
Further, Action Taken Note is also silent about the laying of six monthly report  
to Parliament by each Ministry/Department  detailing the status of 
implementation on various parameters. The Committee  strongly feel that 
regular reporting will enhance accountability, transparency and Parliamentary 
oversight, ensuring that climate change initiatives are progressing as planned. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken by the MoEF&CC 
towards the implementation of the recommenda tion of the Committee and 
ensure that six -monthly reports are submitted to Parliament by each 
Ministry/Department administering specific Mission(s). 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 3) 
10. Regarding formulation of State Action Plans on climate c hange and their 
implementation status at ground level, the Committee had recommended as under: 

 
5 
 
 
“The Committee note from the information furnished by the Government that 32  
States and Union Territories have so far put in place the State Action Plans on 
Climate Change attempting to mainstream climate change concerns in their planning 
process. 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the implementation status of the 
State Action Plans at the ground level. About the remaining States where State 
Action Plans have not been formulated, the Committee would like to be apprised 
about the specific reasons for delay in formulating State Action Plans. These States 
should be pursued for putting in place State Action Plans expeditiously.” 
 
In their Action Taken No te, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
has submitted as under: 
“Preparation of State Action Plans on Climate Change (SAPCCs) has been reviewed 
by the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEFCC). Guidelines for 
SAPCC revisi on have been issued, along with funding support @ Rs 20 lakh per 
State/UT. Tamil Nadu, Odisha, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat 
have submitted revised SAPCCs. SAPCC Regional Workshops are being convened 
for accelerating the work.” 
 
11. While observing that 32 States/UTs had put in place the State Action Plans 
on climate change in their planning process, the Committee desired to be 
apprised of implementation  of status of the States Action Plan at the ground 
level  and also of  the specific reason s for delay in formulating State Action 
Plans in respect of  remaining States.  In the Action Taken Note, the Committee 
have been informed that in pursuance of their recommendation, the MOEF&CC 
issued guidelines for revision of SAPCC along with funding supp ort of Rs. 20 
lakh per State/UTs, as a result five States have submitted revised SAPCCs. The 
Committee recommend for initiating capacity building programmes for States 
that have not yet formulated SAPCCs. This could include providing technical 
assistance, training workshops and sharing best practices from the States that 
have successfully implemented their plans. The Committee  would like to be 
apprised of the reasons for the delay in formulating SAPPCCs in those S tates 
that have not yet done so and implementation status of SAPCC at ground 
level. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 4) 
12. With a view to developing climate resilient economy , the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
 “The Committee during the course of deliberations have been apprised  by a 
representative of the Ministry of Earth Sciences that the proposal for setting up a 
National Coastal Mission has been prepared jointly with MoEF&CC and is at the 
advanced stage of approval. With the high Shoreline Vulnerability along Indian Coast 
as mentioned in the para above, the Committee strongly recommend for setting up of 

 
6 
 
 
a new Mission i.e. National Coastal Mission so as to give focused attention to climate 
change issues related to coastal areas. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised as to whether the Government propose to set up some more new Missions 
in areas like health, waste-to-energy.” 
 
13. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change have submitted as under: 
(a) “National Coastal Mission (NCM) is an  ongoing sub -scheme under National 
Coastal Management Programme of Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change (MOEFCC) with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 87.5 cr spread 
over 2021-2026. 
(b) A proposal for enhancing the scope of on -going National Coastal Missi on to 
promote and give impetus to development of climate resilient blue economy 
development without compromising the safeguard of coastal ecosystem and marine 
environment has been submitted to Department of Expenditure for consideration. 
(c) This Ministry agre es with the statement of representative of Ministry of Earth 
Sciences in respect of preparation of proposal to upscale National Coastal Mission 
jointly with all line-ministries including Ministry of Earth Science. 
(d) NAPCC encompasses eight core missions in t he specific areas of Solar 
Energy, Enhanced Energy Efficiency, Sustainable Habitat, Water, Sustaining the 
Himalayan Ecosystem, Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change, Green India, and 
Sustainable Agriculture, which are anchored by Ministry of New and Renew able 
Energy; Bureau of Energy Efficiency (Ministry of Power), Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs, Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, Department of Science and Technology, 
Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change, and Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmer Welfare, respectively. Three new national missions on (i) Health & Climate 
Change, (ii) Coastal, and (iii) Sustainable Transport have been approved by the 
Executive Committee on Climate Change (ECCC). National Mission on Health & 
Climate Change has been finalized and approved by the ECCC, the mission 
documents on Coastal and Sustainable Transport are being worked upon and will 
be finalized at the earliest. MoEFCC is following up on the sa me for completion of 
the exercise.” 
 
14. The Committee note that National Coastal Mission is an ongoing sub -
scheme under National Coastal Management Programme of MoEF&CC  and for 
enhancing the scope , a proposal in this regard has been submitted to 
Department of Expenditure for consideration. The Committee would like to 
know the date of submission of proposal to the Department of Expenditure 
and the present status of consideration of the same.  
 

 
7 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
15. While enquiring the reason of shortfall in Phase -I and II projects under National 
Solar Mission, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee find from the data made available by the Ministry of New and  
Renewable Energy that whereas the performance of NSM during Phase -I 
(2010-2013) remained satisfactory with achievement of installation/sanctioned 
solar power generation both grid and off-grid, i.e., 1938.94 MW surpassing the 
targets of 1300 MW and install ation of 7.01 million sq.m of collector areas 
against the target of 7 million sq.m, the performance has slowed down during 
Phase-Il (2013 -2017) of the Mission. The targets of 15900 MW under grid -
connected solar power could not be achieved fully with achiev ement 
remaining 10602.83 MW thus the shortfall being 5297.17 MW. Under the off -
grid solar applications segment, although the power sanctioned, i.e., 713 MW 
surpassed the targets of 600 MW, the installed power remained just 345.5 
MW. Under Solar Thermal Col lectors Segment, there is underachievement of 
targets, achievement being 5 million sq .m against the targets of 8 million 
sq.m. So far as the performance during the year 2017 -18 is concerned, 
although tenders have been issued in respect of  22945 MW, the pow er 
commissioned is just 4804 MW. For another 10048 MW, PPA has been 
signed but it is not commissioned. The Committee express strong concern 
over the slowdown of the performance under the Solar Mission during Phase -
Il and recommend to critically review the performance so as to understand the 
reasons for the shortfall in achieving the set targets. Since Phase -Ill of the 
Mission has already commenced, it is utmost necessary to take the corrective 
actions besides effective monitoring of the projects so as to ac hieve the 
ambitious target of 100000 MW by 2021-22.” 
16. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environmen t, Forest and Climate 
Change has submitted as under: 
“The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. Concerted efforts are 
being made in this regard in consultation with various stakeholders. Further, 
regular review meetings/video conferences have been taken by various levels 
to review the progress from time to time and to achieve the set targets without 
any shortfall. 
Phase-wise targets have no t been achieved as targeted. However, the 
progress has picked up in last few years. The installed solar capacity has 
increased by — 200% with addition of — 45 GW in last five years. As on 31 -
05-2023, a cumulative capacity of 67,821 MW of solar power projec ts has 
already been installed in the country. Further, a capacity of around 51,413 
MW is under implementation, for which a Letter of Intents (Lol) has been 
issued, and about 48,878 MW is under the tendering stage. 

 
8 
 
 
Regarding solar thermal collector installa tions, 12 million sq. meters solar 
thermal collector area have been installed (specific scheme ended in 2017 -
18). At present, its installation is taking place in market mode.” 
 
17. While expressing concern over the slowdown of the performance of NSM 
during Phase-ll, the Committee in their original Report had recommended for 
analyzing the reasons for the shortfall in achieving the set targets  under 
phase-II of the Mission so as to take corrective measures and to put in place 
effective monitoring mechanism in  phase-III of NSM for achieving the 
ambitious target of 100000 MW by 2020 -21. In this regard, Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change in their ATN informed the 
Committee that as on 31.05.2023 , a cumulative capacity of 67,821 MW of Solar 
Power projects has already been installed in the Country. Further, a capacity 
of around 51,413 MW is under implementation, for which a Letter of Intents 
(Lol) has been issued and about 48,787 MW is under the tendering stage. The 
Committee find that reasons of sho rtfall in achievement of targets have not 
been furnished. Further, for phase -III, too there seems  the flippant attitude of 
the Ministry towards achieving the ambitious target of 100000 MW Solar Power 
generation by 2021 -22 as large percentage of capacity is  still either under 
implementation or under the tendering stage. While taking a strong view 
towards delay in achievement of targets, the Committee reiterate its 
recommendation of taking corrective actions and  establishment of robust 
monitoring mechanism to track the progress of solar power projects includ ing 
periodic updates on the financial status, project timelines and physical 
progress against planned targets. Regular monitoring will enable the Ministr y 
to stay informed, address challenges promptly and p rovide appropriate 
guidance in the matter. The Committee would like to be apprised of the  targets 
envisaged and achieved till  date in respect of Phase -I, II and III within six 
months of the presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
18. In their Recommendation contained in the original Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“So far as State -wise commissioning of grid -connected solar projects is 
concerned, there is uneven performance in vario us States. Whereas Andhra 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh and Punjab remained the first eight leading States with total 
cumulative capacity in MW as being, 1998.83, 1871.22, 1697.32, 1609.27, 
1249.37, 1082.48, 857.04 and 809.45 respectively, the performance in some 
other big States having larger area of land like Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, 
J&K, Odisha and Chhattisgarh, is not so encouraging. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should review State -wise per formance of the 
projects and take the required initiatives particularly in remote and hilly areas.” 

 
9 
 
 
19. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change have submitted as under: 
“The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. Efforts are being made 
in this regard, in consultation with various stakeholders. It is a fact that solar 
installations in various States, especially Hilly and North Eastern States, are 
low as it depends on various factors such as solar radiation, l and availability, 
State policies etc. 
As on 31 -05-2023, total cumulative solar installation in Maharashtra, Uttar 
Pradesh, J&K, Odisha and Chhattisgarh are 4725 MW, 2520 MW, 50 MW, 
458 MW and 950 MW respectively. 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE)  conducts regular review 
meetings with State Governments/developers for installation of Renewable 
Energy Projects. 
Under the Solar Park scheme, smaller parks in the Himalayan & other hilly 
States where contiguous land may be difficult, are also considered.  Further, 
smaller parks may also be considered in States/UTs with shortage of non -
agricultural lands. 
As on 31 -05-2023, Solar Parks of cumulative capacity of 750 MW in 
Maharashtra, 3730 MW in Uttar Pradesh, 340 MW in Odisha and 20 MW in 
Mizoram are sanctio ned. The Solar Park in Mizoram is already developed. 
The other parks are at various stages of implementation.” 
 
20. Upon noticing that the performance of some big States having large area of 
land like Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, J&K, Odisha and Chattisgarh  was not so 
encouraging for commissioning of grid -connected Solar Projects, the 
Committee in their Original Report had recommended the Ministry to review 
State-wise performance of the projects and take the required initiatives 
particularly in remote and hi lly areas. The Ministry in their ATN have stated 
that as on 31.05.2023, total cumulative solar installation in Maharashtra, Uttar 
Pradesh, J&K, Odisha and Chattisgarh are 4725 MW, 2520 MW, 50 MW, 458 MW 
and 950 MW respectively. The Ministry have further su bmitted that it is a fact 
that solar installations in various States especially Hilly and North Eastern 
States, are low as it depends on various factors such as solar radiation, land 
availability, State policies etc. The Committee would like to know the cu rrent 
status of grid and of f-grid solar power park State/UT -wise along with the 
special efforts made for remote and hilly areas. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
National Mission on Enhanced Energy Efficiency 
21. Giving due weight age for Research and Development on every efficient 
technologies, the Committee had recommended as under: 

 
10 
 
 
“The Committee note that the objective of the Mission is to upscale the efforts 
to unlock the market for energy efficiency which is estimated to be ar ound 
74,000 crore and help achieve total avoided capacity addition of 19,598 MW, 
fuel savings of around 23 million tonnes per year and greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions reductions of 98.55 million tonnes per year at its full implementation 
stage. To achieve its aim, NMEBE spe lls out four initiatives to enhance 
energy efficiency in energy intensive industries. 
The first initiative is Perform Achieve and Trade (PAT) Scheme providing for 
mandatory energy saving targets for Energy Intensive industries. The 
Committee note that the targets set under this have broadly been achieved 
and 8.67 million tonnes oil equivalent (MTOE) saved while CO2 mitigation 
was of the order of 30 million tonnes. 
The Committee, however, feel that the targets set under PAT cycle I were 
modest and that was t he reason they were achieved in spite of less financial 
allocation and utilisation. PAT cycle II and III covering the period 2016 -19 and 
2017-20 respectively expands the vertical as well as horizontal coverage of 
the scheme. The Committee feel that the foc us of the scheme is on 
incrementally reducing energy consumption in industries that are energy 
intensive. The Committee recommend for giving emphasis to R&D for energy 
efficient technologies for which adequate investment is required. The 
Committee also rec ommend to incentivize start -ups to encourage them to 
come to solar energy sector which would help in bringing 
innovations to this field.” 
 
22. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change have submitted as under: 
 For s upporting R&D for energy efficient technologies, BEE has provided 
financial assistance to National Physical Laboratory (NPL) for setting up of 
reference lab for LEDs and Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) for 
setting up of labs for testing and calibra tion facilities for LEDs and LED 
lighting systems. 
 Support for R&D to customize the induction cook stove for Indian cooking 
system has been initiated in IIT Gandhi Nagar and Guwahati through Central 
PowerResearch Institute (CPRI). 
 For larger uptake of innovative technologies in energy intensive sectors under 
the Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT) scheme, proposal for demonstration of 
such technologies is under process. 
 Proposal for R&D in Electric Mobility such as drivetrains, batteries and 
V2G technologies. 
 
 

 
11 
 
 
23. The Committee find that adequate efforts have not been made for Research 
and Development in energy intensive sectors.  Further, there is no mention of 
incentvizing start-ups for which Government may initiate pro-active steps with 
institutions likes IITs and II SCs and others. It has also been stated that 
proposals for demonstration of energy intensive technologies are under 
process. The Committee would like to have on break -through on these matters 
including the outcome of above demonstration.  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
National Mission for Green India 
24. Emphasing the need of comprehensive planning for rural and urban areas under 
National Mission on Sustainable Habitat , the Committee had recommended as 
under: 
“The Committee note that the National Mission on Sustainable Habitat 
(NMSH) aims at promoting sustainability of habitats though improvements in 
energy efficiency in buildings, urban planning, improved management of solid 
and liquid waste including recyclin g and power generation, modal shift 
towards public transport and conservation. The Committee find that major 
components of the mission are, improvements in energy efficiency in buildings 
through extension of energy conservation building code, better urban planning 
and modal shift to public transport, improved solid, liquid waste management 
in urban areas, improved ability of habitats to adapt to climate change by 
improving resilience in infrastructure, community based disaster management 
and measures for ad vance warning system for extreme weather events and 
conservation through appropriate changes in legal and regulatory framework. 
The objectives of the mission are being met through schemes such as Atal 
Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRU T), Swachh 
Bharat Mission, Smart Cities Mission and Urban Transport Programme. By 
the year 2021, these four schemes will result in mitigating GHG emission of 
133 million tonnes and by the year 2031, the mitigation will be to the tune of 
270 million tonnes.  The Committee find that the emphasis of the mission is 
limited to urban habitats only. There is no attention to rural habitats. As the 
population of the Country increases, there will be expansion of cities with 
villages subsumed within the cities. If the integrated plan under the mission 
does not take into account the requirements of the rural habitats, the problem 


 
12 
 
 
would not be fully addressed. The Committee are of the view that mission on 
sustainable habitat has to see the habitat landscape in totality, o nly then 
sustainable solutions are possible. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the mission should introduce a comprehensive and integrated planning 
encompassing the needs of both rural as well as urban habitats. The 
Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.” 
25. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change have submitted as under: 
“The subjects of housing and urban development are in the ambit of State 
Governments. However, Union (Government pl ays a catalytic role through 
formulation and administration of various Policies and Missions, 
implementation of which is done by the State Governments. Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) is mandated to formulate policies on 
Urban Sector only, wh ile Ministry of Rural Development formulates policies 
and programmes pertaining to the Rural Sector. Preparation of plans for cities 
and villages also comes within the purview of State Governments. For 
planned development, MoHUA has formulated Urban and Re gional 
Development Plan Formulation and Implementation (URDPFI) Guidelines, 
which advocates preparation of comprehensive and integrated planning 
encompassing the needs of urban habitats.” 
26. The Committee find that reply is silent about forwarding the 
recommendation to Ministry of Rural Development and State 
Governments/UTs. The Committee would like to be apprised of their reaction.  
   
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
27. Having felt the need of inclusion of traditional construction 
technologies/knowledges in building codes and Guidelines,  the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the mission envisages improvements in energy 
efficiency in buildings through extension of the energy conservation building 
code - which addresses the design of new and large commercial buildings to 
optimize their energy demand. The Committee are of the view that energy 
conservation building code talks about important things about energy 
efficiency of large buildings such as use of natu ral light and air for reduced 
energy requirements. The main issue, however, is the enforceability of the 
building code. Enforcing changes in construction through imposition of codes 


 
13 
 
 
may also result in resistance from the people. Moreover, the Committee are of 
the view that as an ancient civilization, our Country has traditional house 
building knowledge and technology which are more suited for our needs. All 
the habitats whether in desert habitat, mountain habitat or plain areas, people 
have traditional building system designed for comfortable living and maximum 
use of natural resources like air and water and locally available materials. 
Blindly following western technologies and using cement and concrete in 
different habitats result in buildings requiring i ntensive energy. Therefore, 
building designs in new cities should be environment friendly, energy friendly 
and water friendly. The construction of residential/ commercial buildings 
should be in a way that enables proper cross ventilation and natural light 
which would reduce the use of energy. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
to formulate building code and guidelines of the Mission which maximizes use 
of traditional knowledge and building material in buildings, minimize cutting of 
trees besides promoting our traditional construction technologies through 
institutions like CAPART, HUDCO etc.” 
28. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change have submitted as under: 
“Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) is implementing Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban (PMAY -U) since June 2015 to provide all -
weather pucca house with basic amenities to all eligible urban households of 
the country. Based on the project proposals submitted by States/ Union 
Territories (UTs), a s on 31stJuly 2023, 118.90 lakh houses have been 
sanctioned by the Ministry, out of which 112.30 lakh have been grounded and 
76.02 lakh have been completed/ delivered to the beneficiaries. The scheme 
period of PMAY -U which was earlier upto 31.03.2022, has since been 
extended up to 31.12.2024, except Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) 
vertical of the scheme, to complete all the houses sanctioned without 
changing the funding pattern and implementation methodology. 
To accelerate adoption of innovative and alt ernative construction 
technologies, to improve the pace and quality of work under PMAY -U and for 
addressing the challenges of rapid urban growth and its attendant 
requirements, a Technology Sub Mission (TSM) has been set up in PMAY -U. 
The sub mission aims to facilitate adoption of modern, innovative and green 
technologies and building materials for faster and quality construction of 
houses. The sub mission, inter alia, works on green buildings using natural 
resources, innovative technologies and materials, earthquake and other 
disaster resistant technologies and design. Building Material and Techn010kY 
Promotion Council (BMTPC) has already been working on promoting the use 
of local and traditional knowledge with regard to the construction technologies 
and bu ilding material. Further, it is working to develop and operationalize a 
comprehensive and integrated approach for promotion of environment friendly 
and energy efficient innovative building materials and construction 
technologies.” 


 
14 
 
 
29. While observing that our country has traditional house building knowledge 
and technology having traditional building system designed for comfortable 
living and maximum use of natural resources like air , water and locally 
available materials rather using cement and concrete, which result in buildings 
requiring intensive energy, the Committee had recommended to formulate 
building code and guidelines of the Mission which maximizes use of traditional 
knowledge and building material in buildings, minimize cutting of tree besides 
promoting our traditional construction technologies through institutions like 
CAPART, HUDCO etc. The Committee are pleased to note that several 
measures including setting up of Technology Sub Mission (TSM), adoption of 
modern innovative and green technologies  and building materials for faster 
and quality construction of houses have been taken by the Ministry. It has also 
been informed that Technology Sub Mission works on green buildings using 
natural resources, innovative technologies and design. While taking note of 
the measures initiated by the Ministry to develop the buildings environment 
friendly, energy friendly and having proper cross ventilation and natural light, 
the Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome of the measures initiated 
by the TSM and  Building Material and Technology Programme Council 
(BMTPC) in order to improve the construction of residential/commercial 
buildings system so as to ensure reducing the use of energy therein and urge 
to ensure that the Technology Sub Mission (TSM) under PM AY-U actively 
promotes and facilitates the adoption of energy - efficient and environment -
friendly building materials and technologies. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
30. In their Recommendation contained in the original Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“The Committee note that at present 30 percent population of the Country 
lives in urban areas which is expected to grow to 40 percent by 2021 and 50 
percent by 2050. The number of motor vehicles on our roads was 52.37 
million in 2000 which increased to 121.63 million in 2011. The Committee note 
that India is poised for rapid economic growth. Such future growth will largely 
come from economic activities in urban areas as cities today contribute nearly 
65 percent of India's GDP. With incr easing urban sprawl, it is estimated that 
by 2030, this figure would reach nearly 70 percent. Nonetheless, economic 
activities would largely depend on mobility of the people dwelling in urban 
areas. Hence, development of cities through prioritizing urban t ransport is a 
step forward in this direction. Urban Transport is a key urban service that 
imparts efficiency to the city by providing mobility to the workforce and hence 
best productivity. However, the huge number of vehicles on roads is also 
leading to co ngestion and pollution. The number of motor vehicles on our 
roads was 52.37 million in 2000 which increased to 121.63 million in 2011. 
The total number of registered motor vehicles in India was 210.02 million as 
on 31.03.2015. As a result of rapid increase  in motor vehicles, congestion on 

 
15 
 
 
the road is increasing leading to stress to the commuters and spike in air 
pollution. One of the objectives of the mission is better urban planning and 
modal shift to public transport and making long term transport plan to  facilitate 
the growth of medium and small cities in such a way that ensures efficient and 
convenient public transport. 
The Committee note that the Government is implementing AMRUT scheme 
(Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation) and Smart C ities 
mission under the Sustainable Habitat Mission. AMRUT inter alia aims at 
reducing pollution by switching to public transport or providing facilities for non-
motorised transport whereas the aim of Smart Cities mission is to provide 
basic infrastructure through convergence with other schemes in selected 100 
cities. The Government is also encouraging public transport through financing 
of buses and BUS Rapid Transit System (BRTS) and Jawaharlal Nehru 
National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM). Metro Rail Pro jects are being 
implemented in 13 cities of the Country. The Committee are of the view that 
schemes such as AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission are effective schemes for 
promoting public transport but their horizontal coverage is very small. Such 
schemes need t o be expanded to other cities also so that the problem could 
be resolved before it is too late. Similarly, the metro rail services should be 
expanded to all cities which have a population of more than a million. The 
Committee also recommend that in major cities multiple modes of transport 
such as local trains, trams should also be promoted. Besides, attention needs 
to be paid to switching over to clean energy for running our vehicles, i.e., cars 
and buses. Manufacture/ use of electric cars needs to be ince ntivized besides 
giving attention to the infrastructure/ services needed like electrical recharging 
stations. Not only that R&D in solar driven transport like cars and buses should 
be given more emphasis so as to find solar solutions for our transport. For  
covering small distances, dedicated cycle tracks need to be constructed. The 
satellite cities should be linked with the nodal city through rapid transport 
system to avoid congestion in the city centres. All the initiatives being taken in 
this regard need to be further emphasized, which certainly would reduce our 
dependence on diesel/petrol thereby saving money and addressing the issue 
of pollution particularly in big cities and metros.” 
 
31. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change have submitted as under: 
“Urban transport, which is an integral part of urban development, is a State subject. 
Therefore, respective state governments are responsible for planning and 
developing urban transport infrastructure. Ministry o f Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA) provides financial assistance to such projects under its policy/guidelines, 
when such proposals are mooted by State Governments subject to feasibility of the 
projects and availability of resources. 


 
16 
 
 
However, in order to d eal with the emerging problems of increasing number of 
private vehicles, traffic congestion, travel time uncertainty, air pollution, etc. du e to 
rapid urbanization, has taken certain initiatives which arc enumerated as under: 
i. MoHUA formulated National Urban Transport Policy in April, 2006. The 
objective of th e policy is to ensure accessible, safe, affordable, quick, 
comfortable, reliable and sustainable mobility for all. The polic y seeks to 
promote integrated land use and transport. planning, greater use of  public 
transport and non -motorized modes of travel and use of cleaner 
technologies. It offers Central Government's financial support for investments 
in public transport, infrastructure for greater use of non -motorized modes of 
transport, construction of p arking facilities etc. It encourages capacity 
building, innovative financing mechanisms, institutional coordination, private 
sector participation and public awareness and cooperation. 
ii. MoHUA has formulated a National Transit  Oriented Development 
(TOD) Policy in May 2 017. The objective of this policy is to encourag e 
compact mixed land use, which reduces the n eed for travel and improve 
access to public transport within walkabl e distance of transit stations. City 
specific strategies and mechanisms arc to b e framed by the r espective 
Cities/ States for implementation of TOD. 
iii. In order to create an ecosystem for enhancement of metro rail network 
in the country, MoHUA has also formulated the Metro Rail Policy, 2017. As 
per the Metro Rail Policy, 2 017 respective State Government/Union Territory 
(UT) is responsible for initiating metro rail projects. The Central Govt. 
considers financial assistanc e for such projects in cities or urban 
agglomerates, based on feasibility of the proposal and availability of 
resources, as and wh en posed by the concerned State Government/ UT 
Govt. policy bridges th e much-needed gap for ascertaining and enhancing 
the feasibility of m etro rail projects from economic, social and environmental 
perspective. In th eMetro Rail Policy, 2017, it h as been made mandatory for 
State Governments to include feeder system and multi modal integration in 
proposals of Metro Rail seeking Central assistance. 
iv. Under the Urban Transport Planning and Capacity Building Scheme, 
this Ministry provides financial assis tance up to for taking up Traffic and 
Transportation Studies, feasibility studies, Compr ehensive Mobility Plan 
(CMP), preparation of DPR for Mass Rapid Transit System (NIR'I'S)/ Light 
Rail Transit System (LRTS), which are Initiated by th e State 
(Governments/Union Territories/Urban Local Bodies (limited to  50% in case 
of MRTS). 
v. A project named “Efficient and Sustainable City Bus Service (ESCBS)" 
supported by the World Bank is under impl ementation in 4 Cities viz. Bhopal, 
Chandigarh, Jaipur and Mira Bhayandar. The objectives of the project are 
(i)strengthening capacity of urban bus service institutions through capacity 
building and train ing programmes and (ii) assisting  cities in pr eparing a nd 

 
17 
 
 
implementing demonstration "City Bus Modernisation Projects" and provid ing 
technical assistance in ITS/ MIS, enhancing fu el efficiency, rout e and 
business planning. 
vi. To assist the States/ Urban Local Bodies, also extended central 
assistance for creation  Of Bus Rapid Transit System (BR TS) corridors. 
Presently, a total of about 45 0 km length is operational in 11 cities and about 
200 km length in 2 other cities are under construction across the country. 
vii. This Ministry has given financial assistance in develo pment of Metro 
Rail projects in cities in the country. With the impetus of Government on 
proliferation of metro system in country, about 86 0 km of metro rail lines are 
operational in 20 cities and about 1, 000 km (including 82 km Delhi -Meerut 
Regional Rapid  Transit System (RRTS)) arc under construction in various 
cities namely Delhi,Gurugram, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore, Chennai, Kochi, 
Nagpur, Ahmedabad, Pune, Gandhinagar, Navi Mumbai, Patna, Surat, Agra, 
Kanpur, Meerut, Bhopal and Indore etc. 
viii. The Government has taken initiative to provide faster connectivity with 
the satellite cities around Delhi falling within the jurisdiction of National 
Capital Region through construction of RRTS corridors. The first RR TS 
corridor of 82 km length between Delhi & Meerut a t estimated cost of 
Rs.30,274 Crore is under implementation. 
Under AMRUTMission so far, 3,423 MLD sewage treatment capacity and 1,437 MLD 
recycle /reuse capacity has been developed. 99 lakh conventional streetlights have 
been replaced with energy efficient  LEDs. In addition to water supply and sewerage, 
emphasis is given on developing infrastructure for Non-Motorised Transport (NMI). In 
non-motorised urban transport sector projects worth Rs. 626 crore hav e been 
completed, projects worth Rs. 3 84 crore arc un der implementation. Un der Non -
MotorisedTransport, projects related to footpath/ walkways, sidewalks, foot over 
bridges facilities for non -motorised transport (such as bicycles) and multi - level 
parking's have been taken -up. A number of cities selected unde r the Smart Cities 
Mission arc also implementing projects related to NMT and bike- sharing.” 
 
32. The Committee are appreciative of the fact that in pursuance of their 
recommendation to facilitate the growth of medium and small cities in such a 
way that ensures efficient and convenient Public Transport, several measures 
have been initiated by the MoHUA to promote multiple modes of transport in 
major cities such as (i) Formulation of National Urban Transport Policy in April 
2006 so as  to ensure accessible, safe, affordable, quick, comfortable, reliable 
and sustainable mobility for all, (ii) formulation of National Transit Oriented 
Development (NTOD) Policy in 2017 so as to encourage compact mixed land 
use which improve access to Public Transport within walka ble distance of 
transit Station, (iii) formulation of Metro Rail Policy, 2017 to create an 
ecosystem for enhancement of Metro Rail network in the country (iv) A project 
named "Efficient and Sustainable City Bus Service (ESCBS) is under 


 
18 
 
 
implementation in fo ur cities viz. Bhopal, Chandigarh, Jaipur and Mira 
Bhayandar, etc. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the present 
status of implementation of the aforesaid policies /programmes and outcome 
thereof including different RRTS corridors in connecting Delhi to Haryana, U.P. 
and Rajasthan. Besides the Committee are of the view that promoting a variety 
of some other transport modes, such as local trains and trams, would offer 
diverse option for commuters. The Committee further desire the Minist ry to 
establish a robust monitoring and evaluation mechanism to a ssess the impact 
of the aforesaid measures and make necessary adjustments based on the 
evolving urban transport landscape in addition to giving  additional incentives 
for the development and a doption of clean energy in public transport, such as 
electric buses and Solar Powered Transport.  
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
33. In regard to construction  of waste to compost and waste to energy along with 
proper segregation of work at source, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that Swachh Bharat Mission -Urban (SBM -U) was 
launched on 2nd October 2014 with the objective of inter alia elimination of 
open defecatio n, modern and scientific municipal solid waste management 
and capacity augmentation for Urban Local Bodies to be achieved in five 
years, i.e. 2 nd October 2019. It also targeted to achieve 100 percent door -to-
door collection and scientific management of mun icipal solid waste. The 
Committee feel that solid waste is one of the major components of urban 
pollution. The Committee note that a number of policy initiatives have been 
taken to encourage processing of waste to compost and waste to energy, 
mandatory use of plastics in road construction, and mandatory use of recycled 
construction and demolition waste in all construction projects. The Committee 
feel that waste to compost and waste to energy are very important for creation 
of sustainable habitats. The Commi ttee find that 145 compost plants are 
currently functional in the Country while 150 plants are under construction. 
After construction of these plants,the total compost production will increase 
from 13.13 lakh tonnes to 33 lakh tonnes. The Committee recomme nd that 
the underconstruction plants should be expeditiously constructed and more 
cities should be brought under waste to compost plan. The Committee note 
that 511 MW of power can be produced from municipal solid waste. Currently 
seven plants are operation al and 53 are being constructed. The Committee 
recommend that the construction of waste to energy plants should be closely 
monitored so that these plants are constructed without any delay. The 
Committee are concerned that there is no proper segregation of wastes 
before they are dumped on the dumpsites. With the increasing electronic 
waste, hospital waste content among waste, there is serious danger of 
emission of poisonous gases and diseases spreading from the dumpsites. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that there should be proper 

 
19 
 
 
segregation of waste at the source itself for which public awareness campaign 
is needed.” 
 
34. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change have submitted as under: 
1. “Under SBM -U, 2199 compost plants are currently functional in the 
country with the designed capacity of 71,682 TPD. Plants with the designed 
capacity of 30,681 TPD has been approved under SBNI -U 2.0 out of which 
39 plants are under construction with 4,511 TPD designed capacity. 
2. Currently, 9 Waste to Electricity plants arc operational and 11 arc 
under construction with a combined total designed capacity of 22,000 TPD 
and potential to generate 220 MW of power. Also, Action Plans for 
construction of Waste to Bio -CBG Plants of 5,515 TPD and MRF Facilities of 
capacity 32,432 'IVD have been approved under SBM-IJ 2.0. 
3. MoHUA is implementing the SBNI -U 2.0 fully in compliance with the 
notified Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, read together with other 
waste management rules, for which  Additional Central Assistance is being 
provided to ULBs. The first step is segregation of waste at source for which 
ULBs are supported for carrying out regular IEC activates and Capacity 
Building activities for ULB staffs.” 
 
35. The Committee  observe that 39 waste to compost plants and waste to 
energy plants are under construction. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
the present position of these plants which need to be closely monitored to 
avoid delay in their construction as required. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
36. Observing the increasing quantum of plastic wastes in cities, the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
“As regards plastic waste, it is estimated that 15000 tonnes of plastic waste is 
generated every day in the Country. The plastic waste problem in urban areas 
has reached alarming proportions while the problem has also spread in rural 
areas, where, due to absence of any institution tasked for removing  garbage, 
it is posing significant environmental and health chal lenges. As per data, 60 
percent of all plastics in the Country is currently recycled, leaving 40 percent 
of 6000 tonnes/day being disposed in an unsafe manner. In urban as well as 
rural areas, there is no effective mechanism to segregate plastic waste, 
leading to compounding of problem as different plastic has different 
decomposition rates. In cities, there is another problem where disposable 
plates, glasses, etc. made of plastic/nondegradable materials are increasingly 
being used. Although plastic has been  banned in several States, its 

 
20 
 
 
implementation has left much to be desired. Increasing use of plastic bottles 
and bags in vulnerable mountain ecosystems cause environmental 
degradation in areas which are already stressed. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that institutional mechanism may be set up in all the States to 
monitor the use of plastics, besides ensuring its proper segregation, recycling 
and disposal. While banning the use of plastic carry bags, bottles etc., it is 
utmost important to find the bio degradable alternatives through R&D. Above 
all, adequate steps need to be taken to spread awareness among people 
about the importance of proper segregation of plastic waste and avoiding the 
use of disposable materials to the maximum extent possible.” 
 
37. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change have submitted as under: 
“In this regard, MoHUA has already taken steps to generate and enhance 
awareness among public and State/ municipal authorities to restrict single us e 
plastic usage. 
Under SBNI, the annual Swachh Survekshan (Cleanliness Survey) assesses 
the ULBs on their implementation of PWM Rules. 
Similarly, the Garbage free city Protocol for Star Rating Certification in SWNI 
also has assessments for prohibition of SUPs. 
As per notification issued on 12 th August; Plastic Waste Management Rules, 
2021, has incorporated ban on use of Single Use Plastic  (SUP) bags and 
other items. 'Th is is an important component in upcoming Swachh 
Survekshan 2022 and Star Rating Protocol for Garbage Free Cities (GFC) to 
encourage cities to prevent use of single use plastic. 
Detailed Action Plan for phasing out Single Use Plastic (SUP) has been made 
by MoHUA and ULBs are taking action accordingly. 2127 ULBs/Cities have 
notified the Plastic ban. 
Innovative SUP replacement efforts such as Bartan bhandars, Jhola centres - 
Thyla Banks, plastic plog runs, food -for plastic waste programmes etc. are 
also part of Swachh Survekshan indictors and IEC activities. 
SBNI-U 2.0 will be implemented with a vi sion of achieving "Garbage Free" 
status for all cities. Under the Sustainable Solid Waste Management, greater 
emphasis will be on source segregation, complete Solid waste management 
with 100% waste processing with intensified focus on phased reduction on 
Single Use Plastic. 
In SBNI -U 2.0, funding will be provided for setting up of dry waste (plastic 
waste) processing facilities such as MRFs, waste to electricity etc. for plastic 
waste management in all statutory towns.” 
 

 
21 
 
 
38. As regards disposal/ban of plast ic waste, the ATN reflects a proactive 
approach by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs to address this issue. 
Several steps are stated to have been taken by the Ministry to restrict single 
use plastic usage  by involving ULBs . However, the problem sti ll persist s on 
large scale particularly in urban areas, where it has reached alarming 
proportions. Further, there is no mention  of R&D and institutional mechanism 
so that remaining 40% of plastic waste is recycled/disposed in a safe manner.   
The Committee, therefore, urge that the robust institutional mechanism may be 
established to recycle/dispose the plastic waste generated in cities . Strict 
penalties may  also be imposed for non -compliance of plastic waste 
management rules. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 40) 
39. In their Recommendation contained in the original Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“As stated in Economic Survey (2017 -18), according to a 2014 study by the 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), in 2008-09 the country generated 
620 million tonnes of crop residue, of which around 16 per cent was burnt on 
farms, of which 60 per  cent was paddy, straw, whereas wheat accounted for 
just 22 percent. As per estimates, Punjab alone produces 19-20 million tonnes 
of paddy straw and about 20 million tonnes  of wh eat straw. About 85 -90 
percent of this paddy straw is burnt in the field, and, as the  satellite images 
show, wheat straw is also increasingly being burnt in recent years. As  per 
IARI report , main reasons for burning crop residues in field include 
unavailability of labour, high cost in removing the residues and use of 
combines in rice -wheat cropping system especially in the Indo -Gangetic 
plains (IGP). The usage of combine  harvesting machines is an other reason 
because it only reaps the grains, leaving stalks or  stubble of around 40 cm. 
Removing the stubble manually or by using specialized  machines to do the 
job is costly. For every 0.4 ha of wheat crop, the cost of renting a  combine 
harvester is jus t ₹800. Once the machine has harvested, the cost of getting 
the stubble removed is ₹3,500/ha. So the value of fodder is discounted 
because it is more  economic for the farmers to just burn by using match box 
and clear the fields. 
The Committee understand that crop residue burning has been banned by the 
National Green Tribunal (NGT) in States of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, 
Haryana and  Punjab parts of which constitute the National Capital Region, 
and in 2014, the Union  Government had released the National Policy  for 
Management of Crop Residue, which  NGT directed the States to implement. 
Besides crop residue burning is punishable  under the Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. In spite of all these  provisions, the problem of 
crop residue burning per sists. Burning of crop residues leads  to release of 
soot particles and smoke in the atmosphere causing human and animal health 

 
22 
 
 
problems. It also leads to emission of greenhouse gases, namely carbon 
dioxide, carbon monoxide, methane and nitrous oxide, causi ng global 
warming. These gases are  of major concern for their global impact and also 
their local impact in causing rise in  suspended particulate matter (SPM) in the 
nearby areas leading to health hazard.  While appreciating banning burning of 
crop residue in States constituting NCR by  NGT, the Committee observe that 
there is a need for consultation with the farmers and  understanding their 
problems. The farmers should be incentivized for use of specialized  machines 
which cut the crop residue from the bottom o r removing the stubble manually  
without resorting to crop residue burning. Besides , technological solutions are 
to be  found under a time bound programme and Agriculture Engineering 
Departments should be incentivized to provide early cost effective alternat ives 
for burning of crop residue.” 
40. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change have submitted as under: 
 Paddy stubble burning is mainly practiced in Indo -Gangetic plains of the 
States of Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh to clear the fields for Rabi crop 
sowing. The farmers are resorting to paddy straw burning because of very 
short time window between the harvesting of paddy crop and the sowing of 
next crop. 
 To address air pollution and to subsidize machinery requi red for in -situ 
management of crop residue, a Central Sector Scheme on ‘Promotion of 
Agricultural Mechanization for In -Situ Management of Crop Residue in the 
States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi’ for the period 
from 2018-19 to 2019-20 is being implemented. During the year 2018 -19 and 
2019-20, the funds as under have been released under the aforementioned 
scheme: 
 
State/Agency Funds released (Rs. in Crores) 
 
 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total 
 
Punjab 269.38 273.80 272.50 815.68 
 
Haryana 137.84  
 
192.06 170.00 499.9 
Uttar Pradesh 148.60 105.28 120.20 374.08 
 
NCT of Delhi 0 4.52 0.00 4.52 
 
ICAR and other 
Central Agencies 
28.51 18.48 8.00 54.99 
 
Total 584.33 594.14 570.70 1749.17 
 
 
Out of these funds, during last 3 years, the State Governments have 
established more than 30900 Custom Hiring Centres of crop residue 
management machinery to provide machines & equipment to the small and 

 
23 
 
 
marginal farmers on rental basis. A total of more th an 1.58 lakh crop residue 
management machines have been supplied to these established CHCs and 
the farmers of these four States for management of crop residue. 
The State Governments and Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) have also 
undertaken Information, Educati on and Communication (IEC) activities on a 
massive scale for creating awareness among farmers. 
In 2020 season, through the concentrated efforts of this scheme, a reduction 
in number of paddy residue burning events in comparison to 2016 in the State 
of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Punjab were reported as 64%, 52% and 23% 
respectively. 
 Under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) programme all the NFSM 
implementing states have been given flexibility to take up the farm 
machineries/tools at the subsidized rates as per the guidelines of Sub-Mission 
on Agricultural Mechanization. Awareness is also created amongst the 
farmers through training to avoid stubble burning. 
 In Punjab and Haryana, emphasis has been on zero till planting of wheat in 
rice residues with happy seeder as alternative to crop residue burning. The 
efforts of NICRA led to making of 26 villages as residue burning free villages 
adjoining the NICRA villages in the states of Punjab and Haryana. 
41. The Committee are appreciative of the fac t that National  Innovations in 
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) led to making of 26 villages as residue 
burning free villages adjoining the NICRA villages in the States of Punjab and 
Haryana. The Committee desire that these steps be continued on a large scale 
so as to eliminate the issue of crop burning in future.  
The Committee further  find that there is no mention  about incentives to 
Agriculture Engineering Departments for providing early cost effective 
alternatives for burning of crop residue  which is major reason  for rise in air 
pollution. The Committee, therefore, emphasize the Ministry to take urgent 
steps in regard to allocat ing resources to Agriculture Engineering 
Departments to develop and implement time bound programmes for cost -
effective alternatives to crop residue burning.  
 
****** 
  

 
24 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
Recommendations  - Para No. 2 
The Committee find that the Government is implementing the National Action Plan 
on Climate Change (NAPCC), which includes eight national Missions covering solar 
energy, enhanced energy efficiency, agriculture, water, sustainab le habitat, Green 
India, Himalayan ecosystem and Strategie Knowledge for Climate Change, apart 
from various other initiatives. Each Mission is administered by a Ministry/Department 
which is responsible for its implementation and lays down the budget provis ions and 
actionable priorities for it. The broad policy initiatives of the Central Government are 
supplemented by actions at the sub -national levels by the State Governments/UTs. 
The National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) has been 
appointed as National Implementing Entity (NIE) responsible for implementation of 
adaptation projects under the National Adaptation Fund for Climate Change 
(NAFCC). Besides, research and scientific institutions provide scientific inputs for 
framing various policies on climate change. 
Some of the experts who deposed before the Committee raised the issue of 
fragmented approach and lack of coordination amongst various 
Ministries/Stakeholders. The Committee find that the activities covered by various 
Missions are inter-related and the developments in a Mission in an area has bearing 
on the other Missions. NAPCC being a multi -tiered structure with various Ministries/ 
Departments administering various Missions supplemented by actions at the 
States/UTs level, the obje ctives of the action plan for climate change can only be 
achieved through collective action and partnerships for which integrated approach 
and coordination amongst various Ministries, State Government/Union Territories 
and all other implementing agencies i s utmost necessary. The Ministry of 
Environment and Forests & Climate Change (MoEF&CC) being the main 
coordinating Ministry has to take the desired initiatives. For inter -Ministerial 
coordination, the Committee recommend for setting up of an inter -Ministerial entity to 
quarterly review the performance of each implementing agency. Besides, MoEF&CC 
should have a public information portal displaying up -to-date data/information about 
mandate, targets as well as achievements of each of the Missions under specifi c 
heads so as to enable the stakeholders to track what is happening in different areas 
concerning climate change. Besides, the information about the adverse effects of 
climate change should be displayed in the portal so as to sensitize and involve the 
public at large on this important issue. The Committee would also like to recommend 
that six monthly report of each Ministry/Department administering the specific 
Missions) giving the status of implementation on various parameters should be 
laid in Parliament.” 
 
 

 
25 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
• “The "India Climate Change Knowledge Portal" was launched on 27 
November 
2020. This web portal provides information on the different climate initiatives 
taken by various Line Ministries enabling users to access updated status on 
these initiatives. 
• The eight major components included in the knowledge portal are: 
1. India's Climate Profile  
2. ⁠National Policy Framework 
3. India's NDC goals 
4. Adaptation Actions 
5. Mitigation Actions 
6. Bilateral and Multilateral Cooperation 
7. International Climate Negotiations 
8. Reports & Publications 
• The Web Portal can be accessed at: https://www.cckpindia.nic.in/ 
• Meetings of the Executive Committee on Climate Change (ECCC) have 
been regularly held (Seventh Meeting of the ECCC was  held on 3 February, 
2021 and Eighth Meeting of the ECCC was held on 1 st September, 2021), 
chaired by Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister.” 
 
Recommendations - Para No. 3  
The Committee note from the information furnished by the Government that 32States 
and Union Territories have so far put in place the State Action Plans on Climate 
Change attempting to mainstream climate change concerns in their planning 
process. 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the implementation status of the 
State Acti on Plans at the ground level. About the remaining States where State 
Action Plans have not been formulated, the Committee would like to be apprised 
about the specific reasons for delay in formulating State Action Plans. These States 
should be pursued for putting in place State Action Plans expeditiously.” 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
Preparation of State Action Plans on Climate Change (SAPCCs) has been reviewed 
by the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEFCC). Guidelines for 
SAPCC revision have been issued, along with funding support @ Rs 20 lakh per 

 
26 
 
 
State/UT. Tamil Nad u, Odisha, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat 
have submitted revised SAPCCs. SAPCC Regional Workshops are being convened 
for accelerating the work. 
 
Recommendations - Para No. 4 
National Coastal Mission 
The Committee during the course of delibera tions have been apprised by a 
representative of the Ministry of Earth Sciences that the proposal for setting up a 
National Coastal Mission has been prepared jointly with MoEF&CC and is at the 
advanced stage of approval. With the high Shoreline Vulnerability along Indian Coast 
as mentioned in the para above, the Committee strongly recommend for setting up of 
a new Mission i.e. National Coastal Mission so as to give focused attention to climate 
change issues related to coastal areas. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised as to whether the Government propose to set up some more new Missions 
in areas like health, waste-to-energy. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
(a) National Coastal Mission (NCM) is an ongoing sub -scheme under National 
Coastal Management Program me of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate 
Change (MOEFCC) with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 87.5 cr spread over 2021 -
2026. 
(b) A proposal for enhancing the scope of on -going National Coastal Mission to 
promote and give impetus to development of climate resi lient blue economy 
development without compromising the safeguard of coastal ecosystem and 
marine environment has been submitted to Department of Expenditure for 
consideration. 
(c) This Ministry agrees with the statement of representative of Ministry of Earth 
Sciences in respect of preparation of proposal to upscale National Coastal 
Mission jointly with all line-ministries including Ministry of Earth Science. 
(d) NAPCC encompasses eight core missions in the specific areas of Solar Energy, 
Enhanced Energy Efficiency , Sustainable Habitat, Water, Sustaining the 
Himalayan Ecosystem, Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change, Green India, 
and Sustainable Agriculture, which are anchored by Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy; Bureau of Energy Efficiency (Ministry of Power),  Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs, Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, Department of 
Science and Technology, Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change, 
and Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer Welfare, respectively. Three new national 
missions on (i) Health & Climate Change, (ii) Coastal, and (iii) Sustainable 
Transport have been approved by the Executive Committee on Climate Change 
(ECCC). National Mission on Health & Climate Change ha s been finalized and 

 
27 
 
 
approved by the ECCC, the mission documents on Coastal and Sustainable 
Transport are being worked upon and will be finalized at the earliest. MoEFCC is 
following up on the same for completion of the exercise. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 5 
Clean Environment Fund and National Adaptation Fund - Financial 
Achievement 
 
The Committee note that a corpus called National Clean Energy Fund (NCEF), now 
known as Clean Environment Fund, was constituted in the Financial Year 2010 -11 
out of the cess on coal produced/imported (“polluter pays” principle) for the purposes 
of financing and promoting clean energy initiatives, funding research in the area of 
clean energy or for any other purpose relating thereto. Subsequently, the scope of 
the fund was expand ed to include clean environment initiatives also. An Inter -
Ministerial Group (IMG) chaired by the Finance Secretary approves the 
projects/schemes eligible for financing under the NCEF. These projects include 
innovative schemes like Green Energy Corridor fo r boosting up the transmission 
sector, Namami Gange, Green India Mission, National Solar Mission (NSM)’s 
installation of solar photovoltaic (SPV) lights and small capacity lights, installation of 
SPV water pumping systems, SPV Power Plants, Grid -Connected Rooftop SPV 
Power Plants, pilot project to assess wind power potential, etc. The Committee note 
that from 2010-11 to 2017-18, a total of ₹86,440.21 crore was collected as coal cess 
out of which only ₹20,942.29 crore could be transferred to the NCEF. During  this 
period, total amount financed from NCEF for projects was ₹15,911.49 crore. The 
Committee further note that monies from the Fund are allocated to the Ministries of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, New and Renewable Energy and Water 
Resources, R iver Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. The Committee are 
concerned to note that in spite of substantial revenue being generated out of coal 
cess, the same is not being allocated to the NCEF and even the low allocation is not 
being utilised, which indicat es poor planning and execution on the part of 
implementing agencies. The Committee also understand that the coal cess, along 
with some other cesses, have been made a part of GST compensation Fund which 
would be utlilised to compensate the States for five y ears for potential losses on 
account of GST implementation. After five years, any amount left would be shared 
on 50 percent basis between the Centre and States. The Committee deplore the way 
such an important issue pertaining to the existence of the Earth,  the only known 
habitable planet in the Universe, is being handled and strongly recommend for 
adequate financial resources to NCEF, besides putting in place effective monitoring 
mechanisms to ensure full utilization of allocated outlay. The Committee also 
recommend that shortfall on account of the Coal cess being made a part of GST 
Compensation Fund should be compensated to the NCEEF by the Central 
Government. 
 
 

 
28 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
Schemes which were previously funded from National Clean Energy Fund are now 
funded from the gross budgetary support.  
 
Recommendation - Para No. 6 
 
The Committee note that the National Adaptation Fund for Climate Change (NAFCC) 
was set up in 2015 -16 with a budget provision of ₹350 crore for the year 2015 -16  
and 2016 -17 and an estimated requirement of ₹181.5 crore for the financial year  
2017-18. The objective of the Fund is to assist States and Union Territories 
particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change in meeting the cost of 
adaptation. NABARD i s the implementing agency for this Fund. Under the Fund, 
₹118.37 crore  were released for projects in 2015 -16 while ₹93.93 crore were 
released in the year 2016 -17. The Committee observe that against the allocation of 
₹350 crore for two years, only ₹212.3 crore i.e. around 60 percent has been released 
which indicates slow and tardy  pace of implementation of the projects. While 
expressing concern over lack of  seriousness towards implementation of projects 
funded by NABARD, the Committee  recommend to review the implementation of the 
projects being undertaken in various States/UTs. The details of the progress of these 
projects being implemented in various  States/UTs alongwith the initiatives taken/ 
proposed to be taken for their effective  implementation should be  furnished to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of the Report. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 The Government is regularly arranging review meetings to examine the status 
of the  projects being implemented. The present status of NAFCC pro ject is 
enclosed at Annexure – I. 
 
 The “India Climate Change Knowledge Portal” was launched on 27th 
November 2020  as the single point information resource and monitoring. 
Frequent review through  virtual regional meetings and field level monitoring 
(at the State Government level) is being undertaken. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 10 
 
The Committee note that one of the objectives of the Mission is to take a 
global leadership role in manufacturing of cutting edge solar 
technologies with a target of 4 -5 GW equivalent of installed capacity by 2020, 
including setting up of dedicated manufacturing capacities for poly silicon material to 
annually make about 2 GW capacity of solar cells. However, given the 
existing position of solar- related manufacturing capacit y within the 
Country, it is likely to remain a pipedream, as the Ministry itself has acknowledged 
that the country currently does not have enough capacity for solar cells and modules 

 
29 
 
 
to cover full demand, and both imported and indigenous solar equipments a nd 
components are being utilized for achieving the targets. In this context, a 
representative of the Ministry apprised the Committee during the course of oral 
evidence that in solar industry, Chinese solar cells and modules are being used in 
the Country in  high volumes. The Committee may also like to refer to the 22 nd 
Report (2017-18) of the Committee on Public Undertakings, wherein a representative 
of IREDA has been stated to have apprised that Committee that 85 percent of the 
solar panels are still being  imported from China as they are cheaper and 
technologically advanced. 
 
The Committee are concerned to note such high dependence on imported solar 
equipments which is not in the interest of the Country and is detrimental to the 
development of indigenous in dustries. The Committee strongly feel that there is an 
urgent need to work on various fronts, foremost being R&D for which massive 
investment is required. The Ministry of Science and Technology has to work in a 
mission mode to encourage R&D in the sector a t research centres particularly  the 
premier technological institutions like IITs in collaboration with industry for 
technological improvement as well as to develop affordable and innovative solutions 
so as to bring down the costs, improve quality of solar power components including 
solar panels, solar cells and  batteries. Besides encouraging local 
manufacturing of raw material, attracting private sector  particularly the small scale 
industries, availability of skilled manpower are the other areas for which the 
Government has to take urgent and immediate initiatives. The Government should 
also look at the option of increasing duties on Chinese solar products without 
attracting the restrictions laid sown under WTO guidelines. Research and further 
improving the  quality of lithium batteries or batteries based on alternate materials 
should be incentivised. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
The installed manufacturing capacity of solar PY modules in the country, as on 
30.06.2023, as per the manufacturing capacities enlisted in Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy (MNRE) Approved List of Models and Manufacturers (ALMM) for 
solar PY modules and the applications received for enlistment in ALMM, is around 
27 GW per annum. 
 
The installed manufacturing capacity of solar PY  cells in the country, as on 
30.06.2023, as per industry sources, is about 6 GW per annum. 
 
Further, the Government of India is implementing the Production Linked Incentive 
(PLI) Scheme for National Programme on High Efficiency Solar PY Modules, for 
achieving manufacturing capacity of Giga Watt (GW) scale in High Efficiency Solar 
PY modules. Under this Scheme, the Government of India will give Production 
Linked Incentive (PU) to the selected solar PY module manufacturers for five years 

 
30 
 
 
post commissioning, o n manufacture and sale of High Efficiency Solar PY modules. 
The Scheme is being implemented in two tranches as follows: 
 
(a) Under Tranche-I of PLI Scheme for High Efficiency Solar PY Modules, 8.737 GW of 
fully integrated solar PY module manufacturing capacity  is under implementation 
and is scheduled for completion in November/ December 2024. 
 
(b) Under Tranche-II of PLI Scheme for High Efficiency Solar PY Modules, 39.6 GW of 
fully/partially integrated solar PY module manufacturing capacity is under 
implementation and is scheduled for completion by October 2024 to April 2026, 
depending upon the extent of integration proposed. 
 
Thus, it is expected that upon commissioning of the solar PY manufacturing 
capacities under PLI Scheme for High Efficiency Solar PY Modules, India will have 
installed solar PY module manufacturing capacity of more than 75 GW per annum 
which would not only be sufficient to cater to domestic demand but would also cater 
to global demand through exports. 
 
Regarding imposition of duties, it is submi tted that with effect from I st April, 2022, 
the Government has imposed Basic Customs Duty (BCD) on import of solar PY 
modules (HS Code 85414300)@ 40% and on import of solar PY cells (HS Code 
85414200)@ 25%. 
 
Regarding impori of solar PY modules into India, it is submitted that as per the data 
on the website pertaining to export import data bank of Department of Commerce: 
 
(a) In 2021-22, when the HS code for solar PY modules was 85414012, the value of 
solar PY modules imported into India was around 3363 millio n USO, out of which 
imports of around 3075 million USO (~91%) were from China. 
 
(b) In 2022-23, when the HS code for solar PY modules was 85414300, the value of 
solar PY modules imported into India reduced to around 944 million USO, out of 
which imports of around 875 million USO (~93%) were from China. 
 
To reduce imports in solar PY sector, the Government has taken several steps, 
which, inter­ alia, include: 
 
 PLI Scheme: Implementation of PLI Scheme for High Efficiency Solar PY 
Modules, as detailed above. 
 BCD: Imposition of Basic Customs Duty as detailed above 
 
 Domestic Content Requirement (DCR): Under some of the current schemes 
of the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE), namely CPSU Scheme 
Phase-II, and Grid -connected Rooftop Solar Programme Phase -II and  
specified components of PM­ KUSUM Scheme, wherein government subsidy 

 
31 
 
 
is given, it has been mandated to source solar PY cells and modules from 
domestic sources, as per extant Guidelines. 
 
 Discontinuation of Concessional Customs Duty Certificates (CCDCs): 
Government has withdrawn the benefit of concessional customs duty on the 
items imported for initial setting up of solar power projects with effect from 
02.02.2021. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 11 
 
National Mission on Enhanced Energy Efficiency 
 
The Committee note that the National Mission on Enhanced Energy Efficiency 
(NMEEE), one of the eight missions under NAPCC, was launched in the year 2010 
with an approved outlay of ₹235.50 crore during XI plan and ₹775 crore during XII 
plan. The aim of the NMEEE is to st rengthen the market for energy efficiency by 
creating conducive regulatory and policy regime and envisages fostering innovative 
and sustainable business models to the energy efficiency sector. The Committee 
also note that between the period 2010 -11 and 201 6-17, ₹914.13 crore was 
allocated as BE while RE during the same period was only ₹258.84 crore. The 
Committee are surprised that even this drastically reduced amount could not be 
spent under the mission and actual expenditure during the same period was ₹20 7.82 
crore, about 20 percent less compared to RE. The Committee have been informed 
that one of the reasons for less financial allocation under RE is delay in approval of 
rules for Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for Energy Efficiency (PRGFEE) and Venture 
Capital Fund for Energy Efficiency (VCFEE) and also because XII plan scheme was 
approved only in 2014 -15. The Committee feel that mismatch of such magnitude in 
financial allocations for such an important mission does not reflect well on the 
functioning of Minis try. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should undertake due diligence in preparation of financial estimates and ensure that 
the funds are utilised for the schemes for which they have been allocated. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 The recommendation is noted for compliance. 
 However, after the end of the XII th plan, approval for continuation of the mission  
was received for the period 2017 -2020 with an approved outlay of Rs. 430 
Crores. 
 For the period beyond 2020, a SFC proposal for the period 2021-22 to 2025 -26 
with a financial outlay of Rs. 167 Crores has been submitted to Ministry of Power 
and is under circulation to the Appraising Agencies. The outlay has been further 
reduced as the financial initiatives namely PRGFEE and VCFEE have b een short 
closed. 
 
 

 
32 
 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 12 
 
With regard to the pace of allocations of outlay, the Committee find reducing 
allocations since 2014 -15 till 2017 -18, whereby the allocations at BE to the tune of 
₹283 crore during 2013 -14 were gradually reduced to ₹40.90 crore during 2017 -18. 
The allocations during 2018 -19 then suddenly surged to ₹182.55 crore. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of fluctuation of this scale in the Budgetary 
allocation of these years. The corresponding physical target s and achievements 
under NMEEE during this period may also be furnished to the Committee at the 
action taken stage. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 During the Financial years 2012 -13 and 2613 -14, fund was drawn by Bureau of 
Energy Efficiency (BEE) for the financing initiatives under National Mission for 
Enhanced Energy Efficiency (NMEEE) namely Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for 
Energy Efficiency (PRGFEE) and Venture Capital Fund for Energy Efficiency 
(VCFEE). However, fund was not drawn under the aforesaid in itiatives for the 
financial years 2014 -15, 2015 -16 and 2016 -17 due to which the financial 
allocations were reduced. 
 Regarding allocation for the FY 2017 -18, 2018-19 and 2019 -20, it may be noted 
that the scheme was under process for approval for continuatio n. The 
continuation for the scheme was received in May 2018 after which funds were 
drawn by BEE for PAT and Energy Efficiency Financing Platform (EEFP). 
However, funds were not drawn for PRGFEE and VCFEE as Ministry of Power 
had put a condition in NMEEE sanction letter that the fresh tranches for PRGFEE 
/ VCFEE may be released only after utilization of 80% of PRGFEENCFEE corpus 
fund. 
 Physical targets and achievements are as under: 
 
S.No. Year Performance/ target 
fixed 
Performance/target achieved 
1 2014 - 
15 
 Preparatory Activities 
for notification of 
Perform, Achieve and 
Trade(PAT)Cycle—II. 
 Deepening study 
 
 
 
 
 
 Collection of baseline data from 
621 Designated Consumers 
(DCs) 
   
 Deepening study was carried out 
by BEE for including new DCs 
under PAT cycle —11 from the 
existing eight sectors. Under the 
deepening study, new 89 DCs 
were identified from the existing 
eight sectors of PAT Cycle -I. 

 
33 
 
 
  
 
 Widening study 
 Widening study was carried out in 
order to include new sectors in 
addition to the 8 existing sectors 
under PAT scheme. Three new 
sectors Railways, Refineries, and 
Electricity DISCOMs were notified 
  And 84 DCs additionally from these 
new sectors were notified. 
 
 
 Regional workshops were 
conducted for the capacity 
building of the DCs/ SDAs/AEAs 
for hand -holding them to 
understand the various pro -forma 
and other related documents. 
2 2015- 
16 
 Monitoring and Verification was 
carried out by Accredited Energy 
Auditors (AEAs) for DCs of PAT 
Cycle – 1. 
   The reports of all the DCs were 
reviewed by BEE. 
   
 The data of 427 DCs were  
scrutinized by BEE for 
assessment of the achievement. 
   The achievement after the 
analysis of data submitted by DCs 
comes out to be 8.67 MTOE 
against a given target of 6.686 
MTOE for 478 DCs. 
   Baseline verification audit was 
carried out for identification of 
new DCs under PAT scheme 

 
34 
 
 
  
 BEE developed an online portal 
called PAT Net portal and D-CRM 
portal for online trading of 
ESCerts 
  
 Eol for empanelment of 
Participating Financial Institutions 
under Partial Risk Guarantee 
Fund for Energy Efficiency 
(PRGFEE) was floated in October 
2015 
   Training manuals for energy 
efficiency financing in India and 
Success stories for Energy 
efficiency 
Projects financed in India was 
  launched. Normalization documents 
for all the sectors under PAT 
cycle –I were launched. 
 Regional workshops were 
conducted for the capacity 
building of the DCs / SDAs / 
AEAs for hand -holding them to 
understand the va rious pro-forma 
and other related documents 
3 2016 - 
17 
 PATCycle—IInotifiedvideS.0. 
1264 (E) on 31st March, 2016. 
   Regional Workshops were held at 
5 locations across the country. 
 The pro-forma/normalization 
documents are being prepared by 
BEE for the three new sectors  
notified in PAT Cycle – II. 
  
 The amendment to the Energy 
Conservation Rules, 2012 were 
made and they were notified on 
30th March, 2016. 

 
35 
 
 
   The regulations for trading of 
ESCerts were notified in the year 
2016. The procedure for trading 
of ESCerts as well as fee for 
trading of ESCerts were approved 
by CERC in February -March 
2017. 
   The Rules for Partial Risk 
Guarantee Fund for Energy 
Efficiency (PRGFEE) under 
Framework for Energy Efficient  
Economic Development (FEEED) 
were notified in 26th May 2016 
   The Rules for Venture Capital 
Fund for Energy Efficiency 
(VCFEE)under Framework for 
Energy Efficient Economic 
Development (FEEED) were 
notified on in March 2017 
   The Operations Manual for 
PRGFEE was launched in 
October 2016 
   Market assessment for 
  PRGFEE and VCFEE
 were launched 
 Baseline verification audit was 
carried out for identification of 
new DCs under PAT scheme 
4 2017 - 
18 
 PAT cycle —III was launched in 
the year 2017 where 116 DCs 
were notified  from the existing 
sectors of 
PAT scheme. 

 
36 
 
 
   PAT cycle  – IV was notified in 
March 2018 in which 109 DCs 
from existing sectors and two new 
sectors of PAT i.e. 
Petrochemicals and Commercial 
Buildings (Hotels) were notified. 
   The trading of ESCerts was 
launched by BEE, MoP in 
September 2017. A total volume 
of 12.98 lakhs of ESCerts were 
traded in 17 trading sessions 
leading to a business of about Rs. 
100 Crores. 
   Training workshops for individuals 
from banks/NBFCsonEE 
financing was launched. 
   Guidelines for financing EE 
projects in India were launched. 
Achievements under PAT scheme 
were also launched in September 
2017. 
   Regional workshops were 
conducted for  the capacity 
building of the DCs / SDAs / 
AEAs for hand - holding them to 
understand the various pro -forma 
and other related documents. 
   Baseline verification audit was 
carried out  for identification of 
new DCs under PAT scheme 
5 2018 - 
19 
 Baseline verification audit was 
carried out for identification of 
new DCs under PAT scheme 
 Check-verification of 36DCsof PAT 

 
37 
 
 
  cycle–I was carried out by BEE 
   The National Mission for 
Enhanced Energy Efficiency 
(NMEEE) was revised by BEE as 
"Roadmap of Sustainable and 
Holistic Approach to National 
Energy Efficiency “(ROSHANEE)” 
in order to enhance the existing 
programme and take into account 
all the existing initiatives as well 
as new initiatives which could 
help in fulfilling the commitments 
made under the NUCs on a 
mission mode. Subsequently, a 
stakeholder consultation meeting 
was also convened in August 
2018 for further discussion on the 
ROSHANEE document. 
   Under this, over 650 officials 
from72 banks / NBFCs were 
trained on  EE financing. Since 
2015-2019, 28 workshops have 
been successfully conducted 
under Energy Efficiency 
Financing Platform (EEFP) 
   The outcome and evaluation 
study of PAT cycle —I was 
released by the Hon'ble Minister 
of Power in a workshop in 
September 2018 where the CEOs 
of the units under PAT cycle —I, 
heads of the State Designated 
Agencies and other stakeholders 
had participated. 
   In order  to build the capacity  of 
DCs, SDAs and AEAs, around 12 
regional workshops were 
conducted by BEE 

 
38 
 
 
   In order to build the capacity of 
AEAs, BEE has conducted 2 
training workshops for fertilizer 
and cement sector. 
   The Request for Proposal (RfP) 
for conducting feasibility study for 
inclusion of new sectors under 
PAT scheme was released by 
BEE. 
 The enforcement manual for 
carrying 
  Out adjudication under PAT 
scheme has been developed by 
BEE. 
 PAT Cycle —V has commenced  
from April 2019 in  which 110 DCs 
from the existing sectors of PAT 
scheme have been notified. 
 An amendment to Energy 
Conservation Rules (PAT Rules) 
has 
beennotifiedon26thApril2018vide 
G.S.R 409(E). 
 10 MoUs were signed by BEE 
with PAT sectors for adoption of 
ISO 50001. 
 Identification 10 no. of Thermal 
Power Plants for mapping 
exercise has been completed. 
 Revision in PAT targets for  
DISCOM sector under PAT 
scheme was notified vide S.O. 
5045 (E) in October 2018. 
 Pro-forma and Monitoring & 
Verification Guidelines for 
Railway and Refinery sector 
under PAT were developed in 
February 2019 

 
39 
 
 
6 2019 - 
20 
 Baseline verification audit was 
carried out for identification of 
new DCs under PAT scheme. 
Baseline verification was carried 
out for about 230 DCs. 
 The first phase of Check -
verification of36DCsofPATcycle –
IIhasbeen carried out by BEE. 
Second phase of check -
verification of DCs of PAT cycle – 
II is under process. 
 The National Mission fo r 
Enhanced Energy Efficiency 
(NMEEE) was revised by BEE as 
" Roadmap of Sustainable and 
Holistic Approach to National 
Energy Efficiency (ROSHANEE)" 
in order to enhance the existing 
programme and take into account 
all the existing initiatives as well 
as new  initiatives which could 
help in fulfilling the commitments 
  made under the NDCs on a mission 
mode. ROSHANEE document 
was released on 14th May 2019 
by Secretary (MoP). 
   The outcome and evaluation 
study of PAT cycle – II has been 
carried out by BEE. The same is 
under publication. BEE had also 
released the revised Monitoring 
&Verification guidelines. 
   In order to build the capacity  of 
DCs, SDAs and AEAs, around 30 
regional workshops and webinars 
were conducted by BEE 

 
40 
 
 
   In order to build the capacity of 
AEAs, BEE has conducted 2 
training workshops for fertilizer 
and cement sector. 
   Feasibility study for five sectors 
namely Chemicals, Glass, Sugar, 
Ceramics, Non -Ferrous Metals 
(Zinc and Copper) has been 
completed by BEE. 
   PAT Cycle – VI has commenced 
from April 2020 in which 135 DCs 
have been notified with an overall 
energy saving target of 1.277 
MTOE 
   Monitoring & Verification of DCs 
of PAT Cycle – II has been 
completed by BEE for 621 DCs 
  
 Out of the 10 industries that were 
selected for implementation of 
ISO 50001, implementation in 9  
industries were completed. 
   For energy mapping of Thermal 
Power Plants, 10 industries were 
selected. The same has been 
completed for the selected 10 
DCs. 
   Multimedia tutorials  for 
demonstration  of
 Energy 
Management Systems for PAT 
  Sectors have been developed by 
BEE. 

 
41 
 
 
   For energy mapping of Thermal 
Power Plants, 39 industries were 
selected. Draft Reports were 
received from 37 industries out of 
the selected 39 industries. 
   Impact assessment study for the 
initiatives under NMEEE has 
been completed by BEE. 
 Verification of performance of 
DCs under PAT cycle – II resulted 
into energy savings of about 
13.28MTOE. 
   Meeting conducted with ECCJ 
and the action plan for 
dissemination of EC Guideline 
and EM Manual were finalized 
7 2020 - 
21 
 Baseline verification audit was 
carried out for identification of 
new DCs under PAT scheme. 
Baseline verification was carried 
out for about 
260 DCs. Further, Baseline 
verifications are being carried for 
60 DCs of DISCOM sector and 
28 DCs of railway sector. 
   PAT cycle – VI was notified vide 
Gazette Notification S.O. 1254 (E) 
dated 13th April, 2020. Under 
PAT cycle —VI, 117 new DCs 
and 18 old DCs have been given 
targets to reduce  their specific 
energy 
consumptions. 
   The first phase of Check -
verification 
of36DCsofPATcyclehasbeen 
carried out by BEE. In the second 
phase, check – verification has 
been carried out for 28 DCs of 
PAT cycle – II. The third phase of 
the same for1 DC is under  

 
42 
 
 
process. 
 Monitoring & Verification of DCs 
of PAT cycle —III has been 
completed 
by BEE. Finalization of
 energy 
  savings achieved from the 
implementation of PAT cycle-III is 
under process. 
   BEE has undertaken potential 
assessment study in sectors 
namely Cement,  Pulp & Paper, 
Textile, Chlor Alkali, Aluminium 
and Sponge Iron. The aim of such 
study was identification of further 
potential that the  Designated 
Consumers possess to improve 
energy efficiency where the 
possible m easures for energy 
efficiency have already been 
undertaken in the previous PAT 
cycles. 
   BEE had initiated a study in order 
to determine the targets based on 
India's Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDCs) in industrial 
sectors and  other establishments 
till 2030. The report is under 
approval of the Competent 
Authority of BEE. 
   For finalization of targets  for PAT 
cycle —VII, Technical Committee 
meetings for sectors namely Chlor 
Alkali, Fertilizer, DISCOMs, Iron & 
Steel, Cement, Textile and 
Railways under PAT scheme 
were conducted. 

 
43 
 
 
   Notification of PAT cycle —VII for 
the period 2021 -22 to 2023 -24 is 
under process. It is envisaged 
that under PAT cycle – VII, 509 
Designated Consumers from 
sectors namely Thermal Power 
Plant, Iron & Steel,  Textile, 
Cement, Pulp & Paper, Railways, 
Chlor Alkali, Aluminium and 
DISCOM will be noti fied with  an 
overall reduction target of 2.81% 
in all the above sectors except 
DISCOM. The overall reduction 
target for DISCOM sector is 
envisaged to be about 6% upon 
implementation of PAT cycle —
VII 
   The Feasibility study (Phase-11)to 
estimate the distribution of energy 
consumption and to
 create a 
  threshold level of energy 
consumption in another ten nos. 
of energy intensive sectors and 
other establishment namely "Port 
Trust, Dairy, Transport, Edible 
Oils, Breweries & Distillery, 
Beverages, Food Processing, 
Cold Storage, Refractories & 
Heavy Engineering 
Manufacturing" is under progress 
 BEE has also initiated a study in 
petrochemical sector. The aim of  
such study is to identify the other 
petrochemical product to be 
include in PAT scheme 
 The outcome and evaluation 
study of PAT cycle —II was 
released in on1st March 2021 by 
the Hon'ble Minister. User 
manuals for key stakeholders  
under PAT scheme have been 

 
44 
 
 
developed and released on 1st 
March 2021 by the Hon'ble 
Minister 
 In order  to build the capacity  of 
DCs, SDAs and AEAs and other 
stakeholders, around 20 
workshops and webinars / training 
programmes / meetings were 
conducted by BEE 
 
 
 Implementation of ISO 50001 has  
been completed in 10 selected 
DCs under PAT scheme. 
 Capacity building programmes 
have been conducted by BEE for 
Designated Consumers already 
notified under PAT schemes for 
Adoption of IT, loT (Internet of 
Things), smart equipment and 
industry 4.0 applications. 
 As required under the Energy 
Conservation Rules, 2012 (PAT 
Rules) to notify the price of one 
metric tonne of oil equivalent.  
Bureau of Energy Efficiency vide 
notificationG.S.R.779 (E) dated 
14th December 2020 has notified 
that the 
Value of permetrictonne of oil 
   equivalent of energy consumed 
as eighteen thousand four 
hundred and two  rupees only for 
the year 2018-19. 
 
 Notification of 
amendment for 
reducing threshold 
and inclusion of new 
DCs 
 Notification issued in June 2020 
for inclusion  of 2 new Railway 
Production Units under PAT and 
also reduced threshold for 
workshops of Indian Railways to 
having total annual energy 
consumption of 750 MTOE and 
above. 

 
45 
 
 
 Notification was issued in  
September, 2020 under DISCOM 
sector and the threshold 
amended as "Those entities 
having issued distribution license 
by State/Joint Electricity 
Regulatory Commission under the 
Electricity Act, 2003(36of 2003)" 
 Notification for 
regulations for 
Energy Audit and 
accounting in 
DISCOMs. 
 For prompt and accurate 
accounting of the Energy inflows 
at various voltage levels of the 
network and the subsequent 
energy consumption by the end 
customers, draft regulations for 
Energy Audit and accounting in 
DISCOMs were notified, final 
notification is under process. 
 
Trading ofESCerts 
 Procedure for trading 
of Energy Saving 
Certificates 
(ESCerts) 
 The Detailed Procedure for 
Transaction of Energy Savings 
Certificates was approved by the 
CERC in the year 2017 after 
which trading of ESCerts had 
commenced for the first cycle  of 
PAT. Further, Bureau of Energy 
Efficiency had proposed 
modification in the said 
procedures to accommodate 
changes in light of the 
experiences of PAT cycle – I 
which have also been approved 
by CERC in June 2021. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 13 
National Mission on Enhanced Energy Efficiency 
The Committee note that the objective of the Mission is to upscale the efforts 
to unlock the market for energy efficiency which is estimated to be around 
74,000 crore and help achieve total avoided capacity addition of 19,598 MW, 
fuel savings of around 23 million tonnes per year and greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions reductions of 98.55 million tonnes per year at its full implementation 
stage. To achieve its aim, NMEBE spells out four initiatives to enhance 
energy efficiency in energy intensive industries. 
The first initiative is Perform Achieve and Trade Scheme (PAT) scheme 
providing for mandatory energy saving targets for Energy Intensive industries. 

 
46 
 
 
The Committee note that the targets set under this have broadly been 
achieved and 8.67 million tonnes oil equivalent (MTOE) saved while CO2 
mitigation was of the order of 30 million tonnes. 
The Committee, however, feel that the targets set under PAT cycle I were 
modest and that was the reason they were achieved in spite of less financial 
allocation and utilisation. PAT cycle II and III covering the period 2016 -19 and 
2017-20 respectively expands the vertical as well as horizontal coverage of 
the scheme. The Committee feel that the focus of the scheme is on 
incrementally reducing energy consumption in industries that are energy 
intensive. The Committee recommend for giving emphasis to R&D for energy 
efficient technologies for which adequate investment is required. The 
Committee also recommend to incentivize start -ups to encourage t hem to 
come to solar energy sector which would help in bringing 
innovations to this field. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
For supporting R&D for energy efficient technologies, BEE has provided financial 
assistance to National Physical Laboratory (NPL) for setting up of reference lab for 
LEDs and Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) for setting up of labs for testing 
and calibration facilities for LEDs and LED lighting systems. 
 Support for R&D to customize the induction cook stove for Indian cooking 
system has been initiated in IIT Gandhi Nagar and Guwahati through Central 
PowerResearch Institute (CPRI). 
 For larger uptake of innovative technologies in energy intensive sectors under 
the Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT) scheme, proposal for demonstration of 
such technologies is under process. 
 Proposal for R&D in Electric Mobility such as drivetrains, batteries and 
V2G technologies. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 16 
 
National Water Mission 
 
The Committee note that National Water Mission (NWM) is one of the key missions 
under the NAPCC as water is likely to suffer most from adverse impact of climate 
change. Water quality and availability will be impacted due to higher incidence of 
floods and droughts, groundwater recharge will be impacted and rising sea level will 
threaten coastal habitats. The Committee also note that the objectives of the mission 
include conservation of water, minimum wastage and ensuring equitable distribution 
of water throu gh integrated water resources development and management. Major 
components of this Mission are development of comprehensive water database and 
assessment of impact of climate change on water resources, promotion of water 
conservation, augmentation and pres ervation, focused attention to over -exploited 

 
47 
 
 
areas, enhancing water use efficiency by 20 percent, and promotion of basin level 
integrated water resources management. The Committee have been informed that a 
comprehensive exercise to map all the water bodie s in the Country is underway. In 
this connection, the Committee may refer to the Composite Water Management 
Index, 2018 of NITI Aayog, wherein it is stated that data (of water availability), where 
it is available, is often unreliable due to the use of outdated collection techniques and 
methodologies. For example, groundwater data in India is based on an inadequate 
sample of 55,000 wells out of a total 12 million in the country and siloed information 
collection and sharing, especially between States, adds si gnificantly to costs and 
inefficiencies. The Committee strongly emphasize that the real -time data about 
availability of water in the country from all the sources is utmost necessary for a 
sound water planning and as such recommend to review the out -dated techniques 
and methodologies of data collection and prepare a comprehensive realisitic 
database of all water bodies covering entire aquifers, borewells, baolis, ponds, 
ponds/wells which have been abandoned, missing rivers, the dark zones, etc. at the 
earliest. 
  
 Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 For acquisition of real time water level data, Central Water 
Commission(CWC) has proposed to install 1093 new telemetry stations on 
rivers and reservoirs, out of which, 941 telemetry stations have already been 
installed. 
 
 Further, Water Information Management System (WIMS) software has been 
developed as an up gradation and extension of e -SWIS software. WIMS is a 
web-based system for managing data entry, primary data validation, data 
processing, and storage, for surface water and ground water resources. The 
features of WIMS are as under: 
o Based on web applications. 
o Surface as well as ground water data is coming into WIMS. 
o Telemetry Management 
o Data from State and other implementing agencies coming to WIMS. 
o Inclusion of flood forecasting and water quality management 
o Easy access to information 
o Automatic backup procedure. 
o Complete security control over data and functionality 
o Data can be entered from anywhere 
 
 Under India-WRIS project, 7,98,908 water bodies of size more than 0.01 ha 
have been mapped using satellite imageries of 2009 -10. State wise statistics 
of water bodies and its type wise classification is attached as Annexure I 
and Annexure II respectively. 
 

 
48 
 
 
 CWC & ISRO had jointly undertaken the work of development of  Water 
Resources Information System (WRIS) during XI plan. The goal of the 
project was to develop a ‘Single Window Solution’ for all Water resources 
data and information in a standardized National GIS framework for water 
resources assessment, monitoring, p lanning and development, Integrated 
Water Resources Management (IWRM) and to provide foundation for 
advance modelling purpose to all departments, organizations, professionals 
and other stakeholders.  
 
 India WRIS web-portal is being operated as a means of d isseminating water 
resources related data in the public domain for users to search, access, 
visualize, understand and analyze the data. The data collection, generation 
and presentation into the portal are continuous activities. These data had 
been collecte d from CWC offices, State WRD/Irrigation 
department/Electricity Boards and other Govt. of India departments like 
CGWB, IMD, Survey of India etc. 
 
 The database is generated on 1:50000 scale & it has 108 GIS layers broadly 
grouped under five heads: 1) Waters hed Atlas, 2) Administrative layers, 3) 
Water resources projects, 4) Thematic layers and 5) Environmental data. 
The major GIS layer generated are basin/sub -basin/watershed, river 
network, canal network, water body, major and medium irrigation project 
(dam, barrage etc.), road network, town and village extent, CWC HO network 
and CGWB borewell data. The data in the web -portal is arranged in the 12 
major information systems which were further divided into 36 sub-information 
systems. 
 
 National Water Resources Information Centre (NWIC) has taken up the task 
of maintenance, updation, collation and dissemination of water data and 
information through the India -WRIS web portal. (link to web portal 
https://indiawris.gov.in/wris/#/) 
 
 Further, as per 5th MI Census with  Reference Year 2013 -14, the total 
number of Water Bodies used for Minor Irrigation are 5,16,303 and the 
details (State-wise) of the same are enclosed as Annexure III. 
 
 Central Ground Water Board has reported that the groundwater levels are 
monitored four times a year, viz., April/May, August, November & January. 
Groundwater quality monitoring is carried out once a year during April/May 
(pre-monsoon period). In case of State agencies, the frequency of monitoring 
of water level varies from State to State, wh ich may be bi-annually, quarterly 
or monthly. Some states, like Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Telangana, 
Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Kerala & Gujarat are monitoring groundwater level at a 
high frequency (one/two times a day) through Digital Water Level Recorders 
(DWLRs) and data is acquired through telemetry. In order to strengthen the 

 
49 
 
 
monitoring program, under National Hydrology Project, which is a World 
Bank aided project, most of the state agencies and central agency (CGWB) 
are proposing to install DWLRs and acquire data through telemetry. 
 
 The water level would be monitored by DWLRs and transmitted to various 
data centres of State and CGWB and thereafter transmitted to Water 
Resources Information System (WIMS). Efforts are being made to provide a 
common platform  for maintaining database under NHP and for data 
dissemination through India - Water Resources Information System (India -
WRIS). The manual data collection will continue till the automatic 
measurement network is strengthened with higher requisite numbers so as 
to make the monitoring more robust. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 17 
 
The Committee have been apprised that aquifer mapping is going on and the target 
for XII Plan is 0.9 million sq.km for XII Plan out of 2.3 million sq.km in the 8 States, 
Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Tamil 
Nadu and Bundelkhand areas of UP/MP. Out of the target of mapping of 8.89 lakhs 
sq.km, 6.31 lakh sq.km could be mapped upto March, 2017. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the present status of mapping in these States. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 Central Ground Water Board reported that out of the total geographical area 
of nearly 33 lakh sq. km of the country, an area of -25 lakh sq. km map able 
area has been identified to be cover ed under Aquifer Mapping programme. 
So far (up to March 2020), nearly 13 lakh sq. km area of the country has 
been covered under Aquifer Mapping and the remaining nearly 12 lakh sq. 
km is envisaged to be covered during 2020-23. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 18 
 
The data furnished by the Ministry with regard to financial allocation and expenditure 
indicates a dismal performance of the National Water Mission. During the years 
2013-14 to 2016-17, whereas ₹195 crore were allocated at Budget Estimates stage, 
the allocations were drastically reduced to ₹17.45 crore at RE stage which too could 
not be utilised fully, expenditure being just ₹13.22 crore. The very poor position of 
financial achievement is indicative of the low performance of the mission during 
these years. Besides the financial allocations at budget estimates stage are being 
reduced year after year, the allocation of ₹110 crore during the year 2013 -14 came 
down to ₹15 crore during the year 2017 - 18. The Committee are not able to 
comprehend the poor financial  achievement particularly when the problems related 
to water are increasing year after year, the number of over -exploited Blocks 
increasing from 802 during 2009 to 1034 during 2013, the critical Blocks increasing 

 
50 
 
 
from 169 to 253, semi -critical Blocks incre asing from 523 to 681 and Saline Blocks 
rising from 71 to 96 during this period. Not only that as per Government’s data, there 
is a water scarcity of 1000 metre/person/year, the per capita water availability is 
constantly decreasing with 5000 m3/year durin g 1951 to 1545 during 2011 and the 
expected further decline is to 1140 by the year 2051. The Committee take strong 
exception to the way such an important mission related to water is functioning as is 
apparent from the status of financial achievement and wo uld like the Government to 
analyse the performance of the mission and take all the desired corrective action to 
address the various areas related to water availability and quality in various 
States/UTs. 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 The reasons for low bud getary allocation and less expenditure in the 
National Water Mission during the previous years are as follows. National 
Water Mission was constituted as a mission to implement the goals on a 
Mission mode throughout the country. However, NWM still functions  as a 
wing of the Ministry. Lack of administrative and financial powers to the NWM 
has been one of the major bottlenecks in the smooth and independent 
functioning of the mission across India. Absence of full time Mission Director 
till recently coupled with  unavailability of regular officers/staffs also added to 
slow implementation of the programme "National Water Mission". All these 
factors added to substantial reduction in the budget allocations to the NWM 
and resultantly less expenditure due to which a nu mber of goals related 
activities could not be implemented. 
 
 Ministry has taken action to post full time Mission Director in the NWM and 
recently an Additional Secretary level officer has been posted as Mission 
Director of National Water Mission. Besides, o fficers of Central Secretariat 
Service and Central Staffing Scheme of the level of Deputy Secretary/ 
Director have been posted in the Mission. In addition, couple of Consultants/ 
Young Professionals, specialized in subject matters, has been appointed to 
deal with the technical matters. 
 
 NWM has been encouraging the technical team consisting of 
Consultants/Young Professionals to undertake research on the existing 
programs/polices, evaluate emerging trends/best practices in the global 
scenario, and policy dis course. This would lead to policy oriented research 
with practical implications on NWM's formulation and implementation of 
future programs/policies regarding water governance in India. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 19 
 
The Committee note that the targets of t he mission include promotion of citizen and 
state actions for water conservation, augmentation and preservation and focused 
attention to vulnerable areas including over -exploited areas. Also, State Specific 

 
51 
 
 
Action Plans (SSAP) for water sector covering irr igation, agriculture, domestic water 
supply, industrial water supply and waste water utilization in respect of all the 
States/UTs are being prepared. The Committee, however, note that there is no 
mention of people centric programmes and benefits and promot ion of traditional 
knowledge of water conservation existing in the Country in the mission documents. 
The Committee is of the view that various regions in the Country have well 
developed and effective scientific traditional systems of water conservation sui ted to 
their areas and the mission needs to benefit from traditional knowledge. The 
Committee recommend for restoring/reclaiming water bodies in cities as they act as 
sponges at the time of excess rain and store water for supply when there is no rain. 
  
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 The Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies Scheme 
under PMKSY aims at restoring irrigation potential by improvement and 
restoration of water bodies along with other multiple objectives such as 
enhancing the tank storage capacity, ground water recharge, increased 
availability of drinking water, improvement of catchment of tank commands 
etc. It covers rural water bodies having minimum water spread area of 5.0 
hectare and urban water bodies having water spread a rea from 2.0 hectare 
to 10.0 hectare. 
 
 Under the Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies 
scheme, since 12th plan onwards, 2228 water bodies in cluster schemes are 
ongoing with an estimated cost of Rs.1914.86 crore. Central Assistance (CA) 
of Rs.469.68 crore has been released to states up to   August, 2021. Further, 
1549 water bodies have been reported to be completed up to August, 2021. 
Target irrigation potential restoration planned from these schemes is 1.89 
lakh hectare and out of this, 1 .104 lakh hectare is reported to be restored till 
August, 2021. In the current financial year,  no release has been made under 
RRR of Water Bodies schemes. 
 
 One of the strategies specified in the Mission Document of the National 
Water Mission include 'promo tion of traditional systems of water 
conservation. 
 
 Under the aforesaid strategy, NWM advocates restoration/ reclamation of 
water bodies, particularly the traditional system of water conservation. 
Keeping in view the need to sensitize the stakeholders to r estore and 
preserve such bodies, NWM has gathered information of about 100 unique 
step wells across the country is in the process of compilation of a book which 
will not only include photographs and details of step wells but also the 
precise GPS coordinates of their locations. 
 

 
52 
 
 
 The “Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain” campaign was launched by Hon’ble 
Prime Minister on 22 March 2021, the World Water Day and is being taken 
up in all the districts (rural as well as urban areas) covering entire country 
during the pre-monsoon and monsoon period. The campaign period is from 
March 22, 2021 to November 30, 2021 - the active monsoon period in the 
country. 
 
 One of the five focused interventions of “Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain” 
campaign includes renovation of tr aditional water bodies. Accordingly, under 
“Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain” campaign, Nation Water Mission has 
requested all the states and union territories to take up the work of 
renovation of traditional water bodies.  
 
 As per the information upload ed by Central Ministries/Departments on the 
“JSA: CTR” portal, around 1,16,639 traditional water bodies have been 
renovated during the period of 22nd March 2021 to 19.09.2021.  
 
 A project is being funded by National Water Mission (NWM) titled "Hydro -
geological Assessment and Socio -Economic Implications of Depleting Water 
Resources in Nainital" submitted by CEDAR (Centre for Ecology 
Development and Research), in collaboration with IIT (Indian Institute of 
Technology, Roorkee) and Forest Research Institute, D ehradun. The project 
will help in rejuvenation and restoration of Nainital Lake. The project will 
achieve data sharing, research sharing, first city repository for urban water, 
and natural environment, formed in such a way that other cities could 
participate or adapt the mechanism for future. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 20 
 
The Committee note that as per the data maintained by the Central Ground water 
Board, 85 percent of the rural population uses groundwater for drinking and other 
domestic purposes. High co ncentration of fluoride in ground water beyond the 
permissible limit of 1.5 mg/L is a major health problem in India. Due to excess 
fluoride in ground water, a huge rural population is threatened with health hazards of 
Fluorosis. 
 
184 districts in 19 States of the Country are especially vulnerable in this regard. 
Similarly, arsenic contamination is another area of concern. Nitrate contamination is 
mainly from man-made activities. In India, high concentration of nitrate (more than 45 
mg/l) has been found in a large number of districts of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Orissa, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh, the highest 
value being 3080 mg/L found in Bikaner, Rajasthan. The Committee find that there is 
no centralised research centre for checking and preventing the presence of arsenic 
and fluoride contamination of water in the country. The contaminated water has 

 
53 
 
 
resulted in a number of  deaths and affects not only human beings but also animals, 
fishes and horticulture. The Committee take a serious note over lackadaisical 
attitude of the Government in regard to ground water monitoring and recommend 
that immediate steps be taken to set up state of the art research centres in all major 
cities for monitoring of groundwater in all regions of the Country. The Committee also 
recommend to provide sufficient manpower and equipments for the research 
centres. 
  
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 Central Ground Water Board informed that they have offices in all States to 
monitor groundwater levels & its quality. The Regional offices of the Board 
have well equipped chemical laboratories to analyze water samples. 8 of 
CGWB's chemical labs are NABL accredited . CGWB is periodically 
monitoring water quality of groundwater at regional scale in the entire 
country to ascertain the magnitude and extent of ground water 
contamination. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 21 
 
The Committee in their 24th Action Taken Report (16th  Lok Sabha) on the subject 
'Ganga Rejuvenation' pertaining to the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation had expressed serious concern over the way 
different studies on Arsenic are denied funds/support by the different 
Ministries/Departments which include “Studies on genesis of arsenic occurrence in 
Ganga-Brahmaputra basin” by NIH - Roorkee which is awaiting financial approval 
and another study namely “Study on groundwater dynamics and geochemical 
processes of arsenic mobilizat ion in the Middle Ganga aquifers for in -situ arsenic 
remediation” was declined the support on administrative ground. The Committee are 
not able to understand denial of financial support to such an important studies 
related to Arsenic particularly when the budgetary allocations made to the mission 
have remained unutilised and budgetary allocation have been drastically reduced 
year after year, particularly when it is utmost necessary to identify sources to 
conclusively establish the mobilization process which  helps in arsenic release from 
Minerals to groundwater to address the issue of arsenic in water. While reiterating 
their concerns/observations, the Committee would like to be apprised about the 
status of various studies related to arsenic being undertaken in the country and their 
financial and physical achievements status. 
  
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 A meeting of Inter -Ministerial Group for Arsenic Mitigation (IMG) was held 
under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary and Mission Director, 
National Water Mission, Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation on 20.11.2019 to d iscuss the progress 

 
54 
 
 
of concerned agencies – Central and State Governments – in detecting, 
mitigating and remedying the arsenic menace in India. During the meeting, 
following decisions were taken: 
 
i. The multi -sectorial nature of arsenic problem which cuts ac ross the 
dimensions of technology prowess, agricultural sustainability, health risks, 
water-related service provisioning and management, etc. was reiterated. 
ii. The need for enhanced collaboration among concerned ministries / 
departments / states in coproducing and implementing a holistic framework of 
action for introducing transformative outcomes was stressed. 
iii. State representatives were requested to continuously feed information on 
their Department's Integrated Management information System for an updated 
base of knowledge regarding the subject of arsenic in ground water. 
iv. Initiate a national campaign/competition for sourcing innovative technologies 
for supplying arsenic-free drinking water to the people and their livestock. 
  
 The funds provided to the States/UTs under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) by D/o 
Drinking Water and Sanitation can be utilized for taking up schemes in water 
quality-affected areas on priority. Moreover, while allocating the funds under 
JJM to States/UTs, 10% weightage has been given to  population residing in 
habitations affected by chemical pollutants especially Arsenic. 
 
 Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has reported that they have 
conducted an extensive study covering 15000 samples from the extant 
network of National Hydrograph Statio ns in the country and mapped the 
results showing habitats affected by Arsenic contamination based on the 
revised limit of 0.01 mg/I by BIS (IS 1050:1012). 
 
 Under the National Aquifer Mapping Programme, being implemented by 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) , special attention has been given to 
the aspect of arsenic contamination in groundwater. As a special drive, 
CGWB has constructed exploratory wells in arsenic affected parts of the 
States of West Bengal, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh under Aquifer Mapping. The 
arsenic safe deeper aquifer zones have been identified and tapped through 
cement sealing technique. The exploratory wells are handed over to the 
State Government for water supply purposes. 
 
 Physical and financial achievements of exploratory wells construct ed by 
CGWB as part of the special drive in arsenic affected areas of U.P, Bihar 
and West Bengal States under Aquifer Mapping programme is as under: 
  
 

 
55 
 
 
S.I 
No 
Study area No of wells 
exploratory 
wells 
constructed 
Expenditure 
(Rs. in Cr.) 
1 Parts of Ballia and Ghazipur District, Uttar 
Pradesh 
62 16.70 Cr 
2 Parts of Ghazipur district, Uttar Pradesh 97 26.75 Cr 
3 Hoogly district, West Bengal 67 15.69 Cr 
4 Buxar district, Bihar 40 8.60 Cr 
  
 Further, Central Ground Water Board has taken up an in -house R&D study 
on the occurrences and extent of arsenic contamination in Ambagarh Chowki 
block of Rajnandgaon district, Chhattisgarh. 
 
 Also, National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee has taken the following steps 
to mitigate the problem of arsenic contamination: 
 
a. NIH has developed a website (draft) containing information on arsenic 
contamination in India. The link of website (http://nihroorkee.gov.in/arsenic/) 
has been sent to National Water Mission (NWM) for their feedback and 
suggestions. It is also proposed that t he website may be hosted on NWM 
website for its wider dissemination. 
b. NIH has submitted a project proposal for Demand Driven R&D study on 
Arsenic Mitigation in Ganga -Brahmaputra basin with budget estimate of Rs. 
1259.50 lakhs to Indian National Committee on  Ground Water (INCGW) in 
Dec. 2020 and awaiting for approval to start the study in Ganga -Brahmaputra 
basin. 
c. NIH is carrying out two regional studies and the progress of these studies are 
provided below: 
 
1. Title - Hydro-geochemical Evolution and Arsenic Occu rrence in Aquifer 
of Central Ganges Basin 
 This study has been undertaken by NIH under purpose driven study 
(PDS), National Hydrology Project (NHP). The cost of project is Rs. 70 
Lakh out of which 66 lakhs has been spent for achieving the goals of 
the project. The major objectives are: (a) Evaluation of    the controls of 
regional and local hydrology on arsenic contamination through 
monitoring of contaminated aquifer. (b) Evaluation of the mechanism of 
transport of arsenic in geo -environment through a column experiment. 
The study area is Bhojpur district of Bihar where severe arsenic 
problem is reported. The study is under progress and is to be 
completed shortly. The geochemical analyses suggest that rock -water 
interaction is controlling the geochemistry. The chemical results 

 
56 
 
 
revealed high arsenic concentration in the Holocene newer alluvium, 
characterized by various geomorphological features such as meander 
scars and oxbow lake (northern part of district). Arsenic is more 
concentrated in the depth range of 15 -40 meter below ground surface 
in proximity to river Ganga. The arsenic concentration ranged from not 
detected (ND) - 785 ppb with average value of 218 ppb in arsenic 
contaminated areas during pre -monsoon (May, 2019). The study 
suggest that reduction of iro n oxide adsorbed with arsenic is 
responsible for arsenic mobilization in the ground water. Sediment 
chemistry results also indicate that arsenic and iron were found more 
concentrated in the depth range of 10 -20 meter, which support the 
presence of arsenic in groundwater from shallow aquifer consisting 
organic rich clay zone.  
 
2. Title - Future Secular Changes and Remediation of Groundwater Arsenic 
in the Ganga River Basin - FAR GANGA 
 The project FAR GANGA deals with developing a process -based 
understanding of  the vulnerability of complex Ganga river basin 
aquifers to geogenic arsenic pollution. It also addresses, for improved 
public health and wellbeing, the impact of groundwater management 
on secular changes in groundwater arsenic hazard. The project has the 
objectives to i) produce a national risk assessment of shallow 
groundwater arsenic from a geo -statistical model based on carefully 
selected tectonic, geological, geomorphological and climatic variables 
and ii) produce recommendations for the remediation/mi tigation of 
human exposure and health risks arising from current and future 
arsenic prone groundwaters. The project is collating views, knowledge 
and understanding of key stakeholders (both institutional and 
individual) on arsenic hazard and risks in groundwater systems and will 
make recommendations on best practice in selecting and implementing 
remediation/mitigation options. 
 
 The project’s objectives will be achieved in the context of contrasting 
hydrogeological regimes in the upper, middle and lower Ganga. To that 
end, sites for a particular focus of observational studies are spread 
over the states of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal. The 
execution of the study is divided into 7 work packages i) Hazard and 
risk modelling, ii) Remediation strategy – present and future, iii) study 
of urban and rural organics responsible for mobilization of arsenic in 
groundwater, iv) MAR systems, v) contaminant transport through 
Hyporheic zones, vi) Reactive contaminant transport modelling and vii) 
Outreach, impact and s takeholder engagement. These work packages 
are co -managed by the India (NIH, IITR, MCS and IIT -Kgp) and UK 
partners (UoM, UoS, UoB and BGS). 
 

 
57 
 
 
 The key achievements so far are: development of geo -statistical 
models for the spatial distribution of arsenic in groundwater; review of 
various remediation approaches; completion of groundwater arsenic 
mapping across Ballia and across all 38 districts of Bihar, completion of 
groundwater sampling across the city of Patna, progress in the 
installation of field monitori ng (river/groundwater) stations along the 
length of the Ganga and successful running of a series of stakeholder 
events, including in Roorkee, Manchester, Varanasi and Patna. 
 
 In addition to the above, and in consonance with the provision of the 
Operational Guidelines for implementation of JJM, following is also stated 
included in so far as JJM is concerned: 
 
 While allocating funds under JJM to States / UTs, 10% weightage is being 
given to the population residing in habitations affected by chemical contamin ants, 
irrespective of type of geo -genic contaminant. Funds provided to the States under 
JJM to be utilized for taking up schemes in water quality -affected areas on priority. 
Further, up to 2% of the allocation to States/ UTs can be utilized for Water Quali ty 
Monitoring & Surveillance activities. In view of the enhanced allocation under JJM 
and reported utilization in previous years, funds are sufficient. 
 
 In addition, provisioning of potable water supply to water quality -affected 
habitations is a top prior ity under JJM. Efforts are made to ensure safe drinking 
water to all quality -affected villages especially having Arsenic and Fluoride 
contaminations. In case, it takes some time in completing piped water supply 
scheme to provide tap water to every home in quality-affected habitations, purely as 
an interim measure, 8 to 10 litres of water per person per day for drinking and 
cooking by providing treated water from community water purification plants. This 
would provide immediate relief. As a permanent relief States have been further 
asked to provide FHTCs in quality affected habitations from safe sources. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 22 
 
The Committee find that the Composite Water Management Index of NITI Aayog 
mentions about the country facing the worst water c risis in its history with 600 million 
people facing high to extreme water stress, about 2 lakh people dying every year 
due to inadequate access to safe water. What is worrying more, as per the findings 
of the report, is that the crisis is going to get wors e with country’s water demand 
projected to be twice of the available supply by 2030, implying severe water scarcity 
for hundreds of millions of people and an eventual 6 percent loss in the country’s 
GDP. To add to the great gaps between the demand and avai lability of water, inter -
State disagreements are on the rise, with seven major disputes currently raging, 
pointing to the fact that limited frameworks and institutions are in place for national 
water governance, as reported by NITI Aayog in its report. 
 

 
58 
 
 
While taking note of the alarming water scenario as projected by NITI Aayog in its 
report, as stated above, the Committee emphasize for taking urgent and immediate 
actions on various fronts. For effective water management, there is a need for a well 
drafted and well regulated National Water use Policy which clearly delineate the use 
of water by different sectors viz. agriculture, industry, domestic etc. The Committee 
further note that so far as water consumption is concerned, ways of living in the city 
are unsustainable because of excessive wastage of water. In some States, wastage 
of water is rampant because of faulty, cropping patterns and also because free 
electricity and water is being provided. The NAPCC sets a goal of a 20 percent 
improvement in water use efficiency through pricing and other measures to deal with 
water scarcity. 
 
The importance of clean water has been highlighted in the Atharva Veda, as quoted 
in the 15th report of the Committee on the subject ‘Ganga Rejuvenation’. Even at the 
cost of bei ng repetitive, the Committee would again like to quote these hymns to 
emphasize for the need of clean water for our masses: 
 
"As mothers always bring happiness to their children, in the same manner. The 
streams, nourishers of mankind, flow incessantly, add ing milk and honey to their 
waters all the way". 
 
"O learned persons, may you know that there is ambrosia in the waters; there is 
healing balm in them, and there are medicinal herbs; know this, and by their proper 
use become vigorous like horses and kine." 
 
"O elemental waters, may you behold me with an auspicious glance; may you touch 
my skin with your body. Dripping luster, glittering here and that are purifying, may 
those elemental waters be gracious and pleasing to us". 
 
"The worms, that are found in the hilly regions, in the forests, inside the animals' and 
in waters, and that have entered' our bodies, I hereby destroy their entire 
generation". 
 
"I bring her these waters, free from wasteful disease. (consumption) - and destroyers 
of the wasteful disease. I enter these houses with the-, never-dying fire". 
 
Its life -giving and healing qualities are evident from the following description in 
Rajanirghanta (300 AD) “The qualities of Ganga water are: Coolness, sweetness, 
transparency, high tonic property, who lesomeness, potability, ability to remove evils, 
ability to resuscitate from swoon caused by dehydration, digestive property and 
ability to retain wisdom”: 
 
Scriptures cautioned against misusing the Ganga river. For instance, thirteen types 
of human actions: (1) defecation, (2) gargling, (3) throwing of used floral offerings, 

 
59 
 
 
(4) rubbing of filth, (5) flowing bodies (human or animal), (6) frolicking; (7) 
acceptance of donations; (8) obscenity; (9) considering other shrines to be superior, 
(10) praising othe r shrines, (11) discarding garments; (12) bathing, and (13) making 
noise were prohibited. 
 
The Committee, therefore strongly recommend for working on a mission mode by all 
the concerned Government Ministries/Departments/Organisations of the Union and 
State Governments so as to ensure clean water free from all pollutants such as 
arsenic, fluoride, salinity, heavy metals (Lead, Cadmium, Zinc, Mercury), pesticides, 
etc. for our large population. On water conservation, the Committee may like to 
emphasize that every drop of water saved is the water produced and as such all the 
desired initiatives, which include recharging of under -ground water sources; 
enhancing storage capacity both above and below ground; giving emphasis on 
storage of rain water; incentivizing water efficient technologies; efficiencies of 
irrigation systems; plugging leakages; etc. should be taken with a sense of urgency. 
Further for achieving water use efficiency, free water should be provided upto a limit 
for all the sectors. Above all there i s a need for sensitizing the people at large about 
the alarming situation with regard to water so as to involve them in the Mission. 
  
Action Taken by the Ministry 
  
(1) Ensuring water free from pollutants:  
 
i. Water being State subject, initiatives on water  management including 
conservation and augmentation of ground water in the country is 
primarily a States' responsibility. 
  
ii. National Water Mission (National Water Mission) is working in close 
coordination with Central Ground Water Board, National Institute  of 
Hydrology, Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation, Central 
Ministries and various State Governments on action plan to ensure 
clean water free from all pollutants such as fluoride, arsenic, salinity, 
heavy metals (Lead, Cadmium, Zinc and Mercury). 
 
iii. National Water Mission has requested Ministry of Environment, Forest 
& Climate Change; Ministry of Health and Family Welfare; Central 
Ground Water Board; NIH and all States to submit periodic as well as 
detailed status report on water quality improvement pr ograms/projects 
to ensure pollutant free water availability for water users. 
 
iv. NWM emphasizes operation and maintenance of pollutant removal 
schemes, especially through effective community participation. 
 

 
60 
 
 
v. NWM has requested all concerned organizations to provide 
information on the steps taken to update water quality monitoring and 
management standards in India. 
 
vi. The funds provided to the States/UTs under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
by D/o DWS can be utilized for taking up schemes in water quality -
affected areas on priority. Moreover, while allocating the funds under 
JJM to States/UTs, 10% weightage has been given to population 
residing in habitations affected by chemical pollutants especially 
Arsenic. 
 
(2) Initiatives on various aspects of Water Conservation:  
 
i. Government of India has launched Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) in two 
phases, 1st July to 15th September, 2019 and 1st October to 30th 
November, 2019 under which officers, groundwater experts and 
scientists from the Government of India have worked with state and 
district officials in 256 water -stressed districts of the country to 
promote water conservation and water resource management by 
focusing on accelerated implementation of five targets innervations, 
viz. water conservation & rainwater harvesting, renova tion of 
traditional and other water bodies/tanks, reuse and recharge of bore 
wells, watershed development and intensive afforestation. 
 
ii. National Water Mission's campaign "Catch the Rain" is to nudge the 
states and stake- holders to create appropriate Rain Water Harvesting 
Structures (RWHS) suitable to the climatic conditions and sub -soil 
strata i.e. before and during the onset of monsoon. Under this 
campaign, drives to make check dams, water harvesting pits, rooftop 
RWHS etc; removal of encroachments and de -silting of tanks to 
increase their storage capacity; removal of obstructions in the 
channels which bring water to them from the catchment areas etc.; 
repairs to step-wells and using defunct bore-wells and unused wells to 
put water back to aquifers etc. ar e to be taken up with active 
participation of the people. NWM has written to all States/ UTs, 
Central Armed Police Forces, Ministry of Defense, Chairman Railway 
Board, prestigious educational institutions like IIMs & IITs requesting 
to take steps to ensure  appropriate rain water harvesting and artificial 
recharge structures before the onset of monsoon season. 
 
iii. The “Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain” campaign was launched by 
Hon’ble Prime Minister on 22 March 2021, the World Water Day and 
is being taken up in all the districts (rural as well as urban areas) 
covering entire country during the pre -monsoon and monsoon period. 

 
61 
 
 
The campaign period is from March 22, 2021 to November 30, 2021 - 
the active monsoon period in the country. 
 
a) The five major interventions  of the campaign include water conservation & 
rainwater harvesting; renovation of traditional and other water bodies/ 
tanks; reuse and recharge of bore wells; watershed development; and 
intensive afforestation.  
 
b) Other activities proposed to be taken up du ring the campaign include roof -
top RWHS on all buildings - with priority for government buildings, water 
harvesting pits in all compounds, maintenance of old/ building of new check 
dams/ponds; enumerating, geo -tagging and making inventory of all water 
bodies; preparation of scientific plans for water conservation, removal of 
encroachments of tanks/lakes, de -silting of tanks to increase their storage 
capacity, removal of obstructions in their channels, repairs to traditional 
step-wells and other RWHS, use def unct bores/unused wells to recharge 
aquifers, rejuvenation of small rivers and rivulets, revival of wetlands and 
protection of flood -bank. The State Governments have been requested to 
set up ‘Jal Shakti Kendras’ (JSKs) in all district headquarters. These J SKs 
will act as “knowledge centers” for disseminating information related to 
water, techniques for water conservation and water saving. It will provide 
technical guidance to local people as well as to the district administration.  
  
iv. National Water Policy ( 2012) advocates conservation, promotion and 
protection of water. The Policy has been forwarded to all States/UTs 
concerned Ministries/Departments of Central Government for 
adoption. 
 
v. In compliance to the decision taken by the Committee of Secretaries, 
an 'Inter- Ministerial Committee' under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(WR, RD & GR) has been constituted to take forward the subject of 
'Push on Water Conservation Related Activities for Optimum 
Utilization of Monsoon Rainfall', The Committee has held several 
meetings and recommendations given by the Committee have been 
implemented. 
 
vi. Ministry has circulated a Model Bill to all the States/UTs to enable 
them to enact suitable ground water legislation for regulation of its 
development, which includes provision of rain water harvesting. So 
far, 15 States/UTs have adopted and implemented the ground water 
legislation on the lines of Model Bill. 
 
vii. Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has prepared a "Master Plan 
for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water — 2013" which inter -alia 
envisages construction of about 1.11 crore artificial 

 
62 
 
 
recharge/Rainwater harvesting structures in urban and rural areas. 
The Master Plan has been circulated to the State Governments for 
implementation. 
 
viii. Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has been con stituted for 
regulation and control of ground water development and management 
in the country. CGWA has issued directives to all States and UTs to 
take measures to promote/adopt artificial recharge to ground water / 
rain water harvesting. It also grants No  Objection Certificates (NOCs) 
for ground water abstraction with mandatory conditions for 
conservation, augmentation and efficient use of ground water. 
 
ix. Central Ground Water Board is implementing "National Aquifer 
Mapping and Management (NAQUIM)" for mappi ng of aquifers, their 
characterization and development of aquifer management plans to 
facilitate sustainable development of ground water resources. Aquifer 
maps and management plans have been shared with the respective 
State Government agencies. 
 
x. Central G round Water Board is also implementing 'Ground Water 
Management and Regulation' scheme in selected over -exploited 
blocks of the aspirational districts on pilot basis. A joint Action Plan 
has been prepared with the Ministry of Rural development for effective 
implementation of water conservation and artificial recharge structures 
in convergence with MGNREGS. Nine water stressed blocks in the 
State of Haryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Telangana, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu have been identified, whe re 
work is in progress. 
 
xi. Best practices of water conservation by various entities including 
private persons, NGOs, PSUs etc. have been compiled and put on the 
website of the Ministry for the benefit of general public. 
xii. Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL), 2016 c irculated by Ministry of 
Urban Development include provisions for rainwater harvesting which 
has been shared with all the States. So far 32 States / UTs have 
adopted the provisions of rainwater harvesting of MBBL-2016. 
 
xiii. Central Government supports construc tion of water harvesting and 
conservation works primarily through Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Pradhan Manta Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana – Watershed Development Component (PMKSY -
WDC). 
 
xiv. Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABHY), a scheme  for sustainable management of 
ground water with community participation, was launched  with the 

 
63 
 
 
goal to demonstrate community -led sustainable ground water 
management which can be taken to scale. It is a Central Sector 
Scheme with an outlay of Rs. 6000 Cr. with 50% loan from the World 
Bank. 
 
a) The scheme is being implemented from April, 2020 for a five year period. 
The major objective of the Scheme is to improve the management of 
groundwater resources in select water stressed areas in identified states 
viz. Gu jarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The areas covered under Atal Bhujal Yojana 
are enclosed as Annexure IV.  
 
b) Atal Jal is targeted at sustainable ground water management, mainly 
through convergence among var ious on -going schemes with the active 
involvement of local communities and stakeholders. This will ensure that in 
the Scheme area, the funds allocated by the Central and State 
governments are spent judiciously to ensure long term sustainability of 
ground water resources. It also aims at bringing about behavioural change 
at the community level through awareness programs and capacity building 
for fostering sustainable ground water management in the participating 
States. 
 
xv. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employme nt Guarantee Scheme 
(MGNREGS) is implemented by the Ministry of Rural Development 
under which various measures for water conservation have been 
undertaken. Water conservation, water harvesting structures (like 
underground dykes, earthen dams, stop dams, ch eck dams & roof top 
rain water harvesting structures), renovation of traditional water 
bodies (including desilting of irrigation tanks & other water bodies) and 
conservation of old step well/baolis are permissible activities under 
MGNREGS. 
 
 
(3) National Water Mission has undertaken following actions for increasing 
Water Use Efficiency: 
 
i. NWM has awarded 26 Base Line studies covering 6 States for 
improving water use efficiency in irrigation sector, to NERILWALAM, 
Assam; WALMTARI, Hyderabad; WALMI, Aurangabad. 
 
ii. NWM has taken up scoping studies through TERI by undertaking 
comprehensive water audit/ benchmarking in two industrial sectors i.e. 
thermal power plants & textile industries for enhancing industrial water 
use efficiency in India. 
 

 
64 
 
 
iii. For developing standards in respect of improving water use efficiency 
in domestic appliances, NWM, in collaboration with Bureau of Indian 
Standard (BIS), is working on efficiency labeling standards for house -
hold appliances like washing machines, sanitary wares & fittings. 
iv. Food & Agriculture Organization (FAO) has come out with 'dual crop 
coefficient' concept replacing 'Single Crop Coefficient' method for 
assessment of crop water requirement, and to plan irrigation 
scheduling. It has also developed several soft tools, such as 
CROPWAT, MABIA app on WEAP software for the same. These 
techniques need to be spread by the training institutes, and absorbed 
by stakeholders. This will enhance water use efficiency further. 
 
v. Issued official circular requesting Ministries & Departments to i nstall 
"aerators" in office toilets & Rain Water Harvesting Systems at their 
office premises. 
 
vi. A workshop on "Improving Water Use Efficiency in Industry" was held 
on 5th March 2020. 
 
vii. ‘Sahi Fasal' campaign was launched by National Water Mission on 
14.11.2019 to nudge farmers in the water stressed areas to grow 
crops which are not water intensive, but use water very efficiently; and 
are economically remunerative; are healthy and nutritious; suited to 
the agro -climatic-hydro characteristics of the area; and ar e 
environmentally friendly. Under Sahi Fasal, series of workshops are 
being organized in the water stressed areas of the country. NWM 
organised workshops on `Sahi Fasal' in Amritsar (on 14.11.2019), 
Aurangabad (on 13.01.2020), New Delhi (on 26 - 27.11.2019) and 
Kurukshetra (on 14.02.2020) where farmers participated 
enthusiastically. Punjab/Haryana has taken steps for crop 
diversification. 
 
(4) Initiatives taken up for sensitizing the people:  
 
i. "National Water Mission Awards" were instituted to encourage and 
incentivize organizations and individuals to conserve and manage 
water, and to recognize excellence in water conservation, efficient 
water use and sustainable water management practices. The awards 
are given in ten categories defined under five goals of NW M.The first 
NWM awards were given on 25.09.2019 to 22 winners. 
 
ii. Periodic Publication/ Webinars/ Seminars: 
 
a)  ‘Water Talk’: A monthly  ‘WATER TALK’  lecture series is an important 
activity undertaken by NWM with the aim to stimulate awareness, build 

 
65 
 
 
capacities of stakeholders and encourage people to become active 
participants sustain life by saving water on earth.   ‘WATER TALK’, the 
lecture series, wherein leading Water experts are invited to present 
inspiring and broadening perspectives on current water issues  in the 
country. So far NWM has organized 30 Water Talks out of which last 18 
talks have been held on virtual platform. 
 
b) ‘Water Tech Talk’: ‘The Water Tech Talk’ series has been initiated in 
October 2020 and has been conducted ever since on the on second F riday 
of every month. These virtual sessions aimed to focus on technological and 
technical advancements, pioneering research and academic excellence 
exhibited by experts in the field on a myriad of themes related to the water 
sector.  
  
c) Dialogue series wit h DMs on “Catch the Rain”: A periodic dialogue series 
has also been started where Collectors/District Magistrates/Commissioners 
and water activist have been invited to share their commendable work in 
their districts to address the water issues. The webinar  series started in 
August 2020.  
 
d) ‘Jal Charcha’ magazine: The monthly magazine of the ministry - ‘Jal 
Charcha ’ is an effort to bring best practices in water sector to the national 
stage and move ahead in the direction of creating water consciousness in 
the minds of the people of the country. Given the vastness of the subject, 
while the theme of the magazine would change with every issue, effective 
management of water resources in an integrated manner will remain at the 
helm.  
 
iii. IEC and Social Media: NWM has prepared IEC materials on water 
harvesting and conservation, which is uploaded in the official website 
of NWM. The link is shared in all meetings to maximize the reach of 
the campaign. A creative agency was also hired to for implementation 
of IEC activitie s with a view to disseminate information about the 
campaign and to sensitize common populace about the campaign. 
National Water Mission is using all social media tools like Facebook, 
Twitter, Instagram, Youtube etc. for disseminating information about 
the campaign with a view to spread awareness about different 
aspects water conservation and for effective public outreach. NWM 
updates the details of water conservation activities on social media 
platforms on regular basis. NWM also upload details of webinars and 
meetings etc. on social media. NWM also hired creative agency to 
promote awareness about JSA:CTR and for sensitization of water 
conservation activities. State Governments, vide letter dated 
16.03.2021, has been requested to take the support of NYKS for  

 
66 
 
 
expanding the outreach of the campaign. MyGoV platform has been 
used to organize quizzes and to take water pledge. 
  
 Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has recently launched 
AMRUT 2.0 with an outlay of 12,77,000 crore. While Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) focussed on providing 
universal coverage of water supply in 500 major cities. AMRUT 2.0 covers all 
statutory towns and aims to make our cities 'water secure'. Following are the 
salient features of AMRUT 2.0 which  are in sync with recommendation of 
National Water Mission:  
 
i. AMRUT 2.0 will promote circular economy of water through development of 
city water balance plan for each city focusing on recycle/reuse of treated 
sewage, rejuvenation of water bodies and water conservation.  
 
ii. Information, Education and Communication (lEC) campaign is proposed to 
spread awareness among masses about conservation of water. Target based 
capacity building program will be conducted for all stakeholders including 
contractors, plumbers, plant operators , students, women etc. to bring greater 
efficiency.  
 
iii. Mission has a reform agenda  with focus on strengthening of urban local 
bodies and water security of the cities. Major reforms include rejuvenation of 
water bodies, rain water harvesting, reducing Non Re venue Water (NRW), 
meeting 40% industrial water demand through recycled used water, dual 
piping system for bulk users through building bye-laws.  
 
iv. Pey Jal Survekshan will be conducted in cities to ascertain equitable 
distribution of water, reuse of wastewa ter and mapping of water bodies with 
regards to quantity and quality of water through a challenge process.  
 
 The mission has been launched by Hon'ble Prime Minister and Mission 
Guidelines will soon be launched by MoHUA. 
  
Recommendation - Para No. 23 
 
National Mission for Green India 
 
The Committee note that the National Mission for Green India aims at protecting, 
restoring and enhancing India’s diminishing forest cover and responding to climate 
change by a combination of adaptation and mitigation measu res. It envisages a 
holistic view of greening and focuses on multiple ecosystem services, especially, 
biodiversity, water, biomass, preserving mangroves, wetlands, critical habitats etc. 
along with carbon sequestration as a co-benefit. ₹2,000 crores for implementation of 

 
67 
 
 
various activities under the mission for 12th plan has been approved by the Cabinet. 
The Committee also note that the mission seeks to increase forest cover to the 
extent of 5 million hectare and improve quality of forests on another 5 mill ion ha and 
also to improve forest based livelihood income of about 3 million households. 
Further, enhanced annual CO2 sequestration by 50 to 60 million tonnes in the year 
2020 is also an objective. The scheme is proposed for a period of 10 years with an 
outlay of ₹60,000 crore. The Committee find that during FY 2017 -18 ₹47.80 crore 
has been allocated for the scheme which is grossly insufficient as the committed 
liability for FY 2015 -16 and 2016 -17 is ₹89.53 crore which is much more than the 
budget allocated . The Committee, therefore, recommend that adequate financial 
allocation be made for the mission so that the activities of the mission are carried out 
more efficiently. 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 Green India Mission (GIM) activities started in the FY 2016-16. So far fund 
amounting to Rs. 455.73 crores have been released under GIM to fourteen 
States namely Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Manipur, Mizoram, Kerala, Karnataka, 
Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Sikkim, West Bengal and Himachal Pradesh and one Union Territory of 
Jammu & Kashmir for carrying out plantation activities in 167151 ha and 
livelihood activities within the GIM Landscapes. 
 GIM has made demand of Rs. 526.86 crores for the year 2021 -22. However, 
Rs. 250.0 crore has  been allocated for the year 2021 -22 which is grossly 
insufficient to meet the Mission's objectives. 
 Therefore, adequate funds need to be allocated for the Mission so that the 
activities of the Mission can be carried out more efficiently. Afforestation is 
critical for ecological restoration of the degraded areas and also to meet 
various national and international commitments. Recognizing the fact that 
around 60 percent of the allocation under GIM goes for wage employment in 
rural sector, the budgetary suppo rt is essential to implement these Schemes. 
However, the Ministry will also take up appropriate other measures in addition 
to the demand for increase in the budgetary allocation. 
 Other stakeholders such as CPSUs, SPSUs. Corporate Sectors, NGOs, 
Institutions will be actively associated in massive tree planting activities 
outside forest area. Further suitable policy measures will be initiated to 
leverage private investment in afforestation and tree planting activities. 
 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 27  
The Comm ittee note that the mission envisages improvements in energy 
efficiency in buildings through extension of the energy conservation building 
code - which addresses the design of new and large commercial buildings to 
optimize their energy demand. The Committ ee are of the view that energy 
conservation building code talks about important things about energy 


 
68 
 
 
efficiency of large buildings such as use of natural light and air for reduced 
energy requirements. The main issue, however, is the enforceability of the 
building code. Enforcing changes in construction through imposition of codes 
may also result in resistance from the people. Moreover, the Committee are of 
the view that as an ancient civilization, our Country has traditional house 
building knowledge and tech nology which are more suited for our needs. All 
the habitats whether in desert habitat, mountain habitat or plain areas, people 
have traditional building system designed for comfortable living and maximum 
use of natural resources like air and water and lo cally available materials. 
Blindly following western technologies and using cement and concrete in 
different habitats result in buildings requiring intensive energy. Therefore, 
building designs in new cities should be environment friendly, energy friendly 
and water friendly. The construction of residential/ commercial buildings 
should be in a way that enables proper cross ventilation and natural light 
which would reduce the use of energy. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
to formulate building code and guidelines of the Mission which maximizes use 
of traditional knowledge and building material in buildings, minimize cutting of 
trees besides promoting our traditional construction technologies through 
institutions like CAPART, HUDCO etc. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) is implementing Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban (PMAY -U) since June 2015 to provide all -
weather pucca house with basic amenities to all eligible urban households of 
the country. Based on the pro ject proposals submitted by States/ Union 
Territories (UTs), as on 31stJuly 2023, 118.90 lakh houses have been 
sanctioned by the Ministry, out of which 112.30 lakh have been grounded and 
76.02 lakh have been completed/ delivered to the beneficiaries. The s cheme 
period of PMAY -U which was earlier upto 31.03.2022, has since been 
extended up to 31.12.2024, except Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) 
vertical of the scheme, to complete all the houses sanctioned without 
changing the funding pattern and implementation methodology. 
To accelerate adoption of innovative and alternative construction 
technologies, to improve the pace and quality of work under PMAY -U and for 
addressing the challenges of rapid urban growth and its attendant 
requirements, a Technology Sub Mission (TSM) has been set up in PMAY -U. 
The sub mission aims to facilitate adoption of modern, innovative and green 
technologies and building materials for faster and quality construction of 
houses. The sub mission, inter alia, works on green buildings us ing natural 
resources, innovative technologies and materials, earthquake and other 
disaster resistant technologies and design. Building Material and Techn010kY 
Promotion Council (BMTPC) has already been working on promoting the use 
of local and traditional knowledge with regard to the construction technologies 
and building material. Further, it is working to develop and operationalize a 


 
69 
 
 
comprehensive and integrated approach for promotion of environment friendly 
and energy efficient innovative building mater ials and construction 
technologies. 
Recommendation - Para No. 28 
The Committee note that at present 30 percent population of the Country lives 
in urban areas which is expected to grow to 40 percent by 2021 and 50 
percent by 2050. The number of motor vehicl es on our roads was 52.37 
million in 2000 which increased to 121.63 million in 2011. The Committee note 
that India is poised for rapid economic growth. Such future growth will largely 
come from economic activities in urban areas as cities today contribute nearly 
65 percent of India's GDP. With increasing urban sprawl, it is estimated that 
by 2030, this figure would reach nearly 70 percent. Nonetheless, economic 
activities would largely depend on mobility of the people dwelling in urban 
areas. Hence, develop ment of cities through prioritizing urban transport is a 
step forward in this direction. Urban Transport is a key urban service that 
imparts efficiency to the city by providing mobility to the workforce and hence 
best productivity. However, the huge number  of vehicles on roads is also 
leading to congestion and pollution. The number of motor vehicles on our 
roads was 52.37 million in 2000 which increased to 121.63 million in 2011. 
The total number of registered motor vehicles in India was 210.02 million as 
on 31.03.2015. As a result of rapid increase in motor vehicles, congestion on 
the road is increasing leading to stress to the commuters and spike in air 
pollution. One of the objectives of the mission is better urban planning and 
modal shift to public transport and making long term transport plan to facilitate 
the growth of medium and small cities in such a way that ensures efficient and 
convenient public transport. 
The Committee note that the Government is implementing AMRUT scheme 
(Atal Mission for Rejuven ation and Urban Transformation) and Smart Cities 
mission under the Sustainable Habitat Mission. AMRUT inter alia aims at 
reducing pollution by switching to public transport or providing facilities for non-
motorised transport whereas the aim of Smart Citie s mission is to provide 
basic infrastructure through convergence with other schemes in selected 100 
cities. The Government is also encouraging public transport through financing 
of buses and BUS Rapid Transit System (BRTS) and Jawaharlal Nehru 
National Urb an Renewal Mission (JnNURM). Metro Rail Projects are being 
implemented in 13 cities of the Country. The Committee are of the view that 
schemes such as AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission are effective schemes for 
promoting public transport but their horizontal coverage is very small. Such 
schemes need to be expanded to other cities also so that the problem could 
be resolved before it is too late. Similarly, the metro rail services should be 
expanded to all cities which have a population of more than a million. The 
Committee also recommend that in major cities multiple modes of transport 
such as local trains, trams should also be promoted. Besides, attention needs 
to be paid to switching over to clean energy for running our vehicles, i.e., cars 


 
70 
 
 
and buses. Manufacture/ use of electric cars needs to be incentivized besides 
giving attention to the infrastructure/ services needed like electrical recharging 
stations. Not only that R&D in solar driven transport like cars and buses should 
be given more emphasis so as to find solar solutions for our transport. For 
covering small distances, dedicated cycle tracks need to be constructed. The 
satellite cities should be linked with the nodal city through rapid transport 
system to avoid congestion in the city centres. All the i nitiatives being taken in 
this regard need to be further emphasized, which certainly would reduce our 
dependence on diesel/petrol thereby saving money and addressing the issue 
of pollution particularly in big cities and metros. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
Urban transport, which is an integral part of urban development, is a State subject. 
Therefore, respective state governments are responsible for planning and 
developing urban transport infrastructure. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA) provides financial assistance to such projects under its policy/guidelines, 
when such proposals are mooted by State Governments subject to feasibility of the 
projects and availability of resources. 
However, in order to deal with the emerging problems of increasein number of 
private vehicles, traffic congestion, travel time uncertainty, air pollution, etc. due to 
rapid urbanization, bas taken certain initiatives which arc enumerated as under: 
vii. MoHUA formulated National Urban Transport Policy in April, 2006. The 
objective of the policy is to ensure accessible, safe, affordable, quick, 
comfortable, reliable and sustainable mobility for all. The policy seeks to 
promote integrated land use and transport. planning, greater use of public 
transport and non -motorized modes of travel and use of cleaner 
technologies. It offers Central Government's financial support for investments 
in public transport, infrastructure for greater use of non -motorized modes of 
transport, construction of parking facilities etc. It enc ourages capacity 
building, innovative financing mechanisms, institutional coordination, private 
sector participation and public awareness and cooperation. 
viii. MoHUA has formulated a National Transit Oriented Development 
(TOD) Policy in May 2017. The objective of this policy is to encourage 
compact mixed land use, which reduces the need for travel and improve 
access to public transport within walkable distance of transit stations. City 
specific strategies and mechanisms arc to be framed by the respective 
Cities/ States for implementation of TOD. 
ix. In order to create an ecosystem for enhancement of metro rail network 
in the country, MoHUA has also formulated the Metro Rail Policy, 2017. As 
per the Metro Rail Policy, 2017 respective State Government/Union Territory 
(UT) is responsible for initiating metro rail projects. The Central Govt. 
considers financial assistance for such projects in cities or urban 

 
71 
 
 
agglomerates, based on feasibility of the proposal and availability of 
resources, as and when posed by the concerne d State Government/ UT 
Govt. policy bridges the much -needed gap for ascertaining and enhancing 
the feasibility of metro rail projects from economic, social and environmental 
perspective. In theMetro Rail Policy, 2017, it has been made mandatory for 
State Governments to include feeder system and multi modal integration in 
proposals of Metro Rail seeking Central assistance. 
x. Under the Urban Transport Planning and Capacity Building Scheme, 
this Ministry provides financial assistance up to for taking up Traffic and 
Transportation Studies, feasibility studies, Comprehensive Mobility Plan 
(CMP), preparation of DPR for Mass Rapid Transit System (NIR'I'S)/ Light 
Rail Transit System (LRTS), which are Initiated by the State 
(Governments/Union Territories/Urban Local Bo dies (limited to 50% in case 
of MRTS). 
xi. A project named “Efficient and Sustainable City Bus Service (ESCBS)" 
supported by the World Bank is under implementation in 4 Cities viz. Bhopal, 
Chandigarh, Jaipur and Mira Bhayandar. The objectives of the project ar e 
(i)strengthening capacity of urban bus service institutions through capacity 
building and training programmes and (ii) assisted cities in preparing and 
implementing demonstration "City Bus Modernisation Projects" and provided 
technical assistance in ITS/  MIS, enhancing fuel efficiency, route and 
business planning. 
xii. To assist the States/ Urban Local Bodies, also extended central 
assistance for creation Of Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS) corridors. 
Presently, a total of about 450 km length is operational in  11 cities and about 
200 km length in 2 other cities are under construction across the country. 
ix. This Ministry has given financial assistance in development of Metro 
Rail projects in cities in the country. With the impetus of Government on 
proliferation of metro system in country, about 860 km of metro rail lines are 
operational in 20 cities and about 1,000 km (including 82 km Delhi -Meerut 
Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS)) arc under construction in various 
cities namely Delhi,Gurugram, Mumbai, Kolkata, B angalore, Chennai, Kochi, 
Nagpur, Ahmedabad, Pune, Gandhinagar, Navi Mumbai, Patna, Surat, Agra, 
Kanpur, Meerut, Bhopal and Indore etc. 
x. The Government has taken initiative to provide faster connectivity with 
the satellite cities around Delhi falling withi n the jurisdiction of National 
Capital Region through construction of RRTS corridors. The first RRTS 
corridor of 82 km length between Delhi & Meerut at estimated cost of 
Rs.30,274 Crore is under implementation. 
Under AMRUTMission so far, 3,423 MLD sewage treatment capacity and 1,437 MLD 
recycle /reuse capacity has been developed. 99 lakh conventional streetlights have 
been replaced with energy efficient LEDs. In addition to water supply and sewerage, 


 
72 
 
 
emphasis is given on developing infrastructure for Non-Motorised Transport (NMI). In 
non-motorised urban transport sector projects worth Rs. 626 crore have been 
completed, projects worth Rs. 384 crore arc under implementation. Under Non -
MotorisedTransport, projects related to footpath/ walkways, sidewalks, foot over 
bridges facilities for non -motorised transport (such as bicycles) and multi - level 
parking's have been taken -up. A number of cities selected under the Smart Cities 
Mission arc also implementing projects related to NMT and bike- sharing. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 29 
The Committee note that Swachh Bharat Mission -Urban (SBM -U) was 
launched on 2nd October 2014 with the objective of inter alia elimination of 
open defecation, modern and scientific municipal solid waste management 
and capacity augmentation for Urban Local Bodies to be achieved in five 
years, i.e. 2 nd October 2019. It also targeted to achieve 100 percent door -to-
door collection and scientific management of municipal solid waste. The 
Committee feel that solid waste is one of the major componen ts of urban 
pollution. The Committee note that a number of policy initiatives have been 
taken to encourage processing of waste to compost and waste to energy, 
mandatory use of plastics in road construction, and mandatory use of recycled 
construction and demolition waste in all construction projects. The Committee 
feel that waste to compost and waste to energy are very important for creation 
of sustainable habitats. The Committee find that 145 compost plants are 
currently functional in the Country while 150 plants are under construction. 
After construction of these plants,  the total compost production will increase 
from 13.13 lakh tonnes to 33 lakh tonnes. The Committee recommend that 
the under  construction plants should be expeditiously constructed and more 
cities should be brought under waste to compost plan. The Committee note 
that 511 MW of power can be produced from municipal solid waste. Currently 
seven plants are operational and 53 are being constructed. The Committee 
recommend that the construction of waste to energy plants should be closely 
monitored so that these plants are constructed without any delay. The 
Committee are concerned that there is no proper segregation of wastes 
before they are dumped on the dumpsites. With the increasing electronic 
waste, hospital waste content among waste, there is serious danger of 
emission of poisonous gases and diseases spreading from the dumpsites. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that there should be proper 
segregation of waste at the source itself for which public awareness campaign 
is needed.” 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
Under SBM-U, 2199 compost plants are currently functional in the country with the 
designed capacity of 71,682 TPD. Plants with the designed capacity of 30,681 TPD 
has been approved under SBNI-U 2.0 out of which 39 plants are under construction 
with 4,511 TPD designed capacity. 


 
73 
 
 
4. Currently, 9 Waste to Electricity plants arc operational and 11 arc 
under construction with a combined total designed capacity of 22,000 TPD 
and potential to generat e 220 MW of power. Also, Action Plans for 
construction of Waste to Bio -CBG Plants of 5,515 TPD and MRF Facilities of 
capacity 32,432 'IVD have been approved under SBM-IJ 2.0. 
5. MoHUA is implementing the SBNI -U 2.0 fully in compliance with the 
notified Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, read together with other 
waste management rules, for which Additional Central Assistance is being 
provided to ULBs. The first step is segregation of waste at source for which 
ULBs are supported for carrying out regular IEC acti vates and Capacity 
Building activities for ULB staffs. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 31 
As regards plastic waste, it is estimated that 15000 tonnes of plastic waste is 
generated every day in the Country. The plastic waste problem in urban areas 
has reached alarming proportions while the problem has also spread in rural 
areas, where, due to absence of any institution tasked for removing  garbage, 
it is posing significant environmental and health challenges. As per data, 60 
percent of all plastics in the Countr y is currently recycled, leaving 40 percent 
of 6000 tonnes/day being disposed in an unsafe manner. In urban as well as 
rural areas, there is no effective mechanism to segregate plastic waste, 
leading to compounding of problem as different plastic has diffe rent 
decomposition rates. In cities, there is another problem where disposable 
plates, glasses, etc. made of plastic/non -degradable materials are 
increasingly being used. Although plastic has been banned in several States, 
its implementation has left much to be desired. Increasing use of plastic 
bottles and bags in vulnerable mountain ecosystems cause environmental 
degradation in areas which are already stressed. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that institutional mechanism may be set up in all the State s to 
monitor the use of plastics, besides ensuring its proper segregation, recycling 
and disposal. While banning the use of plastic carry bags, bottles etc., it is 
utmost important to find the biodegradable alternatives through R&D. Above 
all, adequate ste ps need to be taken to spread awareness among people 
about the importance of proper segregation of plastic waste and avoiding the 
use of disposable materials to the maximum extent possible. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
In this regard, MoHUA has already taken steps to generate and enhance 
awareness among public and State/ municipal authorities to restrict single use 
plastic usage. 
Under SBNI, the annual Swachh Survekshan (Cleanliness Survey) assesses 
the ULBs on their implementation of PWM Rules. 

 
74 
 
 
Similarly, the Garbage free city Protocol for Star Rating Certification in SWNI 
also has assessments for prohibition of SUPs. 
As per notification issued by on 12 th August; regarding Plastic Waste 
Management Rules, 2021, has incorporated ban on use of Single Use Pl astic 
bags and other items. 'Ibis is an important component in upcoming Swachh 
Survekshan 2022 and Star Rating Protocol for Garbage Free Cities (GFC) to 
encourage cities to prevent use of single use plastic. 
Detailed Action Plan for phasing out Single Use Plastic (SUP) has been made 
by MoHUA and ULBs are taking action accordingly. 2127 ULBs/Cities have 
notified the Plastic ban. 
Innovative SUP replacement efforts such as Bartan bhandars, Jhola centres - 
Thyla Banks, plastic plog runs, food -for plastic waste p rogrammes etc. are 
also part of Swachh Survekshan indictors and IEC activities. 
SBNI-U 2.0 will be implemented with a vision of achieving "Garbage Free" 
status for all cities. Under the Sustainable Solid Waste Management, greater 
emphasis will be on source  segregation, complete Solid waste management 
with 100% waste processing with intensified focus on phased reduction on 
Single Use Plastic. 
In SBNI -U 2.0, funding will be provided for setting up of dry waste (plastic 
waste) processing facilities such as MRF s, waste to electricity etc. for plastic 
waste management in all statutory towns. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 33 
 
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture 
 
The Committee note that the mission aims at enhancing food security and protection 
of resources such as land, water, biodiversity and genetics, through developing 
strategies to make Indian agriculture more resilient to climate change such as 
development of new crop varieties resistant to thermal, fire, drought etc. The mission 
focuses on natural reso urce management, water use efficiency, horticulture, crop 
sector, seed, pest, disease and weed management, soil health management, farm 
mechanisation, conservation, precision farming, agriculture -supply chain 
management, safety net, credit, access to infor mation, research & development, 
capacity building and livestock and fisheries. Although the mission document 
mentions different aspects of agriculture, the crucial element of giving income 
security to farmers is missing. The crop insurance scheme and the M SP scheme 
implemented by the Government is not able to make farming remunerative for 
farmers. The Committee recommend that these elements be taken into consideration 
by the Government and they be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
 
 

 
75 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 The National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) aims at transforming 
Indian agriculture into an ecologically sustainable climate resilient production 
system, while ensuring food security, employment and livelihood opportunities in 
rural areas. Following eleven key priority areas have been identified for 
programmatic interventions under the revised Mission document which can 
minimize the impact of climatic change and reduce the risk: 
 
(i) Climate Ready Crops, Varieties and Resilient Practices 
(ii) Enhancing Resilience in Livestock and Fisheries 
(iii) Improving Water Productivity 
(iv) Pest Surveillance, Forewarning and Management 
(v) Soil Health and Nutrient Management 
(vi) Energy Management and Farm Mechanization 
(vii) Agri-by products Management 
(viii) Insurance and Risk Management 
(ix) Strengthening Value Chain 
(x) Integrated Farming System (IFS) and Agroforestry, including Bamboo 
(xi) Organic farming 
 
The Mission builds on the on -going schemes of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare and also leverages related interventions from other Missions. 
 
 The Central Government has started a new Central Sector Scheme, namely, the 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM -KISAN) with a view to provide income 
support to cultivable land holding farmers’ families across the country to enable them 
to take care of expenses related to agriculture and allied activities as well as 
domestic needs. The measure also protects them from falling in debt traps for  
meeting such expenses and to ensure thei r continuance in the farming activities. 
Under the Scheme an amount of Rs.6000/- per year is transferred in three 4-monthly 
installments of Rs.2000/ - directly into the bank accounts of the farmers, subject to 
certain exclusion criteria relating to higher i ncome status. The Scheme was formally 
launched on 24th February, 2019 and is effective from 1.12.2018. As on 6.3.2020, 
on the basis of the data of beneficiaries provided by the State/UT Governments, 
8,64,27,626 beneficiaries have been given financial benefit under the scheme. 
 
 With a view to provide social security to Small and Marginal Farmers in their old 
age when they have no means of livelihood and minimal or no savings to take 
care of their expenses, the Government has started the Pradhan Mantri Kisan 
Maan Dhan Yojana (PM -KMY). Under this scheme, a minimum fixed pension of 
Rs. 3,000/- will be provided to the small and marginal farmers, subject to certain 
exclusion criteria, on  attaining the age of 60 years. The measure would also 
provide financial suppo rt to the farmers as they continue in the farming activities 
in the old age. It is a voluntary and contributory pension scheme, with entry age 

 
76 
 
 
of 18 to 40 years. The farmer is required to contribute to a Pension Fund between 
Rs.55 to Rs.200 per month depending on the entry age. The Central Government 
also contributes in equal amount to the Pension Fund. The Pension Fund is being 
managed by the Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). The Scheme was 
formally launched on 12th September, 2019. So far (as on 9.3.2020), 19,95,177 
farmers have registered for the Scheme. 
 
 Insurance is an important element of any risk management strategy. To provide 
crop insurance to the farmers, the Government of India launched the flagship 
scheme, Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojan a (PMFBY) & Restructured Weather 
Based Crop Insurance (RWBCIS) in 2016 on the theme of One -Nation-One-
Scheme. PMFBY supports sustainable production in agriculture by providing 
financial support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage arising out of non 
preventable natural calamities. The Scheme is the first largest crop insurance 
scheme in the world in terms of farmers participation and third in terms of Gross 
premium. PMFBY is implemented in 27 States and Union Territories in India in 
one or more seasons and envisages to cover maximum number of farmers under 
the ambit of crop insurance. It is a multi -stakeholder scheme which has Central 
Government, 27 State Governments/UTs, 540 Banks and its branches, numerous 
other financial institutions, 19 empanelled Gener al Insurance Companies and 
about 2.25 lakh Common Service Centres as stakeholders. 
 
The scheme provides financial support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage 
arising out of unforeseen events. PMFBY is yield -based insurance that uses crop 
cutting experiments (CCEs) to determine the yield lost by farmers due to natural 
catastrophes and adverse weather conditions. The yield obtained through the 
CCEs determine the pay-out made by the insurance firm to the farmers. RWBCIS 
aims to mitigate the hardship of the i nsured farmers against the likelihood of 
financial loss on  account of anticipated crop loss resulting from weather 
conditions including fluctuation in rainfall, temperature, wind, humidity etc. 
RWBICS seeks to provide insurance claim to farmers on the basi s of observed 
weather data that are directly relevant to the agriculture. Nationwide, there are 
more than 10,000 Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) under the ambit of 
Government and private sector, from where the weather data is made available 
for the claim calculation under RWBCIS. 
 
The budget allocation for the scheme has increased since 2016 -17. Details of fund 
allocation and utilized under the PMFBY scheme are given below: 
 
Rs. In crores 
 
Year B.E. R.E. Actual 
2016-17 5501.15 13240.04 11054.63 

 
77 
 
 
2017-18 9000.75 10701.26 3419.79 
2018-19 13014.45 12983.1 11945.3886 
2019-20 14000.00 13640.85 12138.44 
2020-21    
 
In 2017-18, 532.7 lakhs farmers have been enrolled under PMFBY/RWBCIS over an 
area of 507.7 lakhs hectares. In 2018 -19, the number of farmers enrolled has 
increased to 577.2 lakh and the area insured to 525.8 lakh hectares. In 2019 -20, 
612.9 lakhs farmers have been enrolled under PMFBY/RWBCIS over an area of 
500.3 lakhs hectares. In 2016 -17, the claim amounting to 16,809 Crores was paid to 
eligible insured farmers with an average claim ratio of 78% and in 2017 -18, claim 
paid is 22,118 crores with claim ratio of 89% and 2018 -19, the claim paid is 28,119 
crores with claim ration of 101% and in 2019 -20 claim paid is 25,817 crores with 
claim ratio of  84%. Claims for  2020-21 is under calculation as the season is going 
on. 
 
To make the PMFBY & RWBCIS further farmer friendly and to address the existing 
challenges in implementation, Cabinet of GoI approved revamping of these Crop 
Insurance Schemes on 19 F ebruary 2020 to be implemented from Kharif 2020 
season throughout the country. The revamped PMFBY proposed to extensive use 
Technology solutions like Smart Sampling Techniques (SST) and optimization of 
number of CCE to ensure early settlement of claims in a transparent manner. 
However, enrolment under the Scheme has been made voluntary for all farmers for 
both Crop Insurance Schemes. Under the revamped PMFBY/RWBCIS, flexibility has  
been offered to the States/UTs to implement the Scheme with option to select any or 
many of the additional risk covers/features like prevented sowing, localized calamity, 
mid-season adversity and post-harvest losses. Further, States/UTs can offer specific  
single peril risk/insurance covers like hailstorm, etc, under PMFBY even with or 
without opting for base cover for both the Crop Insurance Schemes. Detailed 
guidelines on the revamped PMFBY/RWBCIS is under process by Government of 
India. 
 
 Based on the Uni on Budget Announcement of 2018 -19, to ensure remunerative 
prices to farmers for their produce, the Government of India has launched an 
umbrella  cheme ‘Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay SanraksHan Abhiyan’ (PM -
AASHA) in September 2018 comprising of erstwhile Pri ce Support Scheme 
(PSS) with some modifications for pulses, oilseeds and copra, Price Deficiency 
Payment Scheme (PDPS) & pilot of Private Procurement & Stockist Scheme 
(PPSS) for oilseeds. These schemes are implemented by DAC&FW, Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare on the request of the concerned States/ UTs 
governments when a market price dips below MSP. All the States/UT 
governments have been offered a bouquet of PSS and PDPS, with a flexibility to 

 
78 
 
 
choose either of them in a given procurement season  with respect to a particular 
oilseed crop for the entire State. The pulses & copra will be procured under PSS. 
Further, States have the option to roll out Private Procurement Stockist Scheme 
(PPSS) on pilot basis in district/selected APMC(s) of district i nvolving the 
participation of private stockist. 
 
Further, under PM-AASHA, procurement for paddy, wheat and coarse grains  are 
undertaken by Department of Food & Public Distribution (DFPD) through Food  
Corporation of India (FCI). 
 
Previously ongoing Price Support Scheme (PSS) has been incorporated under  
PM-AASHA. Under PSS, only 7.24 lakh metric tones of oilseeds and pulses were  
procured from the year 2009 to 2014. From 2014 to 2019, 93.42 lakh metric 
tones of pulses and oilseeds have been procured in PSS at MSP. During the year 
2019-20 (upto 04.03.2020), under PSS, 31.28 lakh metric tons of oilseeds and 
pulses and copra have been procured. Additional procurement of Pulses of 13.67 
lakh metric tons of pulses  at MSP has also been done under Price Stabilizatio n 
Fund (PSF) for maintenance of  National Buffer Stock by Department of 
Consumer Affairs during 2015 -16 to 2017 -18. Apart from this, 16.82 lakh metric 
tonnes of soybeans have been procured under  PDPS in Madhya Pradesh in 
2018. Thus, the procurement from 2014-15 to 2019-2020 (as on 04.03.2019) 155 
lakh tonnes of oilseeds, pulses and copra have been procured. 
 
Not only MSP is increased by the Govt. but it is also ensured that the benefit  of 
increased MSP has reached to the farmers. 
 
 The restructured National Bamboo Mission (NBM) is operational from the year 
2018-19. NBM focuses on the development of complete value chain of bamboo 
sector to link growers with consumers starting from planting material, plantation, 
creation of facilities for collection, aggregatio n, processing marketing, micro, 
small & medium enterprises, skill development and brand building initiative in a 
cluster approach mode. 
 
 The objectives of the NBM include increasing the area under bamboo plantation 
in non forest Government and private land s to supplement farm income and 
contribute towards resilience to climate change as well as availability of quality 
raw material requirement of industries. The bamboo plantations are promoted in 
non-forest land predominantly in farmers' fields, homesteads, community lands, 
arable wastelands, and along irrigation canals, water bodies etc. This will help to 
enhance farmers’ income. 
 
 The scheme is being implemented in the States where it has social, commercial 
and economical advantage, including the bamboo rich  States of North Eastern 
region and in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Karnataka, 
Uttarakhand, Bihar, Jharkhand, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Gujarat, Tamil 

 
79 
 
 
Nadu, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh & Himachal Pradesh. Union Territory of Jammu & 
Kashmir is also included under NBM in the year 2020-21. 
 
 The scheme is being implemented as Centrally Sponsored Scheme. The funding 
pattern is 60:40 between Centre and State Govt. for all States excepting NE & 
Hilly states, where it is 90:10 and 100% in case of U nion Territories/ R&D 
institutes/ Bamboo Technology support Groups (BTSGs) and National Level 
Agencies. To achieve the objectives many activities have been undertaken during 
2018-19 to 2020 -21 under the restructured National Bamboo Mission. As on 
30.06.2021, an area of 21388 ha has been covered under bamboo plantation 
along with creation of 364 nurseries, 71 bamboo treatment units, 323 product 
development / processing units, 89 infrastructure projects for promotion and 
development of bamboo markets. 11351 n os. of persons have been trained and 
217 workshops/ seminars/ trade fairs/exhibitions have been organized under the 
restructured National Bamboo Mission. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 34 
 
The Committee note that one component of the mission is soil health management 
through promoting organic farming. Farming with the aid of chemical fertilizers is one 
of the contributor of climate change. Such farming also causes degradation of soil, 
water as well as farmers. The Committee have been informed that although per 
capita consumption of pesticides is lowest in India (at 0.6kg/ha), many pesticides are 
applied without following the minimal safety measures leading to health risks, soil 
water and air pollution. Further, the usage of pesticides is highly concentrated in 
irrigated cultivation zones of the Country. The Committee also note that among other 
things, the mission has brought 18.70 lakh hectare of area under organic farming. 
The Committee have been informed that organic farming has been taken up at a 
large scale in various States of the country, most notably in Andhra Pradesh. 
Besides, as reported in the media, Sikkim became India’s first 100 percent organic 
State in January, 2016. The Committee  feel that organic farming needs to be further 
encouraged as chemical fertilizer based farming contribute 50 percent of the 
greenhouse gases (GHG). Organic farming can provide 100 percent solution to the 
build-up of GHG in the atmosphere and use of organic  matter also increases the 
water retention capacity of the soil. The Committee have also taken note of the fact 
that the productivity in organic farming is not less than that achieved through 
chemical farming. Moreover, the Committee have been informed tha t under 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), a subsidy of ₹25,000 per hectare is 
given to the farmers to support them for moving from inorganic to organic farming 
over a period of three years. However, it is not a subsidy on par with that given for 
chemical fertilizers. The Committee feel that this amount is not sufficient and needs 
to be suitably increased to give more incentive to organic farmers. Similarly, the 
subsidy given on chemical fertilizers need to be progressively decreased as such a 
subsidy is like providing incentives for soil, health and climate degradation. The 
Committee have also noted that the Department of Fertilizers is encouraging use of 

 
80 
 
 
city compost by providing Market Development Assistance of ₹1500/metric tonne. 
This amount also n eeds to be increased. The Committee also recommend that 
immediate steps be taken to increase the coverage under organic farming in all the 
States. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 Government of India has been promoting Integrated Nutrient Management 
(INM) i.e., soil test based balanced and judicious use of fertilizers (chemical, 
bio-fertilizers, organic manures like Farm Yard Manure, compost, 
vermicompost, green manure, etc.) to maintain soil health and its productivity 
through Soil Health Card Scheme. Govt  is also educating farmers through 
demonstrations, melas, trainings, etc. 
 To increase the usage of biological and organic inputs as substitute to 
chemical fertilizers, the Ministry is also implementing a scheme -Capital 
Subsidy Investment Subsidy Scheme (C ISS) under National Project of 
organic Farming for setting of bio and organic input units. Under CISS, 
financial assistance is provided for setting up of State of art liquid/ carrier 
based Bio -fertilizer units of 200 Ton Per Annum (TPA) capacity; 100% 
assistance to State Govt./ Govt. Agencies up to a maximum limit of Rs.160.00 
lakh/ unit and for individuals/ private agencies assistance up to 25% of cost 
limited to Rs.40 lakh/unit as capital investment is provided through NABARD. 
State-wise total number of B iofertilizer / Biopesticides / Fruit and vegetable 
compost production units sanctioned through NABARD is given at Annexure II 
and state wise setting up of liquid/carrier based bio - fertilizer production unit 
under Soil Health Management under soil health m anagement scheme is 
given at Annexure III. In addition, use of organic/ bio fertilisers and 
biopesticides has been promoted under organic farming schemes of 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development in North East R egion (MOVCDNER) by providing incentives to 
the farmers. 
 Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is implementing ‘Sub -Mission on 
Plant Protection and Plant Quarantine’ Scheme, under which Integrated Pest 
Management approach is being promoted to educate t he farmers about 
judicious use of chemical pesticides and to recommend use as per the 
directions prescribed on the label and leaflets. Integrated Pest Management 
seeks to promote cultural, mechanical, biological methods of pest control and 
orients the farm ers about judicious use of pesticides. During the last 5 years 
(2016-17 to 2020-21), 3271 Farmer Field Schools and 570 Human Resource 
Development programs were conducted under Integrated Pest Management 
and 98,470 farmers and 22,880 pesticide dealers and State Extension officials 
and master trainers have been trained. 35 Central Integrated Pest 
Management Centres (CPICMs) across [MV1] the country are established. 
The CIPMCs, inter alia, release bio -control agents in the fields, conducts 
Farmer Fields Schools and organizes IPM orientation programmes. 

 
81 
 
 
 Realizing the potential of organic farming Government is promoting organic 
farming through two dedicated schemes, namely Mission Organic Value 
Chain Development for North Eastern Region and Paramparagat Krishi Vi kas 
Yojna (PKVY) since 2015-16. 
 Under MOVCDNER organic farming is being promoted in value chain mode 
with assistance from production, postharvest handling, value addition and 
processing and handholding support for marketing. Entire scheme is 
promoted in FP O/FPC mode with post harvest infrastructure under farmers 
own institutions. An incentive of Rs.25000 / ha is provided under MOVCDNER 
for on farm and off - farm inputs preparation/ procurement. Area under the 
scheme is certified under third party and niche c ommodities are being 
targeted for export markets. 
 Under PKVY scheme assistance of Rs. 50,000 per hectare/ 3 years is given 
out of which Rs. 31,000/ - is provided to farmers directly through DBT for 
inputs (biofertilizers, biopesticides, vermicompost, botani cal extracts etc). 
Besides this farmers through clusters are also facilitated with PGS certification 
and are supported for market facilitation. 
 
 
 Government of India has been organic farming under various scheme), 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY). U nder the PKVY scheme 
assistance of Rs 50,000 per hectare/ 3 years is given, out of which Rs. 31,000 
(62%) is provided to the farmers  directly through DBT, for inputs (bio -
fertilizers, biopesticides, vermicompost,  botanical extracts etc) production/ 
procurement, post harvest management etc. An  incentive of Rs 25000/ ha is 
provided under MOVCDNER for on farm and off - farm inputs preparation/ 
procurement. 
 
In general, Integrated Nutrient Management has been promoted through Soil  
Health card Programme to promote judicious use of fertilisers. Moreover, organic  
farming schemes aim at promotion of non -chemical farming in the country that  
improves soil health as well as environmental and human health. 
 
 Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) certified organic pro duction is 
promoted under PKVY for domestic markets while MOVCDNER aims at 3rd 
party certified production of niche crops of north east region for exports. Third 
party certification of  organic farming is promoted by Agriculture Processed 
Food and Export Development Authority (APEDA), Ministry of Commerce. 
 Due to these efforts the area under organic farming is on rise. As on March 
2019 the  area under organic farming is 27.7 lakh ha. As per next 5 years 
vision document  Government proposes to bring another 25 lakh ha area 
under organic farming by  2024. State-wise details of area covered (certified 
and under conversion) under Organic farming is at Annexure-IV. 
 
 

 
82 
 
 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 35 
 
The Committee in their 22nd Report (16th Lok Sabha) had recommended that the 
Government should come out with a comprehensive and well defined strategy on 
organic farming to which the Government in the action taken note had stated that the 
comprehensive definition will be adopted in the policy on organic farming/organic 
farm produce. The Committee would again like to emphasise to bring uniformity in 
the meaning and definition of 'Organic Farming/Organic Farm Produce' to avoid any 
legal hurdle in domestic consumption and international trade promotion and would 
urge the Government to take immediate and urgent action in this regard. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 The issue of the new definition of the organic farming was discussed during 
the Task Force Meeting chaired by Dr. A.K. Singh, Vice -Chancellor, Rajmata 
Vijayaraje Scindia Krishi Vishwavidyalaya, Gwalior and as agreed by the Task 
Force, the definition was framed which is as under: 
 
“Organic Agriculture is a unique production management system which 
promotes and enhances agro -ecosystem health, including biodiversity, 
biological cycles and soil biological activity. This is accomplished by 
using on -farm agronomic, biological and mechanical methods in 
exclusion of all synthetic offfarm inputs.” 
 
 Recently the definition of organic food has been defined in Food Safety and 
Standards (Organic Foods) Regulations, 2017 under Food Safety and 
Standards Act (2006) which states that “Organic food” means food products 
that have been produced in accordance with specified standards for organic 
food production. The standards covered un der these rules are National 
Programme for Organic Production operated by Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry and PGS -India operated by Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 37 
 
The Committee feel that the Mission lacks in giv ing focus to the farmers while taking 
initiatives for sustainable agriculture. Agriculture as a sustainable occupation can 
survive only after the farmers are given chance to sustain themselves. For this, they 
need to have access to better seeds, best pract ices in farming and support from the 
Government to cover farming risk. In this regard, the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima 
Yojana (PMFBY) was launched by the Government in 2016. It is a yield -based 
insurance that uses crop -cutting experiments (CCEs) to determine  the yield lost by 
farmers due to natural catastrophes and adverse weather conditions. The yield 
obtained through the CCE’s determine the payout made by the insurance firm to the 

 
83 
 
 
farmer. The PMFBY improves on other existing schemes by removing caps on the 
premiums and making use of modern technology. However, the Committee also note 
that the scheme  suffers from several problems such as the delay in crop cutting 
experiments and its associated high costs, delayed/non-payment of insurance claims 
to farmers and  lack of  transparency. As a result, farmers lose interest in the crop 
insurance schemes. Another  problem relating to crop insurance schemes in India is 
coverage. The PMFBY states that overall area insured has decreased over the last 2 
years (from 53.7 mill ion hectare  in 2015-16 and 57.2 million hectare in 2016 -17 to 
47.5 million hectare in 2017 -18). This is less than 24 percent of the gross cropped 
area (against a target of 40percent) as  compared to 89 percent in the US and 69 
percent in China. There is another insurance scheme which is called Weather Based 
Crop Insurance Scheme (WBCIS) which aims to  mitigate the hardship of the insured 
farmers against the likelihood of financial loss on  account of anticipated crop loss 
resulting from weather conditions incl uding fluctuation in rainfall, temperature, wind, 
humidity etc. This scheme seeks to provide insurance  claim to farmers on the basis 
of observed weather data that are directly relevant to the  agriculture. The problem 
with this scheme is that number of auto matic weather stations in the Country is very 
less. As against the requirement of 33000 AWS, there are only  706 AWS operational 
currently. In spite of its advantages, the coverage under WBICS  has declined from 
11.25 million in 2014 -15 to a little over 2.1 million in 2016 -17. In order to increase 
coverage, it is necessary for the Government to effectively  communicate to the 
farmers the value of insurance products. Also, adequate financial  investment for 
installation for more AWS is needed. The Committee, the refore, recommend that 
adequate financial allocation should be made so that the crop  insurance schemes 
attract participation from greater number of farmers. The  Committee also 
recommend that agricultural insurance scheme should be reformulated  in order to 
suit the needs of farmers who engage in organic farming. Multicropping  system also 
which is the very basis of organic farming should also be included  under the 
insurance schemes. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 The Central Government has started a new Central Sector Scheme, namely, 
the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM -KISAN) with a view to provide 
income support to cultivable land holding farmers’ families across the country 
to enable them to take care of ex penses related to agriculture and allied 
activities as well as domestic needs. The measure also protects them from 
falling in debt traps for meeting such expenses and to ensure their 
continuance in the farming activities. Under the Scheme an amount of 
Rs.6000/- per year is transferred in three 4 -monthly installments of Rs.2000/ - 
directly into the bank accounts of the farmers, subject to certain exclusion 
criteria relating to higher income status. The Scheme was formally launched 
on 24th February, 2019 and i s effective from 1.12.2018. As on 6.3.2020, on 
the basis of the data of beneficiaries provided by the State/UT Governments, 
8,64,27,626 beneficiaries have been given financial benefit under the scheme. 

 
84 
 
 
 
 With a view to provide social security to Small and M arginal Farmers in their 
old age when they have no means of livelihood and minimal or no savings to 
take care of their expenses, the Government has started the Pradhan Mantri 
Kisan Maan Dhan Yojana (PM -KMY). Under this scheme, a minimum fixed 
pension of Rs .3,000/- will be provided to the small and marginal farmers, 
subject to certain exclusion criteria, on attaining the age of 60 years. The 
measure would also provide financial support to the farmers as they continue 
in the farming activities in the old age.  It is a voluntary and contributory 
pension scheme, with entry age of 18 to 40 years. The farmer is required to 
contribute to a Pension Fund between Rs.55 to Rs.200 per month depending 
on the entry age. The Central Government also contributes in equal amount to 
the Pension Fund. The Pension Fund is being managed by the Life Insurance 
Corporation of India (LIC). The Scheme was formally launched on 12th 
September, 2019. So far (as on 9.3.2020), 19,95,177 farmers have registered 
for the Scheme. 
 
 Insurance is an important element of any risk management strategy. To 
provide crop insurance to the farmers, the Government of India launched the 
flagship scheme, Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) & 
Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance (RWBCIS) in 2016 on t he 
theme of One -Nation-One-Scheme. PMFBY supports sustainable production 
in agriculture by providing financial support to farmers suffering crop 
loss/damage arising out of non preventable natural calamities. The Scheme is 
the first largest crop insurance s cheme in the world in terms of farmers 
participation and third in terms of Gross premium. PMFBY is currently 
implemented in 27 States and Union Territories in India and envisages to 
cover maximum number of farmers under the ambit of crop insurance. It is a  
multistakeholder scheme which has Central Government, 27 State 
Governments/UTs, 540 Banks and its branches, numerous other financial 
institutions, 18 empanelled General Insurance Companies and about 2.25 
lakh Common Service Centres as stakeholders. 
 
The s cheme provides financial support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage 
arising out of unforeseen events. PMFBY is yield -based insurance that uses 
cropcutting experiments (CCEs) to determine the yield lost by farmers due to 
natural catastrophes and adverse weather conditions. The yield obtained through 
the CCEs determine the pay -out made by the insurance firm to the farmers. 
RWBCIS aims to mitigate the hardship of the insured farmers against the 
likelihood of financial loss on account of anticipated crop los s resulting from 
weather conditions including  fluctuation in rainfall, temperature, wind, humidity 
etc. RWBICS seeks to provide insurance claim to farmers on the basis of 
observed weather data that are directly relevant to the agriculture. Nationwide, 
there are more than 10,000 Automatic Weather Stat ions (AWS) under the ambit 

 
85 
 
 
of Government and private sector, from where the weather data is made 
available for the claim calculation under RWBCIS. 
 
The budget allocation for the scheme has increased since 2016 -17. Details of 
fund allocation and utilized under the PMFBY scheme are given below: 
 
Rs. Incrores 
 
Year B.E. R.E. Actual 
2016-17 5501.15 13240.04 11054.63 
2017-18 9000.75 10701.26 3419.79 
2018-19 13014.45 12983.1 11945.3886 
2019-20 14000.00 13640.85 12138.44 
2020-21    
 
 
In 2017-18, 530.4 lakhs farmers have been enrolled under PMFBY/RWBCIS 
over an area of 515 lakhs hectares. In 2018 -19, the number of farmers 
enrolled has increased to 568.5 lakh and the area insured is 587.9 lakh 
hectares. The coverage under the scheme is expected to increase in 2019-20. 
In 2016-17, the claim amounting to 17,833 Crores was paid to eligible insured 
farmers with an average claim ratio of 81% and in 2017 -18, claim paid is 
22,315 crores with claim ratio of 88% and 2018 -19, the claim paid is 20,008 
crores with claim rat ion of 78% and the claim of 2019 -20 is under calculation 
as the season is going on. 
 
 To make the PMFBY & RWBCIS further farmer friendly and to address the 
existing challenges in implementation, Cabinet of GoI approved revamping of 
these Crop Insurance Sche mes on 19 February 2020 to be implemented from 
Kharif 2020 season throughout the country. The revamped PMFBY proposed to 
extensive use Technology solutions like Smart Sampling Techniques (SST) and 
optimization of number of CCE to ensure early settlement of  claims in a 
transparent manner. However, enrolment under the Scheme has been made 
voluntary for all farmers for both Crop Insurance Schemes. Under the revamped 
PMFBY/RWBCIS, flexibility has been offered to the States/UTs to implement the 
Scheme with optio n to select any or many of the additional risk covers/features 
like prevented sowing, localized calamity, mid -season adversity and post -harvest 
losses. Further, States/UTs can offer specific single peril risk/insurance covers 
like hailstrom etc, under PMFB Y even with or without opting for base cover for 
both the Crop Insurance Schemes. Detailed  guidelines on the revamped 
PMFBY/RWBCIS is under process by Government of India. 
 
 
 
 

 
86 
 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 38 
 
The Committee observe that India had the culture of saving part of the crops as 
seeds but over the years this traditional system has been taken over by a big market 
of seeds where MNCs are selling their seeds at high prices thereby increasing the 
cost of agriculture. Not only that seeds sold by MNCs are often untested in local 
conditions, consume more water and are vulnerable to failures. The Committee 
further note that our country has rich variety of indigenous seeds and traditional 
Indian system of water and agriculture seeds which need to be encouraged  to 
address the issue of availability and quality of seeds. The use of our traditional 
system besides being eco -friendly would reduce the input cost by saving money 
spent on purchasing seeds and saving of water. The traditional seeds which were 
climate resilient and less water guzzling should, therefore, be traced, developed and 
preserved 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
Role of Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Authority (PPVFRA) in 
tracing, improving and enabling access of traditional variet ies conserved by farmers 
in the ambit of Farmers’ Rights and Benefit sharing under the Protection of Plant 
Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act (2001): 
 
(i) Conduct of Awareness Campaigns Among Farmers in the Country on 
Farmers’ Varieties, Protection and Conservation: Each year between 100 -
120 awareness campaigns have been conducted in all parts of the country 
among which at least five each year are for farmers from multi -states in a 
region, purely on letting the farmers know of their rights and claims to 
make on benefit sharing when they come to know about any of their 
conserved varieties of any crop being used in breeding programs by public 
or private sector, or whenever it comes to their notice if any specific trait 
which they know historically as occurr ing only in a traditional variety or 
species conserved by the community in any commercially sold variety by a 
public or private sector. 
 
So far 1817 awareness programmes have been conducted for the last 10 years 
and more than 1.4 lakh farmers were trained and made aware about the 
various provisions of the Act. 
 
(ii) Protection of Farmers’ Varieties involving State Governments, Central 
Government Agencies and Awarding Rights to Communities or Farmers 
on Farmers’ Varieties for Commercialization and Trade: The Auth ority has 
publicised and participated regularly in conducting trainings, campaigns on 
the value of traditional varieties and the utility of obtaining rights of 
ownership by communities or individual farmers who have been able to 

 
87 
 
 
make selections of  different variant forms within the traditional varieties so 
that they can trade commercially with those varieties or their 
genes/characters if other plant breeders would like to make use of these 
traits or genes. The Rights which are given to farmers are Rights t o 
produce, sell, market, distribute, import and export exclusively, in addition 
to the normal Farmers’ Rights which are to save, use, sow, re -sow, 
exchange, share, and sell their farm produce as seed without branding. 
Both these are ‘Unique only to Indian Farmers’ in IPRs on plant varieties 
and their usage. So far more than 64% of the total applications for 
protection of varieties in India comprises of the Farmers’ Varieties with 
extraordinary focus. 
 
Table: No. of Farmers’ Varieties Protected in India since 2008 as on March 4, 
2020 
Category  
No. of 
Applications 
Received 
No. of Varieties 
Granted 
Protection 
Public Variety  2143  1391 
Private  3971  1313 
Farmers  11114(64.51% 
of the total) 
1834(40.41% 
total granted) 
Total  17228  453 
 
 It has been decided by the Authority to notify all public institutions to encourage 
local farmers or communities in their jurisdiction to have their traditional materials 
enumerated, characterized, purified, and source -authenticated by growing the 
material under expert superv ision of one of the State Govt. or Central Govt. 
organization at least for the season. This has been done by issuing Public Notice 
No.12 of 2020. In order to widen the registration of farmers varieties, and it 
should not be struck up due to non -notification of crop species it was decided by 
the Authority that even if the species concerned is yet not notified or its DUS 
guidelines yet not developed by the Authority, the SAU/CAU/ICAR/CSIR 
Institutes have been directed to ensure that every available heritage p lant genetic 
material in the form of landraces or local traditional variety is brought on record 
and registered at this Authority under their facilitation. Further, a landrace or a 
local material used historically in a given rural area is expected to be ow ned by 
the entire community which may be represented by a tribe, a commune, a village 
or a group of village. In this regard, the PPV&FR Authority have issued Public 
Notice No. 13 of 2020 and further has also communicated vide letter No. 
PPV&FR/PS-2/2018/757 to 813 dated 20.10.2020 to all Vice -Chancellors of all 
SAUs/CAUs and to all State Government vide letter No.  PPV&FR/PS-
2/2018/867A to 896A dated 12.02.2021. Further to ensure that new and extant 
varieties filed for registration are free from Pest and Diseases, Public Notice No.8 
of 2021 has been issued regarding minimum seed quality standards to be as per 

 
88 
 
 
Seeds Act, 1966 and Pest and Disease free Certification from National Agency. 
In this regard, a D.O. letter No. PPV&FRA/PS -2/2018/740 dated 25th February, 
2020 has been issued and Public Notice No. 20 of 2019 has been issued fixing 
the criteria of DUS for Extant Notified Varieties under Section 5 of Seeds Act, 
1966. 
 
 The activities of the Authority relating to documentation and characterization of 
farmers varieties are as follows:- 
 
1. Around 332 farmer's varieties of Maize, Millets, Pulses and Vegetables from 
Vindhyan Region of Eastern Uttar Pradesh have been collected documented 
and characterized and applied for registration and the process is under 
progress. The Authority has sanctioned and released Rs. 27,00,000/ - for the 
purpose of purification and characterisation of Farmer’s varieties. 
 
2. Around 21 farmer's varieties of Pulses, Vegetables and Cereals from Konkan  
region of Maharashtra have been collected, characterised and 8 farmer's  
varieties were filed for registration at PPV&FRA. The certificate of 3 farmer's  
varieties were granted. The Authority has sanctioned and released Rs.  
22,54,964/- for the purpose of purification and charactersation of Farmer's  
varieties. 
 
3. From North hilly region of Chhattisgarh 1715 farmer's varieties which include  
778 unique rice and se veral vegetable crops, millet, pulses, oilseeds and  
cereals are documented and characterised and applied for registration at  
PPV&FRA, New Delhi. Around 100 certificate has been issued by the  
Authority. The Authority has released Rs. 17,49,585/ - for the pur pose of  
purification and charactersation of Farmer's varieties. 
 
4. A total of 56 farmer's varieties of Minor Seed Spices (Ajwain, Nigella, Dill  and 
Anise) from North Eastern plain zone of Uttar Pradesh were characterize and 
Authority has funded Rs. 09.00 Lakh. 
 
5. From the State of Karnataka traditional varieties of rice, vegetable, millets and  
Oilseeds were conserved and maintained by farmers were collected and  
characterised and submitted for registration at PPV&FRA, New Delhi in the  
year 2020. The Authority  has released Rs. 19,73,492/ - for the purpose of  
charactersation of Farmer's varieties. 
 
6. Traditional varieties and landraces of around 60 crop species covering 
cereals, Pulses and Vegetables, Oilseeds, fruits, flower crops and medicinally  
important crops w ere collected from Bihar. After documentation and  
characterisation 710 farmer's varieties were applied for registration at 
PPV&FRA, New Delhi for which Authority has release Rs. 3,74,403/-. 
 

 
89 
 
 
7. From Kashmir valley 50 landraces of Maize conserve by farmers were 
characterize and applied for registration at PPV&FRA, New Delhi for which 
Authority has release Rs. 13,50,000/-). 
 
8. 8. A total of 15 farmer's varieties were collected from Northern Karnataka 
applied for registration at PPV&FRA, New Delhi. Financial ass istance has 
been provided by the Authority. 
 
9. 9. Around 15 durum wheat varieties from North Karanataka conserved by 
farmers is under characterization for which financial assistance has been 
provided by the Authority. 
 
10. 10. A pigeon pea variety submitted by a  farmer from Maharashtra is purified 
and characterized by State Agriculture University is under the process of 
registration at PPV&FRA, New Delhi with the financial support of Authority. 
 
11. 11. For Non -notified crops species namely carrot from Gujarat and Ve lvet 
bean from Uttar Pradesh has conserved by the farmers since decades are 
under the process of characterisation and PPV&FRA, New Delhi has provided 
financial assistance of Rs. 3.00 Lakh each to the concerned institution. 
 
(iii) Establishment of Community Seed Bank and Maintenance in Farmer 
Communities: The PPV&FR Act, 2001 was enacted on sui generis 
system, which provides the farmers rights and encourage the farmers 
those are engaged in preservation and conservation of traditional varieties 
and land races and a llow them to register those varieties as farmers 
varieties. The Authority also encourage for establishment of community 
seed banks so that the seeds of the traditional varieties are made 
available to local farmers. The Authority encourages for establishmen t of 
community seed banks through SAUs and KVKs. Four community seed 
banks are at the moment being maintained in Prayagraj (Uttar Pradesh), 
Raipur (Chhattisgarh) , Dharwad & Vijayanagar (Karnataka).The Authority 
also encourages for in situ and ex situ conservation under Section 45 
(2)(c) of PPV&FR Act, 2001. 
 
(iv) Establishment of Community Seed Bank and Maintenance in Farmer 
Communities: The PPV&FR Act, 2001 was enacted on sui generis 
system, which provides the farmers rights and encourage the farmers 
those are engaged in preservation and conservation of traditional varieties 
and land races and allow them to register those varieties as farmers 
varieties. The Authority also encourage for establishment of community 
seed banks so that  the seeds of the tradition al varieties are made 
available to local farmers. The Authority encourages for establishment of 
community seed banks through SAUs and KVKs. Four community seed 
banks are at the moment being maintained in Prayagraj (Uttar Pradesh), 

 
90 
 
 
Raipur (Chhattisgarh) , D harwad & Vijayanagar (Karnataka).The Authority 
also encourages for in situ and ex situ conservation under Section 45 
(2)(c) of PPV&FR Act, 2001. 
 
(v) (v) Recognition of Farmer Communities and Farmers for Conserving 
and/or Preserving Traditional Varieties: PPV&FR Act, 2001 is the only 
Act which confers Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) to farmers who have 
bred plant varieties. Farmers are exempted for the payment of any fee for 
registration under PPV&FR Act, 2001. The application for registration of 
Farmers’ Varieties is contained in 6th Schedule of PPV&FR Rules, 2003 
and the said application format is very simple and contains no technical 
questions. Farmers’ Varieties are tested to determine DUS (Distinct, 
Uniform and Stable) criteria for one year at two locati ons. The DUS criteria 
for Farmers’ Varieties are relaxed when compared to New Varieties and 
other Extant Varieties. 
 
The PPV&FR Authority is the only body which confers 35 Awards to 
farmer(s)/farming communities amounting to a total of Rs.85 Lakhs every 
year. The Plant Genome Saviour Community Award is awarded to five 
farming communities and each Award amounts to Rs.10.00 lakhs along 
with citation and memento. The Plant Genome Saviour Farmer Reward is 
awarded to ten farmers and each Reward amounts to Rs.1 .50 lakhs along 
with citation and memento. The Plant Genome Saviour Farmer 
Recognition is awarded to twenty farming communities and each 
Recognition amounts to Rs.1.00 lakh each along with citation and 
memento. During the last ten years, 138 farmers or far mers communities 
have been awarded the above at the cost of ` 390 lakhs by the Authority. 
The awardees as such receive an identity and visibility in being able to 
enhance the trade value and reach of their varieties. 
 
 
 The Seed Division at the Ministry has  suggested to States 
Governments to include  drought, flood and salt tolerant varieties in 
State Seed Rolling Plan and Breeder Seed  Indent to tackle the climate 
change condition as per ICAR. Accordingly, the States  have reported 
the availability of short an d medium duration varieties certified/quality  
seeds to tackle the climate change condition from last three years and 
current year is  at Annexure- VIII. The availability of stress tolerant 
(flood, drought & salt) paddy  varieties certified/quality seeds from  last 
three years and current year is at Annexure IX. 
 The National Food Security Mission (NFSM) programme is being 
implemented with the objective of increasing food grain production 
through area expansion and productivity enhancement in a sustainable 
manner in the identified districts across the   country. The NFSM 
programme has included various interventions under different 

 
91 
 
 
foodgrain (rice/wheat/pulses/nutri -cum-coarse cereals) crops like 
demonstration of latest crop production and protection technolog y, 
distribution of HYVs/Hybrids, stress tolerant/climate resilient/bio -
fortified varieties, INM & IPM techniques, improved farm 
machineries/tools, water saving devices and capacity building of 
farmers to fulfill the other objective of NFSM i.e., ‘Enhancing  farm level 
economy to restore confidence amongst the farmers. New initiatives 
like breeder seeds/certified seed production and seed hubs had been 
taken up under NFSM -Pulses and NFSMNutri Cereals. Awareness 
amongst farmers is also created on above interven tions through 
trainings/meetings/workshops. 
 
 A total of 67 seed banks are functional in NICRA villages, which caters 
the seed requirement on community basis within the village. These seed 
banks ensure availability of quality seeds in time with reasonable  price 
ensuring spread of climate resilient varieties in the village. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 41 
 
National Mission on Sustaining Himalayan Ecosystem (NMSHE) 
 
The Committee note that the objective of NMSHE is to build S&T capacity to address 
sustenance of Himalayan ecosystem. To achieve its objective, the mission aims  to 
understand the complex processes affecting Himalayan Ecosystem and evolve  
suitable management and policy measures for sustaining and safeguarding the  
Himalayan Ecosystem, assess the heal th status of the Himalayan ecosystem for 
policy formulation functions and assist states in the Indian Himalayan Region for  
implementation of actions for sustainable development. The Committee also note 
that under the mission, a Centre of Glaciology at Wadi a Institute of Himalayan 
Geology, Dehradun has been set up. Moreover, 6 thematic task forces have been 
set up for  detailed study of health status of Himalayan ecosystem and climate 
change centres in 11  out of 12 states. The task forces have been assigned t o 
establish databases, design  monitoring systems, developing modeling and 
simulations, undertaking vulnerability  assessment, adaptation policy research and 
pilot studies for revalidation. Therefore, the  focus of the mission is on creating 
infrastructure for understanding the Himalayan  ecosystem. The Committee feel that 
any mission for gaining detailed knowledge about  Himalayan ecosystem should not 
be confined to just one part of the Himalayan  ecosystem. Himalaya is an 
international ecosystem encompassing co untries such as  Afghanistan, Pakistan, 
China, Bhutan, Nepal, Myanmar, Bangladesh, Vietnam in  addition to India. The 
Committee feel that any effective action for sustenance of  Himalayan ecosystem can 
be meaningful only if it covers all parts of Himalaya and  for this reason such centres 
need to be opened in other countries also which are a part of  Himalayan ecosystem. 
To make this happen, consultations with those countries need to  be under taken and 
Climate Change centres of all these countries should work in tandem. 

 
92 
 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 DST is working in close coordination with the International Centre for 
Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), Nepal which is an inter -
governmental body serving the eight regional member countries namely 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, China, Bhutan, Nepal, Myanmar, Bangladesh, Vietnam 
of the Hindu Kush Himalayas engaged in regional corporation in the area of 
Himalayan Eco -system. In this regard, several workshops and deliberations 
have taken place wherein the scie ntists/ official implementing the National 
Mission on Sustaining the Himalayan Eco -system (NMSHE) have participated 
and interacted with scientists of some of these countries. As part of the 
another major initiative taken up by NITI Aayog with active partic ipation of 
ICIMOD five working groups in different key strategic areas of Himalayan eco -
system addressing sustainable development in the region was taken up in 
2017. DST led one of this Working Group in the area of Himalayan Spring. 
The knowledge generated  through these efforts was shared with the 
neighbouring countries that are part of ICIMOD. Efforts will be made to 
enhance the opportunities and collaboration in this regard. 
 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 42 
 
The Committee note that the assigned task to one of the thematic task forces is 
to compile traditional knowledge existing in the Himalayan region. The key 
objective of the programme is to develop a sound database on the Traditional 
Knowledge System (TKS) on the Indian Himalayan Region (IHR). The Committee 
also note that more than 170 out of total 701 indigenous groups of India inhabit 
the IHR and are repository of vast array of traditional knowledge. Further 50 
groups have been identified for documenting TKS. The Committee further note 
that data has been created on different aspects of a variety of traditional farming 
systems, local innovative farming practices and natural resource based livelihood 
earning traditions of the identified communities. A number of community based 
organisations are also engaged in documentation of TKS at local level in the 
region. The Committee are of the view that preserving, documenting and 
compiling traditional knowledge in the Himalayan region is very important task as 
our existing education system does not lay adequate empha sis on traditional 
knowledge and there is a real danger of this knowledge disappearing. Moreover, 
traditional knowledge pertaining to farming, building houses, tackling weather 
extremities are of direct relevance in our fight against climate change as they  are 
low energy low carbon solutions which we may apply today also with minimal 
changes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the work relating to TKS 
should be expeditiously compiled and after compilation, they should be widely 
publicized and made a part of school and college curriculum. 
 

 
93 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 A thematic task force for mapping the traditional knowledge system has been 
set up under which nearly 60 local/indigenous groups living in different eco -
cultural zones are selected for documentations of their traditional knowledge 
in integrated and focus manner. A rich data base is being created on the 
traditional utilization and conservation pattern of the Wild and Agriculture Bio -
resources of the Selected Committee. 
 A profile document of traditional knowledge system of 30 selected 
communities from the Indian Himalayan region has been recently published 
and widely circulated. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 43 
 
The Committee are of the view that reckless and irresponsible tourism in the 
Himalayan Ecosystem is one of the major reasons for environmental degradation 
there. With the construction of roads and luxurious amenities for the tourists, the 
number of people visiting the Himalayan region have vastly increased which is 
increasing the pressure on the ecosystem. As a result of large number of visitors, the 
roads, the houses, the hotels and resorts - all of these have to be constructed by 
cutting mountains. Many of these constructions are not as per specification for 
mountains but are more inspired by plain areas. Moreover, the tourists visiting these 
areas are not sensitized to responsible and sustainable tourism and indulge in 
littering with plastic bottles and other non -biodegradable materials. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend, that p ublic awareness campaigns for sensitizing people 
about vulnerability of Himalayan region and need for sustainable tourism may be 
undertaken by the Government. 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 The issue of sustainable tourism is being dealt by Ministry of Tourism as part 
of the national initiative taken by NITI Aayog in 2017. A Working Group for 
sustainable tourism is being set up to look into various facets of issues 
including the public awareness campaign for sensitizing the people for 
vulnerability of Hi malayas. A detailed report of the Working Group has been 
brought out. 
 
 In addition, the vulnerability profiles and indexing/ ranking of the Himalayan 
States in IHR have been prepared which is being implemented by the State 
Climate Change Cells set up DST. These cells are also conducting public 
awareness programme to sensitize on the vulnerability of Himalayan regions 
that includes the issues related to tourism. 
 

 
94 
 
 
 Moreover, MoEF&CC is implementing a National Mission on Himalayan 
Studies which is probably look ing into aspects of sustainable Tourism. 
NMSHE mission implemented by DST does not deal with this aspect. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 45 
 
National Mission on Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change 
 
The Committee note that the National Mission on Strategic Knowledge for Climate 
Change (NMSKCC) seeks to build a vibrant and dynamic knowledge system that 
would inform and support national action for responding effectively to the objective of 
ecologically sustainable development. It aims at creating institutional  capacity for 
research infrastructure including access to relevant data sets, technologies, 
computing and communication facilities and awareness to improve the quality and 
sector specific scenarios of climate change over the Indian subcontinent. It also 
seeks to build knowledge and research networks, develop national capacity for 
modeling the regional impact of climate change on different ecological zones within 
the country for different seasons and living standards. The mission seeks to form 
well designed knowledge networks with a well structured framework for 
harmonization, interoperability, sharing and exchange of data of relevance to climate 
change and responses, to enhance the research capability in climate science, 
position a technology watch system fo r key sectors related to economic 
development, likely to be affected by climate change, leverage development of 
suitable technologies for adaptation and mitigation of climate change under various 
missions, assist other agencies engaged in the implementation of the National Action 
Plan on Climate Change and supporting the actions under the other Missions, if 
necessary. So far, 12 thematic knowledge networks have been established, 3 
regional climate models have been developed and 75 high quality climate chang e 
professionals have been trained. The Committee have noted that India's share in 
global climate change research publication is less than 2 percent and we are behind 
countries like USA, UK, Germany and China. The Committee feel that climate 
change as an ac ademic discipline is largely absent from our colleges and 
universities and that is why there is absence of trained manpower in the field. The 
objective of the mission for building national S&T capacity in climate change 
research to develop strategic knowle dge system can be achieved only when climate 
change as a subject is introduced in colleges and universities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend for taking the desired action alongwith adequate financial 
allocation for the purpose. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 Climate Change and environmental studies are taught at university level in 
multiple universities in India and in the institutions on National Importance. 
The list of such courses taught in the institutions is as follows – 
 

 
95 
 
 
S. 
No.  Name of Course  Name of Institution 
1.  M. Tech (Climate Change)  i. IISc Bangaloreii. IIT 
Bhubaneshwar 
2.  M. Sc (Climate Change)  Tata Institute of Social 
Sciences (TISS), Mumbai 
3.  
M. Sc (Climate Change &  
Policy) 
 
The Energy and Resource 
Institute (TERI),  
Roorkee 
4. M. Sc (Climate Change 
andImpact Management) 
Gujarat University 
 
5. M. Sc (Environmental 
Studies) 
 
I. IIT Mumbai 
II. IIT Kharagpur 
III. NIIT Roorkee 
IV. Jawaharlal Nehru    
     University 
V. Delhi University 
VI. Banaras Hindu University 
VII. North-Eastern Hill  
       University 
VIII. Jammu Central  
       University 
IX. Gujarat Central University 
X. Haryana Central University 
XI. Jharkhand Central 
University 
XII. Kerala University  
XIII. Vishwabharti University 
XIV. Pondicherry University 
XV. Indira Gandhi National 
Tribal University (IGNTU) 
XVI. Nagaland University 
XVII. Sikkim University 
XVIII. Mizoram University 
XIX. National Institute of 
Industrial 
Engineering Mumbai 
XX. Guru Ghasidas University 
 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 46 
 
The Committee note that there are 3000 scientists and 450 institutions in the Country 
in so far as climate science is concerned. For a Country of a size of India, this is a 
very small number. Moreover, the research efforts in the climate science are 

 
96 
 
 
fragmented and there is no coordination in research being undertaken in different 
institutions. The Committee also note that there is weak linkage between climate 
science and policy and there is no partnership with private sector and the civil 
society. The Committee recommend that steps be taken to interlink all the institutions 
engaged in climate science research and also involve private sector in climate 
science research through fiscal and other incentives. Involvement of rural population 
is also necessary to collect the real time data. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
Various programmes and projects are initiated under the two National Missions 
which have close linkages with each other. They are working in close coordination to 
achieve common goal and deliverables. Efforts are also being made to develop inter-
institutional, inter agency, inter-ministerial synergy and convergence. A large number 
of civil societies and nongovernmental organizations have been engaged specially 
with State Climate Change Cell as stakeh olders for imparting training programme 
and also the public awareness programme. Under the thematic Task Forces, there is 
involvement of rural population in data collection for the traditional knowledge system 
and Himalayan Agriculture. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 47 
 
The Committee note that the mission seeks to build knowledge and research 
networks, develop national capacity for modeling the regional impact of climate 
change on different ecological zones within the country for different seasons. The 
Committee also note that India does not have an independent data base for climate 
science research and has to depend on foreign sources for them. The Committee 
are of the view that dependence on foreign sources is not healthy as their database 
has been built and  compiled for their requirements which may not be similar to us. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that efforts be made to develop our 
independent database commensurate with our needs. For example, we should be 
able to develop models for monsoon dynamics and regional climate model which are 
relevant to our eco-system. Action in this regard is urgently called for as the study of 
climate is a continuous  process and provides the necessary information for policy 
formulation. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
Under the National Mission on Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change several 
projects have been supported to develop India Centric climate model and regional 
climate model using data from within and from outside country. Several key issues 
such as convection and cloud parameterization for adjusting monsoon dynamic such 
as temperature and precipitation etc. are being adjusted in these model development 
efforts. This work is being carried out by dedicated research teams at IIT Delhi (for 
India Centric Climate  Model) and BHU, Varanasi, Andhra University, 

 
97 
 
 
Vishakhapatnam, Cochin University of Science & Technology, IIT Madras, IIT 
Bombay, IIT, Kharagpur, IIT, Bhubaneswar (for Regional Climate Model) which have 
been supported by DST. The knowledge generated from th ese programmes is being 
translated into strategic knowledge for policy formation purpose. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 48 
 
Climate change is one of the largest and most complex problems we are facing  
today. The impacts of higher temperatures, variable precip itation, and extreme 
weather events have already begun to impact the economic performance of 
countries and the lives and livelihoods of millions of poor people. India is among the 
countries most vulnerable to climate change. It has one of the highest densi ties of 
economic activity in  the world, and a very large number of poor people who rely on 
the natural resource  base for their livelihoods, with a high dependence on natural 
environment, specially rainfall. The Climate change will affect us through vagarie s of 
weather, incidences of  floods and droughts, changes in rainfall patterns, melting of 
glaciers, effect on  groundwater, rise in sea level, food security, energy security, 
water security, health and  increasing conflicts due to increasing stress. The near  
universal impact of climate  change makes effective remedial actions urgent. As a 
number of agencies are expected  to work together to deal with this crisis like 
situation, the action needs to be urgent,  integrated, coordinated, collaborative, 
collective and effective global, national and local  harnessing the energy of all 
citizens. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
Noted 

 
98 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
Recommendation - Para No. 7 
The Committee note that the NSM was launched in 2010 with an initial target of 
generating 20000 MW of grid -connected solar power by 2022. The targets were 
subsequently increased to 100000 MW by 2021 -22, 40 percent of which is to be 
sourced from grid -connected rooftop projects and 60 percent from land -based solar 
power projects. The Committee also not e that the total investment in setting up the 
targeted solar power is ?6,00,000 crore. The funding requirement for the targeted 
solar power generation will be met from budgetary support, internal and international 
financing. A major part of funding requirement will have to be met through funding by 
the financial institutions - both domestic and international. The Government has also 
come out with Viability Gap Funding (VGF) scheme for certain solar power plants. 
So far as Government funding is concerned, in  2016-17 ?2541.15 crore (actuals) 
was allocated for NSM while in 2017 -18 (RE) the allocation declined to ?2102.10 
crore. In 2018-19, the BE was ?2893.74 crore. The Government's outlay for the 12th 
Plan period is ?13,690 crore, which is barely a fraction of  the required investment. 
The Committee fail to understand as to how the enhanced targets of generation of 
100000 MW of solar power by 2021 -22 would be achieved in the aforesaid scenario 
whereby there is no clarity about the sources of funding for the Nati onal Solar 
Mission. The Committee may like to emphasize that with the cost of solar power 
consistently declining, effective implementation of Solar Mission has the potential to 
transform the renewable energy sector and promote ecologically sustainable grow th 
while addressing India's security challenge for which adequate financial resources 
are required. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that an analysis of 
financial support from each of the source viz. budgetary support, private investment, 
viability gap funding, international aid should be undertaken by the Government and 
the revised mission document be brought out indicating therein clearly about the 
sources of financing. 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
Solar projects are mainly set up by Private developers, which are selected through a 
competitive bidding process. These projects are set up primarily through private 
investments. Apart from this, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) 
implements various schemes/programs to achieve the targe ts, now 
enhanced to 292 GW by 2030. MNRE under these schemes have spent around Rs. 
24,400 crores so far, since introduction of National Solar Mission (NSM). 
As on 31-05-2023, a cumulative capacity of 67,821 MW of solar power projects has 
already been installed in the country. Further, a capacity of around 51,413 MW is 
under implementation, for which a Letter of Intents (LoI) has been issued, and about 
48,878 MW is under the tendering stage. 
 
 

 
99 
 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 14 
 
The Committee note that one of  the initiatives under the mission is Market 
Transformation for Energy Efficiency (MTEE) under which Bachat Lamp Yojana 
(BLY) and Super Efficient Equipment Programme (SEEP) is undertaken. The BLY is 
a public -private partnership program comprising of Bureau  of Energy Efficiency 
(BEE), Distribution Companies (DISCOMs) and private investors to accelerate 
market transformation in energy efficient lighting. After initially replacing 
incandescent bulbs by CFLs, BEE is now promoting use of LED lights using the 
institutional structure of BLY Programme. Under SEEP, appliances are identified and 
through fiscal incentives, their super-efficient versions are promoted. The Committee 
have been informed that 70 W ceiling fans have been identified as the first appliance 
under the programme. As regards the BLY, the Committee agree that installing LED 
bulbs have resulted in energy savings, but there is a bigger problem of disposal of 
waste which the programme does not address. The wrong disposal of incandescent 
bulbs and CFL w hich were replaced by LED will create a huge ecological problem. 
Similarly there is no awareness campaign for consumers about the ways to correctly 
dispose the bulbs, CFLs and LEDs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should take adequate  steps to make people aware about how to dispose 
such waste so that they do not create environmental problems. As regards SEEP, 
the Committee feel that energy guzzling appliances such as air -conditioners, 
microwave ovens, geysers have to be expeditiously i ncluded in the programme for 
maximum impact on energy savings. Similarly, alongwith replacement of CFLs and 
incandescent bulbs, the wires and switch boxes which have become very old and 
obsolete also need to be replaced to attain better energy efficiency. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 There are specific norms for E -waste management which covers safe 
disposal of LEDs and fall under the mandate of Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) & Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB). 
 Under S&L programme, BEE has introduced energy performance standards 
for 10 mandatory and 18 voluntary appliances as per table given below: 
 
S. 
No.  Mandatory Appliances  S. 
No.  Voluntary Appliances 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
6 
Room Air Conditioners 
Frost Free Refrigerator Tubular  
Florescent Lamp Distribution 
Transformer 
Room Air Conditioner 
(Cassette, Floor Standing)  
Direct Cool Refrigerator  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Induction Motors  
Pump Sets  
Ceiling Fans  
LPG-Stoves 
Washing Machine  
Computer (Notebook/Laptops) 
Ballast (Electronic/Magnetic) 

 
100 
 
 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Color TV 
Storage type Electric Water Heater 
Inverter Air Conditioner  
LED lamps 
8 
 
9 
 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
 
17 
18 
 
Office Equipment (Printer, 
Copier, Scanner, MFD's) 
Diesel Engine Driven  
Mono-set Pumps 
Solid State Inverter 
DG Sets  
Chillers  
Microwave Ovens 
Solar Water Heater  
Deep Freezers 
Light Commercial Air 
Conditioners (LCAC)  
UHD Televisions  
Air Compressors 
 
 
 As regards to incentivizing the super -efficient appliances to enhance their 
market share, Energy Efficiency Services Limited (EESL) has initiated actions. 
Currently Super-Efficient Air Conditioning programme is under implementation 
on demand aggregation model. These Super -Efficient ACs provide 1.5 -TR 
cooling capacity at high ambient temperature while also reducing the cost of 
cooling by 50%. As on date, around 1, 300 Super -Efficient Air Conditioners 
have been sold. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 15 
 
The Committee would also like to recommend for use of energy efficient appliances 
in the Government buildings for which LED lights, BEE rated 5 -star ACs and ceiling 
fans should be retrofitted in the existing Government buildings. In the newly 
constructed buildings, the use of energy efficient appliances should be made 
mandatory. 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 BEE has launched the updated version of Energy Conservation Building Code 
(ECBC) in the year 2017 and the newly code is futuristic, and easy to 
implement. The new version has three levels of compliance i.e. ECBC, 
ECBC+ and Super ECBC. The ECBC specifies building parameter and 
technical specification for appliances used in buildings. Alongwith the above, 
BEE has also developed a regulatory framework for enforcement of ECBC by 
states and UTs. Till June 2021, 20 States and UTs have notified ECBC in  
their states and 48 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) from 8 States have 
incorporated provisions of ECBC for building approval process. 
 In order to bring energy efficiency in existing commercial buildings, BEE has 
developed a voluntary star rating programme for b uildings which is based on 

 
101 
 
 
the energy usage in the building over its area expressed in kWhisqm/year. 
The programme rates buildings on scale of 1 -5, with 5 -star rating being the 
most efficient. Star labels for day use office buildings, BPOs, Hospitals and 
shopping malls have been developed. This program rates buildings on 1 -5 
scale, with 5 star labelled buildings being most efficient. As on June 2021, 264 
buildings have been awarded star rating. 
 BEE has also signed a MoU with CPWD in the year 2019 for promot ing 
Energy Efficiency in CPWD managed Government buildings. 
 Further, the Ministry of Finance has issued Office Memorandum (OM) no. 
26/6/12- PPD dated 21st January 2013 for procurement of energy efficient 
electrical appliances and OM no. 25(24)/E.Coord/2017 dated 4th August 2017 
for mandatory installation of LED based lighting in all Government buildings. 
 In order to promote energy efficiency in residential building sector, the 
residential building energy conservation code (Eco Niwas Samhita) and 
labeling pr ogram for residential building have been developed. In addition, 
“ECO-NIWAS” Portal (www.econiwas.com) has been launched to raise 
awareness and make people understand the energy efficiency measures in 
buildings. 
 BEE has provided financial assistance to 5 s tates namely Maharashtra, 
Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh for 
construction of Super ECBC buildings. 
 BEE has conducted feasibility study of 100 existing buildings to understand 
the energy consumption scenario & provide solution s to the building 
representatives for achieving. Near Zero Energy Building (NZEB) status. The 
program covers five categories of buildings as Educational Institutions, Health 
Care, Hospitality, Shopping Complex and Transportation (Airports, Railway 
Stations and Metro Stations). 
 In order to reduce the cooling demand across sectors and to reduce the 
cooling energy requirements, Government of India launched “India Cooling 
Action Plan (ICAP)" in 2019. ICAP recommends strategies to propagate 
sustainable way of li ving by adoption of climate friendly cooling technologies 
and strategies to reduce the cooling requirement and related energy demand 
across various sectors of the Indian economy. The India Cooling Action Plan 
seeks to reduce cooling energy requirements of 25% to 40% by 2037-38. 
 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 24 
 
The Committee note that plantation activity is one of the key aspects of the mission. 
During the FY 2015-16 plantation activity was carried out in 32451.72 hectare area in 
four States of Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Manipur and Karnataka in forest and nonforest 
lands. Plantation was carried out in Punjab also in the FY 2016 -17. The Committee, 
however, are of the view that though plantation activity is aimed at increasing green 
cover, they cannot replace actual forest cover. Forest has plants and trees of 
numerous varieties and sizes and shapes. Forests grow naturally and according to 

 
102 
 
 
climate conditions existing in the area. Afforestation exercises are aimed at 
increasing tree count and there is no consideration to existing soil and weather 
conditions. As a result t rees like eucalyptus are planted which make environmental 
problems worse rather than solving it. Planting of unsuitable trees may cause 
drought, and prevent biodiversity in the regions. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that while planting trees and incr easing forest cover under the mission, 
adequate consideration should be given to the climate and soil and only trees that 
are native/suitable to the area should be planted. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 So far, Rs. 455.73 crores have been released to four teen States namely 
Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Manipur, Mizoram, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, 
Punjab, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Sikkim, West Bengal 
and Himachal Pradesh and one Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir for 
improving quality of forest and increasing forest/tree cover in 167151 ha within 
the GIM Landscapes. 
 The interventions of GIM aims at improving forest and tree Cover and 
enhancing ecosystem services like carbon sequestration and storage (in 
forests and other ecosystems), hydrological services and biodiversity. 
However, the State Governments have been advised to select landscape and 
native/suitable plant species for plantation based on the local climatic/soil 
conditions and other requirements. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 25 
 
The Committee note that India has made the target of sequestering 2.523 
billion tonnes of carbon by 2020-30. As per experts, our current forest cover is 
75 million hectare and for meeting our targets of carbon sequestration, 30 
million more hectare land f or forests would be required. The mission 
document does not make it clear as to from where this land is going to be 
arranged. As noted before, till 2016 -17 afforestation programme targeted to 
cover only 51387 hectare which is a tiny proportion of what is n eeded. The 
Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that a holistic approach to increasing 
green cover and protecting existing trees is needed. The Committee feel that 
all aspects of urban and regional planning including architectural and other 
sciences have to work on the premise that trees are critical to our survival and 
they have to be protected at all costs. Similarly, protection of trees and forests 
are also linked to the protection of people who are dependent on forest 
produces for their livelihood. Unless interests of these people are protected by 
making appropriate changes in the law/policy, no amount of plantation 
exercise will succeed. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the mission 
should incorporate human as well as physical elements in its  programme 
formulation and implementation. 
 

 
103 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 The Ministry has initiated the process for revision of Mission Document of 
National Mission for a Green India in terms of the decision taken in the Prime 
Minister's Executive Council on Climate Change and in line with NDCs targets 
submitted by Government of India under UNFCCC. The Mission focus on 
taking up afforestation  and other related activities on degraded forest 
landscapes and other vacant lands wherever feasible. 
 So far, Rs. 45 5.73 crores have been released to fourteen States and one 
Union Territory for improving quality of forest and increasing forest/tree cover 
in 167151 ha. Adequate financial allocation is required for the mission so that 
the mission activities can be carried out in remaining states also. 
 The Mission promotes to enhance tree cover in Urban & Peri -Urban areas 
(including institutional lands). The mission also seek convergence with 
already ongoing schemes  / programmes such as AMRUT, MGNREGA, 
CAMPA, National Watershed Mission, National Bamboo Mission, etc. 
 The Mission provides to unlock people's energy and solicit their engagement 
with the  greening program. It strives to secure participation of multiple 
agencies / organizations / individuals (community, farmers, Panchayat bodies, 
Government /  Non-Government, Private institutions / agencies, academia, 
business houses, children  especially in rural communities, media, etc.) in 
greening activities. This approach  supports the implementing agencies for 
undertaking the Mis sion's activities like  planning, plantation, maintenance, 
monitoring, research, capacity building, awareness,  livelihood improvement 
activities, etc. with active participation of local communities.  The Mission 
provides for 17% of total allocation of Annual  Plan of Operations of the  States 
for carrying out the livelihood improvement activities of household living in and 
around areas. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
National Mission for Green India 
Emphasing the need of comprehensive planning for rural and urban areas under 
National Mission on Sustainable Habitat, the Committee had recommeded as under: 
“The Committee note that the National Mission on Sustainable Habitat 
(NMSH) aims at promoting sustainability of habitats though improvements in 
energy efficiency in buildings, urban planning, improved management of solid 
and liquid waste including recyclin g and power generation, modal shift 
towards public transport and conservation. The Committee find that major 
components of the mission are, improvements in energy efficiency in buildings 
through extension of energy conservation building code, better urban planning 
and modal shift to public transport, improved solid, liquid waste management 
in urban areas, improved ability of habitats to adapt to climate change by 


 
104 
 
 
improving resilience in infrastructure, community based disaster management 
and measures for ad vance warning system for extreme weather events and 
conservation through appropriate changes in legal and regulatory framework. 
The objectives of the mission are being met through schemes such as Atal 
Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRU T), Swachh 
Bharat Mission, Smart Cities Mission and Urban Transport Programme. By 
the year 2021, these four schemes will result in mitigating GHG emission of 
133 million tonnes and by the year 2031, the mitigation will be to the tune of 
270 million tonnes.  The Committee find that the emphasis of the mission is 
limited to urban habitats only. There is no attention to rural habitats. As the 
population of the Country increases, there will be expansion of cities with 
villages subsumed within the cities. If the integrated plan under the mission 
does not take into account the requirements of the rural habitats, the problem 
would not be fully addressed. The Committee are of the view that mission on 
sustainable habitat has to see the habitat landscape in totality, o nly then 
sustainable solutions are possible. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the mission should introduce a comprehensive and integrated planning 
encompassing the needs of both rural as well as urban habitats. The 
Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.” 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
“The subjects of housing and urban development are in the ambit of State 
Governments. However, Union (Government plays a catalytic role through 
formulation and administration of various Policies a nd Missions, 
implementation of which is done by the State Governments. Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) is mandated to formulate policies on 
Urban Sector only, while Ministry of Rural Development formulates policies 
and programmes pertaining to the Rural Sector. Preparation of plans for cities 
and villages also comes within the purview of State Governments. For 
planned development, MoHUA has formulated Urban and Regional 
Development Plan Formulation and Implementation (URDPFI) Guidelines, 
which advocates preparation of comprehensive and integrated planning 
encompassing the needs of urban habitats.” 
Recommendation - Para No. 30 
The Committee in their 15th Report (16th Lok Sabha) had recommended to 
make suitable provision under 'Namami Gange' to p rovide bio-digester toilets 
in all the villages and towns on the banks of Ganga and its tributaries in a time 
bound manner. The Committee while taking note of the fact that human 
excreta if buried in soil, converts into manure and if discharged in the water, 
poisons the water, would like to reiterate their recommendation and would 
urge the Government to act in a time bound manner. 
 


 
105 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
The assessed performance of Bio -digester toilets gives no assurance of its 
effluent meeting th e environment qualities desired by the Committee any 
better than that by a Septic tank system. Further, no urban household is, 
anyway, permitted to discharge human excreta into water or bury it directly in 
soil. 
Recommendation - Para No. 32 
 
The Committee note that the National Mission on Sustainable Habitat is of critical 
importance to make our habitats - both urban and rural better, livable and with 
minimal carbon footprint. To make it possible, an integrated approach to resolving 
existing issues of pollu tion, congestion and environmental degradation is needed. 
This also requires people's participation. Private sector participation is also important 
as the need for funding may not be fulfilled by the Government alone. However, the 
people arc most important  clement of this programme and without their active 
participation, the programme will not succeed. Adequate steps to encourage 
people's participation and involvement of private sector in the programme should, 
therefore, be taken. 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
National Mission for Sustainable H abitat(NMSH) 2021 provides an overarching 
framework for sustainable urbanization and addr essing climate change through, 
various mitigation and adaptation strategies in the coming decade i.e. 2021-2030. As 
pan of NMSH 2021, the M inistry is undertaking the following acti vities under its 
flagship missions to ensure active participation of people as well as private sector. 
Swachh Bharat Mission-Urban actively engages with all development 
partners, knowledge partners, sector partners and industry to leverage their 
support and assistance to accelerate Mission outcomes on the ground, as 
well as to strengthen institutional capacities in the SWM and Used water 
management sectors. 
 
Under Swachh Bharat Mission 2.0, projects under PPP mode arc encouraged, 
to invite private capital in urban infrastructure as well as to bring in private 
sector efficiency in delivery of urban services and O&M. It is also understood 
that in the current scenario, there may be a requirement for viabi lity gap 
funding. For Solid Waste Management, revenue streams such as Compost 
from organic waste, Recycled construction material from C&D waste, etc. can 
be leveraged, while for waste water management, revenue streams such as 
compost from fecal waste, sale of recycled waste water etc. may be leveraged 
from PPP projects. 
 

 
106 
 
 
SBM-U 2.0 encourages adoption of locally innovated, cost effective solutions 
and business models in sanitation and solid waste management by small 
scale and private entrepreneurs and start-ups, through inves tments in R&D, 
Swachhata technology challenge and facilitation for inclusion in G eM, in order 
to take forward the government's vision of an " Aatma Nirbhar Bharat" and 
"Make in India", 
 
AII the ULBs explore pos sibility to take up the  projects in a PPP mode 
(including cluster level projects catering to ULBs of varying popu lation 
categories). Government of  lndia funds as per prescribed fu nding pattern will 
be available for claiming VGF. Payment of VGF from Central assistance will 
be 50% of the gap funding subject to maximum of  30% of project cost, or as 
could be the prevalent Central government guidelines. This could be paid in 
normal PPP mode or Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM) through escrow account. 
Release of VGF grants will be as per contractual arrangement with the private 
partner and as approved by State Government. However, it will be ensured 
that funds do no t remain parked with the State G overnments. For cluster 
projects taken up on EPC mode, the fund release will be on pro -rata basis, 
depending on population category of UL Bs proposed to be covered under the 
cluster. 
 
Under Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) 2.0, 
Public Private Participation (PPP) projects are mandatory in million plus ci ties 
and at least a minimum of 10% of total fund allocation at the city level shall be 
committed to PPP projects. Projects with focus on selling treated water to 
industries and other users may be the potential projects for implementing 
under PPP mode. Such projects can be taken up in Hybrid Annuity Model 
(HAM) or any other suitable model. Viability gap funding for such proj ects will 
be provided through CA . C A will be 50% of the viabi lity gap subject t o 
maximum of 3 0% of the project cost. Balance viability gap will be borne by 
State / ULB. Total viability gap will not exceed 60%) of project cost. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 36 
 
The Committee note that India supports 15 percent of the world’s population, 
but has only 4 percent of the world’s water resources. The data also shows 
that only 35 percent of India’s agricultural land is irrigated. This means that a 
huge 65 percent of farming depends totally on rain. Not much has been done 
to conserve water for of fseason use. Even after constructing 4,525 large and 
small dams, the country has managed to create per capita storage of only 213 
cubic meters - compared to 6,103 cubic  m per capita in Russia, 4,733 in 
Australia, 1,964 in the United States, and 1,111 in  China. India’s water crisis 
stems from the fact that it is highly dependent on a few  major river systems, 
especially the Ganges and its tributaries, for its water supply. But  India use 
almost twice the amount of water to grow crops as compared to China and  

 
107 
 
 
United States. Main reasons for this are power subsidies for agriculture 
leading to decline in water levels and also the policy to give price support to 
water intensive crops  such as sugarcane, wheat and rice. As a result these 
crops are being grown even in those areas with the use of groundwater and 
chemical fertilizers where geographical  conditions for these crops are not 
appropriate. Moreover, new hybrid seeds give more  yield but they also need 
more water. As a result the traditional farming systems and  practices have 
been obliterated because there is no Government support or income  support 
to farmers for them. India’s agricultural sector currently accounts for over 90  
percent of total water drawn, but contributes only 15 percent to the country’s 
GDP. As a result of Government's policy to provide free water and power to 
farmers, crops such as rice are being grown in semi -arid areas of Punjab and 
Haryana and sugarcane is  being grown in dry areas of Maharashtra. The 
Committee are concerned that such  heavy u se of groundwater is causing 
steep decline of groundwater levels in many States  and the country is moving 
towards becoming a water scarce Country. The Committee,  therefore, 
recommend that the Government should formulate appropriate policy  
measures for prom oting efficient irrigation methods such as drip irrigation, 
sprinkler systems for irrigation. Moreover, water efficient crop varieties should 
be developed through R&D in our research institutions such as ICAR. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is implementing ` Per Drop More 
Crop’ component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana(PMKSY) 
which is operational from 2015-16 in the Country. The PMKSY-Per Drop More 
Crop mainly focuses on water use efficiency at farm leve l through Micro 
Irrigation. Besides promoting precision irrigation (Drip and Sprinkler Irrigation 
System) and better onfarm water management practices to optimize the use 
of available water resources, this component also supports micro level water 
storage or water conservation/management activities to supplement Micro 
Irrigation.  
 
State-wise Year wise Released to the States under PMKSY- Per Drop More Crop 
Year 
 
Released (Rs. In Crore) 
 
Achievement (Coverage of 
Micro Irrigation) (Lakh Ha) 
 
2015-16 
2016-17 
1556.73 
1991.24 
5.72 
8.39 
2017-18 2819.49 10.48 
2018-19 2918.38 11.58 
2019-20 2700.01 11.72 
2020-21 2562.18 9.38 
Total 14548.03 57.31 
BE 4000 cr. allocated for the programme during 2021-22 

 
108 
 
 
 
State wise progress made under PMKSY -Per Drop More Crop during last four 
years is given at Annexure-V and Annexure-VI. 
 
 Micro-Irrigation Fund (MIF) created under NABARD 
 
Micro Irrigation Fund with corpus of Rs. 5000 crore has been created with 
NABARD during 2018 -19. The major objective of the fund is to facilitate the 
States in mobilizing the resources for expanding coverage of Micro Irrigation by 
taking up special and innovative projects (any project for covering micro irrigation 
such as Coverage in s pecific area, specific crop, canal command, 
synchronisation of water bodies for micro irrigation, etc.) and also for incentivising 
micro irrigation beyond the provisions available under PMKSY -PDMC to 
encourage farmers to install micro irrigation systems i. e. top-up subsidy projects 
(providing subsidy by states above the norms of scheme guidelines of Govt. of 
India). 
 Steering Committee of MIF and PSC of NABARD has approved projects  
amounting with loans under MIF to Rs. Rs. 3970.17 Crore. The total area of the 
projects is 12.81 lakh ha. 
 Out of the above approved amount, Rs. 1857.2874 crore has been released to 
the States of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Gujarat, Punjab & Tamil Nadu. Total 
area covered achieved till now is 7.18 lakh ha. 
To further strengthen & exp and the adoption of Micro Irrigation systems by the 
farmers in the county for enhancing water use efficiency at farm level, a Budget 
announcement has been made to double the initial corpus of Micro Irrigation 
Fund and augment it by another Rs. 5,000 crores. 
 
 Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare has been 
emphasizing promotion of suitable cropping systems under Crop Diversification 
Programme (CDP) under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and also 
supplement the efforts of the States to diversify agricultural/horticultural crops as 
per the local need  through various schemes viz. National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM), National  Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP), Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH),National Missi on for Sustainable 
Agriculture (NMSA) - Rainfed Area Development & Climate Change (RAD&CC) 
etc. 
 The farmers are encouraged to use available resources like land and water 
judiciously. The new technologies on cropping pattern are demonstrated at the 
farmers’ fields through State Department of Agriculture/Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR)/State Agricultural Universities (SAUs)/Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs), etc. 
 The farmers are given advisories for adoption of modern agronomic practices like 
raised bed sowing, alternate furrow irrigation, furrow irrigation, sprinkler irrigation, 
drip irrigation, mulching, Direct Seeded Rice (DSR), System of Rice 
Intensification (SRI), laser land leveling, adoption of drought tolerant varieties, 

 
109 
 
 
and diversifying  cropping pattern with low water requiring crops like pulses, 
oilseeds, maize and agroforestry. Trainings and Field Level Demonstrations etc. 
are conducted to educate farmers on all these aspects. 
 The Department encourages the farmers to take advantage of the s cheme by 
wide publicity through press & print media, publication of leaflets/booklets, 
organization of  workshops, exhibitions, farmer fairs, information on 
State/Government of India web  portals etc. In addition, Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) imparts training and organizes field demonstrations 
through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVK) to  educate farmers for promotion of Micro 
Irrigation. Demonstrations have been setup so  far in 160 Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
(KVKs) for educating the farmers for taking up MI technology to save water. 
 
 Under the National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) , a  
flagship programme of ICAR following progress has been made since 2011: 
 
 Climate resilient varieties of rice (CR Dhan 201), mungbean (IPM 205 -7 [Virat], 
IPM 2K14-9 [Varsha], IPM 409-4 [Heera] and IPM 302-2 [Kanika], lentil (IPL 534) 
and maize hybrid (CMH 08 -287) were developed. Rice variety (NICRA  Aerobic 
Dhan 1) is identified for release in 2021. 
 Rice variety CR Dhan 201 is a medium duration (110-115 days), semi dwarf, non-
lodging type suitable for water limited/aerobic conditions with an average  
productivity of 3.8 t ha -1. It is moderately resistant to leaf blast, sheath rot, stem  
borer, leaf folder and thrips etc. This variety is released for st ates of Chhattisgarh 
and Bihar for aerobic conditions. 
 Mungbean variety IPM 205-7 (Virat) is early maturing (52 -55 days), high yielding, 
resistant to yellow mosaic disease with an average productivity of 1.4 tha -1. It is 
suitable for summer cultivation for  states of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar  Pradesh, 
Karnataka, TamilNadu, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat. 
 Short duration mungbean variety IPM 2K14 -9 (Varsha) suitable for kharif 
cultivation in Uttar Pradesh. It matures in 60 -70 days and is highly resistant to  
yellow vein mosaic disease with yield potential of 1.4 t ha-1. 
 An extra short duration mungbean variety IPM 409-4 (Heera) matures in 55-65 
days, suitable for spring/summer cultivation and is recommended for release in 
Uttar Pradesh. 
 Short duration variety IPM 302 -2 (Kanika) suitable for cultivation in kharif and 
spring seasons, and is recommended for release in Uttar Pradesh. It is highly  
resistant to yellow mosaic disease, large attractive green and shining seeds. 
 An extra early lent il variety (IPL 534) is released for cultivation in Madhya  
Pradesh which avoids force maturity by sudden rise in temperature during pod  
filling. 
 Drought tolerant maize hybrid CMH 08 -287 with average productivity of 8.0t ha1  
is identified for cultivation in  the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand,  
Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Maharashtra. 
 
 

 
110 
 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 40 
 
As stated in Economic Survey (2017 -18) , according to a 2014 study by the 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), in 2008-09 the country generated 
620 million tonnes of crop residue, of which around 16 per cent was burnt on 
farms, of which 60 per cent was paddy, straw, whereas wheat accounted for 
just 22 percent. As per estimates, Punjab alone produces 19-20 million tonnes 
of paddy straw and about 20 million tonnes of what straw. About 85 -90 
percent of this paddy straw is burnt in the field, and, as the satellite images 
show, wheat straw is also increasingly being burnt in recent years. As per 
IARI report main reasons for burning crop residues in field include 
unavailability of labour, high cost in removing the residues and use of 
combines in rice -wheat cropping system especially in the Indo -Gangetic 
plains (IGP). The usage of combine harvesting machines is anot her reason 
because it only reaps the grains, leaving stalks or stubble of around 40 cm. 
Removing the stubble manually or by using specialized machines to do the 
job is costly. For every 0.4 ha of wheat crop, the cost of renting a combine 
harvester is just ₹800. Once the machine has harvested, the cost of getting 
the stubble removed is ₹3,500/ha. So the value of fodder is discounted 
because it is more economic for the farmers to just burn by using match box 
and clear the fields. 
The Committee understand that crop residue burning has been banned by the 
National Green Tribunal (NGT) in States of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, 
Haryana and Punjab parts of which constitute the National Capital Region, 
and in 2014, the Union Government had released the National Policy f or 
Management of Crop Residue, which NGT directed the States to implement. 
Besides crop residue burning is punishable under the Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. In spite of all these provisions, the problem of 
crop residue burning persi sts. Burning of crop residues leads to release of 
soot particles and smoke in the atmosphere causing human and animal health 
problems. It also leads to emission of greenhouse gases, namely carbon 
dioxide, carbon monoxide, methane and nitrous oxide, causing  global 
warming. These gases are of major concern for their global impact and also 
their local impact in causing rise in suspended particulate matter (SPM) in the 
nearby areas leading to health hazard. While appreciating banning burning of 
crop residue in States constituting NCR by NGT, the Committee observe that 
there is a need for consultation with the farmers and understanding their 
problems. The farmers should be incentivized for use of specialized machines 
which cut the crop residue from the bottom or removing the stubble manually 
without resorting to crop residue burning. Besides technological solutions are 
to be found under a time bound programme and Agriculture Engineering 
Departments should be incentivized to provide early cost effective alternative s 
for burning of crop residue. 
 

 
111 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
Paddy stubble burning is mainly practiced in Indo -Gangetic plains of the States of 
Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh to clear the fields for Rabi crop sowing. The 
farmers are resorting to paddy straw burning because of very short time window 
between the harvesting of paddy crop and the sowing of next crop. 
 To address air pollution and to subsidize machinery required for in -situ 
management of crop residue, a Central Sector Scheme on ‘Promotion of 
Agricultural Mechanization for In -Situ Management of Crop Residue in the 
States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi’ for the period 
from 2018-19 to 2019-20 is being implemented. During the year 2018 -19 and 
2019-20, the funds as under have be en released under the aforementioned 
scheme: 
State/Agency Funds released (Rs. in Crores) 
 
 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total 
 
Punjab 269.38 273.80 272.50 815.68 
 
Haryana 137.84  
 
192.06 170.00 499.9 
Uttar Pradesh 148.60 105.28 120.20 374.08 
 
NCT of Delhi 0 4.52 0.00 4.52 
 
ICAR and 
other 
Central 
Agencies 
28.51 18.48 8.00 54.99 
 
Total 584.33 594.14 570.70 1749.17 
 
 
Out of these funds, during last 3 years, the State Governments have 
established more than 30900 Custom Hiring Centres of crop residue 
management machinery to provide machines & equipment to the small and 
marginal farmers on rental basis. A total of more than 1.58 lakh crop residue 
management machines have been supplied to these established CHCs and 
the farmers of these four States for management of crop residue. 
The State Governments and Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) have also 
undertaken Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities on a 
massive scale for creating awareness among farmers. 
In 2020 season, through the concentrate d efforts of this scheme, a reduction 
in number of paddy residue burning events in comparison to 2016 in the State 

 
112 
 
 
of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Punjab were reported as 64%, 52% and 23% 
respectively. 
 Under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) programme all the NFSM 
implementing states have been given flexibility to take up the farm 
machineries/tools at the subsidized rates as per the guidelines of Sub -Mission 
on Agricultural Mechanization. Awareness is also created amongst the 
farmers through training to avoid stubble burning. 
 In Punjab and Haryana, emphasis has been on zero till planting of wheat in 
rice residues with happy seeder as alternative to crop residue burning. The 
efforts of NICRA led to making of 26 villages as residue burning free villages 
adjoining the NICRA villages in the states of Punjab and Haryana. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 49 
 
To conclude, Climate Change issues cannot be resolved with a fragmented  
approach. They require holistic solution. Any one aspect of environmental change  
quickly interacts with other components. A slight increase in global warming affects  
climate, agriculture, health, water (river and underground), life on coastal regions,  
urban habitats and so on. The Committee strongly recommend to take a holistic view 
of the exi stential problem and find holistic solutions with great urgency. The 
Committee recommend to constitute a Mission Mode Authority with Prime Minister to 
preside and review all the efforts. The Authority should include representatives of all 
the Missions  and provide a holistic approach for resolving the climate issues. The 
recent cataclysmic  happenings spread over from Uttarakhand to Kerala are the 
nature's warning bells and  the sound is too high in decibels to be ignored. The 
Committee recommend an urgent  action on the part of the Government under a 
time-bound programme. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
A Prime Minister’s Council on Climate Change (PMCCC) chaired by Honourable 
Prime Minister already exists. The nodal agency for coordination and implementation 
of this action is Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change. 
  

 
113 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 8 
National Solar Mission 
The Committee find from the data made available by the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy that whereas the performance of NSM during Phase -I 
(2010-2013) remained satisfactory with achievement of installation/sanctioned 
solar power generation both grid and off-grid, i.e., 1938.94 MW surpassing the 
targets of 1300 MW and installation of 7.01 million sq.m of collector areas 
against the target of 7 million sq.m, the performance has slowed down during 
Phase-Il (2013 -2017) of the Mission. The targets of 15900 MW under grid -
connected solar power could not be achieved fully with achievement 
remaining 10602.83 MW thus the shortfall being 5297.17 MW. Under the off -
grid solar applications segment, although the power sanctioned, i.e., 713 MW 
surpassed the targets of 600 MW, the installed power remained just 345.5 
MW. Under Solar Thermal Collectors Segment, there is underachievement of 
targets, achievement being 5 million sq.m against the targets of 8 million 
sq.m. So far as the performance during the year 2017 -18 is concerned, 
although tenders have been issued in respect of 22945 MW, the power 
commissioned is just 4804 MW. For another 10 048 MW, PPA has been 
signed but it is not commissioned. The Committee express strong concern 
over the slowdown of the performance under the Solar Mission during Phase -
Il and recommend to critically review the performance so as to understand the 
reasons for  the shortfall in achieving the set targets. Since Phase -Ill of the 
Mission has already commenced, it is utmost necessary to take the corrective 
actions besides effective monitoring of the projects so as to achieve the 
ambitious target of 100000 MW by 2021-22. 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. Concerted efforts are 
being made in this regard in consultation with various stakeholders. Further, 
regular review meetings/video conferences have been taken by various  levels 
to review the progress from time to time and to achieve the set targets without 
any shortfall. 
Phase-wise targets have not been achieved as targeted. However, the 
progress has picked up in last few years. The installed solar capacity has 
increased by — 200% with addition of — 45 GW in last five years. As on 31 -
05-2023, a cumulative capacity of 67,821 MW of solar power projects has 
already been installed in the country. Further, a capacity of around 51,413 
MW is under implementation, for which a Lett er of Intents (Lol) has been 
issued, and about 48,878 MW is under the tendering stage. 

 
114 
 
 
Regarding solar thermal collector installations, 12 million sq. meters solar 
thermal collector area have been installed (specific scheme ended in 2017 -
18). At present, its installation is taking place in market mode. 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 9 
So far as State -wise commissioning of grid -connected solar projects is 
concerned, there is uneven performance in various States. Whereas Andhra 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tel angana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh and Punjab remained the first eight leading States with total 
cumulative capacity in MW as being, 1998.83, 1871.22, 1697.32, 1609.27, 
1249.37, 1082.48, 857.04 and 809.45 respectively, the performance in some 
other big States having larger area of land like Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, 
J&K, Odisha and Chhattisgarh, notso encouraging. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should review State -wise performance of the 
projects and take the required initiatives particularly in remote and hilly areas. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. Efforts are being made 
in this regard, in consultation with various stakeholders. It is a fact that solar 
installations in various States, es pecially Hilly and North Eastern States, are 
low as it depends on various factors such as solar radiation, land availability, 
State policies etc. 
As on 31 -05-2023, total cumulative solar installation in Maharashtra, Uttar 
Pradesh, J&K, Odisha and Chhattisg arh are 4725 MW, 2520 MW, 50 MW, 
458 MW and 950 MW respectively. 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) conducts regular review 
meetings with State Governments/developers for installation of Renewable 
Energy Projects. 
Under the Solar Park scheme, smal ler parks in the Himalayan & other hilly 
States where contiguous land may be difficult, are also considered. Further, 
smaller parks may also be considered in States/UTs with shortage of non -
agricultural lands. 
As on 31 -05-2023, Solar Parks of cumulative ca pacity of 750 MW in 
Maharashtra, 3730 MW in Uttar Pradesh, 340 MW in Odisha and 20 MW in 
Mizoram are sanctioned. The Solar Park in Mizoram is already developed. 
The other parks are at various stages of implementation. 
  

 
115 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 39  
The Committee note from a media report that NITI Aayog has recently urged to  all 
the States to work towards giving practical shape to the Zero Budget Natural  
Farming (ZBNF) on the lines of Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh, for which 
the Aayog will provide all assistance. Zero Budget Natural Farming system has been 
stated to have the advantages which include saving of water, protecting the 
environment, increase in the fertility of land and under this system the cost of 
production becomes  zero an d products are non -poisonous. While appreciating the 
move of the NITI Aayog  to give emphasis to traditional ways of farming, the 
Committee would like the  Government to furnish the details of the aforesaid model 
and plans to implement ZBNF system by various States/UTs. 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 Government of India has been promoting organic farming for the welfare of 
farmers through the dedicated scheme of Paramparagat Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (PKVY) since 2015-16. Under PKVY, flexibility is given to States to 
adopt any model of organic  farming including ZBNF depending on farmers’ 
choice. 
 Bhartiya Prakritik Krishi Paddhti (BPKP) - A new Sub Mission has been  
proposed under PKVY Scheme. EFC note has been prepared for 
implementation of  BPKP- Sub Mission under PK VY and submitted to D/O 
Expenditure for consideration. 
 Under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), States can avail funds for any 
agriculture development projects including ZBNF with the approval of State 
Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC). The States of A ndhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Kerala,  Himachal Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh have been 
implementing ZBNF. 
 
States Promoting ZBNF 
 
 Karnataka – has initiated implementation of ZBNF on pilot basis in an area of 
2000 ha  in each of the 10 Agro Climatic Zones of the State through the 
respective State  Agriculture/ horticulture Universities as demonstrations/ 
Scientific experimental trials  in farmer’s fields and in the research stations of 
the concerned universities 
 Himachal Pradesh - is implementing State funded scheme  ‘Prakritik Kheti 
Khushal Kisan’ since May, 2018, the details of which are as:  
 
2018-19 – 2669 farmers, Area: 357 ha.  
2019-20 – 19936 Farmers, Area: 1155 ha. 
 

 
116 
 
 
 Kerala – Only awareness programmes, trainings and workshops to draw 
interest of farmers towards ZBNF has been imparted. 
 
 Andhra Pradesh - launched ZBNF in September 2015 under the Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana and Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana. The details on 
area covered and farmers practicing ZBNF, for the last 3 years are as follows: 
 
 
Year  No. of 
farmers  
Area covered 
(ha) 
2016-17  40656  16660 
2017-18  163000  69175 
2018-19  523000  200400 
 
 
Recommendation - Para No. 44 
 
The Committee, vide para 1 of this part, have noted that glaciers in the  Himalayan 
region are retreating at an alarming rate. As per media reports, due to glacial retreat, 
Himalayan region has lost 13percent of its glaciers in last four decades  resulting in 
loss of 443 billion tonnes (Gt) glacial ice. The rate of retreat of glaciers in  the region, 
which varies from glacier to glacier, ranges from a few metres to almost 61  m/year. If 
the same rate continues, it is apprehended that the glaciers are likely to disappear by 
the year 2035. It is also reported that the rate of glacial loss in the  Himalayas has 
accelerated over the decades, from around 9 Gt/year in 1975 -85 to 20  Gt/year in 
2000-2010. Glaciers are reported to be retreating faster in Western Himalaya  than in 
Sikkim. The effect of glacial retreat and their eventual disappearance will  change the 
weather pattern and be catastrophic for the entire region affecting crop  cycles, 
economic development, health, water availability, weather etc. The Committee,  
therefore, recommend that adequate financial allocation be made and adequate  
infrastructure be created for extensive study of the Himalayan ecosystem to measure 
the retreat of all the glaciers existing in the region and the ways to mitigate its 
effects. Besides there is a need to regulate Himalayan Eco -tourism. A Committee 
comprising of experts to formulate the guidelines, to be observed while preparing the 
roadmap for  Himalayan Eco -tourism, should be constituted. The guidelines should 
be designed keeping in view the entire Himalayan range from West to East. Urgent 
steps are  required to create a mechanism involving al l the stakeholders who are 
directly or indirectly affected by the changes in Himalayan system so that integrated 
approach is  adopted in the entire Himalayan area. Such a platform will need 
international cooperation from all the countries falling in/connected to the Himalayan 
range. 
 
 
 

 
117 
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 
 The glaciers dynamics are being studied at the centres of excellence 
supported by DST at Divecha Centre, IISc Bangalore, Kashmir University and 
Sikkim University. 
 A centre of Glaciology is functioning at Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology,  
Dehradun. 
 An inter-University Consortium on “The Himalayan Cryosphere: Science, and  
Society comprising of four Indian Universities viz., Jawaharlal Nehru 
University, New Delhi, University of Kashmir, Srinagar J & K, University of 
Jammu, J & K and  Sikkim Central University, Gangtok, Sikkim are formed to 
look into subject. A  national network programme on glaciology has been 
launched. 
 Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehra dun, an autonmous instituti on of 
DST has been monitoring 10 major glaciers of the Indian Himalayan region for 
research purpose. These include; Gangotri, Dokriani, Chorabari, Dunagiri, 
Bangni, Pindari, Kafani, Pensilungpa, Durung Darang, and Prakachik glaciers. 
 2 Task Forces one each  at Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology and 
National Institute of Hydrology (NIH) carrying out research on Geo - resources 
and impact assessment of geological processes in NW Himalayan Ecosystem 
and Water, Ice,  and Snow including Glaciers – Integrated Hydr ological 
Studies for Upper Ganga Basin up to Rishikesh. 
 An inter-University Consortium on “The Himalayan Cryosphere: Science, and  
Society comprising of four Indian Universities viz., Jawaharlal Nehru 
University, New Delhi, University of Kashmir, Srinagar J  & K, University of 
Jammu, J & K and  Sikkim Central University, Gangtok, Sikkim are formed to 
look into subject. 
 A National Network Programme on Climate Change and Himalayan 
Cryosphere with 7 research projects launched in 2018. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI             DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
    February  2024        CHAIRPERSON 
    Magha 1945 (Saka)                  COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
  

 
118 
 
 
APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
  
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 1st February, 2024 from 1000 hrs. 
to 1045 hrs in Room No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
3. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
4. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
5. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
6. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
7. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
8. Shri Pratap Simha 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
10. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
11. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
12. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
13. Kunwar Danish Ali 
14. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Shri Santosh Kumar  -       Joint Secretary 
           2. Shri Muraleedharan. P     -       Director 
                              
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of  
the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of 
the following draft Reports: 

 
119 
 
 
(i)  XXX   XXX   XXX 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in 30 th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on  the subject “ Performance of the National Action 
Plan on Climate Change”; and 
 
3.       The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Reports. The 
Committee then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on 
the basis of factual verification received from the concerned Ministry and 
present the same to Lok Sabha. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
120 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTIETH REPORT (SIXTEETH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES    
 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations   
   
48 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
(Sl. Nos. 2-6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16-23, 27-29, 31, 33-35, 37, 38, 41-
43, 45-48)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
33 
 
 
 
68.75% 
    
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply Percentage 
of total recommendations  
(Sl No. 7, 14, 15, 24, 25, 26, 30, 32, 36, 40 & 49)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
11 
 
 
 
  22.92%   
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
(Sl. Nos. 8 & 9)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations                                     
                        
  2 
 
 
 
 4.16%     
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies 
of Government are still awaited.  
(Sl. No. 39 & 44)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations                                                 
   2 
 
 
 
  4.16%      
 
 
 
 