25 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
Review of National Disaster Response Force 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 13th 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
Review of National Disaster Response Force 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 13th 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on……………….) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
.........March, 2023/......Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
 

     CONTENTS          Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2022-23)      (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iv) 
           
             
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the 16th Sitting of the Committee on Estimates held on    
16.03.2023  
 
38 
II. Analysis Of Action taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 13th Report of 
 the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I Report  1 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government         
16 
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
27 
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
28 
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply 
of Government is still awaited 
30 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
 Shri Girish Bhalchandra  Bapat – Chairperson 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
6. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
13. Shri jual Oram 
14. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
15. Shri Dilip Saikia  
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
17. Dr. K.C. Patel 
18. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
19. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
20. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
21. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
22. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
23. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
24. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
25. Shri Prathap Simha 
26. Shri Pinaki Misra 
27. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
28. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
29. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
30. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 

iii 
 
Secretariat                            
  
1. Smt.  Anita Bhatt Panda Additional Secretary 
2. Shri  Muraleedharan. P Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Pegu  Under Secretary 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperso n of the Committee on Estimates (2022-23) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Twenty-Fifth Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 13th Report of the Committee on the subject ‘ Review of National 
Disaster Response Force’ pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
2.  The 13th Report of the Committee on Estimates was presented to Lok Sabha on 
4th April, 202 2. The Government furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in the 13th Report on 03 October, 2022 . The draft report 
was considered and approved on 16 March, 2023, by the Committee. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 13th Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI;  
  16 March, 2023         
 25 Phalguna ,1944 (Saka) 
 
GIRISH BHALCHANDRA  BAPAT 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee  deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Thirteenth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Review of National Disaster Response 
Force” pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
  
2.       The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 04.04.2022. It contained 
15 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry  
of Home Affairs. 
 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-   
  
(i)Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation. Para No 3,4,6,7,8,10,11,12,14 and 15 
      Total: 10 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government’s reply: NIL       
              Total: 00 
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)     Observations/Recommendations in respect of whic h Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation. Nos. 01 and 13       
                  Total:02 
(Chapter-IV) 
  
 
(iv)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:  
 Recommendation. No. 2,5,9                                                                                  
                 Total: 03 
(Chapter-V) 

2 
 
  
4.       The Committee desire that   Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final Action Taken Reply in 
respect of the recommendation s contained in C hapter-V for which interim replies  have 
been given by the Government may be furnished to them within six months of the 
presentation of the  Report to the House. 
 
5.       The Committee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
 Observations/Recommendations (Para Nos. 1 and 13) 
 
6. In their recommendation contained in the original 13 th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“Natural and man -made disasters have had their sad history in India. With a worrying 
climate change in the last few decades, the Country has seen many disasters like floods 
in various States like Bihar, Kashmir a nd Uttarakhand and in cities like Mumbai and 
Chennai, Indian Ocean Tsunami, Gujarat Earthquake, Odisha super cyclone etc. 
Hence, the need for a dedicated force like NDRF was felt and consequently the same 
has been raised by the Government. The Committee no te the achievements of the 
National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) in dealing with various types of disasters in 
the Country since its inception in 2006. It, quite appreciably, has not only rescued and 
evacuated innumerable human lives but also rescued liv estock during their operations, 
with professional expertise and requisite dedication so far. The Committee have been 
made to understand that during the time of the setting up of NDRF, there were many 
challenges before the Government and hence, it was decid ed to consider NDRF as 
100% deputationist force, drawing personnel from the Central Armed Police Forces 
(CAPFs) for a period of 7 years, with the objective to keep it as a young force. Besides, 
being at the peak of physical agility, Youth force is dynamic in nature as most skills and 
orientations are acquired in this age. The Committee, hence, recommend that while the 
concept of 100% deputationist force is apt for the purpose, it may be reviewed to 
include participation of suitably fit and trained youth fro m other organizations too, for 
instance, senior NCC cadets, for operational and administrative purposes in NDRF. The 
upper age of 45 as fixed may continue. As India has one of the youngest populations in 
the world, this will also help in availability of ad ditional employment opportunities for the 
youth in the Country”. 
(Para no. 1) 
 

3 
 
7.  In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee note that all CAPFs have been requested to provide 108 women 
(Mahila) personnel for each NDRF Bn. within the strength of NDRF for rescue and relief 
operations especially for women victims. However, so far only 170 such personnel have 
joined the NDRF. The Committee appreciate the idea of participation of Mahila 
personnel in the NDRF. They would  like to know as to how the number of 108 Mahila 
personnel for each NDRF Bns. has been worked out. The Committee are also of the 
view that sports women and senior NCC women 40 cadets, who are physically fit and 
fulfil NDRF pre -conditions, may be considered  for induction so that presence of 
adequate Mahila personnel in each NDRF Bn. can be ensured within a stipulated time 
frame”. 
(para no 13) 
8. The Ministry of Home Affairs In their Action Taken Repl ies, has stated as 
under: 
 “NDRF is a 100% deputationist fo rce and thus personnel from various CAPFs & 
Police Organizations are posted in NDRF on deputation for a period of seven years  to 
maintain young profile in the Force , as the nature of protracted rescue duties require 
young & energetic personnel for various rescue operations. As regards the participation 
of trained youth from other organizations in NDRF  especially form NCC, it is stated that 
deputation to NDRF is allowed from Government organizations only whereas NCC is a 
Voluntary Organization. As such it ma y not be feasible to take NCC cadets on 
deputation in NDRF. However, it is apt to mention here that NDRF have trained 8266 
trainees from Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) in disaster management and their 
database has been maintained in NDRF for utilizing their services whenever required 
during disaster and community awareness programmes”.  
(Reply to Recommendation Para no. 1) 
 
“No women Unit is authorized/formed in NDRF. H owever, all CAPFs have been 
requested to send nomination of 108 Mahila personnel for each NDRF Unit within the 
authorization of CTs  (GD)/Male in NDRF for  rescue and relief operations for women 
victims.  
 
Each NDRF Battalion is having 06 Coys and each Coy consisting 03 teams, all CAPFs 
were requested to provide Mahila team to each Battalion of NDRF as per following 
composition against the authorization of 1149 posts in a NDRF Battalion so that 
services of Mahila contingent can be utilized in all Coys of NDRF: 
 
Inspector (GD)/Sub Inspector 
(GD) 
06 (01 per 
Coy) 
Head Constable (GD) 18 (03 per 

4 
 
Coy) 
Constable (GD) 84 (12 per 
Coy) 
(Reply to Recommendation Para no. 13) 
 
9. The Committee had noted  in their original report that the Government have 
decided to consider NDRF as 100% deputationist force  by drawing personnel 
from the C entral Armed Police Forces (CAPF) for a period of 7 years, with the 
objectives to keep it as a young force. However, the C ommittee were of the view 
that youth force, apart  from being at the peak of physical agility , are dynamic in 
nature, as most skills and orientations are acquired in this age and hence 
recommended reviewing of the concept of ‘100% deputationist force’, to include 
participation of suitably fit and trained youth from other organizations too, for 
instance senior NCC cadets  (including senior women cadets)  for operational and 
administrative purposes in NDRF. In their reply th e Ministry have informed that 
deputation to NDRF is allowed from Government organisatio n only whereas N CC 
is a Voluntary Organisation and hence have submitted that it may not be feasible 
to take NCC Cade ts on deputation in NDRF. The Committee feel that this refusal 
on technical grounds is not desirable.  The emphasis e of their  recommendation 
was not on considering NCC cadets for NDRF on deputation basis, but to review 
the process to enable participation of suitably fit and trained youth from other 
organizations, including senior NCC cadets in NDRF, which will not only be in line 
with the conce pt of establishing ‘Sashakt Bharat’ but will also  serve as an 
additional employment opportunity for the youth  of the country. Applauding the 
role of NDRF not only in domestic disaster relief but also in international 
situations like the recent ‘Operation Dost’ in Turk iye for earthquake relief, the 
Committee foresees the need to strengthen the NDRF further. Thus, w hile 
reiterating their  earlier recommendation, the Committee urge the Ministry to work 
out a mechanism so as to make full use of the senior cadets of NCC (including 
women cadets) , as well as trained youth  of Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
(NYKS), who fulfill the essential pre -conditions, in NDRF. The Committee suggest 
that the Ministry should explore the possibility of  enrolling the cadets/youth  of 
these organisations on the l ines of recruitment being done for  Armed Forces 
under ‘Agniveer Yojana’. The Committee  also urge the M inistry to apprise them 
on the action taken thereon. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 2) 
10.  In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee are happy to note that through NDRF, the Government have raised a 
multi-disciplinary, multi -skilled, high -tech, stand -alone force capable of effectively 

5 
 
responding to all types of disasters and disaster like situations and to mitigate the 
effects of disasters. In this connection, they note that the National Policy on Disaster 
Management -2009 also mandates NDRF for Capacity Building of the community. The 
Force is relentlessly engaged in the “ community capacity building and Public 
Awareness and preparedness programme of State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) 
involving State Police, Home Guards, Civil Defence, Fire Services, NCC Cadets, NGOs, 
NYKS, Students, Volunteers and other stakeholders. Such  capacity building 
programmes are conducted when the NDRF is not engaged in disaster response or 
relief works. The need of training is being worked out/ prioritized by the NDRF Units 
based on the vulnerability profile of the districts, as per the Vulnerabi lity Atlas prepared 
by BMTPC. Accordingly, the syllabus and Training Programme is being prepared by the 
Board of Instructors in consultation with the experienced officials of field formations and 
duly approved by the Competent Authority. The Committee furt her note that in order to 
cater to the training needs of NDRF personnel and other stakeholders, the Government 
of India had approved on 27th September, 2018, the creation of a NDRF Academy by 
merging it with National Civil Defence College, Nagpur. Currentl y the Academy is being 
run at the erstwhile NCDC campus at Civil Lines, Nagpur. New infrastructure project for 
the Academy has been reportedly sanctioned at a total project cost of ₹ 125 Crore, 
possession of 153 acre of land has already been taken and the foundation stone for the 
project laid in 2020. Construction work has been in progress now. The Committee hope 
that a complete construction schedule, funds allocation and utilization details and date 
of completion of new Academy building project has been wo rked out and desire that it 
may be provided to them. They also desire the Government to ensure that the project is 
completed in the stipulated time and within cost schedules. The Committee are desirous 
of being apprised about its current status.” 
 
11. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry  of Home Affairs  submitted as 
under: 
“As per mandate, NDRF is continuously engaged in capacity building & 
awareness programs for community & other stakeholders concern.  
NDRF Academy was established in 201 8 after merging with erstwhile National 
Civil Defence College ( NCDC) to draw synergy among various stakeholders involved in 
imparting training in the field of the Disaster Management. 
The construction for Training infrastructure of NDRF Academy has already 
commenced and new academy premises is coming up over 153.278 acres of land at 
Nagpur, Maharashtra.  Date of completion of New Academy building project is March, 
2023. Complete construction schedule details are attached at Annexure-A. 
 
Funds allocations and utilization details:-  
 
Allocations:  

6 
 
Establishment of NDRF Academy at an estimated cost of ₹ 125.01 Crore, which 
includes:- 
- Development of Infrastructure at cost of ₹85.16 Crore. 
- Land at a cost of ₹18.61 Crore. 
- Provision for specialized equipment, IT, Vehicles & Clothing at a cost of ₹ 13.05 
Crore. 
- Recurring Expenditure for 110 posts at a cost of ₹ 8.19 Crore. 
 
Utilization : 
As on 31.8.2022, ₹ 36.12 crore has been utilized.” 
 
12. The Committee, taking note of the sanction for a new infrastructure project for 
construction of NDRF Academy at Nagpur at a total cost of ₹ 125 crore, had 
desired that the complete construction schedule and utilization details for the 
project be shared wit h them. The Committee has now observed from the 
completion schedule/plan furnished by the Ministry  that the entire project was to 
be completed by the year 2022, whereas the new date for completion has been 
fixed as 31.03.2023. The Committee,  therefore, would like to be informed of the  
status of completion of the project. The Committee had  further observed earlier 
that utilization of funds were around 28 per cent as on 31 st August, 2022, t hey 
hence, now desire to be apprised of the present status of utilization of funds. The 
Committee also hope that the proj ect has not endured any cost over runs, over 
and above ₹125 crore. 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 5) 
13.  In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee note that infrastructure development at 11 Bns, 10 team 
locations and NDRF Academy has been approved at a total estimated cost of ₹ 1272.26 
crore. The infrastructure development, however, reportedly got delayed due to several 
reasons like tim e taken for land allotment/acquisition and clearance procedures by the 
local bodies, other local issues, Covid -19 pandemic impact and in case of Battalions, at 
Assam and Krishna, due to change of land by the State Government. Nonetheless, now 
the infrastructure at six Bn locations viz. Kolkata, Mundali, Arakkonam, Pune, Vadodara 
and Krishna and six team locations at Siliguri, Kolkata, Dwarka, Vishakhapatnam, 
Bengaluru and Balasore have been completed. Other Bns. at Ludhiana, Ghaziabad and 
Patna and team loc ations at Dehradun, Kishangarh and Supaul are reportedly near 
completion and will be completed by 2021 -22. The Committee hope that no major cost 
overruns were experienced due to the delay and would like to be apprised of the latest 

7 
 
position of infrastructu re projects at the action taken stage. They further desire that the 
facilities completed must be put to maximum use by the Battalions. However, few cases 
need attention. In one case at Guwahati, the Committee were informed that the land 
allocated for 1Bn . falls under eco -sensitive zone and, if alternative land is provided by 
the State Government, the work will be completed by 2024. The Committee are 
surprised to note as to how the Ministry has committed to complete the work by March 
2024, when there is no a lternative land made available by the State Government 
presently. Similarly, for RRC/Team location at Gandhinagar 06 Bn., while approval for 
selection of a PSU for the same is pending with MHA, the date of completion has 
already been fixed for 31.03.2023. The Committee hence desire to know status of both 
these projects, and in case of their non -completion, suggest that before finalising the 
date of completion of infrastructure work of above Bns., the NDRF may take up the 
matter at the highest level of the A ssam Government and the MHA too for early 
resolution first and then finalise a realistic date for their completion. The outcome of 
these efforts may be apprised at the action taken stage. With regard to RRC/Team 
locations in 10 cities, the Committee were i nformed about likely completion in 7 places 
by 31.3.2022. They desire to be apprised of the progress thereof too.” 
 
14. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs submitted as 
under: 
“After reviewing the progress of the work, the Ministry of Home Affairs on 04.10.2021, in 
consultation with Ministry of Finance,  has conveyed approval of the EFC for 
continuation of the on -going sub-schemes for the FY 2021 -22 to 2025 -26, without any 
cost overruns. Out of the 12 NDRF Battalions and NDRF Academy Nagpur, 
construction work has been completed at 07 no. NDRF battalions i.e. 02 Bn. NDRF at 
Haringhata (WB), 3rd Bn. NDRF at Mundali, 4th Bn. NDRF at Arakkonam, 5th Bn. 
NDRF at Pune (MH), 6th Bn. NDRF at Vadoda ra (Gujarat), office buildings at 8th Bn. 
NDRF at Ghaziabad (UP), 10th Bn. NDRF at Krishna (AP). The work a t remaining 
NDRF Battalions and NDRF Academy, Nagpur is yet to be completed. Latest status of 
construction work at remaining locations is as under: - 
(i) 7th Bn. NDRF at Ludhiana - 87%. 
(ii) 8th Bn. NDRF at Ghaziabad - 51%.  
(iii) 9th Bn. NDRF at Patna - 64%. 
(iv) 12th Bn. NDRF at Hollongi (AP) - 17%. 
(v) NDRF Academy at Nagpur: - 38%. (Work will be completed by 31.03.2023). 
(vi) 1st Bn NDRF in the State of Assam: - The work could not be started due to 
land issue. 

8 
 
 Out of the 10 no. approved team locations , work has been completed at 07 team 
locations i.e. Siliguri, Kolkata, Balasore, Kishangarh, Dwarka (New Delhi) Bangalore 
&Vishakhapatnam. Work is under progress at the following  team locations: - 
(i) Dehradun under 8th Bn. NDRF-88%. (work will be completed in CFY). 
(ii) Supaul under 9th Bn. NDRF-58%. (work will be completed in CFY). 
(iii)  Gandhinagar- Work has been started  for which, MoU with agency has been 
signed recently on 12.04.2022.  
1st Bn. NDRF in Assam (issue of allotment of land ): - Construction work at 1st 
Bn. NDRF could not be started till date due to land issue. NDRF & M inistry of Home 
Affairs has vigorously pursuing the matter with State Govt. of Assam for early allotment 
of alternative land for NDRF Bn. in Guwahati. In this context, a meeting through VC was 
taken by Union Home Secretary on 04.02.2021  with the Chief Secretary, Assam . 
Accordingly, it was envisaged that if land is provided by the State Govt. then work would 
be completed by March 2024.   
Meanwhile, the State Govt. had identified 02 alternate lands but the same were 
not found suitable. Thereafter, follow up  meeting was again taken by the Additional 
Secretary, MHA on 06.07.2021 with the Officers of State Government of As sam to 
review the progress on land issue. 
Thereafter, 75 Bigha (25 acres approx.) Village Grazing Reserve (VGR) land at 
Village- Majirgoun, Azara circle was identified by the State Govt. , which was found 
suitable by NDRF. The State Govt. of Assam had accorded in principal approval for 
transfer of the said land to NDRF. But again, due to certain issues at local level, it was 
not fructified.   
Again, Union Home Secretary vide DO Letter dated 28.10. 2021 requested Chief 
Secretary, Govt. of Assam to provide sufficient & suitable land at Guwahati for NDRF 
Bn.   
Now, NDRF has identified a piece of Govt. Revenue land measuring 530 Bighas 
2 Katha 5 lecha at Sanapara Parbat  under Hajo Circle  office, Kamrup (Rural). 
Accordingly, a  case for allotment of above land with land details and coordinates has 
been sent to DC Kamrup (Rural) by NDRF on 12.07.2022. In response, the case has 
further been submitted by DC Kamrup (Rural) to Commissioner & Secretary to the Govt. 
of Assam. The case is under process. After the allotment of the land, the time line for 
completion of the battalion infrastructure will be revised, if needed.  
Selection of PSU for construction work at team location Gandhinagar : - 
Earlier, during 2021,  NDRF vide UO Note dated 04.03.2021 had requested MHA to 
award the subject work to M/s HSCL, after carrying out online bid formalities as per 

9 
 
GFR. But, due to infirmity in the tendering process, it was decided that the construction 
of infrastructure at team location Gandhinagar of 6 th Bn. NDRF  be re -tendered. 
Accordingly, the process of re-tendering was done, which has now been completed and 
accordingly, the work has been awarded to PSU namely C&DS, U.P. Jal Nigam, Noida. 
MoU has also been signed by NDRF wi th the PSU on 12.04.2022  and t he work 
scheduled for  completion  by 30th April 2023. 
15. The Committee had noted that the work for construction  of infrastructure 
for NDRF Battalions located at  Ludhiana, Ghazi abad and P atna, and team 
locations at Dehradun, Kishangarh and Su paul were scheduled for completion 
during FY 2021 -22, and desired to be apprised of the latest position of these 
projects. While appreciating the pro gress of work with regard to the se projects, 
as detailed by the Ministry in their Action T aken reply, the Committee hope that 
some works must have been completed in current financial year as stated without 
any cost overruns.  The Committee would like to be informed, accordingly.  The 
Committee had also noted that the Ministry have set dates  for c ompletion of 
infrastructure projects for the battalions located in Guwah ati and Gandhinagar,  
inspite of the fact that no land had been allotted for Guwahati and work was still 
to be awarded  for execution of the pr oject in case of Gandhinagar . Thus, going 
forward, the Committee had suggested the NDRF to take up the matter at the 
highest level for early resolution of issues and then finalise a realistic date for 
completion of the projects. The Committee are now happy to note from the reply 
of the Ministry tha t land has been identified in Guwahati and that the 
administrative process for allotment is underway. The Committee, also note that 
work has been awarded for execution of the battalion infrastructure in 
Gandhinagar, which is scheduled for completion by 30 th April, 2023.  The 
Committee expect  the Ministry to complete these projects in a time bound 
manner. The Committee desire to be apprised of the details of budget allocated 
and the timelines/revised timelines fixed for completion of the two projects. The 
Committee, further note with satisfaction, from the Action Taken Replies, that out 
of 10 Team locations, work has been completed at 07 locations. The Committee, 
would also like to be apprised o f the progress/completion of work in respect of 
the remaining 03 Team locations. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 8) 
16.  In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee note that to deal an emergency/disaster, the Government have  
introduced ‘Aapda Mitra Scheme’. In the first phase of the scheme, 18 to 40 years old 
persons have been provided training and more than 7000 persons have since been

10 
 
 trained. In the second phase, 350 disaster prone districts have been identified and for 
each such district, the Government have proposed to train 1 lakh persons in the three 
year period of 2020 -2023 with a total financial outlay of ₹ 369.41 crore. The Committee 
are happy to note that these initiatives have been started in the Country as a 
precautionary measure to deal with disasters. However, the Committee are of the view 
that while the Government has been conducting mock drills, they should also 
incorporate proper disaster evacuation training at School/Colleges levels to prepare a 
large number of young persons, in line with the practice followed in countries like Japan, 
Israel etc. The Government should also consider giving certificates/awards to trained 
youth according to their level of training viz. Level 1, Level 2, etc. The Committee also 
note that Aapda Mitra Scheme has to be implemented in 3 years with an outlay of ₹ 
369.41 crore, which will be completed this year. They, therefore, hope that the 
Government will utilise the Outlay in the stipulated time frame and complete the target.” 
17. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry  of Home Affairs  submitted as 
under: 
“It is to state that under the Pilot Scheme of Aapda Mitra, a total number of 5513 
volunteers were trained against the target of 6,000 volunteers. Under the ongoing Up -
scaled Aapda Mitra Scheme, nearly 14,710 volunteers against the target of 1 lakh have 
been trained, so far.    
Further, it is to state that M inistry of Education and  NDMA are jointly monitoring 
implementation of National Disaster Management Guidelines on Policy in all Schools 
through a Joint Monitoring Committee. There are 10 prime focus areas  including 
conduct of annual Mock Drills, and conduct of regular training on school safety and 
disaster preparedness, which are being undertaken by Schools.  
Under the Up -scaling of Aapda Mitra Scheme, there is a provision for providing 
certificate / I-Card to each trained volunteer.  
All efforts are being made for timely & full utilization of the funds earmarked 
under the project. 
18. The Committee had noted that the Government have introduced the ‘Aapda 
Mitra Scheme’ to train one lakh  volunteers to deal an emergency/disaster, during 
the three year period of 2020-2023 with a total financial outlay of ₹ 369.41 crore 
and hoped that the Government will utilise the outlay in the stipulated time frame 
and complete the target. The Committee had further urged the  Government to  
incorporate proper disaster evacuation training at school/college level, to prepare 
a large number of young people, in line with the practice followed in countries 
like Japan, Israel etc.  and to consider providing of certificates/awards to  trained 
youths. The Committee are now happy to note  from the reply furnished by the 

11 
 
Ministry that the Ministry of Education  and NDMA are jointly monitoring the 
conduct of annual Mock Drills, and conduct of regular training on school safety 
and disaster p reparedness in all schools. The C ommittee also note with 
satisfaction the provision made under the Up -scaled Aapda Mitra Scheme to 
provide certificate/I -card to each trained volunteers , in line with their 
recommendation. As the implementation of the Up -scaled Aapda Mitra Scheme 
has to be completed by the end of this fi nancial year, the Committee desire to be 
informed of the present status of implementation of the Scheme , including the 
total number of volunteers trained Statewise  and the extent of utilization of funds 
earmarked for the scheme.  
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 9) 
19.  In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee note that the District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMAs) 
have been set up as planning, coordinating and implementing bodies for disaster 
management and to take all measures in the districts, as per the guidelines laid down 
by National and State Authorities. DDMAs have been constituted in all the districts. The 
Committee further not e that so far 7000 community volunteers in 30 most flood prone 
Districts of 25 States have been trained under ‘Aapda Mitra Scheme’ which is intended 
to be increased to 1 lakh and feel that such efforts need to continue to cover other 
disaster prone areas i n Hill districts too where landslides, cloudbursts, earthquakes etc. 
are increasingly being experienced. The Committee also note that Section 31 of the 
Disaster Management Act, 2005 mandates that every district of a State shall prepare 
their Disaster Manag ement Plan (DMP). This includes the areas in the district 
vulnerable to different form of disasters and DMP of a district has to be drawn up by the 
State Disaster Management Authority. So far out of 732 districts in the Country, 673 
districts have drawn th eir DMP. Guidelines prepared by NDMA for management of 
specific disasters are to be taken into account by the concerned 37 authorities while 
preparing their DMP. The Committee desire that the DMPs of remaining 59 districts also 
need to be prepared and appr oved expeditiously in a time bound manner. They may be 
apprised of the progress in this regard. The Committee are happy to note that NDMA 
brings awareness of disasters through electronic and print media. However, they are of 
the view that to strengthen Sta tes’ capacities in disaster education, regular mock drills 
may be conducted and physical camps set up in disaster prone districts of the Country 
with the help of retired CAPF personnel, suitably trained senior NCC Cadets residing in 
the district, so that t rained citizens can act as first responders during the time of any 
disaster. The Committee further opine that BSF and SSB should also provide 
assistance/support to NDRF/SDRF in case a need is felt during any disaster. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to c onsider these measures and apprise them of action 
taken on the same.” 

12 
 
 
20. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry  of Home Affairs  submitted as 
under: 
“(a). Aapda Mitra : It is to state that under the Pilot Scheme of Aapda Mitra, a 
total number of 5513 volunteers were trained against the target of 6,000 volunteers. 
Under the ongoing Up -scaled Aapda Mitra  Scheme, nearly 14710 volunteers against 
the targets of 1 lakh have been trained, so far. Further it is clarified that the Up -scaling 
of Aapda Mitra Sche me is being implemented in 350 districts of India including hilly 
areas. These districts have been identified based on their proneness to landslide, 
earthquakes, floods and cyclones.  
(b). Disaster Management Plan  : The recommendations of the Committee hav e been 
noted. The States where Disaster Management Plan (DMP) of remaining 59 districts are 
yet to be prepared , shall be requested to prepare their DMP expeditiously taking into 
account, inter alia, guidelines for management of specific disasters prepared by 
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA).  
(c). Distt. Level M ock Exercises  : On 30 th June 2020, the Hon’ble Union Home 
Minister, carried out a review of the country’s disaster management activities and 
thereafter directed that mock exercises should be conducted in each district of the 
country at least once in every three years for the following purposes :  
(a) To ensure that every district can constitute field trained teams for disaster response.  
(b) To test the efficacy of every district’s disaster management plans and its 
preparedness component.  
(c)  To bring in greater cohesion and coordination amongst, and betwee n, different 
stakeholder. 
On the day of a district’s mock exercise, the Fire & Emergency Services (F&ES) of the 
concerned district and of the State/UT shall also visit schools in their jurisdiction and 
conduct mock drills in 10 to 20 pre- identified schools in the district.  
In acc ordance with the directions, the NDRF has been tasked with conducting mock 
exercises at the district level, This training is being implemented in phases, as indicated 
below :  
Phase FY  Districts covered  
Phase-I  2020-21 98 
Phase-II 2021-22 239 

13 
 
Phase-
III 
2022-23 Annual Calendar of 
Distt Level MEs 
covering 298 Districts 
has been circulated to 
all States / UTs. 
 
As per Section 22(2) (p) & 30 (2) (xx viii) DM Act 2005, State / District Authorities 
are responsible to carry out Disaster management drills periodically. However, NDMA 
facilitates States / UTs  in conduct of State/UT/ Multi State Level Mock Exercises on the 
disaster scenario based on the vulnerability profile of the State/UT with the active 
participation of State / UT authorities, distt Adminis trations, line Department, community 
volunteers and Central Agencies like EW Agencies, Armed Forces, CAPFs and NDRF. 
During the year 2021 -22, NDMA coordinated and conducted 21 such online Table Top 
Exercises (TTEx) including 02 physical Mock Exercises.     
The contents of recommendation under this para have been noted. However, it is 
submitted that all CAPFs, including BSF and SSB, are already providing immediate 
response in case of any disaster as per the need and also provides all necessary 
supports/assistance to the NDRF Bns /Teams as and when required by them.  It may 
also be submitted that  SSB has operationalized 18 Rescue & Relief Team (RRTs) in 
the State of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Sikkim, West Bengal, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, J ammu & Kashmir to carry out rescue and relief operations 
during disaster situations in the area of operation of SSB. Further, SSB is carrying out 
rescue & relief operations in border areas in the AoR of SSB. Further, Regional 
Response Centres for responding to disasters have also been set up by ITBP.     
The Government of India is committed to provide all supports and make available 
all the necessary resources required for providing response, relief and rescue in case of 
any disaster.”  
21. T he Committee  had observed that out of 732 districts in the country, 673 
districts have prepared their  Disaster Management Plan  (DMP), as mandated by 
Section 31 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005  and hence desired that the 
DMP of remaining 59 distric ts also be prepa red and approved  expeditiously, in a 
time bound manner. In their reply, the Ministry has informed that the States where 
DMP of remaining 59 districts are yet to be prepared, shall be requested to 
prepare their DMP exp editiously. The reply is  however silent about whether the 
remaining districts have completed preparation of their DMP. It is more than 08 
months now since the 13th  Report of the Committee was presented to Parliament. 
It appears that the concern ed districts have not taken any concrete steps to 
complete their DMPs. Matte rs relating disaster management are  always to be a 
top priority for  the administration s considering the ill -impact of climate change 

14 
 
and demographic pressures,  and therefore, the Committee, again urge that the 
DMP of the concerned 59 districts should be completed without further delay and  
apprised them accordingly. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 10) 
22.  In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Moto of National Disaster Response Force is “Saving Lives and Beyond”. They do 
not differentiate whether there is human life or animal life. If any animal is also trapped 
in some place, then they rescue it. Rescue of wild animals during forest fires is a case in 
point here. In this connection, the Committee note that the NDRF has been working with 
the Forest Department to deal with forest fire. However, in so far as inclusion of forest 
fire in the list of disasters to be tackled by the NDRF is concerned, the matter is 
reportedly under consultation wi th stakeholders concerned. Forest fire is a growing 
threat globally now. The incidents of forests fires not only damage the forest resources 
but also damage the biodiversity, cause climate change, adversely impact Tribal 
livelihood and lead to severe distr ess among flora and fauna of forests. In view of the 
increase of forest fire incidents in the recent past in the country, the Committee feel that 
the decision for inclusion of forest fire in the list of disasters by NDRF needs to be taken 
expeditiously. Due to the limited capacity of Forest Department to fight huge forest fires, 
it is high time that the same is tackled by a highly trained force on disasters. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of any progress on this matter.” 
23. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry  of Home Affairs  submitted as 
under: 
“The Ministry of Home Affairs had constituted an Expert Committee under 
Chairmanship of Member (Ops), NDMA to delineate the roles and responsibilities of 
NDRF for management of forest fore. MoEF&CC, N DRF, DG FS, CD & HG, Forest 
Survey of India (FSI), Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) & Forest Research 
Institute were also nominated as members of Expert Committee. After examination of 
the Committee report, it has been decided that existing 03 NDRF t eams at 3 NDRF 
locations will be trained and equipped i.e. 1 team in Uttarakhand, 1 team in Guwahati 
and 1 team in Andhra Pradesh, to deal with the forest fire”. 
24. The Committee, while observing that in the recent past incidents of forest 
fire have incre ased, had urged upon the Government to expeditiously take a 
decision regarding inclusion of forest fire in the list of disasters  by NDRF, as  
Forest Departments are ill -equipped and has limited capacity to fight huge forest 
fires. The Committee are happy to note from the reply of the Ministry , that 03 
NDRF teams- 01 team each in Uttarakhand, Guwahati and Andhra Pradesh, would 
be trained and equipped to deal with forest fire. The Committee, hope that the 

15 
 
Ministry would take further necessary steps to gradually increase the number of 
teams equipped to deal with forest fire s and ensure their strategic presence in 
various parts of the country, so that th ose specialized teams could  respond to 
any fire emergency in a forest, at short notice.  
  

16 
 
Chapter – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 3) 
 
The Committee note that NDRF is largely satisfied with the Government fiscal support 
to them in the last three years, which has been ₹ 1101.41 crore, 1140.74 crore and 
1281.44 crore during 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 respectively of which funds for OB, 
i.e. infrastructure, are very important. An adequate infrastructure is the sine qu a non of 
every Battalion and the repre sentatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, during their 
evidence, have assured the Committee that 80 -90 percent work of infrastructure will be 
completed by the end of this Financial Year and remaining will be completed by the 
middle of next Financial Year. Ho wever, an analysis of the Budget Estimates, Revised 
Estimates and Actual expenditures since 2016 -17 shows that the Capital budget 
provision in BE and RE is less than 50% of the Revenue Budget Estimates and actual 
expenditure in the past. The Committee have  also observed the fact that over the years 
the actual expenditure in Capital Sector has largely been showing a declining trend, 
which may hamper the plan of building infrastructure for NDRF Battalions. The 
Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to clarify as to how they plan to complete 
all infrastructure work for NDRF Battalions with a decrease in funds allocated for Capital 
assets. They recommend that immediate remedial measures may be undertaken to 
address fund reduction/lapse in Capital Sector i n consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance lest the target dates for completion of the project would need extensions, 
leading to cost overruns as well as an adverse impact on the capacity augmentation of 
NDRF Battalions. 
Reply of the Government 
The current state of infrastructure work at different location of NDRF as appraised by 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on dated 04.10.2021, is as under: - 
-    Out of the 12 NDRF Battalions  and NDRF Academy Nagpur;  construction work has 
been completed at 07 no. NDRF battalions [i.e. 02 Bn. NDRF at Haringhata (W est Bengal), 
3rd Bn. NDRF at Mundali, 4 th Bn. NDRF at Arakkonam, 5 th Bn. NDRF at Pune (MH), 6 th Bn. 
NDRF at Vadodara (Gujarat), office buildings at 8 th Bn. NDRF at Ghaziabad (UP), 10 th Bn. 
NDRF at Krishna (AP)]. At remaining NDRF Battalions and NDRF Academy, Nagpur work 
is in progress. Latest status of construction work at remaining locations are as under: - 
(i) 7th Bn. NDRF at Ludhiana-87% work completed.  
(ii) 8th Bn. NDRF at Ghaziabad-51% work completed. 
(iii) 9th Bn. NDRF at Patna-64% work completed. 
(iv) 12th Bn. NDRF at Hollongi (AP)- 17% work completed. 

17 
 
(v) NDRF Academy at Nagpur: -31% work completed. 
(vi) 1st Bn NDRF in the State of Assam: - Work yet to be started due to land issue. 
 
-     Regarding creation of infrastr ucture for 10 no. team locations as approved in EFC, 
work has been completed at 07 team locations [i.e.Siliguri, Kolkata, Balasore, Kishangarh, 
Dwarka (New Delhi) Bangalore & Vishakhapatnam ]. Work is under progress at team 
location Dehradun (88%), Supaul ( 58%) & will be completed in CFY 2022 -23. Work at 
team location Gandhinagar has been awarded to C&DS, U.P. Jal Nigam, Noida, for 
which, MoU with agency has been signed on 12.04.2022.   
-      Detail of actual budget expenditure w.r.t. approved BE/RE incurre d since 2016-17 
is as under- 
Year BE RE Actual 
exp. 
% 
Utilizati
on 
2016-17                  163.08 130 130 100% 
2017-18 180 183.96 183.77 99.90% 
2018-19 190 158 157.95 99.97% 
2019-20 95 95 94.51 99.48% 
2020-21 72 92 92.03 100% 
2021-22 72 127.96 127.64 99.75% 
 
The allocation of funds to NDRF for capital expenditure has been utilised 100%.  
With the aforesaid allocations during the preceding years the requirement of 
funds are met and there is no shortfall noticed in this regard. It may be submitted that  at 
certain places, the State Government provided the land free of cost for NDRF and 
thereby the requirement of funds for capital outlay was reduced substantially. Further, 
the Government is committed to provide all the funds required for the capital outla y of 
NDRF. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 4) 
The Committee further observe that though Government have been allocating sufficient 
funds, an analysis of the Budget Estimates and Actual Expenditures since 2016 -17 
depicts that the budget provision for training of NDRF personnel at domestic and 
international level has remained rather low, i.e. between ₹1 to 2 crore and even its 
utilization has not been 100%, as it has mainly remained in the range of 50% to 80%. 
The Committee are of the view that adequate  measures should be introduced for State-
of-the-art training of NDRF personnel and also for providing basic, advance and 
additional courses free of cost by NDRF to SDRF personnel. Since disasters may occur 
at any time, a regular mechanism should be evolved  to ensure fitness and 

18 
 
preparedness of NDRF/SDRF personnel throughout the year. This calls for enhanced 
BE for training as well as 100% utilization of the same. There is, thus, a need to review 
the budget provision under the Heads of Account like OAE and F TE, which have shown 
less allocation and its utilisation during the last five years. To address the same, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the factors responsible for less utilisation may be 
identified and rectified immediately. They also desire that the  Ministry should prepare 
adequate advance plans for training of NDRF personnel further and project better 
budgetary requirements before Ministry of Finance at the Supplementary Grant/next 
year’s BE stage. 
Reply of the Government 
NDRF personnel undergo various Advance Disaster Management courses from 
other institutes and organization to enhance their capabilities so that their expertise may 
be utilized in a better manner during Rescue operations & others. Further, NDRF 
Academy, Nagpur is functioning sinc e 2018 as a state of art training centre for NDRF, 
State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) and other stakeholders, which are involved in 
Disaster Management. NDRF provides training in various courses to SDRF where only 
the charges of expendable items like PPE  and stationary items are being charged from 
SDRF. No separate charges for training are being taken from SDRF. 
 
To improve the competence of NDRF for serving the country in a better manner, 
NDRF started an exercise of conducting a Training Need Analysis (T NA) for its 
personnel. Accordingly, Indian Institute of Management, Rohtak, consented to help 
NDRF in conducting TNA . 
 However, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for projecting better 
requirement of funds for training in future. 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 6) 
The Committee appreciate that the Government have been assessing the strength of 
NDRF from time to time since its inception, with the result that the strength of the Force 
has increased from 8 Bns in 2006 to 10 Bns in 2010 and 12 Bns in 2015. However, as it 
was felt to further increase the strength, the Government have decided to raise 4 new 
Bns of NDRF and boost the availability of sufficient manpower to meet the requirement 
of prompt response during any disaster si tuation, with all operational and administrative 
power vested in the Director -General, NDRF. The Committee also note that the 
Ministry, in its written reply, have submitted that out of new Bns being raised, the 
process of raising 1 Bn. from BSF had started  but out of 139 personnel selected for the 
same, only 103 could join and due to acute shortage of manpower in BSF, 36 personnel 
will be joining after March, 2022. In this connection, the Committee note that out of total 
16 Bns. of NDRF, only 3 Bn. have been taken from BSF. The Committee feel that out of 

19 
 
all forces, perhaps, BSF is the only force which faces difficulty to provide manpower to 
NDRF, despite the fact that since 2006, Government have sanctioned 171 new 
Battalions in various CAPFs, which include 35 Bns. in the BSF, a rather large number. 
However, if these new battalions are in place now, the Committee are surprised at BSF 
expressing acute shortage of 36 persons for deputing to NDRF. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Home Affa irs should look into the reasons 
for BSF not providing requisite personnel to NDRF and ensure a mechanism for 
regular/periodic assessment of requirement of NDRF personnel for availability of 
manpower sufficient to meet the demand due to growing number of n atural and 
manmade disasters in the Country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India has sanctioned raising of 04 new Bns. from CAPFs to NDRF 
i.e. 02 Bns from ITBP, 01 Bn each from Assam Rifles and BSF. The raising of these 
Bns. has been monitored in the Ministry of Home Affairs at highest level. The shortage 
of man power deployment for new Bn. by BSF was discussed in the meeting on 
23.11.2021 under the Chairmanship of Home Secretary and attended by DG, BSF and 
DG, NDRF.  Thereafter, the necessary manpower from BSF was also deployed in 
NDRF for new Bn. Status of these Bns are as under :- 
 
(i) 01 Bn from Assam Rifles and 02 Bns from ITBP have been inducted in NDRF 
and named as 13th, 14th & 15th Bns NDRF respectively. These Battalions are now 
operational. 
(ii) 01 Bn from BSF named as 16 th Bn NDRF has been raised. The Bn. is 
undergoing DM training. After the DM training, this Bn. will also be operational.  
 
Ministry of Home Affairs regularly monitors the availability of manpower in NDRF Bns. at 
various levels and as soon as any shortfall is noticed, the same is rectified immediately.    
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 7) 
 
The Committee note that where forecast/early warning of floods, cyclones, tsunamis 
etc. is available, the NDRF positions its teams, in consultation with respective State. 
The pre -positioning is made as a measu re of pro -active response to deal with the 
impending disaster. After assessment of the situation, if potentially unmanageable by 
the State, UT and in case additional teams are required by the State, adequate 
additional NDRF teams are deployed even by airli fting from other Battalion locations. It 
is noteworthy that the Central Government does not charge any amount from 
States/UTs for deployment of NDRF. The Indian Air Force and Indian Railways statedly 
have been assisting NDRF in mobilisation of force to the  disasters. The Committee 

20 
 
appreciate that NDRF has been getting support of Indian Air Force and Indian Railways 
for mobilisation of Force and hope that the SOP for ensuring better coordination and 
communication among NDRF Air Force, Railways and other agen cies has been 
established. They further note that for unforeseen disasters, mock drills, enhancement 
of vehicles for swift movement, review of communication equipment, training of SDRF 
Personnel on special request etc. has been undertaken by NDRF. The Comm ittee hope 
that the preparedness will be continued since it is the best step to manage a disaster 
and minimize the damage to life and property. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The Government of India with its 
continuous efforts have significantly improved its preparedness to deal with natural 
calamities. The Government of India & NDRF remain in regular touch with all the 
State/UT concerned & deployment by NDRF is done in consultation with the respective 
State/Distt. Authorities as per requirement.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 8) 
 
The Committee note that to deal an emergency/disaster, the Government have 
introduced ‘Aapda Mitra Scheme’. In the first phase of the scheme, 18 to 40 years old 
persons have been provided training and more than 7000 persons have since been 
trained. In the second phase, 350 disaster prone districts have been identified and for 
each such district,  the Government have proposed to train 1 lakh persons in the three 
year period of 2020 -2023 with a total financial outlay of ₹ 369.41 crore. The Committee 
are happy to note that these initiatives have been started in the Country as a 
precautionary measure to deal with disasters. However, the Committee are of the view 
that while the Government has been conducting mock drills, they should also 
incorporate proper disaster evacuation training at School/Colleges levels to prepare a 
large number of young persons, in line with the practice followed in countries like Japan, 
Israel etc. The Government should also consider giving certificates/awards to trained 
youth according to their level of training viz. Level 1, Level 2, etc. The Committee also 
note that Aapda Mit ra Scheme has to be implemented in 3 years with an outlay of ₹ 
369.41 crore, which will be completed this year. They, therefore, hope that the 
Government will utilise the Outlay in the stipulated time frame and complete the target. 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is to state that under the Pilot Scheme of Aapda Mitra, a total number of 5513 
volunteers were trained against the target of 6,000 volunteers. Under the ongoing Up -

21 
 
scaled Aapda Mitra Scheme, nearly 14,710 volunteers against the target of 1 lakh have 
been trained, so far.    
Further, it is to state that Ministry of Education and NDMA are jointly monitoring 
implementation of National Disaster Management Guidelines on Policy in all Schools 
through a Joint Monitoring Committee. There are 10 prime focus area s including 
conduct of annual Mock Drills, and conduct of regular training on school safety and 
disaster preparedness, which are being undertaken by Schools.  
Under the Up -scaling of Aapda Mitra Scheme, there is a provision for providing 
certificate / I-Card to each trained volunteer.  
All efforts are being made for timely & full utilization of the funds earmarked under the 
project. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 18 of Chapter I ) 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 10) 
 
The Moto of National Disaster Response Force is “Saving Lives and Beyond”. They do 
not differentiate whether there is human life or animal life. If any animal is also trapped 
in some place, then they rescue it. Rescue of wild animals during forest fires is a case in 
point here. In this connection, the Committee note that the NDRF has been working with 
the Forest Department to deal with forest fire. However, in so far as inclusion  of forest 
fire in the list of disasters to be tackled by the NDRF is concerned, the matter is 
reportedly under consultation with stakeholders concerned. Forest fire is a growing 
threat globally now. The incidents of forests fires not only damage the fores t resources 
but also damage the biodiversity, cause climate change, adversely impact Tribal 
livelihood and lead to severe distress among flora and fauna of forests. In view of the 
increase of forest fire incidents in the recent past in the country, the Com mittee feel that 
the decision for inclusion of forest fire in the list of disasters by NDRF needs to be taken 
expeditiously. Due to the limited capacity of Forest Department to fight huge forest fires, 
it is high time that the same is tackled by a highly t rained force on disasters. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of any progress on this matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Home Affairs had constituted an Expert Committee under Chairmanship 
of Member (Ops), NDMA to delineate the roles and res ponsibilities of NDRF for 
management of forest fore. MoEF&CC, NDRF, DG FS, CD & HG, Forest Survey of 

22 
 
India (FSI), Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) & Forest Research Institute were 
also nominated as members of Expert Committee. After examination of th e Committee 
report, it has been decided that existing 03 NDRF teams at 3 NDRF locations will be 
trained and equipped i.e. 1 team in Uttarakhand, 1 team in Guwahati and 1 team in 
Andhra Pradesh, to deal with the forest fire. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 24 of Chapter I ) 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 11) 
 
The Regional Response Centres (RRCs) of CAPFs were created based on the 
vulnerability profile of the Country to provide immediate response during disasters and 
in due course, most o f these RRCs were handed over to NDRF. Usually, 10,000 sq. ft. 
(approx.) built up area or 05 acres land is required for a RRC. At present there are 28 
RRCs in various States/UTs. Only 07 States/ UTs viz. Goa, Meghalaya, Chandigarh, 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Da man & Diu, Ladakh, Lakshadweep and Puducherry do not 
have any NDRF Bn/ RRC. However, these States/ UTs are stated to be covered by 
nearby NDRF Battalion/ RRC location. The Committee are of the opinion that keeping in 
view the increasing incidents of disast ers, the Government may consider creation of 
Regional Response Centre in these States/UTs, most of which are coastal and thus 
prone to disasters like tsunamis, oil spills etc. In this connection, the Committee would 
like to draw attention to the Konkan Region of Maharashtra also, which is disaster prone 
yet is in need of small helicopters to be fully equipped to handle the same. The 
Committee are also of the strong opinion that no State is safe from disasters hence all 
States should be advised to facilitate  their SDRFs expeditiously. The Committee desire 
to know any progress on the same. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The NDRF Bns. and their team locations/RRCs are stationed based on the vulnerability 
profile of the country. Further, The States are also required to augment their resources 
to handle the disasters by creating their SDRFs in line with NDRF. The Ministry of 
Home Affairs has from time to time requesting the State Government and Union 
Territory Administration to raise their SDRF. As per the information received from the 
States, till date 29 States/UTs have already raised their SDRF. 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 12) 
 
The Committee note that under the National Emergency Communication Plan Phase -II, 
the review of communication equipment of NDRF  Battalions was carried out in the year 
2011 and accordingly, requisite equipment were provided to ensure fail -safe 
communication between field units with their headquarters for a period of 5 years w.e.f. 
31 May, 2011 and the same was first extended upto 3 1 March, 2018 and further 
extended upto 31 March, 2020. The Committee feel that the prevailing practice for 
review of communication equipment of NDRF needs attention particularly when the 
communication technology has been taking rapid strides. They, theref ore, desire that 
the review of communication equipment may be conducted in a shorter period now. The 
Committee also note that the proposal to review the communication equipment of NDRF 
has already been sent for financial concurrence after receiving the adv ice of NDMA. 
The Committee therefore, desire the Government to pursue the proposal and obtain 
financial concurrence expeditiously without further delay. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that the proposal for review of communication equipment has a lready 
been approved by Ministry of Home Affairs on 31st January, 2022. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 14) 
 
The Committee note that to enhance the operational efficiency, additional equipment 
(Cutting tools) has been authorized to NDRF and also the authorization of Deep Diving 
equipment has also been revised. In 2017, to enable swift movement of NDRF teams 
from NDRF Battalion the number of vehicles was enhanced from 80 to 104 per 
Battalion. The Committee, when examine the details of authorized and ex isting number 
of various Disaster response equipment under different categories, are surprised to note 
that there has been a huge gap in large number of such items like Brick Hammer, 
chipping Hammer Bits pointed, Chipping Hammer Bits Flat, Multi para monit or, Oxygen 
Concentrator, Pulse Oxymeter and Nebuliser. They also find that about 10 items, which 
are authorised to NDRF, does not form part of it. In addition to this, the Committee also 
find that there has been a huge shortage of almost all the items auth orised to NDRF. 
The Committee desire the Ministry to understand the gravity of adverse impact of such 
a big shortage of equipment on disaster relief management in the past and future too. 
The Committee desire to know the mechanism as to how authorisation o f equipment is 
undertaken and their numbers analysed and finalised. The Committee strongly 
recommend that shortage of equipment under different categories may be reviewed in a 
time bound manner and the remaining equipment procured without further delay. 

24 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The mechanism for authorisation of equipments includes that, the NDRF, based on their 
need, firstly constitute a Board of Officers to review the requirement and specification. 
Thereafter, NDRF submit the proposal to Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). MHA, after 
consultation with other organisations/stakeholders, authorised the equipments to NDRF.  
The procurement of equipment as per authorisation is done by NDRF and 
maintains the requisite inventory. Ministry of Home Affairs allocate suf ficient fund as 
projected by NDRF for procurement of equipments. Further, procurement of equipments 
to replenish the shortage is a continuous and ongoing process. It may be submitted 
here that the high gap seen in the inventory is due to inclusion of equip ments of 4 new 
Bns being raised. As the Bn were under the raising status, the shortfall in the inventory 
was visible. It may be submitted that equipments of 4 new Bn out of 16 Bn, constitute 
25% of the total inventory. 
As regards the observation in respect  of Deep Diving Suit, it is submitted that 
review of specifications is being finalized shortly. Accordingly, procurement process will 
be initiated. Brick Hammer, Chipping Hammer Bits Pointed & Flat, Oxygen 
Concentrator, Pulse Oxy Meter and Nebulizer are lo w value items and the same are 
being procured within the financial competency of Unit Commandant. Further, Multi 
Para Monitor is authorized @ 2 Nos. for each Battalion, and 25 are held by 12 Bn of 
NDRF. There is a shortage of only 08 Nos. for new raised ba ttalions which are in the 
procurement plan in current financial year 2022-23. 
During the last financial year 2020 -21, Cutting Tools have been procured for 
newly raised NDRF Bns. Further, it is also intimated that Cutting Tools are available in 
sufficient q uantity in NDRF Bn. However, in case of any deficiency arising due to 
condemnation/requirement from Bns, the same will be procured in the current financial 
year 2022-23. 
Apart from the above, the observation of the Committee has been noted and the 
progress on procurement of equipment of NDRF is monitored scrupulously. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 15) 
 
The Committee, while applauding the commendable job carried out by NDRF in 
rescuing the people and animals during disasters in the country and abroad, 
recommend that there should be a mechanism for post disaster review to identify any 
shortcomings and furt her strengthen improve their preparedness. Lessons learnt from 
past disasters and post disaster should apply on various fields such as (a) need for 

25 
 
better logistics and supply chain management (including procurement, warehousing, 
transportation and communi cation) (b) training of personnel as reserve manpower to 
meet surges in demand (c) clear delineation of responsibilities and robust 
communication lines (d) coordination of partner agencies, local government, State 
Government (e) adequate compensation for t he victims etc. With passage of time, the 
aim of NDRF should not only confined to rescue operations, but also overall National 
Disaster Risk Reduction. The thematic areas should be (i) prevention and mitigation (ii) 
preparedness (iii) response (iv) recovery and rehabilitation. The Committee would like to 
believe that a dialogue on the same has already started, based on the NDRF 
experience so far. Hence, they desire to be apprised of the future vision of the Ministry 
with regard to disaster prevention and pr eparedness thereof, particularly in the present 
scenario of impending disasters due to adverse climatic events/armed conflicts and 
similar such disasters which are increasing in their intensity all over the world now. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. There is an integral system 
of debriefing after every major incident. Shortcomings, lessons learnt, initiatives 
undertaken are discussed at length. Based on the discussion, measures to improve the 
operational efficiency in future are undertaken in NDRF for better response. 
Further, it is submitted that the primary responsibility of disaster management rests 
with the State Government. The Central Government supplements the efforts of the 
State Government by pro viding necessary logistics and financial support in cases of 
natural disasters of severe nature and beyond the coping capacity of the States. 
Besides, a well established scheme of financing the disasters response is in place 
since long in the form of State  Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and National Disaster 
Response Fund (NDRF). Allocations to these funds are being done as per 
recommendations of successive Finance Commissions.  
Pursuant to the recommendations of 15 th Finance Commission (FC), the Central 
Government has significantly enhanced the allocation for all the States under SDRF i.e. 
from Rs. 61220.00 crore for the period 2015 -2020 to Rs.128122 crore during the period 
2021-22 to 2025 -26. In addition, as per recommendations of 15 th FC, the concept of 
Mitigation Fund has been introduced in the financing mechanism of disaster 
management.  The National Disaster Mitigation Fund (NDMF) has been created at 
national level and many States have set up and remaining States are in the process of 
setting-up of State  Disaster Mitigation Fund (SDMF). These mitigation funds are to be 
used for undertaking mitigation activities involving local level and community based 
intervention which reduce the risks and promote environment friendly settlements and 
livelihood practice s.  Further, based on the recommendation of 15 th Finance 
Commission, the Government has allocated an amount of Rs. 32031.00 crore for all 

26 
 
states under SDMF and Rs. 13693.00 crore under NDMF for the period 2021 -22 to 
2025-26. 
 Further, the 15 th Finance Commission has recommended the total State allocation 
under a new nomenclature viz State Disaster Risk Management Fund (SDRMF). The 
SDRMF has been divided into State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and State 
Disaster Mitigation Fund (SDMF), which will together a ddress the full cycle of disaster 
management needs - response and relief, recovery and reconstruction, preparedness 
and capacity-building, and mitigation. Details of the allocated funds under SDRF/ SDMF 
for 2021-2026 are as under:- 
 
 SDRMF:- Rs. 1,60,153 crore –  
 SDRF (80%): Rs. 1,28,122 crore;  
 SDMF(20%): Rs. 32,031 crore.  
 
 SDRF to be divided in 3 sub windows 
  
i. Response and Relief (40%) - Rs. 64,061 crore 
ii. Recovery and Reconstruction (30%)  - Rs.48,046 crore 
iii. Preparedness & Capacity Building (10%) - Rs. 16,015 crore 
  
Further, it is mentioned that there are institutional mechanisms at the National, 
State & district level in the country to develop appropriate preparedness and prompt 
response mechanism for effective management of natural disasters. Central 
Government has established a robust early warning system and has significantly 
enhanced the accuracy of weather forecasts.  Forecasting agencies are continuing their 
efforts for the improvement of warning and dissemination systems vigorously. Mock 
exercises and community awareness programmes are being regularly conducted to 
educate people/ farmers at the time of natural calamities. 
The measures taken by the Central and State Governments have significantly 
improved the disaster management practices, prepared ness, prevention and response 
mechanism, resulting in significant reduction in casualties during the natural calamities 
in the country. Further, strengthening of the disaster management is a continuing and 
evolving process of governance. 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies 
NIL 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 1) 
 
Natural and man -made disasters have had their sad history in India. With a worrying 
climate change in the last few decades, the Country has seen many disasters like floods 
in various States like Bihar, Kashmir and Uttarakhand and in cities like Mumbai and 
Chennai, Indian Ocean Tsunami, Gujarat Earthquake, Odisha super cyclone etc. 
Hence, the need for a dedicated force like NDRF was felt and consequently the same 
has been raised by the Government. The Committee note the achievements of the 
National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) in dealing with various types of disasters in 
the Country since its inception in 2006. It, quite appreciably, has not only rescued and 
evacuated innumerable human lives but also rescued livest ock during their operations, 
with professional expertise and requisite dedication so far. The Committee have been 
made to understand that during the time of the setting up of NDRF, there were many 
challenges before the Government and hence, it was decided to consider NDRF as 
100% deputationist force, drawing personnel from the Central Armed Police Forces 
(CAPFs) for a period of 7 years, with the objective to keep it as a young force. Besides, 
being at the peak of physical agility, Youth force is dynamic in nature as most skills and 
orientations are acquired in this age. The Committee, hence, recommend that while the 
concept of 100% deputationist force is apt for the purpose, it may be reviewed to 
include participation of suitably fit and trained youth from o ther organizations too, for 
instance, senior NCC cadets, for operational and administrative purposes in NDRF. The 
upper age of 45 as fixed may continue. As India has one of the youngest populations in 
the world, this will also help in availability of addit ional employment opportunities for the 
youth in the Country. 
Reply of the Government 
NDRF is a 100% deputationist force and thus personnel from various CAPFs  & Police 
Organizations are posted in NDRF on deputation for a period of seven years to maintain 
young profile in the Force , as the nature of protracted rescue duties require young & 
energetic personnel for various rescue operations . As regards the participation of 
trained youth from other organizations in NDRF  especially form NCC, it is stated that 
deputation to NDRF is allowed from Government organizations only whereas NCC is a 
Voluntary Organization. As such it may not be feasible to take NCC cadets on 
deputation in NDRF. However, it is apt to mention here that NDRF have trained 8266 
trainees from Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) in disaster management and their 

29 
 
database has been maintained in NDRF for utilizing their services whenever required 
during disaster and community awareness programmes. 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para no. 9 of Chapter I ) 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 13) 
 
The Committee note that all CAPFs have been requested to provide 108 women 
(Mahila) personnel for each NDRF Bn. within the strength of NDRF for rescue and relief 
operations especially for women victims. However, so far only 170 such personnel have 
joined the NDRF. The Committee appreciate the idea of participation of Mahila 
personnel in the NDRF. They would like to know as to how the number of 108 Mahila 
personnel for each NDRF Bns. has bee n worked out. The Committee are also of the 
view that sports women and senior NCC women 40 cadets, who are physically fit and 
fulfil NDRF pre -conditions, may be considered for induction so that presence of 
adequate Mahila personnel in each NDRF Bn. can be ensured within a stipulated time 
frame. 
Reply of the Government 
No women Unit is authorized/formed in NDRF. However, all CAPFs have been 
requested to send nomination of 108 Mahila personnel for each NDRF Unit within the 
authorization of CTs  (GD)/Male in ND RF for  rescue and relief operations for women 
victims.  
 
Each NDRF Battalion is having 06 Coys and each Coy consisting 03 teams, all CAPFs 
were requested to provide Mahila team to each Battalion of NDRF as per following 
composition against the authorizati on of 1149 posts in a NDRF Battalion so that 
services of Mahila contingent can be utilized in all Coys of NDRF: 
 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para no. 9 of Chapter I ) 
 
  
Inspector (GD)/Sub Inspector 
(GD) 
06 (01 per 
Coy) 
Head Constable (GD) 18 (03 per 
Coy) 
Constable (GD) 84 (12 per 
Coy) 

30 
 
CHAPTER V 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 2) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that through NDRF, the Government have 
raised a multi -disciplinary, multi -skilled, high -tech, stand -alone force capable of 
effectively responding to all types of disasters and disaster like situations and to mitigate 
the effects of disasters. In this connection, they note that the National Policy on Disaster 
Management -2009 also mandates NDRF for Capacity Building of the community. The 
Force is relentlessly engaged in the “community capacity building and Public 
Awareness and preparedness programme of State Disaster Response Forc e (SDRF) 
involving State Police, Home Guards, Civil Defence, Fire Services, NCC Cadets, NGOs, 
NYKS, Students, Volunteers and other stakeholders. Such capacity building 
programmes are conducted when the NDRF is not engaged in disaster response or 
relief wor ks. The need of training is being worked out/ prioritized by the NDRF Units 
based on the vulnerability profile of the districts, as per the Vulnerability Atlas prepared 
by BMTPC. Accordingly, the syllabus and Training Programme is being prepared by the 
Board of Instructors in consultation with the experienced officials of field formations and 
duly approved by the Competent Authority. The Committee further note that in order to 
cater to the training needs of NDRF personnel and other stakeholders, the Governm ent 
of India had approved on 27th September, 2018, the creation of a NDRF Academy by 
merging it with National Civil Defence College, Nagpur. Currently the Academy is being 
run at the erstwhile NCDC campus at Civil Lines, Nagpur. New infrastructure project for 
the Academy has been reportedly sanctioned at a total project cost of ₹ 125 Crore, 
possession of 153 acre of land has already been taken and the foundation stone for the 
project laid in 2020. Construction work has been in progress now. The Committee ho pe 
that a complete construction schedule, funds allocation and utilization details and date 
of completion of new Academy building project has been worked out and desire that it 
may be provided to them. They also desire the Government to ensure that the pro ject is 
completed in the stipulated time and within cost schedules. The Committee are desirous 
of being apprised about its current status. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per mandate, NDRF is continuously engaged in capacity building & awareness 
programs for community & other stakeholders concern.  
NDRF Academy was established in 2018 after merging with erstwhile National 
Civil Defence College (NCDC) to draw synergy amon g various stakeholders involved in 
imparting training in the field of the Disaster Management. 

31 
 
The construction for Training infrastructure of NDRF Academy has already 
commenced and new academy premises is coming up over 153.278 acres of land at 
Nagpur, Maharashtra. Date of completion of New Academy building project is March, 
2023. Complete construction schedule details are attached at Annexure-A. 
 
Funds allocations and utilization details:-  
 
Allocations:  
Establishment of NDRF Academy at an estimated cost  of ₹ 125.01 Crore, which 
includes:- 
- Development of Infrastructure at cost of ₹85.16 Crore. 
- Land at a cost of ₹18.61 Crore. 
- Provision for specialized equipment, IT, Vehicles & Clothing at a cost of ₹13.05 
Crore. 
- Recurring Expenditure for 110 posts at a cost of ₹ 8.19 Crore. 
 
Utilization : 
 As on 31.8.2022, ₹ 36.12 crore has been utilized.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 12 of Chapter I ) 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 5) 
 
The Committee note that infrastructure development at 11 Bns, 10 team 
locations and NDRF Academy has been approved at a total estimated cost of ₹ 1272.26 
crore. The infrastructure development, however, reportedly got delayed due to several 
reasons like tim e taken for land allotment/acquisition and clearance procedures by the 
local bodies, other local issues, Covid -19 pandemic impact and in case of Battalions, at 
Assam and Krishna, due to change of land by the State Government. Nonetheless, now 
the infrastructure at six Bn locations viz. Kolkata, Mundali, Arakkonam, Pune, Vadodara 
and Krishna and six team locations at Siliguri, Kolkata, Dwarka, Vishakhapatnam, 
Bengaluru and Balasore have been completed. Other Bns. at Ludhiana, Ghaziabad and 
Patna and team loc ations at Dehradun, Kishangarh and Supaul are reportedly near 
completion and will be completed by 2021 -22. The Committee hope that no major cost 
overruns were experienced due to the delay and would like to be apprised of the latest 
position of infrastructu re projects at the action taken stage. They further desire that the 
facilities completed must be put to maximum use by the Battalions. However, few cases 
need attention. In one case at Guwahati, the Committee were informed that the land 
allocated for 1Bn. falls under eco -sensitive zone and, if alternative land is provided by 

32 
 
the State Government, the work will be completed by 2024. The Committee are 
surprised to note as to how the Ministry has committed to complete the work by March 
2024, when there is no a lternative land made available by the State Government 
presently. Similarly, for RRC/Team location at Gandhinagar 06 Bn., while approval for 
selection of a PSU for the same is pending with MHA, the date of completion has 
already been fixed for 31.03.2023. The Committee hence desire to know status of both 
these projects, and in case of their non -completion, suggest that before finalising the 
date of completion of infrastructure work of above Bns., the NDRF may take up the 
matter at the highest level of the A ssam Government and the MHA too for early 
resolution first and then finalise a realistic date for their completion. The outcome of 
these efforts may be apprised at the action taken stage. With regard to RRC/Team 
locations in 10 cities, the Committee were i nformed about likely completion in 7 places 
by 31.3.2022. They desire to be apprised of the progress thereof too. 
Reply of the Government 
After reviewing the progress of the work, the Ministry of Home Affairs on 04.10.2021, 
in consultation with Ministry of  Finance, has conveyed approval of the EFC for 
continuation of the on -going sub-schemes for the FY 2021 -22 to 2025 -26, without any 
cost overruns. Out of the 12 NDRF Battalions and NDRF Academy Nagpur, 
construction work has been completed at 07 no. NDRF bat talions i.e. 02 Bn. NDRF at 
Haringhata (WB), 3rd Bn. NDRF at Mundali, 4th Bn. NDRF at Arakkonam, 5th Bn. 
NDRF at Pune (MH), 6th Bn. NDRF at Vadodara (Gujarat), office buildings at 8th Bn. 
NDRF at Ghaziabad (UP), 10th Bn. NDRF at Krishna (AP). The work at r emaining 
NDRF Battalions and NDRF Academy, Nagpur is yet to be completed. Latest status of 
construction work at remaining locations is as under: - 
(vii) 7th Bn. NDRF at Ludhiana - 87%. 
(viii) 8th Bn. NDRF at Ghaziabad - 51%.  
(ix) 9th Bn. NDRF at Patna - 64%. 
(x) 12th Bn. NDRF at Hollongi (AP) - 17%. 
(xi) NDRF Academy at Nagpur: - 38%. (Work will be completed by 31.03.2023). 
(xii) 1st Bn NDRF in the State of Assam: - The work could not be started due to 
land issue. 
 Out of the 10 no. approved team locations, work has been completed at 07 team 
locations i.e. Siliguri, Kolkata, Balasore, Kishangarh, Dwarka (New Delhi) Bangalore 
&Vishakhapatnam. Work is under progress at the following  team locations: - 
(iv) Dehradun under 8th Bn. NDRF-88%. (work will be completed in CFY). 

33 
 
(v) Supaul under 9th Bn. NDRF-58%. (work will be completed in CFY). 
(vi)  Gandhinagar- Work has been started for which, MoU with agency has been 
signed recently on 12.04.2022.  
1st Bn. NDRF in Assam (issue of allotment of land ): - Construction work at 1 st Bn. 
NDRF could not be started til l date due to land issue. NDRF & Ministry of Home Affairs 
has vigorously pursuing the matter with State Govt. of Assam for early allotment of 
alternative land for NDRF Bn. in Guwahati. In this context, a meeting through VC was 
taken by Union Home Secretary  on 04.02.2021 with the Chief Secretary, Assam. 
Accordingly, it was envisaged that if land is provided by the State Govt. then work would 
be completed by March 2024.   
Meanwhile, the State Govt. had identified 02 alternate lands but the same were 
not found  suitable. Thereafter, follow up meeting was again taken by the Additional 
Secretary, MHA on 06.07.2021 with the Officers of State Government of Assam to 
review the progress on land issue. 
Thereafter, 75 Bigha (25 acres approx.) Village Grazing Reserve (VG R) land at 
Village- Majirgoun, Azara circle was identified by the State Govt., which was found 
suitable by NDRF. The State Govt. of Assam had accorded in principal approval for 
transfer of the said land to NDRF. But again, due to certain issues at local le vel, it was 
not fructified.   
Again, Union Home Secretary vide DO Letter dated 28.10.2021 requested Chief 
Secretary, Govt. of Assam to provide sufficient & suitable land at Guwahati for NDRF 
Bn.   
Now, NDRF has identified a piece of Govt. Revenue land meas uring 530 Bighas 
2 Katha 5 lecha at Sanapara Parbat  under Hajo Circle  office, Kamrup (Rural). 
Accordingly, a case for allotment of above land with land details and coordinates has 
been sent to DC Kamrup (Rural) by NDRF on 12.07.2022. In response, the case has 
further been submitted by DC Kamrup (Rural) to Commissioner & Secretary to the Govt. 
of Assam. The case is under process. After the allotment of the land, the time line for 
completion of the battalion infrastructure will be revised, if needed.  
Selection of PSU for construction work at team location Gandhinagar : - Earlier, 
during 2021, NDRF vide UO Note dated 04.03.2021 had requested MHA to award the 
subject work to M/s HSCL, after carrying out online bid formalities as per GFR. But, due 
to infirmity in the tendering process, it was decided that the construction of infrastructure 
at team location Gandhinagar of 6 th Bn. NDRF be re-tendered. Accordingly, the process 
of re -tendering was done, which has now been completed and accordingly, the work 
has been awarded to PSU namely C&DS, U.P. Jal Nigam, Noida. MoU has also been 

34 
 
signed by NDRF with the PSU on 12.04.2022 and the work scheduled for  completion  
by 30th April 2023. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 15 of Chapter I ) 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 9) 
 
The Committee note that the District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMAs) have 
been set up as planning, coordinating and implementing bodies for disaster 
management and to take all measures in the districts, as per the guidelines laid down 
by National and State Authorities. DDMAs have been constituted in all the districts. The 
Committee further note that so far 7000 community volunteers in 30 most flood prone 
Districts of 25 States have been trained under ‘Aapda Mitra Scheme’ which is intended 
to be increased to 1 lakh and feel that such efforts need to continue to cover other 
disaster prone areas in Hill districts too where landslides, cloudbursts, earthquakes etc. 
are increasingly being experienced. The Committee also note that Section 31 of the 
Disaster Management Act, 2005 mandates that every district of a State shall prepare 
their Disaster Ma nagement Plan (DMP). This includes the areas in the district 
vulnerable to different form of disasters and DMP of a district has to be drawn up by the 
State Disaster Management Authority. So far out of 732 districts in the Country, 673 
districts have drawn  their DMP. Guidelines prepared by NDMA for management of 
specific disasters are to be taken into account by the concerned 37 authorities while 
preparing their DMP. The Committee desire that the DMPs of remaining 59 districts also 
need to be prepared and a pproved expeditiously in a time bound manner. They may be 
apprised of the progress in this regard. The Committee are happy to note that NDMA 
brings awareness of disasters through electronic and print media. However, they are of 
the view that to strengthen States’ capacities in disaster education, regular mock drills 
may be conducted and physical camps set up in disaster prone districts of the Country 
with the help of retired CAPF personnel, suitably trained senior NCC Cadets residing in 
the district, so tha t trained citizens can act as first responders during the time of any 
disaster. The Committee further opine that BSF and SSB should also provide 
assistance/support to NDRF/SDRF in case a need is felt during any disaster. The 
Committee desire the Ministry t o consider these measures and apprise them of action 
taken on the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(a). Aapda Mitra : It is to state that under the Pilot Scheme of Aapda Mitra, a total 
number of 5513 volunteers were trained against the target of 6,000 volunteers. Under 
the ongoing Up -scaled Aapda Mitra Scheme, nearly 14710 volunteers against the 

35 
 
targets of 1 lakh have b een trained, so far. Further it is clarified that the Up -scaling of 
Aapda Mitra Scheme is being implemented in 350 districts of India including hilly areas. 
These districts have been identified based on their proneness to landslide, earthquakes, 
floods and cyclones.  
(b). Disaster Management Plan  : The recommendations of the Committee have been 
noted. The States where Disaster Management Plan (DMP) of remaining 59 districts are 
yet to be prepared, shall be requested to prepare their DMP expeditiously taking  into 
account, inter alia, guidelines for management of specific disasters prepared by 
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA).  
(c). Distt. Level Mock Exercises  : On 30 th June 2020, the Hon’ble Union Home 
Minister, carried out a review of the country’s disaster management activities and 
thereafter directed that mock exercises should be conducted in each district of the 
country at least once in every three years for the following purposes :  
(a) To ensure that every district can constitute field trained teams for disaster response.  
(b) To test the efficacy of every district’s disaster management plans and its 
preparedness component.  
(c)  To bring in greater cohesion and co ordination amongst, and between, different 
stakeholder. 
On the day of a district’s mock exercise, the Fire & Emergency Services (F&ES) of the 
concerned district and of the State/UT shall also visit schools in their jurisdiction and 
conduct mock drills in 10 to 20 pre- identified schools in the district.  
In accordance with the directions, the NDRF has been tasked with conducting mock 
exercises at the district level, This training is being implemented in phases, as indicated 
below :  
 
Phase FY  Districts covered  
Phase-I  2020-21 98 
Phase-II 2021-22 239 
Phase-
III 
2022-23 Annual Calendar of 
Distt Level MEs 
covering 298 Districts 
has been circulated to 
all States / UTs. 
 

36 
 
As per Section 22(2) (p) & 30 (2) (xxviii) DM Act 2005, State / District Authorities are 
responsible to carry out Disaster management drills periodically. However, NDMA 
facilitates States / UTs in conduct of State/UT/ Multi State Level Mock Exercises on th e 
disaster scenario based on the vulnerability profile of the State/UT with the active 
participation of State / UT authorities, distt Administrations, line Department, community 
volunteers and Central Agencies like EW Agencies, Armed Forces, CAPFs and NDRF . 
During the year 2021 -22, NDMA coordinated and conducted 21 such online Table Top 
Exercises (TTEx) including 02 physical Mock Exercises.     
The contents of recommendation under this para have been noted. However, it is 
submitted that all CAPFs, including  BSF and SSB, are already providing immediate 
response in case of any disaster as per the need and also provides all necessary 
supports/assistance to the NDRF Bns/Teams as and when required by them. It may 
also be submitted that  SSB has operationalized 18  Rescue & Relief Team (RRTs) in 
the State of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Sikkim, West Bengal, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir to carry out rescue and relief operations 
during disaster situations in the area of operation of SSB . Further, SSB is carrying out 
rescue & relief operations in border areas in the AoR of SSB. Further, Regional 
Response Centres for responding to disasters have also been set up by ITBP.     
The Government of India is committed to provide all supports and make available 
all the necessary resources required for providing response, relief and rescue in case of 
any disaster.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 21 of Chapter I ) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
16 March, 2023              
25 Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
GIRISH  BHALCHANDRA  BAPAT 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 
 
  

37 
 
Annexure - ‘A’ 
BUILDING WISE COMPLETION PLAN OF NDRF ACADEMY NAGPUR 
S.N. Name of work Target Date of 
Completion  
New target 
date of 
completion 
as 
submitted 
by IrconISL 
1 Office Building 23.05.2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31.03.2023 
2 180 Men Barrack (1 no) 30.11.2022 
3 Trainee Officers Hostel & 
GOs Mess 
12.07.2022 
4 
5 SOs Mess 24.06.2022 
6 MT Garage work shop 08.05.2022 
7 FWC cum shopping complex 26.04.2022 
8 Training Block :-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26.05.2022 
i.    Swimming Pool with diving tank water 
treatment plant for  
swimming pool and deep diving 
ii.   Drill Shed  
iii.  USAR building with Basic Rubble Field with 
High Rise  
Rescue Tower 
iv.  Specialized External Development (Retaining 
walls,  
cutting & filling due to sloping site) 
v.   Training Block 
vi.  QM Store 
vii.  MI Room 
viii. Gymnasium cum indoor sports complex 
ix.   30 Nos dog kennel 
x.    Auditorium 
xi.   Volley Ball Court 
xii.   Basket Ball Court 
9 Type-II Quarters (48 nos) 20.12.2022 
10 Type-III Quarters (24 nos) 19.11.2022 
11 Type-IV Quarters (12 nos) 07.11.2022 
12 Type-V Quarters (4 nos) 01.11.2022 
13 Type-VI Quarters (1 nos) 10.10.2022 
 
 

38 
 
MINUTES OF THE 16th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022-23) 
 
The 16th Sitting of the Committee was held on Thursday, 16 March, 2023 at 1500  hrs. 
to 1530 hrs. in Room No.52B, Parliament House, New Delhi-110001 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan – Convener 
MEMBERS 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri P.P. Choudhary 
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
8. Dr. K.C. Patel 
9. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
12. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
13. Shri Dilip Saikia  
14. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
16. Shri Prathap Simha 
17. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
18. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 

39 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
       1.     Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda -    Additional Secretary 
2.      Shri Muraleedharan. P -    Director 
3.      Shri R. C. Sharma       -  Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Convener welcomed the Members to the sitting  of the Committee and 
briefed them about the agenda of the sitting viz. Consideration and adoption of three draft 
report(s).   
3.  The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following draft 
Reports: 
i. XXX  XXX  XXX 
ii. XXX  XXX  XXX 
iii. Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 13rd Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of 
National Disaster Response Force’ relating to the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
4. The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Action Taken Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Convener to present the same to Lok 
Sabha. 
5. XXX   XXX  XXX 
The Committee, thereafter, adjourned.   
  
 
 

40 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 13th Report of the Committee on Estimates 
 (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 15 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. NO. 3,4,6,7,8,10,11,12,14,15) 
10 
 Percentage of total recommendations 66.66% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
NIL 
Percentage of total recommendations 
00 
 
 
NIL 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(SI. NO. 1,13) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
02 
 
 
13.33% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
(SI. No. 2,5,9) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
03 
 
 
20% 
 
 