26 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES  
 
 
 
EVALUATION OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) POLICY 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
 
EVALUATION OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) POLICY 
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 24 March, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2023 / Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
  

CONTENTS         Page No. 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2022-23)    ii 
 
Introduction           iv 
          PART-I 
CHAPTER-I  Introductory        1 
 
CHAPTER-II    Challenges of EVs and EV Industry    7 
     
CHAPTER-III Government measures to promote adoption of EVs 10  
CHAPTER-IV    Growth of Electric Vehicles in India    28 
 
CHAPTER-V  Charging Infrastructure      34 
 
          PART-II 
        Observations/Recommendations      36  
     
         PART-III 
     ANNEXURES 
(i) Charging Stations under FAME Scheme     49 
(ii) Annexure B- Manufactures of EVs registered under Fame   54 
India Scheme Phase II for availing demand incentive  
     
                  APPENDICES 
(i) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 07.06.2022  56  
(ii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 02.08.2022  58 
(iii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 23.03.2023   61 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
 Shri Girish Bhalchandra  Bapat – Chairperson 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
6. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
13. Shri jual Oram 
14. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
15. Shri Dilip Saikia  
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
17. Dr. K.C. Patel 
18. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
19. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
20. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
21. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
22. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
23. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
24. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
25. Shri Prathap Simha 
26. Shri Pinaki Misra 
27. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
28. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
29. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
30. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
ii 

 
 
 
Secretariat                            
  
Smt Anita Bhatt Panda Additional Secretary 
Shri Muraleedharan. P Director 
Shri Gagan Kumar Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii 
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on t heir behalf, do present this 26 th Report on the 
subject ‘Evaluation of Electric Vehicle (EV) Policy ’ pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries. 
2.         India is massively dependent on oil imports. Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) 
vehicles produce air pollution and greenhouse gases. Promoting the use of EVs can 
have numerous benefits for the enviro nment, public health, economy and technological 
innovation. India has been working to promote the use of electric vehicles (EVs) through 
various schemes and incentives.  
3.         In this backdrop, with a view to examine various aspects of Electric Vehicl e 
Policy in the country, the Committee on Estimates (2022 -23) selected this subject for in-
depth examination and report to the House.  
4.         In this Report, the Committee have dealt with various schemes and initiatives for 
promotion of electric vehicl es such as Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) 
Electric Vehicles (FAME) scheme, PLI scheme for Advanced Chemistry Cell, PLI 
Scheme for Automobile and Auto Component, other supportive policies, and Charging 
infrastructure development, battery wa ste management, skilled manpower for 
maintenance, repair and scrapping of EVs etc. The Committee have analysed these 
issues in detail and made observations/recommendations in the report.  
5.         The Committee on Estimates took oral evidence of the repr esentatives of 
Ministry of Heavy Industries on the subject on 7th June, 2022 and 2nd August, 2022. 
The Committee also held informal discussion on the subject during its study visit on 4 
November, 2022 at Hyderabad.   The draft Report was considered and adop ted by the 
Committee on Estimates (2022-23) at their sitting held on 23 March, 2023.  
6.         The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries for furnishing material, written replies to list of point s and 
tendering evidence before them.  
7.     For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                  GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT 
23 March, 2023        CHAIRPERSON 
02 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)                    COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
iv 

1 
 
PART I 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
An electric vehicle (EV) is a type of vehicle that uses one or more electric motors for 
propulsion instead of an Internal Combustion Engine (ICE). EVs can be powered by 
batteries that are recharged by plugging the vehicle into an electric power source, or 
they can be powered by a hydrogen fuel cell that converts hydrogen gas into electricity. 
Compared to traditional gasoline -powered vehicles, EVs produce fewer emissions and 
are more energy -efficient that can potentially save money on fuel and maintenance 
costs. While EVs were once seen as a niche market, they are becoming increasingly 
popular as battery technology improves and charging infrastructure becomes more 
widely available. The rise of EVs is part of a broader trend towards more sustainable 
transportation and reducing carbon emissions from the transportation sector.  
1.2 There are four types of electric vehicles available: 
1. Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs):  BEVs are also known as All -Electric 
Vehicles (AEV). Electric Vehicles using BEV technology run en tirely on a 
battery-powered electric drive train. The electricity used to drive the vehicle is 
stored in a large battery pack which can be charged by plugging into the 
electricity grid. The charged battery pack then provides power to one or more 
electric motors to run the electric car.  
2. Hybrid Electric Vehicle (HEV): HEVs are also known as series hybrid or 
parallel hybrid. HEVs have both engine and electric motor. The engine gets 
energy from fuel, and the motor gets electricity from batteries. The 
transmission is rotated simultaneously by both engine and electric motor. 
3. Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV):  The PHEVs are also known as 
series hybrids. They have both engine and a motor. One can choose among 
the fuels, conventional fuel (such as petr ol) or alternative fuel (such as bio -
diesel). It can also be powered by a rechargeable battery pack. The battery 
can be charged externally. 
4. Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle (FCEV): FCEVs are also known as Zero-Emission 
Vehicles. They employ ‘fuel cell technology ’ to generate the electricity 

2 
 
required to run the vehicle. The chemical energy of the fuel is converted 
directly into electric energy. 
Need for Electric vehicles 
1.3 India is massively dependent on oil imports.   According to data of Petroleum 
Planning &  Analysis Cell (PPAC), India has spent USD 119.2 billion in FY 2021 –22, 
which is up from USD 62.2 billion spent in the previous fiscal year.  High crude oil prices 
in the international market have adverse impact on country’s economy.  
Besides, the vehicula r pollution arising from the increasing stock of private 
vehicles, especially internal combustion engines (ICE) has contributed significantly in 
deteriorating the air quality in Indian cities.  
India has committed to Net -Zero carbon emissions by 2070 and to reduce the total 
projected carbon emissions by one billion tones by 2030.  It is believed that f aster 
adoption and promotion of Electric vehicles will not only bring down the import bill but 
also the pollution arising from the use of ICE vehicles.   India has the potential to 
become a leading hub for manufacturing EVs and EV components with a robust Electric 
Vehicle (EV) Policy.  In view of the above, the Committee selected the subject 
‘Evaluation of Electric Vehicle (EV) policy’ for in-depth examination and report.  Two 
sittings were held for the examination of the subject on 7 June, 2022 and 2  August, 
2022 with the representatives of the Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI), NITI Aayog and 
Convergence Energy Services Limited (CESL).  
1.4 Ministry of Heavy Industries in their Background note has submitted as 
follows: 
India represents the fifth largest automobile market in the world. We are 
world's largest 3 Wheeler , 2 nd largest 2 Wheeler and 3 rd largest 
passenger vehicle  manufacturer. We are also massively dependent on 
oil imports, with a USD 112 billion oil import bill in FY19 (equivalent to 
4% of the country's GDP). Pollution in many Indian cities has reached 
alarming levels. All these factors combined, make a strong case for the 
Government of India for moving towards green mobility to control 
pollution and save the environment. The initiative has prom pted 

3 
 
introduction of policy and incentive schemes by MHI for fast adoption of 
Electric Vehicles (EV) in India. As per Vahan portal, EV sales in FY21 -22 
were 4.3 lakh units, which are 3.3 times of EV sold during FY 2020-21. In 
FY21-22 ~2.3 lakh r egistered electric two -wheelers, ~1.7 lakh e -3W ,  
~19000 e-4W and ~0.01 lakh buses were sold, which is about 2.7 % of 
FY21-22 total Internal Combustion Engine vehicle sales. 
1.5 One of the reasons for low popularity of EVs is a high upfront cost as compared 
to Internal combustion Engines (ICE) vehicles. When enquired about the reason for EVs 
being costlier than ICE vehicles, MHI has submitted as below:  
 “Based on the ARAI inputs, it is stated that 
In electric vehicles, major expensive component is Lithium -Ion batte ry 
(approx. 30% to 40% cost of electric vehicle). Currently Lithium -Ion cells are 
imported and further manufacturing / assembly of battery pack is done 
domestically. Globally, prices of Lithium -Ion cells and battery pack are higher, 
although it is expected that there will be a downward trend in future. 
Government of India’s Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 
Advance Chemistry Cells (ACC) will help in local manufacturing of Lithium -Ion 
cells and reduce dependency on import which may bring down the cost of the 
batteries. 
Although penetration of electric vehicles is increasing, the percentage of 
EV sales as compared to total Auto vehicle sales is still minuscule (2 to 3%). 
 Thus the volume of electric vehicles and their components manufacturing and 
sales is still quite low. Typically, in the Auto sector, volume sales drive down the 
cost and hence present volume of electric vehicles being still low, economics of 
scale is not achieved yet, thus resulting in higher cost of electric vehicles as 
compared to Internal Combustion Engines (ICE) vehicles.” 
1.6 In a written reply to a query, MHI has also stated as below: 
Upfront cost of battery -operated vehicles is higher than the conventional 
vehicles. However, the operational cost of battery-operated vehicles is lower than 
the conventional vehicles. Therefore, the overall life time cost of the battery -
operated vehicles is lower than the conventional vehicles. Battery -operated 
vehicles are being supported by the way of demand incentives under FAME India 
Phase II, MHI to reduce the cost difference between the battery -operated 
vehicles and the conventional vehicles. 
 

4 
 
Measures for promotion of EVs 
1.7 When asked about the steps taken to promote Electric Vehicles (EVs) in the 
country Ministry of Heavy Industries in their written reply has submitted as below: 
Following steps have been taken by the Government for adoption of electric vehicles in 
the country: 
i. The Ministry of Heavy Industries formulated a Scheme Faster Adoption and 
Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Ve hicles in India (FAME India) Scheme in 
2015 to promote adoption of electric/ hybrid vehicles (xEVs) in the country. At 
present, Phase-II of FAME India Scheme is being implemented for a period of 5 
years w.e.f. 01st April, 2019 with a total budgetary support of ₹10,000 crore. 
ii. The Government on 12th May, 2021 approved a Production Linked Incentive 
(PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) in the country 
in order to bring down prices of battery in the country. Drop in battery price will 
result in cost reduction of electric vehicles. 
iii. Electric Vehicles are covered under Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for 
Automobile and Auto Components, which was approved on 15th September 
2021 with a budgetary outlay of ₹ 25,938 crore for a period of five years. 
iv. GST on electric vehicles has been reduced from 12% to 5%; GST on chargers/ 
charging stations for electric vehicles has been reduced from 18% to 5%. 
v. Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) announced that battery -
operated vehicles will b e given green license plates and be exempted from 
permit requirements. 
vi. MoRTH issued a notification advising states to waive road tax on EVs, which in 
turn will help reduce the initial cost of EVs. 
vii. Model Building Bylaws 2016 amended to establish charging stations and 
infrastructure in private and commercial buildings.  
1.8 MHI, in their written reply, to a query about the supported EVs, has stated that 
Battery Electric Vehicle and Strong Hybrid vehic les are supported under the FAME -II 
Scheme whereas hydrogen fuel cell based vehicles which are Zero Emission Vehicles 
(ZEVs) are covered under Auto and Auto component PLI Scheme.  
 
EVs on Indian roads 
1.9  Electric vehicles (EVs) are slowly gaining popular ity on Indian roads, although 
they are still relatively uncommon.  One of the main barriers to the widespread adoption 

5 
 
of EVs in India is the lack of charging infrastructure.   Despite various challenges, the 
market for EVs in India is slowly growing. In 2 021, electric two -wheelers, particularly 
scooters, emerged as the most popular EV segment, accounting for over 96% of EV 
sales in the country. Electric cars and buses are also gradually gaining popularity, with 
several manufacturers launching EV models in the market. Overall, while the adoption 
of EVs in India is still in its early stages, the country has the potential to become a major 
market for EVs in the future, given the Government's commitment to promoting electric 
mobility and the increasing awareness among consumers about the benefits of EVs. 
A total of 1 8,02,967 Electric Vehicles (EVs) are being used on the roads of India as on 
30 November, 2022 , as per the information received from Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways. The details are as under: 
Sl. No. Vehicle Category No. of electric vehicles 
1 Two Wheeler 8,13,431 
2 Three Wheeler 9,19,025 
3 Four Wheeler and above 70,511 
Grand Total 18,02,967 
Safety Concerns   
1.10 Expressing concern about reports of some electric two wheelers catching fire, the 
committee enquired about steps taken to check such incidents and ensure safer quality 
of EV in the country. MHI in their written reply informed the committee that Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways ( MoRTH) constituted a team of experts from DRDO, 
IISC, Bangalore and Naval Science and T echnological Laboratory (NSTL) , 
Visakhapatnam to find out the root cause of fires and recommend remedial measures. 
 
1.11 When further enquired about the said team of experts and their report on the 
incidents of fire, MHI in their written reply has updated as below: 
 
As per the information received from Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways. 
In the wake of incidents of fire in electric two wheelers, the Ministry of road 
Transport and Highways vide letter dated 5 th May, 2022 had constituted a 
committee of experts to suggest safety standards for Battery, BMS, and related 
components in electric vehicles. 

6 
 
The committee submitted the report on Safety Standards and suggested some 
additional requirements to be incorpora ted in the existing testing standards for 
battery and related components of L, M, and N category vehicles. 
Incorporating the suggestions of the committee and inputs from the stakeholder, 
Amendment to the Automotive Industry Standards (AIS) 156 [Specific 
requirements for L category electric power train vehicles] and AIS 038 (Rev 2) 
[Specific Requirements for M, N Category Electric Power Train Vehicles] was 
published. The said Amendments will be applicable from 1st December, 2022 and 
some clauses of these AIS standards will be effective from 31st March, 2023. 
MoRTH has issued the draft notification, vide G.S.R 659(E) dated 25 th August 
2022, for the requirements of Conformity of Production (COP), in respect of all 
categories of Electric vehicles including Quadr icycles, E- rickshaws, two wheelers, 
and four wheelers. 

7 
 
CHAPTER II 
CHALLENGES OF EVs AND EV INDUSTRY  
While it cannot be denied that EVs provide huge benefits over traditional vehicles that 
use fossil fuels, there are several challenges that have been identified by EV users, 
enthusiasts and the public as well as various stakeholders in vehicle manufacturing , 
which need to be addressed to realise the full potential of EVs in India. The major 
issues present in the EV space are summarised below:  
1. Charging Infrastructure:  One of the major hurdles in adoption of EVs in India is 
the unavailability and slow development of charging infrastructure. Charging 
infrastructure is the foundation on which the EV market is built and India has not 
achieved an expeditious pace of establishment and use of charging infrastructure 
which creates a barrier in both production and sale of EVs in India. Factors like 
unsurety in utilization rates of charging stations, huge operating costs, load on 
electricity DISCOMs, etc., create a negative environment for operators to 
establish charging stations and discourage investment when there are not 
sufficient numbers of EVs in Indian roads for operators to realise the returns on 
their investments. Limited charging infrastructure in India, especially in smaller 
towns and rural areas as well as on  Highways and expressways which are mo re 
than 600 at present in the country, makes it difficult for EV owners to travel long 
distances and may discourage potential buyers from purchasing an EV. 
2. Range anxiety - Range anxiety is one of the crucial challenges ahead of the 
growth path for electric vehicles in India. The EV customers are often worried 
about the vehicles capability to reach point B from point A before the battery runs 
out. This issue is closely connected to the scarce charging  infrastructure in India. 
The EV charging infrastructure in India is too low compared to the petr ol pumps. 
Also, the available EV charging stations are concentrated in urban areas only.  
3. High initial cos t- There is  no price parity between electric vehicles and ICE 
vehicles in India. Electric vehicles are way more expensive than their 
conventional fuel-powered counterparts. This huge price difference discourages 
many interested EV buyers to shy away from making a decision to buy those. 

8 
 
4. Scarce battery technology - The battery technology used in EVs is still 
evolving, and the cost of the battery is a significant factor in the overall cost of an 
EV. Moreover, the availability of rare earth metals and other raw materials 
required for the production of batteries is limited. The lithium -ion battery is the 
most popular and widely used energy source for EVs. India doesn't produce 
lithium. The country doesn't produce li -ion batteries either. India relies on import 
for EV batter ies resulting in the sky -high price for these important components 
and eventually the EVs as well.   Cost for repetitive battery replacement, etc., do 
not make EVs a popular option for the Indian consumers.  
5. Power Supply: India faces challenges in ensuring reliable and stable electricity 
supply, especially in rural areas . As the EV adoption increases, the demand for 
electricity will also increase. To meet the increasing requirement of electricity, 
huge invest in  infrastructure is required  for producing more electricity from 
renewable energy sources. 
 
6. Manufacturing Capabilities: India is heavily dependent on import in EV sector.  
India's domestic manufacturing capabilities for EVs and its compone nts are 
limited. Therefore, a boost in the domestic manufacturing  industry will be needed 
to provide affordable EVs and components. 
 
7. Consumer perception - The consumer perception about electric vehicles in 
India is still weak compared to ICE vehicles. The range anxiety, lack of charging 
infrastructure, a wide gap between EV and ICE vehicle prices, lack of assurance 
about satisfactory resale value play key roles in that. Despite the Indian 
consumers are becoming more open about adopting e -mobility than before , the 
negative perception about EVs is still there. 
8. Consumer protection: While the technology is still relatively new and is being 
accepted more day by day, The repair and maintenance network is still very 
minuscule compared to ICE vehicles. The lack of people skilled in EV 
maintenance is one of the major causes of this challenge.   
9. Limited Awareness:   In the absence of widespread marketing strategies 
concerning the impact and importance of EVs, Indian consumers have limited 
awareness of EVs as alternative to traditional fossil fuel engine-based vehicles. 

9 
 
10. Policy Support: While various  steps have been taken by the Government to 
promote the use of EVs, more policy support for longer period is required to 
encourage the EV penetration at par with ICE vehicles . This includes providing 
incentives for EV manufacturers, c reating a supportive regulatory environment, 
and investing in charging infrastructure promoting EV awareness etc. 
11. Scrapping Policy : Electric vehicles contain high -voltage components that are 
harmful to the environment, if not handled properly. This includes batteries, which 
can contain toxic chemicals, and electronic components, which can release 
harmful substances when broken down.  Many of the materials used in EVs, 
such as lithium and cobalt, are valuable and can be recycled. E lectric vehicles 
can also contain sensitive data that should be protected during scrapping. This 
includes personal information stored in infotainment systems and telemetry data 
collected by the vehicle's sensors. 
12. Shortage of skilled manpower for servicing and repair of EVs. 
Availability of skilled labor for servicing and repairing EVs is a concern. Unlike 
traditional gasoline -powered vehicles, EVs have unique components and 
systems, such as batteries, electric motors, and regenerative braking systems, 
that require specialized  training and expertise to repair and service. As EVs 
become more popular and their numbers on the road increase, shortage of 
trained technicians and mechanics who are qualified to work on these vehicles 
could result in longer waiting time for repairs, hig her costs for maintenance and 
repairs, and potentially lower customer satisfaction. 
 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER III 
GOVERNMENT MEASURES TO PROMOTE ADOPTION  
OF EVS 
National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP) 2020 
Government of India launched the National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP) 
2020 in 2013.  
The National Electric Mobility Mission Plan 2020 was one of the most important and 
ambitious initiatives undertaken by the Government of India to bring about a 
transformational paradigm shift in the automotive and transportation industry in the 
country. This was a culmination of a comprehensive collaborative planning for 
promotion of hybrid and electric mobility in India through a combination of policies 
aimed at  gradually ensuring a vehicle population of about 6 -7 million electric/hybrid 
vehicles in India by the year 2020 along with a certain level of indigenisation of 
technology ensuring India’s global leadership in some vehicle segments. It was a 
composite scheme using different policy-levers such as: 
1. Demand side incentives to facilitate acquisition of hybrid/electric vehicles 
2. Promoting R&D in technology including battery technology, power electronics, 
motors, systems integration, battery management system, testing infrastructure, 
and ensuring industry participation in the same 
3. Promoting charging infrastructure 
4. Supply side incentives 
5. Encouraging retro-fitment of on-road vehicles with hybrid kit 
3.2 In the Background note submitted to the committee, MHI has stated as below: 
India embarked on its Electric mobility journey in 2015, with the launch of 
flagship Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid) and Electric 
Vehicles (FAME India) scheme. Its approach to electric mobility evolved 
towards developing a shared &  connected mobility paradigm and to 
reduce the fossil fuel imports.  
The Government’s approach for India’s EV transition also encompasses:  

11 
 
1) Promotion of localization ‘Make in India’ or Aatmanirbhar Bharat and 
position India as an export hub for EVs and  
2) Promotion and establishing a comprehensive policy framework that 
shall support a fair and a smooth transition to e-mobility. 
India’s EV policy emphasises on moving people rather than vehicles, 
targeting incentives towards shared and public transport, w hich have 
greater potential to reduce congestion, improve urban air quality, and 
reduce carbon emissions. The incentives are linked to battery capacity, 
providing motivation to customers and manufacturers to shift towards 
longer-range vehicles.  
3.3 The po licy measures taken by MHI to become a leader in sustainable 
mobility are as below: 
(i) Faster Adoption & Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles 
(FAME) Phase -I: The Scheme was launched in April, 2015 with a 
budget allocation of ₹ 895 Crore  over 4 years (till 2019). It supported 
about 2.8 lakh hybrid and electric vehicles and deployed 425 e -buses 
across 10 cities.  
(ii) FAME Phase-II: Following the success of Phase-I of FAME India Scheme 
and the leanings from it, the FAME Scheme was extended to P hase II 
initially for a period of three years commencing from 1st April, 2019 with a 
total budgetary support of ₹10,000 crore to support all ZEVs (Zero 
Emission Vehicles) fitted with Advanced Chemistry Batteries.  This 
Scheme envisaged supporting 1 million  2W, 0.5 million 3W, 55,000 cars 
and 7090 e -buses.  Incentives under this Scheme are linked to power of 
the battery @ ₹10,000/kWh for all vehicles except buses (@₹ 
20,000/kWh).   This scheme provides for ₹1000 Crores for installation of 
Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles. 
 
The Scheme was remodelled in June 2021 based on experience 
particularly during Covid -19 Pandemic and feedback from industry and 
users.   
Under remodeled FAME-II, following are the amendments: 
a. Aggregation will be the key method for bringing the upfront cost of 3W EV 
at an affordable level and at par with ICE 3 -Wheelers. Energy Efficiency 

12 
 
Services Limited ( EESL) will aggregate demand for 3 lakh Electric three 
Wheelers for multiple user segments.  
b. For Electric Buses, 4 million plus cities (Mumbai, Delhi, Bangalore, 
Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Chennai, Kolkata, Surat, and Pune) will be 
targeted. EESL will go for aggregation of demand in these 9 cities for 
remaining E-buses under the Scheme on OPEX basis. 
c. For Electric 2 Wheelers, demand Incentive is increased to @ ₹15000/ - per 
KWh from @ ₹ 10000/- per KWh. 
d. The cap on incentives for Electric 2 Wheelers is increased to 40% of the 
cost of vehicles from 20% cost of vehicles. 
e. The scheme has been extended for a further period of 2 years i.e. upto  FY 
2023- 2024. 
Under the aegis of MHI, the largest ever aggregation of demand for electric 
buses – 5450 buses across five major cities namely Kolkata, Delhi, 
Bangalore, Hyderabad and Surat  is under process. The aggregation model 
establishes a benchmark for public transit going forward in terms of a 
business model. It allows state agencies to purchase mobility as a transit 
service – where operators are paid a fixed price denominated as rupee s per 
kilometre over a period of time. This public -private model has emerged as a 
way for cities to introduce or scale electric bus services. With a burgeoning 
demand for mobility, this model holds the potential to serve as a solution to 
cover the investment needs of the bus sector and ramp up bus services.  
The total number of EVs envisaged under FAME II can cumulatively save 
about 12 billion liters of fuel over their lifetime, which translates into monetary 
savings worth Rs. 72000 crores. It would lead to  avoidance of about 27 
million tonnes of CO2. Hence, there are enormous economic and 
environmental benefits for citizens of the country. 
3.4 When enquired about the details as worked out by EESL for implementation of 
aggregation of demand of electric 3 whe elers and for electric buses, MHI in their written 
reply have submitted the following:  
As per the information received from EESL: 
 
a). For E-3Ws: 

13 
 
i. In fulfillment of the mandate given, Convergence Energy Services Limited 
(CESL) aggregated demand for electric 3Ws, about 82,000 electric 3 -wheelers 
for different uses cases like garbage tipper for municipal corporation, cargo 
vehicles for e-commerce and 3rd part logistic companies’ passenger e -autos and 
refrigerated vehicles for dai ry vaccine & product. Further, CESL has also 
received demand for garbage tippers from various state municipal corporations 
through expression of Interest.  
ii. Subsequently CESL floated tender on 6th August 2021 for 1,00,000 E3Ws for 
price discovery under 8 us e cases , the bidding process concluded in October 
2021.  
iii. 21 Bidders participated in the tender, 12 bidders qualified, after due evaluation 
L1 price was discovered for each lot. 6 bidders agreed to match the L1 price. 
iv. Price reduction achieved for e-3Ws through this aggregated tendering were 18%-
26% lower than the prevailing market prices and are inclusive of GST, 3 -year 
AMC, 1 -year comprehensive insurance. CESL is offering the E3Ws through its 
MyEV portal for retail (B2C) and bulk (B2B) procurement.  
v. Final deployment of these electric 3Ws under FAME -II was not executed as per 
the timelines due the following reasons: 
a. Issue in financing 
b. Final purchase order was not placed by potential clients within the bid validity.  
vi. Currently, CESL is in process of reviving the aggregation model for electric 3Ws 
through robust consultation with various stakeholders for successful 
implementation for this program.  
b). For e-buses: 
i. Ministry of Heavy Industries vide Gazette notification dated 11th June 2021, 
nominated EESL to aggregate demand for e -Buses under FAME -II, in 9 major 
cities having population of over 4 million (Mumbai, Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad, 
Ahmadabad, Chennai, Kolkata, Surat, and Pune). 
ii. EESL through its wholly owned su bsidiary CESL had intense consultations with 
STUs, State Governments, OEMs, NITI Aayog, Ministry of Heavy Industries 
(MHI), financiers and several sector experts/institutions, CESL managed to 
standardize e-bus specifications, terms and conditions of public  transport across 
cities. CESL issued Grand Challenge document on 30 th September, 2021, 
soliciting demand for e -buses from STUs. This stayed publicly floated and open 
until 31 st Dec 2021, and upon closing, a demand for 5,450 buses was received 
from 5 of the 9 nominated cities.  
iii. CESL floated a centralised tender  on 20th January 2022 to enable deployment of 
e-buses against the aggregated demand. This tender contained homogenized 
terms and conditions of public transit across the 5 cities –an unprecedented 
exercise thus far, given the peculiarities and uniqueness of cities across India 
and their local needs for buses and bus transport. The last date of submission of 
bids was 15th March 2022. Financials bids were opened on 26th April 2022. 
iv. The prices discovered are lowest ever and further, they include electricity 
charges. The rates discovered are 27% less than diesel and 31% less than CNG 

14 
 
without subsidy. This was achieved by aggregating the demand and floating a 
unified tender with standardized parameters and contract terms. 
v. The aggregation model of e-buses has resulted in monetary saving of around Rs. 
471 crores of subsidy under FAME-II Scheme.   
vi. Two cities namely Delhi & Bengaluru has signed the concession agreement with 
the operator for deployment of 921 buses each in each city, these buses are 
envisaged to be deployed within a years’ time.  
3.5 To a query about the level at which incentives/subsidies under FAME -II are 
provided, MHI in their written reply has informed the Committee as below:  
 
In FAME -II   Scheme, the demand incentive is available for consumers 
(buyer/end users) in the form of   an upfront reduced purchase price of hybrid 
and electric vehicles (e-2W, e-3W and e-4W) to enable   wider adoption, which is 
being reimbursed to the OEM by Government of India.    
 
3.6 When further enquired whether  FAME-II support is provided to imported EVs, 
MHI replied in negative and stated that, FAME -II supports EVs manufactured in the 
country. 
3.7 During the examination of the subject, one of the representatives of NITI aayog 
explained the rationale behind the remodeling of FAME II scheme and its positive 
outcomes as below: 
“अभी तक हम  हर व्हीकल  सेगमेंट  के ललए  एक ही फॉममूला  लगाते  थे लक इंसेलटव दीलिए आदमी  
उसको खरीद लेगा , लेलकन  ऐसा नहीं होता है। हर के ललए  अलग -अलग  चालहए। यह तो वही बात 
हो गई लक we are giving the same prescriptio n to all the patients. For two 
wheelers, we realised that we must raise the incentives. We raised it and you can 
see the result,  it is ten times. For three wh eelers, we said “no, we should 
aggregate the demand”. Let the manufacturer know that इतना बड़ा लिमांि हमारे 
सामने  खड़ा है। हमलोगों  ने कहा लक तीन लाख  गालियों का लिमांि एग्रीगेट कीलिए । लोगों  से 
पमलिए, क्ोंलक  उनको इसकी िरूरत है। करीब 80,000 या 1 लाख  के आस पास तक इसका 
एग्रीगेशन हो चुका है and this has resulted into drop in prices by 20 per cent. हमने  
बसेज़ में  द म सरा मॉिल  ललया  है। That was altogether a different model. We said that we 
will not spend our resources all over India. इसको पमरे देश में  लेकर नहीं िाए ं गे। We will 
just focus on nine cities, what we call lig ht house cities, cities having population 
of four million plus. हमने  कहा लक यलद हम  इन शहरों में  पब्लिक ट ् ांसपोटेशन में  इलेब्लर ् क 
मोबेललटी  को लापाए ं , तो पमरे भारत में  बाकी शहर भी will be inspired and they will be 
copying it. We took these nine cities and out of these nine, five citi es took 
interest. So, the first principle was light house cities. Then, we said, no, the 
 process should be that of grand challenge. By that  we meant that we will 
ask you whether you are interested or not. We will not be wasting time with a 

15 
 
particular city लक आप बस लीलिए ही लीलिए। लकसी  ने कहा लक हमें  कोई इंट ्ेस्ट नहीं है, हम  
अपने रास्ते िाना चाहते हैं, ठीकहै, आप अपने रास्ते िाइए। That is h ow we selected five 
cities. We harmonized the demands, the specifications. उनको बैठाया, उनसे कहा लक 
बताइए आपको लो  फ्लोर चालहए, स्टैंििू फ्लोर चालहए, 12 मीटर की बस चालहए, 9 मीटर की बस 
चालहए, एसी चालहए, नॉन एसी चालहए, आपको लकस तरह की बस चालहए। तब उनक े ललए  पमरा 
मैलट ् क्स बनाया और हमने  हर िगर पर अपने ओईएम्स  को इन्वॉल्व रखा है।टाटा को, अशोक 
लीलैंि को , वोल्वो को , आइशर को, हमने इसमें हमेशा सभी लोगों को इन्वॉल्व रखा है। उसी तरह 
से हमने िो सबसे बलिया इनीलशएलटव ललया है , वह यह है, हमने कहा लक यह ओपेक्स मॉिल पर 
होगा यानी आपको तुरंत पैसे देने की कोई िरूरत नहीं है। यह सबसे बड़ी चीि है। हमने मॉिल 
चेंि कर लदया। यह क ै पेक्स नहीं होगा। नहीं तो, एक बस का दाम 1 या सवा करोड़ रुपये है, कोई 
भी एसटीयम कहेगा लक यलद हमें हिार बसें खरीदनी हैं, तो उतना पैसा कहां से आएगा। हमने कहा 
लक आपको कोई पैसा नहीं देना है। अब ओईएम ने बस लदया , बस बनाई, उसमें हमें बस लदया , 
बस उसक े  बुक ऑफ असेट्स में है। वह 12 साल तक हमें बस की पमरी सेवा दे रहा है। ररपेयर, 
चालििंग फ ै सेललटी, ि ् ाइवर, क्लीलनंग, लोगों से पैसे कलेर करना , िः साल क े  बाद बैट ् ी चेंि करना, 
सब काम वही करेगा। अब मुझे कोई लेना -देना नहीं है लक इस दौरान टेक्नोलॉिी चेंि होती या 
नहीं होती है।  The only  thing that I am concerned about is that per kilometer का 
लकतना चािू लेंगे। िो सबसे कम चािू लेगा , हम उसको देंगे।  You may see the result,  Sir. 
The result that has come is, ओईएम्स ने िो दाम क्वोट लकया है , ये दाम तो लपिली बार क े  
सीएनिी और िीिल  से भी कम है।  This has happened for the first time. इलेब्लर ् क बस 
का ओपेक्स मॉिल पर price is less than that of CNG and diesel. So, this has inspired 
us. This is a big story that India has done. 
With regard to charging, we said that buses cannot stay in the city and say that 
लक 7 घंटे तक चािू करेंगे। So, it was terminal charging. Every infrastructure is 
developed by the owner. We do not have to do anything. We have to simply run 
the bus. We have to identify  लक बस कौन से रूट पर चलेगी या उसको चेंि करना है, तो 
हम वह करेंगे। I will be just administering it and will be ensuring लक उसने लितने 
लकलोमीटसू कहा है और हमने िो एश्योिू अमाउंट कहा है , that must be given to him. That 
is a fair deal for 12 years. The price that came is Rs. 47 per km.  आि 47 रुपये एक 
लकलोमीटर क े  ललए है , तो 12 साल क े  बाद 47 रुपये की क्ा वैल्यम होगी ? There is no 
increase. For 12 years, it is the same. They have calculated everything. Of 
course, now Tatas will be supporting i t. All of them are pulling off the buses. We 
are in the process of issuing them letter of award finally.” 
 
(iii)     Advance Cell Chemistry (ACC) PLI Scheme:  ACCs are new generation 
advanced storage technologies that can store electric ene rgy and convert 
it back to electric energy as and when required. The Government 

16 
 
approved the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 'Advanced 
Chemistry Cell (ACC) Battery Storage’ for achieving manufacturing 
capacity of 50 GWh for enhancing India’s M anufacturing Capabilities with 
a budgetary outlay of        ₹ 18,100 crore. The scheme was notified in 
June 2021.  
Through PLI ACC Scheme, the Government of India intends to 
optimally incentivize potential investors, both domestic and overseas, to 
set- up Giga-scale ACC manufacturing facilities with emphasis on 
maximum value addition and quality output and achieving pre committed 
capacity level within a pre-defined time-period. 
(iv)     PLI for automobile and auto component Scheme:  Electric Vehicles 
are covere d under Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for 
Automobile and Auto Components, which was approved on 15th 
September 2021 with a budgetary outlay of ₹25,938 crore for a period of 
five years. It envisages enhancing India’s Manufacturing Capabilities fo r 
Advanced Automotive Products (AAT).  
The PLI scheme for Automobile and Auto components proposes financial 
incentives to boost domestic manufacturing of Advanced Automotive 
Technology products and attract investments in the automotive 
manufacturing value chain. Its prime objectives include overcoming cost 
disabilities, creating economies of scale and building a robust supply chain 
in areas of Advanced Automotive Technology products. Under the 
Scheme total 86 applicants have been approved. 
3.8 During the evidence when asked about the rationale of 5% GST on the EVs and 
whether MHI had recommended for zero percent GST on EVs, Secretary, MHI deposed 
as under before the Committee: 
“the rates of GST are decided by the Ministry of Finance. They only take our 
inputs. So, they have to look at various rates that how they do. So, we are 
incapable of answering the rationale. The only thing what we said is this. The 
GST on electric vehicles is to be lower. As on today, the cost of battery is so 

17 
 
high. If the GST is also a t the normal rate, the initial upfront cost of buying an EV 
will be prohibitive for the consumer. So, we suggested reduction. It is the Ministry 
of Finance which has taken the call that at which level it should be.”  
3.9 When enquired about the States which have waived road tax on EVs so far, MHI 
submitted in their written reply as below: 
As per the information received from Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways, it is stated that Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Haryana, Gujarat, Jam mu & Kashmir, Assam, Bihar, 
Telangana, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Maharashtra, 
Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Chandigarh, Uttarakhand, Puducherry, Odisha and 
Delhi have provided concessions at various rates on Road Tax / 
Registration charges / Parking Charges to Electric Vehicles. 
3.10 When further asked about compensation of revenue loss to the States on 
account of waiver of road tax on EVs, MHI has stated that as per the information 
received from Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, no such proposal is  under 
consideration. 
3.11  The Chief Secretary of Telangana informed the Committee during its study visit to 
Hyderabad that the incentives of EV two wheelers and three seate r a uto rickshaws 
comprise of 100% exemption from road tax and registration fee for  the first 2,00,000 
and 20,000 respectively for vehicles purchased and registered in the State of 
Telangana; retro-fitment incentive at 15% of retro -fitment cost capped at Rs.15000 per 
vehicle for the first 5000  retro-fit 3 seater auto rickshaws in Telenga na; Financial 
Institutions are encouraged to provide a hire -purchase scheme at discounted interest 
rates and on similar lines incentives for electric 4 wheeler commercial passenger 
vehicles such as taxi, tourist cabs, private cars etc. have been announced. 
3.12 States have a critical role in ensuring the success of the mobility transition. In this 
regard when asked about States/ UTs which have so far approved/notified dedicated 
EV Policies, MHI in their written response have submitted as below: 
As per information received from MoRTH. 

18 
 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra, Telangana, Gujarat, 
Assam, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Tripura, Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Chandigarh, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Delhi, 
Karnataka, Kerala and H aryana have notified respective EV policies. The EV 
policies for Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and Bihar are in draft stage. 
3.12 The objectives of these State level EV policies vary by state but commonly include 
improved air quality, climate change mitigation, reduced dependence on oil imports, and 
the development of India’s electric vehicle industry. 
Demand-side policies: Capital subsidies are one of the most common demand -side 
tools in state -level policies, with some states like Gujarat and Assam providing flat 
subsidies for the purchase of all new electric 2W, 3W, and 4W vehicles, while others 
like Odisha and Kerala pro vide subsidies that are a percentage of the EV’s purchase 
price. Some programs, such as Assam’s incentive for early 2W and 3W, base the 
subsidy on the vehicle battery capacity. “Early -bird” subsidy programs like the one in 
place in Maharashtra only subsidize the first 100,000 EV purchases. 
Other common incentives include exemptions from or reductions to vehicle registration 
fees, road taxes, parking charges, and occasionally, vehicle purchase taxes. To convert 
its large 3w vehicle fleet, Delhi has adopted a  scrappage program that allows owners of 
internal combustion engine rickshaws to scrap their old vehicles for a credit towards 
purchasing an electric one. 
Supply-side policies: A core component of many state -level EV policies is the 
provision of incentives  and capital subsidies for EV manufacturing, research, and 
development. Some governments establish tax breaks for purchasing land used in the 
construction of EV manufacturing facilities, exempt EV manufacturers from stamp and 
electricity duties, and provide utilities at a reduced rate. 
Charging infrastructure: Indian states provide a variety of incentives for private EV 
charger installations and establish targets for installing public chargers in densely 
populated areas and at regular intervals on high -traffic roads. Many policies change 
their state’s zoning laws, setting charging infrastructure requirements for constructing 
large-scale commercial complexes and residential buildings. 
Several states have invested in battery -swapping kiosks to promote the tran sition to 
electric 2- and 3-wheeled vehicles in the ridesharing and delivery sectors. 

19 
 
3.13 When enquired about the position of India vis -a-vis other major countries 
especially China, in production and usage of Electrical Vehicles, MHI in their written 
reply has furnished the following information: 
 
 A look at key electric vehicle markets 
China 
Key Subsidies 
China was aiming to phase out subsidies from 2020. However, the changed 
subsidy structure has affected the Chinese EV industry in 2019. The EV sales in 
2019 have grown by a mere 4% y -o-y compared to 62% y -o-y growth in 2018. 
Sales in the months of Sep -Nov 2019 were down by more than 30% y -o-y. 
However, the scenario slightly improved in Dec 2019, in which the EV sales 
decline was 22% y -o-y. In order not to  further hinder the car market in the 
depressed context of the pandemic, the planned end-2020 elimination of the New 
Electric Vehicle (NEV) subsidy program was postponed to 2022 albeit with 
gradual reductions in subsidies over that period. 
United States 
Key Subsidies 
In 2020, a federal tax credit of up to $7,500 for the purchase of an electric car 
was still available, with the exception of General Motors and Tesla which had 
reached the 200 000 sales limit per automaker in 2018, but this credit was not 
renewed. 
State-level Regulations 
It was at the state level where policies pushed for stronger EV deployment. The 
number of states following the California Low Emissions Vehicles pollutant and 
greenhouse gas emissions regulations now represent about a third of U S car 
sales. The Governor of California issued an Executive Order requiring that by 
2035 all new car and passenger light truck sales be zero -emission vehicles.   
Major markets such as New York, New Jersey, and Massachusetts are 
considering similar bans on internal combustion engines.  
European Union 
Key Subsidies 
Many countries in Europe are continuing EV subsidy and incentive measures 
launched as far back as 2015. In some, pandemic relief stimulus measures have 
favoured electric vehicles powertrains with ad ditional purchase subsidies and 
cash-incentive schemes for scrapping petrol/diesel vehicles for electric vehicles. 
Acceleration of electric mobility regulations during the pandemic 

20 
 
As part of its pandemic -related response, the European Union accelerated th e 
roll-out of electric mobility through its commitment to decarbonization in the EU 
Green Deal and the subsequent Next Generation EU and Recovery Plan.  
A number of EU directives and regulations are under review to adapt them to 
achieve stated ambitions. These include: CO2 emissions performance standards 
for cars and vans, Alternative Fuels Infrastructure Directive, European Energy 
Performance of Buildings Directive (which supports the deployment of charging 
infrastructure), and the EURO pollutants emissions standard. 
India 
In India key policy initiatives (remodeling of FAME II, PLI Auto and PLI ACC 
scheme) with respect to Electric Vehicles were taken in the calendar year 2021 
during the pandemic. 
Budgetary outlay of the Schemes  
FAME-II scheme 
3.14 In a written reply to the query as to how much funds were allocated vis -a-vis 
utilised during each of the years since the inception of the FAME -II Scheme, MHI has 
submitted as below:  
 
The details of the Budget Estimate (BE), Revised Estimate (RE) and Actu al 
Expenditure (AE) for Phase -II of FAME –India Scheme since FY 2019 -20 are as 
under: 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
Budget Expenditure 
(BE) 
Revised 
Estimate (RE) 
Actual Expenditure (AE) 
1 2019-2020 Rs. 500.00 Crore Rs. 500.00 Crore Rs. 500.00 Crore 
2 2020-2021 Rs. 692.94 Crore Rs. 318.36 Crore Rs. 318.36 Crore 
3 2021-2022 Rs. 756.66 Crore Rs. 800.00 Crore Rs. 800.00 Crore 
4. 2022-23 Rs. 2908.28 Crore Rs. 2897.84 Crore Rs. 1382.90 Crore as on 
08.02.2023 
5. 2023-24 Rs. 5171.97 Crore NA NiL 
  
3.15 When further asked about the reasons for meager allocation of ₹1618.36 crore 
during first 3 years of FAME -II scheme and extra measures being taken/ proposed for 
speedy implementation of FAME -II so as to fully utilise the remaining ₹ 5,500 crore 
allocated for the scheme in its last year of completion i.e. 2023-24. 
MHI in their written reply has submitted the following: 

21 
 
The expenditure has been less as COVID  affected off take of vehicles. The 
upfront cost of EVs is also more than the cost of ICE vehicles. In this regard, 
following actions have been taken by the Government: 
Consultations were held with various stakeholders. 
It was decided to extend FAME II within the overall allocation of  ₹ 10,000 crore 
up to 31st March 2024. 
The subsidy for e -2W has been incre ased from ₹10,000 per Kilowatt hour to ₹ 
15,000 per Kilowatt hour  subject  to a limit of 40% ex -showroom price. This was 
revised from the earlier 20%. 
For three wheeler EESL has been asked to aggregate demand. This will result in 
bringing upfront cost down by 20%. 
These steps will bring down cost of e -2w and e -3w.  Upfront purchase cost is 
main concern. This will lead to a mass movement in e -2w and e -3w and bring 
cost at par with internal combustion vehicles. 
For buses it was decided that EESL will aggregat e demand for the remaining 
buses for the nine, 40 lakh plus cities which will be targeted for deployment. 
3.16 When enquired about proposal to optimally utilize ₹ 2908.28 crore allocated 
during FY 2022 -23 under FAME -II which is on a much higher side as com pared to the 
last three years, MHI in their written reply has stated the following: 
 
“It is submitted that Rs. 1130.19 Cr has been spent towards subsidies/ incentive for sale 
of EVs (e -2w, e -3w and e -4w) being provided under the Scheme as on 21.02.2023. 
Further, after remodeling of the Scheme, the sale of electric vehicles has been 
increased. 
           Further, an amount of Rs. 252.71 Cr. (approx.) has been used under the Grant 
for Capital Creation Head for e-buses and charging infrastructure as on 21.02.2023. 
Therefore, the proposed amount would be required for this purpose.” 
3.17 When asked about the various reasons for slow progress of the Scheme, MHI in 
their written reply has given the following reasons: 
The reasons for slow pace in implementation of F aster Adoption and 
Manufacturing of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles (FAME) scheme have mainly 
been: 
(i) High upfront cost of electric vehicle as compared to corresponding IC Engine 
vehicle. 
(ii) Customer anxiety about range of electric vehicle. 

22 
 
(iii) Limited models available in India compared to Internal Combustion Engine 
(ICE) vehicles especially in Electric car segment. 
 
3.18 Pointing out that not all manufactures of EVs are eligible for subsidy under FAME 
phase II scheme, when enquired about the details of criteria for eligibility of subsidy to 
EVs under FAME II, MHI in their written reply has submitted as below: 
Under FAME -II Electric Vehicles complying the performance and 
efficiently criteria as laid down in Gazette notification dated 8th March 2019 and 
28th March 2019 are eligible for incentive. In this regard, copy of gazette 
notifications and guidelines are uploaded on www.fame2.heavyindustries.gov.in 
web portal.    The manufactures of EVs which are registered under FAME India 
Scheme Phase II for availing demand incentive is attached as Annexure B. 
 
3.19 Ministry of Heavy Industries in their written submission has also clarified that 
there is no proposa l under consideration to further extend th e FAME-II scheme beyond 
FY 2023-24.  
 
Advance Cell Chemistry (ACC) PLI Scheme 
 
3.20 When asked about the timeline for achieving the target of Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) Scheme for advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) Battery storage and year 
wise target set for expenditure under this PLI scheme, MHI in their written reply has 
stated as below: 
As per the Notification No. S.O. 2208(E) dated 09 th June, 2021, the breakup of 
fund allocation year wise, for the scheme’s duration is tabulated below – 
 
 
(All amounts are in ₹ Crore) 
FY 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27 2027-28 2028-29 Total 
Subsidy 
Amount  
Setting Up of 
Manufacturing 
Facilities 
Setting Up of 
Manufacturing 
Facilities 
2700 3800 4500 4300 2800 18100 
 
PLI for automobile and auto component Scheme 
3.21 When asked about the timeline for the PLI Scheme for Automobile and Auto 
components and year -wise target set for expenditure under this PLI scheme, MHI has 
submitted the following information: 

23 
 
“Incentive under the PLI Automobile and Auto Components Scheme will be 
applicable, starting from the Financial Year 2022 -23 which will be disbursed in 
the following Financial Year i.e. 2023 -24 and so on for a total of five (05) 
consecutive Financial Years.” 
The expec ted annual incentive outlay and total incentive outlay under the 
Scheme is as given below: 
Incentive outlay 
Applicable 
Incentive  
(F.Y.) 
Disbursement of 
Incentive 
(Financial Year) 
Total 
 Incentive 
 
 (₹ Crore) 
2022-23 2023-24 604 
2023-24 2024-25 3,150 
2024-25 2025-26 5,925 
2025-26 2026-27 7,199 
2026-27 2027-28 9,060 
Total 25,938 
 
Progress of Schemes of Ministry of Heavy Industries to promote EVs 
3.22 In a note submitted to the Committee, MHI has furnished the following 
information about the progress of the schemes. 
FAME-II Scheme 
MHI has sanctioned 6315 electric buses to 65 cities/STUs/State 
Govt. entities for intra -city operations. Which includes, 700 e -buses  
approved for intercity operation and 100 e -buses to Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation (DMRC) for last mile connectivity. Out of these 6315 electric 
buses, Supply Order for 3538 electric buses for intra -city, inter -city 
operation and last mile connectivity have been issued as on 30th May, 
2022. Out of these 3738 buses, 1397 electric buses have been d eployed 
(340 e -buses are deployed in the city of Mumbai, 150 e -buses in Navi 
Mumbai, 350 e -buses in UP, 50 e -buses in Goa, 10 e -buses in 

24 
 
Dehradun, 10 e -buses in Silvassa, 25 e -buses in Patna, 49 e -buses in 
Surat, 150 e -buses in Ahmadabad, 49 e -buses in Delhi (DMRC), 150 e -
buses by DTC, 40 e-buses in Chandigarh and 24 e-buses in Rajkot as on 
30st May, 2022. After this initiative, total 1,822 electric buses have 
become operational under FAME (Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of 
Hybrid & Electric Vehicles in India) scheme including 425 electric buses 
as deployed in the cities of Srinagar, Jammu, Lucknow, Indore, Kolkata, 
Guwahati and Hyderabad, Mumbai under Phase-I of the Scheme.  
Ministry has also sanctioned 2877 EV charging stations in 68 
cities across 25 St ates/UTs. Letters of Award are being issued to the 
selected entities after ensuring the availability of land for EV Charging 
Stations, signing of necessary agreements/MoU with concerned partner 
organizations like city municipal corporation/Discom/Oil compa nies etc. 
Letters of award for 1822 EV Charging Stations have been issued as on 
30th May, 2022.Out of these 1822 EV Charging Stations 41 EV Charging 
Stations (8 each in the city of Chennai, Delhi and Thrissur; 6 in 
Ernakulum; 4 in Nagpur; 2 each in Ahmedabad, Kannur and Indore and 1 
in Jaipur) installed and commissioned as on 30th May 2022. 
MHI has sanctioned 1576 EV Charging Stations across 16 
Highways & 9 Expressways.  
PLI Scheme for ACC Batteries 
 
 Ministry of Heavy Industries under PLI ACC scheme has allocated 50 GWh of 
battery capacity to 4 successful bidders. The details are as under: 
i. Rajesh Export Ltd. -  5GWh 
ii. Ola Electric Mobility -  20 GWh 
iii. Hyundai Global Motoras Co Ltd. – 20 GWh 
iv. Reliance New Energy Ltd.-  5 GWh 
Hyundai Global Motors did not sign Programme Agreement. Subsequently, they 
have been disqualified from the scheme due to misrepresentation of facts in their bid 
application. 
In the Empowered Group of Secretaries (EGoS) meeting recently he ld on 
06.02.2023, EGoS recommended re -tendering for the unallocated 20 GWh capacity 

25 
 
under the scheme. MHI has taken up necessary activities for re -tendering of 
unallocated capacity in consultation with NITI Aayog. 
3.23 On being enquired about the Companies / firms who had participated in 
the bid for the Scheme and the number of bids which were rejected and the 
reasons thereof, MHI in their written reply has furnished following information: 
“Ministry of Heavy Industries, on 22nd Oct, 2021 has released Request  
for Proposal (RFP) inviting bids from domestic and international players 
for setting up manufacturing facilities for Advance Chemistry Cell (ACC) 
Battery Storage in India under the ACC Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme. 
In response to the EoI, tota l 10 domestic/ intentional manufacturers 
submitted their proposal for ~130 GWh as per technical bids opened on 
15.01.2022. 
After evaluation of the Selected Bidders based on the Quality &  Cost 
Based Selection (QCBS) mechanism and the bidders were ranked on the 
basis of their combined technical and financial score. The ACC 
capacities have been awarded to the selected 3 entities i.e, (Rajesh 
Exports Limited - 5 GWh, Ola Electric Mobility Private Limited - 20 GWh& 
Reliance New Energy Solar Limited - 5 GWh).” 
3.24 When asked  whether the companies which are getting incentives under the 
Scheme free to export the incentivized batteries, MHI in their written reply has stated as 
below:  
The Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Advanced Chemistry 
Cell (ACC) envisages to enhance India’s Manufacturing Capabilities and 
Enhancing Exports – for manufacture of ACC in India. 
PLI scheme for auto mobile and auto component  
 
The scheme for automobile and auto component was introduced 
in September 2021. The Scheme was opened to both existing 
automotive companies as well as new non -automotive investor 
companies (not in automobile or auto component manufacturing 
business) and app lications were invited by the government till January 
2022.  

26 
 
In this short duration, this scheme has received a lot of support from the 
automobile and auto-component industry, as below: 
 Government exceeded investment target by ₹ 27,600  crores (as 
per bid guarantees received from applicants) 
 
 
The Scheme has been successful in attracting proposed investment of ₹ 
70,100 crore against the target estimate of investment ₹ 42,500 crore over 
a period of five years. The proposed investment of ₹ 43,016 crore  is from 
approved applicants under Champion OEM Incentive Scheme and ₹ 
27,084 crore from approved applicants under Component Champion 
Incentive Scheme. 
 High number of applications for the program, indicating favourable 
scheme structure for manufacturers 


27 
 
 
 
The PLI scheme for Automobile and Auto Component Industry has been a huge 
success in terms of the applications received from local as well as globally 
headquartered groups engaged in/ proposing to manufacture Advanced Automotive 
Technology vehicles/ products. Apart from Indian business groups, approved applicants 
include groups from countries such as Japan, Germany, USA, UK, Republic of Korea, 
Ireland, France, Belgium, Netherlands and Italy. 
3.25 During the examination of the subject one of the representatives while explaining 
the importance of the scheme had deposed as under before the Committee: 
“The importance of PLI Auto can be seen by the very fact that today, in the 
world, around 18 per cent of the vehicles constitute electronics. In India it is just 
three per cent and it is expected to go up to 30 per cent by 2030. This schemes 
actually overcomes the disabilities in respect of manufacturing of Advanced 
Automotive Technology. We do not have a supply chain; we do not have the 
required skilled manpower. This scheme provides incentive up to 18 per cent to 
overcome these disabilities so that we can catch up with the world. It has a 
budgetary outlay of ₹ 25,938 crore which will be given for a period of five years. 
The incentives will become applicable from t he year 2023 to 2026 -27. They are 
in two parts. The first part is Champion OEM Incentive Scheme and the second 
part is Component Champion Incentive Scheme. It incentivises various advanced 
technology products like dealing with emission, electronics, safety , CNG, LNG, 
flex fuel technology and clean fuels also.”  
 


28 
 
CHAPTER IV 
GROWTH OF ELECTRIC VEHICLES IN INDIA  
In a note submitted to the Committee, MHI has furnished the following information: 
The outcomes from the efforts on the Policy Front are seen as under: 
 
Electric Vehicle Sales  
 
Electric passenger vehicles displayed the largest growth; The sales volume 
continues to be contributed by the electric 2 -wheeler segment. Segment wise 
insights on electric vehicle sales performance follows: 
Electric 2-wheeler sales 
 
 
The e -2Wh segment has grown at a Cumulative Annual Growth Rate 
24618 
143837 
231297 
FY 20 FY 21 FY 22 
e-2 Wheeler Sales 
0.14 
0.9 
1.7 
FY 20 FY 21 FY 22 
e-2 Wheeler Sales 
Penetration (%) 

29 
 
(CAGR) of 111% over the last 3 years (FY20 -22), thus signifying a rapid 
pace of growth for this segment; e -2Whs accounted for less than 15% of 
the EV market in FY20, whereas  they account for 54% of the market in 
FY22. 
 
Electric 3-Wheeler sales 
 
 
 
 
*Includes both passenger and cargo 3wheelers 
Despite the e -2Wh market taking over in FY22, electric 3 -wheelers have 
been dominating the EV market consistently all throughout and have been 
driving the electrification of the Indian Automobile Industry thus far. 
The growth of the electric 3 -wheeler market can be attributed to the 
following reasons: 
a. Three-wheelers are not only a mode of transportation but also serve 
as the lifeline fo r several people formally/informally employed by 
their use 
b. They offer better value proposition in the shared mobility space 
c. There’s a growing need for last -mile connectivity through Rail -
Metro, buses, etc. 
d. Range anxiety issues are mitigated due to e -3Wh be ing usually 
deployed on shorter routes 
e. They’re quieter, cleaner and cheaper to maintain than a traditional 
auto-rickshaw; cost of maintenance for an e -3Wh is 80% as 
compared to that of an ICE vehicle. 
139675 
88360 
177879 
FY 20 FY 21 FY 22 
e-3 Wheeler Sales 
21.9 
40.2 
68.1 
FY 20 FY 21 FY 22 
e-3 Wheeler Sales 
Penetration (%) 

30 
 
Electric Cars (passenger vehicles):  
 
 
Currently, the e -4Wh market contributes to a mere 3% of the total EV 
ecosystem.  
In the past couple of years, OEMs have been rapidly ramping up their e -
4Wh production and have been pushing out new models in EV space. To 
add to this, issues related to range  anxiety and cost of ownership – 
caused primarily due to a lack of ancillary manufacturers – have been 
steadily getting mitigated through cost parity and development of EV 
technologies. This has led to an increase of over 300% in sales from 
FY20 to FY22. 
Electric Buses 
 
 
 
The growing focus of the government has led the transformation of 
public transportation landscape in the country; several players 
have ventured into this arena and have started launching their 
electric bus models. 
6000 5387 
18883 
FY 20 FY 21 FY 22 
e-Car Sales 
0.17 0.18 
0.52 
FY 20 FY 21 FY 22 
e-Car Sales Penetration 
(%) 
445 
955 
1186 
FY 20 FY 21 FY 22 
e-Bus Sales 
1.04 
9.54 7.65 
FY 20 FY 21 FY 22 
e-Bus Sales 
Penetration (%) 

31 
 
4.2 When asked to elaborate on Sales penetration of EVs, MHI in their written reply 
has stated as below: 
Sales penetration refers to the successful selling of a good or service in a 
specific market. As per vahan portal sale penetration of e -2w, e-3w and e-4W is 
as per below: 
FY(2022-2023) till 22-02-2023 
  Registration of battery 
Electric Vehicles 
Registration of Total 
Vehicles 
Sale 
penetration(%) 
  A B (A/B) 
2W 6,22,562 142,28,292 4.4 
3W including e -
rickshaw 3,35,551 6,33,612 53.0 
4W 37,539 44,89,055 0.8 
 
4.3 When inquired whether the Government is satisfied with the number of 
production of EVs during FY 2022, MHI in their written submission has stated as below: 
 
“EV sector witnessed significant growth during FY 2022. As per the VAHAN 
portal a total of 4.29 lakh EVs  (E-2W:2.31 lakh, E -3W:1.8 lakh and E -4W:0.18 
lakh) were sold in FY 2022 as compared to 1.34 lakh EVs (E -2W:0.41 lakh, E -
3W:0.88 lakh and E -4W:0.05 lakh) in the year FY 2021, an increase of about 
220%. The penetration of EVs across all segments of vehicles  increased from 
0.9% to 2.6% in the same period. The sale of E -2W has seen a substantial 
traction in the year FY 2022 as compared to FY 2021. 
  
Presently penetration of EVs across all segments continues to remain upward as 
in first quarter of FY 2022 -23 as  per vahan portal a total of 2.1 lakh EVs (E -
2W:1.31 lakh, E-3W:0.71 lakh and E-4W:0.08 lakh) were sold which is 4.34 % of 
sale of total Vehicles in the same period.” 
 
4.4  When asked to about the projected number of electric vehicles to be used in 
India by the year 2025, MHI in their written reply has stated as below: 
 
It is expected that the share of sale of EVs across all segment may grow to more 
than 5% in a few years. 

32 
 
CHAPTER V 
CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
In a note submitted to the Committee, MHI has submitted the following Information:  
Abundant availability of EV charging infrastructure is one of the major 
drivers for enabling higher adoption of electric mobility. A robust and well 
developed EV charging i nfrastructure alleviates the charge anxiety of 
users and increases off-take. 
Ministry of Power (MoP) on 13.04.2018 has issued a clarification stating 
that charging EVs is considered a service, not a sale of electricity, 
meaning that no license is required to operate EV charging stations and 
any individual/entity is free to set up public charging stations as per 
extant guidelines. 
 Guidelines and Standards for Charging Infrastructure for Electric 
Vehicles were issued by Ministry of Power on 01.10.2019, which  was 
further amended on 08.06.2020 and 14.01.2022 to cap Tariff for Supply 
of Electricity to Public Charging Stations (PCS) and Definitions of Public 
Charging Station, Battery Swapping Stations, Battery Charging Stations 
and Electric Vehicle Charging Equip ment. Further, the guidelines 
specifies the type of chargers of different standards (viz. CCS, 
CHAdeMO, Type -2 AC, Bharat AC 001) thus ensuring that the PCS 
owners have the freedom to install the chargers as per the market 
requirement. To keep the PCS tech nology agnostic, it has been provided 
that any other fast/slow/ moderate charger as per approved DST/BIS 
standards whenever notified can also be installed at the PCS. Thus, the 
Guidelines provide an extensive flexibility while ensuring a democratic 
choice to both EV owners and PCS providers to install the type and 
number of chargers. The Guidelines as issued by MoP mentions that 
“Charging Station may also be installed by Housing Societies, Malls, 
Office Complexes, Restaurants, and Hotels etc. with provision  to allow 
charging of visitor’s vehicles which are permitted to come in its premises. 

33 
 
 The tariff to be charged, from Public Charging Stations as well as from 
domestic consumers for domestic charging, by the DISCOMs and the 
Service Charges to be charged by  these PCS from EV users have also 
been covered in the guidelines. It has been provided that the domestic 
charging shall be akin to domestic consumption of electricity and shall be 
charged as such. However, in case of PCS, it has been provided that 
tariff for the supply of electricity to PCS shall be a single part tariff and 
shall not exceed the ‘Average Cost of Supply’ till 31 st March, 2025. In 
such cases where the Public Charging Station/Fast Charging Station has 
been installed with Government Incentives (financial or otherwise), State 
Nodal Agency/State Government/Appropriate Commission shall fix the 
ceiling of Service Charges to be charged by such Public Charging 
Station/Fast Charging Station. 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has issued amendment to  the 
guidelines to allow establishing charging stations and infrastructure in 
private and commercial buildings. 
5.2 In view of the expected growth of EVs, it was enquired about the quantum of 
charging stations which will be required on Expressways, NHs and  SHs by the year 
2025. Responding to it, MHI in their written reply has stated as below: 
 
“as per the guidelines of  Ministry of Power, there shall be at least one 
charging station at every 25 kms on both sides of the Highway and also atleast 
one Charging Station for long Range/Heavy Duty EVs at every 100 kms on both 
sides of the Highway. For the city at least one charging station will be set up in a 
grid of 3km x 3km. MHI has sanctioned 1576 EV Charging Stations across 16 
Highways & 9 Expressways.” 
 
5.3 When asked about the present status of charging infrastructure available in the 
country, MHI in their written reply has stated as below:  
  
The Ministry of Heavy Industries had sanctioned 520 Charging Stations/ 
Infrastructure under the Phase -I of FAME Indi a Scheme. Further, this Ministry 
has also sanctioned 2,877 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in 68 cities across 
25 States/UTs and 1576 charging stations across 9 Expressways and 16 
Highways under Phase II of FAME India Scheme. Under FAME India Scheme I & 
II, a total of 529 charging stations have been installed as on 1 st July, 2022 as per 

34 
 
ANNEXURE A . Further, as per information received from the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas,total 1536 charging stations have been installed at 
Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) retail outlets in the country as on 01.01.2022. 
 
5.4 During the briefing on the subject a representative of MHI had inter-alia informed 
the Committee as below: 
“I would also like to bring to your knowledge that various OMCs are also 
planning to set up 22,000 charging stations by 2024 and NHAI is also setting up 
charging stations.” 
 
5.5  When enquired about steps taken/ proposed to be taken by the Government to 
meet the targets for installation of the charging stations, MHI in written reply has st ated 
as below:  
 
To facilitate the establishment of Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles, 
following actions have been taken by the Government of India: 
 
i. FAME-India Scheme: Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) has launched 
Phase-II of FAME India Scheme which provides for INR 1000 Crores for 
installation of Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles. 
 
ii. Grid Connectivity and Safety regulations: Central Electricity Authority 
(CEA) has issued amendments in the regulations regarding Technical 
Standards pertaining to Grid Connectivity and Safety of supply for 
Charging Stations. 
 
iii. Guidelines and Standards: Revised consolidated Guidelines and 
Standards for Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles were issued by 
Ministry of Power vide MoP Communication No.12/2/2018 -EV (Comp No. 
244347) on 14.01.2022. 
 
iv. Central Nodal Agency: Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) has been 
selected as the Central Nodal Agen cy (CNA) under the provisions of 
Guidelines issued on 01.10.2019. 
 
v. Go Electric Campaign: Ministry of Power along with Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways, Ministry of Heavy Industries and NITI Aayog has 
launched a nationwide “Go Electric” Campaign o n 19.02.2021 to educate 
the general public on the benefits of e -mobility, inform the potential EV 
owners about the Government incentives for EV adoption, generate 
curiosity and transform the same into demand, discredit misinformation 

35 
 
against Electric Vehic les and bring together multiple stakeholders under 
single platform. 
 
vi. Amendments issued by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs: Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs has issued amendments in Model Building 
By-Laws and Urban and Regional Development Pl ans Formulation and 
Implementation Guidelines regarding Charging Infrastructure for Electric 
Vehicles.  
 
5.6 When asked to furnish details of cost of EV charging station sanctioned by MHI 
under FAME-I & FAME-II schemes, MHI in their written  reply has  stated as below:  
“the Ministry of Heavy Industries had sanctioned 520 Charging Stations/ 
Infrastructure for ₹ 43 Crore (approx.) under Phase-I of FAME-India Scheme. 
Under phase -II of FAME -India Scheme, ₹1000 Cr. has been allocated for 
supporting charging inf rastructure for electric vehicles in the country through 
active participation and involvement of various stakeholders including 
Government agencies, industries, and Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs). 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries has sanctioned 2,877 ele ctric vehicle charging 
stations in 68 cities across 25 states/UTs including the State of Tamil Nadu. 
Further, 1576 charging stations across 9 Expressways and 16 Highways under 
phase-II of FAME India Scheme has also been sanctioned.” 
 
5.7 When asked whether the Government has prepared any roadmap for creation of 
solar charging stations in the country, MHI in their written reply have stated as below: 
 
There is no roadmap prepared as of now by Ministry of Power for creation of 
solar charging stations in the co untry. However, it may be noted that Charging 
Stations take connection from DISCOMs which in turn take the supply of 
electricity from the Grid and the power is supplied to grid from both Non -
Renewable and Renewable Sources. 
  

36 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. An overview 
India is currently the world's fifth largest automobile market,  and the largest 3 
Wheeler, 2nd largest 2 Wheeler and 3rd largest passenger vehicle manufacturer.  
However, the country's heavy reliance on imported oil, with a staggering USD 
119.2 billion spent on crude oil imports in FY 2021 -22, coupled with the alarming 
pollution levels in many Indian cities, calls for urgent action towards green 
mobility. The shift of  Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles, being the 
significant contributor to the pollution levels, towards electric vehicles (EVs) to 
curb the pollution and to reduce oil imports is a need of the hour. The trend has 
stared since at present 1.8  million EVs ply on the roads, majority of which are 2 
wheelers and  3 wheelers. The Committee note with satisfaction that  since 2013  
the Government has taken several steps to promote the adoption of EVs through 
various schemes such as FAME   I&II, ACC PLI, AAT PLI, and incentives such as 
lower GST etc. However, the higher upfront cost of EVs compared to ICE 
vehicles, inadequate charging infrastructure, range anxiety, dependence on 
imported e -vehicle components, lack of domestic lithium, need for a  scraping 
policy for EVs, skilling of labour for servicing and repair of EVs, and fast -
changing EV technology are some of the impediments hindering the faster 
adoption of EVs.  Hence efforts are required at all levels to increase public 
confidence on EVs.  As regards prices, the Committee acknowledge that once the 
volume of sales of EVs increases, the cost of EVs and their components will 
come down due to the economics of scale. Therefore, the Committee urge the 
Government to bring more vigour into their eff orts,   increase incentives on EVs 
further and  address the challenges faced by EV industry with a view to brin g 
down upfront cost of EVs and  accelerate the transition towards green mobility so 
that India could become a leader in the global EV market. 
2. Need for National Policy on EVs 
Government of India launched the National Electric Mobility Mission Plan 
(NEMMP) 2 020 in 2013. The NEMMP 2020 is a  National Mission document 

37 
 
providing the vision and road map for the faster adoption of EVs (full range of 
hybrid and electric vehicles) and their manufacturing in the country. It was 
believed that with the commitment and support of all stakeholders, 6 -7 million 
units of new vehicle sales of EVs, could be achieved by 2020. The Committee 
note with regret that the target 6 -7 million units of EVs was not achieved as only  
around 1.4 million Electric Vehicles were being used on the roads of India as on 
3rd August, 2022.  It has been a decade since MHI had launched the NEMMP 2020. 
The Committee are  of the view that  since transport, being State subject, some  
States have formulated an EV policy for themselves, still a strong National Policy 
framework on EVs is required which should incorporate the experience and 
feedback of NEMMP 2020 , which can serv e as a guiding policy to all States/UTs 
and ensure a comprehensive and uniform growth of the EV Sector . A National 
Policy on EVs should have realistic goals and strategies and it should be 
commensurate with India’s commitment to the Paris Agreement on clim ate 
change to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Committee, therefore,  urge the 
Government to frame a comprehensive National Policy on EV by incorporating 
the  elements of successful State models and international best practices on 
charging infrastructure, battery swapping, battery waste management/ recycling, 
public awareness in addition to the demand and supply side incentives such as 
lower GST, waiving road tax, registration fee, hire -purchase scheme at 
discounted interest rates by Financial Institutions for buying EVs etc.  
3. Upfront cost of EV Four Wheelers 
 
The Committee note that there were total 18,02,967 Electric Vehicles (EVs) being 
used on the roads of India as on 30 November , 2022. Out of which maximum 
number of vehicles ( 9,19,025) are under three wheeler category and 8,13,431 are 
under two wheeler category.  The Committee are somewhat perturbed to note that 
under four wheeler category, there were only 70,511 vehicles on the road in 
November, 2022. They are of the view that lower number of EVs under four 
wheeler category is due to huge gap between the upfront cost of EV four 
wheelers and ICE four wheelers of similar specifications as well as driving range 
anxiety among the vehicle users. The Committee strongly hold that sale of  EV 

38 
 
four wheelers  would pick up if the upfront cost could be further brought down by 
offering incentives such as tax breaks, waiving registration fee etc. as well as if 
other major concerns of range anxiety, lack of ne twork of EV charging facility, 
longer time for charging etc. are addressed urgently. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should consider remodelin g the subsidy on 
electric four wheelers similar to that of electric two wheelers i.e. deman d 
incentive may be increased to @ ₹15000/- per KWh from @ ₹ 10000/- per KWh and 
the cap on incentives for Electric 4 Wheelers may be increased to 40% of the cost 
of vehicles from 20% cost of vehicles. The Government may also consider 
incentivizing the rang e of the vehicle in addition to the subsidy being given on 
per unit power of the battery. This would push the OEMs to produce more 
efficient EVs which would provide greater range per unit power of the battery.  
The Committee desire to be apprised of the vi ew of the Ministry on these 
measures.  
 
4. Remodelled Scheme for Electric Buses 
The Committee observe that nine 4 million plus cities (Mumbai, Delhi, B engaluru, 
Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Chennai, Kolkata, Surat, and Pune) were targeted under 
remodelled FAME II scheme for electric buses. EESL has undertaken aggregation 
of demand in these cities for remaining e -buses under the Scheme on OPEX 
basis. It was aimed to bring electric mobility in public transportation in these 
cities which would inspire other cit ies too. However, the Committee are 
concerned to note that only five of the nine targeted cities namely Kolkata, Delhi, 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Surat have opted for it.  They would like to be 
apprised of the reasons for other four cities declining this sc heme, and alternate 
schemes, if any, opted by those cities. The Committee are further of the view that 
cities which have less than 4 million population also use considerable number of 
buses for inter -city and intra -city transport hence those should also be  
considered under the remodelled FAME II scheme for electric buses so that e -
mobility could pick up its momentum on Pan India basis.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 

39 
 
5. Extension of FAME-II Scheme 
As per the Ministr y, the FAME II scheme will be phased out on March 31, 2024 
under which a significant subsidy amount is provided on EVs. Incentives under 
this Scheme are linked to power of the battery of all EVs @ ₹10,000/kWh except 
for 2 wheelers @ ₹15,000/kWh and buses @  ₹ 20,000/kWh. The Committee are 
concerned that removal of Government support would result in price escalation 
of EVs significantly. The Committee find that a large number of Start -Ups are also 
involved in this field, which may have to shut down once the s cheme is closed.  It 
will, therefore, be detrimental for long -term growth that EVs can achieve in the 
Indian market. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 
should extend the FAME-II scheme beyond its current March 31, 2024 timeline by 
an a dditional two years to allow more time to evaluate the effectiveness of the 
scheme and to make necessary adjustments/modifications to promote the 
electric vehicles (EVs). Further, a comprehensive FAME -III scheme should be 
introduced once the extended perio d of FAME-II is over, based on the experience 
gained from FAME I and FAME II to continue the momentum till the desired level 
is achieved. This will help increase the penetration of EVs in the market and allow 
them to compete with Internal Combustion Engine  (ICE) vehicles, especially in 
terms of upfront costs, without requiring high incentives. 
 
6. Need for robust mechanism for bidding process 
The Committee were informed that bidding process for award of the Government 
approved the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 'Advanced Chemistry 
Cell (ACC) Battery Storage’ for achieving manufacturing capacity of 50 GWh for 
enhancing India’s Manufacturing Capabilities with a budgetary outlay of ₹ 18,100 
crore has been undertaken and MHI has  issued Letters of Award for 50 GWh of 
battery capacity to 4 successful bidders namely:- 
i. Rajesh Export Ltd. -  5GWh 
ii. Ola Electric Mobility -  20 GWh 
iii. Hyundai Global Motoras Co Ltd. – 20 GWh 
iv. Reliance New Energy Ltd.-  5 GWh.  

40 
 
However, it is distressing to note that Hyundai Global Motors did not sign 
Programme Agreement.  Consequently, they had to be disqualified from the 
scheme due to misrepresentation of facts in their bid documents and MHI 
reportedly initiated necessary action for re -tendering of the unallocated 20 GWh 
capacity in consultation with NITI Aayog. The Committee note with concern that 
proper scrutiny of bid documents was not done before the bidding process 
reached the stage of Let ters of Award  and signing of Programme Agreement, 
which has resulted in wastage of precious time and resources.  Hence, t he 
Committee are of the view that appropriate action should be taken against those 
who are  found accountable for the lapse.  The Committee strongly hold that a 
robust mechanism should be developed for all such bidding processes so that 
incomplete/frivolous applications can be rejected summarily at pre -bid/technical 
bid stage in future.  
  
7. Promotion of other technologies along with EVs 
EVs are charged at Charging Stations by using supply of electricity from the Grid 
and the power is supplied to grid from both Non -Renewable and Renewable 
Sources.  In the foreseeable future, coal is projected to remain an important 
source of electr icity generation. This means that vehicles are being switched 
from petrol and diesel to coal, which may not assist in meeting the  aggregate 
pollution targets. Also, in electric vehicles, major expensive component is 
Lithium-Ion battery (approx. 30% to 40%  cost of electric vehicle is battery). 
Currently Lithium-Ion cells are imported and further manufacturing / assembly of 
battery pack is done domestically. Globally, prices of Lithium -Ion cells and 
battery pack are higher and the rising global demand for ce rtain minerals would 
make coasting  and importing them difficult. The Committee observe that Battery 
Electric Vehicle and Strong Hybrid vehicles are supported under the FAME -II 
Scheme, whereas hydrogen fuel cell based vehicles, which are Zero Emission 
Vehicles (ZEVs), are covered under Auto and Auto component PLI Scheme. It is 
possible that EVs will continue to dominate the mobility transition because other 
alternatives require more research and development, but it is prudent to keep 
options open and the Government should also promote other technology such as 

41 
 
flex fuel vehicles, Hydrogen ICE , Hydrogen fuel cell vehicles etc. with greater 
emphasis. The Committee also recommend that a roadmap for setting up of Solar 
charging stations should be prepared in a t ime bound manner to reduce the 
dependence on electricity generated  by using coal ,  to remain true to the green 
mobility objective of the Government.  
 
8. Waiving of Road Tax on EVs 
The Committee note that Ministry of Road transport and Highways (MoRTH) had 
issued a notification, advising States to waive road tax on EVs, which , in turn, will 
help reduce the initial cost of EVs. The Committee also note that Uttar Pradesh, 
Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Haryana, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Assam, Bihar, Telan gana, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Maharashtra, 
Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Chandigarh, Uttarakhand, Puducherry, Odisha and  Delhi 
have waived off or reduced the road tax on EVs and these States are not getting 
any compensation for the loss of revenue arisi ng on account of waiver/reduction 
of road tax on EVs  from the Union Government. The Committee are of the view 
that some compensation to the States, which have waived off or reduced the road 
tax on EVs , may be provided so that these States do not find it fi nancially 
burdensome to continue such waiver  or reduction on road tax to promote and 
poplularise  EVs. The Committee believe that this will encourage all the States to 
provide such waiver on road tax on EVs , which will result in faster adoption of 
EVs all over the Country.  
 
9.     Need for Review of GST on EVs 
The Committee are glad to note that  GST on electric vehicles has been reduced 
from 12% to 5%; and GST on chargers/ charging stations for electric vehicles has 
been reduced from 18% to 5% to promote the electric mobility in the country. The 
Committee are of the view  that the Government should make a comparative 
study on GST rate on EV vis-à-vis ICE vehicles and their components/ spare parts 
for rationalizing GST on EVs and their components. The Committee strongly hold 
that for e-two wheelers, being , the  common man’s vehicle, the MHI should take 
up the matter with Ministry of Finance at the appropriate lev el to further reduce or 

42 
 
waive off GST, so that their upfront cost may be reduced further to make it more 
affordable to the common man. 
 
10. PLI Scheme for automobile and auto components 
The Committee note  that PLI for automobile and auto component Scheme 
provides incentive up to 18 per cent to overcome disabilities in respect of 
manufacturing of Advanced Automotive Technology  so that it can catch up with 
the world. It has a budgetary outlay of ₹ 25,938 cro re, spread over a period of five 
years from 2022-2023 to 2026-27. The scheme consists of two parts. The first part 
is Champion OEM Incentive Scheme and the second part is Component 
Champion Incentive Scheme. It incentivises various advanced technology 
products, dealing with emission, electronics, safety, CNG, LNG, flex fuel and 
clean fuels. The Committee take note of the fact  that 19 applications under 
Champion OEM scheme and 67 applications under Component Champion 
Scheme have been approved.  Apart from In dian business groups, approved 
applicants include groups from countries such as Japan, Germany, USA, UK, 
Republic of Korea, Ireland, France, Belgium, Netherlands and Italy. The 
Committee are of the view that for the benefit of domestic economy, the 
beneficiaries of the scheme need to continue their production , even after the 
conclusion of the scheme. The Committee , therefore, recommend that the 
Government should make such a provision applicable to the beneficiaries of the 
scheme to make it mandatory for the m to continue their production till 2030 at 
least.  
11. Export of ACC Batteries 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) 
envisages to enhance India’s Manufacturing Capabilities and  Exports  of ACC in 
India with a budgetary outlay of ₹ 18,100 crore. The Committee are aware that the 
Government of India intends to optimally incentivize potential investors, both 
domestic and overseas, to set - up Giga-scale ACC manufacturing facilities with 
emphasis on maximum value addition and quality output. The Committee are 
perturbed to note that the ACC battery produced with the incentive under the PLI  

43 
 
scheme would be exported apart from domestic consumption. The Committee are 
of the view that while export of ACC batteries produced with the incentive under 
PLI scheme will boost the ‘Make in India’  initiative, it is equally important to 
ensure enough production of ACC for domestic EV Sector too. The steps taken in 
this regard may be furnished to the Committee. 
 
12.       Guarantee for EV Batteries’s life 
In the wake of certain incidents of fire in electric two wheelers  in the past , the 
Committee note that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways had 
constituted a Committee of Experts to suggest safety standards for Battery, BMS, 
and related components in electric vehicles. The Expert Committee , in its report, 
suggested some additional requirements to be incorporated in the existing 
testing standards for battery and related components of L, M, and N cate gory 
vehicles. Incorporating the suggestions of the Expert Committee and inputs from 
the stakeholders, amendment to the Automotive Industry Standards (AIS) 156 
[Specific requirements for L category electric power train vehicles] and AIS 038 
(Rev 2) [Specif ic Requirements for M, N Category Electric Power Train Vehicles] 
were notified. The said Amendments have reportedly been made applicable from 
1st December, 2022 and some clauses of these AIS standards would be effective 
from 31st March, 2023. The Committee  expect that these specific requirements 
would help in improving the safety standards of the battery. The Committee 
further hold that in addition to the safety standards, there should be a minimum 
guarantee for batteries’ life.  Longer battery life of EVs would instill confidence 
among potential EV buyers as the price of the battery in the EVs constitutes 
major part of the cost of the vehicle.  The Committee also recommend that the 
Government should work closely with Bureau of Indian Standards  (BIS) to 
establish a series of national standards in relation to EVs and its various 
components.  
 
13.      Strategy for reuse or disposal of EV Batteries 
The Committee find that presently penetration of EVs across all segments 
continues to remain upward. As per VAHAN portal, a total of 4.29 lakh EVs were 

44 
 
sold in FY 2022 as compared to 1.34 lakh EVs in FY 2021, an increase of about 
220%. The same is expected to rise further as the adoption of EVs pick up. As the 
number of EVs being used in the country will be  continuously rising, safe 
disposal and /or reuse of batteries and requirement for  skilled manpower for 
undertaking this job need s to be addressed.  A proper disposal plan and 
dedicated recycling units would ensure a truly sustainable ecosystem of EVs. E -
waste (management) rules may suitably be modified  and elaborated further  to 
facilitate processes for disposal and/or re -use of EV batteries. The Committee , 
therefore, recommend that the Government should develop a national strategy to 
facilitate processes for disposal and/or re -use of such batteries and to ensure 
trained manpower  for the same to reduce the environmental impact of EV 
production/ manufacturing.   
  
14.      Need for apprenticeships and traineeships  
The Committee are of the view that scheme such as FAME India, Advance Cell 
Chemistry (ACC) PLI Scheme  and PLI for automobile and auto component 
Scheme would not only promote adoption of EVs but would also give a major 
boost to the manufacturing of EVs, batteries and automobiles sector. As the 
manufacturing in these areas  grow further, it would lead to cr eation of a large 
number of employment .   Though  repair and maintenance in EVs is  statedly 
minimum compared to ICE vehicles , yet  lack of skilled manpower in EV repair, 
maintenance and scrapping is one of the major concerns as well as challenges 
for universal adoption of EVs.  Keeping this i n view, the Committee recommend 
that the Government, in conjunction with industry stakeholders , should frame 
new courses for specialization in EVs in ITIs, other Industrial Training Centres 
and Skill Development Centres, as well as  fund apprenticeships and traineeships 
in the local EV and associated manufacturing sector so that a pool of trained and 
skilled workforce can be  created.    
 
15.     Expediting extraction of Lithium 
The Committee note that in electric vehicl es, major expensive component is the 
Lithium-Ion battery (approx. 30% to 40% cost of electric vehicle). Currently 

45 
 
Lithium-Ion cells are imported and further manufacturing / assembly of battery 
pack is done domestically. Globally, prices of Lithium -Ion cells and battery pack 
are higher.  As per a think tank, EV manufacturing in India will raise reliance on 
China since China processes more than 60% of Lithium globally.  In this regard, 
the Committee are glad to learn that Geological Survey of India (GSI) has , for the 
first time , established Lithium inferred resources (G3) of 5.9 million tonnes in 
Salal-Haimana area of Reasi District of Jammu & Kashmir (UT). In view of the 
recent discovery of Lithium reserves the Government should expedite the 
process for its e xtraction and further processing/refining so that import of 
Lithium can be cut down. Reducing the import dependency of Lithium would help 
produce cheaper Lithium -ion batteries to bring down the upfront cost of EVs. 
Hence the Ministry should follow the deve lopments closely in coordination with 
the Ministry of Mines and other agencies to make full use of the opportunity and 
strive to get domestically manufactured Lithium-ion batteries for EVs in the times 
to come.  The Committee are also of the view that Gove rnment should accelerate 
further exploration of Lithium reserves in other parts of the country.      
16. Need for increase in Public Charging Network 
The Committee note that as per the Ministry of Power guidelines, there shall be at 
least one charging station at every 25 kms on both sides of the Highway and also 
at least one Charging Station for long Range/Heavy Duty EVs at every 100 kms on 
both sides of the Highway. For the city at least one charging station will be set up 
in a grid of 3km x 3km.  The Comm ittee also find that MHI had sanctioned 520 
Charging Stations/ Infrastructure under the Phase -I of FAME India Scheme. It has 
also sanctioned 2,877 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in 68 cities across 25 
States/UTs and 1576 charging stations across 9 Expr essways and 16 Highways 
under Phase II of FAME India Scheme. The Committee regret to note that only 479 
charging station out of 520 charging station sanctioned under FAME phase I and 
merely 50 out of 2877 charging station sanctioned under FAME phase II cou ld be 
installed till December 2022.   Various Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have also 
planned to set up 22,000 charging stations by 2024 and NHAI is also setting up 
charging stations. At present, the n umber of EV charging stations sanctioned 

46 
 
under FAME is very meager as India has about 63.73 lakh km of road network, 
which is the second largest in the world. The Committee are of the view that 
reason for slow pace of installation of the sanctioned charging station under 
FAME should be examined.  Further it is learnt that a pilot programme namely 
‘National Highways for EVs’ has been framed lately by the Government of India 
under which a new model for upgrading some existing highways into ‘electric’ 
highways with adequate charging infrastructure at  regular intervals, has been 
created, and trial report on the same is awaited.  As more and more EVs show up 
on the road, frequently placed smart charging stations would make movement for 
long distance smoother and faster.  Hence existing highways or expre ssways 
would be ultimately required to become e -highways.  The Committee recommend 
that MHI should coordinate with other Ministries and charging infrastructure 
operators to frame a comprehensive plan for rollout of a nationwide public 
charging network.  
 
17.      Charging Infrastructure 
The Committee note that Ministry of Power (MoP) issued a clarification on 
13.04.2018 to the effect that charging EVs is considered a service, not a sale of 
electricity and dispensed with the license required to operate EV ch arging 
stations.  Accordingly, any individual/entity is free to set up public charging 
stations as per extant guidelines. Model Building Bylaws 2016 was amended to 
establish charging stations and infrastructure in private and commercial 
buildings. However, people living in tall apartments who do not have designated 
parking spots would find it difficult to install their own charging points. To solve 
such difficulties, the Government need to modify the Building Bylaws suitably to 
make provision for personal charging points at the designated parking spots or at 
a designated location for the benefit of EV users residing in apartments. The 
Committee are of the view that If some form of incentives /subsidy can be 
provided to private persons /builders to set up charging stations, it would boost 
the network of charging infrastructure. This would help solve the problem of 
range anxiety of EVs and would further boost faster adoption of EVs.  The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken on the matter.  

47 
 
18.     Cost escalation of Charging Stations  
The Committee note that the MHI had sanctioned 520 Charging Stations/ 
Infrastructure for ₹ 43 Crore (approx.) under Phase -I of FAME -India Scheme 
launched in year 2015  and under phase -II of FAME -India Scheme launched in 
year 2019, ₹1000 Cr. has been allocated for supporting charging infrastructure for 
electric vehicles in the country. MHI sanctioned 2,877 electric vehicle charging 
stations in 68 cities a nd 1576 charging stations across 9 Expressways and 16 
Highways under phase-II of FAME India Scheme. The Committee are concerned to 
note that charging stations sanctioned under phase I of  FAME India Scheme 
were much cheaper with an average cost of ₹8.27 la kh per station than the 
charging stations sanctioned under phase II of FAME India scheme, which has an 
average cost of ₹22.45 lakh per station. The Committee would like to know the 
reasons for such cost escalation of charging stations under Phase -II of FAME of 
India Scheme and also recommend that Government should conduct an audit to 
avoid any inefficient use of funds.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard. 
 
19.     Cash Incentive Scheme on Exchange/Scraping of  ICE Vehicles for EVs. 
India’s Vehicle Scrappage Policy took effect in April 2022. The o bjective of this 
Government-funded programme is to phase out old passenger and commercial 
vehicles and thereby reduce urban air pollution, increase passenger and road 
safety, and stimulate vehicle sales. The policy requires passenger vehicles older 
than 20 years and commercial vehicles older than 15 years to pass a “fitness and 
emissions test” to keep their registration.  The Committee  notice that some 
countries are providing additional purchase subsidies and cash -incentive 
schemes for scrapping petrol/diesel vehicles for electric vehicles. The y, 
therefore,  are of the view that similar purchase subsidies and cash -incentive 
schemes for scrapping/exchanging petrol/diesel vehicles for electric vehicles can 
be considered here too as it would lead not only to faster adoption of EVs but 
also have a major  impact on controlling CO 2 emissions. The Committee believe 
that many ICE vehicle owners, who may  be willing to change their vehicle to EV, 

48 
 
would feel encouraged if such incentives are provided.  They recommend an early 
consideration of the matter. 
 
20.Awareness for promotion of EVs 
The Ministry of Power along with Ministry of Road Transport and Highwa ys, MHI 
and NITI Aayog had launched a nationwide “Go Electric” Campaign on 19.02.2021 
to educate the general public on the benefits of e-mobility, inform the potential EV 
owners about the Government incentives for EV adoption, generate curiosity and 
transform the same into demand, discredit misinformation against Electric 
Vehicles and bring together multiple stakeholders on single platform. The 
Committee are of the view that the said campaign could not fulfill its objective to 
the required extent. In spite of various concessions and benefits, EV sales’ 
penetration is very low. In the absence of widespread marketing strategies 
concerning the impact and importance of EVs, Indian consumers have limited 
awareness of EVs as alternative to traditional fossil fuel engine-based vehicles. 
The Committee are of the view that to  further promote EVs,  Government in 
collaboration with EV manufacturers should organize exhibitions/ consumer 
education campaign, especially in colleges , corporate offices, institutions, motor 
race events like  formula race in various parts of the country to  make people 
aware of the  capabilities and benefits of EVs  such as low operating cost, low 
maintenance, benefit in income tax on interest on loans for EVs, low GST, roa d 
tax, registration  fee, lesser pollution etc and various concessions being given on 
EVs to  promote adoption of EVs as well as to clear doubts  to dispel any 
inhibition in the minds of potential buyers.  
 
 
NEW DELHI  
23 March, 2023              
02 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
GIRISH  BHALCHANDRA BAPAT 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 

49 
 
Annexure A 
1. Under Phase -I of FAME India Scheme  – Ministry of Heavy Industries has 
sanctioned520 EV Charging Stations out of which 479 charging stations have been 
installed as on 07th December, 2022 as follows: 
  
State/ UT Charging Stations Highway Charging Stations 
Chandigarh 48 Delhi -Chandigarh 24 
Delhi 94 Mum-Pune 17 
Rajasthan 49 Delhi- Jaipur- Agra 31 
Karnataka 65 Jaipur-Delhi 
Highway 9 
Jharkhand 30     
Uttar Pradesh 16     
Goa 30     
Hyderabad 
(Telangana) 57     
Himachal Pradesh 9     
Total 398   81 
  
  
2.    Under Phase-II of FAME India Scheme: 
 Ministry of Heavy Industries has sanctioned 2877 EV Charging Stations in 68 
cities across 25 states/UTs out of which 50 Charging stations have been installed 
as on 15th July, 2022. 
State No. of EV chargers sanctioned 
Maharashtra 317 
Andhra Pradesh 266 
Tamil Nadu 281 
Gujarat 278 

50 
 
Uttar Pradesh 207 
Rajasthan 205 
Karnataka 172 
Madhya Pradesh 235 
West Bengal 141 
Telangana (Hyderabad- 118, Warangal- 
10, Karimnagar- 10) 138 
Kerala 211 
Delhi 72 
Chandigarh 70 
Haryana 50 
Meghalaya 40 
Bihar 37 
Sikkim 29 
Jammu & Kashmir 25 
Chhattisgarh 25 
Assam 20 
Odisha 18 
Uttarakhand 10 
Puducherry 10 
Andaman and Nicobar (Port Blair) 10 
Himachal Pradesh 10 
Total 2877 
  
  
 MHI has sanctioned 1576 EV Charging Stations across 9 Expressways & 16 
Highways. Details are as specified below: 

51 
 
Sl. No Expressways EV Charging Stations 
Sanctioned 
1  Mumbai - Pune  10 
2  Ahmadabad - Vadodara  10 
3  Delhi Agra Yamuna  20 
4  Bengaluru Mysore  14 
5  Bangaluru-Chennai  30 
6  Surat-Mumbai  30 
7  Agra-Lucknow  40 
8  Eastern Peripheral (A)  14 
9  Hyderabad ORR  16 
Sl. No Highways EV Charging Stations 
Sanctioned 
1  Delhi - Srinagar 80 
2  Delhi – Kolkata  160 
3  Agra - Nagpur 80 
4  Meerut to GangotriDham 44 
5  Mumbai - Delhi  124 
6  Mumbai-Panaji  60 
7  Mumbai - Nagpur  70 
8  Mumbai - Bengaluru 100 
9  Kolkata - Bhubaneswar 44 
10  Kolkata - Nagpur  120 
11  Kolkata - Gangtok   76 

52 
 
12  Chennai-Bhubaneswar 120 
13  Chennai - Trivendram 74 
14  Chennai-Ballary 62 
15  Chennai - Nagpur  114 
16  Mangaldai - Wakro 64 
1576 
3.0 State/UT No. of Petroleum Retail Outlets (Ros) where EV Charging facility is 
available as on 1.1.2022 
State/UT No of RO's where EV Charging Facility available 
Andhra Pradesh 65 
Arunachal Pradesh 4 
Assam 19 
Bihar 26 
Chandigarh 4 
Chhattisgarh 51 
Delhi 66 
Goa 17 
Gujarat 87 
Haryana 114 
Himachal Pradesh 13 
Jharkhand 22 
            J&K 3 
Karnataka 100 
Kerala 39 
Leh 2 
 Madhya Pradesh 167 
       Maharastra 88 
Manipur 1 
Meghalaya 3 
Nagaland 2 
Odisha 26 
Pondicherry 2 
Punjab 41 

53 
 
Rajasthan 174 
Tamil Nadu 76 
Telangana 112 
Tripura 3 
Uttar Pradesh 128 
Uttarakhand 10 
West Bengal 71 
Grand Total 1536 
  
****  
 

54 
 
 
 ANNEXURE -B 
State-wise manufacturing units established registered as on 15.12.2022 
under phase-II of FAME India Scheme 
Category Name of Manufacturers Location of 
Manufacturing Plant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e- 
2 
W 
1 Ampere Vehicle Pvt. Ltd. Tamil Nadu 
2 Ather Energy Pvt. Ltd. Karnataka 
3 Benling India Energy & Technology 
Pvt. Ltd. Haryana 
4 Hero Electric Vehicles Pvt. Ltd. Punjab 
5 Jitendra EV Tech Pvt. Ltd. Maharashtra 
6 Li-ions Elecktrik Solutions Pvt. Ltd. Haryana 
7 Okinawa Auto Tech Pvt. Ltd. Rajasthan 
8 Revolt Intellicorp Pvt. Ltd. Haryana 
9 TVS Motor Company Ltd. Tamil Nadu 
10 Tunwal E-motors Pvt. Ltd Rajasthan 
11 Bajaj Auto Ltd Maharashtra 
12 Booma Innovative Transport Pvt. Ltd. Tamil Nadu 
13 Kabira Mobility Llp Goa 
14 Lectrix Ev Pvt.ltd. Uttar Pradesh 
15 Microcon I2i Private Limited Tamil Nadu 
16 Okaya Ev Pvt Ltd. Himanchal Pradesh 
17 Ola Electric Technologies Private 
Limited Tamil Nadu 
18 Twenty Two Motors Private Limited Rajasthan 
19 Maruthisan Private Limited Karnataka 
20 Bgauss Auto Pvt.Ltd Maharashtra 
21 Kinetic Green Energy & Power 
Solutions Ltd.* Maharashtra 
22 Hero Motocorp Limited Andhra Pradesh 
23 Chetak Technology Limited Maharashtra 
24 Tork Motors Pvt. Ltd. Maharashtra 
25 Amo Mobility Solutions Pvt. Ltd. Uttar Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e- 
3 
W 
1 Champion Polyplast New Delhi 
2 Kinetic Green Energy and Power 
Solution Ltd. Maharashtra 
3 Mahindra Electric Mobility Ltd. Karnataka 
4 Victory Electric Vehicles Intl. Pvt. Ltd. Haryana 
5 YC Electric Vehicle Pvt. Ltd New Delhi 
6 Best Way Agencies Pvt. Ltd. Haryana 
7 Energy Electric Vehicles New Delhi 
8 Thukral Electric Bikes Pvt Ltd Haryana 
9 Saera Electric Auto Pvt Ltd Rajasthan 
10 Khalsa Agency Uttar Pradesh 
11 Goenka Electric Motor Vehicles Pvt. 
Ltd. Haryana 
12 Atul Auto Ltd. Gujarat 
13 Dilli Electric Auto Pvt Ltd Haryana 
14 U P Telelinks Ltd Uttarakhand 
15 Piaggio Vehicles Pvt. Ltd. Maharashtra 
16 Lohia Auto Industries Uttarakhand 
 

54 
 
 
17 Avon Cycles Ltd. Punjab 
18 Altigreen Propulsion Labs Pvt. Ltd.  Karnataka 
19 Keto Motors Pvt. Ltd.  Telangana 
20 Omega Seiki Pvt. Ltd.  New Delhi 
21 Speego Vehicles Co. Pvt. Ltd.  New Delhi 
22 Etrio Automobiles Private Ltd.  Telangana 
23 Grd Motors  Delhi 
24 Om Balajee Automobile India Pvt Ltd  Uttar Pradesh 
25 Mlr Auto Ltd  Telangana 
26 Balan Engineering Private Limited  Karnataka 
27 Continental Engines Private Limited  Uttarkhand 
28 Euler Motors Pvt Ltd  Delhi 
29 J.s. Auto Pvt Ltd.  Uttar Pradesh 
30 Shigan Evoltz Limited  Haryana 
31 Sks Trade India Pvt Ltd  Haryana 
32 Scooters India Limited  Uttar Pradesh 
33 Jitendra New Ev Tech Pvt. Ltd.*  Maharashtra 
34 Efev Charging Solutions Pvt Ltd  Haryana 
35 Green Evolve Private Limited  New Delhi 
36 Smartomatic Vehicles Private Limited  Bihar 
37 Mahindra & Mahindra  Maharashtra 
38 Ti Clean Mobility Private Limited  Tamil Nadu 
39 Fitwel Mobility Private Limited  Maharashtra 
1 Mahindra & Mahindra  Maharashtra 
2 Tata Motors  Gujarat 
1 PMI Electro Mobility Solutions Pvt.  
Ltd (PEMSPL)  
Haryana 
2 Olectra  Telangana 
3 TATA Motors  Karnataka 
4 Eicher Madhya Pradesh 
5 JBM Solaris Electric Vehicle  
(JBMSEV)  
Uttar Pradesh 
6 Mytrah Mobility  Rajasthan 
7 Ashok Leyland  Tamil Nadu 
 

56 
 
MINUTES OF SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 7th June, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
                            PRESENT 
 Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat – Chairperson 
 Members 
2. Shri Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
4. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
5. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
7. Shri Pinaki Misra 
8. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
9. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
10. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
11. Shri Dilip Saikia 
12. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
13. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
   SECRETARIAT 
             1.         Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Additional Secretary  
    2.         Smt. Geeta Parmar -  Additional Director  
   WITNESSES 
1 Shri Arun Goel - Secretary 
2 Shri Shashank Priya - SS&FA 
3 Shri Vijay Mittal - Joint Secretary  
4 Shri Amit Mehta - Joint Secretary 
5 Shri Sudhendu J Sinha - Adviser, NITI Aayog 
6 Ms. Mahua Acharya - MD, CESL 
  
2.    At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and the officers accompanying him to the sitting of the Committee convened 
to have briefing on the subject 'Evaluation of Electric Vehicle (EV) Policy.'   

57 
 
3. Thereafter, a representative of the Ministry made a power point presentation 
highlighting key policy initiative for promotion of electric vehicles, like launch of Faster 
Adoption & Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles( FAME) Phase-I in 2015, FAME Phase -II 
in April, 2019,  Advance Chemistry Cell (ACC) PLI Scheme , Auto & Auto Component 
PLI Scheme , etc. Other initiative taken were also apprised like identity of Electric 
Vehicles, Reduction in GST on EVs, framing of guidelin es and standards for EV 
charging infrastructure and  amendments in Model Building Bylaws 2016 to establish 
charging stations and infrastructure in private and commercial buildings, etc. 
4.   The Members, then, raised various queries on the subject related issues like lack of 
charging infrastructure for EVs, lack of Lithium in India which is used in the 
manufacturing of EV batteries, range anxiety of EVs, GST on EVs, EV policy of 
States/UTs and  its impact on the investment in these States/UTs, issue of incentives 
going to few big private players of EVs, skilling of labour for servicing and repair of EVs, 
apprehension in the minds of the consumer about fast changing technology in EVs and 
chargers and other related matters. 
5.         The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry and tendering 
their views. The Ministry was asked to furnish written repl ies, on the points, which 
remained unanswered, within two weeks. 
6.         A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept 
7. The witness, then, withdrew. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 

 
58 
 
MINUTES OF S IXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022 -
2023) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 2nd August, 2022 from 16 00 hrs. to 
1720 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
     PRESENT 
 Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan – convenor 
 Members 
2. Shri Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
9. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
11. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
12. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
13. Shri Prathap Simha 
14. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
   SECRETARIAT 
         1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Additional Secretary  
         2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
             3. Smt. Geeta Parmar  -  Additional Director  
Representatives of the Ministry of Heavy Industries  
1 Shri Arun Goel 
 
- Secretary 
2 Shri Shashank Priya 
 
- SS&FA 
3 Shri Amit Mehta 
 
 Joint Secretary 
4 Ms. Mahua Acharya 
 
- MD, Convergence Energy 
Services Ltd.(CESL) 
5 Shri Anand Kumar Singh 
 
 Director 
6 Shri Rajnesh Singh 
 
- 
 
Director 
7. Ms. Pamela Tikku - Director, International Centre for for 
Automotive Technology(ICAT) 
 

 
59 
 
2. At the outset, the Convener, Committee on Estimates  welcomed the 
Members to the sitting of the Committee.  The Committee, thereafter, took up for 
consideration the following draft Reports  and ad opted the same without any 
amendments/modifications : 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Requirement of Human Capital & 
Physical Infrastructure to meet the growth of Civil Aviation Sector in 
India and Development of Airports in various parts of the Country’  
pertaining to the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
 
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report 
of the Committee on Estimates (17th Lok Sabha)  on "Estimates 
and Functioning of Nationa l Highways Projects including 
Bharatmala Projects" pertaining to the Ministry of Road Transport 
& Highways. 
 
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of 
the Committee on Estimat es (17th Lok Sabha)  on "R ecent 
Budgetary Reform for Better Management of Government 
Expenditure" pertaining to the Ministry of Finance(Department of 
Expenditure). 
 
3. The Committee, then, authorized the Hon’ble Chairperson to finalise the 
draft report , mentioned at Para (i) above in light of the factual verification 
received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation before the same are presented in the 
House. 
4. Thereafter, the Convener, Committee on Estimates welcomed the 
representatives of the Ministry of Heavy Industries to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to take oral evidence of the Ministry on the subject ‘Evaluation of 
Electric Vehicle (EV) Policy ’ and drew their attention to the provisions contained 
in Direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of 
the Committee's proceedings.  
5. The Secretary then briefed the Committee on the progress made so far 
with regard to the tendering process of E -buses for 5 major cities, production of 
EVs in various segments like two -wheelers, three wheelers and four wheelers, 
constraints faced and initiatives being taken to enhance their productions. During 
deliberations on the subject, the Members raised various queries which inter -alia 
included the amount and  purpose of subsidies to EVs, inadequate charging 
stations, time required for charging EVs, area required for  setting up of charging 
stations, transformer to back -up charging stations, e -charging stations by oil 

 
60 
 
companies in petrol pumps, possibility of solar charging stations  in towns & 
villages, hybrid e -vehicles, dependency on import of e -vehicle components, 
shortage of l ithium in India for EV batteries , speed of EVs,  range anxiety 
associated with EVs, steps for promotion of EV s in rural areas  and scrapping 
policy for EVs , if any, coordination with Ministry of Mines for lithium exploration 
etc. 
6.  The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries of the 
Members. The Convener then  thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing useful information to the Committee . T he Secret ary, 
MoHI was requested to furnish required information which remained 
unanswered, in writing, to the Secretariat within two weeks time.    
 
7. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has bee n 
kept. 
  The witness, then, withdrew. 
 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

61 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 23rd March, 2023 from 1545 hrs. to 1615 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
           PRESENT 
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan – Convener 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
4. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
7. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
8. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
9. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
10. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
11. Shri Dilip Saikia 
12. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
13. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
14. Shri Kesineni Srinivas (Nani) 
15. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             1. Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda -       Additional Secretary 
           2. Shri Muraleedharan. P     -       Director 
 3. Shri R.C. Sharma  - Additional Director 
                              
2.         At the outset, the Convener welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and briefed them about the agenda of the sitting viz. Consideration and 
adoption of draft Report.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the draft 
Report on the subject ‘Evaluation of Electric Vehicle (EV) Policy ’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
4.       The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Report. The 
Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson  / Convener  (Shri Nihal Chand 
Chauhan, MP) to finalize the draft Report and present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 