2 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
CENTRAL ARMED POLICE FORCES AND INTERNAL SECURITY CHALLENGES – 
EVALUATION AND RESPONSE MECHANISM 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in Twenty- 
Eight Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2020-21) 
 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


SECOND REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2020-21) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Twenty- 
Eight Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 September, 2020) 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
21 September, 2020/ 30 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 


CONTENTS 
 
 
 
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2019-20) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
19 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies 
43 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government’s replies have not been accepted 
by the Committee 
70 
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited 
87 
 
 
 
 
I 
 
 
 
II 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
Office Memorandum on request for deployment of CAPFS 
from the State/UTs 
 
Security arrangements for categorized protectees with 
CAPF security cover - cooperation from State authorities 
reg. 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
 
91 
 
 
 
94 
I 
 
 
II 
Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee on 
Estimates held on 18.03.2020 
 
Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee on 
Estimates held on 11.08.2020 
96 
 
 
98 

III Analysis of the action taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty - 
Eight report of the Committee on Estimates (16thLok 
Sabha) 
100 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2019-20) 
 
Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudharshan Bhagat 
5. Shri Pradan Baruah 
6. Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan 
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
13. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
14. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
15. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
17. Dr. K.C. Patel 
18. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
19. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
20. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
21. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
22. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
23. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
24. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
25. Shri Prathap Simha 
26. Shri Dharambir Singh 
27. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
28. Shri Kesineni Srinivas 
29. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
30. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
------ 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21) 
 
 
Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Pradan Baruah 
5. Shri Sudharshan Bhagat 
6. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan 
9. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
10. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
12. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
13. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
14. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
15. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
16. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
17. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
18. Dr. K.C. Patel 
19. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
20. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
21. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
22. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
23. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
24. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
25. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
26. Shri Prathap Simha 
27. Shri Dharambir Singh 
28. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
29. Shri Kesineni Srinivas 
30. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2020 -21) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit  the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Second Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -Eighth Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on the subject ‘Central Armed Police Forces and Interna l 
Security Challenges- Evaluation and Response Mechanism' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Home Affairs. 
 
2. The Twenty-Eighth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 19 March, 2018. Action Taken Notes on Observations/  
Recommendations were received from the Ministry of Home Affairs on 5th April, 2019 
and updated Action Taken Notes were received on 14 th July, 2020. The draft Report 
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 18 th March, 2020. 
However, the Report could not be presented to the Lok Sabha due to adjournment of 
the House sine die. Hence, the draft Report was reconsidered and adopted by the 
Committee(2020-21) at their sitting held on 11th August, 2020 
 
3. An analysis of action taken by the  Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT, 
21 September, 2020 
Bhadrapada 30, 1942 (Saka) 
CHAIRPERSON, 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE. 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 28 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Estimates on the subject “Central Armed Police Forces and In ternal 
Security Challenges − Evaluation and Response Mechanism” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Home Affairs. 
1.2 Twenty-Eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 th March 
, 2018. It contained 33 Recommendations/Observations.. Action Taken Notes in respect of 
all the Recommendations/Observations were received from Ministry of Home Affairs on 
14th July, 2020.  
1.3 Replies to the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
               Sl. Nos  6, 7, 10, 11, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31 and 33  
                                                                                                                           Total = 16 
 (Chapter II) 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply: 
  
     Sl. Nos.2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 12, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20 and 29    
                                                          
                                                                                                                Total = 12                                                                                       
 (Chapter III) 
 
 

 
 
2 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
       Sl. Nos. 9,13, 17 and 32                                                                                     
                                                                                                                   Total = 4 
 (Chapter IV) 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
       Sl. No. 1                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  Total = 1 
 (Chapter V) 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that final replies to the Recommendation No. 1 and 
response to comments contained in Chapter I of this Report should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on some of the 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
1.6   The Committee had noted that challenges to internal security in the Country were 
mainly due to terrorism in the hinterland of the Country, cross border terrorism in Jammu 
and Kashmir, insurgency in the North Ea st and Left wing extremism (LWE) in certain 
States. However, the Committee had observed that consistent increase in deployment of 
CAPFs in States with heavy dependence of States on Central Security Forces even for 
day to day law and order issues deploying them even for holding elections, was having an 
adverse effect on the security of the country. Taking note of this the Committee had 
recommended the State Governments/Ministry of Home Affairs to explore the concept of 

 
 
3 
 
deputation of State Police Force Person nel in good numbers to specific CAPF for a period 
of three years or so where they would be trained and deployed. 
1.7 In their reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the recommendations of the 
Committee had been conveyed to the Chief Secretaries an d DGs of all States. . Further, 
the Ministry also mentioned about the existence of Standard Operating Procedure ( SOP ) 
from the year 2005 whereby there was a provision for short term requirement and long 
term requirement norms and the formalities associate d with it. The Ministry had then listed 
the various procedure/modalities regarding the short term requirement and long term 
requirement. 
1.8  The Committee had recommended the deputation of State forces  with the 
CAPF with a view to reduce the burden on CA PF and to enable them to meet their 
training needs on one hand and strengthening of State Police Forces on the other. 
The Ministry, in their response, have stated that the recommendation of the 
Estimates Committee was conveyed to the Chief Secretaries and DGs of all States.  
The Committee feel that the Government ought to engage more with the State 
Governments in order to convince/encourage them to send their forces on 
deputation to the CAPF as it would help in strengthening the Security Forces in the 
long run. The Committee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to pursue the States in 
this regard and apprise the Committee of the outcome of their efforts. 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
1.9  The Committee had recommended on the Indo Myanmar border ( IMB)  issues and 
also on issues relating to Jammu & Kashmir. As regards IMB, the Committee after having 
noted the fact that IMB was porous and vulnerable to illegal crossover, insurgent activities, 
smuggling of contrabands including arms and ammunitions and posed major challenges to 
security forces, had recommended that the decision with regard to border infrastructure 
project involving construction of roads, helipads along Indo -Myanmar Border and opening 
of New operating bases be taken up expeditiously 

 
 
4 
 
1.10 The Committee had expressed concern to note some instances of involvement of 
children/youth in violence in Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee had noted that the 
Government has introduced some of the schemes to engage with the youth and increase 
their employability. In view of these facts, the Committee had recommended for evaluation 
of their impact by the Union as well as State Governments besides intensifying the efforts 
being made by the Government and to hire persons on contract by PSUs/Government 
Agencies particularly in the border areas for employment and for which dialogue should 
take place with PSUs and other organizations. The Committee had further recommended 
that the well known Universities/institutions be roped in to conduct study on social fabric, 
cultural milieu of the people residing in disturbed/border areas and preventive steps be 
taken to contain the social/political unrest being caused by unscrupulous elements. 
 
1.11 The Ministry in its reply stated that Assam Rifles had submitted a revised proposa l 
of 4802.34 KMs of roads, 131 helipads and 325 bridges and a meeting under the 
chairmanship of Secretary (Border Management) with the State Governments and 
Ministries concerned to review the proposal received from Assam Rifles had been held 
which decided that more ground work needed to be done before taking up the prop osal for 
consideration. Further, the Ministry provided the steps being carried out for the youth in 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh region under schemes such as UDAAN, HIMAYAT, 
PMKVY and other related schemes. 
 
1.12  The recommendation of the Committee had two components: (i) Expeditious 
completion of border infrastructure project involving construction of roads, 
helipads and operating bases close to the border. (ii) Engaging with the youth, 
evaluation of welfare schemes such as UDAAN and HIMAYAT in respect of their 
impact on local situation and also study the social fabric and cultural milieu of the 
people living in border areas for the purpose of containing social unrest. As regards 
construction of infrastructure at IMB, the Committee urge upon the Ministry to 
finalise the proposals and implement them at the earliest. The Committee observe 
that certain steps have been taken up under various schemes of the government for 
the youth of Jammu and Kas hmir and Ladakh region . The Committee note that 

 
 
5 
 
steps regarding roping in of well known Universities/institutions to conduct study 
on social fabric, cultural milieu of the people residing in disturbed/border areas and 
preventive steps be taken to contain t he social/political unrest being caused by 
unscrupulous elements, have not been addressed so far. They therefore may be 
informed of the steps taken up in this regard 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
1.13 Having noted the fact that out of 400 Police Stations sanctioned, construction work 
for 356 Police Stations has been completed in 10 LWE affected States, the Committee 
had recommended that Central Government should take necessary steps to ensure 
completion of remaining Police Stations within a stipul ated time frame and also for proper 
monitoring of the progress of implementation of Road Requirement Plan (RRP Phase -I). 
The Committee had also recommended that the Ministry apprise them about the outcome 
of the progress of the construction of 342 roads, ( totalling 5466.31 KMs) and 126 bridges 
covering 44 districts of 9 LWE affected States. 
1.14 In their response, the Ministry replied that out of 5,422 KM road lengths envisaged 
in RRP -I, 4,652 KM roads had been completed. Further, road construction had now 
reached the core areas of Left Wing Extremism influence and progress of the scheme was 
being monitored by MHA on regular basis at the Home Minister / Home Secretary and 
Cabinet Secretary level through meetings with the concerned Ministers / Secretaries and  
Chief Ministers / Chief Secretaries of the respective State Governments. Besides it was 
stated that MHA had set up an Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of Special 
Secretary/Additional Secretary for monitoring and reviewing the progress of various  
development schemes in LWE affected areas. 
1.15 The Ministry further stated that out of 400 PSs sanctioned under the scheme, 
construction work for 399 PSs had been completed and the construction of remaining 01 
Police Station in Nalanda district had been delayed due to the matter being sub -judice. 
The case had then been disposed by the court and the construction had started. Regular 
meetings at various levels are also held to review the progress of the scheme. 
 

 
 
6 
 
1.16  In view of the criticality of developin g infrastructure in the LWE affected 
regions, the Committee had recommended construction of 400 police stations, 342 
roads (totaling 5466.31 Kms) and 126 bridges covering 44 districts of 9 LWE 
affected states. In their reply, the Ministry have stated that 393 police stations 
(98.25% of the total) and 4652 Kms roads (about 85.79% of the total) have been 
completed. The Committee appreciate the substantial progress made in the 
construction of fortified police stations and roads. However, they express their 
displeasure that no information has been provided about the progress in 
construction of bridges in the LWE area. The Committee urge upon the Government 
to complete the remaining works as soon as possible and also provide complete 
information about the progress in construction of bridges.  
 
  
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
1.17  The Committee had observed the twin problem of less allocation of funds for 
projects and non utilization of funds allocated at the Budgetary Estimates Stage. It was 
further obs erved that the expenditure on salaries which was 66 per cent of the total 
allocation during 2012-13 had increased to 74 per cent. The Committee had taken strong 
exception to the way the capacity augmentation of CAPFs was being undertaken as the 
analysis of financial achievement of the modernization plan remained very poor. 
1.18  Having taken into consideration the above mentioned points and the fact that 
interest of security of the country could never be compromised at any cost, the Committee 
had recommende d that the issues as mentioned must be taken up by the CAPFs with 
concerned departments for corrective measures, and that the budgetary allocation of 
recruitment of manpower/infrastructure and provision of combatant equipments should be 
enhanced substantia lly and planning on long term basis i.e. for 10 years, 20 years, 30 
years should be made keeping in view the perceived multi dimensional threat. Besides to 
meet the challenges of cyber threat by external/internal forces, the Committee had 
recommended that there was an imperative need to develop a system to counter the 

 
 
7 
 
future threats of biological, chemical and mini nuclear weapons capable of causing limited 
damage. 
  
1.19   The Ministry in its reply had stated that  observed by the Committee, the outlays 
were not a problem in the way of modernization of CAPFs. It was also stated that CAPFs 
were procuring latest and state of the art technology weapons, surveillance equipment, 
training equipment, medical equipment, IT equipment, special vehicles and clothing it ems 
under five general provisioning heads (i.e. Arms & Ammunitions, Clothing & Tentage, 
Information and Technology, Motor Vehicle and Machinery Equipment) to make good the 
deficiency and upgrade the inventory. The details of BE allocated to CAPFs for their  
modernization under the five provisioning budget heads were also produced. The details 
of financial progress achieved by CAPFs under Modernization Plan -II and Modernization 
Plan-III were also reproduced. 
1.20  It was also stated that formulation of long t erm acquisition plans by CAPFs had 
been included in the Vision Document of MHA and accordingly, CAPFs had been asked to 
prepare three years Procurement Plan from 2020-21 to 2022-23. 
 
1.21  The Committee had expressed dissatisfaction over utilization of fin ancial 
resources by the CAPF affecting their capacity augmentation. It had also observed 
that provisioning should be planned on long term basis keeping in view the 
perceived multi dimensional threats in the form of cyber threat by external/internal 
forces, biological, chemical and mini nuclear weapons etc. The Committee are 
happy to note that the Government has been taking steps with regard to the 
development of a system to counter biological, chemical, mini nuclear weapons 
threat. The Committee reiterate t heir recommendation for optimum utilization of 
financial resources for capacity augmentation and also implementing long term 
plans to deal with emerging challenges such as  cyber threat by external/internal 
forces, biological, chemical and mini nuclear wea pons and so on. The Committee 
also urge upon the Ministry that Procurement Plan which have been included in 
Vision Document should be prepared expeditiously keeping in view security 
concerns of the country. 

 
 
8 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
1.22 The Committee had discussed the evolvement of information technology and the 
pros and cons of it vis a vis the economy, security of the country. The Committee had also 
discussed about the various steps taken up by the Government of India to meet the 
challenges and prevent cyber attacks such as approving a National Cyber Security Policy, 
setting up of Indian Computer emergency response team (CERT -In) etc. Having noted 
about the emerging challenges with the rapid penetration of IT in various fields particularly 
from the internal security perspective, the Committee had recommended for effective 
implementation of the projects such as establishment of national cyber forensic laboratory, 
capacity building, R&D and its awareness and that its progress should be monitor ed 
through structural monitoring mechanism. Further it was recommended that the outcome 
of the follow up in this regard should be intimated to the Committee. 
 
1.23 In their reply, the Ministry has stated that it was  implementing the ‘Cyber Crime 
Prevention against Women and Children (CCPWC)’ scheme from NIRBHAYA funds of the 
Ministry of Women & Child Development. The main features of the scheme and the 
subsequent steps taken up in that regard were provided and the same has been 
mentioned below: 
i.  Online c ybercrime reporting platform: the online cyber -crime reporting portal 
was launched on 20th September 2018 by the Hon’ble Home Minister. 
ii.  National Cyber Forensic Laboratory: DFSS had been identified as the nodal 
agency for setting up of NCFL. The NCFL w ould be setup at CFSL, 
Hyderabad premises 
iii.  Training of Police officers, judges & prosecutors and setting up of cyber 
forensic training laboratories: Financial assistance of Rs. 6 crore was provided 
to all States/UTs for capacity building of Police Off icers, Judicial Officers & 
Prosecutors in cyber domain and training had been imparted to more than 
3000 such officers. Further, standardized Training Modules for 3 days’ cyber -

 
 
9 
 
crime awareness and 5 days’ cyber -crime investigation course had been 
developed and made available to all the States/ UTs for utilizing the same in 
training programmes. Rs 82.80 crore had been released to States/UTs for 
setting up of one cyber forensic training lab. Himachal Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Arunachal Pradesh and Telangana had commissioned 
the cyber forensic training lab and the matter was being followed up with 
remaining. 
iv.  Cybercrime awareness activities, Research & Development : Cyber Crime 
awareness campaign had been launched through twitter handle 
(@CyberDost) & radio across the country. 
v.  Research & Development  : Steering Committee under CCPWC scheme had 
shortlisted proposals from 12 institutes. 
Further the Ministry stated following steps have been taken in regards to the observations 
of the Committee "fo r effective implementation of the project and its progress monitored 
through structural monitoring mechanism": 
I. Cyber and Information Security Division has been established in MHA to deal with 
projects on cyber crimes, issues related with cyber crime and In formation Security 
issues, etc.  
II. The Cybercrime Prevention against Women and Children (CCPVVC) Scheme has 
inbuilt mechanism for monitoring by Steering Committee and Empowered 
Committee.  
III. The utilization of funds allocated to Schemes handled by Cyber and In formation 
Security Division, is reviewed periodically by the Home Secretary.  
IV. Progress of implementation of the Cybercrime Prevention against Women and 
Children (CCPWC) Scheme being funded from Nirbhaya Fund is also monitored by 
Empowered Committee of Mini stry of Women and Child Development (MWCD) 
chaired by Secretary, MWCD.  
V. NITI Aayog has implemented Output Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) 
Dashboard where all schemes including CCPWC are being monitored on the basis 
of the Key Performance Indicators (KPI) which is updated on quarterly basis.  

 
 
10 
 
VI. Improvement in structured monitoring of projects is an ongoing process and in this 
regard, MHA has developed an internal dashboard to monitor the progress of 
important schemes/projects.  
Cyber Crisis Management Plan  (CCMP) has been prepared to deal with cyber 
security related matters. 
 
1.24  While taking note of the emerging challenges with the rapid penetration of IT 
in various fields particularly from the internal security perspective, the Committee 
had strongly em phasized for effective implementation of the project relating to 
cyber security monitoring of its progress through structural monitoring mechanism. 
The Ministry in its reply have informed that they have established Cyber and 
Information Security division, NITI Aayog has implemented Output Outcome 
Monitoring Framework (OOMF) Dashboard, Cyber Crisis Management Plan (CCMP) 
has been prepared to deal with cyber security related matters. The Committee are of 
the opinion that there should be a monitoring mechanism  to assess the success of 
all these steps in checking the emerging security challenges. 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 
1.25  The Committee had discussed various challenges involved due to penetration of IT 
in every sphere and requirement of pr oper training due to such acts. In view of it, the 
Committee had recommended that the Government/CAPFs should ensure that while 
purchasing the latest state -of-the-art equipments, training needs were properly taken care 
of and, if need be, it could be inclu ded in the purchase agreement itself. To meet the 
emerging challenges, the Committee had also recommended that the contents of training 
should be a mix of conventional matters as well as latest technologies like IT, Cyber 

 
 
11 
 
Security and Cyber Crime. Besides it was also recommended that training must be a 
continuous affair during service of CAPFs so as to update the personnel about the latest 
trends of technology and strategy to face new challenges and that experts from various 
fields could be hired from out-side and associated in the training programmes. 
1.26  The Ministry its reply has stated that CAPFs were already incorporating training 
clauses on handling as well as repair and maintenance aspects of modern/ latest 
equipments in the tender enquiries while making procurement of equipments. 
 
1.27 Noting the ever-evolving technology and new emerging security threats due 
to penetration of IT in every sphere, the Committee had stressed on the need to 
upgrade and update the curriculum and infrastructure in the tra ining institutes and 
had recommended that the contents of training should be a mix of conventional as 
well as modern technologies such as IT, cyber Security etc, involvement of experts  
from various fields in training programmes. The Committee are surprise d that the 
Ministry, instead of concretising any action plan, has merely expressed that CAPFs 
were already incorporating training clauses on handling as well as repair and 
maintenance aspects of modern/ latest equipments in the tender enquiries while 
making procurement of equipments.  The Committee urge the Ministry to seriously 
dwell on their recommendation and act upon it at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
 
1.28  The Committee had noted that the number of personnel who have commi tted 
suicide in each of CAPFs surpasses the number of personnel except Assam Rifles. In 
ITBP, SSB and CISFs the number of suicide was many times the number of personnel 
killed in action. The Committee had also discussed about the working environment that l ed 
personnel to be deprived of time to relax their minds, the relation between the supervisors 
and some of the steps taken up by the Ministry and its inadequacies in dealing the same. 

 
 
12 
 
1.29  In view of the observations and findings, the Committee had strong ly 
recommended to take all possible measures including psychological counselling on a 
permanent basis, by taking the help of professionals, that the workshops/programmes on 
stress management should regularly be undertaken for the officers/personnel, that Y oga 
and meditation be made part of the daily exercise of CAPFs personnel. The Committee 
had further recommended on the need of having some sort of accommodation, be a base 
camp, nearby the deployment of the respective force, to enable the personnel to meet  
their family members which would go a long way in handling stress in forces. 
1.30  The Ministry in its reply stated that Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) 
New Delhi had been awarded a research project on “Comparative Analysis of Attrition a nd 
Suicide Cases in CAPFs and Corrective Measures”. The Bureau of Police Research and 
Development (BPR&D) had signed an MoU with the IIPA on 01.05.2020. BPR&D had also 
received Terms of Acceptance on 12.6.2020, Stress Counsellors had been hired for Yoga 
/ Stress management programmes, whenever required. The Ministry has provided 
following steps that had been taken up to reduce the rate of suicides in the CAPF.  
i) Yoga and meditation had been made part of training and daily physical exercise in 
CAPFs.  
ii) Yoga Training had been included as the ‘desired criteria’ for deployment of CAPFs 
personnel on UN/India Missions abroad. 
iii) Organizing talks by doctors and other specialists to address their  personal and 
psychological concerns; 
iv) Better medical facilities for troops and their families including introduction of 
Composite Hospitals with specialized facilities; 
v) Implementation of a transparent, rational and fair leave policy; 
vi) Liberal grant of leave to the force personnel to attend to their urgent domestic 
problems/issues/needs 
vii) Revamping of grievances redressal machinery; 
viii) Regulating duty hours to ensure adequate rest and relief; 
ix) Improving living conditions through provision of basic amenities/ facilities for troops 
and their families; 
x) Motivating the forces through increased risk, hardship and other allowances; 

 
 
13 
 
xi) Discontinuation of Suraksha Sahayaks; 
xii) Regular interaction, both formal and informal, among Commanders, officers and 
troops to find out and address their problems from time to time; 
xiii) Recreational and sports facilities and provision of team games and sports etc; 
xiv) Providing welfare measures like Central Police Canteen facility to the troops and 
their families, scholarships to their wards etc. 
 
1.31 Noting the highly stressful environment in which the CAPF personnel are 
working and its impact on their mental health, the Committee had recommended 
various initiatives like psychological counseling, stress management, etc. The 
Committee appreciate the steps taken up or proposed to be taken by the Ministry to 
deal with the issue. T he Committee, however, desire the Ministry to be pro active 
and take preventive measures to ensure that the situation can be under control at 
the outset. Since mental stress, depression or any other mental illness is noticeable 
only when its pronounced and  beyond any remedies, the Committee feel that 
preventive measures are necessary to maintain morale of the CAPF personnel. 
 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
 
1.32  The Committee had noted that only 98,688 houses were available against the 
authorized 2,63,605 houses, which was approximately 37.42% and way below the 
satisfactory level of 50%. During the 12th Five Year Plan, as against the target of 24,206 
houses, only 11884 houses had been constructed till 31.03.2016 .The Committee had 
observed that the basic constraint in housing was the cumbersome process of acquisition 
of land due to existing legal provisions. Against this background, the Committee  had 
recommended that MHA, CAPFs should hold consultations with various State 
Governments and impress upon them, the imperative need to allocate land for the purpose 
of construction of Houses for CAPF personnel. 

 
 
14 
 
1.33  The Ministry in its reply had stated that as against authorization of 2,68,341 houses 
in CAPFs, the availability was only 1,17,481 as on 01 .01.2020 and thus there was a 
shortfall of 1,50,860 dwelling units. Further, 21,743 houses were under construction. With 
the completion of these houses, the housing satisfaction level would increase to 51.88% of 
authorisation as against the present satisfaction level of 43.78%. 
 
1.34 The Ministry also stated that land for CAPFs was acquired through State 
Governments and such sanctions were issued on need basis as and when proposals were 
received from CAPFs and that whenever there was delay on the part of th e State 
Government in acquisition of land, which was mainly due to litigation cases, the matter 
was taken up by MHA with State Governments at appropriate level. The reply further 
mentioned that the recommendations of the Committee had been shared with the State 
Governments/UTs, vide MHA’s letter No.II -27012/18/2018-PF.I (CF -3422145) dated 
30.05.2018. 
 
1.35 Keeping in view the dissatisfactory achievement rate of only 37.42 % in 
housing construction and crucial role of land availability in that, the Committee  had 
recommended regular consultations with State Governments. The Ministry in their 
reply have admitted that there is a shortfall of 1,50,860 houses, but also stated that  
with the completion of 21, 743 houses which were under construction, the housing 
satisfaction level would increase to 51.88% of authorisation as against the present 
satisfaction level of 43.78%. The Committee appreciate the good progress being 
made in this regard and urge the Ministry to have regular consultation and 
interaction with the State Governments and extend all possible help including timely 
release of funds in order to ensure that all hurdles in land acquisition are addressed 
timely and there is no delay in construction of houses for want of land.   
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 27) 
 
1.36  Having noted the fact that there were 39 composite hospitals for providing specialty 
services to CAPFs personnel and their family members and Government had allowed 

 
 
15 
 
appointment of doctors on contractual basis to meet the demand of the CA PFs, the 
Committee had recommended that vacancies of doctors in all CAPFs should be filled up in 
a time bound manner so as to ensure that CAPF Personnel were provided best health 
care facilities. 
 
1.37  The Ministry in its reply has stated that 62 Speciali st Medical Officers, 229 Medical 
Officers and 01 Dental Surgeon had been selected through Medical Officers Selection 
Board (MOSB) -2016. Thereafter, MOSB -2018 was conducted through ITBP (Nodal 
Force). 02 Super Specialist Medical Officers, 61 Specialist Medi cal Officers and 390 
Medical Officers have been selected through MOSB -2018 and offer of appointment has 
been issued 
 
1.38 Recognizing the need for providing best medical facilities for the CAPF 
personnel and their family members, the Committee had recommended vacancies of 
the posts of doctors in all CAPFs should be filled up in a time bound manner. From 
the reply of the Ministry, it is observed that action is being taken to fill vacancies 
through Medical Officers Selection Board. The Committee desire that t he 
recruitment process for appointment of doctors be completed at the earliest and 
also ensured that there is minimum delay between advertisement of vacancies and 
appointment of doctors. The process may be streamlined and action for filling up 
anticipated vacancies/requirement be initiated well in advance. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 30) 
 
1.39  The Committee had discussed about Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) pahse II 
which was being implemented by Ministry of Home Affairs and was scheduled to be 
completed by 31.03.2020. Under this scheme, coastal States/UTs were to be provided 
with 131 Coastal Police Stations (CPS), 60 jetties, 10 marine operation centre, 150 boats, 
75 special category of boats/RIDs, 131 four wheelers, 127 two wheelers and 242 
motorcycles. Having noted that out of these only 109 CPS had been operationalized, 4 
marine operation centre, 127 four wheelers and 234 motorcycles had been procured, 

 
 
16 
 
procurement of 225 numbers of boats had been initiated which was expected to take 3½ 
years, th e Committee had recommended that progress of work pertaining to 
operationalization/construction of remaining 22 CPS, 37 jetties should be closely 
monitored so as to ensure their completion as per target and as regards procurement of 
225 boats for which act ion had already been initiated, the same was to be made within a 
stipulated time frame. 
 
1.40  The Ministry in its reply has stated that The CSS (Phase -II) had been formulated in 
the context of the fast changing coastal security scenario subsequent to the Mumbai 
incidents on 26 November and followed by a vulnerability / gap analysis carried out by 
coastal States and UTs which projected additional requirements for strengthening the 
coastal security infrastructure. The CSS (Phase -II) approved the Cabinet Comm ittee on 
Security (CCS) for implementation w. e. f. 01.04.2011 to 31.03.2016 with an outlay of 
Rs.1579.91 crore which had been further granted extension up to 30.03.2020 with the 
approval of the CCS. Under the Phase -II, the coastal States / UTs have been s anctioned 
with 131 CPS, 60 jetties, 10 Marine Operation Centres, 150 boats (12 Tons), 75 special 
category of boats / RIBs, 131 four wheelers and 242 motorcycles. 
 
1.41 The reply also stated that 131 CPS had been operationalized, 38 jetties had been 
constructed, 10 Marine Operation Centres were functional, 131 four wheelers and 242 
motorcycles had been procured. It further stated that with the approval of the competent 
authority, the procurement of 225 boats might not be pursued with, keeping in view the 
inadequate utilization and poor maintenance of 204 boats supplied under the Phase -I of 
the Scheme by the Coastal States/UTs 
 
1.42 Keeping in view the importance of having a strong coastal security system, 
the Committee had recommended that there should be no time over -run in 
completion of phase-II of the Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) which, after extension, 
is targeted to be completed by 31.03.2020. While appreciating the substantial 
progress made in the different components of the scheme, from the reply of th e 
Ministry, the Committee find that 22 out of 60 jetties are not yet 

 
 
17 
 
constructed/upgraded. The Committee urge that remaining works under the Phase-II 
of the CSS are completed as early as possible. 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 32) 
 
1.43 The Committee had noted that during the Union Home Minister meeting with Home 
Ministers/Chief Secretaries and DGPs of Coastal States/UTs to review coastal security in 
Mumbai on 16.06.2016, the issue of creation of Central Marine PoliceForce for coastal 
security was raised by the participants. Having felt the need to create a separate force to 
exclusively patrol India's 7000 km coast line, the Committee had recommended that the 
decision for formation of Central Maritime Police Force (CMPF) should be taken 
expeditiously.  
1.44  The Ministry in its reply had stated that after due deliberations the competent 
authority had decided that instead of establishment of a separate Coastal Marine Police 
Force/Coastal Border Police Force, the Indian Coast Guard (ICG) be strengthene d, 
capacity building of the Coastal Police be done with the help of the ICG  and enhance 
coordination between the Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard and the Coastal Police . 
. 
 
1.45 Keeping in view the emerging threats, the Committee had observed it was 
imperative to have a Central Maritime Police force (CMPF). The Ministry, however, in 
its reply, stated that instead of establishing a separate Coastal Marine Police 
Force/Coastal Border Police Force, the Indian Coast Guard (ICG) be strengthened, 
capacity buildi ng of the Coastal Police be done with the help of the ICG  and 
enhance coordination between the Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard and the Coastal 
Police . However, the Committee find that during the review of Coastal Security by 
Union Home Minster on 16.06.2 016 with the Home Ministers/Chief Secretaries and 
DGPs of Coastal States/UTs, the need for creation of CMPF was raised.  The 
Ministry has not provided any reasons for the decision taken by them in regard to 

 
 
18 
 
non formation of separate Coastal Marine Police F orce. The Committee may be 
apprised of the reasons for not considering the formation of CMPF. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 6 
 
 As per a stu dy conducted by Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA) in 
2013, to identify sources of funding for LWE groups, the  Maoists ge t their funds by 
resorting to collection of levy from Government works and schemes, industry and 
business, social institu tions and infrastructure, de velopmental works etc. Funds are  also 
collected from people in terms of membership fees, supporters/sympathizers and fines 
from defaulters. To address the issue of flow of funds, an apex level group under the 
Chairmanship of Add itional Secretary (LWE) in MHA has been created. In addition, 07 
Groups at State Level one each in LWE affected States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Odisha, & Telangana have been created to 
address the issue. The Committee desire that meetings of these groups should be held 
periodically, situation reviewed and appropriate corrective steps taken to stop the flow of 
funds to Maoists. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Meetings of Apex Level Multi -Disciplinary Groups comprising officer s from Central 
Agencies and the State Police (ED, DRI, State Intelligence CID, CBDT, NIA, CBI) headed 
by AS (LWE) at the Centre and JD (IB) at the State Level. Meetings with ED, DRI, State 
Intelligence & CID, CBDT, NIA, and CBI are held periodically to rev iew the situation. A 
meeting was held on 31.05.2018 under the Chairmanship of Union Home Secretary with 

 
 
20 
 
officials of IB, ED, NIA, DsGP of States to discuss the issues of choking of flow of funds to 
Left Wing Extremists. The issue was also discussed by Unio n Home Minister with the 
Chief Ministers of LWE affected States in a meeting held on 26.08.2019.   Recently, the 
issue was discussed in a Video Conference held on 03.06.2020 with the States, IB and 
CAPFs.Some of the actions taken include: 
 
 Registration of c ases by the ED under Prevention of Money Laundering 
Act   (PMLA) against 13 LWE cadres of CPI (Maoist).  Property worth ₹306 lakh has 
been attached in two cases in last one year. 
 A separate vertical for investigation of LWE related cases has been created i n NIA 
on 21.12.2018. NIA has seized/ attached/ frozen the properties of LWE cadres in 20 
cases till now and property worth ₹326.45 lakh has been attached in last one year. 
 
 Among States, Bihar and Jharkhand have registered cases related to chocking of 
flow of funds.   Bihar Police attached property of LWE cadre worth ₹157 lakh in 
three cases and Jharkhand Police has seized property worth ₹15 lakh in 12 LWE 
cases in last one year.. 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 7 
 
The Committee further note that Indo -Myanmar Border which runs along the State 
of Manipur, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh is characterized by hilly, terrain, 
dense forests and water bodies. Due to historic, cultural and ethnic bonding amongst the 
locals residing on either side of Indo -Myanmar Border, the region enjoys the free 
movement regime (FMR) whereby the residents of either side are permitted to move up to 
16 KMs on other side of the border. This coupled with lack of poor road connectivity and 
infrastructure, makes the IMB porous and vulnerable to illegal crossover, insurgent 
activities, smuggling of contrabands including arms and ammunitions and poses major 
challenges to security forces. 
 

 
 
21 
 
 The Committee have been informed that in order to enhance the operational 
capability of Border G uarding Force and address the connectivity issues, a border 
infrastructure project involving construction of roads, helipads along Indo -Myanmar Border 
is being planned in MHA. New operating bases are also being planned to be set -up closer 
to Indo -Myanmar B order. The Committee desire that decision in this regard should be 
taken expeditiously so that the required infrastructure is created urgently to prevent and 
obviate the vulnerable activities being perpetrated from across the IMB Border. Issues 
related to youth in J&K 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note some instances of involvement of 
children/youth in violence in Jammu & Kashmir. While noting that the aforesaid situation is 
a dangerous proposition and reflects adversely on the working of intelligence ag encies as 
well security forces for not anticipating the gravity of the situation in the valley, the 
Committee strongly emphasize to deal with the issue diligently. There is an urgent need to 
engage with the youth so as to bring them in the mainstream and t he children/youth 
involved in such incidents should be handled with utmost care and are properly counselled 
by the professionals so that they don’t get trapped again and indulge in violent activities. 
 
 The Committee note that the Government has introduced  some of the schemes to 
engage the youth and increase their employability which include UDAAN - to enhance skill 
and employability of Graduates and three -year Engineering Diploma holders, HIMAYAT - 
to provide options and opportunities to School/College Drop  outs for getting jobs or self -
employment. The Committee find that such schemes of Centre and States have been 
launched with right objective, however their impact need to be evaluated by the Union as 
well as State Governments besides intensifying the effor ts being made by the 
Government. In addition to the above, one way of providing employment is to hire persons 
on contract by PSUs/Government Agencies particularly in the border areas for which 
dialogue should take place with PSUs and other organisations. 
 

 
 
22 
 
 The Committee further recommend that the well known Universities/institutions be 
roped in to conduct study on social fabric, cultural milieu of the people residing in 
disturbed/border areas and preventive steps be taken to contain the social/political unr est 
being caused by unscrupulous elements. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Assam Rifles, in January, 2020 furnished the revised proposal for construction of 
4802.34 KMs of roads, 131 helipads and 325 bridges at an estimated cost of ₹17,934.58 
crore including cost of land. A Meeting was held on 27.01.2020 under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (Border Management) with the State Governments and Ministries concerned to 
review the proposal received form Assam Rifles. In the aforesaid meeting, it was decided 
that ‘since various infrastructure projects are being implemented / proposed by difference 
Central and State Government agencies, more ground work is needed to be done on the 
proposal before it is taken up for consideration. Thereafter, the proposal may be circulated 
by Assam Rifles to the concerned Central Government Departments and State 
Governments for their comments’. Further action is being taken by Assam Rifles. 
 
 Under the Scheme, Special Industry Initiative for Jammu & Kashmir titled ‘UDAAN’ 
implemented by the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) in Public -Private 
Partnership mode, 48,584 candidates were selected for training, 44,369 candidates had 
joined training, 38,798 had completed training and jobs had been offered to 23,902 
candidates from UT of J &K. From the UT of Ladakh, under UDAAN scheme, 458 
candidates joined training, 403 candidates were trained and jobs have been offered to 158 
candidates. The Scheme was extended twice and finally the Scheme was completed  on 
31st December, 2018. 
 
 After the successful completion of the UDAAN scheme on  31st December 2018, the 
rural and urban youth including school drop outs are now being imparted job -oriented 
training in various sectors such as ITeS, Sales and Customer Service and Hospitality etc. 
under the ‘HIMAYAT’ scheme being run by the Ministry of Rural Development for Jammu 

 
 
23 
 
and Kashmir and Ladakh regions. In order to step up efforts under HIMAYAT, Phase -II of 
the scheme is being implemented under the Prime Minister’s Development Package 
(PMDP) 2015. The i nitial period of 5 years has been extended up to 2022 and the total 
outlay has been increased to ₹1781.66 Crores. As per the approved Action Plan for 2019 -
22, the target is to train 1,43,299 youths in Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh. Under this 
Scheme upto 29 th Feb, 2020, 13728 candidates have been trained, 7801 youths are 
undergoing training and 4,968 youth have got employment in J&K. As per information 
provided by M/o Rural Development that is implementing the scheme in UT of J&K and 
Ladakh, as of 29 th Feb, 2020, out of the target of 1,43,299, approved by the Empowered 
Committee of the National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) for achievement during 
2019-22,   UT of J&K has fixed a sanctioned target of 90,792 so far.   A target of 3,263 has 
been fixed for the UT  of Ladakh (Kargil - 1675 and Leh 1588) out which a total of 247 
candidates have been trained (Kargil 242 and Leh 5). The rest of the target would be 
sanctioned by UT of J&K and Ladakh in due course of time. 
 Under Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY ) for skilling and enhancing 
employment opportunities for the youth in J&K and Ladakh, various other courses have 
been started relating to  Agriculture, Automotive, Apparel, Make -ups & Home Furnishing, 
Beauty & Wellness, Banking, Financial Services & Insur ance, Capital Goods, 
Construction, Domestic Workers etc. 
 
 Further, under the Prime Minister’s Development Package -2015, the Government 
of India has  approved an outlay of Rs. 1,080 crores, for creation of 3,000  additional State 
Government jobs for the Kash miri migrants. This has also generated  employment in J&K 
especially for the youth. During the last 3 years, selection process has been concluded in 
respect of 1781 posts and 604 candidates have joined in different departments of Jammu 
& Kashmir. This is in  addition to the  State Government jobs filled by 2933 youths in 
various districts of Kashmir valley, against 3000 supernumerary posts created under 
PMRP-2008. 
 
 With regard to hiring on contract basis, though there are no major PSUs or other 
Government age ncies in border areas, there are a few agencies which are involved in 

 
 
24 
 
construction of roads for the defence, viz Projects/SAMPARK Operation, MINAG, Beacon, 
GREF.  Resultantly, 19,500 jobs have been advertised so that skilled and semi-skilled jobs 
can be provided.. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.12 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 10 
 
 The analysis of the data with regard to financial allocations and expenditure for 
CAPFs during the last four years as made available to the Com mittee during the course of 
examination indicates that on the one hand the Government did not allocate the funds 
commensurating with projected / proposed outlay by CAPFs, on the other hand CAPFs 
could not utilize fully the outlay allocated at the Budgetary  Estimates Stage. The 
allocations each year though were increased consistently, allocations of Rs.36959 crore in 
2013-14 reaching to the level of Rs.53079 crore in the year 2016 -17, alongwith consistent 
increase in expenditure from Rs.37666 crore to Rs.482 98 crore during the aforesaid 
period, most of the expenditure was met on salaries. The expenditure on salaries which 
was 66 per cent of the total allocation during 2012 -13 has increased to 74 per cent. The 
Secretary, during the course of deposition was of the view that salary component should 
not be more than 60 to 65 per cent and stated the rise in percentage component as not a 
very desirable situation as more expenditure on salaries leave lesser amount for 
equipments. While appreciating the concerns of th e Secretary, analysis of the data 
indicates that the outlay allocated under the heads meant for capacity augmentation, 
financial performance remained very poor for example under the Modernization Plan - II 
(2012-17). Rs.11009.19 crore was approved outlay b y CCS, the allocations during the 
period 2013-16 remained just Rs.250.92 crore which too could not be fully utilized as the 
expenditure reported during these years remained Rs.197.62 crore. The aforesaid 

 
 
25 
 
scenario clearly indicates that outlay is not the is sue, problem lies elsewhere which need 
to be critically analysed. 
 
 The Committee take strong exception to the way the capacity augmentation of 
CAPFs is being taken as is apparent from the analysis of financial achievement under the 
Modernization Plan. The Committee would like to emphasize that interest of the security of 
the nation, is sacrosanct and can never be compromised at any cost. The matter, 
therefore, should urgently be taken by CAPFs with the concerned Ministries/Departments/ 
organizations for taking corrective actions. The Committee further note that on the advice 
of the Ministry of Finance, consultations with the stakeholders are being undertaken for the 
ongoing scheme in Medium term (up to 2020) and Long Term (up to 2025). The 
Committee strongly emphasize for completing the assessment process expeditiously. The 
Committee also desire that budgetary allocation for recruitment of manpower/infrastructure 
and provision of combatant equipments should be enhanced substantially and planning on 
long term basis i.e. for 10 years, 20 years, 30 years should be made keeping in view the 
perceived multi dimensional threat. Besides to meet the challenges of cyber threat by 
external/internal forces, there is an imperative need to develop a system to counter the 
future threats of biological, chemical and mini nuclear weapons capable of causing limited 
damage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As observed by the Committee, the outlays are not a problem in the way of 
modernization of CAPFs. CAPFs are procuring latest and sta te of the art technology 
weapons, surveillance equipment, training equipment, medical equipment, IT equipment, 
special vehicles and clothing items under five general provisioning heads (i.e. Arms & 
Ammunitions, Clothing & Tentage, Information and Technolog y, Motor Vehicle and 
Machinery Equipment) to make good the deficiency and upgrade the inventory. The details 
of BE allocated to CAPFs for their modernization under the five provisioning budget heads 
are as under: 

 
 
26 
 
(₹ in crore) 
S. N. Year BE Expenditure Percentage 
1 2019-20 3640.16 3147.03 93.01 
2 2018-19 3374.49 3210.12 95.12 
3 2017-18 3190.43 2969.12 93.06 
4 2016-17 2610.62 2423.18 92.82 
5 2015-16 2466.46 2167.67 87.88 
 
 As an add-on budgetary provision the Government approved Modernization Plan -II 
for CAPFs with total financial outlay of Rs. 11009.19 Cr for the period of 2012 -2017 which 
was further extended till 14.06.2018. To continue this exercise the Government approved 
Modernization Plan-III for CAPFs with total financial outlay of Rs. 1053 Cr for  the period of 
2018-2020 which has been further extended till 31.03.2021 or till the date 
recommendations of 15 th Finance Commission come into effect, whichever is earlier. 
Keeping in view the frequent technology up -gradation and change in operational 
requirement of CAPFs, Modernization Plan-III was approved for two years only. 
 The details of financial progress achieved by CAPFs under Modernization Plan -II 
and Modernization Plan-III are as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
Modernization Plan-II  (03.05.2013 to 14.06.2018) 
(₹ in crore) 

 
 
27 
 
CAPFs Total outlay Total 
allocation 
Total revised 
allocation  
Total 
expenditure 
% w. r. t. 
budget 
allocation 
AR 1545.47 191.98 219.93 212.55 110.71 
(96.64% 
against 
revised 
allocation) 
BSF 4570.07 259.13 185.76 184.45 71.18 
CISF 264.36 42.49 41.57 40.14 94.47 
CRPF 2619.16 380.55 189.06 184.33 48.44 
ITBP 686.87 88.55 35.82 31.01 35.02 
NSG 664.62 71.03 44.96 42.45 59.76 
SSB 658.64 93.92 51.82 31.67 33.72 
Total 11009.19 1127.65 768.92 726.60 64.43 
 
 After in -depth analysis of Modernization  Plan-II, the following reasons were 
observed behind the slow progress of this plan: 
 Late approval of Modernization Plan -II: Though the proposed period of implementation 
of Modernization Plan -II was from 01.04.2012 to 31.03.2017, it was approved by the 
Cabinet Committee on Security only on 03.05.2013. Further time was taken for 
allocation of funds. Therefore, almost one and a half year had already elapsed before 
any procurement activity could be initiated leading to teething troubles and delays. 
 Poor planni ng at CAPF level : Despite late approval of Modernization Plan -II, CAPFs 
had five years for its implementation (i.e. 04.05.2013 to 14.06.2018). During the five 
years span, CAPFs could utilize only 64.43% of funds allocated to them which 
indicates lack of fu nds absorption capacity in CAPFs as well as poor procurement 
planning at their level. 
 Frequent modification by CAPFs to the projected inventory to be procured : After the 
scheme was conceptualized in 2012, all CAPFs reviewed the Modernization Plan -II 

 
 
28 
 
several times and changed their requirements in respect of approved equipment. This 
also resulted in delay in initiating the procurement process.  
 Cumbersome procurement Procedure : The earlier procurement procedure was 
comparatively cumbersome and time consuming . Most of the items were being 
procured through open/global tenders which require considerable time due to various 
time taking procedures such as import of samples for technical evaluations. Since 
various items were not readily available for supply, it too k relatively longer time for their 
acquisition by the Forces. 
 
 Keeping in view the poor performance of CAPFs under Modernization Plan -II, the 
Government made several procedural reforms to streamline the procurement process well 
before approving Modernizat ion Plan-III for CAPFs for 2018 -2020. The salient procedural 
reforms have been reproduced as under:  
 Substantial enhancement in the delegated financial powers of  
SDG/ADG/IG/DIG/Commandant in CAPFs for procurement of stores to ensure 
decentralization of power and speedy procurement on 02.01.2018; 
 Delegation of power to DsG of nodal CAPFs for finalization/approval of Qualitative 
Requirements (QRs)/Trial Directives (TDs) on 02.01.2018; 
 Introducing two tier procurement procedure in place of earlier three tier procurement 
procedure on 02.01.2018; 
 SDG/ADG to head Tender Purchase Committee (TPC) instead of  DsG, CAPFs on 
02.01.2018; 
 Trial power of DsG, CAPFs was enhanced from Rs. 1 Cr to Rs. 2 Cr on 02.01.2018 to 
enable CAPFs to trial more and more technology avai lable globally and then acquire 
them as per their operational requirement; 
 Abolition of Procurement Advisory Committee (PAC) on 29.09.2017; 
 Delegation of financial powers from Home Secretary to Joint Secretary for procurement 
of stores within MHA on 08.12.2017; 
 

 
 
29 
 
 As a result of enhancement in delegation of financial power on 02.01.2018, CAPFs 
have been able to incur 93% (approx) expenditure at CAPF level itself during financial 
year 2018-19 whereas only 7% (approx) expenditure needed MHA’s approval during t he 
same financial year. The CAPF -wise effect of enhancement in delegation of financial 
power of various functionaries within CAPFs is as under: 
 
S. 
N. 
CAPFs Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
 
Approval at force level (in value) % Approval 
at MHA 
level 
DG Other than 
DG 
Total at 
Force 
level 
1 AR 421.13 100.00 0.00 100.00 0.00 
2 BSF 902.01 81.82 18.18 100.00 0.00 
3 CISF 145.63 92.81 0.02 92.83 7.18 
4 CRPF 1040.62 44.87 42.66 87.53 12.47 
5 ITBP 359.11 78.14 6.78 84.92 15.08 
6 NSG 119.05 92.02 6.63 98.65 1.35 
7 SSB 222.57 67.53 20.19 87.72 12.28 
 Total 3210.12 73.26 19.99 93.25 6.75 
 
Modernization Plan-III   (2018-2021) 
(₹ in crore) 
CAPFs 
 
 
Total outlay Total 
allocation  
Total revised 
allocation* 
Total expr. 
(as on 
08.05.2020) 
% with 
respect to 
allocation 
AR 140.78 124.00 68.37 48.31 38.96 
BSF 282.47 175.36 121.92 50.01 28.52 
CISF 104.35 39.87 39.02 21.61 54.20 
CRPF 302.23 361.92 275.42 104.92 28.99 
ITBP 102.02 55.94 41.53 25.04 44.76 

 
 
30 
 
CAPFs 
 
 
Total outlay Total 
allocation  
Total revised 
allocation* 
Total expr. 
(as on 
08.05.2020) 
% with 
respect to 
allocation 
NSG 49.22 47.55 22.54 0.71 0.01 
SSB 71.93 27.51 27.92 17.43 63.35 
Total 1053.00 832.15 596.72 268.03 32.20 
*BE and RE 2020-21 have been kept same for calculation in this table 
 
 Efforts are on to speed up progress during thi s Financial Year. During in -depth 
analysis of performance of CAPFs, it has also been observed that Qualitative 
Requirements (QRs) of various items approved under Modernization Plan -III could not be 
formulated / finalized by CAPFs so far. Earlier, in antici pation of approval of Modernization 
Plan-III a preparatory meeting was convened in Ministry with all CAPFs on 04.06.2018.  
CAPFs were advised to complete the process of formulation of QRs as soon as possible 
so that the benefit available in the Modernization Plan-III could be utilized to the maximum. 
CAPFs were also advised to prepare draft tender documents immediately and be ready to 
initiate tender process as soon as the approval of Modernization Plan -III is conveyed to 
them. CAPFs were further advised on  05.07.2018 to float tender enquiry for all items 
which are approved under Modernization Plan -III but not available through GeM/OFB as 
per their approved outlay irrespective of funds availability under relevant budget head for 
the current financial year. 
 During review meeting it was observed that out of total 266 items approved under 
Modernization Plan-III, QRs of 158 items were available but QRs of 108 items were not 
available as on 21.06.2018. Despite delegation of power for finalization of QRs, there ar e 
still considerable number of items for which QRs could not be finalized. 
 
 It may also be mentioned that the performance of Modernization Plans for CAPFs 
cannot be made the indicator of capacity augmentation of CAPFs in terms of equipping 
them with latest and state of the art technology equipment, weapons, special vehicles etc. 
Modernization Plan -II/Modernization Plan -III has been conceptualized as an add -on 

 
 
31 
 
budgetary provision for CAPFs for their capacity augmentation and improve operational 
efficiency. Most of the items procured/being procured under Modernization Plan -
II/Modernization Plan -III are same as under General Provisioning budget heads. There 
has been consistent increase in expenditure under these five budget heads in respect of 
all CAPFs during last five years. The details are as under: 
(₹ in Crore) 
Financial 
year 
Expenditure under General 
Provisioning budget heads which is 
other than the expenditure incurred 
under Modernization Plan-II/III 
Expenditure 
incurred under 
Modernization 
Plan-II/III 
Total 
expenditure for 
modernization 
of CAPFs 
2019-20 2991.75 155.28 3147.03 
2018-19 3072.21 137.91 3210.12 
2017-18 2686.42 282.70 2895.64 
2016-17 2201.94 221.24 2357.23 
2015-16 2089.81 90.19 2180.00 
 
 From the above table it is evident that overall exp enditure for modernization of 
CAPFs is consistently increasing during last five years. Further, CAPFs have been 
allocated sufficient funds for procuring all types of equipment under Machinery & 
Equipment (M&E) budget head as per their operational requireme nt. The details of funds 
allocated during last three years under M&E budget head are as under: 
 
Financial years BE (₹ in crore) 
2019-20 749.99 
2018-19 701.88 
2017-18 667.53 
 
 As mentioned earlier, a broad outlook can be had while drawing plans but the 
procurements work depends upon real time security concern and technologies available. 

 
 
32 
 
Thus, it may not be desirable / appropriate to formulate 10, 20 and 30 years plan as 
security situation in the country is very dynamic, whereas rapid changes are necessit ated 
due to fast up -gradation of technology. The deployment pattern of these CAPFs also 
changes very fast. However, the formulation of long term acquisition plans by CAPFs has 
been included in the Vision Document of MHA. Accordingly, CAPFs have been asked to 
prepare three years Procurement Plan from 2020-21 to 2022-23. 
 
 The challenges posed by Cyber threat are also being taken care of. The threats of 
biological chemical and mini nuclear weapons capable of causing limited damage are the 
new areas of securit y concern which need to be given due importance in view of their 
increased possibilities  of  use  in  future. A review of the preparedness of CAPFs to meet 
their challenges will be carried out. This Ministry will explore what more needs to be done 
to supplement the available equipments with CAPFs. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.21 of Chapter I ) 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 11 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that Modernization of Police Forces is a 
continuous process and the Ministry of Home Affairs has been making efforts for providing 
modern Arms & Ammunitions, Machinery & Equipment, Surveillance Equipment, IT 
Equipment, Specialized vehicles, Hospital Equipment. In this regard the Modernization 
Plan-II (2012-17) for CAPFs has been  approved by the Cabinet Committee on Security at 
an estimated cost of ₹11009.19 crore. The Plan aims at providing financial support for 
modernization in the area of Arms & Ammunitions, Clothing & Tentage, Machine & 
Equipment. 
 

 
 
33 
 
 The status of expenditure r eported with regard to the Modernization Plan II, as 
analyzed in the preceding Para point out slow and tardy progress which clearly indicates 
serious problems in the execution of the Plan. Cumbersome and time consuming 
procurement procedures and fast chang es in technology have been cited as the 
challenges in procurements. While noting the detailed procedures adopted and formation 
of sub-Groups under different DGs for probity and public accountability and enhancement 
in the delegated financial powers of DGs of CAPF with effect from 16 October, 2014, the 
Committee note that these steps seem not helped much in increasing the pace of 
procurement as is visible from the low level of expenditure under the Modernization Plan. 
 
 The Committee observe that Central Par a Military Forces personnel have to work 
under constant pressure and difficult conditions to fight insurgency, terrorism, guarding 
borders, maintaining law and order etc. Non -availability of state of the art equipments and 
facilities like winter clothes et c. to CAPF personnel not only put them at disadvantageous 
position against the insurgents and terrorists but also compromise the security of the 
Country. It is, therefore, imperative that they are equipped with latest equipments and 
other facilities which are available to the best forces of the world. The Committee have 
been informed that level of modernization of our forces to effectively equip them to fight 
the menace of terrorism and insurgency is though fairly well equipped is not very well 
equipped compared to USA or UK. The Committee also note that some of Para Military 
Forces are facing problem in respect of supply of equipments and other infrastructure and 
are dependent on army and ordnance factories for the supply. 
 
 The Committee as such strongly s tress to review the tendering and procurement 
processes which as per the Government’s own admission are cumbersome and time 
consuming. The bottlenecks faced in procurement needs to be identified and the 
corrective action taken. Besides, the Ministry in con sultation with Para Military Forces 
should hold negotiations with the ordnance factories and other manufacturers in Public / 
Private Sector to ensure uninterrupted supply of equipments and other infrastructure to 

 
 
34 
 
Central Armed Police Forces. Urgent and imm ediate steps as suggested should be taken 
and the Committee apprised accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The detail of funds provided and expenditure incurred thereon in the Mod Plan-II 
since its inception till 31.03.2018 is as under: 
[₹ in crore]   
Fund Allocation (from 
2013-14 to 2017-18) 
Total Expenditure 
as on 31.03.2018 
% Expenditure 
743.76 701.44 94.31 
 
 Apart from Mod Plan -II, CAPFs procure their operationally required items from 
funds allocated to them in five provisioning hea ds (i.e. Arms & Ammunition, Clothing & 
Tentage, Motor Vehicle, Machinery & Equipment and Information Technology) under 
regular budget heads also for modernization. The detail of funds allocated to CAPFs under 
regular budget heads during three years is as under: 
[₹ in crore]   
Year Total Fund Allocation 
to CAPFs 
Total 
Expenditure 
% 
Expenditure 
2017-18 2612.94 2686.42 102.81 
2016-17 2202.09 2220.40 100.83 
2015-16 2089.81 2077.55 99.41 
 
 Following steps have been taken by this Ministry to remove the bottlenecks in the 
procurement process of CAPFs: 

 
 
35 
 
 Substantial enhancement in the delegated financial powers of  
SDG/ADG/IG/DIG/Commandant in CAPFs for procurement of stores to ensure 
decentralization of power and speedy procurement on 02.01.2018; 
 Delegation of power to  DsG of nodal CAPFs for finalization/approval of Qualitative 
Requirements (QRs)/Trial Directives (TDs) on 02.01.2018; 
 Introducing two tier procurement procedure in place of earlier three tier procurement 
procedure on 02.01.2018; 
 SDG/ADG to head Tender Purc hase Committee (TPC) instead of  DsG, CAPFs on 
02.01.2018; 
 Trial power of DsG, CAPFs was enhanced from ₹1 Cr to ₹2 Cr on 02.01.2018 to 
enable CAPFs to trial more and more technology available globally and then acquire 
them as per their operational requirement; 
 Abolition of Procurement Advisory Committee (PAC) on 29.09.2017; 
 Delegation of financial powers from Home Secretary to Joint Secretary for procurement 
of stores within MHA on 08.12.2017. 
 To ensure uninterrupted supply of arms & equipment to CAPFs, re conciliation 
meetings are held with Ordnance Factory Board quarterly. Further, CAPFs are procuring 
equipment/stores from PSUs/ private suppliers through GeM/ CPP Portal. 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 18 
 The Committee further recommend that each CAPF as per their requirement of 
operational area must introduce a basic course of foreign language of the adjoining 
Country and the vernacular language of the State wherein the personnel of that respective 
CAPF are to be deployed as per the mandate. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry agrees with the recommendation that CAPF, as per their operational 
requirement, may introduce basic course in foreign language / regional languages of the 
country / State where they are deployed as per the mandate. 

 
 
36 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 21 
 The Committee note that there is an extreme level of frustration among the CAPFs 
due to acute stagnation in promotions and also lack of cadre review. The promotional 
aspects in all cadres of each CAPF are not the same while some cadres a re getting faster 
promotion, promotion of few cadres are considerably getting delayed. Observing high level 
of frustration among BSF, Delhi High Court vide their Judgment dated 22.04.2015 directed 
that cadre review exercise of Group 'A' officers of BSF sho uld be completed within a 
period of six months. As a result 74 additional posts in Group 'A' were created by DoPT. 
The Committee have been informed that cadre review proposals of Group 'B' & 'C' cadres 
as received from BSF on 13.05.2016 is under examinatio n in MHA. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the latest position in this regard. The Committee also desire that 
cadre review of all the CAPFs should be carried out within a definite timeline. Besides 
there should be a structured mechanism to have c adre review regularly after a definite 
period so as to ensure better promotional prospects and boost the morale of Jawans and 
Officers of CAPFs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Cadre Reviews in most of the Forces had not been taken place for a 
considerable l ength of time although, as mandated in DOP&T’s instructions, this should 
take place every 5 years. However, the exercise has now been started in CAPFs and it is 
hoped that now Cadre Review will take place in every 5 years. 
 
 The Status of cadre review in CAPFs is as under:  
 
Cadre Present Status 
CRPF 
Group ‘A’ officers (Executive). Finalized and order issued on 09.07.2016 
Group ‘A’, ‘B’ & ‘C’ Ministerial  Finalized and order issued on 29.09.2016 

 
 
37 
 
Cadre Present Status 
Group ‘A’, ‘B’ & ‘C’ Stenographer  Finalized and order issued on 11.01.2017 
Group ‘A’, ‘B’ & ‘C’ of Para -
medical  
Under consideration. 
 
Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ Executive (GD)  
Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ of Armourer 
Cadre 
Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ of Tailor  
Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ of Motor 
Transport  
Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ of Motor 
Mechanic/ Fitter  
Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ of Signal 
BSF 
Group-‘A’ Executive  Finalized and order issued on 21.09.2016 
Ministerial  Finalized and order issued on 20.02.2017 
Communication  Finalized and order issued on 29.11.2017 
Stenographic  Under consideration. 
SSB 
Group ‘A’ General Duty  Finalized and order issued on 02.01.2018 
Non-Combatised  Finalized and order issued on 18.10.2017 
Group ‘B’&‘C’ GD  
Under consideration Tradesmen 
CISF 
Group ‘A’  Finalized and order issued on 30.01.2018 
Group ‘B’ & ‘C’  Finalized and order issued on 05.02.2018 
ITBP 
Group ‘A’ GD and Non-GD Group 
‘B’ & ‘C’ and Group ‘C’ 
Under consideration 

 
 
38 
 
Cadre Present Status 
Tradesmen. 
 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 22 
 The Committee are concerned to note that a number of CAPFs personnel are 
committing suicide. What is worrying is the fact that the number of personnel who have 
committed suicide in each of CAPFs surpasses the number of personnel except Assam 
Rifles. In ITBP, SSB and CISFs the number of suicide is many times of the number of 
personnel killed in action. 
 The Committee find that a number of initiatives are being taken to improve the 
physical and mental health and for stress management of the CAPF personnel especially 
those deployed on international border/counter insurgency operations etc. which inc lude 
transparent policy pertaining to transfer and leave, a regular interaction of officers with 
troops, ensuring adequate rest and relief, facility of retention of Government 
accommodation, adoption of Yoga as main stream in basic training etc. While the stated 
initiatives are in the right direction, the same seems inadequate while looking at the 
number of suicide data as stated above. Not only that it has come out during the 
deliberations that excessive deployment of CAPFs in States leads to a situation w hereby 
the personnel are not getting adequate recuperation/rest time besides curtailing the 
training, which alongwith increasing the professional competence also provides an 
opportunity to the personnel to be away from the field duty to stay with the peer group 
thereby relaxing for a short period thereby relaxing the personnel. Sometimes the 
approach of supervisory officers, though unintentional also aggravates the stress 
particularly when leave to visit their families or for other urgent reasons is not san ctioned 
and provoke the aggrieved soldier to take extreme step to commit suicide. The aforesaid 
scenario indicates a grave situation which needs urgent and immediate attention. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to take all possible measures incl uding 
psychological counselling on a permanent basis, by taking the help of professionals. The 
workshops/programmes on stress management should regularly be undertaken for the 
officers/personnel. Yoga and meditation can be made part of the daily exercise o f CAPFs 

 
 
39 
 
personnel. In this connection, the Committee may like to refer to ancient Indian literature, 
whereby the need for giving special attention and taking care the needs of the forces 
deployed at far away places has been emphasized. The Committee would further like to 
emphasize for the need of having some sort of accommodation, it may be a base camp, 
nearby the deployment of the respective force, to enable the personnel to meet their family 
members which would go a long way in handling stress in forces. All the desired initiatives 
should be undertaken and the Committee apprised, accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The research project on “Comparative Analysis of Attrition and Suicide Cases in 
CAPFs and Corrective Measures” was awarded to Indian Institute of Public Administration, 
New Delhi. The Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) has signed an 
MoU with the IIPA on 01.05.2020. BPR&D has also received Terms of Acceptance on 
12.6.2020. The project will commence with release of the first insta lment to the IIPA and 
the Project Coordinator, soon.  
 
 The Objective of the research study is as under: 
a) To empirically study the rat e of suicide and attrition among the personnel in the 
various CAPFs in the last five years.  
b) To study the reasons and patt erns of suicide and attrition among the personnel in 
the various CAPFs in the last five years. This will be done by engaging the family 
members, superiors, subordinates and colleagues.  
c) To review the institutional culture and welfare measures, interactiona l opportunities, 
provisions in CAPFs and assess linkages, if any, between them and the rates of 
attrition and suicide.  
d) To prepare, at least, two case studies of suicide cases from each of the CAPFs for 
deeper understanding of the reasons for suicide. 
e) To study the rate and reasons of attrition. For this purpose individuals who have left 
the CAPFs will also be interviewed.  

 
 
40 
 
f) To study the best practices followed internationally with regards to profiling of 
mental health of employees in police and other para -military organizations and 
understand the scope and desirability of their implementation in the Indian context. 
g) To provide policy recommendations and actionable suggestions for corrective 
measures to decrease the rates of suicide and attrition in CAPFs.  
 
 Stress Counsellors are hired for Yoga / Stress management programmes, 
whenever required. Government has also sanctioned some posts of Education & Stress 
Counsellors (ESC). Besides, stress management programmes are also organized in the 
Forces from time to time. 
 
 The following steps have been taken by the Government to reduce the number of 
suicides by CAPF personnel including easing of job -related stress and improving the 
working conditions and mental health of the police personnel: 
 
i) Yoga and meditation have been made part of training and daily physical exercise in 
CAPFs.  
ii) Yoga Training has been included as the ‘desired criteria’ for deployment of CAPFs 
personnel on UN/India Missions abroad. 
iii) 1059 personnel have undergone four -month Yoga training from Morarji Desai 
National Institute of Yoga (MDNIY). Apart from this, 1.75 lakh personnel have 
undergone one-month Yoga training. 
iv) Organizing talks by doctors and other specialists to address their  personal and 
psychological concerns; 
v) Better medical facilities for tr oops and their families including introduction of 
Composite Hospitals with specialized facilities; 
vi) Implementation of a transparent, rational and fair leave policy; 
vii) Liberal grant of leave to the force personnel to attend to their urgent domestic 
problems/issues/needs 
viii) Revamping of grievances redressal machinery; 
ix) Regulating duty hours to ensure adequate rest and relief; 

 
 
41 
 
x) Improving living conditions through provision of basic amenities/ facilities for troops 
and their families; 
xi) Motivating the forces through increased risk, hardship and other allowances; 
xii) Discontinuation of Suraksha Sahayaks; 
xiii) Regular interaction, both formal and informal, among Commanders, officers and 
troops to find out an address their problems from time to time; 
xiv) Recreational and sports facilities and provision of team games and sports etc; 
xv) Providing welfare measures like Central Police Canteen facility to the troops and 
their families, scholarships to their wards etc. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.31 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 23 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Home Affairs issued an advisory to all 
CAPFs in 2011 to increase the representation of women in CAPFs upto 5% of the total 
strength of each CAPF. The Committee note that except CISF none of th e CAPF has met 
the limit prescribed. The average percentage of women in all six CAPF is just 2.29% which 
is far below then the prescribed strength of women i.e. 5%. The Committee also note that 
considering the increased demand of women police in tackling l aw and order situation and 
also to raise the level of representation of women, directions have been issued to reserve 
33% posts at constable level for being filled up by women in CRPF & CISF to begin with 
and 14-15% at constable level in BSF, SSB & ITBP. 
 
 Certain forces viz. ITBP, Assam Rifles and BSF have stated that due to their 
extreme harsh working conditions they are facing difficulties for induction and deployment 
of women. The Committee don't agree with the contention of the ITBP, Assam Rifles & 
BSF and feel that they have not taken enough steps to attract and recruit the women 
officers. 

 
 
42 
 
 The Committee desire that the Government should explore all possibilities to attract 
women in CAPFs by providing better incentives, convenient posting etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The strength of women in CAPFs & Assam Rifles as on 31.3.2020 is as under: 
 
Force Sanctioned 
Strength 
Posted 
strength 
Strength of 
Women 
Percentage of 
women against 
posted strength 
CISF 163214 140963 8615 6.11% 
ITBP 88437 83033 2119 2.55% 
CRPF 324340 298167 8193 2.75% 
SSB 97244 78951 2057 2.60% 
ARs 65143 59156 895 1.51% 
BSF 265173 237334 5249 2.21% 
Total 1003551 897604 27128 3.02% 
 
  
 Steps taken to encourage women to join CAPF and to improve the facilities for 
women personnel in CAPFs are as under: 
 
a. All female candidates have been exempted from payment of application fee. 
b. There are relaxations in Physical Standard Test (PST) and Physical Efficiency Test 
(PET) for all female candidates for recruitment in CAPFs in comparison to Male 
candidates. 
c. Crèches and Day Care Centres have been provided by the    CAPFs to women 
employees. A new head of Account for crèche facilities in CAPFs under Grant No. 54 - 
Police  for the year 2011 -12  has also been opened in CAPFs, vide MHA letter No. 
9/8/2011-Bdt-I dated 20.01.2012. 
d. Separate accommodation for women personnel with basic amenities, including 
separate toilets, has been provided.  

 
 
43 
 
e. Vehicles fitted with mobile toilets for women personnel during movement from one 
place to another and during picketing duties. 
f. Facilities already available under the Central Government like Maternity Leave, Child 
Care Leave, are also applicable to CAPFs women personnel. 
g. Medical facilities with special care to the pregnant women. Lady Doctors are available 
to provide medical coverage. 
h. One female member is detailed as member of the board for making recruitment of 
women personnel. 
i. Committees have been constituted at all levels to check sexual harassment and to 
expeditiously deal with the complaints of women personnel.  All C APFs have included 
the Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) in the complaint committees to enquire into 
complaints of sexual harassment. 
j. Women personnel are given equal opportunity in their career progression i.e. 
promotion/seniority as per the RRs rules. 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 24 
 Houses for CAPFs are constructed under the scheme Residential building (Plan) 
through CPWD and other Public Sector Undertakings/Public Work Organisations. The 
Committee note that almost same level of expenditure against a llocations has been 
incurred during the last three years i.e. 2013 -16, but physical achievements do not 
commensurate to the expenditure met. They are apprised that only 98,688 houses are 
available against the authorized 2,63,605 houses, which is approximat ely 37.42% and far 
below the satisfactory level of 50%. During the 12th Five Year Plan, as against the target 
of 24,206 houses, only 11884 houses have been constructed till 31.03.2016 which again 
shows that the requisite efficiency is missing in the constr uction area. The Committee 
were further informed that the basic constraints in housing have been cumbersome 
process of acquisition of land due to existing legal provisions. The Committee desire that 
MHA, CAPFs should hold consultations with various State G overnments and impress 

 
 
44 
 
upon them, the imperative need of allocation of land for the purpose of constructio n of 
Houses for CAPF personnel. 
Reply of the Government 
 Against authorization of 2,68,341 houses in CAPFs, the availability is 1,17,481 (as 
on 1.1.2020). There is a shortfall of 1,50,860 dwelling units. Further, 21,743 houses are 
under construction. With the completion of these houses, the housing satisfaction level will 
increase to 51.88% of authorisation as against the present satisfaction level of 43.78%. 
 
 Land for CAPFs is acquired through State Governments. Sanctions for acquisition 
land are issued on need basis as and when proposals are received from CAPFs. 
Whenever there is delay on the part of the State Government in acquisition of land, which 
is mainly due to litigation cases, the matter is taken up by MHA with State Governments at 
appropriate level. 
 The recommendations of the Estimates Committee have been shared with the 
State Governments/UTs, vide MHA’s letter No.II-27012/18/2018-PF.I (CF-3422145) dated 
30.05.2018. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.35 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 25 
 The Committee express their serious concern over the sluggish progress in the 
construction of houses/accommodation to CAPFs pers onnel and are convinced that 
inadequate availability of accommodation facilities to the CAPF personnel further 
contributes  to their dissatisfaction and stress causing frustration which affects their overall 
working. The Committee think that already hard d eployment conditions alienate the CAPF 
personnel and non -availability of accommodation, at least for their families to ensure 
stability of education of their children, may further add to their agony and demoralize them. 
The Committee, therefore, having und erscored the importance of availability of adequate 

 
 
45 
 
accommodation facilities strongly recommend that the Ministry must evolve a mechanism 
to expedite the completion of houses already under construction stage. They also 
recommend that to construct additiona l houses, the matter should be taken up with the 
Ministry of Defence to get land from their Cantonments. The Committee may also be 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 CAPFs have their own approved Key Location Plans (KLP) w ith authorized land 
norms for each establishment. Construction of houses in Army Cantonments, other than 
the approved KLPs, may disturb their existing set up. However, whenever any Defence 
land is identified by the CAPFs, MHA takes up the matter with Minis try of Defence for 
transfer of such land to CAPFs. Such has been done in case of ITBP and NSG recently.  
 
 Land for CAPFs for developing authorized infrastructure, including residential 
quarters, is acquired through State Governments. The shortfall in resi dential 
accommodation is mainly attributable to shortfall in budget allocation. Although the CAPF 
battalions are sanctioned in one go, their raising is phased over the subsequent years with 
provision of meeting the expenditure out of the sanctioned budget grant of the respective 
financial year. The infrastructure, including residential quarters, is supposed to be 
developed as per the authorised norms, as and where the Battalions are raised. This could 
not happen mainly due to shortfall in budget allocation.  
 
 The budget allocated in a financial year fell short of the requirement for construction 
of infrastructure schemes. The data in the last 4 years in respect of CAPFs is given below, 
as an example that the budget allocation fell short of the demand projected. 
[₹ in crore]  
Year Projection by MHA Allocation Shortfall 
2015-16 4377.63 2594.18  1783.45 
2016-17 4250.39 2591.35 1659.04 
2017-18 6001.77 3510.13 2491.64 
2018-19 7397.64 3555.86 3841.78 

 
 
46 
 
Total 22027.43 12251.52 9775.91 
 
 Against authorization of 2,68,341 houses in CAPFs, the availability is 1,17,481 (as 
on 1.1.2020). There is a shortfall of 1,50,860 dwelling units. Further, 21,743 houses are 
under construction. With the completion of these houses, the ho using satisfaction level will 
increase to 51.88% of authorisation as against the present satisfaction level of 43.78%. 
 To make the Forces more self -sufficient, MHA have authorized the Engineering 
Wings of CAPFs to execute Major Works upto ₹15.00 crore and Minor Works upto ₹1.00 
crore and delegated powers for Technical Sanction to the Technical Officers of 
Engineering Wings, as per CPWD Manual. 
 
 
Observation / Recommendation – 26 
The Committee note with concern that there was an adverse report in social media 
in the recent past about the poor quality of food in BSF. During interaction with the 
representatives of MHA and Par a Military Forces, the Committee did not get the 
satisfactory response with regard to quality, contents/ingredients of food served to 
Jawans. The Committee are of the considered view that providing good quality food to 
CAPFs personnel is not only necessary  to keep them healthy and fit but also for boosting 
their morale. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a mechanism be put in place for 
testing food items supplied to CAPFs at the source of supply itself, whereby it is tested 
and certified in respect of  nutritional value, hygiene and labeled as `fit for consumption’. In 
this connection, CAPFs may take the help of _Ordnance Factories/DRDO. Besides 
packed food may be supplied to forces deployed at hilly and difficult terrains, where it is 
not possible/difficult to cook the food. 
 
 The Committee note that various allowances being paid to CAPF personnel which 
include rationing allowance, are taxable. The Committee are of the view that the 
allowances are paid for meeting the functional requirement of these for ces and hence 

 
 
47 
 
should not be taxable. The concerns of the Committee in this regard should be 
communicated to the concerned Ministry/Department. Besides, the Committee also 
recommend that CAPFs personnel when deployed on border duty should be provided the 
facilities like clothes, food, at par with the Defence Services personnel. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per information received from Forces, mechanism to check quality of food being 
served to jawans is in place. CAPFs, while deployed under Ops Control of A rmy, procure 
ration as per Defence food specification/Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI). Also some Forces like Assam Rifles is reported to have engaged nutritionist to 
prepare a standard menu based on caloric requirements of troops. In F orces, Unit Medical 
Officer/Duty Officer/Senior Officers check food for its nutritious value and quality during 
their visits. Monthly mess meeting is being carried out to look into grievances and further 
improvements in the quality of food. In addition, th is Ministry has also advised the Forces 
that the senior officers may also partake the food prepared for Jawans and endorse a note 
on the quality/quantity of food in Inspection Register. 
 
 The forces have also been advised to review their internal grievance s redressed 
system and take proactive measures to redress the grievances. MHA have launched a 
Mobile Application for redressal of the grievances of CAPFs personnel. 
 
 MHA, vide letter dated 31.07.2017, have requested Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue) to exempt Ration Money Allowance from the purview of Income 
Tax, as a welfare measure for CAPF personnel. Decision is awaited. 
 
 As recommended by the 7th CPC, CAPFs personnel are now entitled for Uniform 
Allowance and Risk & Hardship Allowance at par  with Defence personnel. Further, the 
Ration Money Allowance (RMA) given to CAPFs is at the rate of RMA granted to Defence 
personnel. 

 
 
48 
 
 
Observation / Recommendation – 27 
The Committee note that in addition to the medical facilities available to Central 
Government employees, there are 39 composite hospitals for providing specialty services 
to the CAPFs personnel and their family members. The Committee have been apprised 
that the Government has allowed appointment of doctors on contractual basis to meet the 
demand of the CAPFs. The Committee desire that vacancies of doctors in all CAPFs 
should be filled up in a time bound period so as to ensure that CAPF Personnel are 
provided best health care facilities. 
Reply of the Government 
62 Specialist Medical Officers, 229 Medical Officers and 01 Dental Surgeon were 
selected through Medical Officers Selection Board (MOSB) -2016. Thereafter, MOSB-2018 
was conducted through ITBP (Nodal Force). 02 Super Specialist Medical Officers, 61 
Specialist Medical Officers and 390 Medi cal Officers have been selected through MOSB -
2018 and offer of appointment has been issued.. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.38 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 28 
 The Committee also note that a scheme of Central Armed Poli ce Force Institute of 
Medical Sciences (CAPFIMS) with an outlay of Rs.1300 crore has been sanctioned to 
provide better medical facilities to CAPFs personnel through construction of super 
specialty hospital. The work of construction of CAPFIMS has been entr usted to CPWD. 
The Committee desire that progress of construction of work should be periodically 
monitored so as to ensure its completion and operation as per target thereby benefitting 
approximately 9 lakh CAPFs personnel. 

 
 
49 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The co nstruction work of CAPFIMS was started by CPWD in July 2017.  The 
progress is being monitored regularly at appropriate level.  The present physical progress 
is about 60%.  Outbreak of COVID -19 pandemic and the resultant lockdown in the country 
have adversely impacted the progress of work. 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 30 
 India has a Coast Line of 7516.6 km bordering the main land and the island with the 
bay of Bengal in the East, the Indian Ocean on the South and the Arabian Sea on the 
West. There are ni ne States vis. Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil 
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha & West Bengal and four Union territories viz. Daman & 
Diu, Lakshadweep, Puducherry & Andaman & Nicobar Islands situated on the Coast. 
Coastal area of the Country are safeguarded by the Police forces of the respective coastal 
states/UTs which have jurisdiction of up to 12 Nautical miles (NMs) from the coast and by 
the Indian Coast Guard and the Indian Navy who have jurisdiction over the entire maritime 
zone, upto 200 NMs, including the 12 NMs of territorial water. Thus there is a three -tier 
security for the coastal states of the country. Ministry of Home Affairs is implementing a 
comprehensive and integrated Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) to strengthen security 
infrastructure of police of coastal states/UTs. Presently phase II of CSS is under 
implementation since 01.04.2011. Under CSS Phase II which is targeted to be completed 
by 31.03.2020, coastal States/UTs are to be provided with 131 Coastal Police Stations 
(CPS), 60 jetties, 10 marine operation centres, 150 boats, 75 special category of 
boats/RIDs, 131 four wheelers, 127 two wheelers and 242 motorcycles. The Committee 
note that out of these 109 CPS have been operationalized, 4 marine operation centre, 127 
four wh eelers and 234 motorcycles have been procured. Ministry of Home Affairs has 
initiated actions for procurement of 225 numbers of boats which is expected to take 3½ 
years. The Committee desire that progress of work pertaining to 
operationalization/construction of remaining 22 CPS, 37 jetties should be closely 
monitored so as to ensure their completion as per target. Further, procurement of 225 

 
 
50 
 
boats for which action has already been initiated, should also be made within a stipulated 
time frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Department of Border Management, Ministry of Home Affairs is implementing 
Coastal Security Schemes (CSS) in phase with the objective of strengthening 
infrastructure of Coastal Police Force for patrolling and surveillance of coastal areas, 
particularly shallow areas close to the coast. 
 
 The CSS (Phase -I) was implemented from 2005 -06 with an outlay of ₹646 crore 
over a period of 6 years. Under the Scheme, coastal States / UTs were provided with 73 
Coastal Police Stations (CPS), 97 check posts, 58 outposts, 30 barracks, 204 interceptor 
boats, 153 jeeps, 312 motor cycles and 10 Rigid Inflatable Boats (RIBs). The 
implementation of Scheme was completed on 31.03.2011. 
 
 The CSS (Phase-II) has been formulated in the context of the fast changing coastal 
security scenario subsequent to the Mumbai incidents on 26 November and followed by a 
vulnerability / gap analysis carried out by coastal States and UTs which projected 
additional requirements for strengthening the coastal security infrastructure. The CSS 
(Phase-II) approved the Cabinet Committee o n Security (CCS) for implementation w. e. f. 
01.04.2011 to 31.03.2016 with an outlay of ₹1579.91 crore which has been further granted 
extension up to 30.03.2020 with the approval of the CCS. Under the Phase -II, the coastal 
States / UTs have been sanctioned  with 131 CPS, 60 jetties, 10 Marine Operation 
Centres, 150 boats (12 Tons), 75 special category of boats / RIBs, 131 four wheelers and 
242 motorcycles. 
 
 The funds for all Coastal Police Stations (CPS), Jetties, MOCs 2 wheelers and 4 
wheelers have been sa nctioned to the Coastal States/UTs. Against this allocation 131 
CPS have been operationalized, 38 jetties have been constructed/ upgraded, 10 MOCs 
are operational and all the sanctioned 131 four wheelers and 242 two wheelers have been 
procured. 

 
 
51 
 
 It has been decided with the approval of the competent authority, that presently, the 
procurement of 225 boats may not be pursued with, keeping in view the inadequate 
utilization and poor maintenance of 204 boats supplied under the Phase -I of the Scheme 
by the Coast al States/UTs, primarily due to acute shortage of technical manpower and 
crew being employed by the Coastal States/Union Territories. 
 The Coastal Security Scheme Phase II has ended on 31.03.2020 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.42 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 31 
 The Committee note that Government of India has approved the setting up of 
National Marine Police Training Institute (MPTI) to be located at Pindara Village, District 
Devbhoomi, Dwarka in the State of Gujarat. Th e Committee would like to be apprised of 
the timeline fixed for setting up of the institute and latest progress made so far in the 
setting up of MPTI. The Committee would also like to recommend exploring the feasibility 
of setting up of National Marine Pol ice Training Institute in East/South East Coa st at the 
appropriate location. 
Reply of the Government 
 Marine Police Training Institute (MPTI) has been renamed as National Academy of 
Coastal Policing (NACP). NACP is being set up in District Dev Bhoomi Dwarka, Gujarat for 
which land has been allocated by the Government of Gujarat. In the interim, a temporary 
campus of the NACP is being operationalized at Okhla, Gujarat. 
 
 Setting up of regional campuses of the Academy will be taken up once the NACP is 
established. 
 
. 

 
 
52 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 33 
The Committee observe that Article 51A of the Constitution of India provides for 
fundamental duties for the citizens. The Fundamental Duties inter -alia enjoin upon the 
citizens to uphold and protect the sovereignt y, unity and integrity of India, defend the 
Country and render national services when called upon to do so, promote harmony and 
the spirit of common brotherhood and safeguard public property and abjure violence. 
However, there is a growing tendency of inse nsitivity amongst citizens towards nation and 
national causes. The Committee feel that adequate publicity of the above article is not 
being accorded. Although maintaining the safety and security of the Country is the prime 
responsibility of armed forces/CA PF, nevertheless the committee feel that there is an 
urgent need to sensitize every citizen of the Country about his role and responsibility 
towards the safety and security of the Country in the light of aforesaid Fundamental Duties 
for which the Governmen t and security forces should devise a system for sensitizing 
citizen at least in their area. The Committee also desire that in the first instance, emphasis 
should be given to the citizen residing in disturbed areas, North Eastern Borders and 
coastal areas of the Country. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry in its reply has stated that Security forces undertake community 
interaction programmes for the border population and fishermen to create awareness 
about security issues and to promote nationalistic feel ings. The community interaction 
programmes sensitize the border population on the prevailing security situation and 
motivate / educate them about the fundamental duties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
53 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 2 
 
 As per Constitutional provisions 'Policing' and 'Public Order' fall under the State List, 
whereas the Union Government is mandated to protect the State against external 
aggression and internal disturbance under Article 355 of the Constitution. As stated above, 
States are now -a-days heavily dependent on Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) for 
maintaining Law and Order and sending frequent requisition to the Union Government for 
deployment of CAPFs even for day to day law and order issues. 
 
 The Committee note that even though under Article 355 of the Constitution, Union 
Government has been mandated to protect every State against external aggression and 
internal disturbance, however th ere is no specific entry in this regard in the Union List. As 
a result, the issue of internal security is being interpreted differently by Centre and State 
Governments. While Centre consider that maintenance of law and order including internal 
Security is primarily the duty of State Government and the Union is mandated to 
supplement the efforts of States and assist in controlling the situation in internal 
disturbance and external aggression, States feel that it is the duty of Centre to protect 
them in the e vent of internal disturbance as well, as stipulated under Article 355. The 
Committee are of the view that due to lack of clarity State Governments themselves are 
not doing enough to contain internal disturbances in the States and they are heavily 
dependent on Central Government by frequently asking for deployment of Central Armed 
Police Forces. 

 
 
54 
 
 
 The Committee, therefore, are of the view that there is a need for clarity about the 
mandate of the Union and State Governments, indicating the kind of situation a nd state of 
affairs under which the Union Government would spare CAPFs to help the States. In this 
regard, at the first instance the consultations with the States should be undertaken to 
arrive at a broad consensus. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following Constitutional provisions affect the deployment of CAPFs in the State: 
 
I. Article 355 - Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression 
and internal disturbance : It shall be duty of the Union to protect every State 
against external aggression and internal disturbance and to ensure that the 
government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of this 
Constitution. 
 
II. Article 365 - Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions 
given by the Union : Where any State has failed to comply with or to give effect to 
any directions given in the exercise of the executive power of the Union under any 
directions given in the exercise of the executive power of the Union under any of 
the provisions of this Constitution, it sh all be lawful for the President to hold that a 
situation has arisen in which the government of the State cannot be carried on in 
accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. 
 
III. Article 356 (1) - Provision in case of failure of constitution machinery in 
States: If the President, on receipt of report from the Governor of the State or 
otherwise, is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the government of the 
State cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, 
the President may proclaim: 

 
 
55 
 
a) Assume to himself all or any of the functions of the Government of the State 
and all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Governor or 
anybody or authority in the State other than the Legislature of the State; 
b) Declare that the powers of the Legislature of the State shall be exercisable 
by or under the authority of Parliament; 
c) Make such incidental and consequential provisions as appear to the 
President to be necessary or desirable for giving effect to the objects of the 
Proclamation, including provisions for suspending in whole or in part the 
operation of any provisions of this constitution relating to anybody or 
authority in the State: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall authorize the President to assume to 
himself any of the powers vested in or exercisable by a High Court, or to suspend in 
whole or in part the operation of any provision of this Constitution relating to High 
Courts. 
 
IV. Article 256 - Obligation of State and the Union : The executive power of every 
State shall be so exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws made by 
Parliament and any existing laws which apply in that State, and the executive power 
of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to s State as may appear 
to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose. 
 
V. Article 257 (A) - Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other 
forces of Union : The Government of India may deploy any armed force of the 
Union or any other force subject to the control of the Union  for dealing with any 
grave situation of law and order in any State. 
 
VI. Article 258 (A) - Power of the State to entrust function to the Union : 
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Governor of a State may, with the 
consent of the Government of India, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to 
that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any matter to which the 
executive power of the State extends. 
 

 
 
56 
 
 Ministry of Home Affairs, vide OM No. III -11039/31/2017-G/P-II dated 18.10. 2017 
(Annexure-I) had issued detailed policy guidelines for requisition and deployment of 
CAPFs by the State Governments / UTs, which inter -alia, states that CAPFs cannot 
substitute the State Police Forces, and deployment of CAPFs is inherently related to 
emergent / unforeseen crises like situation which need immediate mobilisation for Forces 
to support the States / UTs for maintaining law and order. The State Governments were 
advised to constitute a local committee under the chairmanship of ADG (Law & Orde r) of 
the State where the representatives of local SIB and representatives of the CAPFs at the 
level of DIG / Commandant may be co -opted. The said Committee may be entrusted with 
the job of examining and scrutinising the requirements of CAPFs having regard  to various 
factors such as prevailing internal security situation, intelligence inputs, availability of India 
Reserve Battalions (IRBs), etc. except for unforeseen development which cannot be 
anticipated. All requests for deployment of CAPFs may invariabl y be accompanied by the 
assessment of the Committee. 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 3 
 
 The Committee note that presence of Left Wing Extremists in naxal affected States 
like Chhattisgarh, Odissa, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Jharkhand and Telangana, militancy in North Eastern States and terrorism sponsored from 
across the border by terrorist outfits like Lashker -e-Toiba (Let), Jaish -e-Mohamad, (JeM), 
Hizbul-Mujahideen (HM), Indian Mujahideen (IM) etc. ISIS/ISIL phenomenon and the 
youth joining ISIS are posing great threats and putting tough challenges before the 
Security forces requiring them to walk extra miles to diffuse their nasty designs. 
 
 The Government has taken a series of measures to deal with the menace of 
terrorism which include augmenting the strength of CAPFs, strengthening of Multi Agency 
Centre, establishment of NSG hubs, strengthening the coastal security, constitution of 
National Investigation Agency, establishment of National Intelligence Grid, raising the 

 
 
57 
 
issue of Pakistan support to various terror outfits in many fora. Though the number of 
terrorist incidents and infiltration attempts in J&K decreased to some extent during 2015, 
the Committee are concerned to note drastic increase in terrorists violence incidents a nd 
infiltration attempts in the State of J&K, which increased to 322 and 364 respectively 
during the year 2016 as compared to 208 and 121 respectively in the year 2015. 
 
 With regard to Left Wing Extremism, though there has been decline in violence in 
LWE affected areas due to greater presence of security forces and better monitoring of 
developmental schemes in affected areas, it is disturbing to note that LWE militants are 
targeting new States and trying to carve out the base on the junction of Karnataka, Kerala 
and Tamil Nadu. In respect of security situation in North Eastern States, the Committee 
are relieved to note that the situation improved substantially in 2016 and the year 
witnessed lowest number of insurgency incidents since 1997. 
 
 As per the inpu ts provided by the Ministry of Home Affairs the overall internal 
security situation in the Country is firmly under control due to the systematic and 
unrelenting efforts of the Central and State Governments. While appreciating the 
contribution of CAPFs in h andling security challenges, the Committee would like to 
emphasize for further intensifying the efforts in this regard. Not only that given the access 
to modern arms and ammunitions involving complex technology with the terrorists and 
militants, the situat ion has to be brought under control in close coordination with all 
stakeholders with matching technology and equipment. The Committee are of the firm 
view that there is an imperative need to improve the intelligence gathering mechanism, 
which should be str engthened and modernized within the shortest possible timeframe. 
Intelligence Bureau and allied agencies involved in intelligence gathering should be given 
autonomy in recruitment of its personnel so that the persons with right aptitude are 
recruited and deployed besides having an effective system for training of these officials in 
their specific domain. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to take urgent and 
immediate steps so as develop an efficient and effective intelligence gathering mechanism 
with complete synchronization between intelligence gathering agencies and operational 

 
 
58 
 
forces with zero -tolerance in delay of sharing information and executing the operation by 
the concerned stakeholders. Besides a strategy need to be evolved to involve Stat e 
Police, Intelligence Agencies both Central and States, Central Armed Police forces and 
their internal intelligence units and if need be Defence Forces to form an institutionalized 
mechanism to face the threats in an integrated approach/ strategy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Multi-Agency Centre (MAC) was established in IB in pursuance of the 
recommendations of Group of Ministers in 2001. It was further revitalized by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in 2008, after 26/11 Mumbai Terror Attack. It is a well -established Inter -
Agency Intelligence Dissemination Platform for counter terrorism related threats / 
intelligence inputs. MAC has 24 Member Agencies at the Headquarter level in New Delhi, 
which includes Intelligence Agencies, Law Enforcement Agencies, Central Arm ed Police 
Forces and the Defence Forces. There are number of State Multi -Agency Centres 
(SMACs) at State level, which work in smooth coordination with State Intelligence and Law 
Enforcement Agencies. A number of inputs are shared on MAC platform everyday w ith all 
concerned Agencies. There is also a 24x7 operational MAC Control Room. 
 
 MAC has been organizing various types of meetings, viz., Daily Nodal Officers 
Meetings, Focus Group Meetings, Meeting on Jammu & Kashmir, discussions on IIG 
camps in Myanmar and Bangladesh, as well as meetings on LWE and Militancy in Punjab. 
In addition, numbers of SMAC meetings are also organized at SMAC level. The aim of 
these meetings is to identify the significance of the available inputs, to identify the gravity 
of threat and to suggest various options or response. 
 
 The State Governments are advised from time to time to direct the State Security 
Agencies to share inputs on MAC / SMAC platform on real time basis and initiate 
immediate action on the intelligence inputs received from MAC / SMAC platform. 
 Various exemptions have also been granted to IB for facilitating in recruiting the 
right persons in the Bureau which are as under: 

 
 
59 
 
a. Consultation with UPSC for Group B posts (except the posts of Section Officer); 
b. Group C executive posts from the purview of Staff Selection Commission (SSC); 
c. Recruitment of Non-IPS personnel on deputation basis to all Group ‘A’ and Group 
‘B’ posts up to the rank of Joint Director; 
d. Clauses of the deemed abolition as enshrined in Ministry of Finance OM dated 
03.05.1993; 
e. Discontinuation of interview for 5 Group ‘C’ posts (Assistant Central Intelligence 
Officer-II / Executive, Assistant Central Intelligence Officer -II / Tech, Junior 
Intelligence Officer-II / Tech, Security Assistant / Executive and Secu rity Assistant 
/ Motor Transport. 
 Further, DIB has been delegated full powers to transfer location of posts up to 
Junior Time Scale (₹8,000-13,500/-) and for a period for 1 year up to the level of Additional 
Director in IB. The measures helped immensely t o clampdown upon the subversive 
elements and diffuse their efforts within the country and abroad without administrative 
paper work and delays in the consultation process. 
 In order to facilitate training of IB personnel in various domains of intelligence, 4 
Regional Training Centres (RTSc) (Trivandrum & Kolkata in 2008 and Dwarka, New Delhi 
and Jodhpur in 2011) have also been sanctioned in IB. 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 4 
 
 On the issue of new States coming in the grip of LWE violence, the Committee fi nd 
it a disturbing situation and would like the Government to take all desired initiatives on an 
urgent basis in close coordination and consultations with State Governments, CAPFs, 
intelligence agencies etc. Further the measures taken by Central Government  to 
supplement efforts of State Governments which interalia include security related 
interventions, development measures, ensuring rights and entitlement of local 
communities, special projects to improve connectivity of roads and rails, improvement of 
education and infrastructure, financial inclusion through Post Offices, Banks, distribution of 
title deeds to Tribals / traditional forest dwellers under the Forest Rights Act, 2006 etc. 

 
 
60 
 
should be taken up and implemented in right earnest so as to motivate the  LWE cadres to 
shun the violence and join into the mainstream. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Government of India views the Left Wing Extremism (LWE) insurgency as an 
area of concern and remains firmly committed to address the problem. The Central 
Government has adopted an unambiguous multi -pronged strategy to tackle LWE 
insurgency, centred around security related measures and development related 
interventions. On security front, the Central Government assists the LWE affected State 
Governments by providing CAPF battalions, training and funds for modernization of State 
Police Force, equipment and arms, sharing of intelligence etc. On the development side, 
the Central Government has taken various measures including construction of roads, 
strengthening of communications network, installation of mobile towers, improving network 
of banks, post offices, health and education facilities in the LWE affected areas. 
  
          The efforts of the Government have resulted in consistent decline in violence, both 
in terms  of geographical spread and numbers. The number of districts covered under 
Security Related Expenditure (SRE) scheme has come down to 90. Incidents of LWE 
violence had also come to 670 in 2019 from high of 2253 in 2009. 
. 
 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 5 
 
 The Committee have been informed that biggest challenge in LWE area is threat of 
improvised explosive devise and training is being imparted to the forces to counter IED. 

 
 
61 
 
During the year 2016, total 446 personnel have been trained in counter IED programm e. 
The Committee desire that regular training should be provided to security personnel to 
enable them to face the challenges and threat of Explosive devices. Besides a lot of 
casualties of security forces in LWE affected areas are taking place due to laying and blast 
of mines due to non availability of technology to detect the deeply planted mines. The 
Committee desire that the Government should take up the matter with concerned research 
organizations, like DRDO to develop advance technology to counter the threats posed by 
Naxalites and Maoists in the LWE affected area. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of Home Affairs and Forces are taking seriously the use of IEDs by LWE as 
reflected by the continuously evolving technology to counter IEDs. CAPFs are bein g 
provided with quality equipment to deal with the threat of IEDs. In addition, due attention is 
being paid to provide quality training to personnel through world class institutions of Army, 
NSG and CRPF. An SOP has also been promulgated by the MHA giving out precautionary 
measures required to be undertaken to counter IEDs. The CAPFs have developed 
credible inherent counter-IED training capacity. The Institute of IED Management, Pune of 
CRPF is a state -of the -art training institute for counter -IED training. Intensive training of 
personnel of CAPFs and State Police is also being undertaken through the Army and 
NSG. In the year 2017, 1083 security forces were imparted counter -IED training, and in 
the year 2018, 383 security forces were trained. Ministry of Hom e Affairs and CAPF are 
constantly in touch with DRDO, other PSUs and private sector companies for developing 
suitable technologies for anti-LWE operations. 
 
 Following institutes are providing such training: 
 
 Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVP NPA), Hyderabad. 

 
 
62 
 
 
 Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVP NPA) Hyderabad is 
organizing many in -service course on Basic and Advance Tactics like “Course on 
Tactics”, “Course on Explosive, Improvised Explosive Devices & Post Blast 
Procedures”, Urban Operations, “Course on Counter Terrorism” and Course on 
Management of Tactical Operations etc. for the officers of State Police, APFs and 
other Security Agencies / Organisations. 
 
 Further the following topics are also covered in above mentio ned courses for 
training of security personnel by using advance technologies / developments: 
 
(a) Collection of intelligence and surveillance - Use of latest and advance 
Technology and surveillance equipments/Gadgets like USB Adapter 
(Audio/Video Recorder), Spy camera, Helmet Camera, Cable setup box camera 
to enhance the skill to collect the Intelligence/ Information in Counter Insurgency 
LWE scenario. 
(b) Ops Planning- Use of Google maps, Global Positioning System, Terra Explorer 
for Operational Planning and Terrai n analysis, Case studies are also briefed on 
3D to them for better understanding. 
(c) IEDs Detection and Disposal - Use of latest modern and advanced technology 
like portable X -ray machine, non Linear Junction Detectors, Mobile Phone 
Jammer, Explosive Detector,  Water cannon to detect, disrupt and dispose the 
improvised Explosive Device. 
(d) Firing- Use of Firing simulator and Paint Ball Guns to enhance the shooting 
capabilities of police personnel in LWE/Urban Scenario. Firing with latest/ new 
weapons is also carrie d out for updating professional efficiency and conversant 
of police personnel. 
 
 Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D), New Delhi. 
 

 
 
63 
 
 BPR&D, New Delhi is coordinating courses on counter Naxal/ IED Trg being 
conducted by Army, CRPF & CPOs includin g training institutes of Assam Rifles. (ii) 
BPR&D is sponsoring “Vertical Interaction Courses on LWE Appreciation” at ISA, 
CRPF, Mount Abu (Rajasthan). 
 
 
 North Eastern Police Academy, Shillong 
 
 NEPA is conducting In -service courses on “collection of Intel ligence & 
Interrogation Techniques”, Course on “Explosive & Bomb Disposal”, Course on 
“Counter Insurgence & Jungle Warfare” & “DTRA- Counter Proliferation Course”. 
 
 
Observation / Recommendation – 8 
 
The Central Government, besides, sharing intelligence in puts with CAPFs to deal 
with law & order, terrorism, militancy and insurgency related problems and issuing 
advisories on specific issues/threats, also assists the State Governments/ Union 
Territories Administrations by reimbursing security related expendit ure in areas (seriously 
affected by militancy/insurgency/terrorism) in the North Eastern States, Left Wing 
Extremism affected States and Jammu & Kashmir, under the scheme of reimbursement of 
security related Expenditure (SRE) of North Eastern States, excep t Mizoram & Sikkim, 
SRE scheme for J&K and SRE Schemes for assistance to LWE affected States. From the 
details of financial assistance given to J&K, North East and LWE States under SRE, it is 
noted that the amount released to State Governments has been ind icated as fully utilized 
since the funds are given on reimbursement basis. 
 

 
 
64 
 
 From the data made available, the Committee find fluctuations in the 
allocations/expenditure during the last six years. With regard to financial assistance 
provided to North Easte rn Region, the releases during the year 2012 -13 were to the tune 
of ₹264.90 crore which increased to ₹290 crore during 2013 -14, then there was slight 
decrease/increase during the years 2014 -15 and 2015 -16. During the year 2016 -17 (upto 
10th February, 2017)  the releases were ₹225.64 crore. In case of SRE schemes for 
Jammu & Kashmir the expenditure has increased drastically during 2016 -17. Under 
scheme SRE (P) the expenditure has increased from ₹326.95 crore to ₹1055.84 crore, the 
rise in expenditure thus bei ng more than three times. Under the scheme SRE(R&R) the 
expenditure has increased from ₹245.34 crore to ₹377.50 crore. However, in case of the 
assistance to Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected States, there is slight decrease in the 
releases made during 201 6-17 as compared to previous year. The releases have 
decreased to ₹21000 lakh as compared to ₹25865 lakh during the previous year. The 
Committee in this regard would like to be apprised about the reasons for fluctuations in the 
releases particularly under the SRE(P) for J&K where there is three times rise in the 
expenditure during 2016 -17. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the 
monitoring/review mechanisms with the Central Government while releasing the 
allocations to these States. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Jammu & Kashmir : Under scheme SRE (P) the total reimbursement made to Govt. of 
J&K during 2016 -17 was ₹1181.20 crore whereas the same was ₹326.95 crore during 
2015-16. Initially the budget allocated was ₹330 crore which was enhanced to ₹880 crore 
at RE stage. Additional authorization of ₹305 crore was received from Ministry of Finance 
from their Demand No.32. Thus, the total allocation was ₹1185 crore for the year 2016 -17 
under SRE (Police). The allocation had to be enhanced due to the following reasons:- 
 

 
 
65 
 
i) Clearance of pending claims amounting to ₹191.47 crore for the year 2014-15; 
ii) Clearance of pending claims amounting to ₹583.61 crore for the year 2015-16. 
iii) Regular payment amounting to ₹341.56 crore for the year 2016-17. 
iv) Payment of ₹31.80 crore as arrear on account of enha nced rate of remuneration to 
SPOs of J&K owing to revision in honorarium from ₹3000 p.m. upto ₹6000 p.m. w. 
e. f. 01.01.2016. 
v) Approval for raising of 5 new IR Battalion for J&K. Advance payment of ₹32.75 
crore @25% of total standard cost of ₹130.95 crore.  
 
 As regards monitoring/review mechanisms about release of fund by MHA is 
concerned, it is stated that under the SRE (P) scheme funds were released to State Govt. 
on reimbursement basis i.e. 60% upfront on receipt of the claim from State Govt. and 40% 
on receipt of the Audit Report.  
 
 Under SRE(R&R) the allocation had to be enhanced due to pending claims of the 
previous years a nd also significant increase in the component of cash relief provided to 
the registered Kashmiri Migrant families @ ₹2500/ - per head per month (maximum of 
₹10,000 per family per month) w. e. f. 01.05.2015 
 
 Besides this, the expenditure incurred by the Gov ernment of NCT Delhi over and 
above ₹1000 per head per month to Kashmiri migrant families living in Delhi/NCR was 
being reimbursed by the MHA under SRE(R&R). There are also increases in other 
components viz. improvement in infrastructure, civic amenities a nd maintenance of civic 
action programme, salary, construction of transit accommodation, Ex-gratia relief etc. 
 As regard monitoring/review mechanisms of SRE (R&R) Scheme is concerned, the 
funds are released to State Govt. on reimbursement basis i.e. 60% u pfront on receipt of 
the claim from State Govt. and 40% on receipt of the Audit Report. 
 
Left Wing Extremist affected States : Under the Security Related Expenditure (SRE) 
scheme for LWE affected States, the entire amount of ₹210 crore allotted in RE 2016 -17 
was released to the States. In FY 2015 -16, the funds allotted in BE 2015 -16 was also 
₹210 crore. Further, the savings of ₹ 48.65 crore in the scheme ‘Construction 

 
 
66 
 
Strengthening of Fortified Police Stations’ was re -appropriated to SRE scheme leading to 
expenditure of ₹258.65 crore in FY 2015 -16. Thus release was more in FY 2015 -16. 
However, the outlay was raised by ₹235 crore i n FY 2017 -18 and ₹445 crore was 
released. 
 
 Monitoring and review mechanisms for SRE Scheme for LWE affected States is as 
follows: 
 Work Plans for given year approved by SRE Committee based on State proposals 
and audited expenditure trend of past years. 
 Internal Audit Wing of MHA examines claims of State Government and 
recommends as per scheme guidelines. Funds releases are approved by SRE 
Standing Committee in consultation with IFD of МНА. 
 SRE scheme guidelines and districts / State covered under SRE Scheme  and its 
implementation reviewed periodically at various levels. The SRE district reviewed 
recently in April 2018 and SRE guidelines revised recently in May 2018. 
 
North East States : Year -wise expenditure under SRE Scheme for NE States from FY 
2012-13 to 2016-17 is as under: 
[₹ in crore]     
Financial Year Expenditure 
2012-13 264.90 
2013-14 290.00 
2014-15 261.00 
2015-16 280.00 
2016-17 300.00 
 
 As shown above, expenditure in 2012 -13 was ₹264.90 crore and in 2013 -14 ₹290 
crore. It came down to ₹261 crore in 2014-15 and ₹280 crore in 2015-16 as there was less 
allocation of funds in these years. In 2016-17, ₹300 crore were spent under SRE. 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 12 

 
 
67 
 
 In the backdrop of exaggerated demand of State Governments, Union Government 
is expanding Central Arme d Police Forces to meet the request/indent of the former. The 
Committee having examined the reasons why State Governments are frequently seeking 
assistance of Central Armed Police Forces, find that inadequate infrastructure with State 
Police in terms of quality motor vehicles, modern weapons, state-of-the-art communication 
equipment and quality training as well as robust network of quality intelligence inputs 
considerably contributed to their heavy dependence on CAPFs. 
 The Committee find that the Central G overnment has been supplementing the 
efforts of the State Governments in modernizing their police forces under the 
Modernization of Police Forces Scheme. As per mid -term evaluation report of 2006 by 
BPR&D, the MPF scheme has made a significant impact in improving capacities leading to 
improved housing facilities, better police buildings, improved work environment, availability 
of improved and advance weaponry to fight militancy, increased training facilities with 
latest training gadgets, better networking a nd computerization of police offices, better 
operational efficiency etc. Further, as per the impact assessment by Ernst & Young in 
2009-10, the scheme has made a considerable impact on the State Police Forces. The 
Committee also note that utilization perce ntage of funds by States for the period from  
2000-01 to 2014-15 was 94.85%. 
 The Committee note that consequent to decision of Union Government to increase 
share of Central resources to States from 32% to 42%, many schemes of Central 
assistance to States i ncluding schemes of modernization of police forces were 
discontinued. The Committee express their serious displeasure that despite the significant 
impact of the scheme of modernization & strengthening State Police Forces, the Scheme 
has been discontinued. In this regard, the Committee find that consequent to Shiv Raj 
Committee recommendation for reintroduction of scheme, MHA has submitted the 
proposal to the Ministry of Finance for their approval and presently, the matter is stated to 
be under consideration  of a Committee of Secretaries, which is headed by Cabinet 
Secretary. While noting the urgency of modernization of State Police and the positive 
impact these schemes have as has come out during different reviews, the Committee 
emphasize for early decision in this regard. MHA should accordingly take initiative to find 
out the status of modernization of CAPFs in various States and pursue the matter with the 

 
 
68 
 
Committee of Secretaries and immediate steps be taken to introduce and implement the 
modified scheme of modernization & strengthening State Police Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The umbrella scheme of ‘Modernization of Police Forces (MPF), was pursued by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs vigorously and finally the same was approved by the 
Government on 27.09. 2017 for implementation during 2017 -18 to 2019 -20, with total 
outlay of ₹25061 crore. Out of this total outlay, the central outlay approved is ₹18,636 
crore and the States’ share was ₹6,425 crore. Broadly, this umbrella scheme comprises of 
two schemes, nam ely, scheme for Modernization of Police Forces of States and Union 
Territories and scheme of Security Related Expenditure (SRE) for Jammu & Kashmir, 
North-Eastern States and Left Wing Extremism affected Areas. 
 
 One of the sub -schemes under this umbrella s cheme is ‘Assistance to States for 
Modernization of Police’ which is erstwhile scheme of Modernization of Police Forces, with 
central outlay of ₹7,380 crore for the 3 year’s period i.e. ₹2,460 crore for each year. 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 14 
 The Committee note that all CAPFs have set up training institutions to meet their 
training requirement and imparting other professional skills on specialized topics. The 
Committee are however constrained to note that excessive deployment of CAPFs because 
of pref erence of Central forces by the State Governments, training needs are not being 
fully met. The Committee are concerned to note the tendency of the State Governments to 
retain the forces even after the specified duty is over as reported to the Committee dur ing 
the course of oral evidence. The Committee find this situation disturbing. The issue of 
over-dependence of State Governments on CAPFs has been comprehensively dealt with 
and commented in the previous part of the Report. Here the Committee would like to  
stress the Government to look into the matter urgently and take the desired steps so as to 
ensure that the training needs are fully met and no compromise is made in this respect. 

 
 
69 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Central Police Forces are made available in aid  of the State Governments for 
public order duties.  The deployment of the Forces depends upon the overall security 
scenario.  In order to meet the requirement of these Forces in various States, CAPFs are 
fully committed and Border Guarding Forces have also  been diverted from their primary 
role.  This has resulted in over -stretching of the CAPFs to the extent that all reserves 
including the training reserves have been committed for Law & Order and election duties.  
 
 The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) fo r deployment of CPMFs provides that 
one coy in each battalion shall be kept for rotational training and shall not be committed for 
operational deployment.  But these training Coys are also deployed in order to meet the 
emergent requirements and other exigencies.  
 
 The CAPFs, therefore, plan training of their earmarked training coys, keeping in 
view the predictable requirements as mentioned above.   The training module is such that 
every Coy of the battalion undergoes training during the year despite regula r deployment.  
For this purpose, each Force conducts a detailed exercise every year and prepares the 
training calendar accordingly. 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 15 
 The Committee have been apprised that under the scheme of upgradation of 
training infrastructure of Central Police Forces, Rs. 22.60 crore was allocated during 11 th 
Five Year Plan, out of which only Rs. 15.18 crore were utilized. The scheme continued 
during 12th Five Year Plan and Rs.16.37 crore could only be utilized against the budgetary 
allocations for Rs.43.07 crore. During the last year of 12 th Plan i.e. 2016 -17, Rs.17.95 
crore have been allocated, which is more than cumulative expenditure of four years i.e. 
Rs.16.37 crore. The Committee fail to understand how the allocations during the y ear 
2016-17 i.e. for Rs.17.95 crore which are more than 8 times of expenditure as made 
during the previous year i.e. 2015 -16 i.e. Rs.2.26 crore would have been met. Since the 
year 2016-17 is already over and 2017 -18 is about to complete, the Committee woul d like 
to be apprised of the status of expenditure met in these years so far. The aforesaid 

 
 
70 
 
scenario clearly reflects the unrealistic allocation and the casual approach towards one of 
the important aspect for capacity building of CAPFs. Since 12 th Plan is already over, the 
Committee would like to be apprised about the overall financial and physical achievements 
under the scheme. The Committee would also like to recommend that the infrastructure of 
the State Training Institutes need to be upgraded in term of quality/content of training, staff 
requirement as per the emerging needs. The Committee in the subsequent Para of the 
report have emphasized to explore all possibilities to attract women in CAPFs by providing 
better incentives, convenient posting etc. In the context of training, the Committee would 
like to recommend for adequate infrastructure like hostels/accommodation for women at 
the Training Institutes. The Committee, therefore, would like the Government to take up 
the matter regarding upgradation of i nfrastructure as recommended above with the State 
Governments and the necessary assistance for upgradation provided to them by the Union 
Government. Besides overall review of the infrastructure of training institutes should be 
undertaken and if need be the  scheme continued with greater stres s on monitoring and 
evaluation. 
Reply of the Government 
 This scheme is meant for six Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs). Funds are 
mainly meant for purchase of Computers, Books, Training aids & Equipment’s, Class 
Room Equipment’s, LCD Colour photo printers, interactive Board, GPS, Hand Held Metal 
Detectors, Digital Cameras etc. in the institutes. Under this scheme, the fund was to be 
released to five Central Armed Police Forces (AR, BSF, CRPF, ITBP, and SSB) to 
strengthen the training infrastructure. During the 12 th Plan ₹53.07 crore in BE and ₹31.30 
crore in RE stage was allocated, out which ₹26.64 crore utilized. During the 2017 -18 the 
allocation for this scheme was merged with regular ‘other charges head’. 
 
 The facilities / incentives provided to women personnel in CAPFs are as under: 
 
i. ‘Crèches’ and ‘Day Care Centres’ have been provided by the CAPFs to women 
employees.  
ii. Separate accommodation for women personnel with basic amenities. 

 
 
71 
 
iii. Toilet facilities are made available for the use of women employees by pitching of  
proper tents with commode in areas where appropriate locations are not available. 
iv. Vehicles fitted with mobile toilets for women personnel during movement from one 
place to another and during picketing duties. 
v. The Programme on Gender Sensitization in Govt. Service has been conducted by all 
CAPFs to educate their personnel. This has also been made part of the Basic 
Training Programme. 
vi. CISF is imparting basic training to both male and female personnel for equal duration 
and there is no variation in training m odule. Women personnel in NGOs ranks are 
imparted training at RTC Barwaha (MP) where special facilities are created for them. 
SOs and GOs are trained at National Industrial Security Academy (NISA) Hyderabad 
(AP). 
Observation / Recommendation - 16 
 The Comm ittee further find that Central Industrial Security Force had not utilized 
any fund during the 11th Plan period and no funds were allocated to them during 12th 
Plan. The Committee would like to be apprised about the specific reasons for non -
utilisation of outlay by CISF. Besides the infrastructure status of CISF may be reviewed 
and the Committee apprised, accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Details of Budget allocated to CISF and expenditure incurred during 11 th and 12 th 
Five year Plan period are as under: 
 
11th Plan period: 
 
2007-08 
[₹ in crore] 
Head BE Expen
diture 
Reasons for underutilization 

 
 
72 
 
Head BE Expen
diture 
Reasons for underutilization 
OB  
(Non-
Plan) 
39.00 24.00 a) Purchase of land for ₹3.5 crore could not be 
materialised. 
b) CPWD could not utilise ₹2 crore out of ₹4.5 crore 
allotted to them for const ruction of 4 nos. 180 -men 
barracks at NDRF, Mundali. 
c) ₹3 crore could not utilised on construction of non -
residential buildings at Mahipalpur due to change of Lay 
Out Plan and want of DDA’s approval. 
d) ₹2.60 earmarked for non -residential building for NDRF 
Bn at Mundali could not be utilised due to decision for 
shifting of 50% strength of NDRF Bn to Patna. 
e) ₹2.37 crore for non -residential buildings at RTC Behror 
could not be utilised by CPWD. 
f) ₹1.59 crore earmarked for boundary wall and fort -wall 
for RTC, Mundali could not be utilised due to delay in 
finalisation of drawings by CPWD.  
 
RB 
(Non-
Plan) 
9.30 6.50 a) ₹1.50 crore surrendered due to slow progress in 
construction of 223 nos. res.quarters at NDRF Bn, 
Mundali, by CPWD. 
b) ₹0.50 crore earmarked for 40 nos. re. qua rters at NDRF 
Bn, Mundali could not be utilised for want of decision 
from NDMA on shifting of 50% strength of this Bn to 
Patna. 
c) ₹0.50 crore for construction of res. Quarters for VIP 
Security Unit at Greater Noida could not be utilised due 
to non-finalisation of drawings by CPWD. 
d) ₹0.30 crore earmarked for res. Quarters for GBS Unit, 
could not be utilised due to non -availability of land/flats 
from DDA. 

 
 
73 
 
Head BE Expen
diture 
Reasons for underutilization 
 
RB 
(Plan) 
4.00 3.00 ₹1 crore was surrendered by CPWD due to slow progress in 
construction of 107 non -res. Quarters at Behror against 
allocation of ₹4 crore. 
Total 52.30 33.50  
 
 
 
2008-09 
[₹ in crore]        
Head BE Expenditure 
OB (Non-Plan) 21.00 27.00 
RB (Non-Plan) 7.80 11.06 
RB (Plan) 5.00 2.90 
TOTAL 33.80 40.96 
 
2009-10 
[₹ in crore]        
Head BE Expenditure 
OB (Non-Plan) 24.00 41.78 
RB (Non-Plan) 6.00 5.00 
RB (Plan) 5.00 2.50 
TOTAL 35.00 49.28 
 
2010-11 
[₹ in crore]        
Head BE Expenditure 
OB (Non-Plan) 75.00 102.48 
RB (Non-Plan) 10.00 29.08 

 
 
74 
 
RB (Plan) 10.00 161.00 
TOTAL 95.00 133.17 
 
2011-12 
[₹ in crore]        
Head BE Expenditure 
OB (Plan) 125.00 125.00 
RB (Plan) 32.00 32.00 
TOTAL 157.00 157.00 
 
12th Plan Period: 
 
2012-13 
[₹ in crore] 
Head BE Expendit
ure 
Reasons for underutilization 
OB 
(Plan) 
128.19 120.29 BE amount of ₹128.19 was reduced to ₹120.29 at RE 
stage. Hence, no underutilisation. 
RB 
(Plan) 
67.68 48.28 Due to allocation of excess funds over and above 
projection, ₹19.40 crore was surrendered. 
TOTAL 195.87 168.57  
 
2013-14 
[₹ in crore]        
Head BE Expenditure 
OB (Plan) 60.98 63.47 
RB (Plan) 34.12 36.61 
TOTAL 95.10 100.08 
 
2014-15 
[₹ in crore] 

 
 
75 
 
Head BE Expendit
ure 
Reasons for underutilization 
OB 
(Plan) 
117.00 61.61 BE amount of ₹117 crore was reduced to ₹61.48 
crore at RE stage against which ₹61.61 crore was 
incurred. Hence, there was no underutilisation. 
RB (Plan) 28.00 20.64 BE amount of ₹28 crore was reduced to ₹20.45 crore 
at RE stage against which ₹20.64 crore was incurred. 
Hence, there was no underutilisation 
TOTAL 145.00 81.93  
 
 
2015-16                                 [₹ in crore]        
Head BE Expenditure 
OB (Plan) 189.00 157.25 
RB (Plan) 32.20 63.95 
TOTAL 221.20 221.20 
 
2016-17 
[₹ in crore]        
Head BE Expenditure 
OB (Plan) 69.47 69.47 
RB (Plan)  83.95 83.95 
TOTAL 153.42 153.42 
 
The status of infrastructure projects of CISF is as under: 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project / Scheme Date of 
Sanction 
Cost (₹ in 
crore) 
Progress 
1 Establishment of Dog Training 
School 2nd RB Ranchi 
27.06.2012 6.30 Completed 
2 Construction of 50 rooms Sos 23.07.2012 6.74 Completed 

 
 
76 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project / Scheme Date of 
Sanction 
Cost (₹ in 
crore) 
Progress 
Hostel FSTI Hyderabad 
3 Construction of Boundary wall for 
10th RB Bangalore 
13.12.2012 2.48 Completed 
4 Construction of infrastructure of 2nd 
RB Ranchi & ES HQr 
03.07.2012 87.69 Final stage 
5 Shifting of Main Electric HT Lines 
from CISF Campus at 2nd RB 
Ranchi 
08.03.2013 4.97 Completed 
6 Construction of Non residential 
Building for Gp HQr Ahmedabad 
06.06.2012 12.83 Completed 
7 Construction of infrastructure for 
GBS Mahipalpur 
26.09.2012 99.72 Final stage 
8 Payment towards acquisition of 
land for 4th RB Sivagangai 
14.06.2012 9.73 Completed 
9 Construction of 72 nos additional 
residential quarters  at RTC Deoli 
04.08.2011 6.56 Final stage 
10 Up-gradation of 160 Nos 
Residential Qrts (Civil) RTC 
Arakkonam 
31.10.2012 1.46 Completed 
11 Construction o f Residential 
Accommodation for DTS 2nd RB 
Ranchi 
27.06.2012 1.23 Completed 
12 Construction of Residential building 
for Gp HQr,  Ahmedabad 
06.06.2012 2.94 Completed 
13 Additional payment to DDA towards 
enhancement of FAR from 100 to 
200 in the 3.66 Acres  of Land at 
Sayurpur Delhi for DMRC Delhi 
30.07.2012 2.79 Completed 
14 Purchase of 166 Nos ready built 04.03.2013 24.01 Completed 

 
 
77 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project / Scheme Date of 
Sanction 
Cost (₹ in 
crore) 
Progress 
flats at Ghaziabad from GDA for 
DMRC 
15 Construction of non -residential 
buildings of GP HQrs., Guwahati 
(Original Sanction ₹ 1095.17 and 
Revised Sanction ₹1460.77) 
21.07.2015 3.66 Completed 
16 Procurement of Dormitory -432nos 
from DSIIDC at Narela for CISF 
personnel deployed in DMRC 
23.09.2015 40.13 Completed 
17 Acquistion of land for establishment 
of CISF 6th Reserve Battalion  in 
Pernem, North Goa, Goa. 
28.12.2015 25.96 Completed 
18 C/o 01 No. of CISF Barracks each 
at Dwarka Sector -14 (252 men) 
and Chawari Bazar (150 men) for 
CISF personnel deployed in DMRC 
Delhi 
14.03.2015 16.67 Completed 
19 Procurement of 108 Nos (T -III/III(S) 
Type-IA flats from DSIIDC at Narela 
for CISF personnel deployed in 
DMRC 
23.09.2015 26.39 Completed 
20 Acquisition of 25 acre of land at 
Kamla Nehru Nagar, Ghaziabad 
from Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD) for 
construction of infrastructure 
(Residential & Non -Residential 
building) for the personnel deployed 
in CISF Unit DMRC, Delhi and 
17.03.2015 6.53 Completed 

 
 
78 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project / Scheme Date of 
Sanction 
Cost (₹ in 
crore) 
Progress 
Samadhi Sthal 
21 Procurement of 116 Nos (T -III) flats 
from DSIIDC at Narela for CISF 
personnel deployed in DMRC 
22.03.2015 27.50 Completed 
Total 416.29  
 
Observation / Recommendation - 19 
 As per the information submitted by the Government, 73831 vacancies in all five 
CAPFs and Assam Rifles are lying vacant against the total sanctioned strength of 
9,68,130 as on 31.10.2016. This shows a shor tfall of almost 7.6% of the total sanctioned 
strength. The vacancies are created every year due to attrition i.e. retirement, voluntary 
retirement, resignation, dismissal etc., raising of new battalions, non -availability of eligible 
candidates and promotio n to the higher ranks. The Committee have been given to 
understand that though recruitment is planned in advance, it is taking time as the recruiting 
agency i.e. SSB is stated to be overstressed. While observing that recruitment for security 
forces is the most priority area and no compromise can be made at any cost, when the 
question is about the safety and security of the Country, the Committee strongly 
recommend to convey their concerns to the recruiting agency i.e. SSB so that the 
vacancies are filled up  within the shortest possible time. Besides the Committee would 
also like to recommend for strengthening of NCC in schools and colleges, so as to 
inculcate discipline and motivate/attract the youth for joining the armed forces, which 
would help in filling the vacancies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Filling up of vacancies arising in CAPFs out of retirements, resignations, new 
raising etc, is an ongoing administrative process and timely action is taken to fill up the 
vacancies by direct recruitment, by promotio n or by deputation as per the Recruitment 

 
 
79 
 
Rules. The vacancies which remain unfilled due to any reason, including non -joining of the 
candidates selected for the post are, carried forward to the next vacancy year in the same 
category. 
 
 Recruitment to 57,26 4 posts has been completed. Vacancies for 1073 posts of 
SI/ASI have been notified by SSC and 398 posts of Asstt Commandant by UPSC. Further, 
54,953 posts of Constables (GD) are being notified to SSC. 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 20 
 
The Committee observ e that the lowest Cadre Officers in the rank of Assistant 
Commandants are recruited through UPSC and these officers cater to the feeder grade for 
promotion to higher grades like Deputy Commandant, Commandant, DIG, IG and ADG. It 
is surprising to note that even when these officers are recruited by UPSC through open 
competition and that too at officer level, the top positions in CAPFs are occupied by IPS 
officers. It is needless to mention that IPS officer, inspite of competence and efficiency, 
cannot have th e advantage of expertise the insider i.e. CAPF officer has in respect of 
specific tasks as per the mandate of the organisation and long relationship that is nurtured 
through continuous engagement with forces. Above all it has demoralizing effect on the 
officers of respective CAPF, thereby affecting the effectiveness of the forces. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend for filling up top positions from the specific 
cadre of the CAPF. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Regarding recommendation for filling up top  positions from the specific cadre of the 
CAPF, it is stated that only those posts which are earmarked for IPS officers in the 
Recruitment Rules of CAPFs are filled up through deputation. 
Observation / Recommendation - 29 
 The Committee note with concern that a very peculiar treatment is meted out by the 
concerned State Police to the personnel deployed for VVIP Security. These personnel, 

 
 
80 
 
when they are on movement with the VVIP for the purpose of security, are not provided 
any logistic support like lodging a nd boarding by their counterpart Police of the State 
concerned. The Committee brought this to the notice of the Ministry during course of 
deposition. The representative from the Ministry apprised the Committee that there is a 
protocol to address such thing s/ requirements and assured to look into the matter. Having 
felt the need for logistic support necessary to the personnel while they are moving with 
VVIP on duty, the Committee recommend the Government to issue standing instructions 
to all States Police Fo rce to honour such request of lodging and boarding by the 
concerned personnel during their VVIP security duty. 
Reply of the Government 
 In 2015, necessary instructions were issued to all States / UTs for their cooperation 
in the security of Central Protectees. It included provision of accommodation for CAPFs on 
security duty. While deploying CAOFs for individual security duties, the State 
Governments are also simultaneously requested to provide necessary logistic support and 
accommodation to CAPFs to help t hem in discharging their duties. The State Government 
do generally honour the request of Ministry of Home Affairs. However, there have been 
some cases where the CAPFs have reported issues in getting the required support from 
the State Governments. Such cas es are taken up with the State Governments. The 
instructions issued in 2015 have been re -issued to all States / UTs on 17.05.2018 
(Annexure-II). 
 
 Security is provided to an individual as per the guidelines contained in the ‘Yellow 
Book’ which is honoured by all State Governments. In the ‘Yellow Book’ a chapter on 
provision of security by CAPFs is being added under which the State Governments have 
been requested to provide the CAPFs with requisite logistic support, such as appropriate 
accommodation for the contingent, good condition vehicles for transport and escort duties, 
etc. However, ‘Public Order’ and ‘Police’ being State subjects, their cooperation in the 
matter is essential. 
 
 
 

 
 
81 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE    
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 9 
 Under the scheme namely Construction / Strengthening of fortified Police Stations 
to be constructed in 10 LWE affected States at ₹2.00 crore per Police Station on 80:20 
(Centre Share : State Share basis), the Committee note that out of 400 Police Stations  
sanctioned, construction work for 356 Police Stations has been completed. The 
Committee desire that Central Government should take necessary steps to ensure 
completion of remaining Police Stations within a stipulated time frame. The Committee 
also desire that progress of implementation of Road Requirement Plan (RRP Phase -I) 
being implemented by the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways for improvement of 
road connectivity in 34 most LWE affected districts in eight States should be closely 
monitored to e nsure proper road connectivity in the affected districts. MHA should also 
pursue the matter with Ministry of Rural Development for early implementation of scheme 
of construction of 342 roads, (totalling 5466.31 KMs) and 126 bridges covering 44 districts 
of 9 LWE affected States and the Committee apprised about the outcome in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 Out of 5,422 KM road lengths envisaged in RRP -I, 4,652 KM roads have been 
completed. Road construction has now reached the core areas of Left Wing Extremism 
influence. Progress of the scheme is being monitored by MHA on regular basis at the 
Home Minister / Home Secretary and Cabinet Secretary level through meetings with the 
concerned Ministers / Secretaries and Chief Ministers / Chief Secretaries of the State 
Governments concerned. Besides, an Inter -Ministerial Empowered Committee (IMEC) 
under the co -chairmanship of Union Home Sec retary and Secretary, Rural Development 
has been set up for monitoring and reviewing the progress of various development 
schemes in LWE affected areas. The Committee monitors and reviews the progress of the 

 
 
82 
 
scheme with the concerned Ministry through Video Conferences with the representatives 
of LWE affected States. 
 Out of 400 PSs sanctioned under the Scheme, construction work for 399 PSs has 
been completed. The construction of remaining 01 Police Station in Nalanda district was 
delayed due to the matter be ing sub-judice. The case has been disposed by the court and 
the construction started. Regular meetings at various levels are held to review the 
progress of the scheme. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.16 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 13 
 The Information Technology (IT) Sector has become one of the most significant 
growth catalysts for the Indian Economy. Today Government business, societies and 
individuals are embracing digitization at an exponential pace. This rapid penetrat ion of 
technology connected to the internet in all facets of life is leading to the convergence of 
the digital and physical world bringing about efficiencies and new opportunities. At the 
same time, it has created multidimensional and often unpredictable c hallenges from an 
internal security perspective. In India, the critical infrastructure is steadily increasing its 
connectivity and dependency on IT. As such the threat of cyber attacks on critical 
infrastructure in the Country is also increasing. The Gover nment of India has taken steps 
to meet the challenges and prevent cyber attacks, safeguard the ICT system which inter -
alia include approving a National Cyber Security Policy on 08 May, 2013, formulation of 
crisis management plan by Department of Electronic  & Information Technology for 
countering cyber terrorism, setting up of Indian Computer emergency response team 
(CERT-In) etc. 
 The Committee note that MHA has issued the National Cyber Security Policy to all 
CAPFs and State Police Forces for implementatio n with a view to tackle the cyber crime 
issues, MHA has also approved implementation of a project at a total cost of Rs. 195.83 
crore out of the approved Nirbhaya Fund for implementation during the financial years 

 
 
83 
 
2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019 -20 to achieve th e objectives of online cyber crime -reporting, 
establishment of national cyber forensic laboratory, capacity building, R&D and awareness 
creation. The Committee while taking note of the emerging challenges with the rapid 
penetration of IT in various fields particularly from the internal security perspective, 
strongly emphasize for effective implementation of the project and its progress monitored 
through structural monitoring mechanism. The outcome of the follow up in this regard 
should be intimated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Home Affairs is implementing the ‘Cyber Crime Prevention against Women 
and Children (CCPWC)’ scheme from NIRBHAYA funds of the Ministry of Women & Child 
Development. The main objective of Cyber Crime Prevention against Women and Children 
(CCPWC) Scheme is to have an effective mechanism to handle cybercrimes against 
women and children in the country. The scheme has a total estimated outlay of ₹223.19 
crore (revised outlay after addition of sub -project of ₹27.36 crore to the initial outlay of 
₹195.83 crore). Below are the main features along with initiatives taken under the scheme: 
 Online cybercrime reporting platform  - Hon’ble Home Minister has launched the 
online cyber -crime reporting portal on 20th September 20 18. The portal, 
www.cybercrime.gov.in facilitates the public to report complaints of online contents 
related to child pornography and sexually explicit material. 
 National Cyber Forensic Laboratory  (NCFL) -  Directorate of Forensic Science 
Services (DFSS) h as been identified as the nodal agency for setting up of NCFL. 
The NCFL will be setup at CFSL, Hyderabad premises. As a nodal agency DFSS 
has been tasked to carry out the following activities:  
I. Tools and Technology procurement for the National Cyber Forens ic 
laboratory 
II. Hiring of 37 forensic experts for 24x7x365 days laboratory function.  
III. Manage the National Cyber Forensic Laboratory operations. 
 Training of Police officers, judges & prosecutors and setting up of cyber 
forensic training laboratories  - Financial assistance of Rs. 6 crore has been 

 
 
84 
 
provided to all States/UTs for capacity building of Police Officers, Judicial Officers & 
Prosecutors in cyber domain, so far training has been imparted to more than 3000 
such officers. Further, standardized Training Mo dules for 3 days’ cyber -crime 
awareness and 5 days’ cyber -crime investigation course have been developed and 
made available to all the States/ UTs for utilizing the same in training programmes. 
₹82.80 crore has been released to States/UTs for setting up of  cyber forensic 
training labs. Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Arunachal 
Pradesh and Telangana have commissioned their cyber forensic training lab and 
the matter is being followed up with remaining States / UTs. 
 Cybercrime awareness activiti es – Under the CCPWC scheme a handbook on 
Cyber Safety for Adolescents/Students has been released (copy available on 
www.cybercrime.gov.in). Cyber Crime awareness campaign has been launched 
through twitter handle (@CyberDost) & radio across the country. Tw o workshops 
have been conducted for capacity building of LEAs. 
 Research & Development  - Steering Committee under CCPWC scheme has 
shortlisted proposals from 12 institutes. The shortlisted proposals will now be 
placed before the Empowered Committee. 
 
 Following steps have been taken in regards to the observations of the Committee 
"for effective implementation of the project and its progress monitored through structural 
monitoring mechanism": 
VII. Cyber and Information Security Division has been established in MHA  to deal with 
projects on cyber crimes, issues related with cyber crime and Information Security 
issues, etc.  
VIII. The Cybercrime Prevention against Women and Children (CCPVVC) Scheme has 
inbuilt mechanism for monitoring by Steering Committee and Empowered 
Committee.  
IX. The utilization of funds allocated to Schemes handled by Cyber and Information 
Security Division, is reviewed periodically by the Home Secretary.  
X. Progress of implementation of the Cybercrime Prevention against Women and 
Children (CCPWC) Scheme being funded from Nirbhaya Fund is also monitored by 

 
 
85 
 
Empowered Committee of Ministry of Women and Child Development (MWCD) 
chaired by Secretary, MWCD.  
XI. NITI Aayog has implemented Output Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) 
Dashboard where all schemes includin g CCPWC are being monitored on the basis 
of the Key Performance Indicators (KPI) which is updated on quarterly basis.  
XII. Improvement in structured monitoring of projects is an ongoing process and in this 
regard, MHA has developed an internal dashboard to mon itor the progress of 
important schemes/projects.  
Cyber Crisis Management Plan (CCMP) has been prepared to deal with cyber 
security related matters. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.24 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 17 
The Co mmittee find that with the ever -evolving technology and new emerging 
security threats due to penetration of IT in every sphere, there is an urgent need to 
upgrade and update the curriculum and infrastructure in the training institutes. With the 
modernization of equipments, it is imperative that the persons behind/using the 
machines/equipments are properly trained. In view of this, the Committee would like the 
Government/CAPFs to ensure that while purchasing the latest state -of-the-art equipments, 
training n eeds are properly taken care of and, if need be, it may be included in the 
purchase agreement itself. To meet the emerging challenges, the Committee recommend 
that the contents of training should be a mix of conventional matters as well as latest 
technologies like IT, Cyber Security and Cyber Crime. Besides training must be a 
continuous affair during service of CAPFs so as update the personnel about the latest 
trends of technology and strategy to face new challenges. Experts from various fields may 
be hired  from out -side and associated in the training programmes, as per the need 
particularly in the new and emerging areas of technology. 

 
 
86 
 
Reply of the Government 
CAPFs are already incorporating training clauses on handling as well as repair and 
maintenance aspects of modern/ latest equipments in the tender enquiries while making 
procurement of equipments 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.27 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 32 
 The Committee note that during the Union Home Minister meeti ng with Home 
Ministers/Chief Secretaries and DGPs of Coastal States/UTs to review coastal security in 
Mumbai on 16.06.2016, the issue of creation of Central Marine Police Force for coastal 
security was raised by the participants. The Committee feel that it  is imperative to create a 
separate force to exclusively petrol India's 7000 km coast line. The Committee therefore 
desire that decision for formation of CMPF should be taken expeditiously. 
Reply of the Government 
 After due deliberations the competent aut hority has decided that instead of 
establishment of a separate Coastal Marine Police Force/Coastal Border Police Force, the 
Indian Coast Guard (ICG) be strengthened, capacity building of the Coastal Police be 
done with the help of the ICG  and enhance coor dination between the Indian Navy, Indian 
Coast Guard and the Coastal Police . 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.45 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
87 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Observation / Recommendation - 1 
 The Committee note that challenges to internal security in the Country are mainly 
;due to terrorism in the hinterland of the Country, cross border terrorism in Jammu and 
Kashmir, insurgency in the North East and Left wing extremism (LWE) in certain States. 
 There are five Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) namely Border Security Force 
(BSF), Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), 
Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP), Sashastra Se ema Bal (SSB) and one Central Para -
Military Force namely Assam Rifles (AR) under the Ministry of Home Affairs. Out of these 
Assam Rifles, BSF, ITBP and SSB are the 'Border Guarding Forces' while CRPF is 
deployed to assist the civil administration under the  State Governments/UT 
administrations in matters relating to maintenance of public order, internal security and 
counter insurgency. The Rapid Action Force (RAF) and Commando Battalion for Resolute 
Action (COBRA) are specialized wings of CRPF to deal with t he riots and left wing 
extremism/insurgency. CISF provides security and protection to vital installations of 
national/strategic importance including Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), airports, 
atomic power plants, space organizations, industrial units, im portant national museums, 
Government buildings in Delhi and other important sensitive organizations. 
 The issue regarding consistent increase in deployment of CAPFs in States has 
been brought into the knowledge of the Committee during the course of deliber ations. As 
per the data made available, the number of deployment of CAPFs battalions has 
increased from 91 in 2012 -13 to 119 in 2016 -17. The Committee are concerned to note 
heavy dependence of States on Central Security Forces even for day to day law and o rder 
issues, more so when CAPFs are sometimes detained even after the task is over and are 
deployed continuously in some of the States for holding elections, which indicates a 

 
 
88 
 
gradual trend of substitution of State Police Force with Central Armed Police Fo rce. What 
is disturbing more is the situation whereby over deployment is likely to affect the anti 
insurgency and border guarding operations, besides curtailing the training needs of these 
forces. Not only that continuous deployment leaves little time for recuperation/rest thereby 
creating stress among the CAPFs personnel. 
 While noting that, as per Constitutional provisions, law and order is the State 
subject, the Committee are of the view that the tendency of States looking towards Centre 
even for day to day law and order issues needs to be reversed. The States must develop 
their own systems and upgrade as well as augment their own police forces by providing 
adequate training and equipping them with state of the art weapons/machines, to enable 
them to effectively deal with the militancy and insurgency besides handling the day to day 
law and order problems of their States. Nevertheless, the Union Government although 
cannot be absolved from their responsibility of ensuring safety/security of the citizens and 
properties of the Country and therefore, should supplement the efforts of the State 
Governments besides providing financial assistance and other help needed by States for 
capacity building of their forces. The request for deployment of CAPFs by the State 
Governments at the same time should come in unforeseen and emergent security 
situations not manageable by the respective State Government, so that CAPFs 
supplement the efforts of the State Governments and not act as their substitute in the true 
spirit of federalism. 
 While the issues related to training, modernization and capacity building of these 
forces have been dealt with in detail in the later part of the report, here the Committee 
would like State Governments/Ministry of Home Affairs to explore the con cept of 
deputation of State Police Force Personnel in good numbers to specific CAPF for a period 
of three years or so where they would be trained and deployed. Once deputation is over, 
they may return back to their parent State cadres and can be useful in handling situations 
that may arise in their States. The Committee feel that such a measure would take off 
some pressure from CAPF and would also strengthen the State Police in the long run. 
Reply of the Government 

 
 
89 
 
 MHA had laid down Standard Operating Proc edure (SOP) in the year 2005. The 
said SOP, inter-alia, provides for short term requirement and long term requirement norms 
and the formalities associated with it, as under: 
 
(A) Long Term Deployment:- 
 
 The long term deployment has certain pre -induction fo rmalities, coordinating 
mechanism, post induction formalities and post withdrawal. 
 The long term deployment of the Forces basically imply deployment for Counter 
Insurgency Operations, militancy/extremism, border guarding. Broadly speaking, 
the long term deployment is in the following threats: 
i) Border Guarding, 
ii) Internal Security / Counter-Intelligence (mainly J&K), 
iii) Anti-Naxal Operations (LWE), 
iv) North East Region. 
 
(B) Short Term Deployment 
 
 MHA handles the requests of short term deployment on day to day basis . The short 
term deployment, according to the SOP, is in the nature of crisis management in 
various situations such as riots, strike, agitation, demonstration, rally, religious 
congregations, rescue & relief operations in calamities etc. 
 Although not spec ified in the SOP, deployment during Elections (General and 
Assemblies) is also done in consultation with the Election Commission of India. 
 Noticing that CAPFs are being requested for deployment in the States in a routine 
manner, without proper assessment of the situations, MHA had revisited the SOP and 
issued detailed guidelines vide OM dated 18.10.2017 (Annexure -I) for requisition and 
deployment of CAPFs by the State Governments/UTs.  The OM, inter alia, stated that 
CAPFs cannot substitute the State Polic e Forces, and deployment of CAPFs is inherently 
related to emergent/unforeseen crisis like situation which need immediate mobilisation of 
Forces to support the States/UTs for maintaining law and order. The State Governments 

 
 
90 
 
were advised to constitute a Loc al Committee under the Chairmanship of ADG (Law & 
Order) of the State with representatives from local SIB and CAPFs in order to have a 
professional assessment of the requirements.  The said Committee may be entrusted with 
the job of examining and scrutinis ing the requirements of CAPFs having regard to various 
factors such as prevailing internal security situation, intelligence inputs, availability of India 
Reserve (IR) Battalions, etc. except for unforeseen developments which cannot be 
anticipated, all requ ests for deployment of CAPFs may invariably be accompanied by the 
assessment of the Committee, having regard to certain norms like nature of sensitivity 
involving historical data specific to the occasion/location, availability of the State Forces 
etc. Almost all the States have confirmed having constituted a Committee. 
 The Central Government have sanctioned many India Reserve Battalions (IRBs) in 
the States. The rationale behind the IRB Scheme is to make the States self sufficient in 
dealing with law and order and internal security situation and not dependent on CAPFs. 
 As regards deputation of State Police Personnel to CAPFs for a specific period of 3 
years, the recommendation of the Estimates Committee was conveyed to the Chief 
Secretaries and DGs of all States vide MHA’s letter dated 31.05.2018 and requested to 
sponsor as many personnel as possible for deputation to CAPFs. As and when 
advertisements are issued by CAPFs to fill up vacancies in various ranks,  copies are also 
endorsed to the Civil Administrations under the State Governments.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter I) 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                 GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT 
20 September, 2020                                                                             CHAIRPERSON 
Bhadrapada 29, 1942(Saka)                                                ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
 

 
 
91 
 
 


 
 
92 
 
 


 
 
93 
 
 


 
 
94 
 
 


 
 
95 
 
 


96 
 
APPENDIX - I 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 (2019-20) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the  18th March, 2020  from 1 500 hrs. to 
1515 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                                           Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat  – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
         2.  Kunwar Danish Ali 
         3.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
                4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
   5. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
        6.  Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan    
         7.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
         8.  Shri Dilip Ghosh             
                 9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
     10. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
     11.  Shri Dayanidhi Maran    
     12.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
     13. Dr. K.C. Patel 
     14.  Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore  
    15.  Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
     16.  Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy    
     17.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
     18.  Shri Francisco Sardinha 
     19.  Shri Prathap Simha 
     20.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
     21. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
     22.  Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
     
 

97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
              1. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi        -    Additional Director 
                               2.      Shri Sujay Kumar          -      Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee  then took up for consideration and adoption of  the following 
draft Reports: 
(i) *****  
(ii) Action Taken Report on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 28th 
Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the subject ‘Central 
Armed Police Forces and Internal Security Challenges – Evaluation and Response 
Mechanism’ pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs.  
3. The Committee after due deliberations adopted **** the draft Report(s) without any 
modifications. The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to make any consequential 
changes and finalize the draft Reports on the basis of factual verification by the concerned 
Ministry and present the same to Lok Sabha.  
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  

98 
 
 
APPENDIX - II 
MINUTES OF 2nd SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21) 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th August, 2020 from 1130 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘2’, A Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
                      Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat  – Chairperson 
  
Members 
                          2.     Kunwar Danish Ali 
                     3.        Shri Sudharshan Bhagat  
                            4.        Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan 
                            5.        Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
                            6.        Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
                            7.        Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
                            8.        Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
                            9.        Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
                           10.       Shri K. Muraleedharan 
                           11.       Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
             12.       Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
                           13.       Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
                           14.       Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
                           15.       Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
                           16.       Shri Pinaki Misra 
                           17.       Smt.Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
SECRETARIAT 
                                
1.       Dr. Kavita Prasad                -           Joint Secretary 
                      2.       Smt. B. Visala                     -           Director 
                      3.       Smt. A. Jyothirmayi             -           Additional Director 
                      4.       Shri R.S. Negi                     -           Deputy Secretary 
WITNESSES 
  
   xxx   xxx   xxx 
xxx   xxx   xxx 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and briefed them about the agenda of the sitting viz. (i) Consideration and 
adoption of the draft report(s)  and (ii)  xxx   xxx   xxx 
Contd……2/- 

99 
 
 
-2- 
3.         The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following draft 
Reports: 
(i)         xxx   xxx   xxx 
xxx   xxx   xxx 
(ii)       Action Taken Report on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the  
28th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the subject 
‘Central Armed Police Forces and Internal Security Challenges – Evaluation 
and Response Mechanism’ pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs.  
 
4.         xxx   xxx   xxx 
5.         xxx   xxx   xxx 
6.       xxx   xxx   xxx 
7. xxx   xxx   xxx 
8.  xxx   xxx   xxx 
9.       The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been kept on  record. 
            The Committee, thereafter,  adjourned. 
 

APPENDIX - III  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-EIGHT REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (16th LOK SABHA)  
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations                                                33  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 
 the Government  
 
(Sl. Nos. 6, 7, 10, 11, 18, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31 and 33)                   16 
 
Percentage of total recommendations                                                          48.48%  
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in  
view of the Government’s reply  
 
(Sl. No. 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 12, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20 and 29)                                             12 
 
Percentage of total recommendations                                                          36.36%  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s  
replies have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 (Sl. Nos. 9,13,17 and 32)                                                                                     4 
 
Percentage of total recommendations                                                           12.12% 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of  
Government is still awaited.  
 
(Sl. No. 1)                                                                                                               1 
 
 Percentage of total recommendations                                                            3.03% 