27 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
Assessment of various initiatives under CGHS 
 
[Action Taken by Government on the observations/ recommendations contained 
in the Twenty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
Assessment of various initiatives under CGHS 
 
[Action Taken by Government on the observations/ recommendations contained 
in the Twenty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 September, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
21 September, 2023/ 30 Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 

     CONTENTS          Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2023-24)      (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iv) 
           
             
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee on Estimates held on 
18.09.2023 
 
38 
II. Analysis Of Action taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 21st  Report of 
 the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)………….. 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I Report  1 
 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government         
12 
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
31 
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
32 
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply 
of Government is still awaited 
36 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
2.  Kunwar Danish Ali 
3.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4.  Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
6.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7.  Shri Saikia Dilip 
8.  Shri Harish Dwivedi 
9.  Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
10.  Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
11.  Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12.  Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
13.  Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
14.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
15.  Shri Pinaki Misra 
16.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
17.  Shri Jual Oram 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
20.  Dr. K.C. Patel 
21.  Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
22.  Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
23.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
24.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
25.  Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
26.  Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
27.  Shri Prathap Simha 
28.  Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
29.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
30. Shri R. K. Singh Patel* 
 
*    Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II, Para No. 7096, dated 28 th 
July, 2023. 

iii 
 
 
Secretariat                            
  
1. Smt.  Anita Bhatt Panda Additional Secretary 
2. Shri  Muraleedharan. P Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Pegu Under Secretary 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2023 -24) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Twenty-Seventh Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 21 th Report of the Committee (2022 -23) on the subject ‘Assessment of 
various initiatives under CGHS’ pertaining to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
 
2.  The 21th Report of the Committee on Estimates (2022 -23) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 9 th February, 2023. The Government furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in the 21 th Report on 12 th July, 2023. The 
draft report was considered and approved on 18.09.2023 by the Committee. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 21st Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI;  
18  September, 2023         
27 Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
  REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Twenty First Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “ Assessment of various initiatives under 
CGHS” pertaining to the Ministry of Health And Family Welfare.  
2.     The Twenty First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 09.02.2023. It contained 
18 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare. 
 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations con tained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-   
  
(i)       Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation Para No 1,3,4,5,7,8,10,12,13,14,15,16,17 and 18 
    
      Total: 14 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation Para No.NIL        
         Total: 00 
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)     Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Para  Nos. 6, 9 and 11      
                  Total:03 
(Chapter-IV) 
  
 
(iv)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:  
 Recommendation. No.  2                                                                                          
                     Total: 01 
(Chapter-V) 
  

2 
 
4.       The Committee desire that  Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapte r-I and final Action Taken Replies  
in respect of the recommendation contained in C hapter-V for which interim reply has  
been given by the Government may be furnished to them within six months of the 
presentation of the  Report to the House. 
 
5.       The Commit tee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
  
 Observations/Recommendations(Para No 2) 
 
6.  In their recommendation contained in the original 21st Report, the Committee 
had stated as under: 
“The Committee note that as per norms there has to be at least 6,000 Central 
Government employees for opening of CGHS wellness centre in a new city and at least 
2,000 primary card holders for opening CGHS Wellness Centre in an existing CGHS 
covered city. Th e Committee, however, are aware that there still are many cities and 
towns where there is a sizable number of Central Government employees/beneficiaries, 
but no CGHS wellness centres are functioning in such cities due to the existing norms. 
The Committee w ould also like to highlight the fact that there are many Central 
Government employees posted in remote towns/cities of the country, particularly in the 
North East and other hilly States, who are unable to avail benefits under CGHS. Such 
beneficiaries have to travel long distances to reach the nearest CGHS centres to 
address their medical needs. The Committee are of the opinion that, this scenario, apart 
from being financially draining on the beneficiaries, also affects the productivity of 
employees. Therefore, the Committee would like the Ministry to revise norms/guidelines 
for establishing CGHS Wellness Cent re in a new city in such a way as to include 
Central Government employees, pensioners and their dependent family members for 
meeting the criteria of 6000. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken 
in this regard. Such review must be undert aken inter -alia also with the objective of 
exploring the possibilities of establishing centres in towns and cities, where it doesn’t 
meet the existing norms. They feel that the Government needs to consider relaxation of 
existing norms or create new norms f or opening new wellness centres particularly for 

3 
 
beneficiaries of hilly and difficult States viz. Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jammu & 
Kashmir, UT of Ladakh and North Eastern States. The Committee are also of the 
opinion that the Government should consid er on boarding retired doctors of the State 
Governments on contract basis, in such cities/towns in the initial phase till the process 
of recruitment of doctors is completed for posting in such locations.”  
 
7. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfa re in their Action Taken Reply , has 
stated as under: 
Government considers opening of CGHS Wellness Centre in new Cities and in existing 
CGHS covered cities.  A  considered view is needed to be taken taking into account 
multiple factors, as existing Manpower is fully committed and new posts like the posts of 
Medical officers , Nursing officers, pharmacists , clerical staff, etc are to be sanctioned 
by Department of Expenditure , Ministry of Finance. Government has also appointed a 
Committee under Chairperson of Add itional DDG(HQ), CGHS to study the staffing 
pattern at CGHS Wellness Centre. So , Ministry would take a considered view regarding 
opening of new Wellness Centres at an appropriate time and the observations of the 
Hon’ble Committee will also be taken into a ccount. Central Government employees 
residing in non -CGHS covered areas are however, covered under another health 
scheme, viz., CS (MA) Rules 1944. 
 
8. The Committee had observed that there should be at least  6000 Central 
Government employees and at least 2000 primary card holders for opening a 
CGHS Wellness centre in a new city and in an  existing CGHS covere d city, 
respectively. The Committee had felt the need to revise the said norms in such a 
way as to include Central Gov ernment employees, pensioners and their 
dependent family members for meeting the criteria of 6000 , as many Central 
Government employees posted in remote areas, particularly in the North East and 
other hilly States of the c ountry, have to travel far to reach the nearest CGHS 
centres for medical consultation/treatment. In their reply, the Ministry has stated 
that the existing manpower is fully committed and creation of new posts have to 
be sanctioned by DoE, Ministry of Finance and that a considered view on opening 

4 
 
of new wellness centre s shall be taken at an appropriate time in accordance with 
the observations of the Committee.  The Ministry has also informed about 
coverage of Central Government Employees in non -CGHS covered a reas under 
CS (MA) Rules, 1944, which being nearly 80 year old, itself contains many archaic 
references, and in the Committee’s view, need a thorough review.  While 
reiterating their earlier recommendation , the Committee are of the  firm view that 
decisions on relaxation of existing norms or creation of new norms to enable 
more CGHS beneficiaries as to access CGHS wellness centres  should be taken 
within a definite timeframe.  The Committee urge the Ministry to revise provisions 
of the CGHS guidelines and make  all concerted efforts in conjunction with DoE 
(Ministry of Finance) so that a dense network of CGHS wellness centres gets 
established in the country. Further  the Committee are o f the view that the  final 
recommendations of the Government Committee appointed to study staffing 
pattern and the action taken by Government  thereon may be shared with th is 
Committee within 6 months of present ation of this A ction Taken R eport. The 
Committee also desire to know about the Ministry’s stance on reviewing the CS 
(MA) Rules, 1944.   
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 5) 
9. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee are happy to note the steps taken by the Ministry to strengthen 
the process of consultations and treatment under Indian system of medicine for CGHS 
beneficiaries, which is gaining worldwide popularity now. The Committee also note with 
satisfaction that the number of AYUSH units under CGHS have increased to 97, from 
85 prior to 2018. However, the Committee have observed that the number of 
beneficiaries visiting the AYUSH units for treatment/consultation are very less as 
compared to the number of beneficiaries visiting allopathic wellness centres. Reasons 
could be either the beneficiaries do not have sufficient information on the benefits of 
Indian system of medicines or are just reluctant to go for consultation or treatment due 
to various inhibitions. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry along with 
their proposals to expand the CGHS AYUSH units to new cities, must also strive to 

5 
 
promote the process and benefits of treatment under Indian system of medicines 
through their Department of AYUSH. The Committee, believe that such measures taken 
by the Ministry will be in consonance with the vision of the Government to ensure 
optimal development and propagation of indigenous AYUSH system of healthcare in the 
country.”  
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under: 
“106 AYUSH units are presently functional and 32 more shall become 
operational soon. To improve the awareness about AYUSH stream of medicine, 25% of 
the Webinars held by CGHS are dedicated to subjects from AYUSH System of 
medicine. CGHS signed MoU with Morarjee Desai Institute of Yoga on 09.02.2023 to 
run Health Care Units of Yoga in the CGHS Wellness Centres. Such , Health Care Yoga 
units shall be run  at 20 CGHS Wellness Centre i n Delhi, to begin with, at Janakpuri, 
Hari Nagar, Nangalraya, Palam Colony, Delhi Cantt., Pusa Road, Inderpuri, Laxmi 
Nagar, Chanakvapuri, Laxmi Bai Nagar, Sadiq Nagar, MB Road, Pushp Vihar, Laipat 
Nagar, R. K. Puram Sector -6, Kingsway Camp, Shahdara, Noid a-Sector 11, Ghaziabad 
and Kalkaji-1.” 
 
11. While noting the fact that  the less number of beneficiaries visiting AYUSH 
units of CGHS as compared to those  visiting A llopathic wellness centres, the 
Committee had recommended promotion of treatment under Indian system of 
medicines, along with expansion of CGHS AYUSH units. In their reply, the 
Ministry has informed about 106 AYUSH units as presently functional and 32 
more to be operational soon .  25 % of the webinars held by CGHS are  also 
statedly dedicated to increase awareness on AYUSH system of medicine. While 
appreciating the step s taken, the Committee expect  the Ministry to  continue 
dedicated and pro-active steps go ing beyond webinars . The Committee firmly 
believe that AYUSH awareness stalls or camps, y oga sessions, etc. should be 
organized regularly at wellness centre s, which would generate further 
enthusiasm among beneficiaries and strengthen their belief on the efficacy of the 
wholistic Indian systems of medicine.  

6 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 6) 
12.  In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee are concerned to note that around 30 percent of sanctioned 
strength of Doctors, paramedical and administrative staff for all CGHS set -ups in the 
country are lying vacant. It is really worrisome that out of the sanctioned strength of 
1997 doctors, 490 posts are lying vacant. No wonder, patients are made to wait for long 
time in CGHS dispensaries due to non -availability of doctors. The Committee, while 
taking note of the steps taken by the Ministry to fill -up the vacant posts, recommend the 
Ministry to pursue strongly with the concerned recruiting Departments/Agencies so that 
the recruitment process can be completed expeditiously. The Ministry should not shrug 
off its responsibilities by leaving it to the UPSC/SSC or other recruiting agencies to 
complete the recruitment process. Since providing medical assistance under CGHS is 
their responsibility, they must constantly follow up with them to ensure that the process 
is not delayed. Medical service being an essential and emergency service, recruitment 
to vacancies should be the top priority for the Government. The Committee are of the 
view, that opening or operating CGHS centres without sufficient doctors has no 
meaning and causes inconvenience to beneficiaries.” 
 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
submitted as under: 
“CHS Division of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is regularly submitting 
requisitions to UPSC for recruitment of GDMOs through Combined Medical 
examination.” 
 
14. The Committee had observed that a large number of posts are lying vacant 
across various cadres of CGHS and had, therefore, urged the Ministry to strongly 
pursue and follow up constantly with the recruiting agencies so as to ensure 
completion of the recruitment process expeditiously. The Ministry, in their Action 
Taken Reply, has stated that they are submitting regular requisition s to UPSC for 
recruitment of GDMOs through combined Medical Examination. While reiterating 
their earlier recommendation, the Committee urge t he Ministry to take up the 

7 
 
matter with the recruiting agencies  regularly for a further boo st on the matter, 
while following up with the UPSC so as to ensure that the process  of recruitment 
gets completed in a mission mode  manner. The Committee would l ike to be 
updated o n the details of vacancies reported, exams conducted and candidates 
joined at different levels, during the last three years , within six months of 
presentation of this report.    
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 9) 
15. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee are aware of the fact that for availing treatment in a CGHS 
empanelled private hospital, a patient is required to obtain a referral from CGHS 
dispensary. However, at present, the referral process is cumbersome. Once a patient is 
referred to any private empanelled hospital, if the doctor (at the empanelled hospital) 
prescribes any tests/investigation/treatment, the CGHS beneficiary needs to return to 
the dispensary and get referral from the CGHS doctor for the prescribed 
tests/investigation/treatment. The Committee, have observed that this process where a 
patient has to get ref erral done every time tests/investigations/treatment are prescribed 
by the doctor at any private empanelled hospital adds to the woes of a patient with poor 
health. The Committee would like to believe that CGHS has been envisioned for 
seamless treatment of  the beneficiary, rather than troubling the beneficiary with 
procedures/rules to obtain referrals time and again, once he or she has obtained initial 
referral from any CGHS dispensary. As most of the Government procedures are 
digitized, the Committee would  like the Ministry to review the archaic referral system 
and recommend the Ministry to come up with appropriate solutions to ensure that 
patients, once being referred by dispensary, need not visit multiple times there for 
obtaining referral on subsequent t ests/investigations/indoor treatment as prescribed by 
private empanelled hospitals. The Committee feel that this would also reduce the long 
queues witnessed outside CGHS dispensaries and will also help in reducing the 
workload on doctors. The Committee wou ld like to be updated on the action taken in 
this regard.” 
 

8 
 
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under: 
“Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) provides primary health care 
through Allopathic Wellness Cen tres, which are manned by General Duty Medical 
Officers(GDMOs), recruited through UPSC.  CGHS provides primary health care of 
Consultation and issue of medicines through CGHS Wellness Centers. For specialist 
consultation and hospitalization CGHS beneficiari es are referred to Government 
hospitals and private empaneled hospitals.CGHS beneficiaries are registered with a 
CGHS Wellness Centre closer to their residence. Central Government employee or 
Pensioner is the primary CGHS Card holder and their dependent fa mily members are 
linked as family to the primary card holder. CGHS beneficiaries are attached to an 
identified Wellness Centre generally attend by Medical Officers posted at Wellness 
Centre and quite often all family members tend to attend the same medical  officer. 
CGHS Medical Officers treat acute and chronic illnesses and provides preventive care 
and health education to patients of all ages and treat  people with multiple health issues. 
Moreover, the medical history of beneficiaries is available in CGHS m odules. The 
follow-up treatment after consulting specialists / inpatient treatment are provided at 
Wellness Centers. CGHS Medical Officers therefore, act in a Family Physician Mode, 
thereby providing all advantages of family physician. Therefore, referral to empanelled 
hospitals is only for consultation with specialists of empanelled hospitals. The follow up 
treatment / investigations advised by Specialists of empanelled hospitals are therefore, 
endorsed by CGHS Medical officers. It is also part of checks a nd balances in the 
system. 
However, there are certain exceptions for this endorsement. If any treatment 
procedure/ investigations are advised by a Specialists of empanelled hospitals and are 
required to be un dertaken in a medical emergency , no such endorsement by CGHS is 
required and the same can be under in the same empanelled hospital. Similarly, CGHS 
beneficiaries aged 75 years and above also do not required endorsement to undergo 
listed treatment procedures/ listed investigations advised by Speci alists in the same 
hospital.” 
 

9 
 
17. In order to do away with multiple referrals, t he Committee  had urged  the 
Ministry to come up with appropriate solutions  so as  to ensure that the 
beneficiaries do not have to visit dispensaries multiple times for referrals for the 
same treatment. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply , has stated that the 
subsequent referrals are a part of checks and balance in the system. Taking note 
of the facts mentioned in the  reply of the Ministry, the Committee are of the view 
that even if the entire referral system can’t be done away with, the Ministry could  
at least  try to  fix a ceiling vis-à-vis treatment, which could be avail ed withou t 
referral. The Committee would like to be apprised of the Ministry’s view  in this 
connection.  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 11) 
18. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“Under CGHS, beneficiaries aged 75 years and above can go directly to any 
private CGHS empanelled hospital and take consultations from the doctor for any 
ailment. The Committee, appreciate the existing guidelines but they are of the view that 
these guidelines of direct consultation should be extended  to all the beneficiaries aged 
60 years and above. Fixing age bracket of 75 years for availing direct private 
consultations must have been done with a vision to provide relief to aged beneficiaries. 
The Committee, would like the Ministry to review its guidelines and consider appropriate 
amendments so as to bring all the CGHS beneficiaries aged 60 years and above in the 
ambit of direct private consultation. This would be in consonance with existing set up 
and would not lead to additional expenditure because as such pensioners/beneficiaries 
aged 60 years and above receive cashless treatment from private empanelled hospitals. 
Once beneficiaries 60 years and above are put under one category of seeking direct 
private consultation, the mounting pressure on doctors would be really manageable with 
the existing 70% workforce. Also, the beneficiaries aged 60 and above would be saved 
from visiting dispensaries for the mere sake of getting referral. The Committee, would 
recommend the Ministry to take appropriate action and apprise them.” 
 

10 
 
19. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
submitted as under: 
“As explained under reply to Item No 9, CGHS provides primary health care 
through General Duty Medical Officers in a Family Physician Mode. Consultation from 
Specialists is required for expert opinion and regular follow up treatment is to be taken 
from Med ical Officers of CGHS. Therefore, CGHS beneficiaries cannot consult 
Specialists of empanelled hospitals directly, except under medical emergencies. Similar 
exception is provided in case of CGHS beneficiaries aged 75 years and above. CGHS 
beneficiaries may however consult specialists at any Government Hospitals directly.” 
 
20. The Committee had felt the need for extending direct consultation, for all 
the beneficiaries above age 60, to empanelled hospitals, in a bid to provide relief 
to aged beneficiaries and  also to reduce queuing of beneficiaries at CGHS 
wellness centres. The Ministry, in their Action Taken reply, have not accepted it 
and stated that consultation from specialists is required for expert opinion and 
regular follow up treatment is to be taken from Medical Officers of CGHS. 
Nonetheless the Committee urge the Ministry to again have a relook into the 
“provision of direct consultation” and try to extend it to all the beneficiaries aged 
60 years and above. The  Committee are of the view that this move will not have 
any financial burden and would also reduce the load of doctors at wellness 
centres at a time of paucity of adequate M.O.s in CGHS system.  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 17) 
21. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“As regards rates for treatment, the Committee, have been informed that the 
revision of rates for treatment/diagnosis under CGHS was last undertaken in October, 
2014 in Delhi and in the year 2015 in other cities. It has been informed that for cancer 
and kid ney surgeries, rates were revised. However, virtually a decade has nearly 
passed. The Committee observe that the rates for treatment or diagnosis under CGHS 
are very low as compared to prevailing rates of hospitals in general now. This scenario 
appears to be one of the prime reasons that hospitals are reluctant to provide treatment 

11 
 
to CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee also learn that many empanelled hospitals have 
shown scant interest for renewal or extension of MoA for empanelment due to the wide 
gap in ra tes fixed by CGHS in comparison to prevailing general rates or market rates. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government, to put in place a mechanism 
to review the rates of treatment/diagnosis under CGHS every year and make those 
reasonable enough to attract the interest of a wider number of hospitals.”  
 
22. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under: 
“Government has initiated the process of revision of CGHS rates. CGHS rates for 
three items, viz., Consultation fee, Room rent and ICU charges have been revised w.e.f. 
12.04.2023. CGHS Rates for 36 radiological/Imaging services have been revised w.e.f. 
19.06.2023. Revision of CGHS package rates for other specialties is also being 
undertaken. 87 n ew health care Organizations have also been empanelled under 
CGHS, since April 2023.” 
 
23. The Committee had urged the Ministry to put in place a mechanism so as to 
review and revise the rates of treatment/ diagnoses periodically. The Ministry, in 
their Action Taken Reply, have stated that the process of revision of CGHS rates 
have begun and accordingly consultation fee, room rent, ICU charges have been 
revised w.e.f. 2023. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry have implemented 
their recommendation and accordingly rates for 36 radiological/imaging services 
stand revised w.e.f. 19.06.2023 altoget her with empanelment of 87 new H ealth 
Care Organisations under CGHS. The Committee would like the Ministry to put in 
place a permanent mechanism for periodic revision or cost indexed revisions of 
CGHS rates , so that the empanelled hospitals would be able to extend proper 
healthcare to CGHS beneficiaries . The Committee would also like to draw the 
attention of the Ministry towards subsequent revision of rates for AMA , as well , 
so that beneficiaries under non -CGHS areas also get t he benefit of revision of 
rates, once the CS (MS) Rules, 1944 are reviewed in a time-bound manner.     

12 
 
Chapter – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 1) 
 
The Committee observe that the initiative to provide a specialised medical service on 
subsidised rates to Government employees through CGHS has been a very useful step 
by t he Government which is being expanded over the years. They note that the 
allocation of budget to CGHs has been continuously increased over last five Financial 
years as the network of CGHS coverage has reached to 75 cities now. From an 
allocation of ₹ 2,890 .82 crore  in the year 2017 -18, the allocation has risen to ₹ 4,495 
crore in the current Financial year. They further note with satisfaction that the utilisation 
of budget has been more than 95% of the total allocation during these years. The 
Committee do expect that CGHS shall spend 100% budget in the coming years. While 
responding to the query regarding reasons for surrendering of allocated funds, the 
Ministry has stated ‘savings on account of non -filling of vacant posts’ as one of the 
reasons. The stated  reason of the Ministry is not acceptable, as allocated budget is 
meant for complete utilization as per demands raised by the Ministry and not for 
savings. The Committee further observe that a  number of new Wellness Centres have 
been approved on 05.04.2021 to be established in various cities. However, no separate 
or special allocation have been made in the 2021-22 Budget to meet the expenditure on 
opening of new wellness centres. The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised 
of any financial grant during supplementary stage in the current year for the same. They 
strongly recommend the Government to set aside a percentage of budget allocation or 
create a sub -Head under the Capital Head to meet expenditure relating to 
establishment of new wellness centre s, since no separate Budget is allocated for the 
purpose. The Committee, feel that such a step will enable the Ministry to set a time -
bound date and target for completion of the process to open new wellness centres. It 
will also enable the Ministry to revi ew and evaluate the progress of the work vis -a-vis 
the financial allocation. As the Government has changed the timelines for presentation 
and approval of Demands for Grants of various Ministries by Parliament to ensure 
proper and optimum utilisation of funds, the Committee, are hopeful that the Ministry will 

13 
 
initiate necessary action in line to streamline the process of budgetary allocation and 
expenditure. The Committee, are surprised to know the fact that the limited presence  
of PAOs is one of the reasons for savings/surrender. Hence, they are of the opinion that 
the Ministry must review that location / posting place of DDOs and PAOs, because of 
which bill payments are getting delayed and on many occasions are not being settled 
and paid during the current financial year. CGHS centres/set-ups are spread all over the 
country, but as per information  furnished by the Ministry, PAOs are located only in 5 
cities. The Committee, desire that the Ministry must take up this matter with the 
Controller General of Acc ounts (CGA), Ministry of Finance, to explore the possibility of 
increasing the number of PAOs, so that the settlement of budgetary expenditure could 
be completed in a time bound manner within the financial year.  
Reply of the Government 
The Observations of Hon’ble Committee are noted. 
1. The expenditure of budget by different CGHS Cities is being monitored on 
monthly basis and on quarterly basis to ensure timely utilization of budget 
allocated. Care would be taken to ensure that budgetary demands would be 
submitted as per requirements. 
2. Out of 16 New Allopathic Wellness Centres(WCs)  approved by Department of 
Expenditure, 13 WCs are already functional and 3 more shall be made functional 
soon. Since, buildings for new Wellness Centres are not constructed , 
immediately, additional / separate budget under Capital Head  is not  required for 
opening new Wellness Centres. 
3. Since, the settlement of Credit hospital  bills have been shifted to online 
paperless mode through PFMS system, the matter related to locati on of PAOs in 
only ‘5’ Cities has been largely resolved. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 3) 
 
The Committee, note from the submission of the Ministry that majority of the CGHS 
owned buildings housing the wellness centres are relatively new and  do not require 
major repair/renovation work. The Committee are, however, not convinced as 
beneficiaries visiting the centres have often highlighted poor infrastructure of some of 
the wellness centres viz. shabby buildings, broken windows, lack of proper sitting 
arrangements, lack of proper lights, cleanliness and availability of other basic amenities, 

14 
 
etc. Th e Committee, therefore are of the opinion that the condition of available 
infrastructure, including condition of the buildings should be regularly reviewed by the 
Estate Management Division of the Ministry and necessary renovation or maintenance 
work plann ed accordingly. A well maintained building or infrastructure will create a 
healthy and positive atmosphere in the centres. As the Ministry has already submitted 
that sufficient funds are available for maintenance of existing buildings, the Committee 
recommend  that the fund must be judiciously used for the upkeep and maintenance of 
Wellness Centres, rather than surrendering funds at the end of a financial year. As the 
Ministry has submitted that during the period/year 2020 -2022, 17 proposals for 
construction and 14 proposals for renovation of buildings have been received, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of those projects/CGHS centres and 
the status of their constructions/renovations.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has issued OM dated 17.03.2023 revising the guidelines for Local Advisory 
Committees at Wellness Centres and Zonal Advisory Committees at the level of Zonal 
Additional Directors, CGHS. Major repairs and monitoring of construction is also one of 
the issues under the mandate of Zonal Advisory Committee. 
Status of buildings 
CGHS Buildings at Alaknanda, Rohini -sector-16 and at Vasant Vihar had been 
completed and CGHS wellness Centres are functioning from own buildings. CGHS 
building at Bhopal is under construction and is likely to be completed by September in 
this year. The CGHS building at Avadi , Chennai is likely to be completed by September 
2023. CGHS buildings at Sarita Vihar, Mayr Vihar -Phase-II and at Prasad Nagar are 
under constructions. 
Details pertaining to Propo sals regarding consructions and renovations are submitted 
as under: 
The sanctions issued for constructions/plots in 2020 
1 Purchase of plot at Geeta Colony/Krishna 
Nagar/Gandhi Nagar for construction of CGHS 
WC building 
Rs 7,92,815 – Part 
payment 

15 
 
2 Payment of difference of land premium in respect 
of allotment of plot of land measuring 1314 Sqm 
for construction of CGHS Wellness 
Center/Dispensary building at Minto road, New 
Delhi. 
Rs. 53,96,126 - Part 
payment 
3 Construction of CGHS WC building at Vasan t 
Vihar, New Delhi 
Rs. 1,65,31,181 
4 Construction of CGHS Wellness Centre building 
at Sarita Vihar, New Delhi 
Rs.3,98,50,600 
Part payment 
5 Construction of CGHS WC at Prasad Nagar Rs.3,00,00,000 Part 
payment 
6 Construction of CGHS Wellness Centre building 
at Mayur Vihar Phase-II, Delhi 
Rs.1,00,00,000 Part 
payment 
7 Construction of CGHS Dispensary building at 
Alaknanda/ Kalkaji, New Delhi 
Rs.1,48,92,328 part 
payment 
8 Construction of boundary wall with gate including 
colour wash and jungle clearing of newly merged 
G&RB Dispensary with CGHS, Dehradun 
Rs.11,21,500  
9 Construction of Boundary Wall, Topographical  
Survey, Soil Investigation and  Providing services 
of Watch and Ward for the construction of CGHS 
Wellness Centre Building plot of l and at Paschim 
Vihar, New Delhi 
Rs. 48,55,000 
10 Construction of CGHS WC building at Mayur 
Vihar, Phase-I, Delhi-related to arbitration award. 
Rs. 31,00,000 
 
2020-Renovation proposals 
 
1  40 KVA DG set for 13 passenger lift at CGHS 
Dispensary C.G. Road, New Delhi 
Rs.5,65,950 
2 provision of one  13 passenger lift at CGHS 
Dispensary C.G. Road, New Delhi 
Rs28,40,200 

16 
 
3 Replacement of 2 Nos. Hospital (Passenger cum 
bed) lifts in CGHS WC at Sector -12, R K Puram, 
New  
Delhi 
Rs 49,82,000 
4 Replacement of two lifts and provision of one DG 
set (160 KVA) at  Ayurvedic Hospital & CGHS 
Dispensary Aliganj, New Delhi. 
Rs. 75,96,750 
5 Replacement of existing 02 nos. passenger cum 
bed lifts with 1360 Kg(20 passenger) bed cum 
passenger lifts at CGHS Dispensary, Janakpuri -
New Delhi 
Rs.19,47,560 
6 construction of additional rooms; repair and 
maintenance work at CGHS building N o.19 & 20 
housing AD’s office and WC-1, Dehradun 
Rs.70,71,700 
7 special repair & structural rehabilitation 
&strengthening /retrofitting & miscellaneous work 
at CGHS Ayurvedic Hospital & CGHS Dispensary 
Aliganj building 
66,69,600 
8 Extensive Repair & Maintenance of CGHS 
Dispensary Building, Shahdara, Mansarover Park 
(D-49), Delhi 
74,69,700 
9 renovation of CGHS WC (D65), MB Road, Sec -1, 
Pushp Vihar, New Delhi 
1,04,47,067 
10 upgradation work of CGHS Dispensary, Sector -4, 
Pushp Vihar, New Delhi 
58,81,344 
11 provision of lift for CGHS WC & Polyclinic at K.K. 
Nagar, Chennai 
23,64,691 
 
The sanctions issued for constructions/plots in 2021 
1 Construction of CGHS Wellness Centre building 
at Mayur Vihar Phase-II, Delhi 
Rs.3,14,00,000 
2 construction of CGHS Wellness Centre with 
Laboratory at HVF Avadi, Chennai 
Rs. 7,00,00,000 
3 construction of CGHS Wellness Center Building at 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi 
Rs. 8,75,70,700 
4 Construction of CGHS Wellness Centre building 
at Sarita Vihar, New Delhi 
Rs. 3,70,00,000 

17 
 
5 construction of Boundary Wall, Topographical 
Survey and Soil Investigation and Watch and 
Ward of Plot of land for Construction of CGHS  
Wellness Center at Knowledge Park, Greater 
Noida 
Rs. 72,08,500 
6 construction of Boundary Wall, Topographical  
Survey, Soil Investigation and  Providing services 
of Watch and Ward for the construction of CGHS 
Wellness Centre Building plot of land at Paschim 
Vihar, New Delhi  
Rs. 33,55,000 
 
Sanctions issued for Renovations in 2021 
 
1 renovation of CGHS WC (D65), MB Road, Sec-1, 
Pushp Vihar, New Delhi 
Rs. 1,04,47,067 
2 Electrical Works of General Pool Accommodation 
Flat No. 2 & 3, Block I, Dovar Lane, Central Govt. 
Qtr. Complex, Kolkata occupied by CGHS 
Kolkata for specialist Doctor and Pathological 
service 
Rs. 7,18,274 
3 payment of final bill of Electrical Works in respect 
of Sector-9, Dwarka Wellness Center  
 Rs. 21,00,000 
 
Sanctions issued in 2022 
1 Construction of CGHS WC building at Arira Hills, 
Bhopal Rs. 11,00,00,000 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 4) 
 
As regards CGHS centres operating in rental buildings, the Committee note that 122 
CGHS wellness centres are housed in rental buildings. The Committee were surprised 
as well as intrigued by the submission of the Ministry that some rental buildings viz. 
Bandra (Mumbai) and Pusa Road (Delhi), to name a few, are so old that the names of 
owners of those buildings are unavailable in official records. The Committee are unable 
to comprehend as to how this arrangement is carried on without the name of an owner. 
They urge upon the government to maintain proper records of all CGHS centres housed 
in rental buildings, as payments or funds for rent, etc. are debited from Government 

18 
 
exchequer. Considering that rental buildings have their own set of problems such as the 
premises, recurring expenditure including payment of rent, review of lease agreement, 
etc. apart from having to face the whims and fancies of the owners, the Committee, 
strongly recommend the Government to take necessary steps to construct its own 
buildings at all the cities/locations where CGHS centres are presently functioning from 
rented premises. As the Ministry has informed that land for building CGHS centres at 
suitable locations are required to be allotted by State Government, the Committee, 
further re commend the Government to vigorously pursue with the concerned State 
Governments for allotment of land for the purpose. As some closed PSUs have valuable 
land/buildings at prime locations, the Ministry can explore utilization of such properties 
too. 
Reply of the Government 
Government is pursuing with State Government for allotment of plots , suitable for 
CGHS Wellness Centres. As per the policy CGHS makes efforts to seek Central / sate 
Government buildings or semi- government buildings to open a Wellness Ce ntre. When 
no such accommodation is available, then only, private rented buildings are opted. 
Efforts are also made to utilize the buildings of  BSNL , PSUs, etc., before opting for a 
private accommodation. Recently, new Wellness Centre in Coimbatore was s tarted in a 
BSNL building.  Majority of 33 Postal Wellness Centres taken over by CGHS in 2019 
are operating from the buildings of Dept. of Posts. Additional Directors are also asked to 
updated data of rented buildings on regular basis. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 5) 
 
The Committee are happy to note the steps taken by the Ministry to strengthen the 
process of consultations and treatment under Indian system of medicine for CGHS 
beneficiaries, which is gaining worldwide popularity now.  
The Committee also note with satisfaction that the number of AYUSH units under 
CGHS have increased to 97, from 85 prior to 2018. However, the Committee have 
observed that the number of beneficiaries visiting the AYUSH units for 
treatment/consultation are very less as compared to the number of beneficiaries visiting 
allopathic wellness centres. Reasons could be either the beneficiaries do not have 

19 
 
sufficient information on the benefits of Indian system of medicines or are just reluctant 
to go for consultatio n or treatment due to various inhibitions. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry along with their proposals to expand the CGHS AYUSH 
units to new cities, must also strive to promote the process and benefits of treatment 
under Indian system of medicines through their Department of AYUSH. The Committee, 
believe that such measures taken by the Ministry will be in consonance with the vision 
of the Government to ensure optimal development and propagation of indigenous 
AYUSH system of healthcare in the country.  
Reply of the Government 
106 AYUSH units are presently functional and 32 more shall become operational soon. 
To improve the awareness about AYUSH stream of medicine, 25% of the Webinars 
held by CGHS are dedicated to subjects from AYUSH Syst em of medicine. CGHS 
signed MoU with Morarjee Desai Institute of Yoga on 09.02.2023 to run Health Care 
Units of Yoga in the CGHS Wellness Centres. Such , Health Care Yoga units shall be 
run  at 20 CGHS Wellness Centre in Delhi, to begin with, at Janakpuri,  Hari Nagar, 
Nangalraya, Palam Colony, Delhi Cantt., Pusa Road, Inderpuri, Laxmi Nagar, 
Chanakvapuri, Laxmi Bai Nagar, Sadiq Nagar, MB Road, Pushp Vihar, Laipat Nagar, R. 
K. Puram Sector -6, Kingsway Camp, Shahdara, Noida -Sector 11, Ghaziabad and 
Kalkaji-1. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 11 of Chapter I ) 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 7) 
 
The Committee observe that beneficiaries are facing inconvenience at CGHS centres 
due to poor doctor -beneficiary ratio. Most of the CGHS centres have around 2 doctors 
only present at a time and long lines of patients can be witnessed outside their 
chambers any time. The Committee would therefore urge upon the Government to 
prepare a road map for the future, considering that the number of beneficiaries are 
increasing every year, whereas the number of sanctioned strength of doctors remaining 
static. The Commi ttee are of the view that such pro -active step would help the 

20 
 
Government to make proper assessment of the number of doctors which will be 
required in future, to cater to the needs of growing number of beneficiaries.  
Reply of the Government 
Government has constituted a Committee under the Chairperson of Addl. DDG(HQ) 
CGHS , to study the staffing pattern in CGHS Wellness Centre. The committee has 
submitted a Draft report. It will be examined and after approval of Competent Authority 
necessary action will be initiated for creation of new Posts of Medical Officers and other 
staff. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 8) 
 
The Committee also note that number of posts in the grade of Specialist and GDMOs 
are lying vacant, due to low joining rate of candidates recommended for appointment, 
as well as preference of GDMOs to pursue further studies. The Committee recommends 
that t he Government review the terms and conditions of services in the grade of 
Specialist and GDMOs and make necessary amendments or changes in the service 
conditions to attract bright candidates. The Committee are convinced that such a step 
will help the gover nment in addressing the low joining rate of candidates, as well as 
attrition of incumbents.  
 
Reply of the Government 
CHS Division of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is regularly submitting requisitions 
to UPSC for recruitment of GDMOs through Combined Medical examination. 
Requisition Sent to UPSC for CMSE- 2021-349 
No. of Recommended candidates for CHS - 340 
Requisition Sent to UPSC for CMSE- 2022 (Interviews for to be done)   -314   --                                   
Draft Rules for CMSE- 2023 are under preparation 
No. of candidates clear for Offer of Appointment of CMSE-2021  
In the meantime, retired Government Doctors are engaged by CGHS on a contract 
basis as an interim basis to provide the services of Doctors at Wellness Centres. 
The observation of Hon’ble Committee would be examined. 
 
 

21 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 10) 
 
Under CGHS, the medicines which are not available in the dispensary are indented and 
procured through Authorised local Chemists and provided to the beneficiaries. The 
Committee, have observed that in certain cases the medicines which are indented are 
not procured in time and the beneficiaries have to procure it by themselves from open 
market. This creates inconvenience as well as dissatisfaction among beneficiaries, who 
are making regular contributions to the Central Government Health Scheme. Also, it has 
come to the notice of the Committee that in many cases, the bid/contract of the 
Authorized local Chemist are not renewed well in time and the dispensary is not in a 
position to supply the medicines. The Committee strongly hold that when any 
beneficiary is c ontributing under CGHS, it is the primary responsibility of the 
dispensaries to provide not only medical consultations, but also requisite medicines at 
the earliest. The Committee would like the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to look 
into the cases wherein bids/contracts were not renewed/not awarded afresh on time, 
leading to delays in procurement and subsequent distribution of medicines. The 
Committee, would like to be apprised of the changes/reforms brought into the guidelines 
for local purchase of medicines, so as to ensure uninterrupted supply of the same.  
Reply of the Government 
Government has taken steps to streamline the empanelment of Authorize Local 
Chemists and they are engaged through GeM portal for transparency and better 
participation. Tougher penalties have been prescribed in the terms and conditions for 
imposition of penalty of Rs 100 per drug per beneficiary for non supply of indented 
medicine. Changes have been made in the CGHS modules to capture data of 
commonly indented medicines b y generic names. Such medicines are being procured 
through Jan Aushadhi Pariyojana. The orders are placed by the Additional Directors and 
the medicines are delivered by the Jan Aushadhi Distributors at the Wellness Centres. 
The aim is to procure the medicines to maintain a buffer stock equal to the consumption 
for 2 months. 
 
 
 

22 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 12) 
 
The Committee note the submission of the Ministry regarding certain categories of 
beneficiaries being provided treatment on cashless basis. T he Committee have also 
observed that serving employees of Ministries/Departments, except those serving in the 
M/O Health and Family Welfare and its subordinate offices, are not entitled for this 
facility. In this regard, the Committee are not convinced by the reason specified by the 
Ministry in their submission for not extending cashless treatment to employees/ 
beneficiaries of all Ministries/Departments. The Committee have been informed that 
processing and payment of hospital bills pertaining to CGHS pensioner beneficiaries are 
being completed on the IT -platform of NHA. The Committee, therefore, are of the 
opinion that it is high time the Ministry consider using IT platforms for the benefit of all 
stakeholders, as far as cashless treatment are concerned. Be neficiaries may not have 
the required resources or the time to apply for drawing Advances during certain 
circumstances. The Committee, therefore, would like to underline the importance of 
extending the facility of cashless treatment to all beneficiaries in cluding serving 
employees of all Ministries/Departments. The Ministry may consider using the NHA -IT 
platform or explore the possibility of developing a new software or IT platform for the 
common use of all Ministries and Departments, to streamline the proc ess for 
payment/reimbursement of cashless treatment. Through such a software/IT platform, 
the expenditure with regard to the concerned Budget Head can be monitored and 
payment/reimbursement to beneficiaries by all Ministries and Departments streamlined. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to seriously consider 
expanding the ambit of cashless treatment and apprise them of the action 
proposed/taken. 
 
Reply of the Government 
All CGHS beneficiaries including serving Central Government employees are entitled for 
cashless treatment under medical emergency. As per terms and conditions of 
empanelment, the empanelled Health Care Organizations are required to provide 
treatment on Cashless basis to Pensioner CGHS beneficiaries, Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament, ex-MPs , Serving employees of Ministry Health & Family Welfare and sub -

23 
 
ordinate offices. Reimbursement of the Medical claims in respect of serving employees 
of Departments/Ministries is made by concerned Department/Ministry. Therefore, 
department / ministry have to enter MOA with empanelled hospitals for cashless 
treatment facility for treatment of their staff and accept responsibility to settle the 
hospital bills in timely manner. Recently, Ministry of Home Affairs have through NHA 
entered MOA have  empanelled private hospital for provision of treatment on cashless 
basis for serving personnel of Central Armed Police Forces(CAPFs). 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 13) 
 
The Committee are aware that CGHS wellness centres start functioning early in the 
morning and closes by mid-day/afternoon. The Committee, feel that the existing working 
hours of the centres are one of the reasons for huge rush of beneficiaries witnessed at a 
given time in the centres. Ideally the wellness centres need to be  kept functioning till the 
evening hours for the convenience of those in -service beneficiaries who may need 
consultations after office hours and also to manage the huge rush usually witnessed at 
the centres. Hence, the Ministry may also consider making the  centres functional during 
evening hours, at those locations where the rush of beneficiaries is too high, on a pilot 
basis. The Ministry may also consider appointing retired doctors or work out a 
mechanism to depute senior resident doctors of Government ho spitals, to attend to 
beneficiaries during additional working hours and also to manage efficiently the 
workload of incumbent doctors of such centres. At the same time, the Committee 
appreciate the e -Sanjeevani initiative of the Ministry to start an online consultation 
service for patients, although the same is at an initial phase presently. The Committee 
recommend that e -Sanjeevani can be a boon to elderly and immobile patients in 
particular provided it ensures an efficient service as well as streamlining o f medicines 
availability nearby. 
 
Reply of the Government 
For CGHS Wellness centres to function for 12 hours, the manpower has to be increased 
manifold. There would also be need to create additional counters of pharmacists for 
evening shifts. It is also a fact that the Government offices function up to 530 PM / 6  PM 

24 
 
and after leaving offices, which are generally located away from residential areas, it 
would be quite late in the evening to visit wellness centres. Government has also 
provided option to avail facilities from any CGHS Wellness centre.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 14) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note a very common complaint that doctors posted in 
some CGHS centres, on many occasions, are not found to be present during duty hours 
or are granted leave without posting any substitutes. It ca n cause immense hardship to 
the serious patients, particularly in current COVID surges. Nonetheless, the Committee 
acknowledge the efforts made by the Government to ensure regular attendance of 
doctors, including installation of biometric attendance system  at CGHS centres etc. and 
desire to strictly monitoring and reviewing attendance of doctors and other staff in the 
CGHS periodically. The Committee also recommends deputing substitute doctors 
whenever an incumbent is granted leave, so that beneficiaries vi siting the centres do 
not face any inconvenience. The Committee also urge upon the Government to display 
the names of doctors going on leave on the notice board of the centres well in advance, 
for the information of beneficiaries. Sending such information on registered mobile 
numbers of area beneficiaries would be most appreciated.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Addl. Directors, CGHS monitor the punctuality during inspections of Wellness Centres. 
Additional Director, CGHS try to re -pool the existing manpower to arrange for substitute 
Medical Officers, whenever it is feasible. However, based in report on staffing pattern at 
the CGHS Wellness Centres Government would take measures for creation of 
additional posts, which would address this problem. At present, there is no mechanism 
to send SMS messages to selected group of CGHS beneficiaries about the names of 
Medical Officers on leave. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 15) 
 
The Committee, note tha t bills amounting to ₹ 1500 crore are in different stages of 
processing for payment to HCOs/empanelled hospitals, while the bills worth ₹ 1083 

25 
 
crore have been cleared during the current financial year 2022 -23. The Committee are 
happy to note that since Jun e, 2021, credit hospital bills are being uploaded on NHA -IT 
platform for online processing by NHA and online payment by CGHS in a paperless and 
transparent mode. However, the Committee, have also observed that many bills due for 
payment, are carried over t o the next financial year owing to various reasons, which is 
affecting the credibility of CGHS with regard to timely payment of bills to hospitals. It 
ultimately translates in refusal of treatment to CGHS beneficiaries by some of the 
empanelled hospitals o r demand for a security deposit before starting the treatment. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to work out a mechanism for 
fixing a timeline for fast settlement and payment of bills to hospitals for example, the 
hospitals may be directed  to submit all bills relating to credit facilities provided to 
beneficiaries during a particular month by the 10th day of the following month and 
CGHS must initiate action for settlement and payment of all such bills by the 30th day of 
that month. The Comm ittee, also urge upon CGHS to consider payment of 80% of the 
total outstanding due to a hospital till final settlement/payment of the bills, if there is any 
discrepancy or lacunae in the bills submitted by those hospitals. Such a step will be in 
the intere st of both the beneficiaries and hospitals and will also address various 
grievances related to denial of treatment by hospitals in the wake of non clearance of 
outstanding dues by CGHS.  
Reply of the Government 
Processing of Credit Hospital bills has been shifted to NHA -IT platform for online 
processing by NHA and online payment by CGHS in a paperless and transparent mode 
since June 2021. Additional manpower has been mobilized by CGHS for processing of 
Hospital bills and the progress of bills processing has been regularly monitored by 
Senior Officers in the Ministry. Additional budget has also been provided under PoRB 
Head at RE stage. Due all these efforts, hospital bills of over Rs 3100 Cr  (approx.) had 
been settled in 2022 -23, as against Rs1330 Cr paid in  the preceding year. The 
empanelled hospitals have restored cashless treatment to CGHS beneficiaries. The 
issue of pendency of hospital bills has largely been addressed to. It would not be 
possible to make 80% payment initially, as it would be difficult to reconcile every bill. 

26 
 
Recently government has engaged CMOs In charge of Wellness Centres  as 
Sanctioning Authorities on temporary basis for settlement of Hospital bills. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 16) 
 
The Committee, notice that a Performance Audit covering the period 2016 -17 to 2020-
21 was conducted by C&AG, to examine payment of hospital bills by CGHS. However, 
the Committee, have observed that some of the recommendations are still under 
consideration of the Government. It is worth mentioning  that in line with the 
recommendations of the Committee in the above para, the C&AG has also highlighted 
the need for a prescribed timeline for submission/settlement of claims by hospitals and 
imposing penalty on hospitals for non -adherence to such timelin es. During evidence, 
the Committee were informed that revised timelines are being finalized and will be 
incorporated in the new MoA to be signed with HCOs. The Ministry also submitted their 
action taken on the matters raised by C&AG. The Committee, hope th at the procedure 
pending is since completed and therefore, would like to be appraised of action taken in 
this matter. 
Reply of the Government 
Timelines are incorporated within the TMS module of the NHA  itself which do not 
permit delayed submission. Data b ase of CGHS pensioner beneficiaries is linked with 
NHA platform. National Anti fraud Unit (NAFU) measures are incorporated for detection 
suspected fraud cases. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 17) 
 
As regards rates for treatment, the Committee, have b een informed that the revision of 
rates for treatment/diagnosis under CGHS was last undertaken in October, 2014 in 
Delhi and in the year 2015 in other cities. It has been informed that for cancer and 
kidney surgeries, rates were revised. However, virtually  a decade has nearly passed. 
The Committee observe that the rates for treatment or diagnosis under CGHS are very 
low as compared to prevailing rates of hospitals in general now. This scenario appears 
to be one of the prime reasons that hospitals are reluct ant to provide treatment to 
CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee also learn that many empanelled hospitals have 

27 
 
shown scant interest for renewal or extension of MoA for empanelment due to the wide 
gap in rates fixed by CGHS in comparison to prevailing general  rates or market rates. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government, to put in place a mechanism 
to review the rates of treatment/diagnosis under CGHS every year and make those 
reasonable enough to attract the interest of a wider number of hospitals.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Government has initiated the process of revision of CGHS rates. CGHS rates for three 
items, viz., Consultation fee, Room rent and ICU charges have been revised w.e.f. 
12.04.2023. CGHS Rates for 36 radiological/Imaging services have been revised w.e.f. 
19.06.2023. Revision of CGHS package rates for other specialties is also being 
undertaken. 87 new health care Organizations have also been empanelled under CGHS 
, since April 2023. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 23 of Chapter I ) 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 18) 
 
The Committee were informed about CGHS Panchayat initiative by the Ministry 
between the Ministry and elected representatives at few cities during the evidence. The 
Committee underline the need for r egular healthy interaction between public 
representatives and Government Organisations/Departments with regard to monitoring 
and effective delivery of public services. Till now, there is hardly any interaction between 
the CGHS set ups/officials and local M Ps of the area or region of any CGHS set -up, 
apart from the 5 cities claimed by the Ministry. As they stated to cover the entire country 
within 6 months, i.e. December, 2022, the Committee desire to be apprised of the dates 
and cities concerned in all CGHS Panchayats till date. The Committee would also like to 
know about any concrete steps further taken, based on the feedback of these 
Panchayats. Further, they recommend the Government to devise a mechanism, to 
ensure that every CGHS set -up in the country re gularly interacts, preferably every 3 
months, with the local MP. The Committee strongly feel that such an initiative will help in 
strengthening the services delivered by CGHS, as Members of Parliament apart from 

28 
 
being public representatives, are also benef iciaries themselves, hence their feedback in 
such interactions will greatly benefit CGHS.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Panchayat meetings have been held in all CGHS Cities. These are interactive sessions 
with CGHS beneficiaries and other stake holders. Revised  guidelines have been issued 
by the Ministry on 17 thMarch 2023 for constitution f Local Advisory Committees at 
Wellness Centres and Zonal Advisory Committees(ZACs) at the Additional Director, 
CGHS level.  Additional Directors CGHS had been advised to solicit the participation of 
Hon’ble members of Parliament for the ZAC meetings. During CGHS Panchayats and 
Advisory Committee meetings feedback is received and information related to the 
various initiatives under taken by the Government is disseminated. 
Government has taken several initiatives recently to improve the functioning of CGHS. 
1. OM dated 17th March 2023  regarding Setting up of Grievance Advisory 
Committee At Dispensary Level  and Constitution of Zonal Advisory 
Committees at the Office of  Additional Directors. 
       To ensure optimal functionality to facilitate seamless delivery of health care                  
services and prompt redressal of grievances within the CGHS System Ministry of          
revised guidelines for constitution of Loca l Advisory Committee (LAC) and                    
Constitution of Zonal Advisory Committees at the Office of Additional Directors.  
2. Office Memorandum  dated 31st March 2023  regarding Permission ex -
post facto approval when advice is from AIIMS New Delhi 
        When the advice for any treatment procedure or investigation is from Specialist            
of AIIMS, New Delhi, there is no requirement of examination by another expert            
Committee  for grant of permission/expost facto approval.  
3. OM dated 31st  March 2023 - Modifications  to referral to empanelled 
HCOs without Physical presence of Beneficiary 
In case a CGHS beneficiary is not in a position to physically visit CGHS 
Wellness Centre a request for referral to empanelled hospital / endorseme nt 
may be submitted through an authorized representative. 

29 
 
1. CMO in charge shall, based on the documents submitted like old 
prescription, investigation reports, advice for revisit, etc.,  shall  issue referral 
to  CGHS empanelled hospital for consultation / endorsement, as the case 
may be, without insisting on the physical presence of the patient. 
2. If the CMO in -charge is not satisfied with the papers submitted through 
the representative, he/she may avail the option of contacting the CGHS 
beneficiary by means of a video-call, or make a domiciliary visit to satisfy the 
requirement of referral/endorsement. 
3. OM dated 12th  Apr 2023  revising CGHS package rates for three items  
Consultation Fee  ICU Charges and Room Rent 
Ministry and is now decided to revise the rates for these items as per the   details 
given under: 
1. Consultation fee - 
OPD Consultation Rs 350 /- 
IPD   Consultation Rs. 350/- 
 
2. ICU Charges     - Rs 5400/- for all categories of 
     ward entitlement (General Ward/Semi-private ward /Private ward) 
     It includes accommodation charges 
    (for non-NABH accredited Hospitals the charges shall be 15% Less) 
3. Room Rent 
               General ward          Rs .1500/- 
               Semi-private ward Rs. 3000/- 
               Private ward           Rs. 4500/-  
5. Office Order dated 20th   April  2023 regarding constitution of SQUAD 
Team 

30 
 
Orders have been issued for constitution of ‘SQUAD’ at the Zonal Level under 
CGHS, Delhi for random i nspection of CGHS Wellness Centres and Constitution 
of a ‘Inspection Team’ at CGHS(HQ) for random Inspection of empanelled Health 
Care Organizations (HCOs). 
6. OM dated 1st May 2023   Validity of CGHS Card in all Wellness Centres  in 
India 
         It has been reiterated that CGHS Card is valid at any CGHS Wellness Centre in   
the Country for availing CGHS benefits as per the details given under: 
 
i) CGHS Card is valid in any Wellness Centre in India and no additional 
document / attachment is required.  
ii)  Medicines shall be issued for up to to '3' months, in case of beneficiaries 
undergoing treatment for chronic illnesses. 
iii) Referral / endorsement for treatment from private HCOs empanelled under 
CGHS shall be issued from any CGHS Wellness centre. 
7. OM dated 8th  May 2023  regarding Submission of MRC to CGHS in City 
where treatment is taken 
CGHS pensioner beneficiaries (principal card holders) are now permitted to     submit 
Medical Reimbursement Claims (MRCs) to CGHS of city, where the        treatment  was 
taken. 
          Additional Director shall generate ID number and reimburse the amount       from 
the same city.  
 However, option to submit Medical claim in Parent city remains unchanged.  
Second Allopathic Wellness Centre has been inaugurated in Cha ndigarh on the 9th 
June 2023. Presently 340 Allopathic CGHS Wellness Centres are functional in 80 Cities 
in the Country. 
 
 
 

31 
 
CHAPTER III 
 Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies 
NIL 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 6) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that around 30 percent of sanctioned strength of 
Doctors, paramedical and administrative staff for all CGHS set -ups in the country are 
lying vacant. It is really worrisome that out of the sanctioned strength of 1997 doct ors, 
490 posts are lying vacant. No wonder, patients are made to wait for long time in CGHS 
dispensaries due to non -availability of doctors. The Committee, while taking note of the 
steps taken by the Ministry to fill-up the vacant posts, recommend the Ministry to pursue 
strongly with the concerned recruiting Departments/Agencies so that the recruitment 
process can be completed expeditiously. The Ministry should not shrug off its 
responsibilities by leaving it to the UPSC/SSC or other recruiting agencies to complete 
the recruitment process. Since providing medical assistance under CGHS is their 
responsibility, they must constantly follow up with them to ensure that the process is not 
delayed. Medical service being an essential and emergency service, recruitme nt to 
vacancies should be the top priority for the Government. The Committee are of the 
view, that opening or operating CGHS centres without sufficient  
doctors has no meaning and causes inconvenience to beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
CHS Division of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is regularly submitting requisitions 
to UPSC for recruitment of GDMOs through Combined Medical examination. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 14 of Chapter I ) 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 9) 
 
The Committee are aware of the fact that for availing treatment in a CGHS empanelled 
private hospital, a patient is required to obtain a referral from CGHS dispensary. 
However, at present, the referral process is cumbersome. Once a patient is referred to 

33 
 
any private empanelled hospital, if the doctor (at the empanelled hospital) prescribes 
any tests/investigation/treatment, the CGHS beneficiary needs to return to the 
dispensary and get referral from the CGHS doctor for the prescribed 
tests/investigation/treatment. The Committee, have observed that this process where a 
patient has to get referral done every time tests/investigations/treatment are prescribed 
by the doctor at any private empanelled hospital adds to the woes of a patient with poor 
health. The Co mmittee would like to believe that CGHS has been envisioned for 
seamless treatment of the beneficiary, rather than troubling the beneficiary with 
procedures/rules to obtain referrals time and again, once he or she has obtained initial 
referral from any CGH S dispensary. As most of the Government procedures are 
digitized, the Committee would like the Ministry to review the archaic referral system 
and recommend the Ministry to come up with appropriate solutions to ensure that 
patients, once being referred by d ispensary, need not visit multiple times there for 
obtaining referral on subsequent tests/investigations/indoor treatment as prescribed by 
private empanelled hospitals. The Committee feel that this would also reduce the long 
queues witnessed outside CGHS d ispensaries and will also help in reducing the 
workload on doctors. The Committee would like to be updated on the action taken in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Central Government Health Scheme  (CGHS) provides primary health care through 
Allopathic W ellness Centres, which are manned by General Duty Medical Officers  
(GDMOs), recruited through UPSC. CGHS provides primary health care of Consultation 
and issue of medicines through CGHS Wellness Centers. For specialist consultation 
and hospitalization CGHS  beneficiaries are referred to Government hospitals and 
private empanelled hospitals. CGHS beneficiaries are registered with a CGHS Wellness 
Centre closer to their residence. Central Government employee or Pensioner is the 
primary CGHS Card holder and thei r dependent family members are linked as family to 
the primary card holder.  
CGHS beneficiaries are attached to an identified Wellness Centre generally attend by 
Medical Officers posted at Wellness Centre and quite often all family members tend to 
attend t he same medical officer. CGHS Medical Officers treat acute and chronic 

34 
 
illnesses and provides preventive care and health education to patients of all ages and 
treat  people with multiple health issues. Moreover, the medical history of beneficiaries 
is avai lable in CGHS modules. The follow -up treatment after consulting specialists / 
inpatient treatment are provided at Wellness Centers. CGHS Medical Officers therefore, 
act in a Family Physician Mode, thereby providing all advantages of family physician.  
Therefore, referral to empanelled hospitals is only for consultation with specialists of 
empanelled hospitals. The follow up treatment / investigations advised by Specialists of 
empanelled hospitals are therefore, endorsed by CGHS Medical officers. It is also part 
of checks and balances in the system. However, there are certain exceptions for this 
endorsement. If any treatment procedure/ investigations are advised by a Specialists of 
empanelled hospitals and are required to be undertaken in a medical emergency , no 
such endorsement by CGHS is required and the same can be under in the same 
empanelled hospital. Similarly, CGHS beneficiaries aged 75 years and above also do 
not required endorsement to undergo listed treatment procedures/ listed investigations 
advised by Specialists in the same hospital. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 17 of Chapter I ) 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 11) 
 
Under CGHS, beneficiaries aged 75 years and above can go directly to any private 
CGHS empanelled hospital and take consultations from the doctor for any ailment. The 
Committee, appreciate the existing guidelines but they are of the view that these 
guidelines of direct consultation should be extended to all the beneficiaries aged 60 
years and above. Fixing age bracket of 75 years for availing direct private consultations 
must have been done with a vision to provide relief to aged beneficiaries. The 
Committee, would like the Ministry to review its guidelines and consider appropriate 
amendments so as to bring all the CGHS beneficiaries aged 60 years and above in the 
ambit of direct private consultation. This would be in consonance with existing set up 
and would not lead to additional expenditure because as such pensioners/beneficiaries 
aged 60 years and above receive cashless treatment from private empanelled hospitals. 
Once beneficiaries 60 years and above are put under one category of seeking direct 

35 
 
private consultation, the mounting pressure on doctors would be really manageable with 
the existing 70% workforce. Also, the beneficiaries aged 60 and above would be saved 
from visiting dispensaries for the mere sake of getting referral. The Committee, would 
recommend the Ministry to take appropriate action and apprise them.  
Reply of the Government 
As explained under reply to Item No 9, CGHS provides primary health care through 
General Duty Medical Officers in a Family Physician Mode. Consultation from 
Specialists is required for expert opinion and regular follow up treatment is to be taken 
from Medical Officers of CGHS. Therefore, CGHS beneficiaries cannot consult 
Specialists of empanelled hospitals directly, except under medical emergencies. Similar 
exception is provided in case of CGHS beneficiaries aged 75 years and above. CGHS 
beneficiaries, may however consult specialists at any Government Hospitals directly. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 20 of Chapter I ) 
 
 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER V 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 2) 
 
The Committee note that as per norms there has to be at least 6,000 Central 
Government employees for opening of CGHS wellness centre in a new city and at least 
2,000 primary card holders for opening CGHS Wellness Centre in an existing CGHS 
covered city. The Committee, however, are aware that there still are many cities and 
towns where there is a sizable number of Central Government empl oyees/beneficiaries, 
but no CGHS wellness centres are functioning in such cities due to the existing norms. 
The Committee would also like to highlight the fact that there are many Central 
Government employees posted in remote towns/cities of the country, p articularly in the 
North East and other hilly States, who are unable to avail benefits under CGHS. Such 
beneficiaries have to travel long distances to reach the nearest CGHS centres to 
address their medical needs. The Committee, are of the opinion that, th is scenario, 
apart from being financially draining on the beneficiaries, also affects the productivity of 
employees. Therefore, the Committee would like the Ministry to revise norms/guidelines 
for establishing CGHS Wellness Centre in a new city in such a w ay as to include 
Central Government employees, pensioners and their dependent family members for 
meeting the criteria of 6000. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken 
in this regard. Such review must be undertaken inter -alia also with the objective of 
exploring the possibilities of establishing centres in towns and cities, where it doesn’t 
meet the existing norms. They feel that the Government needs to consider relaxation of 
existing norms or create new norms for opening new wellness centres particularly for 
beneficiaries of hilly and difficult States viz. Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jammu & 
Kashmir, UT of Ladakh and North  Eastern States. The Committee are also of the 
opinion that the Government should consider on boarding retired doctors of the State 
Governments on contract basis, in such cities/towns in the initial phase till the process 
of recruitment of doctors is completed for posting in such locations.  
 

37 
 
Reply of the Government 
Government considers opening of CGHS Wellness Centre in new Cities and in existing 
CGHS covered cities.  A  considered view is needed to be taken taking into account 
multiple factors, as existing Manpower is fully committed and new posts like the posts of 
Medical officers , Nursing officers, pharmacists , clerical staff, etc are to be sanctioned 
by Department of Expenditure , Ministry of Finance. Government has also appointed a 
Committee under Ch airperson of Additional DDG(HQ), CGHS to study the staffing 
pattern at CGHS Wellness Centre. So , Minstry would take a considered view regarding 
opening of new Wellness Centres at an appropriate time and the observations of the 
Hon’ble Committee will also be taken into account. 
Central Government employees residing in non -CGHS covered areas are however, 
covered under another health scheme, viz., CS(MA) Rules 1944. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 08 of Chapter I ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
    September, 2023         
    Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2023-2024)  
  
The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th September, 2023 from 1500 hrs. 
to 1715 hrs in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
 3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
 4. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
 5. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
 6. Shri Dilip Saikia 
 7. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
 8. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
 9. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
 10. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
13. Dr. K.C. Patel 
14. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
16. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
17. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
18. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
19. Shri Prathap Simha 
20. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
21. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
 

39 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda  -       Additional Secretary 
           2. Shri Muraleedharan. P     -       Director 
                              
2.       At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3.       The Committee then took up for cons ideration and adoption of the Draft 
Report on Action taken by the Government on the recom mendations contained in 
the 21st Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the 
Subject “Assessment of various initiatives under CGHS”. 
 
4. The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Report  without 
any modifications and  authorised the Chairpers on to present the same to Lok 
Sabha. 
 
5. XXX   XXX  XXX 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 21th Report of the Committee on Estimates 
 (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 18 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. NO. 1,3,4,5,7,8,10,12,13,14,15,16,17 and 18) 
14 
 Percentage of total recommendations 77.78% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
NIL 
Percentage of total recommendations 
00 
 
 
00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(SI. NO. 6, 9 and 11) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
03 
 
 
16.67% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect  of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
(SI. No. 2) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
01 
 
 
05.55% 
 
 
 