4 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
PREPAREDNESS OF ARMED FORCES- DEFENCE PRODUCTION AND 
PROCUREMENT   
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in Twenty-
Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]  
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2020-21) 
 
 
FOURTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 

FOURTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2020-21) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in Twenty-
Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on    23 September, 2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
September, 2020/ Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
  

CONTENTS 
 
 
                     PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2019-20)          
 
INTRODUCTION                
 
 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government 
29 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies 
95 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government’s replies have not been accepted 
by the Committee 
103 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
 
I 
 
II 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
Status of DPSUs regarding registration and 
implementation of TReDS 
 
AONs approvals for System approved by DRDO: 2015-18 
  
107 
 
 
 
112 
 
115  
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I 
 
II 
Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee on  
Estimates held on 21.09.2020  
 
Analysis of  the action taken by G overnment on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -
Ninth report of the Committee on Estimates (16 thLok 
Sabha) 
 
 
116 
 
118 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21) 
 
Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat – Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
     2.  Kunwar Danish Ali 
     3.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
     4. Shri Pradan Baruah  
                5. Shri Sudharshan Bhagat 
     6. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
     7.  Shri P.P. Chaudhary  
     8.  Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan 
     9. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
              10.  Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
              11.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
              12. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
   13.  Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
   14.  Shri Dayanidhi Maran    
   15.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
   16.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
   17.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
   18.  Dr. K.C. Patel 
   19.  Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
   20.  Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
   21.  Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
   22.  Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
   23.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
   24.  Shri Francisco Sardinha 
   25.  Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
              26. Shri Prathap Simha 
   27.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
   28.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
   29.  Shri Kesineni Srinivas  
   30. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates  (2020-21) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Fourth 
Report on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 
‘Preparedness of Armed Forces  - Defence Production and Procurement' pertaining to 
the Ministry of Defence. 
 
2. The Twenty-Ninth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates was 
presented to Lok Sabha  on 25 July, 2018.  Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
Recommendations were received from the Ministry on 7 th October, 2019 and 17 th 
December, 2019.   Moreover, ATNs in respect of Recommendation Nos . 10, 11, 13 and 
25 were sent to the Chairperson dire ctly by the Ministry. The draft Report was 
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 21st September, 
2020.  
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -Ninth Report of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT, 
22 September, 2020 
Bhadrapada 31, 1942 (Saka) 
CHAIRPERSON, 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE. 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 29 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Estimates on the subject ‘Preparedness of Armed Forces: Defence 
Production and Procurement’ pertaining to the Ministry of Defence. 
1.2       The 29th Report ( 16th Lok Sabha ) of the Committee on Estimates (2018 -19) on 
the s ubject ‘Preparedness of Armed Forces : Defence Production and Procurement’ 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 25 th September, 2018. It contained 30 
Recommendations/Observations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 
Recommendations/Observations, except ATN i n respect of Recommendation no. 26 
were received from the Ministry of Defence on 7 th October, 2019. The ATN in respect of 
Recommendation no. 26 was received on 17 th December, 2019. Further  ATNs in 
respect of Recommendation Nos. 10,11,13 and 25 were sent to  Chairperson directly by 
the Ministry. 
1.3       Replies to the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
    Sl. Nos 3 to 5, 7, 9, 14 to 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28 and 29 
                                                                                                                      Total = 17 
 (Chapter II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
     Sl. Nos. 6, 8, 10 to 13,17and 25 
Total = 8 
  (Chapter III) 

2 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
       Sl. Nos. 1, 2, and 19  
                                                                                                      Total = 3 
 (Chapter IV) 
(iv)  Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
       Sl. Nos. 24 and 30 
                                                                                                                         Total = 2 
 (Chapter V) 
1.4       The Committee desire that final replies to the Recommendation No. 24 and 30 
and response to comments contained in Chapter I of this Report should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
1.5       The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on some of 
their Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Observation/Recommendation No. 1-2 
Increasing the Expenditure on Defence Services 
1.6       The Committee had noted that India needed its Defence preparedness to be 
kept consistently at the highest level on account of its strategic location, having a 
coastline of about 7500 kms and land borders of 15000 kms coupled with the fact that 
 its western, north -western, northern and north -eastern borders are volatile because of 
historical as well as strategic reasons. The Committee had also noted that the 
percentage of Defence e xpenditure, when compared to Central Government 
expenditure, had declined from 13.15 during 2014 -15 to 12.20 during 2017-18. Defence 
expenditure when analysed as a percentage of GDP, ranged between 2.06 per cent 
(2014-15) to 1.56 per cent (2017 -18). As per  an analysis in a Stockholm International 
Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) study, defence expenditure as a share of GDP of 

3 
 
China and France had remained the same, increased in case of Saudi Arabia and 
Russia and decreased in case of USA and UK in the last decade (2007 -2017). 
However, keeping in view the scale of GDP of the developed countries, the decrease of 
defence expenditure as percentage of GDP in India, as per Government data, seems 
more noticeable. The Committee had further noted that the defence exp enditure at 
1.56% of GDP was at the lowest level since 1962 when the India -China war was fought. 
In the current geo -political scenario, a country of the size of India could not afford 
complacency when it was a question of defence preparedness as our preparedness had 
to be for a two -front war and retaining our dominance in the Indian Ocean at the same 
time. The Committee had therefore, strongly emphasized that allocation of adequate 
financial resources for defence preparedness both for the current needs and future 
expansion and modernization plans should be accorded highest priority to enable the 
Armed Forces to meet the challenges concerning safety and security of the Country. 
1.7  The Ministry, in its reply has stated as under : 
               “ It may not be always appropriate to think about Defence spending in terms of 
national economic output. If the economy grows at a faster rate, spending decreases as 
a percentage of GDP. There is also a worldwide trend of decline in defence expenditure 
w.r.t. GDP as can be seen from the table as under:- 
Country China US Brazil France Germany Italy Spain UK Japan 
In 1960 2.5% 
(in 
1990) 
8.6% 2.7% 6.5% 4.0% 3.1% 2.3% 6.3% 1.1% 
In 2016 1.9% 3.3% 1.3% 2.3% 1.2% 1.5% 1.2% 1.9% 1.0% 
 *Source: SIPRI/Times of India Article dated 26th March, 2018. 
  

4 
 
          Therefore, it doesn’t mean that the level of spending has fallen, or has even 
become inadequate. Looking at spending as a percentage of GDP thus creates an 
illusion of declined spending by ignoring the size of the econom y. As per SIPRI military 
expenditure database, India is better compared to China in terms of percentage of 
defence expenditure vis -à-vis GDP. In 2016 and 2017, China spent 1.9% of their GDP 
on defence, whereas India spent 2.5% of its GDP on defence. 
          (2).Total Defence Expenditure (including Miscellaneous and Pension) as a 
percentage of Central Government Expenditure was 17.14% in 2014 -15. In 2017 -18 
also, it is 17.14%. In real terms defence expenditure has grown by ₹ 1,19,260.71 crore 
as the Central Government Expenditure increased from ₹ 16,63,673 crore in 2014 -15 to 
₹ 24,42,213 crore in 2017-18. 
            (3) The Ministry, therefore suggests that it would be more prudent to look at 
Defence expenditure as percentage of total Central Governm ent Expenditure on the 
Central Government Capital Expenditure.  This question was also examined in detail by 
the Kargil Review Committee. It too, did not recommend a specific, targeted percentage 
of the GDP to be earmarked for defence. It exhorted the need to extract the maximum 
value from each defence rupee, inter -alia through rigorous prioritisation, restructuring of 
the defence forces, integration with defence production and focusing resources in areas 
likely to enhance the effectiveness of the defence fo rces. The Armed Forces are 
accorded the highest possible consideration for allocation of budget. Requirement of 
funds will be assessed and provision of additional funds will be made as the need arises 
based on pace of expenditure”. 
 1.8  While taking note that in the current geo -political scenario, our country 
cannot afford complacency when it was a question of defence preparedness, the 
Committee had strongly emphasized for allocation of adequate financial 
resources for defence preparedness.  The Committee are constrained to note  the 
reply of the Ministry wherein they   have inter -alia stated that there is also a 
worldwide trend of decline in defence expenditure w.r.t. to GDP and cited   
examples of declining GDP to defence expenditure ratio in respect of oth er major 

5 
 
countries.  The Committee strongly feel that  India faces constant threats at all its 
land borders and our defence preparedness should not suffer on account of lack 
of financial resources.   Moreover, there is great disparity in the defence 
expenditure incurred by China and by India, although admittedly Chinese 
economy is much larger compared to India.   The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation that there should be adequate financial resources made 
available for defence preparedness b oth for the current needs as well as 
expansion and modernization plans and should be accorded highest priority to 
enable the Armed Forces to meet the challenges concerning safety and security 
of the country.   
Observation/Recommendation No. 3-4 
Increasing the proportion of Capital Procurement Budget within the Defence 
Budget 
1.9    The Committee had noted that the share of Capital Expenditure as a percentage 
of total Defence Services Expenditure was abysmally low and continuously declining 
over the years. F rom 39% in the year 2012 -13, the share of capital expenditure came 
down to 34% in 2018 -19. As a result, the procurement had to be adjusted as per the 
budgetary allocations made by the Government which were not as per the requirements 
projected as per Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP). It had an adverse 
impact on modernisation process of our Armed Forces and tantamount to compromising 
safety and security of our Country. The Committee strongly felt that in view of the 
intensity and complexity of o ur security challenges due to current geopolitical 
environment, India could not afford to be lagging behind in defence preparedness. 
Noting the urgent need to replace the obsolete armaments with state -of-the-art weapon 
systems, the Committee had recommended that the capital procurement Budget should 
be in consonance with the projections made by the Armed Forces as per LTIPP. 
1.10. Further, analysis of the data with regard to budgetary allocations for capital 
procurement for Services indicated variations in BE, RE and Actuals during various 
years and the Committee had noted that the allocations made at Budgetary Estimates 

6 
 
stage had been consistently reduced at RE level. Further, even the reduced allocations 
could not be utilized fully during the years 2014 -15 and 2015-16. The Committee were 
apprised by the Secretary, Defence  Acquisition, that the requirement of the Armed 
Forces was very high and the fund allocations to that extent was not there. The 
Committee, therefore, while recommending for adequate alloca tions for defence 
production, had asked the Department to analyse the reasons and take all the 
corrective actions to ensure that the resources allocated were fully utilized which would 
help in getting further higher allocations in the coming years. 
1.11  In its reply, the Ministry  has stated as under : 
         "Details of projections made and fund allocated in Budget Estimate, Revised 
Estimates, Modified Appropriation and Actual expenditure during the last five years and 
the current year are as following:- 
(₹. in Crore) 
Year BE Projected BE Allocated RE MA (Final 
Grant) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2013-14 134070.26 86740.71 78872.23 78872.23 79125.05 
2014-15 145091.29 94587.95 81965.24 81965.24 81886.98 
2015-16 117955.42 94588.00 81400.00 79483.28 79958.98 
2016-17 121929.80 86340.00 79370.29 81747.26 86367.29 
2017-18 146113.54 86488.01 86488.01 86488.01 90460.26 
2018-19 172203.30 93982.13 93982.13 93965.45 94893.27 
        (2) Defence Budget is peculiar in nature and is different from budget of other Civil 
Ministries. No set trend could be seen in the expenditure pattern of Defence Budget 
especially under Capital Head. This is basically due to the fact that many of the projects 

7 
 
being handled in Defence Ministry involve large payments spread across years.  Due to 
this fact there is a possibility that some years may see large expenditure whereas the 
succeeding year may see fall in expenditure.  Though all aspects are taken into account 
while projecting/allocating funds, it may not be possible to accurately predict the 
expenditure as it depends on various facts like necessary approvals, meeting the 
milestones/time-lines, delays in delivering of items, slippages, etc.   
          (3) It may also be added that the progress of capital acquisition expenditure is 
monitored regularly by the Acquisition Wing which is tasked with the responsibility of 
defence capital procurement. Acquisition Wing, being a specialist organization created 
on the basis of the Kargil Committee Report and recommendations of the Group of 
Ministers, not only monitors capital expenditure, but also looks after all capital 
acquisition projects from inception to finality. In addition, the Defence Procurement 
Board, which is chaired by Defence Secretary and The Defence Acquisition Council 
headed by Raksha Mantri comprising of all stakeholders, monitors adherence to broad 
timelines in Defence Procurement. 
          (4) Necessary instructions are being issued from time to time for adherence to 
financial propriety and avoidance of under-utilization of funds/wasteful expenditure. The 
trend in under-utilization of Budget has been reversed in FY 16-17 and 17-18. In FY 
2017-18 under Capital Head, allocations at RE, and MA (Final Grant) stage remained 
the same as at BE stage i.e. ₹ 86,488.01 Crore and Expenditure incurred is ₹. 
90,460.26 Crore.  In FY 2018-19, an amount of ₹ 93,982.13 Crore has been allocated 
for Defence Services Estimates under Capital Budget i.e. an increase of ₹ 7494.12 Cr. 
over RE/BE of 2017-18. Out of the allocated funds in 2018-19, an amount of ₹ 
74,091.65 crore has been incurred as expenditure upto December, 2018 i.e. 78.84%. 
        (5) The total Capital Budget (Defence Services Estimates+MoD (Miscellaneous) of 
Ministry of Defence for 2018-19 is ₹ 99,563.86 crores, which is an increase of ₹ 7984.16 
crores (8.72%) over Capital Budget of 2017-18 (₹ 91,579.70 crores). Further, Capital 
Budget of Ministry of Defence is approximately 33% of the total Capital expenditure of 
the Central Government". 

8 
 
  
1.12 The Committee note the fact that the expenditure, specially under Capital 
head, in the Ministry of Defence is different from other Ministries and there is 
likelihood of expenditure spreading across ye ars. The Committee also appreciate  
that there are institutional arrangements like Defence Procurement Board and 
Defence Acquisition Council to monitor the defence procurement. With such 
institutional mechanisms in place, the Committee opine that inordinate delays are 
avoidable on that account. Further, it is seen that the Ministry has not responded 
to the observation that allocations are not being made as per LTIPP.   The 
Committee may be apprised of the reasons thereof.  
Observation/Recommendation No. 15 
Ordnance Factory Board - Their role a nd contribution to preparedness of Armed 
Forces 
1.13 Noting that the major challenges/constraints before the OFBs were Non -Uniform 
demand from Armed Forces and Security Forces, uneconomic quantities to be 
produced to meet strategic needs, difficulties in e ntering into long term agreement with 
dedicated vendors and low scale of production which did not attract the vendors to 
respond to LTE/OTE and that there were quality issues on the part of the Services with 
regard to the armaments produced by the Ordnance  Factories, the Committee had 
emphasized for better coordinating mechanisms between the OFBs and the Services. 
The Committee had held that there was an urgent need on the part of the Services to 
place the orders for various armaments well in advance keepin g in view the 
complexities and the long period required for production of armaments so as to sustain 
the viability of these Factories. The Committee had observed that the draft Defence 
Production Policy 2018 -19 had talked of active participation of private  sector in the 
defence production and OFBs needed to work more professionally and increase their 
competence to remain viable. Modernisation and upgradation of technology in 
Ordnance Factories were to be accorded top priority. 

9 
 
 1.14     The Ministry has submitted as under : 
     "Demand from the Armed Forces is based on their operational requirements 
which are dynamic in nature. However, to provide adequate workload to the Ordnance 
Factories, various interactive meetings are being held with the Armed Forces and OFB 
to finalise the mutually agreed targets. Besides, OFB also caters to the demands of 
other indentors like Paramilitary Forces and State Police Forces. 
     A budgetary allocation of ₹ 11742.42 crore (BE 2018 -19) has been made to OFB 
for Army supplie s. However, the allocation has been stated to be inclusive of GST and 
all applicable taxes/overheads. Including GST in the total budgetary allocation will bring 
down the total budget for supplies to the Army significantly and will also adversely 
impact the manufacturing activities of Ordnance Factories. As per the system in vogue, 
the budgetary allocation for Defence supplies does not include the applicable taxes. 
Matter has been taken up at the appropriate level for exclusion of GST from budgetary 
allocation.  
    OFB has been geared up to make up for the reduced/fluctuating demand from 
Army by focusing on the export market. Adequate thrust has been given to export of 
Arms and Ammunition by way of re -structuring export governance in OFB. Potential 
markets a broad are being proactively identified for expansion of export and thereby 
increasing the scale of production in OFB.  
   Qualitative issues raised by Indentors are being regularly monitored and 
addressed in association with Indentors. The Ministry constit uted a Committee to look 
into certain issues on quality processes in the Ordnance Factories, their relation with 
DGQA establishment, quality issues related to ToT, licensed production and structural 
changes required to make the Ordnance Factory Board move to six sigma status. A 
pilot project in selected Ordnance Factories has been implemented wherein the 
modified roles of Finance and Accounts and DGQA and OFB have been implemented 
with the objective of studying effect of single agency responsibility for qua lity of 
manufacture of a product.  

10 
 
    Towards greater customer engagement, the Ammunition Group of OFB has 
initiated visits of Ordnance Depots and had interactions with the Depot Heads for the 
purpose of getting feedback on deficiency in supply of ammunit ion (if any), quality of 
ammunition, packaging & handling, storage conditions and other aspects. Corrective 
actions have been taken/are being taken by OFB on all feedback.   Also, interactive 
meetings are being held regularly with the concerned Line Directo rates of Services and 
Operating Divisions of OFB to resolve various issues. Further, periodic reviews are 
being done with all the stakeholders at Ministry level to address specific cases of delay 
in supplies to Armed Forces.  
     In order to enable OFB to  work professionally, a revised OFB Procurement 
Manual-2018 which deals with procurement of input materials/stores by OFB has come 
into effect from 01.09.2018. There has been enhancement of delegation of financial 
powers to OFB for procurement of stores an d Plant & Machinery. Further, Approval -in-
Principle (AIP) has been accorded for 10 proposals of OFB for procurement of Plant & 
Machinery during the year 2018-19 with an estimated cost of approx. ₹ 706 crore.  
         The Ministry is committed to create, m aintain and modernize capital assets of 
OFB with appropriate contemporary technology at par with global standards for 
enhancing productivity, quality and quantity to provide state -of-the-art Battlefield 
Equipment to the Services". 
1.15   The Committee appr eciate the steps taken by the Ministry in a bid to make 
the OFBs run on professional lines and also to modernize and upgrade their 
factories. The Committee also express their satisfaction that a coordinating 
mechanism between the OFBs and the Armed Forces has been set up which 
would go a long way in removing production bottlenecks and creating better 
products by OFBs at a faster pace. The Committee have noted the concern raised 
by the Ministry regarding inclusion of GST in the budgetary allocation to the 
OFBs. Since the Ministry has already initiated efforts to resolve this issue, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the same. 
 

11 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 19 
1.16 The Committee had noted that the existing Procurement system for advance d 
weapons involved three stages of which second and third stage, i.e., the stage of field 
trials and contract negotiation stage took considerable time. The Committee further 
noted that procurement and acquisition of defence hardware was a long drawn proces s 
where there was involvement of a large number of stakeholders resulting in coordination 
issues leading to avoidable delays. The Committee felt that with proper advance 
planning, the time for first and second stage could be substantially reduced, which 
would address the issue of shortage of required defence hardware with the defence 
forces. In certain instances, the decision to buy advanced weapon systems had also 
resulted in controversies being created on the ground of payment of kickbacks and 
commissions. The Committee felt that such delays were avoidable as ultimately it was 
the defence preparedness of the Country that had suffered. In the above context, the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry might take appropriate steps to 
constitute an integra ted institutional mechanism with adequate in -built transparency 
consisting of all key stakeholders in order to reduce delays in procurement process. 
 1.17    In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry has replied as under : 
         “ There are a number of changes that have been introduced in DPP to expedite 
procurement process and ensure transparency. 
i. Single stage collegiate vetting of RFP. 
ii. Approval of Retractions/Foreclosure of RFPs delegated to DG(Acq)/Vice Chiefs 
for reasons other than change in operational requirements. 
iii.  Approval of TEC at SHQ level if all vendors are compliant with RFP. 
iv. Commencement of Benchmark modeling immediately after receipt of trial report 
by SHQ to save time at CNC stage. 
v. No negotiation to be done with DPSU vendor, where Costing Committee of DDP 
has already determined basic price of defence equipment/platform. 

12 
 
vi. Concurrent vetting of draft contract at CNC stage. 
vii. IEMs details in RFP. 
viii. Complaint Redressal Mechanism". 
 1.18 The Committee had recommended for an integrated institu tional mechanism 
with adequate in-built transparency consisting of all key stakeholders in order to 
reduce delays in procurement process so that the Armed Forces could get the 
hardware without any delay. It had identified lack of proper coordination and 
advance planning leading to avoidable delays in the second and third stages. 
However, in their reply, the Ministry has remained silent on the issue of setting up 
of an integrated institutional mechanism consisting of all key stakeholders. The 
Committee, therefore would like to prevail upon the Ministry with their view that 
such a mechanism appears to be necessary in the context of inordinate delays 
occurring in procurement of defence hardware. The Committee, accordingly, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation  regarding setting up of an integrated 
institutional mechanism consisting of all key stakeholders.  
Observation/Recommendation No. 22 
Encouraging MSMEs in Defence sector 
1.19  The Committee had noted that for encouraging Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSME), Government of India had issued a notification whereby 20% of orders were to 
be placed with MSME sector and had decided to formulate a scheme for providing 
financial assistance to these enterprises for taking up design and development work in 
the defence production. The Committee had also noted that the Technology 
Development Fund (TDF) was established to encourage participation of public/private 
industries specially MSMEs. Under the TDF, funding was covered through grants to 
industry that might work in co llaboration with academia or research institutions to carry 
out innovation, research and development. The Committee had desired that the Ministry 
should ensure that the financial assistance as envisaged under the Scheme was 
provided to the MSME sector and adequate orders were placed with them to fully utilise 

13 
 
their potential. The Committee had also urged the Government to examine the feasibility 
of inserting a provision in the defence offset policy mandating setting up of defence 
production facilities in th e MSME sector in order to expand domestic production base 
and promote 'Make in India' initiative. 
1.20   The reply of the Ministry is as under : 
"Since the launch of ‘Make in India’ in September 2014, several measures have 
been taken by the Government to p romote indigenous design, development and 
manufacture of defence & aerospace equipment in the country under ‘Make in India’   by 
harnessing the capabilities of the public and private sector especially MSMEs. These 
measures, inter alia, include: 
i. Separate pro cedure for ‘Make -II’ sub -category has been notified wherein a 
number of industry friendly provisions such as relaxation of eligibility criterion, 
minimal documentation, provision for considering proposals suggested suo -moto 
by industry/individual etc., have been introduced. So far, 33 proposals have been 
accorded ‘Approval in Principle’, out of which EoI has been issued for 6 projects. 
In order to encourage the participation of MSMEs and Startups, under Make -II 
procedure, no separate technical/ financial cr iteria have been defined for the 
projects with estimated cost of prototype development phase not exceeding ₹ 3 
crore. 
ii. Defence Investor Cell has been created in the Ministry to provide all necessary 
information including addressing queries related to invest ment opportunities, 
procedures and regulatory requirements for investment in the sector. 
iii. The process for export clearance has been streamlined and made transparent 
and online. 
iv. Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) has been revised in 2016 wherein 
specific pr ovisions have been introduced for stimulating growth of the domestic 
defence industry.  

14 
 
v. A new category of procurement ‘Buy {Indian -IDDM (Indigenously Designed, 
Developed and Manufactured)}’ has been introduced in DPP -2016 to promote 
indigenous design and development of defence equipment. It has been accorded 
top most priority for procurement of capital equipment. Besides this, preference 
has been accorded to ‘Buy (Indian)’ and ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ categories of 
capital acquisition over ‘Buy (Global)’ & ‘ Buy & Make (Global)’ categories. As a 
result, during the last four financial years (2014 -15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-
18) Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) has accorded approval of 211 capital 
procurement cases at an estimated cost of ₹ 4,44,597 crores, o ut of which 156 
cases involving ₹ 2,75,391 crore are under the ‘Buy(Indian -IDDM), ‘Buy(Indian)’, 
‘Buy & Make (Indian) and ‘Make’ categories. 
vi. The ‘Make’ Procedure has been simplified with provisions for funding of   90% of 
development cost by the Government to Indian industry   and reserving projects 
not exceeding development cost of ₹ 10 Crore (Government funded) and ₹ 3 
Crore (Industry funded) for MSMEs. 
vii. Government has decided to set up two Defence Production Corridors, one each, 
in Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh. Five nodal points in Tamil Nadu namely 
Chennai, Coimbatore, Hosur, Salem and Tiruchirappalli and Six nodal points in 
Uttar Pradesh, namely Aligarh, Agra, Chitrakoot, Jhansi, Kanpur and Lucknow 
have been identified for these corridors. Setting up o f these corridors would 
catalyse indigenous production of defence and aerospace related items thereby 
reducing our reliance on imports and will also enable export of these items to 
other countries. This will lead to generation of employment opportunities a nd 
promote the growth of private domestic manufacturers, MSMEs and start-ups. 
viii. MoD has launched the Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) initiative, 
primarily aimed at creation of an ecosystem to foster innovation and technology 
development in Defence and Aerospace by engaging Industries including 
MSMEs, start -ups, individual innovators, R&D institutes and academia and 
provide them grants/funding and other support to carry out R&D which has good 
potential for future adoption for Indian defence and aeros pace needs. Deserving 

15 
 
MSME units be provided hand -holding and technical guidance within the iDEX 
framework. 
ix. Industrial licensing regime for Indian manufacturers under IDR {Industries 
(Development and Regulation)} Act, 1951   has been liberalised and most of  the 
components/ parts/ sub -systems have been taken out from the list of defence 
products requiring Industrial Licence. This has reduced entry barriers for new 
entrants in this sector, particularly MSMEs.   
x. For promoting Ease of Doing Business and efficien cy in procurement, Ministry 
has decided to de -reserve 275 items which are regularly procured by the Armed 
Forces, and upload on the GeM portal.  
xi. Government of India has notified the Public Procurement Policy for Micro and 
Small Enterprises (MSEs) Order, 20 12 under which a minimum of 20% of the 
total annual procurement is made mandatory from Micro & Small Enterprises by 
Central Ministries / Departments / Public Sector Undertakings w.e.f. 1st April 
2015.  
a. The aforesaid policy mandates that all the Micro and S mall Enterprises 
registered with bodies designated/ specified by Ministry of MSME or having the 
Udyog Aadhaar Memorandum (UAM) will be issued tender set free of cost and 
exempted from payment of Earnest money, and will also be allowed to bring 
down their p rice to L1 level provided it has bid in the price band of L1+15%, by 
the Central Ministries/ Departments/ Central Public Sector Undertakings. In 
addition, 358 items are reserved for exclusive procurement from MSEs. 
b. To monitor the effective implementation o f the Public Procurement Policy for 
Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) Order, 2012 within the Ministry, a 
Committee under the chairmanship of JS (P&C) was formed. The Committee 
regularly reviews the progress made and furthers the objectives laid down in th e 
Policy. 
c.  Additionally, Ministry of MSME has issued a circular dated 10 Mar 2016 which 
mandated that relaxation may be given by Central Ministries / Departments / 

16 
 
Central Public Sector Undertakings in prior experience / prior turnover criteria to 
MSEs. Th e Defence PSUs, which are under DDP, have been accordingly 
directed to implement the above relaxations, and the same has been extended to 
MSEs by Defence PSUs.     xii.  In order to encourage ‘Make in India’ and 
promote manufacturing and production of goods and services in India with a view 
to  enhancing income and employment, Department of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion (DIPP) has notified the Public procurement (Preference to Make in 
India), Order 2017 on 15th June 2017. Based on this mandate, DDP has iss ued 
04 notifications for 111 items procured by Ordnance Factories (OFB) and 
Defence Public Sector undertakings (DPSUs) with the stipulated percentages of 
local content of eligibility vide orders dated 29th June 2018, 26th July 2018, 27th 
August 2018 and 16 th November 2018. The status of procurement under Public 
Procurement (Preference to Make in India), Order,2017 by DPSUs/OFB till 30th 
November, 2018 are as follows: - 
S 
No 
Name of DPSUs/ OFB         Procurement under PPP(MII) Order, 2017 
(₹ in Lakhs) 
1 HAL 59.48 
2 BEL 999.00 
3 GRSE 44.45 
4 BDL 2191.00 
5 MIDHANI 329.00 
  TOTAL 3622.93 
                    
xiii.  Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) is a platform established 
by D/o Financial Services to facilitate financing of Trade receivables of MSMEs. The 

17 
 
objective of the TReDS is to facilitate financing of invoices / bills of MSMEs drawn on 
Government Departments and PSUs, by way of discounting by financiers. To enable 
this, the TReDS has to put in place suitable mechanism whereby the invoice/ bill is 
converted into "factoring unit" (which would be a standard nomenclature used in the 
TReDS for an invoice or a bill on the system) on TReDS.  
a)  In the first phase, the TReDS would facilitate the discounting of 
these factoring units by the financiers (refers to a bank as well as 
an NBFC factor participating in the TReDS and who accepts the 
factoring unit for financing purpose) resulting in flow of funds to the 
MSME with the final payment of the factoring unit being made by 
the buyer to the financier on due date. In the second phase, the 
TReDS would enable further discounting/ re -discounting of the 
discounted factoring units by the financiers, thus resulting in its 
assignment in favour of other financiers. 
b)         The status of DPSUs regarding registration and 
implementation of TReDS is placed at Annexure-I. 
(2).         The capability and viability o f the defence and aerospace industry is built on 
the strength of supply chains, in which the MSMEs are intricately intertwined. There are 
substantially large number of MSMEs across the country supplying components and 
sub-assemblies and systems to the Defe nce Public Sector Undertakings, Ordnance 
Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation and private industries. 
Vendor development meets help to sensitize the MSMEs about their products and 
method of registration etc.   
 (3).         Ministry of Defence regularly conduct conferences and discussions through 
Annual seminars with an aim to strengthen long term plans and industry capability in 
defence procurement. Regular interaction with interested vendors / indigenous 
developers, including MSME unit s, through collegiate mechanism of procurement 
committee and pre-bid meetings are scheduled for clarification on various aspects of the 
procurement process". 

18 
 
 1.21  The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Government to encourage the 
participation of MS MEs in the Defence Sector. Such measures, if properly 
implemented, will go a long way in integrating MSMEs in the defence hardware 
supply chain. However, the Ministry has not specifically responded to the 
observation of the Committee regarding examining th e feasibility of inserting a 
provision in the defence offset policy mandating setting up of defence production 
facilities in the MSME sector. The Committee would like to be apprised in this 
regard.  
Observation/Recommendation No. 24 
Leveraging Our Capabili ties in Space and Information Technology for R&D in 
Defence 
1.22 The Committee had referred to the vision statement of Draft Defence Procurement 
Policy (DPP) 2018 which stated about making India among the top five countries of the 
world in Aerospace and De fence industries, with active participation of public and 
private sector. The Committee had also noted that there were institutions like ISRO in 
the field of research, in cutting edge technologies, in the field of missile and space 
technology which could be leveraged for self reliance in defence hardware as well as in 
India becoming a major exporter. For forging partnership and collaboration between 
organisations such as ISRO, DRDO and the DPSUs the Committee had recommended 
for the formation of an inter-ministerial group. 
1.23.    In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry has stated as follows : 
       "In order to tap the potential available with the space and nuclear establishments in 
the country, the draft Defence Production Policy 2018 proposes the following: 
         Department of Defence Production (DDP) will consult all stakeholders and explore 
possibility of setting up an autonomous National Aeronautical Commission, in line with 
Nuclear or Space Commissions to bring focus to following important areas: 

19 
 
a) Leverage mutually beneficial links between military and civil aviation for 
expansion and, importantly, indigenisation.  
b) Bring together diverse agencies for synergies in technology development, 
basic and fundamental research and production.  
c) Create a scenario in which the benefits of a competitive environment are 
felt in all areas of the economy as a whole and the defence economy in 
particular. 
         Furthermore, DDP has initiated action towards the formation of an Inter -Ministerial 
Group to fa cilitate collaboration between ISRO, DRDO and DPSUs to leverage the 
nation’s capabilities in space and nuclear technology not only for self reliance in 
defence hardware but also to become a major exporter". 
1.24 The Committee are happy to note that the Min istry has initiated action 
towards the formation of an Inter -Ministerial Group to facilitate collaboration 
between ISRO, DRDO and DPSUs. As opined earlier, this would not only help in 
leveraging our capabilities in space and nuclear technology to become self reliant 
but also help in becoming a major exporter in the world by supplying defence 
hardware to friendly countries. The Committee would like to be informed about 
further progress in the matter including the terms of reference of this Inter -
Ministerial group. 
Observation/Recommendation No. 29 
1.25  The Committee had noted that the Country had talented scientists and there was 
a possibility of their exit from premier research institutions such as DRDO to foreign 
based companies which offered attractive salary and other benefits. This could prove  to 
be detrimental to our interests. The Committee had also noted that technical manpower 
in the DPSUs such as HAL, were concerned about their future because of lack of orders 
from the Government. Same situation could be prevalent in other DPSUs also. The 
Committee had, accordingly, recommended that the manpower possessing valuable 
knowledge, experience and expertise ought to be retained in the Country by providing 

20 
 
better work environment, research infrastructure and recognition including appropriate 
financial incentives. The Government needed to ensure that there was no anxiety 
among the technical personnel about their future. 
1.26     In their response, the following submissions have been made by the Ministry: 
            " Ordnance Factory Board:- 
          The initial sanctioned strength of the Ordnance Factories Organization was 
1,63,103. A manpower rationalization exercise was suggested by Ministry in the year 
2015. Accordingly, a Committee was constituted for submitting a report on 
rationalization of m anpower in the Ordnance Factories. The main objective of the 
Committee was to assess and rationalize the manpower requirement for the Ordnance 
Factories in relation to the anticipated production and supporting activities on long -term 
basis i.e. up to the year 2024-25 and also to examine other issue(s) relevant to this. The 
Committee based thereon, recommended revised sanctioned strength of 1,45,503 in 
respect of various categories of employees. However, Ministry has sanctioned the 
operating strength of OFB at 1.1 lakh, meaning thereby that at no point of time there is 
requirement of more strength, and OFB is working with the operating strength of 1.1 
lakh as on date. 
              Hindustan Aeronautics Limited : 
             The attrition rate among the Executives in HAL has been less than 2% during 
the last 5 years. However, a sizeable quantum of the current order book of the company 
will be completed in the next 2-3 years with major manufacturing programs like Hawk, 
Su-30MKI already completed/getting completed shortly. A robust order book is a must 
for avoiding idling of facilities as well as, for retention and growth of the trained technical 
talent pool of any company. The Company has taken up the following major initiatives to 
retain the trained manpower: 
 a. HAL continuously endeavors to create a learning culture wherein Officers are 
nominated for various Post Graduate Courses in Technical and Non –Technical 

21 
 
Disciplines to Institutes of repute (both inland & abroad). Over 200 officers have been 
nominated for various Sponsorship programmes during the last 5 years. 
 b.  A Leadership Development initiative, in the form of a Leadership Development 
Programme of one year, has been institutionalized for Officers in the Senior 
Management Cadre and the Middle Manage ment Cadre. 3 batches consisting of a total 
of 90 Officers each in the Senior Management Cadre have undergone the Programme. 
One more batch of 30 Officers is currently undergoing the Programme. 95 Officers in 
the Middle Management Cadre have also undergone the Programme. 
 c.  HAL has a Scheme for Fast Track Promotion viz. Internal Merit Selection (IMS) in 
respect of Executives. Officers with excellent track record in performance during the 
preceding 3 years are considered for promotion to the next higher Grade. 
 d.  Naini Aerospace Limited (NAeL) is a subsidiary of HAL. The employees of NAeL 
have undergone phase-wise theoretical as well as on-the-job training at Bangalore and 
Transport Aircraft Division (TAD), Kanpur to get technical expertise in connection with 
manufacturing of looms of ALH & LCA as well as structure of ALH. These trainings were 
organised at LCA, Helicopter and TAD-Kanpur divisions etc as well as at Technical 
Training Institute (TTI), Bangalore wherein the employees participated in skill up-
gradation program on Aircraft/ Helicopter Structural Assembly, Aircraft/ Helicopter 
Looms and Aircraft Loom Fabrication & Assembly. 
 e.  HAL Management Academy (HMA) focuses on training programs to meet the 
internal Learning & Development requirements of its Executives. It conducts training 
programs for various levels within the organization ranging from entry level to the senior 
most Executives. Several refresher courses are conducted by HMA for its officers at its 
dedicated campus in Bangalore such as Refresher Training Program for Technical & 
Non-Technical Officers, Middle Management Program, Specialized Technical Training 
Program, Senior Executive Refresher Program etc. The role of HMA is to be a nodal 
agency to align the companies’ officers to the evolving business needs and enhance 
their capabilities to meet the strategic vision of the organization. 

22 
 
 Bharat Electronics Limited:- 
        BEL provides excellent working environment with freedom for innovation, 
empowerment, challenging work assignments etc.  As a result, all the executives are 
self-motivated and the overall attrition rate in BEL is less than 2% in the past ten years. 
            All executives are covered under the BEL Conduct Discipline & Appeal Rules 
and in accordance with the said rules, n o Functional Director (including CMD), 
Executive Director’s & GMs, who have retired/resigned from the services of the 
Company, shall accept any appointment or post in any foreign company/Govt., with 
whom BEL has business dealings, within 1 year of their re signation/superannuation, 
without prior permission of the Government. A Service Bond to this effect is executed by 
the concerned Officer. Further, Officers working on specific R&D projects are required 
to execute a Deed of Assignment or Non -disclosure agre ements barring them from 
disclosing any information pertaining to the project during their service in BEL or on 
resignation from BEL. 
 Bharat Earth Movers Limited:- 
          BEML is very much concerned about the anxiety and discontentment of its 
technical personnel. BEML is striving hard to even further ameliorate their working 
conditions and making all out effort to secure more orders to dispel the anxiety of its 
experienced and expert technical personnels. 
 Bharat Dynamics Limited:-  
          The order book position of BDL is depleting year after year and in such a scenario 
it is becoming difficult for the organization to retain manpower. In the absence of a 
growing order book, it is very difficult to retain talented executives.  
         BDL is putting all out efforts to improve order book position so that all production 
units are fully loaded with optimal utilization of men & machines.  

23 
 
         BDL takes good care of its employees & their welfare. BDL sends its employees 
for enhanci ng knowledge to premier Management & Technology Institutes like IIMs, 
IITs, XLRls. etc.  
          BDL recognizes talent & hard work by way of merit awards, which are distributed 
every year on 15th August & 26 January. 
Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL):- 
            While MDL is concerned with the loss of skill -set due to lack of order visibility in 
future, presently MDL does not face this kind of situation of forcing large scale exodus 
of executives. 
          MDL has a professional management struct ure & healthy working environment, 
where scope for personal development and recognition is supported by robust, and 
generous HR policies. 
 Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE):- 
           The Company has sufficient orders which are to be e xecuted in next few years. 
Accordingly emphasis has been given for retention of talents for which different 
initiatives have been taken towards improvement of work environment, creating different 
facilities, recognition to the employees for exemplary / inn ovative performance as given 
below:- 
i. Improvement of work environment 
ii. Establishment of Research Infrastructure.          
iii. Recognition including appropriate financial incentive.             
 Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL):- 
           GSL is the first Indian ship yard to have an in -house R&D unit recognized by the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), Government of India. The 
R&D initiatives have not only helped in attaining self reliance but also earned significant 

24 
 
foreign earning. As part of GS Ls initiative to be market ready for future, the R&D 
department is working on future advance vessels which are required by Indian Navy 
and Coast Guard. Thus, GSL provides ample opportunities to its technical personnel to 
showcase their expertise in R&D.  
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI):- 
           The attrition rate of MIDHANI is almost negligible and the significant retention 
policies/ strategies prevailing in MIDHANI are mentioned as under: 
        MIDHANI has excellent policies in place to retain i ts employees and the workplace 
environment is exceedingly cohesive and cordial. Policies are reviewed periodically and 
amended from time to time as per requirement. 
            In addition to salaries, MIDHANI also pays ‘Performance Related Pay (PRP)’ to 
employees based on their annual performances. 
        As per 3 rd PRC Recommendations, the Executives and Non -Unionized 
supervisors’ pay revision has been implemented successfully w.e.f. 01 - Jan-2017 and 
the arrears are also disbursed. 
           The Executi ves and Non -Unionized Supervisors’ Promotion Policy is recently 
revised and it has been amended in a manner that provides higher weightage to annual 
performance of employees. Weightage is also given to qualification and experience 
along with attendance & punctuality. 
         MIDHANI also identifies and nominates individuals/groups to participate in various 
Training Programmes/Workshops/Seminars, Leadership Programs etc. within the 
country and even abroad so as to expose them to global standards and develop them. 
         In order to encourage managerial excellence among young managers and bring 
out their hidden talents/ ideas/Concepts, MIDHANI organizes annual competition named 
as “Dr Tamhankar’s Trophy for Young Managers” where the team with the best proje ct 
is awarded with cash prize and are also sent to attend international/national 
conferences. 

25 
 
          Best Executive/ NUS/ Non -Executive/ Women of the Year Award are also given 
annually in MIDHANI to encourage all-round performances. 
          MIDHANI also organizes various cultural programs, sports & games activities to 
bring all the employees together and create a sense of belongingness and engagement 
amongst them. 
        MIDHANI has excellent employee wellness and medical scheme in place for 
existing as well as retired employees and also provides good quality education facilities 
to employee’s children". 
1.27  The Committee appreciate that the Defence PSUs are aware of this crucial 
issue and are taking all necessary steps to address it. In respect of O rdinance 
Factory Boards (OFB), however, the response forwarded by the Ministry appears 
to be out of place. The response mentions about the strength of the OFBs and 
deals with the issue whether it is adequate or inadequate. It does not mention 
about the ste ps taken/being taken for retaining talented scientists in the 
organization. Moreover, the reply in respect of OFBs appear to be a replica of the 
response given by the OFB in respect of recommendation no. 28 which relates to 
‘Human Resources of DPSUs and ot her Defence Production Institutions’. The 
Committee express their unhappiness at the lackadaisical manner in which the 
Ministry has chosen to respond to its recommendation on such an important 
point and urge that an appropriate reply be  furnished at the earliest.         
Observation/Recommendation 30 
1.28 The Committee had taken note of a written submission by HAL suggesting creation 
of an additional post of Director (Corporate Planning & Business Development). 
Besides, the attention of the Committee was also drawn to the need for upgradation of 
pay scales of officers of the company at par with PSUs like BHEL/NTPC based on the 
recommendations of an Expert Group constituted by the Government under the 
Chairmanship of Shri B. K. Chaturvedi for restructuring and strengthening of HAL. The 

26 
 
Committee had wanted the Ministry of Defence to consider the proposals submitted by 
HAL positively in view of interest of the organization 
1.29    In response to the above, the Ministry has stated as under : 
      "(1) With the approval of Hon'ble Prime Minister, an Expert Group under the 
Chairmanship of Shri B.K. "Chaturvedi, Former Cabinet Secretary and Member, 
Planning Commission was constituted in 2011 for restructuring and strengthening of 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL). The Expert Group submitted its report to 
Government in September, 2012. As per one of the recommendations of the Expert 
Group, the Board of HAL was to be reconstituted as a 14 Members Board with 5 
Functional Directors including CMD, 2 Government Directors and 7 Independent 
Directors: 
       (2) The proposal for reconstitution of the Board of Directors of HAL was considered 
by PESB in consultation with DPE. While considering the proposal, PESB vide its O.M 
dated 04.11.2013 was of the view that Administrative Ministry may consider retaining 
the post of  Director (CP&M) and desirability of creating an additional post of Director 
(Operations) depending upon the reporting/ supervisory mechanism between proposed 
CEOs and HAL Board. 
         (3) The view of the PESB was considered by this Department and it wa s felt that 
creation of an additional post of Director would also require appointment of an additional 
Independent Director to comply with the SEBI guidelines. This would have taken the 
strength of HAL's Board to 16 as against the recommendation of the Exp ert Group for 
downsizing it to 14 from the then size of 17. Therefore, the same was not agreed to. 
        (4) In view of above decision, the proposal for reconstitution of the Board of 
Directors of HAL was sent to DPE for obtaining concurrence of PESB. In  this regard, 
DPE vide its O.M dated 29.01.2014 had intimated that the proposal was considered in 
consultation with PESB and the same was concurred into. They had requested this 
Department to process the proposal further and to obtain the approval of ACC i n this 
regard.  

27 
 
        (5) In the light of directions of DPE, the proposal for reconstruction of HAL Board 
was sent to ACC for approvat in March, 2014. ACC vide its communication dated 
25.11.2014 had accorded approval for reconstitution of the Board of Directors of HAL, in 
which inter-alia, it was decided to discontinue the post of Director (CP&M) and creation 
of a re-designated post of Director (Operations) in lieu thereof.  
       (6) HAL had again initiated the proposal for creation of the post of Direc tor 
(Corporate Planning and Business Development) in August, 2017 and the same was 
examined in the Department. Since the reason for discontinuation of Dir (CP&M) 
remains the same, the proposal of HAL was not agreed to.  
       (7) Pay Scales of Executives and Non-unionised Supervisors of CPSEs is notified 
by the Dept. of Public Enterprises (DPE) from time to time. HAL has been adopting the 
Pay Scales as notified by the DPE. However, PSUs like ONGC, NTPC, BHEL, GAIL 
etc. had been adopting superior Pay Scales  which are two levels above that adopted in 
HAL, including at the entry level for fresh Engineering Graduates, etc. The entry level 
pay scales of HAL in comparison with other big PSUs are as below: 
 HAL 
  
BHEL NTPC 
Grade 
  
Scale Grade  Scale Grade Scale 
  
 I 
  
  
12600-32500 
  
 E-1 
  
20600-46500 
  
 E-1 
  
20600-46500 
  
           (8) The Govt. vide MoD letter dated 21/10/11 had constituted an Expert Group 
under the Chairmanship of Shri B.K. Chaturvedi, Former Cabinet Secretary and 
Member, Planning Commission, to carry out a comprehensive review of the working and 
restructuring of HAL. Amongst others, the Group had noted that the Pay Scales and 
Salary Structure for Executives of HAL are much lower compared to other Navaratna 

28 
 
PSUs in the manufacturing Sector; and had recommended that HAL's Pay Scales & 
salary structure needs to be brought at par with CPSUs like BHEL/NTPC.  
      (9) While communicating acceptance of the Government of the various 
recommendations of the Expert Group, MoD vide its letter dated 25/04/13 had intimated 
HAL that the proposal to upgrade the Pay Scal es of Executives, on par with the Pay 
Scales in BHEL/NTPC, be examined internally; and on obtaining approval of the Board 
of Directors, be forwarded to the Ministry for consideration and approval.  
         (10) Accordingly, proposal for upgradation of the  Pay Scales was considered by 
the HAL Board during March 2014. The Board had approved upgradation of the Pay 
Scales by one level w.e.f 01.04.2014; and by one more level w.e.f 01.01.2017, to bring 
them on par with BHEL. On approval by the Board, HAL vide it s letter dated 18.03.2014 
had forwarded the proposal to this Ministry to consider upgradation of Pay Scales, 
within the then prevailing 2007 Pay Scales notified by the DPE.  
         (11) In June, 2017, with the approval of competent authority, a Note was moved 
for consideration and approval of CCS on the proposal for upgradation of pay scales in 
respect of Executives in HAL. PMO vide their ID dated 19.07.2017 had conveyed that 
the Cabinet Secretary may constitute an expert committee to take a holistic view  on 
rationalization of pay scales in all public sector enterprises in consultation with relevant 
stakeholders. After the report of the expert committee is finalized, the Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE) may be the nodal Department to take further nec essary action 
on the committee's recommendations. Thereafter, no further communication has been 
received in this regard". 
 1.30 The Committee take note of the reply of the Ministry that the issue of 
creation of a post of Director (CP&BD) was not agreed to by the Ministry in the 
light of cited reasons. With reference to upgradation of pay scales, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to pursue the matter with the concerned authorities and inform 
the Committee about the outcome in the matter as it is an issue in th e interest of 
the organization that may affect the morale and motivation of HAL employees.  
 

29 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Observation/Recommendation No.  3-4 
Increasing the proportion of Capital Procurement Budget within the Defence 
Budget 
3. The Committee express their unhappiness that the share of Capital Expenditure as a 
percentage of total Defence Services Expenditure is abysmally low and is continuously 
declining over the years. In the years 2012-13 and 2013 -14, the share of capital 
expenditure was 39% in each year, which in the year 2017-18 and 2018-19 came down to 
33% and 34%, respectively. What is more worrisome is the situation whereby the 
procurement has to be adjusted as per the budgetar y allocations made by the 
Government which are not as per the requirements projected as per LTIPP. The 
Committee observe that allocations under the Capital head are made for procurements 
for our Services which include defence equipments, weaponry, aircraft s, naval ships, 
constructing roads and bridges in border areas, etc. and any decrease in capital 
expenditure has an adverse impact on modernisation process of our forces and 
tantamount to compromising safety and security of our Country. The Committee stron gly 
feel that in view of the intensity and complexity of our security challenges due to current 
geopolitical environment, India cannot afford to be lagging behind in defence 
preparedness. There is an urgent need, therefore, to replace the obsolete armament s 
with state of the art weapon systems for which substantial increase in capital budget is 
essential. The Committee find the present situation unacceptable whereby the allocations 
are not being made as per the LTIPP, thereby defeating the purpose of having  long term 
defence plans. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the capital procurement 
Budget should be in consonance with the projections made by the services as per LTIPP. 
4. The analysis of the data with regard to budgetary allocations for capital procurement for 
services indicates variation in BE, RE and Actuals during various years. The allocations 
made at Budgetary Estimates stage have been consistently reduced at RE level, and 
even the reduced allocations could not be utilized fully during the ye ars 2014 -15 and 
2015-16. In this scenario, the Committee are not able to appreciate the remarks of the 
Secretary, Defence Acquisition, during the course of deposition that they hear from the 
Department of Defence that the requirement of the forces is very high and the fund 
allocation to that extent is not there. The Committee, therefore, while recommending for 
adequate allocations for defence production would like the Department to analyse the 
reasons and take all the corrective actions to ensure that the r esources allocated are fully 
utilized which would help in getting further higher allocations in the coming years. 

30 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Details of projections made and fund allocated in Budget Estimate, Revised 
Estimates, Modified Appropriation and Actu al expenditure during the last five years and 
the current year are as following:- 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year BE 
Projected 
BE 
Allocated 
RE MA (Final 
Grant) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2013-14 134070.26 86740.71 78872.23 78872.23 79125.05 
2014-15 145091.29 94587.95 81965.24 81965.24 81886.98 
2015-16 117955.42 94588.00 81400.00 79483.28 79958.98 
2016-17 121929.80 86340.00 79370.29 81747.26 86367.29 
2017-18 146113.54 86488.01 86488.01 86488.01 90460.26 
2018-19 172203.30 93982.13 93982.13 93965.45 94893.27 
 
2. Defence Budget is peculiar in nature and is different from budget of other Civil 
Ministries. No set trend could be seen in the expenditure pattern of Defence Budget 
especially under Capital Head. This basically due to the fact that many of the projects 
being handled in Defence Ministry involve large payments spread across years.  Due to 
this fact there is a possibility that some years may see large expenditure whereas the 
succeeding year may see fall in expenditure.  Though all aspect are taken into acco unt 
while projecting/allocating funds, it may not be possible to accurately predict the 
expenditure as it depends on various facts like necessary approvals, meeting the 
milestones/time-lines, delays in delivering of items, slippages, etc.   
 
3.  It may also be added that the progress of capital acquisition expenditure is monitored 
regularly by the Acquisition Wing which is tasked with the responsibility of defence 
capital procurement. Acquisition Wing, being a specialist organization created on the 
basis of the Kargil Committee Report and recommendations of the Group of Ministers, 
not only monitors capital expenditure, but also looks after all capital acquisition projects 
from inception to finality. In addition, the Defence Procurement Board, which is chaire d 
by Defence Secretary and The Defence Acquisition Council headed by Raksha Mantri 
comprising of all stakeholders, monitors adherence to broad timelines in Defence 
Procurement. 
 

31 
 
4.  Necessary instructions are being issued from time to time for adherence to  financial 
propriety and avoidance of underutilization of funds/wasteful expenditure. The trend in 
underutilization of Budget has been reversed in FY 16 -17 and 17 -18. In FY 2017 -18 
under Capital Head, allocations at RE, and MA (Final Grant) stage remained the same 
as at BE stage i.e. Rs. 86,488.01 Crore and Expenditure incurred is Rs. 90,460.26 
Crore.  In FY 2018 -19, an amount of Rs. 93,982.13 Crore has been allocated for 
Defence Services Estimates under Capital Budget i.e. an increase of Rs. 7494.12 Cr. 
over RE/BE of 2017 -18. Out of the allocated funds in 2018 -19, an amount of Rs. 
74,091.65 crore has been incurred as expenditure up to December, 2018 i.e. 78.84%. 
 
5. The total Capital Budget (Defence Services Estimates +MoD (Miscellaneous) of 
Ministry of Def ence for 2018 -19 is Rs. 99,563.86 crores, which is an increase of Rs. 
7984.16 crores (8.72%) over Capital Budget of 2017-18 (Rs. 91,579.70 crores). Further, 
Capital Budget of Ministry of Defence is approximately 33% of the total Capital 
expenditure of the Central Government. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.12 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
Self Reliance in Defence 
The Committee note that the Preamble of the Defence Production Policy 2018 
states India as one of largest importer of defence goods and services in the 
world.  It has specifically been mentioned that despite some salient achievements 
of our defence product ion ecosystem, a significant part of our defence 
requirements continue to be dependent on  imports. During the course of 
examination, the Committee  have been apprised by the Department of  Defence 
Production that out of total defence production around 40 pe r cent is produced 
indigenously and 60 per cent is imported. The Committee while expressing serious 
concern over the prevailing situation observe that dependence on foreign 
suppliers particularly for military hardware not only results in huge expenditure 

32 
 
on import of defence equipments but makes the   security of the Country 
vulnerable as during emergency situations the supplier may not provide us the 
required weapons or spare parts. The Committee are concerned to note that the 
indigenization level in the Defence Sector is increasing at a very slow rate. Nothing 
concrete has been done for implementation of the strategic  partnership model 
unveiled by the Government in May, 2017 which envisaged private players 
playing a key role in building military platform s like submarine and fighter jets  in 
India  in partnership with  major  global  defence companies.  
The Committee find that the draft Defence Production Policy 2018 aims at 
making India one  of the world's top five defence producers by 2025 with self- 
reliance in 13 areas covering  almost the entire range of weapons and systems. 
The Committee  while noting the vision document of DPP 2018, would like the 
Government to take urgent and immediate  initiatives in the desired sectors so 
that India's dependence on imports is decreased thereby improving our 
defence preparedness. In  this regard,  the Committee would like to  emphasize 
that increasing local content in defence platforms and hardware will have a 
multiplier effect in the sense that it will result in a st rong manufacturing sector, 
generate substantial number of jobs and also save the financial resources.  
Clear-cut road map should, therefore, be drawn up with effective monitoring to 
achieve the level of self -reliance envisaged as per the vision document of  the 
draft policy.  The Committee may be apprised of the specific steps being 
taken to that end.  
 
Reply of the Government 
      The following steps have been taken for ensuring that the country becomes self -
reliant in production of defence equipments.  
I. Defence Production in India is led by Ordnance Facto ries and Defence 
Public Sector U ndertakings which have played a huge role in making our 
country a defence production hub.  There are 41 Ordnance Factories and 9 
DPSUs in our country contributing to more than Rs.58,000 crores approx. in 
defence production every year. Government provides s upport to Defence 

33 
 
Public Sector Undertakings and Ordnance Factories to expand their 
activities. 
II.  Government has issued 439 licenses covering 264 companies till March,  
2019. Industrial Licenses are issued for manufacturing of tanks and other 
armored fighting vehicles, defence aircraft, space craft and parts thereof, 
warship, arms and ammunition and al lied items of defence equipment, parts 
and accessories thereof. In addition, for a large number of defence 
components, no license is required.  
III. An innovation ecosystem for Defence titled Innovations for Defence 
Excellence (iDEX) has been launched in April,   2018. iDEX  is  aimed  at  
creation  of  an  ecosystem  to  foster  innovation  and  technology 
development  in Defence  and Aerospace  by engaging  Industries  including  
MSMEs, Start-ups, Individual Innovators, R&D institutes and Academia and 
provide them grants/funding and other support to carry out R&D which has 
potential for future adoption for Indian defence and aerospace needs. Under 
iDEX, innovative solutions have been successfully identified  for 14  problem 
areas pertaining to national defence r equirements. More than 600 startups  
have been engaged in the process and 44 different solutions have been 
identified for the problem statements by the innovators.  
IV. In order to expand the manufacturing infrastructure, Government has 
decided to establish two defence industrial corridors to serve as an engine of 
economic development and growth of defence industrial base in the country. 
These are spanning across Chennai, Hosur, Coimbatore, Salem and 
Tiruchirappalli in Tamil Nadu and spanning across Aligarh, Ag ra, Jhansi, 
Kanpur, Chitrakoot and Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh (UP) 
 
2.   In addition, the following steps have also been taken: - 
i. Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) has been revised in 2016 wherein 
specific provisions have been introduced for stimulating gr owth of the 
domestic defence industry. 

34 
 
ii. A new category of procurement ‘Buy {Indian -IDDM (Indigenously Designed, 
Developed and Manufactured)}’ has been introduced in DPP -2016 to promote 
indigenous design and development of defence equipment. It has been 
accorded top most priority for procurement of capital equipment. Besides this, 
preference has been accorded to ‘Buy (Indian)’, ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ & 
‘Make’ categories of capital acquisition over ‘Buy (Global)’ & ‘Buy & Make 
(Global)’ categories. 
iii. Government has notified the ‘Strategic Partnership (SP)’ Model which 
envisages establishment of long -term strategic partnerships with Indian 
entities through a transparent and competitive process, wherein they would tie 
up with global Original Equipment Manufacturer s (OEMs) to seek technology 
transfers to set up domestic manufacturing infrastructure and supply chains. 
iv. The ‘Make’ Procedure has been simplified with provisions for funding of 90 % 
of development cost by the Government to Indian industry and reserving 
projects not exceeding development cost of Rs.10 Crore (Government 
funded) and Rs.3 Crore (Industry funded) for MSMEs. 
v. Separate procedure for ‘Make -II’ sub -category has been notified wherein a 
number of industry friendly provisions such as relaxation of eligi bility criterion, 
minimal documentation, provision for considering proposals suggested by 
industry/individual etc., have been introduced. Till August, 2019 36 proposals 
for development by industry have been given ‘in -principle’ approval under 
Make-II.  
vi. FDI Policy has been revised and under the revised policy, FDI is allowed 
under automatic route upto 49% and beyond 49% through Government route 
wherever it is likely to result in access to modern technology or for other 
reasons to be recorded. 
vii. The Defence Products List for the purpose of issuing Industrial Licenses (ILs) 
under IDR Act has been revised and most of the components, parts, sub -
systems, testing equipment and production equipment have been removed 
from the list, so as to reduce the entry barriers fo r the industry, particularly 

35 
 
small & medium segment.  The initial validity of the Industrial License granted 
under the IDR Act  
has been increased from 03 years to 15 years with a provision to further 
extend it by 03 years on a case -to-case basis. So far, the process for export 
clearance has been streamlined and made transparent & online. 
viii. Offset guidelines have been made flexible by allowing change of Indian Offset 
Partners (IOPs) and offset components, even in signed contracts.  Foreign 
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) are now not required to indicate 
the details of IOPs and products at the time of signing of contracts. ‘Services’ 
as an avenue of offset have been re-instated. 
ix. Government has set up the Technology Development Fund (TDF) to 
encourage pa rticipation of public/private industries especially MSMEs, 
through provision of grants, so as to create an eco –system for enhancing 
cutting edge technology capability for defence applications. 
x. The Ministry has instituted a new framework titled ‘Mission Rak sha Gyan 
Shakti’ which aims to provide boost to the IPR culture in indigenous defence 
industry. 
xi. Government has notified a Policy for indigenization of components and 
spares used in Defence Platforms in March , 2019 with the objective to create 
an industry ecosystem which is able to indigenize the imported components 
(including alloys & special materials) and sub -assemblies for defence 
equipment and platform manufactured in India 
xii. Defence Investor Cell has been c reated in the Ministry to provide all 
necessary information including addressing queries related to investment 
opportunities, procedures and regulatory requirements for investment in the 
sector 
 
3. Inter Government Agreement (IGA) between India and Russia has been signed 
on 18 Feb 2019 for production of AK series Assault Rifles including AK -203 and other 
small arms in India through a Joint Venture (M/s Indo -Russian Rifle Private Limited 
(IRRPL)) of OFB an d Joint Stock Company Rosoboron export (JSC ROE) and J oint 

36 
 
Stock Company Concern Kalashnikov (JSC CK). The JV company will manufacture at 
least 7,50,000 Nos. of Assault Rifles @ 75,000 Nos. per annum to meet the requirement 
of the Services and MHA etc. 
Observation/Recommendation No. 7 
Shortage of Ammunitions in the Armed Forces 
The Committee during the course of examination have been apprised by 
the Ministry of Defence that the shortage strictly in the totality is not there yet 
there are 10 -15 ammunitions where there is shortage and some of them of a 
critical nature. 
 
The Committee find that the OFBs/DPSUs have achieved some expertise 
in armaments/weapon manufacturing although dependency on imported parts 
and systems is the area of concern. So far as the production of armaments by 
Ordnance Factories is concerne d, the Committee note that the dependency on 
import with regard to heavy equipment range, has considerably decreased. In 
respect of T -90 Tanks, the dependency on import has decreased from 40% to 
13% as stated by the representative of MoD during the course of evidence. The 
Committee still feel that more need to be done to reduce our dependency on 
imports. In the aforesaid scenario, the Committee recommends that adequate 
allocations should be provided under the Revenue Head for meeting the 
shortage of armamen ts with the Services besides upgrading the manufacturing 
capacity of OFBs and DPSUs serving to the Services in this regard. 
Reply of the Government: 
 The projection of funds for various activities/items/projects is made by the 
Services/Departments. The pro jections made by the Services are forwarded to 
Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration.  Ministry of Finance allocates 
funds based on which service-wise allocations are sent to Services/Departments. 
 Details of manufacturing capacity of Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) and 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) are as under:- 
Ordnance Factory Board (OFB): OFB manufactures 91 types of ammunition for 
supply to Army. In this regard, Army has intimated that most ammunition which 
have been traditionally  produced by OFB have attained higher stocking level. 

37 
 
Accordingly, demands of Army for several ammunition have been considerably 
reduced. However, capacity constraints exist for 30mm & 125mm ammunition, 
for which capacity augmentation is under progress. 
As far as armament is concerned, OFB is making efforts to further improve 
indigenization levels. In addition, T -90 Engine is now fully indigenized. Efforts 
have also been made for indigenization of other aggregates of T -90 Tanks. The 
indigenous content of su pplies ex -Ordnance Factories (i.e. value of indigenous 
content to value of supply) is 90.06%. 
 
The Ministry is continuously working towards improving ammunition 
manufacturing in Ordnance Factories. A monthly review is done in the Ministry 
with the Ammuniti on and Explosives Group of OFB along with MGO and DGQA 
to resolve quality and timely supply issue of ammunition for Army. Further, 
interaction of OFB officers with the Depot Heads for the purpose of getting first 
hand feedback has resulted in addressing th e deficiencies in supply and quality 
of ammunition immediately.  
 
Towards upgrading the manufacturing capacity of OFB, there has been 
enhancement of delegation of financial powers to OFB for procurement of stores 
and Plant & Machinery. Approval -in-Principle (AIP) has been accorded for 14 
proposals of OFB for procurement of Plant & Machinery and Stores during the 
year 2018-19 with an estimated cost of approx. Rs. 845 crore. 
 
Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL):   BEL is engaged in the design, 
development, manufacture, supply & maintenance of strategic electronic 
equipment/systems in the areas of Radars & Weapon Systems, Sonars & Fire 
Control Systems, Communication, Electronic Warfare & Avionics, Network 
Centric Systems, Electro-Optics and Tank Electronics/G un Upgrades, Homeland 
Security etc., primarily for Indian Defence forces (around 85% of turnover). Also, 
BEL manufactures and supplies Electronic Fuses for Artillery Shells. 
Dependence on Imports:  BEL generally does not import fully finished 
Defence equip ment. For the design, manufacture & supply of Defence 
equipment, the company resorts to imports only for some of the special 
Components/Raw materials, proprietary items/sub -systems etc., (input material) 
that are not being manufactured in the country. Howe ver, BEL continuously 
strives to minimize import of these items through consistent efforts on 

38 
 
indigenization, outsourcing from domestic industry, vendor development, 
collaborative R&D process involving Indian Private industries including MSMEs 
etc. Major p ortion of BEL's turnover (89%) is generated from products based on 
indigenous technology. 
Augmentation of Manufacturing Capacity: BEL spends around Rs.600 
crores annually on CAPEX towards capacity augmentation/modernization. BEL 
recognizes the need for con tinuous modernization & up -gradation of its facilities 
in order to have state-of-the-art set ups towards capacity augmentation and to be 
in tune with the changing needs of the technology/products to offer the best in 
class products/systems to the Defence S ervices. Some of the major facilities 
established in recent past include Establishment of Shock & High Temperature 
Test Facilities, Advanced EMC Testing Facilities having Anechoic Chamber, High 
level Shock Testing Facility, State -of-the-art Electronic Arti llery Fuse 
manufacturing etc.            
  
Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL):   The following are the major products/ 
Weapons Systems being currently manufactured and supplied by BDL to Armed 
Forces. 
(a) Akash Weapons Systems (Indigenous developed by DRDO) 
(b) Invar – ATGM (Under ToT from OEM, Russia) 
(c) Konkurs-M (ATGM)-  (Under ToT from OEM, Russia) 
(d) Torpedoes (LWT) – (Under ToT from DRDO, NSTL) 
The above weapons are being manufactured by BDL and are being 
supplied in desired quantities (as per Indent & delivery schedule)  to Armed 
Forces. However, sometimes there is delay in supplying to Forces due to non -
availability of imports in time & also due to technical issues of parts going into 
missile integration. In order to reduce the dependency on foreign imports BDL 
has taken the following steps: 
(i) Thrust on indigenization:   BDL is putting up determined efforts 
towards indigenization of ATGMs with the objective of increasing self -
reliance, reduction of Foreign Exchange (FE) outflow. Indigenization of 
products like Konkurs -M, Invar, Milan -2T has been achieved upto 90%, 
78.6% and 71% respectively. Efforts are being made to indigenize the 
items for 100% self -reliance. In this direction, BDL is developing alternate 
sources of supplies by imparting training & assistance to qualifi ed vendors. 

39 
 
As per the directions of MoD all imported items have been kept in BDL site 
for indigenous development by prospective vendors. 
(ii) Reduction in Direct Imports (DI):   Due to sustained indigenization 
efforts by BDL, the DI as a percentage of Valu e of Production (VoP) has 
decreased from 14.5% in 2015-16 and 7.89% in 2017-18. 
Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL):   Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders 
Limited (MDL) had successfully completed the augmentation of its infrastructure 
through Mazdock Modernizatio n Project (MMP) which comprises of a new Wet 
Basin, Heavy Duty 300 Ton capacity Goliath Crane, Module Workshop, Cradle 
Assembly Shop, Store Building and associated ancillary structures. Introduction 
of these facilities will augment the capacity & effective ly reduce construction 
period of warships/Submarines. These Infrastructure facilities have been created 
with funds from Naval Projects and internal accruals. 
MDL has constructed, the Submarine Section Assembly (SSA) Workshop 
as second assembly line for submarines which can accommodate construction of 
five submarines 
Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) :   It has adopted comprehensive ‘Make in India 
(Outsourcing, Long Term Procurement, Vendor Development and indigenization 
Policy’ which provides purchase preference to Indian  
manufacturers with over 30% indigenous content (later increased to 50% in line 
with DPP 16). The list of items identified for indigenization has been uploaded on 
GSL’s website. 
The indigenous content is increased from 62% on recently concluded 6 
CGOPVs project (last ship delivered in October 2017) to over 70% on current 05 
CG OPV project under construction. 
GSL, with the technical expertise available with it, has been continuing its 
efforts to further enhance self -reliance in Defence Shipbuilding t hrough 
indigenization of critical ship borne equipment’s/ products, wherever 
technologically feasible and economically viable. GSL has created perceptible 
footmarks in indigenizing the niche technology areas by entering into technical 
collaboration with prominent global firms.  
 

40 
 
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) 
Indigenization of materials needed for arms & ammunitions: 
 MIDHANI has indigenously developed & manufactured the following 
materials for production of armaments by Ordnance Factories. 
 Armoured steel and composite for use in Tank T -90, T-72, BMPs and for 
other armoured vehicles. 
 Forged products have been developed to meet critical deficiency of vital 
parts of various Artillery systems. 
 MIDHANI has also developed & supplied light eight body armour  products 
(BhabhaKavach; ToT from BARC Mumbai) to armed forces & police 
personnel. 
 
Import substitution for items imported in India:   MIDHANI is putting its 
best efforts in maximizing the indigenization in the area where certain 
materials are not available in India and are being imported such as: 
 Tungsten Metal Powders  
 Manufacturing of Metal Powders 
 Production of Carbon Fiber technology and setting up a high end 
Aluminum alloy manufacturing plant. 
Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited:   Ship desi gn & 
construction is being done by GRSE using in house/indigenous resources. ASW 
Corvettes and Landing Craft Utility Vessels which are under construction in 
GRSE have an indigenous content of over 90%. All yard material fittings and 
commonly used equipment  & systems are also sourced indigenously. Some 
equipment/systems are nominated by the customers (Indian Navy/Indian Coast 
Guard) and GRSE’s role is limited to that of an “integrator’. Most of the 
procurement in GRSE is done indigenously, if available. The variation in import 
content is caused due to customer nominated equipments that are imported for 
strategic need of Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard.  
It has implemented the “Make -in-India and Indigenization” policy whereby 
indigenous vendors are encourag ed to quote with maximum indigenization 
content through Licensed Production with collaboration, Licensed production with 
Transfer of Technology (TOT) Co -production, Assembling, Design and 
Manufacture in India with TOT.  

41 
 
For non -buyer nominated equipment an d yard material, the existing 
procurement policy is followed wherein procurement is done mostly through 
indigenous sources. Further, to boost up the indigenization, GRSE is tying up 
with many foreign companies and also has signed agreements with them. 
Towards upgradation of facilities, GRSE has set up a virtual Reality Lab and 
Data Centre of Central Design office during 2018-19. 
Hindustan Shipyard Limited(HSL) :  HSL has initiated following measures for 
reducing the import component and to encourage MSEs & o ther private sector 
players:- 
(i)     Inclusion of the provisions contained in ‘Public Procurement 
(Preference to Make in India),   Order 2017’ issued by Department of 
Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
in Purchase manual and its effective implementation. 
(ii) Assurance of orders for future requirement in 5 years on the same 
Indian firm which executed import substitute order successfully. 
(iii) Relaxation of norms (prior experience and prior turnover) for MSEs 
and Star tups in all public procurements, subject to meeting quality and 
technical specifications. 
(iv) Alignment of payment terms i.e. provision of advance payment to 
MSEs. 
(v)   Deemed registration of vendors (vendors registered in other Defence 
PSUs are to be considered as Deemed Registered). 
Indigenous content as a % of VoP achieved has been steadily increasing 
during the last 4 years as tabulated below: 
Details of Indigenous content as % of VoP achieved in last five years 
Year VoP 
(Rs Cr) 
Direct 
Import  
(Rs Cr) 
Value of Import 
content from 
domestic 
suppliers (Rs 
Cr) 
Indigenou
s Content  
(Rs Cr) 
Indigenous 
content as 
a % of VoP 
2013-14 453.40 123.10 -- 330.30 72.85% 
2014-15 294.16 99.51 -- 194.65 66.17% 

42 
 
2015-16 593.29 159.63 -- 433.66 73.09% 
2016-17 629.04 65.18 19.04 544.82 86.61% 
2017-18 644.77 72.84 0.93 571.00 88.56% 
 
 
Status of upgradation of facilities:  Presently, the first phase of the 
modernization i.e. the Refurbishment and Replacement of Machineries and 
Infrastructure (RRMI) is under progress with financial support from Government 
of India. As part of infrastructure upgradation, implementation of SAP  ERP 
Solution along with PLM is in progress. The SAP ERP system is expected to ‘GO 
LIVE’ in current fiscal. 
Observation/Recommendation No 9 
The Committee further note that comprehensive upgrade programme for various 
aircraft have been undertaken/are being undertaken which include Mirage 2000, MiG-29 
aircraft, DARIN III, An-32, IL-76/78 fleet, Mi-17 helicopters. The Committee while noting 
the upgradation process would like to emphasize for replacement of the aircraft which 
have completed their life. 
Reply of the Government. 
The IAF inventory is a mix of legacy and new equipment. Ageing of equipment is a 
natural process and is dealt with through proper maintenance, obsolescence 
management, upgrades and acquisition of new equipment without compromising safety. 
Defence equipment are phased out on completion of Total Technical Life (TTL)/ Total 
Calendar Life (TLC) and replaced with suitable equipment to maintain operational edge 
over adversary. 
MiG-29, Mirage -2000, Jaguar DARIN III, and Mi -17/Mi-17 1V helicopters are being 
upgraded in a phased manner. 
The issue of drawdown in the strength of the fighter squadron in the IAF is being given 
due emphasis. Induction of the balance of 272 x Su -30 MKI aircraft from HAL is under 
process and will be completed by 2020 -21. In duction of 40 x LCA into the IAF has 
commenced. Till date nine LCA aircraft have been inducted. Induction of Rafale aircraft 

43 
 
will commence from September 2019. The procurement case for 83 x LCA Mk1A has 
been initiated and the RFP was issued in December 201 7. Further, the Government of 
India plans to procure Fighter aircraft under ‘Make in India’ initiative, and also examining 
other suitable options. Towards this, a case for procurement of approximately 110 
fighter aircraft is being progressed under Strategic Partnership model. 
Besides this, the planned inductions include Apache Attack Helicopters, Chinook Heavy 
Lift Helicopters and Light Combat Helicopters. IAF is also enhancing its combat 
potential with procurement of Combat Support Elements viz Airborne Wa rning and 
Control System (AWACS), AEW&C Flight Refuelling Aircraft etc. 
Observation/Recommendation no. 14 
 
Shortage of Night Vision Equipment 
 
As per the status of Night Vision Equipment as stated by the Ministry of Defence in 
respect of Indian Army, as on  date the holdings of night vision equipment vis -à-vis 
authorization are ranging from 70% to 80%. The deficiencies are due to routine discard for 
which procurement cases are actively being processed. The Committee have further been 
apprised that a contract  for procurement of night vision Goggles for C -130 Aircraft has been 
signed on 16.09.2016. The Committee also find that third generation night vision devices like 
Electro Optical Fire Control System (EON-51) and Stabilized Optronic Pedestals (SOP) have 
been fitted on Indian Navy Ships. The Committee while taking note of the importance of Night 
Vision Equipment for military operations, would like to stress for taking all the desired 
initiatives to meet the deficiencies. 
 
Reply of the Government. 
Capital procurement of defence equipment is a continuous activity undertaken in 
accordance with the extant Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP -2016) which contains 
timelines for completion of procurement cases. 
 In last one year, supply orders for Qty 6,834 Night Vision Devices (NVD) of various 
types have been placed and deliveries are in progress. Further, procurement of different 

44 
 
varieties of Night Vision Devices is under progress. These procurements would reduc e the 
deficiencies of Night Vision equipment in Indian Army considerably. 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 15 
 
Ordnance Factory Board - Their role and contribution to preparedness of Armed 
Forces. 
 
 The Committee note that 41 Ordnance Factories function und er Ordnance 
Factory Board (OFB) and their core competence include small, medium and large 
calibre weapons, mortar equipment, signalling and related stores, rockets & aerial 
bombs, fuses, explosives, chemicals & propellants, trucks, tanks & its variants, ni ght 
and day vision sights & instruments, brake parachutes, tentage, clothings etc. The 
turnover of the OFBs during 2015 -16 was Rs.14158 crore which is proposed to be 
increased to Rs. 20,000 crore in three years. With regard to modernization of OFB, the 
Committee find that     Rs. 2956 crore were spent during 11 th Plan and during 12th Plan, 
the amount spent on modernization increased to Rs. 8635 crore, i.e. which is nearly 
three times increase from the spending during the 11 th Plan. So far as achievements of  
OFB are concerned, it inter alia include developing and supply of first NBC vehicle to 
Indian Army, participation in RFP of upgunning of 130mm Gun to 155 mm x 45 Calibre 
Gun, development of MOD -II Chaff launcher system, 7.62 x 39 mm Assault rifle 
“GHAATAK”,  Bi -Modular Charge System (BMC S) and 155 x 45 Calibre Fund 
“Dhanush”. 
 The Committee during the course of examination have been apprised about the 
major challenges/constraints before the OFBs like Non -Uniform demand from Armed 
Forces & Security Forces, uneconomic quantities to be produ ced to meet strategic 
needs, difficulties in entering into long term agreement with dedicated vendors and low 
scale of production which does not attract the vendors to respond to LTE/OTE. The 
Committee understand that there are quality issues on the part o f the Services with 
regard to the armaments produced by the Ordnance Factories. The Committee while 
taking note of the achievements and the constraints of Ordnance Factories would like to 
emphasize for better coordinating mechanisms between the OFBs and th e Services. 

45 
 
There is an urgent need on the part of the Services to place the orders for various 
armaments well in advance keeping in view the complexities and the long period 
required for production of armaments so as to sustain the viability of these Fact ories. 
Now when the draft Defence Production Policy 2018 -19 talks of active participation of 
private sector in the defence production, OFBs need to work more professionally and 
increase their competence. As mentioned earlier, modernisation and upgradation of 
technology in Ordnance Factories should be given top priority. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   Demand from the Armed Forces is based on their operational requirements which 
are dynamic in nature. However, to provide adequate workload to the Ordnance 
Factories, various interactive meetings are being held with the Armed Forces and OFB 
to finalise the mutually agreed targets. Besides, OFB also caters to the demands of 
other indentors like Paramilitary Forces and State Police Forces. 
   A budgetary allocation of Rs. 11742.42 crore (BE 2018-19) has been made to OFB 
for Army supplies. However, the allocation has been stated to be inclusive of GST and 
all applicable taxes/overheads. Including GST in the total budgetary allocation will bring 
down the total budget fo r supplies to the Army significantly and will also adversely 
impact the manufacturing activities of Ordnance Factories. As per the system in vogue,  
the budgetary allocation for Defence supplies does not include the applicable taxes. 
Matter has been taken u p at the appropriate level for exclusion of GST from budgetary 
allocation.  
  OFB has been geared up to make up for the reduced/fluctuating demand from 
Army by focussing on the export market. Adequate thrust has been given to export of 
Arms and Ammunition by way of re -structuring export governance in OFB. Potential 
markets abroad are being proactively identified for expansion of export and thereby 
increasing the scale of production in OFB.  
  Qualitative issues raised by Indentors are being regularly monitored and addressed 
in association with Indentors. The Ministry constituted a Committee to look into certain 
issues on quality processes in the Ordnance Factories, their relation with DGQA 

46 
 
establishment, quality issues related to ToT, licensed production and  structural changes 
required to make the Ordnance Factory Board move to six sigma status. A pilot project 
in selected Ordnance Factories has been implemented wherein the modified roles of 
Finance and Accounts and DGQA and OFB have been implemented with the  objective 
of studying effect of single agency responsibility for quality of manufacture of a product.  
Towards greater customer engagement, the Ammunition Group of OFB has initiated 
visits of Ordnance Depots and had interactions with the Depot Heads for t he purpose of 
getting feedback on deficiency in supply of ammunition (if any), quality of ammunition, 
packaging & handling, storage conditions and other aspects. Corrective actions have 
been taken/are being taken by OFB on all feedback.  Also, interactive meetings are 
being held regularly with the concerned Line Directorates of Services and Operating 
Divisions of OFB to resolve various issues. Further, periodic reviews are being done 
with all the stakeholders at Ministry level to address specific cases of d elay in supplies 
to Armed Forces.  
 
  In order to enable OFB to work professionally, a revised OFB Procurement Manual-
2018 which deals with procurement of input materials/stores by OFB has come into 
effect from 01.09.2018. There has been enhancement of delegation of financial powers 
to OFB for procurement of stores and Plant & Machinery. Further, Approval -in-Principle 
(AIP) has been accorded for 10 proposals of OFB for procurement of Plant & Machinery 
during the year 2018-19 with an estimated cost of approx. Rs. 706 crore.  
 The Ministry is committed to create, maintain and modernize capital assets of OFB 
with appropriate contemporary technology at par with global standards for enhancing 
productivity, quality and quantity to provide state -of-the-art Battlefield Equipment to th e 
Services.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.15 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 16 
Strengthening  DPSUs 
With the objective of achieving self -reliance in defence production, the 
DPSUs which include the Ordanance Factories have been continuously 
modernizing & upgrading their capabilities and expanding their product range. 
The Committee also note that DPSUs, through in -house R&D initiatives, have 
developed a large number of products in addition to a number of 
products/equipme nt being produced through Transfer of Technology. The 
Committee are however, concerned that due to high dependence on external 
content, low percentage of value addition in the DPSUs, low labour 
productivity and high production cost, the DPSUs have not been  able to meet 
the defence requirements of the Country.  Moreover, delays on the part of 
foreign suppliers also lead to cost and time overrun in development of weapon 
systems.  To quote an example, the manufacturing of warships and 
submarines in Mazagaon Do ckyard Limited, in the past, got delayed because 
the foreign supplier did not supply vital components in time. The Committee 
also note that the DPSUs take long time in the acquisition/production of 
weapon systems due to a number of other factors including changes sought in 
weapon specification by the Armed forces, delay in availability of know -how 
from external sources. The Committee feel that the DPSUs have, over the 
years, accumulated experience and technically skilled manpower to deliver 
high value and h igh volume projects. About Mazagaon Dockyards Limited, the 
Committee have been informed that to overcome the shortcomings observed 
during the earlier built ships and also to improve the productivity and reduce 
the build periods, development of weapons and sensors is being expedited 
through DRDO and DPSUs through various routes such as ‘Buy and make’, 
‘Buy and make (Indian)’ and ‘Make’ acquisition process. Moreover, 
indigenisation of warship building steel is being undertaken through DPSU and 
private industr ies and large scale outsourcing is being resorted to for parallel 
construction of part of ships at different geographical locations.  
The Committee feel that optimum utilisation of potential of the DPSUs is 
essential for their strengthening.  For this they have to be enabled to produce 
not only for our own requirements but also be able to export their products.  In 
this regard, the Committee feel that platforms such as Defexpo are ideally 
suited to project the capabilities of DPSUs.  The Committee, according ly, 
recommend that DPSUs may be given adequate autonomy and resources to 
enable them to operate on commercial basis and sell their products to the 
global customers without depending continuously on the Government.  

48 
 
However, the Committee feel it necessary to underline that in case of conflict, 
the demands of the national armed forces have to be given primacy.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Initiatives of Department of Defence Production toward following issues 
are as under:  
 Export-Institutional/Governance 
 
To promote optimum utilisation of potential of the DPSUs, Department of 
Defence Production has taken several initiatives to promote Defence export as well to 
achieve the targets within specified time lines. Accordingly export action plans have 
been formula ted by them so that they are able to achieve the assigned targets and 
become global suppliers by integrating themselves with global supply chain of major 
international defence OEMs. DPSUs/OFB have been asked to undertake market 
research to identify potenti al target countries and formulate differentiated product 
development strategies suiting the requirements of the host country. Initiatives taken by 
the department are listed below:- 
1. DPSUs/OFB have been directed to aim at achieving 25% of turnover through 
export in the next 5 years. Their action plans are attached. 
2. To enhance their participation in international tenders, powers have been 
delegated to Secretary DRDO and CMD DPSUs/OFB for issuing authorizations 
for participation in tenders/exhibitions and for  submission of techno -commercial 
proposals for items in their production lines.  
 
3. Rationalisation of simplification of Standard Operating Procedures for providing 
export authorization. 
 
4. DPSUs/OFB are re -examining their export pricing strategies for penetra ting 
various markets. 
 
5. A new Online system for processing of export authorization applications has 
been launched for streamlining Export Licensing applications on 29.10.2018. The 
entire process made paper less right from filing of application by the indust ry to 
issue to export authorization, including consultation with stakeholders. 
 

49 
 
6. Defence Exports scheme for promotion of Defence Exports notified. The scheme 
will provide an opportunity to the prospective exporters an option to get their 
product certified by the Government.  
 
7. Defence Attaches in Indian Embassies asked to provide support for defence 
export promotion. Scheme for funding DAs to promote export is under approval. 
Workshop with foreign Defence Attaches was organized. 
 
8. An Export Booklet has been pu blished which showcases India’s capabilities in 
Defence for Export and sent to Indian Embassies across the globe for further 
distribution. 
9. Award from Ministry of Defence proposed for Best Defence Exporter (from 
Industry). 
10. In Def Expo India (Chennai, April 2018), for the first time, India’s defence 
manufacturing capabilities were projected to the world.   
 
11. To showcase India’s defence manufacturing capabilities, visits by foreign 
delegations are being arranged to Indian industry, in addition to DPSUs. 
12. Single Widow Point Of Contact (POC) in US and Russia has been provided by 
the respective countries to promote export. 
 
 Export Action Plan of DPSUs /OFB 
 
GRSE:GRSE is exploring the export opportunities through: 
(a) Participation in Exhibitions both Domestic and International, various Tender 
Sites, International and Domestic Journals; through interactions with 
Defence Attaches / Naval Attaches and Indian Embassies Abroad at 
various locations; ensuring follow up visits  wherever some interactions 
have happened either through exhibitions or visit of delegations.  
(b) Exploring possibilities of outsourcing the design capabilities which are 
acquired by the GRSE over the long period of its operations. GRSE 
forwarded letter o n it’s capability & proposal to MoD for undertaking de -
novo design, through G 2 G Channels ( DTTI agenda) 
 (c) GRSE is exploring exports of: 
i. Portable Steel Bridge (Bailey Type) to some neighboring countries like  
   Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar, Lagos, Cambodia etc.  

50 
 
ii. Supply of different classes of warships to Egypt and Morocco. 
  (d) Increased marketing emphasis on the countries under GOI consideration 
for defence  Line of Credit. 
  (e)  Initiating for finalization of Joint ventures for tender parti cipation, wherever 
feasible. 
 MIDHANI: MIDHANI’s  has taken following initiatives for exports: 
a). Through directly interacting with OEM/end -user; export agents appointed, 
traders/stockiest. 
b). Targeting price competitiveness for high -end products such as Titaniu m and 
Super alloys. 
c). Exploring opportunities not only in Defence but also Non-Defence areas such 
as Oil, Gas and Energy sectors. 
d). Stocking of MIDHANI Products outside India.  
e). Attending /Participating in Exhibitions and trade shows in targeted Segments 
f). Developing a steady customer base of 100 Customers who will provide 
regular RFQ /Enquires for MIDHANI Products. 
g). Promotion of MIDHANI Brand name to International Customers to create 
Brand Awareness including on Social media. 
h). Appointed export agents in India  and offshore for Oman, USA, Canada, 
Mexico. 
HSL: HSL has taken following initiatives for exports: 
a). Participate in Global Design tenders to undertake all stages of design 
(Concept to Detailed) 
b). Participate in Global shipbuilding tenders for OPV’s, IPV’s Tugs  and Bulk 
Carriers. 
c). HSL is exploring export opportunities in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, 
Indonesia, Turkey, Malaysia, Philippines, UAE and Kuwait. 
d). HSL is in the process of identification of global shipbuilding tender details 
through tender portals. Eff orts are being made to respond to tenders which 
meets existing shipyards capabilities and product profile. 
e). Establishing contacts with global firms to gather news on various shipbuilding 
and ship repair tenders floated in various countries 
GSL: GSL has taken following initiatives for exports: 
a). GSL’s Export Pricing Strategy is set up, on a case to case basis. The pricing 
of each project is decided as per the opportunity available in the overseas 
country and other factors such as competition existing for the pr oject, clients 

51 
 
paying capacity, Line of Credit available for the project and Exim bank credit 
terms, etc.  
b). Countries are identified and targeted for export of GSL products based on 
suitability of the product and requisite demand in that country, market 
research, information from Indian Embassies in respective country, enquiries 
received from potential customers etc. 
c). Promotion/ Marketing of Product is carried out through participation in trade 
shows where international buyers are present, well designed websi te to 
showcase its latest products and offerings.  
d). Marketing Representatives of GSL are appointed in various countries to 
identify potential markets outside India and to promote and assist GSL in 
selling its products and services.   
e). GSL has plan to  appoin t local or international Consultant to jointly work with 
GSL for submission of bids and if required during execution of project. 
f). GSL is exploring ToT  for midsized platforms such as OPVs and FACs which 
are in much demand with the South East Asian, African and Middle East 
countries. 
g). GSL is in negotiation with MTU for local manufacturing of 8000 series diesel 
engines in the range of 07 to 10 MW which has potential  for  indigenisation 
content upto 60%, with sourcing of items/ sub -assemblies from indigenous 
sources. These items once indigenized can also be potential export. 
 
BEML: BEML has taken following initiatives for exports: 
a). Appointed Distributor in 10 Countries 
b). Target opportunities through Line of credit and  Global  Tenders 
c). Avail services of Trading PSU for exports 
d). Collaboration with other DPSUs / Indian companies having overseas 
operation 
e). Participation in Exhibitions. 
MDL: MDL has taken following initiatives for exports: 
a). Adopting product pricing strategies viz: Market Oriented pricing, Market 
penetration pricing to enter export market. 
b). Participating in trade shows both in India and abroad to reach the 
international buyers. 
c). Appointing agent to facilitate export orders in target countries. 
d). Corporate Brand Strategy for positioning MDL in the potential market  will be 
adopted for advertorial in the relevant print media. A consultant or agent to 

52 
 
facilitate MDL’s footprint in the import market of target countries is being 
explored.  
e). Based on market research, MDL is promoting auxiliary support vessels and 
commercial vessels for the countries who  are not in financial position  to 
acquire major warships.     
HAL: HAL has taken following initiatives for exports: 
a). Establish Global contacts/ identify to prospective customers by  
1. Identifying target countries for export. 
2. Marketing efforts to reach out prospective customers through participation 
in International air show/ exhibitions considering the business 
opportunities in the region. 
3. Inviting Defence delegation from friendly countries to HAL to experience 
demo flight on HAL Aircraft platforms. 
4. Deputing Technical/ Marketing teams to iden tified potential countries for 
actively pursuing the export of aircraft platform. 
b). Establish long term supply chain relationship with Global OEMs for offset 
business by  
1. Identify available Offset Business. 
2. Approach OEMs for considering HAL as Tier -1 supplier for their ongoing 
projects as part of Offset obligation. 
3. HAL manufactured equipment to be considered for fitment in all future 
aircraft procurement programe of GoI. 
 
c). Persue international certification:- 
 
Pursue International Civil Certification for Dhruv helicopters so as to enter 
Civil market. 
 
d). Strategy to facilitate exports to countries with Line of Credit. 
1. Identify the requirement for products similar to HAL’s platforms in target 
countries and compile list of available Line of Credits in these countries. 
2. Export HAL products /services by utilizing the existing GoI, Lines of Credit. 
 
BEL: BEL has taken following initiatives for exports: 
a). In order to have close interactions with customers, BEL has set up 
Representative marketing office in Vietnam and planned to open 05 more 
offices in Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Oman, New York & Singapore. 

53 
 
b). BEL is targeting opportunities mostly in SE Asia, Africa, South America and 
CIS countries. 
c). Offer Build to Print  and Build to Spec Components, Modules, Sub -systems 
and Systems to Global OEMs and Establishing long -term supply chain 
relationships with global OEMs. 
d). Establishing long -term supply chain relationships with global OEMs for 
Offsets 
e). Appointment of local Agents to market BEL’s products and systems. 
f). Direct participating in tenders floated by overseas customers and interactions 
with Foreign DAs in New Delhi and Indian DAs abroad on a regular basis.  
BDL: BDL has taken following initiatives for exports: 
a). Exploring international Markets for BDL specific products. 
b). Examining pricing policy for a competitive international environment. 
c). Product promotion and branding through participation in international 
defence shows/exhibitions and visits 
d). Exploring avenues for engaging  agents to promote BDL products in friendly 
foreign South Asian Countries 
e). Tying up with potential foreign OEMs with offset obligations in using facilities 
created  at BDL in the manufacture of   products targeted to potential buyers 
across globe. 
f). Exploring ToT avenues with leading missile manufacturers of the world under 
Make II and targeting  the products  for export in the world market. 
OFB: OFB has taken following initiatives for exports 
a). Approaching international agencies involved in market research of de fence 
products for assessing the market potential and identification of target 
countries. Further, OFB is also exploring the potential market for its identified 
exportable products with the help of Defence  Attache, agents and other 
interested buyers in the  environment thereby enhancing their participation in 
the International tenders. 
b). Approached various foreign OEMs for meeting their requirement towards 
offset. viz. BAE systems, Dassault aviations, BTC Sweden 
c). Pricing the export products as per guidelines is sued by DDP and has also 
forwarded the proposal for modifying the methodology of pricing for 
exportable items to DDP.. 
d). Targeting export to  Middle East – UAE, Turkey ; South Asia – Myanmar, 
Bangladesh, Nepal; South East Asia – Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia , 
Vietnam;  Central Asia – Uzbekistan ; Africa – Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, 
Egypt; USA 

54 
 
 Indigenization Policy for DPSUs & OFB 
 
The objective of Indigenization Policy is to create an Industry ecosystem which is 
able to indigenize the imported components (including alloys & special materials) and 
sub-assemblies for defence equipment and platform manufactured in India and leverage 
the said capability to create components export market. 
Several strategies have been envisaged in the Draft Indigenization Policy to meet 
the above objective. Defence PSUs and OFB are to give preference to indigenous 
components. Each DPSUs and OFB is to identify 10 to 20 items, which constitute 
highest value of  import and take up a campaign for Indigenization. Where there is 
requirement of development of technological capabilities, government will provide 
support. Three key areas have been identified, viz. Engine technology, Material 
technology (Special material s & super alloys) and Semiconductor fab technology. DDP 
will examine feasibility of acquiring offshore assets for obtaining these technologies and 
materials. Policy envisages setting up Defence Innovation Hubs with participation from 
industry and support f rom iDEX, for items required in small numbers, not allowing 
economically viable scale of manufacturing facilities.  
 Policy also has strategies to support domestic industry in the efforts of 
indigenization, viz. facilitation & priority of testing of indige nized products at No Cost No 
Commitment (NCNC) basis, developing testing infrastructure, long term orders, 
adoption of Make -II process in DPSUs and OFB, Intellectual Property for indigenized 
products, setting up Indigenization fund, Indigenization portal a nd encourage export 
market for indigenized items. 
Thus, Draft Indigenization Policy aims at reducing dependence on import and 
bringing self-reliance in defence production. 
It may be noted that the Draft Indigenization Policy has been approved by the 
Hon’ble Raksha Mantri on 6th March, 2019 and notified on 8th March, 2019. 
 ‘Make-II’ Procedure 
 
A new separate ‘Make -II (Industry Funded)’ procedure’ was notified by the 
Government in Feb 2018, with primarily focus upon development of 
equipment/system/platform or  their upgrades or their subsystems/sub -
assembly/assemblies/components and import substitution. Under this procedure, no 
Government funding is envisaged for prototype development purposes but there is an 
assurance of orders on successful prototype development. 

55 
 
This procedure has number of industry friendly provisions such as relaxation of 
eligibility criterion, minimal documentation, reduced timelines, and provision for 
consideration of Suo-moto proposals by industry/individuals, etc. 
So far, 3 5 proposals h ave been accorded ‘Approval in principle’, out of which 
Project Sanction Orders has been issued for 05 projects. 
Intellectual Property Right Facilitation Cell/Design Capability 
Introduction: 
1. It was decided in the Meeting held on 13 Feb 2018 under chairmanship of 
Secy (DP) that an Intellectual Property Facilitation Cell shall be set up in 
the DGQA. Accordingly, IPF Cell under DGQA established. 
2. A number of Ordnance Factories, Defence PSUs and  even the individual 
officials of these organizations have been carrying out innovative research 
leading to the development of certain materials, components/sub -
assemblies/assemblies that result in performance up gradation of this 
existing systems/platform s and simultaneously reducing India’s 
dependence on imports. Such innovation may be treated as Intellectual 
Properties and need to be protected by way of filing of patents for which 
the concerned organizations/individuals make their own isolated efforts. 
Need is felt to create a structured mechanism to facilitate and encourage 
innovative activities with a primary objective to “Boost IP culture” which 
would enhance the Intellectual capital that is vital for encouraging in -house 
R&D in such organizations. 
3.       Role and Responsibility: 
 
 (a) To provide general advisory about IPRs, such as patents, trademarks, 
designs and copyrights etc. 
(b) To provide services such as IP Protection, IP awareness & training and 
counseling & advisory services. 
(c) To enable o rganizations/individuals in understanding, identifying & 
using intellectual property. 
(d) To provide services related to patent searches, patent drafting, patent 
prosecution facilitation in commercialization of inventions, trademarks 
prosecution matters, etc., 
(e) To follow up the applications submitted for patents with various 
government agencies. 

56 
 
(f) Keep the above organizations abreast of the latest amendments, if any, 
in the Indian patents Act 1970 and Indian Patent Rules 2003 
promulgated by the Government. 
(g) To create IP news tracker for latest news. 
(h) To hand hold organizations/individuals for identifying IP in their day to 
day functioning & leverage it for Business Excellences. 
(i) To create a delivery mechanism for comprehensive awareness & 
training in IPR to all stake holders of IP in the corresponding 
technological fields. 
 (j) To organize patent workshops at different locations. 
(k) To have an arrangement with NRDC to seek their advice and to share 
their experiences. 
(l) To identify a panel of professional IP attorneys/IP consultants and fix a 
fee structure for consulting them for professional services, so that the 
DPSUs/OFs can refer specific cases to them directly for professional 
expertise.     
4.       Training 
 A training calendar has been prepared by IPF Cell i.e., approx. 10,000 personnel 
(less HAL) have been trained till Mar 2019. 
5.        IPR Data 
 
During 2018-19, total 179 IPR filed by the DPSUs and OFB upto Nov. 2018. 
 
 Line of credit  
 
Hon’ble Prime Minister in a meeting dated 05.11.2018 stressed that CPSEs 
should not work in silos and should work in tandem with policies of government.  
 
He further directed that the existing mechanism of extending Line of Credit  (LoC) 
by India to other countries should be streamline d to ensure that CPSEs taken 
advantage of this mechanism for expanding their global outreach. Accordingly, DPSUs 
have suggested that LOC to friendly countries may also be identified for Defence 
Projects.  
 
Ordnance Factory Boa rd:- 
The internal system of OFB has been strengthened to bring in more focus on 
exports. The matter is being periodically monitored in the Ministry. 

57 
 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited :  
Defence forces are the primary customers of HAL and around 80% of the flyin g 
fleet of Services is being supported by HAL. At the same time export is a thrust area at 
HAL with an export footprint in over 20 countries. The export product spectrum of HAL 
include platforms such as Do -228, ALH Dhruv, Cheetah/Chetak/Cheetal as well as 
structural work packages, avionics and accessories, forgings, castings, rolled rings etc 
are being exported to various countries. A specific exports strategy has been formulated 
to enhance the export performance, which focuses on platform-wise export performance 
of the company. 
HAL participates in international airshows and exhibitions such as Aero India, 
Paris Airshow, Farnborough Airshow, MAKS airshow, Bahrain Airshow etc and 
showcases the products and activities of the company. The state -of-the-art indigenous 
combat aircraft LCA Tejas was showcased during last Bahrain airshow in January, 2016 
evincing keen interest from international audience. HAL was also lead partner in 
organising the DefExpo -2018 held at Tiruvidanthai, Kancheepuram district near 
Chennai in April 2018 and showcased its capabilities and contributions under “Make in 
India” in aviation and aerospace. While continuous efforts are on to up the export 
related sales, serving the needs of Indian Defence customers is of utmost priority to the 
company which is never compromised. For instance, the annual production capacity of 
LCA Tejas aircraft is being enhanced from 8 to 16 aircraft per annum to meet the 
demands of Indian Air Force. 
Bharat Electronics Limited:- 
Being a leading supplier of Defence electronics in India, more than 85% of BEL's 
turnover is generated through supply of products/systems through indigenous 
design/knowhow to Defence thus contributing to the country's requirements in Strategic 
Electronics. The dependence on foreign knowhow is around 15%. 
 
As regards, timely supply to Defence, it is pertinent to mention here that the on -
time delivery of BEL on an average is around 80%. The improvement initiatives like 
implementation of SAP (Enterprise Resource Planning application), usage of l atest 
Project Management tools, Process improvements, structured review mechanism etc., 
ensure thrust on timely delivery. However, many of the complex projects involving 
concurrent engineering gets delayed. Such delays are also attributable to factors like  
change in user requirement, specifications to incorporate additional features, accord of 
Bulk Production Clearance (BPC), site readiness etc.  
 
It is also observed that in the case of first time inducted project, the development 
& productionization of fir st system gets delayed while the subsequent batches and 
overall project is delivered within the overall timelines. 

58 
 
 
As part of BEL's review mechanism to monitor Time & Cost overrun status of the 
projects, the milestones are defined at the time of initiatin g Project Sanction file. These 
milestones are monitored and reviewed by Development & Engineering heads 
periodically to take corrective action if required.   
 
Apart from these reviews, Preliminary Design Reviews, Critical Design Reviews, 
Final Design Reviews are conducted as per the project needs by a cross function tea m 
which consists of representatives  from Design, Production (Fabrication, assembly & 
testing), Quality assurance department. Projects are reviewed Monthly and Quarterly 
and report generated for taking corrective measures, wherever required.  
 
It may also be noted, that On -time Delivery is one of the annual performance 
parameters of the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed between BEL and 
Ministry. 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited:- 
BEML will be  able to operate on commercial basis and sell its product to global 
customer without being continuously dependent on Government if it is given 
adequate autonomy and resources.  
Bharat Dynamics Limited:-  
 The following are the major products / Weapons Systems being currently 
supplied by BDL to Armed Forces.  
 Akash Weapons Systems  
 Invar – ATGM 
 Konkurs-M (ATGM) 
 
 The Torpedoes being produced by BDL is TAL – Torpedo (Underwater 
equipment) [ToT with NSTL]  
 
       The above weapons are being produced by BDL a nd being supplied to 
Armed Forces. However, sometimes, there is delay in supplying to Forces due 
to non -availability of foreign inputs in time & also to criticality of parts going 
into missile manufacture. In order to solve the issues BDL has taken the 
following steps:-  
 

59 
 
Thrust on Indigenisation  
BDL is putting up determined efforts towards indigenization of ATGMs with the 
objective of increasing self -reliance, reduction of Foreign Exchange (FE) out 
flow and achieving cost reduction. Indigenisation of products like Konkurs -M, 
Invar, Milan 2T has be en achieved upto 90%, 78.6% and 71% respectively.  
Thrust on Exports:  
Light Weight Torpedo: Two New Contracts for Export of Light Weight Torpedo 
(LWT-XP) to a friendly neighbouring country have been signed and the same 
is under execution.  
Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL):- 
1. Considering the time taken in building ships and submarines and the 
requirement of particular equipment/items as per the PERT/construction 
schedule, it is generally difficult to indigenize the items, during the project 
execution period. However, it is possible to undertake indigenization of items 
in the subsequent projects.  
2. The shipyards can play a very significant role in enhacing the indigenous 
content. Public Procurement Policy 2017 ‘Preference to make in India’ 
clause ha s been made applicable to all purchses by MDL, so as to further 
reduce the import dependence.  
Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE):- 
GRSE has started Modernization of its infrastructure, enhancement of 
Technology and R&D in both design and construction of warships. GRSE is 
progressing with its ambitious plans of revitalization and refurbishment of Raja 
Bagan Dockyard. After revitalization and augmentation of facilities at RBD, the 
shipbuilding capacity of GRSE will increase to 20 ships concu rrently (i.e. 08 
large ships & 12 small ships). The Integrated Construction Technology 
adopted by GRSE, would result in significant reduction in build period of ships 
and also improve quality.  
GRSE produce the most modern warships for the country through 
indigenization aimed at self -reliance. GRSE has achieved the unique 
distinction of supplying 97 warships to Indian Navy/Coast Guard.  
GRSE has a proven track record on design development, construction, supply 
and post-delivery support to major warships like  Frigate, Anti- 

60 
 
Submarine Warfare Corvettes, Missile Corvette, Fleet Replenishment Tanker, 
Landing Ship Tank, Fast Attack Craft, Inshore Patrol Vessel, Offshore  Patrol 
Vessel, Landing Craft utility and other ships like Survey Vessels, Dredgers, 
Bulk Carriers, Research Vessels, Fire Floats, Fishing Trawlers, Tugs & Towing 
Vessels, Fast Interceptor Boats, Passenger Ferries, RO – RO Ferries etc.  
Brief on major indigenisation successes: - 
GRSE has Board approved Vendor Development Policy, Procurement Policy 
and Outsourcing Policy which comply with the Governmental directives & 
guidelines.  GRSE has implemented the “Make in India and Indigenisation” 
policy whereby indigenous vendors are encouraged to quote with maximum 
indigenisation content through Licensed prod uction with collaboration, 
Licensed production with Transfer of Technology (TOT), Co -production, 
Assembling, Design and Manufacture in India.   GRSE has its Vendor Policy & 
Procurement Policy in line with Government directives to increase vendor 
base, outsourcing & support to Micro & Small Enterpriseses (MSE).  
With strategic focus on the Make in India drive of the Govt. of India, GRSE has 
achieved over 90% indigenous equipment fit on board for ASW Corvettes and 
LCUs. Over 70% indigenous content has also been  achieved on the WJFACs.  
Rail Less Helo Traversing System: -  
GRSE has a License Agreement for 10 years with M/s MacTeggart, Scott & 
Co. Ltd. UK regarding indigenization and supply of Rail Less Helo Traversing 
System for Warships and other ships. GRSE achi eved over 72% 
Indigenization till date on supply of Rail Less Helo Traversing System through 
collaboration with M/s MacTeggart, Scott & Co. Ltd. UK.  
Marine Diesel Engine:  
GRSE has signed a License Agreement with M/s MTU Friedrichshafen GmbH, 
Germany on 0 4th Mar 2017 for Indigenization of MTU 12V/16V4000M90 
Diesel Engines. The agreement is valid for 10 years and is for Overhauling, 
Assembly & Testing of MTU, Germany make 12V/16V4000M90 Diesel 
Engines from Semi Knocked Down (SKD) to Completely Built Unit (C BU).  
Diesel Alternator: -  
The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) regarding development of engines 
for marine applications was signed between GRSE and M/s Cooper 

61 
 
Corporation Pvt. Ltd., Satara, India on 16th Oct 2017. The scope of 
collaboration is to manufa cture Diesel Alternators of the Range 50 -500 KW 
with an aim towards self -reliance, to promote ‘Make in India’ initiatives and to 
meet the requirements of Indian Navy & Indian Coast Guard.  
High Strength Steel: - 
Prior to advent of ASW Corvette under P -28, the special grade of high strength 
steel required for construction of warships were always imported by the 
country. GRSE got associated with development of this steel by DMRL 
Hyderabad and subsequent TOT to SAIL for commercial production of steel. 
Subsequently, GRSE also had a major role to play in developing the weld 
consumables and welding processes in consultation with WRI Trichy. GRSE 
took an active role in indigenization of DMR 249 A grade steel considered to 
be an advance grade Steel for Warship const ruction. At present DMR 249 A 
grade steel is utilized for Hull of warships constructed of Indian Naval Ships.  
Export (Sales) Performance of GRSE  
Financia
l year 
Defence Export Civil Export Total Value of 
Export 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Exporte
d To 
(Country
) 
Value of 
Export  
(Rs. in 
Crore) 
Exported 
To 
(Country) 
Value of 
Export  
(Rs. in Crore) 
2013-14 - - Bhutan 4.69 4.69 
2014-15 
Mauritiu
s 
336.87 Bhutan - 336.87 
2015-16 - - Bhutan 0.02 0.02 
2016-17 - - Bhutan 0.26 0.26 
2017-18 - - Bhutan 3.89 3.89 
2018-19 
(As on 
31st Jul 
- - Nepal 1.3624 1.3624 

62 
 
2018) 
GRSE is the first Indian Shipyard to export warship (Mauritius Coast 
Guard Ship Barracuda) to Mauritius Government.  
Mauritius Offshore Patrol Vessel (MOPV) CGS Barracuda was delivered 
by GRSE on 12 Dec 2014 and was commissioned on 12 Mar 2015. 
Export Order in hand as on 31st Jul 2018 is Rs. 74.86 Lakh. 
 
Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL):- 
GSL projects are at fixed price with scheduled delivery dates and there have been no 
time and cost overrun in the execution of these projects for the past 5 years. GSL has 
65-70 indigenous content in its products.  
GSL has delivered six 105M Offshore Patro l Vessels (OPVs) to Indian Coast Guard, 
one Damage Control Simulator and four 1000 T Fuel Barges to Indian Navy. GSL has 
also exported two Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPV) to Sri Lanka Navy, two Fast Patrol 
Vessels & 11 Fast interceptor Boats for Government o f Mauritius, one Damage Control 
Simulator for Myanmar Navy in last three years and current year, all ahead of 
contractual schedule. 
GSL with the approval of GOI has undertaken planned modernisation and which has 
enabled increase in capacity by nearly three  times. GSL has sufficient spare capacity to 
undertake additional orders, to utilise the capacity to nearly 100%. 
GSL as a DPSU under MoD has been given adequate autonomy and resources to 
market its products to the global customers however keeping in view the requirement of 
Indian Navy/ Cost Guard with first preference. 
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI):- 
MIDHANI deals with the strategic materials such as Special Steels, Superalloys and 
Titanium alloys. Initially, the special metals and alloys are develo ped with the help of 
Technology Transfer. Presently, MIDHANI is able to develop new alloys with home 

63 
 
grown R&D. The requirements of services are met by MIDHANI in time and to cater to 
the future demand, equipments have been modernized and upgraded such as Melting 
Furnace, Forge Press and Wide Plate Mill. Further, for supply to export market, 
MIDHANI has identified and is developing low cost Super alloyes for Oil and Gas 
Sectors. 
Observation/Recommendation No. 18 
The Committee further find that the percentag e achievement with regard to 
supply of ammunition to Army by the OFB has been stated by the Ministry as 93, 98 and 
91 percent during the years 2014 -15, 2015-16 and 2016 -17 respectively. However, the 
overall data of indent for 2014 -19 has been stated to be Rs.26,475 crore against which 
the delivery made till March, 2017 has been shown as Rs.12,919 crore which do not 
commensurate to the percentage achievement which has been stated as more that 90 
percent as stated above.  The Department has furnished the deta iled data with regard 
to order received, delivery made and delivery due by OFB and DPSUs with regard to 
various items indented by the forces which indicated that in some of the cases the 
delivery has yet not started even though a substantial period has lap sed since the 
contract was made. For example, in case of HAL, LCA Tejas (FOC configuration) 
contract was made during December, 2010 by IAF and delivery is yet to start.  Again in 
case of MDL, the contracts for Project P75 Submarines (6); Project P15B Destroyers (4) 
and Project 17A Stealth Frigate (4) were made during October, 2005, January, 2011 
and February, 2015 respectively, but the deliveries are yet to start.  There are similar 
cases in case of other DPSUs too, where the delivery is yet to start or mos t of delivery 
is due. One of the expert has drawn the attention of the Committee towards long time 
taken for production of destroyers in MDL which take almost five years whereas the 
same kind of vessels can be produced in 2 -2.5 years in Asia and globally.  In this 
context, the Department of Defence Production has apprised the Committee that due to 
the several productivity measures taken recently by MDL, the average build period is 
expected to come down from earlier 88 months (P15A Destroyers) to 72 months ( P15B 
Destroyers). 

64 
 
The Committee note from the aforesaid scenario that there is a huge gap 
between the orders received, targeted deliveries and deliveries made. The Committee 
strongly feel that there is need for synergy between the Services and DPSUs which is 
absolutely essential for defence preparedness of the country for which some hand -
holding on the part of armed forces of the DPSUs is required and both need to work in 
the spirit of partnership.  In the opinion of the Committee, such lack of coordination  is 
detrimental to our national interests.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry may constitute an institutional mechanism consisting of representatives of both 
the parties to facilitate synergy between them.  The Committee may be apprised  of 
steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Ordnance Factory Board:- 
OFB supplies equipments to Services based on mutually agreed target every year 
prioritizing the urgent requirement to meet the defence preparedness. The percentage 
achievement figures with regard to supply of ammunition to Army by OFB during the 
years 2014 -15, 2015 -16 & 2016 -17 are correct. This is in terms of mutually agreed 
targets based on annual budget given by the User to OFB for first three years of the 
Roll-on-Indent which covers requirements of five years from 2014-15 to 2018-19. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited : 
HAL has been putting in all efforts to ensure timely production and supplies of various 
deliverables. The project execution is regularly reviewed at multiple leve ls to ensure 
early identification of potential issues and timely risk mitigation is undertaken. 
Institutional mechanisms like Steering Committees, Empowered Committee etc 
consisting of representatives of customer/MoD at senior levels are in place to monito r 
project execution/strategies and to facilitate synergy between the Customer (Armed 
forces) and developer /manufacturer (DPSU).  

65 
 
The example of LCA – Final Operational Clearance (FOC) contract signed in Dec 2010 
and deliveries not yet started may be seen in conjunction with the certification of the 
aircraft which is still awaited. 
HAL has orders for: 
 20 aircraft (16 fighters and 4 trainers) of FOC configuration for which contract 
signed in Dec 2010 and FOC clearance is still awaited. 
The Standard of Prepar ation (SOP) for trainer version (8 aircraft) in both IOC and FOC 
configuration is yet to be released by Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA). In the 
absence of SOP of trainer aircraft and to avoid any production break, the production 
activities for the 16  fighter aircraft of FOC configuration have been initiated by HAL. 
However, the final acceptance and delivery of FOC fighter will depend on FOC 
clearance by ADA. 
Bharat Electronics Limited:- 
BEL maintains synergy with its Defence customers towards meeting the delivery 
requirements as well as to ensure customer satisfaction. Some of the measures in place 
for ensuring customer satisfaction are listed below: 
 A separate Product Support group has been established under General 
Manager (Product Support) to facili tate a clear focus on all Product Support 
issues from all our Customers.  
 Toll Free telephone number facility established for registering customer 
complaints, which has been functioning since Dec 2011. 
 Customer interaction meetings like Institutional Meetings, PPR meetings, etc are 
being held at the senior management levels, on a regular basis, to discuss & 
resolve various issues related to product performance. 
 
It is noteworthy to mention here that as part of our endeavour to enhance the customer 
satisfaction level, the company has been conducting Customer Satisfaction Surveys 
(CSS) every year through an independent professional body. The study is to evaluate 
Customer Satisfaction index based on major attributes viz., Product performance, 

66 
 
Maintenance, Service and Overall perception and the responses are rated in a 10 -point 
scale.  A report indicating the areas of weakness and possible actions needed to 
improve the  ratings is submitted for necessary actions. Based on CSS reports, 
interactions with customers at various levels, Project Performance Review meetings 
with armed forces, etc., indicate that BEL supplied equipment/systems meet the 
required performance levels. The customer satisfaction index is found to be around 85% 
during the last three years. 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited:- 
BEML gladly accepts the recommendations of the committee for constitution of an 
institutional mechanism consisting of recommendations of both the parties i.e. DPSUs 
and Armed Forces. This would surely result in better coordination and synergy between 
the services and DPSUs. 
Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL):- 
Warship design is telescopic in nature. Unavoidable modifications by custome r, for 
improving operational capability, after co mmencement of production leads  to rework 
and delays.  
The ancillary industry in the country was in its nascent stages & took much longer than 
the anticipated time for developing equipment / systems. 
Delay in  receipt of vital weapons, sensors and certain propulsion machinery from 
suppliers abroad cause cascading delays in the project. These equipments are not 
available indigenously. 
The delay in the ship’s delivery schedule is due to non -receipt of equipment a s per the 
contractual schedule. The delay in receipt of these equipments will subsequently affect 
the delivery of the other three ships of Project.  
Reason for the delay in delivery of P15B : -  Late receipt of Gas Turbine Generator 
and DA with respect to c ontractual requirements by 42 and 52 months respectively. 
Delay in other Russian items such as Shafting by 47 months. 

67 
 
Following measures have been taken by MDL to improve the productivity and 
reduce the build periods:- 
New technology for shipbuilding such as integrated construction has been incorporated 
in new projects. M/s. Fincantieri, Italy have been appointed as a Know How Provider for 
Technology up -gradation and Capability Enhancement (KHP for TUCE) to guide MDL 
on integrated construction. 
P17A is to be constructed resorting to Integrated Construction. Build period is expected 
to be 66 months for first ship and is expected to reduce to 60 months for 2 nd, 3 rd and 
4thship which is comparable to global standards. 
Development of most of weapons and sensors is being expedited through DRDO and 
DPSUs through various routes such as ‘Buy and Make’, ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ and 
‘Make’ acquisition processes. 
MDL has also successfully completed the augmentation of its infrastructure through 
Mazdock Modernisation Project (MMP) which comprises of a new Wet Basin, a Heavy 
Duty Goliath Crane, a Module Workshop, a Cradle Assembly Shop, Store Building, 
Submarine Sub Assembly shop and associated ancillary structures.  
MDL has developed new parallel lines of construction of S ubmarines and also another 
warship construction facility at Alcock & Nhava Yards. 
In addition, large scale outsourcing is being resorted to for parallel construction of part 
of ships and submarines at different geographical locations. 
Regular follow ups are being undertaken for availability of balance material as per 
revised schedule indicated by Naval Group and Task force formed to focus and 
expedite the outfitting phase of the boats in order to mitigate the delays on account of 
delayed delivery of MPM items. 
Indian Navy has been requested to reduce the number of BFE & BNE items and freeze 
the design before the commencement of production. 
 

68 
 
Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE):- 
GRSE has so far been building ships using conventional method of making the blocks in 
workshops followed by outfitting at ship construction sites in Building Berths & Dry 
docks. This was a cumbersome process which resulted in prolonged construction time 
for ships thereby delaying the delivery of ships. 
It may be ment ioned that the major modernisation programme of the company was 
completed in Jun 2013 at a cost of Rs. 605 Cr. through which the shipbuilding capacity 
has almost doubled. After modernisation of facilities at Main Yard, GRSE is working on 
a strategy to impl ement Integrated Construction Technology which will result in 
considerable reduction in build period of ships. In this regard, the shipyard is working on 
an innovative approach to optimally utilize modernized facilities and effectively 
implement Integrated Construction concept on P17A and other future warships. These 
ships will be built in the form of units/blocks/mega blocks at different locations. 
The mega blocks will be constructed at various other selected shipyards. However, 
integration will be done at  GRSE Main Works. This will enable the shipyard to improve 
quality and reduce build period, thereby meeting the stiff timelines as being achieved by 
leading global players in shipbuilding industry. It is also planned to adopt this technology 
in all future projects of GRSE. 
Synergy between Indian Navy/ Indian Coast Guard: 
The productivity enhanceme nt measures taken by GRSE  will reduce the build period, 
Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard and GRSE has been constantly building up the 
synergy. Besides the top level  meeting of CWP&A’s progress review meeting, there is 
regular interaction between GRSE and Indian Navy & Indian Coast Guard through 
Working Level Meeting (WLM) and also with their local representatives in Warship 
Overseeing Team (IN) and Coast Guard Refit Program Team (CGRPT). 
Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL):- 
In the last four years, GSL has consistently delivered 23 ships, which amounts to more 
than 32000 gross tonnage, not only on time, but ahead of contractual delivery schedule. 

69 
 
In the last year, the Shipyard  delivered 04 Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPV), 01 Fast 
Patrol Vessel (FPV), 02 Fuel Barges and 01 Damage Control Simulator (DCS) 
amounting to 12000 gross tonnage. 
Observation/Recommendation No. 20 
Partnership with Private Sector 
India has become one of the l argest importer of defence goods and 
services in the world.  As per Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute (SIPRI) data, India’s share in global arms imports during 2012 -16 is 
12.8%.  The Committee also note that in order to achieve maximum exten t of 
self-reliance in defence sector, the Government has provided incentives to 
private sector under the Make in India Programme.  It has allowed 100% FDI 
in defence sector while up to 49% FDI will be under automatic route, FDI 
above 49% will be through Go vernment route where it is likely to result in 
access to modern technology.  Further as per the draft DPP Policy 2018, FDI 
regime in defence would further be liberalized and FDI up to 74% under 
automatic route would be allowed in niche technology areas. There a r e  other   
initiatives also   taken to promote the involvement of private sector and 
MSMEs in defence sector.  
       While noting that harnessing available potential in private sector, using its 
management, scientific and technolog ical  skills  may be key to achieving total 
self-reliance, the Committee find that there is no existing mechanism to 
facilitate public -private partnership  in  the  defence sector. Moreover, the 
strategic partnership model formulated for defence production  does not specify 
a clear role for major defence PSUs. There seems to be a total lack of 
coordination among Government agencies in so far as  integrated approach to 
public-private partnership in defence sector is concerned. The Committee are 
of the opinion  that given long history of weapons manufacturing  in India, there 
is a skill set and trained man power existing in the Country, particularly in the 
DPSUs which can be leveraged for further growth. However, to make private 
sector-public sector partnership meaningful, the DPSUs have to extend 
necessary assistance to private sector. Such partnership will not only result in 
substantial savings of money but also   create jobs in the country. Such 
partnership will be able to combine the capabilities existing in the private 

70 
 
sector with experience of public sector and prove to be a win -win situation for 
both and will  result  in overall betterment of the Country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that appropriate steps may be taken to institutionalize 
public-private participation in defence sector. The Committee may be informed 
of the steps taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government  
1 As far as  public private participation and providing necessary assistance to 
private sector is concerned there is supply chain of Private vendors supplementing the 
manufacturing capacity of OFB and DPSUs.  The total value of outsourcing for 2018 -19 
is Rs. 22333 Crore  and outsourcing as percentage of value of production is 38.74%.  
As on 31.03.2019, total number of Vendors  (all vendors) and MSME Vendors of OFB 
and DPSUs are 42,617 and 8,643 respectively supplying various items to them.   
2. In Feb 2019 Govt. has promulgated a framework for implementation of Make -II 
framework for OFB and DPSUs wherein DPSUs are being asked to iden tify items which 
are being perpetually imported to be developed under Make -II. Industry has to be 
facilitated by the DPSUs and OFB with the specifications etc. All the DPSUs and OFB 
have been asked by the Ministry to work in a time bound manner.  
3. In order to facilitate private sector in early development of the products required 
by  the Armed forces, Govt. test facilities have been opened up for the private sector . 
Even the Govt. proof ranges have been offered to the private vendors based on their 
requirement.  
4.  To promote greater indigenization by Defence PSUs and Ordnance Factories, 
Department of Defence Production has issued 5 notifications under the Public 
Procurement (Preference to Make in India), Order, 2017 of  the Department of Industrial 
Policy & Promotion. These notifications were issued on 29.06.2018, 26.07.2018, 
27.08.2018, 16.11.2018 and 01.05.2019. These notifications cover 112 items being 
procured by Defence PSUs and Ordnance Factories. As a result of these notifications, it 
has become e ssential for these Defence PSUs to provide preference to domestic 
manufacturers over imported suppliers, in terms of the said policy.  

71 
 
5.       Policy for indigenization of components and spares used in defence platforms 
for DPSUs and OFB promulgated by th e department in March 2019  will also go long 
way in promoting public private partnership in defence production. 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 21 
             The Committee observes that defence is highly sensitive area and utmost care 
need to be taken to  maintain the confidentiality/secrecy about our 
data/technology/capabilities. While taking initiatives to liberalize FDI and Private sector 
partnership in defence production, the Committee would like the Government to take 
all the requisite precautions to ensure that our defence capabilities are not 
compromised at any cost. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.   The Government has put in place a Security manual for private companies in 
defence manufacturing sector.  As per conditions of licenses, the Licensed Defenc e 
Companies are required to follow detailed security guidelines applicable to them as per 
security instructions/architectures prescribed in ‘Security manual for License Defence 
Industries’ based on their categorization.  The manual provides detailed guidel ines on 
physical security/ materials security/documents security/information security etc. 
2. The companies are also subjected to external security audit by Intelligence 
Agencies once in two years and cyber security audit by CERT -IN empanelled auditors 
once every year.  The Chief Security Officer (CSO) of the investee/joint venture 
company should be resident Indian citizen. 
 
Observation/Recommendation No 22 
Encouraging MSMEs in Defence sector 
 
The Committee note that for encouraging Small and Medium Enterprises  (MSME), 
Government of India has come out with notification whereby 20% of orders are to be 
placed with MSME sector.  The Government has also decided to formulate a scheme 

72 
 
for providing f inancial assistance to these enterprises to take up design and 
development work in the defence production.  The Committee also note that the 
Technology Development Fund (TDF) has been established to encourage participation 
in public/private industries spec ially MSMEs so as to create an ecosystem for 
enhancing cutting edge technology and capability for defence application.  Under the 
TDF Scheme, funding is covered through grants to industry that may work in 
collaboration with academia or research institution s to carry out innovation, research 
and development.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should ensure that the 
financial assistance as envisaged under the Scheme is provided to the MSME  sector 
and adequate orders are placed with them to fully utilise  their potential.  The Committee 
would also like the Government to examine the feasibility of inserting a provision in the 
defence offset plicy mandating setting up of defence production facilities in the MSME 
sector in order to expand domestic production base and promote ‘Make in India’ 
initiative. 
Reply of the Government 
Since the launch of ‘Make in India’ in September 2014, several measures have 
been taken by the Government to promote indigenous design, development and 
manufacture of defence & aerospace equipment in the country under ‘Make in India’  by 
harnessing the capabilities of the public and private sector especially MSMEs. These 
measures, inter alia, include: 
i. Separate procedure for ‘Make -II’ sub -category has been notified wherein a 
number of industry friendly provisions such as relaxation of eligibility criterion, 
minimal documentation, provision for considering proposals suggested Suo -
moto by industry/individual etc., have been introduced. So far, 33 proposals 
have been accorded ‘Approval in Princ iple’, out of which EoI has been issued 
for 6 projects. In order to encourage the participation of MSMEs and Startups, 
under Make -II procedure, no separate technical/ financial criteria have been 
defined for the projects with estimated cost of prototype de velopment phase 
not exceeding Rs 3 crore. 

73 
 
ii. Defence Investor Cell has been created in the Ministry to provide all 
necessary information including addressing queries related to investment 
opportunities, procedures and regulatory requirements for investment in  the 
sector. 
iii. The process for export clearance has been streamlined and made transparent 
& online. 
iv. Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) has been revised in 2016 wherein 
specific provisions have been introduced for stimulating growth of the 
domestic defence industry.  
v. A new category of procurement ‘Buy {Indian -IDDM (Indigenously Designed, 
Developed and Manufactured)}’ has been introduced in DPP -2016 to promote 
indigenous design and development of defence equipment. It has been 
accorded top most priority for pr ocurement of capital equipment. Besides this, 
preference has been accorded to ‘Buy (Indian)’ and ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ 
categories of capital acquisition over ‘Buy (Global)’ & ‘Buy & Make (Global)’ 
categories. As a result, during the last four financial y ears (2014-15, 2015-16, 
2016-17 and 2017 -18) Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) has accorded 
approval of 211 capital procurement cases at an estimated cost of Rs 
4,44,597 crores, out of which 156 cases involving Rs 2,75,391 crore are 
under the ‘Buy(Indian -IDDM), ‘Buy(Indian)’, ‘Buy & Make (Indian) and ‘Make’ 
categories. 
vi. The ‘Make’ Procedure has been simplified with provisions for funding of  90 % 
of development cost by the Government to Indian industry  and reserving 
projects not exceeding development cost of  Rs.10 Crore (Government 
funded) and Rs.3 Crore (Industry funded) for MSMEs. 
vii. Government has decided to set up two Defence Production Corridors, one 
each, in Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh. Five nodal points in Tamil Nadu 
namely Chennai, Coimbatore, Hosur, Salem and Tiruchirappalli and Six nodal 
points in Uttar Pradesh, namely Aligarh, Agra, Chitrakoot, Jhansi, Kanpur and 
Lucknow have been identified for these corridors. Setting up of these 
corridors would catalyse indigenous production of defence and aerospac e 

74 
 
related items thereby reducing our reliance on imports and will also enable 
export of these items to other countries. This will lead to generation of 
employment opportunities and promote the growth of private domestic 
manufacturers, MSMEs and start-ups. 
viii. MoD has launched the Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) initiative,  
primarily aimed at creation of an ecosystem to foster innovation and 
technology development in Defence and Aerospace by engaging Industries 
including MSMEs, start -ups, individual i nnovators, R&D institutes and 
academia and provide them grants/funding and other support to carry out 
R&D  which has good potential for future adoption for Indian defence and 
aerospace needs. Deserving MSME units be provided handholding and 
technical guidance within the iDEX framework. 
ix. Industrial licencing regime for Indian manufacturers under IDR {Industries 
(Development and Regulation)} Act, 1951  has been liberalised and most of 
the components/ parts/ sub -systems have been taken out from the list of 
defence products requiring Industrial Licence. This has reduced entry barriers 
for new entrants in this sector, particularly MSMEs.   
x. For promoting Ease of Doing Business and efficiency in procurement, Ministry 
has decided to de -reserve 275 items which are reg ularly procured by the 
Armed Forces, and upload on the GeM portal.  
xi. Government of India has notified the Public Procurement Policy for Micro and 
Small Enterprises (MSEs) Order, 2012 under which a minimum of 20% of the 
total annual procurement is made manda tory from Micro & Small Enterprises 
by Central Ministries / Departments / Public Sector Undertakings w.e.f. 1st 
April 2015.  
a) The aforesaid policy mandates that all the Micro and Small 
Enterprises registered with bodies designated/ specified by Ministry 
of MSME or having the Udyog  Aadhaar Memorandum (UAM) will 
be issued tender set free of cost and exempted from payment of 
Earnest money, and will also be allowed to bring down their price to 
L1 level provided it has bid in the price band of L1+15%, by the 

75 
 
Central Ministries/ Departments/ Central Public Sector 
Undertakings. In addition, 358 items are reserved for exclusive 
procurement from MSEs. 
 
b) To monitor the effective implementation of the Public Procurement 
Policy for Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) Order, 2012 within 
the Ministry, a Committee under the chairmanship of JS (P&C) was 
formed. The Committee regularly reviews the progress made and 
furthers the objectives laid down in the Policy. 
 
c) Additionally, Ministry of MSME has issued a circular date d 10 Mar 
2016 which mandated that relaxation may be given by Central 
Ministries / Departments / Central Public Sector Undertakings in 
prior experience / prior turnover criteria to MSEs. The Defence 
PSUs, which are under DDP, have been accordingly directed to 
implement the above relaxations, and the same has been extended 
to MSEs by Defence PSUs. 
 
xii. In order to encourage ‘Make in India’ and promote manufacturing and 
production of goods and services in India with a view to  enhancing income 
and employment, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) has 
notified the Public procurement (Preference to Make in India), Order 2017 on 
15th June 2017. Based on this mandate DDP has issued 04 notifications for 
111 items procured by Ordnance Factories (OFB) and Defence Public Sector 
undertakings (DPSUs) with the stipulated percentages of local content of 
eligibility vide orders dated 29th June 2018, 26th July 2018, 27th August 
2018 and 16th November 2018. The status of procurement under Public 
Procurement (Pr eference to Make in India), Order,2017 by DPSUs/OFB till 
30th November, 2018 are as follows: - 
 

76 
 
S 
No 
Name of DPSUs/ OFB         Procurement under PPP(MII) Order, 2017 
(Rs in Lakhs) 
1 HAL 59.48 
2 BEL 999.00 
3 GRSE 44.45 
4 BDL 2191.00 
5 MIDHANI 329.00 
 TOTAL 3622.93 
 
   xiii.  Trade Receivables Discounting S ystem (TReDS) is a platform established 
by D/o Financial Services to facilitate financing of Trade receivables of MSMEs. 
The objective of the TReDS is to facilitate financing of invoices / bills of MSMEs 
drawn on Government Departments and PSUs, by way of discounting by 
financiers. To enable this, the TReDS has to put in place suitable mechanism 
whereby the invoice/ bill is converted into "factoring unit" (which would be a 
standard nomenclature used in the TReDS for an invoice or a bill on the system) 
on TReDS.  
a) In the first phase, the TReDS would facilitate the discounting of 
these factoring units by the financiers (refers to a bank as well as 
an NBFC factor participating in the TReDS and who acce pts the 
factoring unit for financing purpose) resulting in flow of funds to the 
MSME with the final payment of the factoring unit being made by 
the buyer to the financier on due date. In the second phase, the 
TReDS would enable further discounting/ re -discounting of the 
discounted factoring units by the financiers, thus resulting in its 
assignment in favour of other financiers. 
b) The status of DPSUs regarding registration and implementation of 
TReDS is placed at Annexure-I. 

77 
 
2.  The capability and viability  of the defence and aerospace industry is built on the 
strength of supply chains, in which the MSMEs are intricately intertwined. There are 
substantially large number of MSMEs across the country supplying components and 
sub-assemblies and systems to the De fence Public Sector Undertakings, Ordnance 
Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation and private industries. 
Vendor development meets help to sensitize the MSMEs about their products and 
method of registration etc.   
 
3. Ministry of Defence regularly conduct conferences and discussions through 
Annual seminars with an aim to strengthen long term plans and industry capability in 
defence procurement. Regular interaction with interested vendors / indigenous 
developers, includi ng MSME units, through collegiate mechanism of procurement 
committee and pre-bid meetings are scheduled for clarification on various aspects of the 
procurement process.   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.21 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 23 
 
Performance of Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO). 
 
The Committee note that the Defence Research and Development Organisation 
is the premier institution in defence research in the Country with more than 50 
laboratories, 5000 scientists and 20,000 other scientific, technical and supporting 
personnel and a bu dget of about Rs. 13600 crore which is about 5.5% of total defence 
budget. (DRDO) is Country’s leading organisation involved in design and development 
of indigenous Defence systems. DRDO is engaged in developing defence technologies 
covering aeronautics, a rmaments, electronics, combat vehicles, engineering systems, 
instrumentation, missiles, advanced computing and simulation, special materials, naval 
systems, life sciences, training, information systems and agriculture. The Committee 
also note that the DRDO  and the DPSUs are expected to be storehouses of strategic 
know how in the development of missiles, armaments, light combat aircrafts, radars, 

78 
 
electronic warfare systems and other defence hardware. In this background, the 
Committee are surprised to note that the Country has to depend on foreign suppliers not 
just for sophisticated weapons but also for basic defence armaments and that DRDO 
has not been able to meet nation's expectations. The Committee note from the 2015 
report of C&AG that an examination of 14 mission mode projects, carried out by DRDO 
laboratories, revealed that all projects failed to achieve their timelines and the probable 
date of completion (PDC) was extended many a times. These mission mode projects 
include the crucial S -band surveillanc e system'Rohini' radars, secure video and fax 
communication between airborne platforms and ground station 'Meghdoot' and 
electronic warfare suit for the modified MIG -29 fighters. Further, the Committee also 
note that a high power Committee constituted by t he Ministry of Defence which 
reviewed the functioning of DRDO had said that at least 11 laboratories of the DRDO 
need to be closed down or amalgamated and its "non -core" research activities stopped. 
The high powered committee also said that DRDO needs to w ork with "clearly defined" 
objectives to develop "weapon systems and platforms". The committee felt that end -
users —the three services — must be consulted on areas of research and development 
of weapon systems. The Committee are of the view that the functi oning of DRDO needs 
a major overhaul and its contribution in the context of country's requirements need to be 
re-examined. The Committee would also like the Government to examine various 
reports coming out in media/blogs about non development of seeker tec hnology for 
development of Short-Range Surface to Air Missiles (SRSAM). 
  
Reply of the Governemnt 
DRDO has played a major role behind the development of state -of-the-art 
platforms, sensors and weapon systems. DRDO systems are contemporary and 
DRDO products worth more than Rs. 2.6 lakh Cr ore have been inducted or are in 
the process of induction in the Services. This has also contributed immensely 
towards the development and upgradation of Defence industry base. List of some of 
the major systems developed by DRDO and accepted/ inducted by Armed Forces 
during the last three years are attached herewith as Appendix ‘A’. 

79 
 
It is true that some of the projects have taken longer than expected to complete. 
However, various steps have been taken/are being taken by DRDO for 
strengthening the functioning of DRDO and expediting the completion of defence 
projects. Some of these are: 
 Revised Procedures for Project Formulation and Management (PPFM -2016) 
has been launched with mandatory focus on pre -project activity including 
completion of preliminary/configuration design and procurement plan before 
project sanction. This will help in proper planning & then cut down on time 
delays. 
 More stringent review mechanisms in place - various high level committees 
including, Steering Committees, Advisory Committees and Monitoring Boards 
 Involvement of Services & Production Partners during development process 
and reviews - To know their views in advance including finalisation of General 
Staff Qualitative Requirements (GSQRs). 
 Synergy among stakeholders – Regular interactions 
 DRDO today actively involves the users right from the conceptualization of the 
project through peer reviews, design reviews, all three levels of project monitoring as 
per DRDO procedure, upto trials and evaluation for all Mission Mode projects under 
taken by DRDO. Such projects are normally initially based on the user requirements 
(LTIPP, Collegiate meetings, IN -DRDO Synergy etc.) with the request of the 
concerned user Service. It is also to be noted that all Mission Mo de (MM) projects 
and high value Technology Demonstration (TD) projects are taken up invariably in 
consultation with Users. While formulating the XIII Five Year Plan (2017 -22) 
Projections, a concerted effort was made to evolve the plan, especially the MM 
projects of DRDO, through mutual consultation and consensus between the DRDO 
and the three Services. For the first time, MM projects have been duly factored -in to 
the integrated plan of the MoD, lending much needed synergy to the plan 
formulation process. 
Research Centre Imarat (RCI), a DRDO Lab has developed Indigenous Ku -
Band Seeker for ASTRA, AKASH -1S and Quick Reaction Surface to Air Missile 

80 
 
(QRSAM) missile programs. The seeker has been successfully flight tested in the 
year, 2017 in ASTRA and AKASH -1S missiles. M/s Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) 
team has been trained in RCI throughout the development of Ku -band Seeker and at 
present these seekers are under production through M/s BEL, Bengaluru. It is 
proposed to implement certain design modifications/ a daptations in this seeker to 
meet the requirements of SRSAM system. 
All accepted recommendations of the Rama Rao Committee which were under 
the purview of DRDO have been implemented. Status of implementation of the 
recommendations is tabulated below: 
1 2 3 4 6 7 
Name of the 
Task Force/ 
High Level 
Committee 
(HLC) 
Year of 
composition and 
tenure 
Composition Purpose of 
constituting 
the Task 
Force 
The major 
decisions/ 
outcomes 
 
 
Status of 
implementation 
of the decision/ 
outcomes 
Rama Rao 
Committee 
(RRC) 
RRC originally 
constituted in 
Feb 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chairman:  
Prof. Rama Rao 
 
Members: 
i)  Air Marshal Ajit 
Bhavnani, Former VCAS 
ii) Lt. Gen. C S 
Chima, Former DG AAD 
Indian Army 
iii) Sh. A K. Ghosh, 
Former   FA (DS) 
iv) Sh. T. K. 
Ghoshal, Prof. Jadavpur 
University 
v) Vice Admiral P. 
Jaitly, Former Chief of 
Enhancing 
effectiveness 
of DRDO 
 
 
 
 
i)  
Decentralisation 
into seven 
technological 
domains each 
under a DG. 
 
ii)  
Establishment of 
Defence 
Technology 
Commission 
(DTC) and a 
commercial arm 
 
iii)  
Creation of 
Integrated  
Financial  
Sl. No.  
 i), iii) & iv) 
[mentioned in 
Column 6] has 
been 
implemented 
and Sl. No. ii) 
[mentioned in 
Column 6] has 
been deferred.  

81 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 26 
International Cooperation in Defence 
      The Committee noted that cooperation in defence sector among friendly countries 
was an integral element of defence preparedness. The geographical location of the 
Country made it incumbent to seek partnership in defence sector with friendly countries. 
The Committee felt that the ar chitecture of such a partnership might be based on 
shared values and interests. The Committee, accordingly, recommendrd that the 
Government took adequate steps to ensure that regional and global partnership with 
friendly countries in defence sector was ful ly integrated into our Defence Preparedness 
architecture. The Committee might be informed of the steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
    In all the engagements with Friendly Foreign Countries (FFCs), Strengthening of 
regional and global partnership forms the central theme, integrated into our Defence 
Preparedness architecture. Various bilateral and multilateral activities like Joint 
Exercises Service level Staff Talks, subject -matter exchanges, mutual logistic support 
arrangement etc. are  regularly held with FFCs, which ensures sustained robustness of 
our defence preparedness architecture’. 
 
 
 
 
 
Materials, Naval HQ 
vi) Sh. C. G. 
Krishnadas Nair, Former 
Chairman HAL 
vii) Sh. Satish K. 
Kaura, CMD, Samtel 
Colour Limited, 
Chairman Industry 
Council, CII 
viii) Dr. K Sekhar, 
Outstanding Scientist, 
DRDO, Member 
Secretary 
 
Advice (IFA) 
scheme 
 
 iv) 
Renaming DG 
(DRDO) as 
Chairman 
DRDO. 

82 
 
Observation/Recommendation no. 27 
 
Contract writing relating to Defence Hardware Procurement 
 
The Committee note that entering into contract with foreign Governments and foreign 
defence suppliers is a highly specialized job. The Committee have been apprised by the 
Ministry of Defence that as per standard composition of Contract Negotiation 
Committee(CNC), Acquisition Manager, Technical Manager, Fina nce Manager, Advisor Cost 
alongwith representatives of DGQA/DGAQA/DGNAI, user department and SHQs are 
nominated in CNC. The expert who deposed before the Committee brought their attention to 
lack of expertise in writing contracts due to which the foreign s uppliers are able to take 
advantage of loopholes and maximize their profits and at the same time adversely affect our 
interest. Moreover, in the absence of stringent conditions, they may also go back on their 
commitment to supply spares and transfer techno logical know how on one pretext or other 
during emergency. Although the Ministry of Defence in the written replies has stated that no 
incident has come to the notice of the Government where the Indian interests were adversely 
impacted due to lacunae/loopho les in contract writing, HAL, has requested for Government 
support to ensure that comprehensive ToT is provided to the Indian manufacturer. It has 
specifically been mentioned that when the aircraft is manufactured under ToT, OEMs do not 
provide ToT for cri tical and high end technology items. The aforesaid contention of HAL 
clearly indicates need for making our contract writing system more professional so as to fully 
protect the interest of Services/country. The Committee, therefore, feel that a dedicated te am 
of personnel who have sufficient expertise in contract writing, particularly in defence 
acquisition , is the need of the hour. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that the 
Ministry may take steps to create a team of skilled personnel with adequate tra ining for 
writing contracts in the defence acquisitions. The Committee also desire that services of 
senior qualified representatives of the armed forces may also be secured during contract 
finalization. 
Reply of the Government 
Capital procurement of defence equipment is undertaken in accordance with the 
extant Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP -2016).  The Standard composition of Cost 
Negotiation Committee (CNC) is made as per DPP which comprises senior qualified 

83 
 
members/experts from various Departments of MoD including representatives of the Armed 
Forces, having adequate background and authority to take a decision. The vetting of draft 
contract is also done concurrently by the CNC and hence all the stakeholder in CNC are 
involved in vetting of the contract. 
Further, to enhance the skill of the Officers associated with Procurement/acquisition 
cases, regular training course are undertaken at various institutes.  
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 28 
Miscellaneous- Human Resources of DPSUs and Other Defence Production 
Institutions. 
The Committee note that a large number of people, including technical personnel 
are employed in the DPSUs, OFBs and organisations such as DRDO. So far as the 
Ordnance Factories are concerned, the Committee have been apprised that the existing 
strength of OFBs officers/industrial employees/non -industrial employees is 87474 out of 
total strength of 145503. Even when out of the sanctioned strength of 2981 Group A 
officers, the existing strength is 1804 officers which include engineers and non-technical 
officers who are on deputation. The Committee have been apprised that the sanctioned 
strength of ordnance factories is intended towards catering to peak load requirements of 
Indian Armed Forces while existing streng th is maintained for meeting the current load 
of the Armed Forces on annual basis. The flexibility is required to help Indian Ordnance 
Factories to augment the manpower at a very short notice in times of exigency and to 
cater to the workload from time to time. The Committee are not able to comprehend why 
such a large number of officers and employees are to be kept as a cushion to meet the 
short notice exigencies.  The Committee in this regard would like to recommend to 
review the manpower requirement of Ord nance Factories. Besides, the Committee 
would also like to emphasis to use the trained manpower in the OFBs/PSUs for the 
defence purposes. 
 
 
 

84 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ordnance Factory Board: - 
The initial sanctioned strength of the Ordnance Factories Organization was 
1,63,103. A manpower rationalization exercise was suggested by Ministry in the year 
2015. Accordingly, a Committee was constituted for submitting a report on 
rationalization of manpower in the Ordnance Factories. The main objective of the 
Committee was to assess and rationalize the manpower requirement for the Ordnance 
Factories in relation to the anticipated production and supporting activities on long -term 
basis i.e. up to the year 2024-25 and also to examine other issue(s) relevant to this. The 
Committee based thereon, recommend ed revised sanctioned strength of 1,45,503 in 
respect of various categories of employees. However, Ministry has sanctioned the 
operating strength of OFB at 1.1 lakh, meaning thereby that at no point of time there i s 
requirement of more strength, and OFB is working with the operating strength of 1.1 
lakh as on date. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited :  
The induction of manpower in Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) is done with 
reference to the Overall Sanctioned Strengt h (OSS) of Manpower which is the 
Maximum Strength within which the various Divisions / Offices of the Company are 
required to operate. 
A comparison of the Overall Sanctioned Strength and the Existing Strength as on 31st 
July 2018 is indicated below: 
Category Overall Sanctioned 
Strength (2017-18) 
Existing Strength 
(31.7.18) 
Officers 9270 8671 
Workmen 23563 20080 
Total 32833 28751 
Apart from above regular manpower, HAL has also introduced tenure based recruitment 
which will ensure optimal availability of manpower for the ongoing projects. 

85 
 
Bharat Electronics Limited:- 
The listed information is pertaining to OFBs and not applicable to BEL. However, 
BEL is complying to the Committee's emphasis to use the trained manpower for all the 
business activities. BEL h as stringent norms and criteria with reference to  
Qualifications and experience in the recruitment stage itself.  
As part of skill development/knowledge up -gradation, BEL imparts adequate 
training on continuous basis across all levels to its manpower to c ope up with the 
changing needs of Technology, customer requirements and enhance managerial 
capabilities. Training programs are organized in the area of Technology, Management & 
Behavioural aspects. Training needs are assessed through Annual Performance 
Appraisals & inputs from Department/Division Heads and customized programs catering 
to specific needs are organized. 
In order to achieve the strategic objectives of the organization, a Behavioural 
Competency Model with 9 competencies have been developed. Base d on the 
Competency Model, Online Development Centres (ODC) have been rolled out for junior 
to middle level executives and post ODCs, Competency Development Workshops have 
been carried out for addressing identified competencies. Competency Based 360 
Degree Feedback & Leadership Development Workshops are conducted for senior level 
executives. Development Centres have been conducted for senior executives. 
Assessment Centres are being done for senior executives. 
Being in the Technology forefront, it is imperative to build a learning organization. 
Technology programs are conducted in collaboration with DIAT/IITs and experts from 
various Technology organizations. Management Development Programs are organized 
at MDI/IIMs for various grade executives. General Manag ers are nominated for 
Advanced Management Programs (AMPs) through leading institutes like MDI/IIPA. 
Customized programs are conducted on Change Management, Enterprise Risk 
Management, Strategy Building & Competitive Intelligence, Contracts Management, 
Women Leadership Development (DEEPSHIKHA), Gender Sensitization & POSH Act 
(SAMMAN), Finance for Non -Finance Executives,  HR for Non -HR Executives, IPR, 

86 
 
Emotional Intelligence, etc. Quality related programs like ASQ Certification, Project 
Management, Six Sigma, Lean, 5 S, Quality Tools, Reliability &Maintainability, Business 
Excellence etc., are conducted by BEL Quality Institute. Besides, Skill Up -gradation & 
Development Programs are conducted for Non-Executives in various subjects. 
It is pertinent to mention here that, the company has recently established BEL 
Academy of Excellence (BAE) - "Nalanda", at Bengaluru, Karnataka to address the 
training needs of BEL employees, customers & vendors/partners. 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited:- 
In BEML, the trained manpower is not idle. BEML is utilizing the services of 
trained manpower for Defence Production activities & the same would be further 
ramped up to increase production as and when the need arises. 
Bharat Dynamics Limited:-  
Over the past four decades BDL is having highly talented & trained manpower 
which is adept at manufacturing missiles and handling of Explosives. Also training is 
continuously imparted to fresh recruits / regular employees for excelling in their work 
area. Also whenever new technology is deployed for prod uction purpose, training is 
imparted.   
Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL):- 
The sanctioned strength of executives in MDL is 1231 and the existing strength is 
1119.  The gap is mainly because of retirement and resignations and due to non -
availability of suitable candidates under reserved category.  The current order position 
comprises 8 Warships and 5 Submarines.  MDL expects further follow -on as well as 
new orders for Ships and Submarines in near future.  The new Modular Shop for 
Integrated Co nstruction and Submarine Section Assembly Workshop (SSA) has been 
built to augment the Shipyard Capacity.   
 
 

87 
 
Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE):- 
Sanctioned strength vis -à-vis employees are in position as on 01 Aug 18 is as 
under:– 
Category Category Sanctioned Strength In position as on  
01.08.18 Officers 596 473 
Non-Officers 4973 1682 
 
Sanctioned strength mentioned above was derived in 2009 which is under review 
keeping in view the present dynamic business scenario.  A manpower study has already 
been conducted by an outside Agency. The Agency has recommended following 
strength:- 
 Officers  : 430 
 Other employees : 2589 
(ii) Meanwhile GRSE has taken different steps to increase the content of 
indigenization, diversification and optimum u tilization of available facilities and 
manpower. As a part of optimum utilization of manpower the skilled category work force 
are engaged in core and high technology areas. The Company has resorted to 
outsourcing of various noncore, low and medium technolo gy areas to meet the 
manpower requirement in unskilled and semiskilled category of work force. In addition 
to the above initiatives automation and IT technology like ERP, Biometric Attendance, 
Digital payments, Data Management System, Business Intelligence solutions,  etc. have 
been introduced.  
(iii) Pending finalisation of revised sanctioned strength recruitment action is being 
undertaken on case to case basis depending upon business requirement. 
 
 

88 
 
Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL):-  
GSL has maintained manpower  as per the sanctioned strength and are 
effectively utilizsed on jobs. The additional/peak load requirements are met through 
Outsourcing and Fixed term employment on need basis. GSL has the flexibility of 
deputing its trained manpower for Defence purposes during the exigencies. The details 
of sanctioned manpower and actual manpower position in SL as on 01.09.2018 is as 
under:- 
S.No. Particulars Sanctioned MCMV Total 
Sanction 
Held 
1 Executives* 249 51 300 256 
2 Supervisors (including 4 
fixed term) 
1630 454-
Regular 
195-FTE 
2279 185 
3 Workmen (including 94 
– fixed term, 84 -ITI 
Trainees & 5 - Diploma 
Trainee 
1158 
total  1879 700 2579 1599 
 
*Excluding CMD, Directors & CVO, 21 Management Trainee and 11 Fixed term 
Officers. The manpower is utilised as per  the sanctioned strength and also filled up 
progressively as per the progress of other projects of GSL. 
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI):-  
The existing strength of Executives (b elow Board Level ) is 261 out of the 
sanctioned strength of 276 in MIDHANI  and the existing strength of other employees 
(Non-Unionized Supervisors and Non -Executives) is 557 out of the sanctioned strength 
of 1184. Non Core areas are being outsourced through Job/Work Contracts . MIDHANI 
is in the process of expanding its business and is coming up with two new Plants. 
However, MIDHANI does not have large cushion of employees and officers. Trained 

89 
 
manpower is being used in MIDHANI and proper training/skill development programmes 
are being conducted for the employees on need basis. 
Observation/Recommendation No. 29 
The Committee also note that many talented scientists exit from premier 
research institutions such as DRDO to find better opportunities in foreign based 
companies which is detrimental to our interests. Moreover, the Committe e also find that 
technical manpower in the DPSUs such as HAL are concerned about their future 
because of lack of orders from the Government.  Reportedly same situation prevails in 
other DPSUs also. The Committee, therefore, recommend that it is in our nati onal 
interest to ensure that the manpower possessing valuable knowledge, experience and 
expertise are retained in the Country by providing better work environment, research 
infrastructure and recognition including appropriate financial incentives. The 
Government needs to ensure that there is no anxiety among the technical personnel 
about their future. 
Reply of the Government 
Ordnance Factory Board:- 
The initial sanctioned strength of the Ordnance Factories Organization was 
1,63,103. A manpower rationalization exercise was suggested by Ministry in the year 
2015. Accordingly, a Committee was constituted for submitting a report on 
rationalization of manpower in the Ordnance Factories. The main objective of the 
Committee was to assess and rationaliz e the manpower requirement for the Ordnance 
Factories in relation to the anticipated production and supporting activities on long -term 
basis i.e. up to the year 2024-25 and also to examine other issue(s) relevant to this. The 
Committee based thereon, recom mended revised sanctioned strength of 1,45,503 in 
respect of various categories of employees. However, Ministry has sanctioned the 
operating strength of OFB at 1.1 lakh, meaning thereby that at no point of time there is 
requirement of more strength, and OF B is working with the operating strength of 1.1 
lakh as on date. 

90 
 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited : 
The attrition rate among the Executives in HAL has been less than 2% during the 
last 5 years. However, a sizeable quantum of the current order book of the company will 
be completed in the next 2 -3 years with majors manufacturing programs like Hawk, Su -
30MKI already completed/getting completed shortly. A robust order book is a must for 
avoiding idling of facilities as well as, for retention and growth of the trai ned technical 
talent pool of any company. The Company has taken up the following major initiatives to 
retain the trained manpower:  
a) HAL continuously endeavors to create a learning culture wherein Officers are 
nominated for various Post Graduate Courses in Technical and Non –Technical 
Disciplines to Institutes of repute (both inland & abroad). Over 200 officers have 
been nominated for various Sponsorship programmes during the last 5 years. 
  
b) A Leadership Development initiative, in the form of a Leadership De velopment 
Programme of one year, has been institutionalized for Officers in the Senior 
Management Cadre and the Middle Management Cadre. 3 batches consisting of 
a total of 90 Officers each in the Senior Management Cadre have undergone the 
Programme. One mo re batch of 30 Officers is currently undergoing the 
Programme. 95 Officers in the Middle Management Cadre have also undergone 
the Programme. 
 
c) HAL has a Scheme for Fast Track Promotion viz. Internal Merit Selection (IMS) in 
respect of Executives. Officers w ith excellent track record in performance during 
the preceding 3 years are considered for promotion to the next higher Grade. 
 
d) Naini Aerospace Limited (NAeL) is a subsidiary of HAL. The employees of NAeL 
have undergone phase -wise theoretical as well as on -the-job training at 
Bangalore and Transport Aircraft Division (TAD), Kanpur to get technical 
expertise in connection with manufacturing of looms of ALH & LCA as well as 
structure of ALH. These trainings were organised at LCA, Helicopter and TAD -

91 
 
Kanpur divi sions etc as well as at Technical Training Institute (TTI), Bangalore 
wherein the employees participated in skill up -gradation program on Aircraft/ 
Helicopter Structural Assembly, Aircraft/ Helicopter Looms and Aircraft Loom 
Fabrication & Assembly. 
 
e) HAL Ma nagement Academy (HMA) focuses on training programs to meet the 
internal Learning & Development requirements of its Executives. It conducts 
training programs for various levels within the organization ranging from entry 
level to the senior most Executives.  Several refresher courses are conducted by 
HMA for its officers at its dedicated campus in Bangalore such as Refresher 
Training Program for Technical & Non -Technical Officers, Middle Management 
Program, Specialized Technical Training Program, Senior Execu tive Refresher 
Program etc. The role of HMA is to be a nodal agency to align the companies’ 
officers to the evolving business needs and enhance their capabilities to meet the 
strategic vision of the organization. 
Bharat Electronics Limited:- 
BEL provides e xcellent working environment with freedom for innovation, 
empowerment, challenging work assignments etc. As a result, all the exe cutives are 
self-motivated and the overall attrition rate in BEL is less than 2% in the past ten years. 
All executives are cove red under the BEL Conduct Discipline & Appeal Rules 
and in accordance with the said rules, no Functional Director (including CMD), 
Executive Director’s & GMs, who have retired/resigned from the services of the 
Company, shall accept any appointment or post in any foreign company/Govt., with 
whom BEL has business dealings, within 1 year of their resignation/superannuation, 
without prior permission of the Government. A Service Bond to this effect is executed by 
the concerned Officer. Further, Officers working on specific R&D projects are required 
to execute a Deed of Assignment or Non -disclosure agreements barring them from 
disclosing any information pertaining to the project during their service in BEL or on 
resignation from BEL. 
 

92 
 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited:- 
BEML is very much concerned about the anxiety and discontentment of its 
technical personnel. BEML is striving hard to even further ameliorate their working 
conditions and making all out effort to secure more orders to dispel the anxiety of its 
experienced and expert technical personnels. 
Bharat Dynamics Limited:-  
The order book position of BDL is depleting year after year and in such a 
scenario it is becoming difficult for the organization to ret ain manpower. In the absence 
of a growing order book, it is very difficult to retain talented executives.  
BDL is putting all out efforts to improve order book position so that all production 
units are fully loaded with optimal utilization of men & machines.  
BDL takes good care of its employees & their welfare. BD L sends its employees 
for enhancing knowledge to premier Management & Technology Institutes like IIMs, 
IITs, XLRls. etc.  
BDL recognizes talent & hard work by way of merit awards, which are distributed 
every year on 15th August & 26 January. 
Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL):- 
While MDL is concerned with the loss of skill -set due to lack of order visibility in 
future, presently MDL does not face this kind of situation of forcing large scale exodus 
of executives. 
MDL has a professional management structure & healthy working environment, 
where scope for personal development and recognition is supported by robust, and 
generous HR policies. 
Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE):- 
The Company has sufficient orders which are to be execute d in next few years. 
Accordingly emphasis has been given for retention of talents for which different 

93 
 
initiatives have been taken towards improvement of work environment, creating different 
facilities, recognition to the employees for exemplary / innovativ e performance as given 
below:- 
i. Improvement of work environment 
ii. Establishment of Research Infrastructure.  
iii. Recognition including appropriate financial incentive.  
Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL):- 
GSL is the first Indian shipyard to have an in -house R&D unit rec ognized by the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), Government of India. The 
R&D initiatives have not only helped in attaining self reliance but also earned significant 
foreign earning. As part of GSLs initiative to be market ready for future, the R&D 
department is working on future advance vessels which are required by Indian Navy 
and Coast Guard. Thus, GSL provides ample opportunities to its technical personnel to 
showcase their expertise in R&D.  
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI):- 
The attrition rate of MIDHANI is almost negligible and the significant retention 
policies/ strategies prevailing in MIDHANI are mentioned as under: 
MIDHANI has excell ent policies in place to retain  its employees and the 
workplace environment is exceedingl y cohesive and cordial. Policies are reviewed 
periodically and amended from time to time as per requirement. 
In addition to salaries, MIDHANI also pays ‘Performance Related Pay (PRP)’ to 
employees based on their annual performances. 
As per 3 rd PRC Recommen dations, the Executives and Non -Unionized 
supervisors’ pay revision has been implemented successfully w.e.f. 01 - Jan-2017 and 
the arrears are also disbursed. 
The Executives and Non -Unionized Supervisors’ Promotion Policy is recently 
revised and it has been amended in a manner that provides higher weightage to annual 

94 
 
performance of employees. Weightage is also given to qualification and experience 
along with attendance & punctuality. 
MIDHANI also identifies and nominates individuals/groups to participate in 
various Training Programmes/Workshops/Seminars, Leadership Programs etc. within 
the country and even abroad so as to expose them to global standards and develop 
them. 
In order to encourage managerial excellence among young managers and bring 
out their hidden talents/ ideas/Concepts, MIDHANI organizes annual competition named 
as “Dr Tamhankar’s Trophy for Young Managers” where the team with the best project 
is awarded with cash prize and are also sent to attend international/national 
conferences. 
Best Executive/ NUS/ Non -Executive/ Women of the Year Award are also given 
annually in MIDHANI to encourage all-round performances. 
MIDHANI also organize s various cultural programs, sports & games activities to 
bring all the employees together and create a sense of belongingness and engagement 
amongst them. 
MIDHANI has excellent employee wellness and medical scheme in place for 
existing as well as retired e mployees and also provides good quality education facilities 
to employee’s children. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.27 of Chapter I) 
 
 
             
             
             
             
            
 

95 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
Observation/Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee observe that our defence PSUs have travelled a long journey and have 
talent and expertise in manufacture of various defence equipments and as such the role 
for defence PSUs which have been producers of key military platforms should be 
included in the strategic partnership models so as to provide a level playing field to 
PSUs.  
Reply of the Government: 
 The policy and procedures for the selection of private Indian entities as 
Strategic Partners (SP) was approved by the Defence Acquisition Counc il (DAC) and 
promulgated the same on 31.05.2017 as Chapter VII of Defence Procurement 
Procedure (DPP) 2016 as “Revitalising Defence Industrial Ecosystem through Strategic 
Partnerships”. The Policy is intended to encourage broader participation of the priva te 
sector, in addition to DPSUs/OFB, in manufacture of defence platforms and equipment. 
Strategic Partnerships seek to enhance indigenous defence manufacturing capabilities 
through the private sector over and above the existing production base. Keeping thi s 
broad objective in view, MoD may consider the role of DPSUs/OFB at the appropriate 
stage(s) keeping in view of the order book position, capacity and price competitiveness, 
and same has already been included in the strategic partnership model so as to pro vide 
a Level Playing Field to PSUs. 
Observation/Recommendation No 8 
Acquisition/ upgradation for IAF 
The Committee understand that a large proportion of our defence hardware have 
served their useful life cycle and now need to be replaced urgently. From the 
information given in Annual Report 2016 -17 of the Ministry of Defence, it is noted that 
IAF is on a trajectory of modernization and is transforming itself into a strategic 

96 
 
aerospace power with full -spectrum capability. The draft Defence Production Policy 
2018, speaks about reducing current dependence on imports and to achieve self -
reliance in development  and manufacture of various weapon systems and platforms 
which includes fighter aircrafts, medium lift and utility helicopters. Further the 
procurement for various aircraft/ helicopters is underway, inter -Governmental 
Agreement for procurement of 36 Rafale  Aircrafts from France has been signed on 23 
September, 2016; C -130J has already been inducted and the delivery of balance 
aircraft is likely to be completed by July 2017; delivery of AH  64E Apache Attack 
Helicopters and Chinook Heavy Lift Helicopters is expected to be completed by March 
2020. Besides Mirage 2000 and MIG -29 aircraft upgrade is under progress and few 
upgraded aircraft have already been operationalised in the IAF. The Committee note 
that air power has a very important role with regard to def ence preparedness in the 
present security scenario and as such strongly emphasize the budgetary allocations 
should not come in the way of planned acquisitions of aircraft/helicopters so that the 
requisite capacities could be built. Besides the Government should follow the acquisition 
status with the countries from which imports are being made for timely delivery of the 
aircraft/helicopters. 
Reply of the Government. 
             Procurement schemes are progressed as per the laid down DPP. The schemes 
are prioritised to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired. The Budget 
Estimates are projected based on the capabilities that are planned to be acquired. The 
acquisition status is regularly followed up with the respective countries for timely  
delivery of aircrafts/helicopters. 
Observation/Recommendation No. 10 
            The Committee observe that as per the standard norm at any time there should 
be 70% serviceability of aircraft. But the Committee, during the course of evidence have 
been apprised that the availability/serviceability was 60%. The Committee in this regard 
would like to stress to address the issues with regard to maintenance and repair of 
aircraft to ensure serviceability level at any given time as per international norms.  

97 
 
Reply of the Government 
“The reply contains information classified as CONFIDENTIAL and, therefore, the 
same is being sent directly to the Hon’ble Chairperson Committee on Estimates with a 
request that the contents of this may not be incorporated in the Report of the 
Committee”. 
Observation/Recommendation No. 11 
           The Committee note from the Annual Report 2016 -17 that current lot of Su30 
MKI aircraft are being manufactured in HAL through transfer of technology. With regard 
to Tejas, the first fighter sq uadron of the IAF with LCA Tejas aircraft, has been formed 
on July 1, 2016. The Ministry of Defence has apprised that investment of around 
Rs.15000 crore is estimated to be made in the next five years towards enhancing 
production rate of LCA Tejas from 8 t o 16 aircraft. One of the expert who deposed 
before the Committee was all in appreciation for the indigenous production of Tejas and 
was of the view that Tejas product can be the bulk aircraft for Indian Air Force. The 
Committee would like the Government t o take all the desired initiatives for increasing 
the production rate of LCA Tejas by HAL not only for our Services but also for exports to 
other countries. The Committee observe that the induction of more and more 
indigenous product Tejas in IAF fleet would result in uniformity in the type of aircraft and 
would also address the issue of maintenance and repair to a great extent. 
Reply of the Government 
“The reply contains information classified as CONFIDENTIAL and, 
therefore, the same is being sent directly  to the Hon’ble Chairperson Committee 
on Estimates with a request that the contents of this may not be incorporated in 
the Report of the Committee”. 
Observation/Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee note that on the one hand, the Secretary (Defence  Production) 
during the course of deposition has stated that HAL have already got the orders of 40 
Tejas and another 83 would be sufficient for next 25 -26 years, HAL in response to 

98 
 
queries raised during the informal discussion with them during the study visit has stated 
that the firm order to HAL would be liquidated by 2020 -21. The Committee would 
strongly like to emphasize that the Services should plan their orders for the long term 
and place firm orders with HAL well in advance particularly when the production cycle 
for aircraft build is very high of the order of 2-3 years. 
Reply of the Government. 
There have been delays in the delivery of Tejas aircraft. Contract was signed in 
March 2006 for procurement of 20 x LCA in Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) 
configuration. The IOC was achieved in December 2013 and only 09 aircraft have been 
delivered till date. Similarly, LCA in Final Operational Clearance (FOC) standard 
contract was signed on 23 D ecember 2010 for procurement of 20 aircraft. The  present 
status of FOC of LCA Mk 1A is mentioned below: 
(a) The Built Document (The document for manufacturing of LCA in Final 
Operational Clearance) of FOC for LCA was forwarded to HAL on 31 st 
December, 2018 an d the FOC has been formally announced during Aero -India 
2019 at Bengaluru on 20 February, 2019. 
(b) The delivery of LCA in FOC configuration is likely to commence in the last 
quarter of the year 2019. 
(c) Fourteen aircraft in IOC Configuration have been delivered till date. 
         The procurement of 83xLCA Mk 1A is at costing & Contract Ne gotiation 
Committee (CNC) stage 
Observation/Recommendation No. 13 
Shortage of Trainer Aircraft/Accidents  
        The Committee note that IAF is using Pilatus PC -7 aircraft for basic training 
purpose and 75 of these aircraft are directly procured from OEM. Further requirement of 
basic training is proposed to be met by HAL’s indigenously designed basic trainer 
aircraft HTT -40. Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) has  cleared procurem ent for 70 

99 
 
aircraft for IAF. The production of these aircraft is expected to commence during 2019 -
20. 
       For the advance training purpose, IAF is using Hawk aircraft which is manufactured 
by HAL under Transfer of Technology from BAE System. HAL has so far supplied 82 
Hawk aircraft to IAF and 17 Hawk aircraft to Indian Navy. Quotation has been submitted 
by HAL for additional requirement of 20 Hawks for IAF. Also, Navy has initiated action 
for 12 more Hawk aircraft for which HAL has submitted a budgetary quote. 
      The Committee have been apprised that design and development programmes for 
Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) and Basic Trainer Aircraft (HTT -40) are under way at 
HAL. The Committee during the course of examination have been apprised that in tota l 
16 Dhruv helicopters have met with an accidents so far in India. The reasons for these 
accidents as brought out in the report of Court of Inquiry (CoI) have been mainly 
attributed to human error and environmental factors. The Committee in this regard 
strongly recommend to look into the issues related to training. Urgent steps should be 
taken for procurement of trainer aircraft to meet the needs of training. In this context, the 
Committee would like the Government/Services to consider taking the help of simulators 
and private companies which not only would compensate for the infrastructure gap but 
would also help in saving the capital expenditure. Environmental effects are to be 
remedied and this needs a special research programme. Committee would like that  
such a programme be initiated speedily by involving the ministries of Science and 
Technology and Environment, Forests and Climate Change. 
Reply of the Government 
            “The reply contains information classified as CONFIDENTIAL and, 
therefore, the same is being sent directly to the Hon’ble Chairperson Committee 
on Estimates with a request that the contents of this may not be incorporated in 
the Report of the Committee”. 
 
 
 

100 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 17 
Gaps between orders received and delivery scheduled/made- Synergy between 
Armed Forces and DPSUs in Defence Hardware Production. 
From the data made available, the Committee find that the overall value of 
production of 10 DPSUs which include OFB has increased from Rs.41,047.74 Crore 
during 2013 -14 t o Rs.54,132.36 Crore during 2016 -17. However, the data of 
performance of individual DPSU indicates that in MDL and GRSE, the value of 
production has decreased from 4169.64 crore and Rs.1707 during the year 2015 -16 to 
Rs.3510 crore and Rs.936.70 crore durin g 2016-17 respectively.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the specific reasons for decline in value of production in these 
two DPSUs. 
Reply of the Government 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited:- 
The value of production is on upward trend as shown in the following table:- 
SI. 
No. 
FY Value of Defence 
Production in Rs. In 
Crore (Net) 
1 2013-14 143.41 
2 2014-15 160.86 
3 2015-16 329.60 
4 2016-17 495.16 
5 2017-18 539.01 
 
Bharat Dynamics Limited:-  
BDL has always strived to deliver quality products in time to the Customer. This 
is indicated by its performance in the last 3-4 years as given below: 
                                                                                         (Rs. In Crore) 
Years  2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18  
VoP 2770 4160 5911.00 4641  
VoS 2800 4298 4887 4588 
The above trend indicates that there is an increase in VoP year after year. 

101 
 
Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL):- 
In the year 2015 -16, MDL VoP was Rs 4106 Cr ore which was reduced to Rs 
3524 Crore in 2016-17. The shortfall in FY 2016-17 was due to following reasons:- 
In P15B, delay in the receipt of equipments resulted in shortfall of Rs 284 Cr ore. 
As a result, yard efforts of P15B resulted in shortfall of Rs 244 Cr ore due to non-receipt 
of equipments. Steel received from M/s SAIL for Project 17A has been not up  to the 
mark and rejected, which resulted in the shortfall of VoP. Further, the VoP of MDL for 
FY 2017-18 has been increased to Rs 4399 Crore. 
Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE):- 
The dip in VoP during FY 2016 -17 is primarily due to the following reasons that 
remained beyond the control of the company:- 
 The t otal Nos. of Ship planned   for delivery during FY 2016 -17 was 06 Nos., 
whereas, Ship delivered were 04 Nos. Thus Cascading Effect substantially 
reduced progress of other ships of the above projects. Further, Majority of 
Materials has already been booked on ships planned for delivery. 
 Delay in delivery of 01 ship (3 rd ASWC Kiltan) of major project ASWC & 03 ships 
(L-52, L-53 & L-54) of LCU project could not materialize due to reasons:-  
Delay in delivery of Mk IV – LCUs (08 Nos) and 
Delay in delivery of P-28 (3rd& 4th Ships) 
Observation/Recommendation No. 25 
Defence Preparedness for Future Wars  
                The Committee note that there has been a fundamental change in the nature of 
modern warfare. Apart from maintaining a massive conventional arsenal, countries also 
need to prepare for future wars. Future warfare is headed towards cyber warfare, 
drones, auto mated warfare systems, stealth technology and precision guidance. The 
foundation of such warfare systems are information technology and artificial intelligence. 
The Committee also note that preparedness for futuristic wars involve all three wings of 
armed forces and Country needs to have state -of-the-art technologies on all three 
fronts. The Committee, however, feel that preparation for futuristic warfare has to be 
undertaken without any compromise on conventional war preparedness. The 
Committee understand that the Government is seized of the importance of futuristic war 
technologies and through its R&D institutions, is working to develop them. However, the 

102 
 
Committee feel that the Country needs to invest more resources on getting ready for 
futuristic warfare and also leverage its capabilities in information technology for this. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government may take steps for constituting 
an institutional arrangement to oversee the state of preparedness of the country in 
futuristic warfare. Adequate flexibility should be introduced in the system to leverage our 
capabilities, including those existing in private sector, in other related sectors such as 
space technology, information technology and artificial intelligence for preparation 
relating to futuristic warfare. 
Reply of the Government 
“The reply contains information classified as CONFIDENTIAL and, 
therefore, the same is being sent directly to the Hon’ble Chairperson Committee 
on Estimates with a request that the contents of this may not be incorporated in 
the Report of the Committee”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

103 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMEN’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Observation/Recommendation No. 1-2 
Increasing the Expenditure on Defence Services 
       The Committee note that India with its strategic location, having a coastline of about 
7500 kms and land borders of 15000 kms of which 3323 kms are with Pakistan and 3380 
kms with China, its western, north-western, northern and north-eastern borders remaining 
volatile because of historical as well as strategic reasons, and internal security threats, 
need Defence preparedness to be kept consistently at the highest level. From the data 
made available to the Committee, it is found t hat Defence expenditure has marginally 
increased since 2014 -15 and when compared to Central Government expenditure, the 
percentage has declined from 13.15 during 2014 -15 to 12.20 during 2017 -18. Defence 
expenditure when analysed as a percentage of GDP, in the last few years it has ranged 
between 2.06 per cent (2014 -15) to 1.56 per cent (2017 -18). As per Stockholm 
International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) study, defence expenditure as a share of 
GDP of China and France has remained the same, increased in case of Saudi Arabia and 
Russia and decreased in case of USA and UK in the last decade (2007 -2017), however, 
keeping in view the scale of GDP the developed countries have, the decrease of defence 
expenditure as percentage of GDP in India, as per Government data, is more noticeable. 
      The Committee further note that the defence expenditure at 1.56% of GDP was at the 
lowest level since 1962 when India -China war was fought. In the current geo -political 
scenario, a country of the size of India cannot affo rd complacency when it is a question of 
defence preparedness even for a two-front war while retaining its dominance in the Indian 
Ocean. The Committee therefore, strongly emphasize that allocation of adequate financial 
resources for defence preparedness bo th for the current needs and expansion & 
modernization plans should be accorded highest priority to enable the services to meet 
the challenges concerning safety and security of the country. 
 
 

104 
 
Reply of the Government 
       It may not be always appropriate to think about Defence spending in terms of national 
economic output. If the economy grows at a faster rate, spending decreases as a 
percentage of GDP. There is also a worldwide trend of decline in defence expenditure 
w.r.t. GDP as can be seen from the table as under:- 
Country China US Brazil France Germany Italy Spain UK Japan 
In 1960 2.5% 
(in 
1990) 
8.6% 2.7% 6.5% 4.0% 3.1% 2.3% 6.3% 1.1% 
In 2016 1.9% 3.3% 1.3% 2.3% 1.2% 1.5% 1.2% 1.9% 1.0% 
 
*Source: SIPRI/Times of India Article dated 26th March, 2018. 
 
Therefore, it doesn’t mean that the level of spending has fallen, or has even 
become inadequate. Looking at spending as a percentage of GDP thus creates an 
illusion of declined spending by ignoring the size of the economy.  As per SIPRI military 
expenditure database, India is better compared to China in terms of percentage of 
defence expenditure vis -à-vis GDP. In 2016 and 2017, China spent 1.9% of their GDP 
on defence, whereas India spent 2.5% of its GDP on defence. 
 
2.   To tal Defence Expenditure (including Miscellaneous and Pension) as a percentage 
of Central Government Expenditure was 17.14% in 2014 -15. In 2017 -18 also, it is 
17.14%. In real terms defence expenditure has grown by Rs. 1,19,260.71 crore as the 
Central Government Expenditure increased from Rs. 16,63,673 crore in 2014 -15 to Rs. 
24,42,213 crore in 2017-18. 
 
3.  The Ministry, therefore suggests that it would be more prudent to look at Defence 
expenditure as percentage of total Central Government Expenditure on th e Central 
Government Capital Expenditure.  This question was also examined in detail by the 
Kargil Review Committee. It too, did not recommend a specific, targeted percentage of 

105 
 
the GDP to be earmarked for defence. It exhorted the need to extract the maximu m 
value from each defence rupee, inter -alia through rigorous prioritisation, restructuring of 
the defence forces, integration with defence production and focussing resources in 
areas likely to enhance the effectiveness of the defence forces. The Armed Forc es are 
accorded the highest possible consideration for allocation of budget. Requirement of 
funds will be assessed and provision of additional funds will be made as the need arises 
based on pace of expenditure. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.8 of Chapter I) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 19 
       
        The Committee note that the existing Procurement system for advanced weapons 
involves three stages. The first stage is the issue of Request for Proposal and second 
stage is that of field trials. The Committee have been informed that the second stage 
takes considerable time -sometimes upto two years for completion of trials. The third 
stage which requires caution and diligence is the most difficult stage of contract 
negotiation stage. The Committee further note that procurement and acquisition of 
defence hard ware is a long drawn process where there is involvement of a large 
number of stakeholders. The coordination issues between such large number of 
stakeholders sometimes result in avoidable delays. The introduction of the DPP 2016 
tries to redress the situati on. The Committee feel that with proper advance planning the 
time for first and second stage can be substantially reduced which would address the 
issue of shortage of required defence hardware with the defence forces.  Sometimes, 
the decision to buy advanc ed weapon systems also result in controversies being 
created on the ground of payment of kickbacks and commissions. The Committee feel 
that such delays are avoidable and ultimately, the defence preparedness of the Country 
suffers. The Committee, accordingl y, recommend that Ministry may take appropriate 
steps to constitute an integrated institutional mechanism with adequate in -built 
transparency consisting of all key stakeholders in order to reduce delays in procurement 
process.   

106 
 
Reply of the Government 
        There are a number of changes that have been introduced in DPP  to expedite 
procurement process and ensure transparency. 
(i) Single stage collegiate vetting of RFP. 
(ii) Approval of Retractions/Foreclosure of RFPs delegated to DG (Acq)/Vice 
Chiefs for reasons other than change in operational requirements. 
(iii) Approval of TEC at SHQ level if all vendors are compliant with RFP. 
(iv)  Commencement of Benchmark  modeling immediately after receipt of   trial 
report by SHQ to save time at CNC stage. 
(v) No negotiation to be done wi th DPSU vendor, where Costing Committee of 
DDP has already determined basic price of defence equipment/platform. 
(vi) Concurrent vetting of draft contract at CNC stage. 
(vii) IEMs details in RFP. 
(viii) Complaint Redressal Mechanism. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.18 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

107 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 24 
Leveraging Our Capabilities in Space and Information Technology for R&D in 
Defence 
 Vision statement of Draft DPP 2018 stated about making India among the top 
five countries of the world in Aerospace and Defence industries, with active participation 
of public and private sector, fulfilling the objective of self -reliance as well as demand of 
other friendly countries. The Committee noted that along with the DPSUs, the Country 
had institutions like ISRO in the field of research in cutting edge technologies in the field 
of missile and space technology. Performance of ISRO had b een laudable and it had 
become a world leader in satellite launch vehicles. It was also offering its services on 
commercial basis to 102 other countries. The Committee felt that it was very important 
to leverage our capabilities in space and nuclear techno logy not only for self reliance in 
defence hardware but also to become a major exporter. For this, an attitude of 
partnership and collaboration needes to be developed between organisations such as 
ISRO, DRDO and the DPSUs. The Committee, therefore, recomme nded the formation 
of an inter -ministerial group to facilitate such collaboration. The Committee might be 
apprised of steps taken in this direction. 
Reply of the Government: 
In order to tap the potential available with the space and nuclear establishments 
in the country, the draft Defence Production Policy 2018 proposes the following: 
  Department of Defence Production (DDP) will consult all stakeholders and 
explore possibility of setting up an autonomous National Aeronautical Commission, in 
line with Nuclear or Space Commissions to bring focus to following important areas: 

108 
 
a)  Leverage mutually beneficial links between military and civil aviation for 
expansion and, importantly, indigenisation.  
b)  Bring together diverse agencies for synergies in technology development, 
basic and fundamental research and production.  
c)  Create a scenario in which the benefits of a competitive environment are 
felt in all areas of the economy as a whole and the defenc e economy in 
particular. 
            Furthermore, DDP has initiated action towards the formation of an Inter -
Ministerial Group to facilitate collaboration between ISRO, DRDO and DPSUs to 
leverage the nation’s capabilities in space and nuclear technology not only for self 
reliance in defence hardware but also to become a major exporter. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.24 of Chapter I) 
  
Observation/Recommendation 30 
 HAL in a written submission before the Committee had made a suggestion fo r 
creation of additional post of Director (Corporate Planning and Business Development). 
Besides, the attention of the Committee had been drawn to the need for upgradation of 
pay scales of officers of the company on par with PSUs like BHEL/NTPC based on th e 
recommendations of the Expert Group constituted by the Government under the 
Chairmanship of Shri B. K. Chaturvedi for restructuring and strengthening of HAL. The 
Committee would like the Ministry of Defence to consider the proposals submitted by 
HAL positively in view of interest of the organization 
Reply of the Government : 
1. With the approval of Hon'ble Prime Minister, an Expert Group under the 
Chairmanship of Shri B.K. "Chaturvedi, Former Cabinet Secretary and Member, 
Planning Commission was constitut ed in 2011 for restructuring and strengthening of 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL). The Expert Group submitted its report to 
Government in September, 2012. As per one of the recommendations of the Expert 
Group, the Board of HAL was to be reconstituted a s a 14 Members Board with 5 

109 
 
Functional Directors including CMD, 2 Government Directors and 7 Independent 
Directors: 
2. The proposal for reconstitution of the  Board of Directors of HAL was considered by 
PESB in consultation with DPE. While considering the p roposal, PESB vide its O.M 
dated 04.11.2013 was of the view that Administrative Ministry may consider retaining 
the post of Director (CP&M) and desirability of creating an additional post of Director 
(Operations) depending upon the reporting/ supervisory m echanism between proposed 
CEOs and HAL Board. 
3. The view of the PESB was considered by this Department and it was felt that creation 
of an additional post of Director would also require appointment of an additional 
Independent Director to comply with the SEBI guidelines. This would have taken the 
strength of HAL's Board to 16 as against the recommendation of the Expert Group for 
downsizing it to 14 from the then size of 17. Therefore, the same was not agreed to. 
4. In view of above decision, the proposal f or reconstitution of the Board of Directors of 
HAL was sent to DPE for obtaining concurrence of PESB. In this regard, DPE vide its 
O.M dated 29.01.2014 had intimated that the proposal was considered in consultation 
with PESB and the same was concurred into . They had requested this Department to 
process the proposal further and to obtain the approval of ACC in this regard.  
5. In the light of directions of DPE, the proposal f or reconstruction of HAL Board was 
sent to ACC for approvat in March, 2014. ACC vide  its communication dated 
25.11.2014 had accorded approval for reconstitution of the Board of Directors of HAL, in 
which inter-alia, it was decided to discontinue the post of Director (CP&M) and creation 
of a re-designated post of Director (Operations) in lieu thereof.  
6. HAL had again initiated the proposal for creation of the post of Director (Corporate 
Planning and Business Development) in August, 2017 and the same was examined in 
the Department. Since the reason for discontinuation of Dir (CP&M) remains  the same, 
the proposal of HAL was not agreed to.  

110 
 
7. Pay Scales of Executives and Non -unionised Supervisors of CPSEs is notified by the 
Dept. of Public Enterprises (DPE) from time to time. HAL has been adopting the Pay 
Scales as notified by the DPE. However, PSUs like ONGC, NTPC, BHEL, GAIL etc. had 
been adopting superior Pay Scales which are two levels above that adopted in HAL, 
including at the entry level for fresh Engineering Graduates, etc. The entry level pay 
scales of HAL in comparison with other big PSUs are as below: 
HAL 
 
BHEL NTPC 
Grade 
 
Scale Grade  Scale Grade Scale 
 
 I 
 
 
12600-32500 
 
 E-1 
 
20600-46500 
 
 E-1 
 
20600-46500 
 
8. The Govt. vide MoD letter dated 21/10/11 had consti tuted an Expert Group under the 
Chairmanship of Shri B.K. Chaturvedi, Former Cabinet Secretary and Member, 
Planning Commission, to carry out a comprehensive review of the working and 
restructuring of HAL. Amongst others, the Group had noted that the Pay Scales and 
Salary Structure for Executives of HAL are much lower compared to other Navaratna 
PSUs in the manufacturing Sector; and had recommended that HAL's Pay Scales & 
salary structure needs to be brought at par with CPSUs like BHEL/NTPC.  
9. While communicating acceptance of  the Government of the various 
recommendations of the Expert Group, MoD vide its letter dated 25/04/13 had intimated 
HAL that the proposal to upgrade the Pay Scales of Executives, on par with the Pay 
Scales. in BHEL/NTPC, be examined internally; and on obta ining approval of the Board 
of Directors, be forwarded to the Ministry for consideration and approval.  
10. Accordingly, proposal for upgradation of the Pay Scales was considered by the HAL 
Board during March 2014. The Board had approved upgradation of the  Pay Scales by 
one level w.e.f 01.04.2014; and by one more level w.e.f 01.01.2017, to bring them on 

111 
 
par with BHEL. On approval by the Board, HAL vide its letter dated 18.03.2014 had 
forwarded the proposal to this Ministry to consider upgradation of Pay Sca les, within the 
then prevailing 2007 Pay Scales notified by the DPE.  
11. In June, 2017, with the approval of compete nt authority, a Note was moved for 
consideration and approval of CCS on the proposal for upgradation of pay scales in 
respect of Executives  in HAL. PMO vide their ID dated 19.07.2017 had conveyed that 
the Cabinet Secretary may constitute an expert committee to take a holistic view on 
rationalization of pay scales in all public sector enterprises in consultation with relevant 
stakeholders. Aft er the report of the expert committee is finalized, the Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE) may be the nodal Department to take further necessary action 
on the committee's recommendations. Thereafter, no further communication has been 
received in this regard. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.30 of Chapter I) 
 
 
NEW DELHI; GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT, 
22 September, 2020 
Bhadrapada 31, 1942 (Saka) 
CHAIRPERSON, 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

112 
 
Annexure-I 
Status of DPSUs regarding registration and implementation of TReDS: 
Sl. No. DPSU Registered on TReDS 
Platform (Yes/No) 
Status of implementation  
1 HAL Yes, 
RXIL &Mynd Solution Pvt. 
Ltd. 
  
Started payment through 
TReDS. 2 No. of invoices 
worth ₹. 1.67 lakhs referred 
to the TReDS platform in the 
month of August. 
2 BEL Yes 
RXIL Member ID: 
BH0000157 
'Nil' invoices referred to 
TReDS 
3 MIDHANI Yes 
A.TREDS Limited (JV of 
Axis Bank and mjunction):  
ARN: EHPIDDZE5V 
Entity (Account) Number: 
1000001120. 
'Nil' invoices referred to 
TReDS 
4 BEML Ltd. Yes 
RXIL, Mumbai, member 
Code of BEML Limited: 
BE0000187 
-- 
5 BDL Yes -- 

113 
 
ATReDS.  
The ARN no. allotted for 
BDL is 1JOPH94DQ0. 
6 GSL Yes 
RXIL, Member ID: 
GO0000186. 
  
Started payment through 
TReDS. 1 No. of invoice 
worth ₹. 1,82,742 referred to 
the TReDS platform. 
7 GRSE Yes, 
A.TReDS. Registration No. 
is "5H58M936FB" 
Started payment through 
TReDS. 21 no. of invoices 
worth ₹. 77,47,546.68 
referred to the TReDS 
platform in the month of 
August. 
  
22 No. of invoices worth ₹. 
13,564,685.64 referred to the 
TReDS platform in the month 
of September. 
8 MDL Yes, 
A..TReDS 
  
Started payment through 
TReDS. 1 no. of invoice  
worth ₹. 434,055 referred to 
the TReDS platform in the 
month of August. 4 no. of 
invoices worth ₹. 2,68,275 
referred to the TReDS 

114 
 
platform in the month os 
September.  
  
9 HSL Yes, 
RXIL/1120170152. 
-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
  
 
 

115 
 
 
ANNEXURE II

116 
 
APPENDIX  I 
 
MINUTES OF 4th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 21st September, 2020 from 1200 hrs. to 1330 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’,  Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
       Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat - Chairperson 
 
Members 
     2.    Kunwar Danish Ali 
           3.    Shri Sudharshan Bhagat  
           4.    Shri Ajay Bhatt 
           5.    Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
           6.    Shri P.C.  Gaddigoudar 
7.    Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
      8.    Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
      9.    Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
    10.    Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
    11.    Shri K. Muraleedharan 
    12.    Dr. K.C. Patel 
    13.    Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
    14.    Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
    15.    Shri Francisco Sardinha 
    16.    Shri Prathap Simha 
    17.    Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
 
SECRETARIAT 
                                
1.         Dr. Kavita Prasad                -           Joint Secretary 
                      2.        Smt. B. Visala                      -           Director 
                      3.        Smt. A. Jyothirmayi              -           Additional Director 
                      4.        Shri R.S. Negi                      -           Deputy Secretary 

117 
 
 
WITNESSES 
  
1.        xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
2.       xxx   xxx     xxx 
 
3.        xxx   xxx    xxx 
 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and briefed them about the agenda of the sitting viz. (i) Consideration and 
adoption of the draft report(s) xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx.  
3.         The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following draft 
Reports: 
(i)        xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx.  
(ii)       Action Taken Report on the Observations /Recommendations contained in 
the 29th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the subject 
‘Preparedness of Armed Forces – Defence Production and Procurement’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Defence; and   
(iii)  xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx. 
4.         The Committee after due deliberations adopted the above 03 draft Action 
Reports without any modif ications and authorised the Chairperson to   finalize them in 
the light of the factual verification by the concerned Ministry and present the same to 
Lok Sabha.  
 
5.         xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx. 
6.        xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx. 
7.         xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx.  
8.         xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx. 
9.       xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx. 
            The Committee, thereafter, adjourned. 

118 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY -THIRD 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (16th LOK SABHA)  
 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations    
   
30 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
(Sl.Nos. 3 to 5, 7,9, 14 to 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28 and 29 
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
17 
 
 
 
 56.67% 
 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply  
 
(Sl. No. 6, 8, 10 to 13, 17 and 25) 
  
Percentage of total recommendations                                                
        8           
      
      
      
 
26.67% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee  
 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 2 and 19)  
 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
3 
 
 
 
0.10% 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final replies of 
Government is still awaited.   
 
(Sl. No. 24 and 30) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations  
2 
 
 
 
6.67% 
 
 
 