22 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
Review of Performance of Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 11th 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Review of Performance of Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas 
Yojana  
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 11th 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 09 February, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
.........February, 2022/........Magha, 1944 (Saka) 
 

     CONTENTS          Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2022-23)      (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iv) 
           
             
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates held 
on 02.02.2023  
 
46 
II. Analysis Of Action taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 11th Report of 
 the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)………….. 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I Report  1 
 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government         
12 
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
38 
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
40 
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply 
of Government is still awaited 
44 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
 Shri Girish Bhalchandra  Bapat – Chairperson 
 Members 
2. Shri Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
6. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
13. Shri jual Oram 
14. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
15. Shri Saikia Dilip 
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
17. Dr. K.C. Patel 
18. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
19. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
20. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
21. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
22. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
23. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
24. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
25. Shri Prathap Simha 
26. Shri Pinaki Misra 
27. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
28. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
29. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
30. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 

iii 
 
Secretariat                            
  
1. Smt.  Anita B. Panda Additional Secretary 
2. Shri  Muraleedharan. P Director 
3. Dr.  (Smt.) Sheetal Kapoor Committee Officer 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperso n of the Committee on Estimates (2022-23) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Twenty-Second Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 11th Report of the Committee  (2021-22) on the subject ‘ Review of 
Performance of Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojna’ pertaining to the Ministry of Rural 
Development. 
 
2.  The 11th Report of the Committee on Estimates (202 1-22) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 5th August, 2021. The Government furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in the 11th Report on 10 January, 2023. The 
draft report was considered and approved on  2 February, 2023, by the Committee. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 11th Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI;  
 02 February, 2023         
 13  Magha ,1944 (Saka) 
 
GIRISH BHALCHANDRA  BAPAT 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the  Eleventh Report  
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “ Review of Performance of Pradhan Mantri 
Gramin Awaas Yojna (PMAY-G)” pertaining to the Ministry of Rural Development. 
  
2.       The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 05.08.2021. It contained 18 
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect to 
all the Observations/Recommendations have been rec eived from the Ministry of Rural 
Development. 
 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-   
  
(i)       Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation. Para No 1,2,3,4,5,6,7, 8,11,12,14,15,16 and 17 
    
      Total: 14 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation. Para No.18         
         Total: 01 
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)     Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation. Nos. 10 and 13       
                  Total:02 
(Chapter-IV) 
  
 
(iv)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:  
 Recommendation. No.  9                                                                                    
                 Total: 01 
(Chapter-V) 
  

2 
 
 
 
4.       The Committee desire that   Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final Action Taken Reply in 
respect of the recommendation contained in Chapter -V for which interim reply have 
been given by the Gov ernment may be furnished to them within six months of the 
presentation of the  Report to the House. 
 
5.       The Comm ittee will now deal with the  Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
 Observations/Recommendations(Para No 9) 
 
BANK LOAN FACILITY TO BENEFICIARIES 
6. In their recommendation contained in the original 11 th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“Under PMAY - G, financial assistance is provided directly to the beneficiaries for the 
construction of the house. On the issue of the provisions for Bank loan facilities to the 
beneficiaries of rural areas for construction of house above the prescribed amo unt of 
1,20,000/- under the Scheme , the Committee were informed that there is a provision of 
availing a loan of 70000 in this scheme . In some States where the follow up is good the 
beneficiaries have availed the loan, but in some States it has not been i mplemented 
formally at Bank level. As a result, the beneficiaries had to go for informal loan which is 
costlier than the formal loan. The Ministry has taken up the matter of developing small 
housing loan in consultation with Indian Bank Association and Dep artment of Financial 
Services because rural housing is also a priority sector lending. If the Ministry can have 
this programmes the subsequent generations of beneficiaries, when they grow up and 
get separated, can go for bank loan for further expansion of the house rather than for a 
total subsidy scheme from the Government. In response to one of the queries of the 
Committee, Ministry vide its written reply (of 19h July, 2021 ) has informed that the 
Sample loan product ( under PMAY - G ) has not been finaliz ed till date. The Ministry 
had further informed that the Secretary (Rural Development) vide a DO letter dated 
23rdJune , 2021 had requested Secretary, Department of Financial Services (DFS) for 
expediting the development of loan product by convening the me eting by DFS 
immediately . Even after completion of four years of this scheme of PMAY - G and 
taking cognizance of the fact that rural housing is also a priority sector lending, the 
Committee are pained to note that the Ministry has been inactive in modeli ng a 
mechanism of financial assistance to the beneficiaries. Therefore, the Committee urge d 

3 
 
the Ministry to take effective steps so as to make financial assistance available to all the 
needy beneficiaries in time so that the scheme does not build houses me rely on paper 
but in reality too. The Committee were apprehensive if the Ministry would write off the 
loan so sanctioned under PMAY - G and therefore , would like to be apprised of the 
mechanism through which formal institutional loan is made available to the beneficiaries 
and the way through which the Bank would recover the loan sanctioned under PMAY - 
G . The Committee were of the strong view that the Ministry should not push the " 
financial assistance " aspect to a further date rather complement the " sa mple loan plan 
" with " category wise " loan to the beneficiaries of SC , ST , minorities and other 
backward categories . The Committee would like to be apprised If the Ministry is 
finalizing an interest scheme coherent with the several categories of eligi ble 
beneficiaries under the scheme. “ 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Rural Development submitted 
as under: 
 “Provision of institutional loan i.e. facilitating the beneficiary to avail loan upto 
Rs.70,000 from Financial Institutions is one of the salient features of PMAY-G. 
It was decided for development of loan product in lines with the para 2.2 (i) of the 
Chapter 2 of the Framework For Implementation (FFI) of Pradhan Mantri Awaas 
Yojana- Gramin (PMAY-G)- 'If the benefic iary so chooses, he/she will be facilitated to 
avail loan of up to Rs.70,000/- from Financial Institutions'. 
The proposed draft loan product has been approved by the MRD and is under 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance through Integrated Finance Divi sion of the 
Ministry. As per the approved loan product, the financial requirement would be Rs.60 cr 
for seeking the loan Rs.1400 cr to proposed 2.0 lakh beneficiaries @ 0.70 lakh over a 
period of two years i.e 2022-23 and 2023-24. “ 
 
8. The Committee had n oted that bank loan facilities to the beneficiaries of 
rural areas for construction of house (over and above the prescribed amount of  ₹ 
120000) is provided under the scheme but certain States had not formally 
implemented it at the bank level.  The Committ ee note from the Action Taken 
reply of the Ministry that the proposed draft loan product has been approved by 
the Minister of Rural Development in consultation with Ministry of Finance. While 
appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry in finalising the “ draft loan product”, 
the Committee hope that the same has been concluded now. They desire that the 
Ministry should be swift in implementing it as well. The Scheme of PMAY -G has 
been extended till March, 2024 and having time period of even less than 2 years in 
its completion, a delay in implementing “draft loan product” would fail the very 

4 
 
purpose of its creation. The Committee further reiterate that the proposed loan 
product should be made available to all the proposed 2 lakh beneficiaries, who 
must be in d ire need of additional funds for completion of the construction of 
their houses. The Committee urge the Ministry to take urgent steps so as to bring 
forth “loan product” in real terms and apprise them suitably. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 10) 
 
Need for Revision of Financial Assistance 
9. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“ The Committee note that the targeted period of construction under the scheme of 2.95 
crore houses was from the year 2016 -17 to 2021 -22 ; only o ne year being left for 
construction of the targeted number of houses . The Committee observe d that due to 
cost escalation of various construction materials and labour charges, the beneficiaries 
are finding it difficult to complete construction of houses wi th the funds at their disposal. 
The Committee observe that seventy thousand rupees, the threshold limit of the loan 
that a homeless can raise, seem very meager In the phase of rising prices of 
construction material and the Ministry could think of raising i t further. The Committee 
are also of the view that owing to steady and continuous rise in the rates of labour, cost 
of building material and increase in the cost of other supplies , it becomes imperative on 
the part of the Ministry to raise the amount of l oan / financial assistance permissible 
under PMAY - G. The Committee strongly ho ld that the Ministry should revise the 
amount of financial assistance keeping in view the cost of inflation associated with the 
construction costs . The Committee recommend tha t the Ministry could even draw up a 
proposal to have " indexed cost of construction "as a baseline to sanction funds which 
would in real terms benefit the targeted beneficiaries .” 
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Rural Development submitted 
as under: 
“While seeking approval of Union Cabinet for restructuring erstwhile rural housing 
scheme, it was proposed that the cost of construction would be ₹ 1.50 lakh for a Pucca 
houses with toilet in a 25 Sq.m. area @ ₹ 600 per Sq.f t. The unit assistance under 
PMAY-G (Rs. 1.20 lakhs/ Rs. 1.30 lakhs) alongwith support for unskilled labour from 
MGNREGS (90/95 mandays) and SBM -G (Rs. 12,000 assistance for construction of 
toilet) would be sufficient to construct a house of 25 Sq.m. This would be for a basic 
housing unit which the beneficiary can expand when more resources are available. As 
per Union Cabinet’s approval for implementation of PMAY -G, the Unit assistance under 
PMAY-G is Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakh in diffic ult areas, IAP districts 
and Himalayan States – Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, North Eastern States, UTs of 

5 
 
Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. The unit assistance under erstwhile rural housing 
scheme till 31.03.2016 was Rs. 70,000/ 75,000 which was enhanced to Rs .1,20,000/ 
Rs. 1,30,000 by the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 23 rdMarch, 2016 while 
approving restructuring of erstwhile rural housing scheme to PMAY-G.  
The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 8 thDecember, 2021 has approved the 
continuation of PMAY-G beyond March, 2021 till March, 2024 as per the existing norms 
of PMAY-G. The unit assistance under the scheme has been retained as same and the 
cost estimation for completion of remaining houses within cumulative target of 2.95 
crore during FY 2021-22 to 2023-24 has been arrived accordingly.   
Under PMAY -G, a total target of 2.70 crore houses had been allocated various 
States/UTs, out of this a total of 2.43 crore houses have been sanctioned to 
beneficiaries and 1 st installment has already been released to 2.31 crore beneficiaries 
and 1.86 crore houses have been constructed as on 27.6.2022. The Ministry is targeting 
completion of 2.02 crore houses by 15 thAugust, 2022 and complete 2.95 crore houses 
by 31stMarch, 2022. 
Considering the above, at present, there is no proposal under consideration in the 
Ministry for revision of the unit assistance provided under PMAY-G.” 
11. The Committee had observed that due to cost escalation of different 
construction materials, it has been difficult for the beneficiaries under PMAY -G to 
complete construction of houses. Further, the amount of loan that a beneficiary 
could raise for construction of houses seemed insufficient hence the Committee 
had recommended to revise the amount of fina ncial assistance under the scheme 
of PMAY-G. In their reply, the Ministry have informed about approval of Cabinet 
on extension of scheme up to 2024 with same norms on threshold limit of 
financial assistance for a beneficiary. The Committee, however, urge t hat loan 
assistance to the beneficiaries need to be reviewed and an indexed cost of 
construction module should be developed so as to mitigate cost escalation under 
the PMAY-G scheme.  
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 12) 
 
Performance Audit  
12. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“While examining the subject, the Committee sought to know the monitoring 
mechanisms that were in place to ensure that the funds provided to the beneficiary for 

6 
 
purchase of land were actually spent for that purpose. To this, the Ministry responded 
that providing land to landless beneficiaries for construction of houses is the 
responsibility of the States / UTs. In response to the queries of the Committee, the 
Ministry admitted that there was no separate monitoring system set by the Ministry to 
ensure that funds were being utilized for the said purpose. The Ministry had further 
informed that a Performance Audit was yet to be done with regard to PMA Y - G. The 
Committee strongly ho ld that a scheme of such PAN India coverage with homeless 
being the subject needs review and audit periodically and thus the Committee would like 
to be apprised of the results of the Performance Audit of the scheme. The Committee 
are of the view that Social Self Help Groups could be registered for extending social 
audit to this housing scheme. The Ministry concurred to this and submitted that “ ...... 
your suggestion is also extremely useful for us ". The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.” 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Rural Development submitted 
as under: 
“The social audit  is a formal review of an Organization’s endeavors, 
procedures, and code of conduct regarding  social responsibility and their impact 
on society for implementation of a particular project. A social audit  is an 
assessment of how well a policy is achieving its goals or benchmarks for social 
responsibility. Social Audit is one of the important provisi ons mentioned in the 
FFI of PMAY-G. Accordingly, to simplify the process and to have better monitoring and 
transparency aspects in the said exercise, module on Social Audit under PMAY -G has 
been developed, but yet to be made live. However, all States/UTs v ide this Ministry 
letter dated 27thJanuary, 2022 were directed to conduct the social audit as per the 
social audit guidelines of PMAY -G and provide the data of social audit conducted since 
2016-17 till date and along with proposed number of social audits f or FY 2022 –23, the 
action on which is yet under progress in State/UTs.  Below is the status of Social Audit 
as on 02.12.2022: 
 
  
S No State/UT Social Audit Conducted 
1 Uttar Pradesh 1,11,319 
2 Tripura 46,905 
3 Meghalaya 40,550 
4 West Bengal 12,547 
5 Uttarakhand 5,645 
6 Assam 542 
7 Mizoram 310 
8 Jharkhand 128 
9 Andhra Pradesh 124 
10 Bihar 116 
11 Himachal Pradesh 88 

7 
 
12 Odisha 52 
Total             2,18,326  
  
The Evaluation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes in Rural Development Sector by NITI 
Aayog stated that the SHGs under DAY -NRLM are also involved in creating awareness 
among the beneficiaries of PMAY-G about the construction of durable houses, source of 
procurement of materials etc. 
Further the All India Performance Audit in respect of Prad han Mantri Awaas Yojana -
Gramin is initiated by the DG Audit (Central Expenditure) is being conducted for the 
period 2017 -18 to 2021 -22 in respect of   1250 Gram Panchayats in 250 blocks in 97 
districts of 12 States, viz., Uttarakhand, Haryana, Bihar, West B engal, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Uttar Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh. The field audit is being conducted from September, 2022 to December, 
2022.” 
 
14. The Committee had noticed no separate monitoring mechanism to ensure 
that funds related under PMAY -G were utilised effectively. Hence, they had 
recommended that self help groups could be utilised for extending social audit to 
the said audit scheme. The Committee are happy to note from the Ministry’s reply 
that 12 States had co nducted social audit by Self Help Groups (SHGs) as per the 
social audit guidelines issued under PMAY -G. The Committee at the same time, 
urge the Ministry to take serious note of the fact that more than half of the 
States/UTs are yet to implement and report on the social audit w.r.t. rural housing 
under PMAY -G. The Committee further note that All India Performance Audit of 
PMAY-G has been initiated based on their recommendation for a period of 5 
years. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in this regard. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 13) 
 
Quality of Construction 
15. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee were informed that 
officers at the Block level and District level are to inspect only 10 % and 2 % of the 
houses respectively at each stage of construction. The Committee had sought to know 
how the quality supervision of the other houses would be ensured and how the Ministry 
ensured that construction was in conformity to the House Design Typologies developed 
for the scheme. Replying to these the Ministry inter - alia stated that with the help of NIC 
they had developed a " House Quality Review Application " in Awaas Soft to review 
quality of the houses using captured geo - tagged photographs at the completed stage . 

8 
 
The quality construction of the houses under PMAY - G is also being reviewed throu gh 
field visits by the Common Review Mission team, officials from the Department of Rural 
Development and so on. Dwelling on the issue further, the Ministry Informed the 
Committee that since the beneficiaries were involved in construction of the houses, th ey 
ensured that the quality was good. Thus the Ministry categorically stated that there was 
no need for any change with respect to implementation and design in the programme. 
Drawing parallel with Indira Awaas Yojana, it was stated that owing to involvemen t of 
contractors in Indira Awaas Yojana the quality of construction of houses were not good 
vis - à - vis the present condition of houses where beneficiaries were involved.  
Further, the Committee observed that the scheme for ' Housing for All ’ does not provide 
for monitoring the quality of houses at different stages of construction. The Committee 
opine that the provision of PMAY - G scheme should have been parallel to that of 
Pradhan Mantri Gram SadakYojna(PMGSY) where the stages of construction are 
monitored . The Committee strongly h old that as houses constructed under PMAY - G 
are going to last and used for longer times , the quality of houses at different stages of 
construction should be evaluated . The Committee urge the Ministry to devise a 
mechanism in consultation with the State Governments through a joint meeting or so 
and appoint a nodal officer in every district who would inspect houses at different stages 
of construction ; thereby enriching both the monitoring aspect of the scheme as well as 
ensure the quality of houses constructed thereof . The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard. “ 
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Rural Development submitted as 
under: 
“The Ministry of Rural Development emphasizes on regular monitoring and evaluation 
of  theprogrammes being implemented in rural areas under its ambit. In order to 
enhance the   efficiency and efficacy of its programs, the Ministry has evolved a 
comprehensive system of   monitoring and evaluat ion of the implementation of its 
programmes. The purpose of National Level Monitors (NLMs) system is to strengthen 
all the rural development programmes and ensure effectiveness, transparency and 
accountability in the implementation of the programmes. The f indings are reviewed and 
shared with the States to discuss and suggest improvements in the implementation 
processes at the grass roots levels. 
NLM undertake periodic visits to the States/UTs for review in respect of all schemes/ 
programmes of DoRD including PMAY -G. In addition, Central Teams are also deputed 
for undertaking review of houses constructed under the scheme.  
The time-tagged and geo -tagged photographs of the houses under PMAY -G are being 
captured at the different levels of the house construction using Awaas App and are 

9 
 
being uploaded in the AwaasSoft MIS. To review the quality of the houses to some 
extent using the uploaded Geo -tagged photographs of the PMAY -G houses the MoRD 
has developed a 'House Quality Review Application'. Accordingly, the house quality 
review module is made live and State/UTs vide this Ministry letter dated 5 thJanuary, 
2022 issued necessary directions along with the designed SOP to use the House quality 
review module for better monitoring of PMAYG houses at different levels of 
construction.  
Further, the Hon’ble Union Minister of Rural Development, Government of India has 
launched the Area Officer Monitoring Visit A pp on 21 st May 2021. The purpose of the 
App is to make real time inspection &evidence-based reporting of all the schemes of the 
Ministry of Rural Development including PMAY-G. This App facilitates the officials of the 
States/ UTs to record their field visi t findings electronically/ online. The app also allows 
the officials to record time stamped and geo -tagged photograph of the houses. The 
Administrative Secretary dealing with implementation of PMAY -G have been asked to 
conduct at least 10 visits to ongoing PMAY-G houses per month and officers at the level 
of Additional Secretary/ Joint Secretary / Director/ State Nodal Officers or equivalent 
have been asked to conduct at least 15 visits to the ongoing PMAY -G houses per 
month. The findings of the field visits should be recorded on the Officers Monitoring Visit 
App.  
The MoRD is further in process of developing a module to assess the construction 
quality of the houses using the geotagged photographs of the houses through AI based 
image analytics.” 
 
17.  The Co mmittee had observed that the guidelines of PMAY -G did not 
provide for monitoring the quality of houses at different stages of construction 
there by making the quality and longetivity of the construction dubious. Hence, 
they had recommended to appoint a no dal officer in every district for inspecting 
quality of houses at different stages of construction for strengthening the 
monitoring mechanism. The Committee are now happy to note from the reply of 
the Ministry about the National Level Monitor System in pla ce, a House Quality 
Review App, visits by Central Team etc. Also an “Area Officer Monitoring App” 
has been statedly launched for assessing real time inspection and evidence 
based reporting as well as developing of a Module for AI based imaging for geo -
tagged photos of Houses constructed under the Scheme. But the reply is silent 
about the status and jurisdiction of the designated area officer. The Committee 
desire the Ministry to disclose the details w.r.t. the appointment/designation, area 
and mandate, whic h an “Area Nodal Officer” would inspect and report back on 
the “Area Monitoring App”. The Committee also urge the Ministry to apprise them 

10 
 
further on the issue together with district wise data, surveys conducted by each 
Area Officer, frequency of inspection etc.  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 14) 
 
Provision of Drainage and Water Supply System 
18. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee during the course of examination of the subject wanted to know about 
the provision of some common services like drainage or water supply system and the 
arrangements that were in place for enabling these services. The Ministry submitted 
that there was no separate provision for drainage and water supply system under the 
scheme. The Ministry added that the beneficiary of PMAY - G needs to be provided 
access to safe drinking water in convergence with National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme of Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation or any other similar 
Schemes. On the issue of waste water management facility for the houses constructed 
under the scheme, the Ministry admitted that there was no separate provision for waste 
water management under the Scheme. It was added that in order to ensure a cleaner 
and healthy environment for the households, the solid and liquid waste generated by the 
households needs to be treated. Accordingly, the State/UT Government may through 
convergence with Swachh Bharat Mission (G) or any other scheme of the State /UT 
Government to ensure proper managem ent of solid and liquid waste. The Committee 
recommend that the PMAY - G be appropriately converged with the Schemes for 
providing water and waste management in order to ensure that the scheme is 
implemented both in letter and spirit. The Committee strongly h old that the Ministry 
should take steps for inter - linking different schemes of Government of India and 
coordinate ( through a nodal officer ) in a way to ensure that the houses constructed 
under PMAY - G are habitable in all respects including water supply, drainage system, 
electricity connection etc. Th e Committee recommend that the Ministry should issue 
guidelines to State Government in this regard.” 
19. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Rural Development submitted 
as under:  
 
“The Ministry has already constituted a Committee on analysis of t he degree of 
convergence and coordination with the line Ministries with whom the PMAY -G has been 
converged to provide benefits of electricity connection, LPG connection, Drinking water, 
toilet construction, etc. Study to assess the impact of convergence is  already planned 
by the Ministry to be conducted through NIRD&PR. The Ministry is in consultation with 
the line Ministries for data transfer among MIS of the schemes with which PMAY -G has 
been converged, including D/o DWS so that the convergence benefits p rovided to the 
PMAY-G beneficiaries are available on AwaasSoft MIS. It is stated that a committee 
under the Chairpersonship of Additional Secretary, Department of Rural Development 

11 
 
has been constituted comprising the members from the line Ministries to mon itor and 
provide suggestions for effective convergence with the concerned schemes of the 
Central Government and State Govts.   
  
In order to capture the details of convergence among PMAY -G houses, a convergence 
module on AwaasSoft was made live since July 2021 and the States / UTs have been 
asked to enter convergence data in it. The States /UTs in the vide letter dated 7 th June 
2022 have been requested to expedite enter the convergence details of the PMAY -G 
houses on the convergence module in the AwaasSoft.” 
 
20. The Committee had observed that except for providing shelter to rural 
households in terms of physical construction, the guidelines of the scheme had 
no provision/linkages for drainage and water supply system in such households, 
which are most essent ial amenities. In view of the foregoing, the Committee had 
recommended the scheme to be appropriately converged with the schemes for 
drinking water and waste management so as to make houses (constructed under 
PMAY-G) habitable in all respects. The Committe e now take note of the fact that 
the Ministry has duly acted on their recommendation by constituting a Committee 
on the analysis of the degree of convergence/coordination with the line Ministries 
for providing access to drinking water, LPG connection, wast e management etc. 
But the Ministry has not been able to chalk out the ways and means through 
which such convergence would be carried out. The Committee also note that the 
Ministry is in consultation with line Ministries for data transfer among MIS of the 
schemes with which PMAY -G has been converged. While reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee urge the Ministry to define protocols/mechanism 
through which it plans to converge PMAY -G with other schemes (viz drinking 
water, sanitation, LPG connection) and should also issue guidelines to the States 
on an urgent basis. The Committee further note from the Action Taken Replies 
that a convergence module on AwassSoft has been made live since July, 2021 
where States have been asked to enter convergenc e details of the PMAY -G 
houses. The Committee desire that since more than 18 months have elapsed, the 
Ministry should also monitor effective convergence with PMAY -G and report the 
progress thereon to them.  
 
 
 
 

12 
 
Chapter – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 1) 
 
Introductory to the Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in the Report. 
 
Being introductory part, no action is required. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 2) 
 
Allocation of Resources 
Out of the annual budgetary provisions for PMAY -G, 95% were earmarked for 
construction of new houses under PMAY -G. This included 2% allocation towards 
Administrative Expenses for administrating the Scheme at the Central and State level. 
The remaining 5% of budgetary grant was retained at the Central Level as reserve fund 
for special projects in order to meet exigencies arising out of extraordinary situations 
like floods, cyclones, earthquakes, etc. 
To ensure timely release of Central share and State share from the treasury to the State 
Nodal Account (SNA) for Scheme implementations, the Committee note that apart from 
regular monitoring of funds status in State Nodal Account (SNS) meetings through VCs  
with States to highlight the need for timely release of funds to ensure Scheme 
implementation were also carried out. The Committee were apprised that letter from 
Secretary, Rural Development to States were sent with respect to budget provision for 
PMAY-G in respect of targets allotted for 2020-2021.   
Having taken cognizance of the measures taken by the Ministry, the Committee 
would urge the Ministry to ensure that these measures are effective and do not 
merely remain as wishes on the paper. The Committee hope that the monitoring 
through the correspondence undertaken in this regard would bring about the 
desired results. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
In the current Financial Year 2022 -23 under PMAY-G, the total budget allocation is Rs. 
20,000 cr.  5% of annual Central allocation (i.e. Rs.975 cr. for year 2021 -22) would be 
retained at the Central Government level as reserve fund for financing the Special 
project proposals received from the States. Th e States should submit the proposal for 
Special Projects with adequate justifications.    As per the revised procedure for   release 
of funds under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and monitoring utilization of the 

13 
 
funds released received from Departmen t of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance (vide OM 
dated 23.03.2021) in which all the States/UTs were requested to ensure timely release 
of Central Share and corresponding State Share to the State Nodal Account. The States 
were requested to maintain separate b udget lines for Central and State Share under 
each CSS (including PMAY -G) in their Detailed Demand for Grants (DDG) and make 
necessary provision of the State share in the State’s budget. As per TRSY 07 report of 
PFMS, all the States under PMAY -G have made provision for separate account heads 
for Central Share and State Share. UTs without legislature work directly in PFMS. 
Therefore, there is no need for them to open a Single Nodal Account. They will ensure 
that the funds are released to the vendors/benefici aries “just in time”. In case funds are 
to be released to any agency as per scheme guidelines, provision of Rule 230 (vii) of 
GFR 2017 will be strictly followed to avoid parking of funds, with agencies. Further the 
State Governments should transfer the Cen tral Share received in its account to the 
concerned SNAs account within 21 days of its receipt. The corresponding State Share 
should be released as early as possible not later than 40 days of release of Central 
Share. Further as per the guidelines received  from Ministry of Finance vide letter dated 
23.03.2021 States to release corresponding State Share failing which further 
installments will not be considered under PMAY-G. 
NEW IT Solutions developed so far under PMAY-G  
• PMAY-G Dashboard- PMAYG dashboard has  been developed to provide end -
to-end insight  to cater to the analytical and strategic business intelligence needs 
and provide physical and financial progress of PMAY -G scheme at a glance. The 
dashboard provides the actionable insights that include the si ngle screen 
visualization of entire physical and financial progress and reports up to the block 
level, analyzing the gap/delays in release of installments, speed of house 
construction, age-wise, category-wise data analysis in order to find out anomalies 
and outliers. Also, dashboard illustrates the trend analysis for sanction and 
completion progress using dynamic and customizable data visualization in close 
coordination with business users. 
• Landless Households Module  - The scheme has taken care of landless 
households in the permanent waitlist (PWL). The State Government ensures 
provision of land to landless households on priority as they are the neediest 
ones. Further, to map landless beneficiaries in the PWL of PMAY -G and to 
capture the status of availing land or financial assistance for land purchase to the 
landless beneficiaries, a module on landless households has been developed. 
The module captures the status of land provided to landless beneficiaries either 
financially assisted or provided land in physical.   
• Convergence Module- Convergence is an inherent component of the Scheme 
and therefore it is important to monitor the progress under convergence. 
Convergence module has been developed to monitor the status of benefit availed 
by PMAY -G beneficiary unde r other Government Schemes focusing on toilet 

14 
 
construction, LPG, Drinking water, MGNREGA employment, involvement of SHG 
etc. 
• E-Ticketing system –The module has been introduced to address the 
grievances pertaining to technical as well as non-technical issues under PMAY-G 
as referred by the State/UTs. 
• Aadhaar Based Payment System  –ABPS allows Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
to the PMAY -G beneficiary in his/ her bank account linked with the Aadhaar 
number of the concerned beneficiary for safe and authentic transaction. 
• Social Audit Module- The module has been set up to introduce the Social Audit 
Units (SAU) set up by State/UT Government under MGNREGA,  to facilitate 
conduct of Social Audit of PMAY -G. which is conducted in every Gram 
Panchayat at least once in a year, involving mandatory review of all aspects. 
• House Quality Review Module- Review Teams and the resource persons along 
with the beneficiaries verify the quality of house constructed, with respect to 
processes and procedures. Monitoring is done at all levels and with special 
emphasis on quality and timely completion of construction. 
• In addition to above, a module on understanding the features of PMAYG, from 
design to execution, is also available on iGOT platform, which is an e -learning 
platform intended for capacity building of stakeholders of PMAY-G.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 3) 
Allocation of Funds 
The financial requirement for the implementation of the Scheme initially was through    
annual budgetary provision. However, in the Interim Budget Speech 2019, apart from 
the budgetary allocation, Extra Budgetary Support was  announced in order to meet the 
budgetary gap of PMAY-G. 
The additional funds as Extra Budgetary Resources was over and above the GBS and it 
could be sought from lending institutions i.e. NABARD for making releases to States 
/UTs for smooth implementation of the Scheme. Out of the annual budgetary provision 
for PMAY-G, 95% are earmarked for construction of new houses under PMAY -G. This 
includes 2% allocation towards Administrative Expenses for administering the Scheme 
at the Central and State level. The rem aining 5% of budgetary grant is retained at the 
Central Level as reserve fund for special projects in order to meet exigencies arising out 
of extraordinary situations like floods, cyclones, earthquakes, etc. Financial Assistance 
is released to States/UTs  in two instalments of 50% each as per provisions of 
Framework for implementation of PMAY -G. The Central share requirement for 
construction of 70 lakh houses for FY 2020 -21 is to be met from GBS and EBR. Out of 
which Rs 19,500crore has been provided as the G ross Budgetary Support (GBS) and 
the balance is to be met through Extra Budgetary  Resources to be raised through 

15 
 
NABARD. Out of this,  Ministry of Finance had approved Rs 10,000 crore for PMAY -G 
for FY 2020 -21. Further, an additional EBR of Rs 25,324 crore has been sought from 
Ministry of Finance for FY 2020 -21 to enable Ministry to fulfill financial requirements of 
States/UTs. The Committee was assured that the fund requirement for Phase –II 
would be sufficient to meet the targets. The committee hope that b y ensuring the 
availability of funds to States and regular monitoring of physical progress, the 
Ministry would be able to achieve the targets for Phase –II. Given the fact that the 
Ministry has exhibited confidence that the target of construction of 2.02 c rore 
houses under PMAY -G by 15 thAugust, 2022 and 2.95 crore houses by 31 stMarch, 
2024 would be achieved, the Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard.             
Reply of the Government 
As on 07.02.2022, a total of 2.18 crore houses have been sanctioned, 1 st installment 
released for 2.08 crore houses and 1.72 crore houses have been completed. With the 
current pace of construction of houses, 2.02 crore houses under PMAY -G would be 
completed by 15 thAugust, 2022 and cumulati ve target of 2.95 crore houses would be 
achieved by March, 2024. The expected timelines are as under:- 
 
 Physical Milestone Date Houses to be completed 
 (units in Nos.) 
15th August, 2022 2.02 crore 
31st March, 2023 2.38 crore 
31st March, 2024 2.95 crore 
  
The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 8thDecember, 2021 had approved continuation 
of PMAY-G beyond March, 2021 with existing norms till March, 2024 with total financial 
implication for construction of 155.75 lakh  houses during three years 2021 -22 to 2023 -
24, at Rs. 1,98,581 crore (Central Share Rs. 1,25,106 crore  and state share Rs. 73,475 
crore) for achieving cumulative   targets of 2.95 crore   houses in rural areas under the 
PMAY-G and additional requirement of fund towards the interest repayment to 
NABARD. The total Cost at Central Level of Rs.  1,43,782 crores would be met by Rs. 
60,000 crore of projected Budgetary Resources, while the remaining fund could be 
secured either by way of GBS or Extra Budgetary Resources, in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 4) 
 
Utilisation of Funds 
            During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee noted that the 
expenditure reflected on Awaas  Soft is made by the State /UT against the Cumulative 
fund available in State Nodal Account(SNA) with the State/UT which includes Opening 
Balance of previous year, Central Share, state Share, Interest Accrued and 
Miscellaneous income. However, no expenditur e is being reported separately against 
the Central share releases of the State share releases as all funds from different 
sources are credited to the single bank account i.e. SNA and therefore expenditure is 
made against the total Fund Available (TFA)   in SNA irrespective of the fund sources. 
Further, the TFA with States/UTs as on 17.11.2020 is Rs35279.81 crore which includes 
Opening Balance of Rs 10002.84 crore, the Central Share Releases of Rs 15007.66 
crore, State Share releases of Rs 9517.40 crore, Misc ellaneous income of Rs 701.49 
crore and interest accrued of RS 50.42 crore. The total expenditure made as on 
17.11.2020 is Rs 21388.76 crores against the TFA of RS 35279.81 crore i.e 60.62 %.   
The Committee find that the percentage of fund that has been ut ilized vis -à-vis 
the total fund available is definitely not encouraging in ensuring the achievement 
of targets that have been set. The Committee would call upon the Ministry to 
ensure that the necessary measures taken in this regard are effectively 
implemented so that the remaining amount available in the SNA is gainfully 
untilized. Further, the Committee opine that the reviews that are undertaken 
would have the intended outcome and not merely remain on paper. 
Reply of the Government 
Under Pradhan Mantri Aw aas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G), the closing balance left in the 
State Nodal Accounts is carried forward as opening balance in the next Financial Year. 
During the Financial Year 2021 -22,  an amount of Rs.26,792.88 crore was released to 
States/UTs. As reported b y States/UTs on Awaassoft, as on 13.09.2022, the 
expenditure for FY 2021 -22 is Rs.42,805.94 crore including the state share. It is 
pertinent to mention that expenditure is reported against the Total Available Funds of 
Rs.63,374.75 crore.  
 
The financial details for the years 2021-22 and 2022-23 are given in the table below – 
 
(Rs. in crore) 

17 
 
Sr. No. Items 2021-22 2022-23 
1 Opening Balance 18,710.25 20,006.46 
2 Funds released (Central) 26,792.88 9,078.87 
3 Funds released (State) 16,156.29 8,035.42 
4 Total Available Funds 63,374.75 37,869.37 
5 Expenditure 42,805.94 27,470.10 
The Utilization of Funds under PMAY -G depends on the performance of the States/UTs 
w.r.t their pace of construction of houses by releasing funds directly into the bank 
accounts of beneficiaries through DBT. The Ministry continuously monitors the progress 
of the States/UTs with focus on completion of incomplete houses with 2 nd& 3 rd 
installments released to beneficiaries, improving the performance of poorly performing 
states, completion   of delayed houses, availing land to landless beneficiaries  with no 
land to construct the houses, etc. Further, to encourage healthy competition among 
States/UTs and expedite rate of house completion, the Ministry has developed a 
Performance Index Dashboard in AwaasSoft to rank the States/ UTs based on their 
performance. 
Further, as per the extant procedure of release of funds under Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSS) of Ministry of Finance, the interest earned on the funds released should 
be mandatorily remitted to respective Consolidated fund on pro -rata basis and also not 
more than 25% of the amount earmarked for a State under PMAY-G should be released 
at the beginning of the financial year.   Additional central share (not more than 25% at a 
time) will be released upon transfer of the stipulated State share to the Single Nodal 
Account (SNA) and utilization of at least 75% of the funds released earlier (both Central 
and State share) and compliance of conditions of previous sanction.   
As an outcome of the rigorous monitoring & facilitation to the States/ UTs the quantum 
of balance funds has come down significantly. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 5) 
 
Number of House constructed 
The PMAY-G Scheme envisaged to provide pucca houses with basic amenities to all 
houseless households and households living in kutcha and dilapidated houses in rural 
areas by 2022. It commenced on 1 stApril, 2016. The assessment of the beneficiaries 
was made combing the data sets of Census 2011 and Socio -Economic Caste Census 

18 
 
(SECC) 2011, houses constructed since 2011 and houses under construction till 
31st March, 2016. The estimation was that 2.95 crore houses would have to be 
constructed to meet the objective of ‘Housing for All’ in rural areas. Also, as on 15 
September, 2016, 2.57 crore households were identified for providing financial 
assistance under PMAY-G after due verification by Gram Sabha and after completion of 
Appellate Process. The Committee observe that during the year 2016 -2017 against the 
target of construction of 42,82454 houses, the achievement was 32,14,495. For the 
years 2017 -18, 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 the target of construction of house were 
32,33,800, 25,14,646 and 60,00,000 respectively . However, the target of houses 
completed for these successi ve years were 4454493, 4733,445 and 21,91,804 
respectively . The target for the year 2020 -21 was 44,25,494 houses. Out of these, 
40,60,503 houses had been sanctioned ( status as on 15.07.2021 ) and 3399538 
number of houses have been constructed . During th e year 2021 -22 against the target 
of 1,49,30,760 PMAYG houses, 11,11,811 houses have been completed as on 
15.07.2021.Against the target of construction of 2.95 crore houses during the period 
from 15h September , 2016 till 15th July , 2021 the total houses constructed is only 
1,57,06048 . There is a shortfall of 1,37,93,952 houses and only an year is left to reach 
the target of providing pucca houses with basic amenities to all houseless households 
and households living in kutcha and dilapidated houses in ru ral areas by 2022. The 
Ministry has attributed various reasons for the delayed achievement and has initiated 
measures to accomplish the pending targets. The Committee view the tardy progress 
in the construction of House under PMAYG seriously. In view of th e above 
backdrop, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry to review the targets and 
achievements of completion of houses periodically with due diligence and ensure 
its completion so that more homeless get houses within their means. The 
Committee may be ap prised of the progress made in this regard. The Committee 
expect the Ministry to identify the problems inherent with the slow pace of 
construction of houses and apprise them of the steps taken in this regard 
Reply of the Government 
As on 28.06.2022, a tota l of 2.43 crore houses have been sanctioned, 1 st installment 
released for 2.31 crore houses and 1.87 crore houses have been completed. In the 
present Financial Year, a total of 8.75 lakh houses have been constructed at an 
average rate of 9,837 houses const ructed per day. This is expected to increase further 
as the Ministry has been regularly reviewing the scheme with selected States/UTs.  
With the current pace of construction of houses, 2.02 crore houses under PMAY -G 
would be completed by 15 thAugust, 2022 a nd cumulative target of 2.95 crore houses 
would be achieved by March, 2024. The expected timelines are as under:- 
 

19 
 
Physical Milestone Date Houses to be 
completed (units in 
Nos.) 
15th August, 2022 2.02 crore 
31st March, 2023 2.38 crore 
31st March, 2024 2.95 crore 
 
 It is also pertinent to mention here that 13 States/UT namely States of Madhya 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Assam, Bihar, Tripura, Maharashtra, Odisha, West 
Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and UT of Jammu & Kashmir h ave 
cumulative target of 2.50 crores (or 92.60% of total targets) under PMAY -G. These 
States have already sanctioned 2.26 crore houses (or 93% of total sanctions) and 
houses completed in these 13 States/UT is 1.74 crore which is 93.92% of the total 
houses constructed under PMAY-G. The Ministry is also following up with these States 
to boost the progress under PMAY -G and have already allocated them fortnightly 
targets till 15 thAugust, 2022 for achieving cumulative completion of 2.02 crore houses 
under PMAY -G. The progress made by these States/UT is being reviewed through 
meetings at level of Secretary (RD), Additional Secretary (RD) and Dy. Director General 
(Rural Housing), DoRD. 
A few problems which have hindered the progress under PMAY -G alongwith corrective 
measures taken by Ministry are detailed as under:- 
Issues Corrective measures taken by MoRD 
Delay in provision of land to 
the landless beneficiaries. 
  
States have been requested for setting up Task Force under 
Chief Secretary comprising of the Secretary (Revenue) and 
Secretary dealing with PMAY-G so that time bound provision of 
land to landless beneficiaries can be achieved. 
  
Provision of land to Landless beneficiaries under PMAY -G is 
always one of the agenda for the review meetings with 
States/UTs. 
Delay in release of central 
share & corresponding state 
matching share from 
Treasury to SNA. 
  
Non availability of funds is one of the major reasons leading to 
low pace of construction of houses under PMAY -G. This has 
impacted the progress under PMAY -G in last two financial 
years. The Ministry through meetings and telephonic 
conversation with States/UTs raise this issue so that the States 
release the funds from their Treasury into SNA for onward 
release as installments of assistance to beneficiaries. 
Delay in sanction of houses 
by the States/UTs.   
  
The States/UTs are regularly followed up in this regard. The 
Ministry resolves the technical issues raised by States/UTs so 
that the process of sanctioning is not hampered. The Ministry 
has also  released User Manual to assist the States/UTs in 

20 
 
sanctioning houses from finalized Awaas+ lists and this is 
expected to boost the sanction of houses and 2.95 crore 
houses are expected to be sanctioned by August, 2022. As on 
28.06.2022, a total of 2.43 cro re houses have already been 
sanctioned under PMAY-G. 
Gap in sanctions and release 
of installments 
The States have been requested to ensure that there is no lag 
between sanction of houses and release of funds. Timely 
release of funds ensure timely construction of houses.  
  
The States/UTs have also been requested to give special 
attention to houses whic h have already received 2 nd and 3 rd 
installment to ensure that the houses are completed in a time 
bound manner. 
Delay in completion of 
houses –houses incomplete 
even after more than 12 
months of release of 1 st 
instalment.  
Around 12.24 lakh houses as on 27.06.2022 are in the delayed 
houses category i.e. houses which are incomplete even after 
12 months of release of 1stinstallment of assistance.  
  
The Ministry has requested the States/UTs to come up with the 
strategy to expedite the completion of all such delayed houses 
and also specify reasons in cases the delayed houses could 
not be completed owing to reasons such as death of 
beneficiary without heir, permanent migration, legal issues, etc. 
  
The Ministry has already released SOPs for dealing with such 
cases of permanent migration, death of beneficiary without 
heir, etc. so that the States/UTs can deal with such cases and 
the progress is not impacted.  
Resolution of difficulties in 
operation of transaction 
based MIS Awassoft 
Ticketing system has been intr oduced so that all the states 
facing any difficulty with the application can raise issues online, 
whose resolution is monitored. 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 6) 
 
Identification of Beneficiaries 
While examining the procedure adopted by the Ministry for identifying genuine poor, the 
Committee found that the beneficiaries of PMAY - G were identified by the Gram Sabha 
based on the housing deprivation parameters as per SECC 2011. The universe of 
eligible beneficiaries under PMAY - G included all the houseless and households living 
in zero, one or two room kutcha houses as per SECC data, subject to the exclusion 
process. Prioritization of beneficiaries for providing assistance was done category - wise 
viz SC/ST, Minorities and others. The households were prioritized category - wise 
based on houselessness followed by the number of rooms i.e. zero, one and two rooms. 

21 
 
These priority lists that were so prepared were verified by the Gram Sabha to check for 
ineligible beneficiaries and changes in priority. The necessary changes made in the list 
were based on the minutes of Gram Sabha and these lists which were approved by the 
Gram Sabha were widely publicized within the Gram Panchayat. The complaints that so 
arose on account of deletion or change in the ranking could be submitted to the 
Appellate Committee which was constituted by the State Government to resolve such 
complaints. Once the Appellate process was complete, the category - wise Permanent 
Waitlist (PWL ) of the Gram Panchayat got finalized and it was widely published and 
entered on the website of PMAY - G. From the above, the Committee find that in the 
procedure that is adopted for listing out the eligible beneficiaries, Gram Sabha is 
the authority final izing the lists and the Appellate Committee constituted by the 
State Government would resolve complaints that come forth. The implementation 
of the Scheme is based on the lists so finalized at the grass root level without any 
other authority verifying the lists. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
reasons for the same. They would also like to know whether the lists so prepared 
have ensured proper implementation of the Scheme so far. The Committee 
strongly feel that the linkage of Aadhaar into the  scheme can help in avoiding 
duplicity and would even ensure that the benefit reaches the deserving ones The 
Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the provisions of the Framework For Implement ation (FFI) of PMAY -G, the 
universe of eligible beneficiaries under PMAY-G includes the houseless and households 
living in zero, one or two room kucha houses as per Socio Economic Caste Census 
(SECC)and Awaas+ data, subject to the exclusion process. 
The Gram Panchayat wise system -generated eligible beneficiaries’ lists are referred to 
the Gram Sabha to verify the same. The Gram Sabha verifies the facts based on which 
the inclusion has been done in the meeting of Gram Sabha. If the inclusion has been 
done ba sed on wrong facts, if the household has constructed a pucca house or 
migrated since the survey or has been allotted a house under any government scheme, 
the Gram Sabha shall delete the name of such families.   Further the Gram Sabha can 
change the priority of the households in certain cases. The list of such persons deleted, 
including reasons for deletion, changes made in the priority will form part of the minutes 
of the Gram Sabha resolution. 
The procedure for identification of the right beneficiary under PMAY-G is in alignment 
with the Article 243(G) of the Indian Constitution on the Powers authority and 
responsibilities of Panchayats. 
 

22 
 
Appellate mechanism 
a. Post verification, the lists approved by the Gram Sabha are widely publicized 
within the Gram Panchayat for a minimum period of seven days. 
b. After the lists have been publicized, a window period of fifteen days is provided 
for submission of complaints regarding deletion or change in ranking. 
c. The state government shall constitute a three -member Appellate Committee 
headed by nominee of District Magistrate / Collector  and at least one non -official 
member at the District level to whom the complaints are referred. 
d. The Appellate Committee will consider the complaints, hear appeals against 
deletion or change in ranking and resolve the same within a fixed period of time. 
e. After decision of Appellate Committee, the Gram Panchayat wise final permanent 
waitlist for each category will be published on the notice board of the Gram 
Panchayat and advertised widely.  
Apart from the process mentioned above for the selection of eligible beneficiaries from 
the SECC-2011 survey data / Awaas+ survey data, the eligibility of the beneficiaries is 
also being confirmed at the time of registration & sanctioning the houses by  the PMAY-
G functionaries. 
As per FFI, a Grievance redressal mechanism is also set up at Gram Panchayat, Block, 
District, and the State levels. Contact details of the designated grievance redressal 
official and the procedure to file the grievance is clearl y displayed in each Panchayat. 
There is also scope for escalation, if the complainant is not satisfied with the disposal of 
his/ her grievance. Complaints received in the MoRD are forwarded to the respective 
State Government for redressal of the grievance.  The designated officers are required 
to take necessary action and furnish the ATR to the MoRD under intimation to the 
complainant within one month of receipt of the complaint. Services of the Ombudsman 
under MGNREGA can also be utilized for redressal of the grievances.  
In addition, complaints are received through CPGRAMS wherein there is an inbuilt 
mechanism for categorization of complaints. Regular follow up is done with States/UTs 
for speedy disposal of the grievances. In cases of serious irregularities / allegations, 
Central Government Teams are also deputed for conducting enquiry. 
 In cases where the complaint against the Officials/ Panchayat Adhikari/ Pradhan etc. is 
found to be true during enquiry by Central Government/ State Government team, 
prompt action is taken against the erring Officials. Following actions are suggested by 
Ministry to the States for immediate action against the erring Officials: 
(i)FIR be filed against the erring Officials immediately 

23 
 
(ii) Action to be taken against the concerned BDO, who is second signatory of the FTOs 
under PMAY-G and other supervisors who would have certified and inspected the works 
(iii) Show cause be served against the Officials and other concerned officials in cases 
where there is delayed action against the erring Officials 
(iv) State/UT to publicize widely the action taken in the matter including on social media 
The above grievances redressal mechanism ensures that in cases of selection of 
ineligible households or other such cases, appropriate action is take n against those 
responsible for irregularities. 
  
In addition, the rural housing Scheme, PMAY -G implemented by Ministry of Rural 
Development is monitored very closely at all levels and with special emphasis on quality 
and timely completion of construction.  The details of monitoring mechanism 
incorporated are  as follows: - 
a. All data regarding beneficiaries, progress of construction and release of funds, 
including photographs and inspection reports shall be placed on AwaasSoft and 
would form the basis for fol low up on both the financial and physical progress of 
the scheme. The reports pertaining to the eligible / ineligible households, 
Permanent Wait List (PWL), Physical and financial progress, etc. are available in 
the public domain supporting transparency and accountability.  
b. The physical progress in construction would be monitored through the 
photographs to be uploaded at every stage of construction as decided by the 
State Government. The State Government to use the AwaasApp for uploading 
the photographs. A photograph should be uploaded on completion of 
construction of the house.  
c. National Level Monitors (NLM) and Area Officers of the Ministry would also visit 
PMAY-G houses during the field visits, to the extent possible to assess the 
progress, procedure followed for selection of beneficiaries etc., 
d. The Project Management Unit (PMU)  at the State level is to undertake the tasks 
of implementation, monitoring and quality supervision. Officers at the Block level 
should inspect as far as possible 10% of the houses at each stage of 
construction. District level officers should inspect 2% of the houses at each stage 
of construction. Every house sanctioned under PMAY -G to be tagged to a village 
level functionary (Gram Rozgar Sahayak or any other village level worker) whose 
task is to follow-up with the beneficiary and facilitate construction.  
e. Timely release of funds to the States/UTs and follow up with them for releasing 
the same & state matching share from Treasury into State Nodal Accounts. 
f. Review over Video Conferences with States at the level of MRD and SRD 
g. Regional/ State-wise review by the AS (RD), DDG (RH) on physical & financial 
progress including several identified parameters such as house sanctions, 
completions, delayed houses, fund release from State treasury, etc. 

24 
 
h. Separate review of States with high target, poor performing States and delayed 
houses 
i. Cleaning of the Permanent Wait List (PWL) by removing ineligible/ unwilling 
beneficiaries from the PWL. 
j. Formal Social Audit is to be conducted in every Gram Panchayat at least once in 
a year, involving a mandatory review of all aspects.  
k. Payment of assistance to beneficiaries who have been sanctioned houses would 
be made directly into the bank / post office accounts through the AwaasSoft -
PFMS electronically. This lead to increased transparency by enabling real time 
monitoring of funds disbursed to beneficiaries. 
l. The progress of different parameters for implementing the scheme are monitored 
through the Performance Index Dashboard. 
In pursuance of the provisions of section 7 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of 
Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016) 
(hereinafter referred to as the said Act), the Ministry has already issued n otification in 
respect of PMAY -G for seeking Aadhaar details from PMAY -G beneficiaries. As on 
27.06.2022, a total of 1.84 crore Aadhaar details out of 2.42 crore households 
sanctioned under PMAY -G has already been recorded with consent by the State 
Governments/UTs. 
In respect of Awaas+ households, Aadhaar has been mandated for de -duplication of 
beneficiaries from SECC 2011 database of PMAY-G. 
As on 27.06.2022, a total of 2.66 crore Aadhaar numbers of Head of households & 3.21 
crore Aadhaar numbers for Membe rs of Households have been recorded, against 2.85 
crore households remaining in Awaas+ survey lists after remanding of ineligible 
households by States/UTs. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 7) 
Selection Criteria  
During the course of examination with re spect to implementation of the Scheme the 
Committee were given to understand that as per the framework for implementation of 
PMAY - G, there is a multilayered prioritization within the universe of eligible PMAY ( G) 
beneficiaries. The process of creating a database of beneficiaries is the paramount step 
in the scheme of PMAY - G. The Committee pinpoint that the ' List of Beneficiaries ' 
should be prepared with utmost accuracy so that no deserving poor is ignored and no 
undeserving ones stands to benefit in the mist of doubt / corruption . The Identification 
of beneficiaries under PMAY - G is done by the Panchayat. But with growing times, the 
role of Panchayats has seemed to change in real terms and people in  Panchayat are 
prone to be moulded as polítical In struments. The Committee strongly view the 

25 
 
malpractices associated with inclusion of name in the list of beneficiaries and hence 
recommend that the preparation of list of beneficiaries should be done in consultation 
with the "government official" nominated by the State Government. 
During the course of examination, the Committee found that in a few cases the contact 
number of panchayat Pradhan was mentioned against the name of beneficiaries 
propounding financial dilution of the scheme The Committee are of th e firm view that 
such breeding grounds of corruption could only be eradicated to a great extent if the 
state Government nominates a Government official who would cross check facts before 
finalizing the list of beneficiaries. The Committee recommend the Min istry to revise the 
guidelines of the scheme in such a way that inclusion of name of beneficiaries, are 
henceforth verified by a government official and only after such authentication the 
names should be included in to list of beneficiaries. 
The Committee observe that at the time when socio Economic caste Census was 
carried out in 2011, owing of Television sets and mobile phones were categories as 
“comfort” items of high extrinsic value. But with the passage of time, the situation in the 
country has changed and prices of such electronic gadgets have come down drastically 
in a way that a homeless household could even afford to have a mobile phone.   The 
Committee are of the firm view that due to ever changing dynamics of ownership 
pattern of physical goods, a static selection criteria do not appear. The 
Committee expect the Ministry to evolve dynamic selection criteria which is 
efficient enough in churning out the “real poor” and segregating undeserving 
from the targeted beneficiaries. This has elevated the thr eshold limits and 
therefore the committee strongly desire the ministry to have a relook in the 
selection criteria. 
Reply of the Government 
The exclusion process under PMAY -G based on SECC 2011 is already prescribed in 
Annexure –I of the FFI of PMAY-G and also detailed as under:- 
EXCLUSION PROCESS 
Step 1: Exclusion of pucca houses - All households living in houses with pucca roof 
and/or pucca wall and households living in houses with more than 2 rooms are filtered 
out.  
Step 2: Automatic Exclusion – From the r emaining set of households, all households 
fulfilling any one of the 13 parameters listed below are automatically excluded: - 
i. Motorised two/three/four-wheeler/ fishing boat  
ii. Mechanised three/ four-wheeler agricultural equipment  

26 
 
iii. Kisan Credit Card with credit limit of Rs.50,000 or above  
iv. Household with any member as a Government employee  
v. Households with non-agricultural enterprises registered with the Government  
vi. Any member of the family earning more than Rs.10,000 per month  
vii. Paying income tax  
viii. Paying professional tax  
ix. Own a refrigerator  
x. Own landline phone  
xi. Own 2.5 acres or more of irrigated land with at least one irrigation equipment  
xii. 5 acres or more of irrigated land for two or more crop seasons  
xiii. Owning at least 7.5 acres of land or more with at least one irrigation equipment  
As may be seen from above, the above criterion had been adopted to ensure that the 
beneficiary being provided assistance under PMAY -G, is the poorest of the poor. 
Further, owning a Television or a mobile phone is not included in exclusion criteria 
under PMAY-G. 
There were 4.03 Crore households identified from the SECC -2011 survey after the 
prescribed exclusion process. The list of identified 4.0 3 crore households was shared 
with the States/ UTs for field verification. Post verification after the elimination of 
ineligible beneficiaries, 2.95 Crore households were identified as eligible for assistance 
under the PMAY -G, the same has been set as a ta rget for house completion under 
PMAY-G by March 2024. In the cases wherein the beneficiary died leaving no 
successor, permanently migrated, etc., such cases were further deleted from the list of 
2.95 Crore beneficiaries. As of 14th September 2022, there ar e 2.15 Crore beneficiaries 
in the PWL after deleting the ineligible ones. To fulfill the gap of 80 lakh, the 
beneficiaries have been identified from the Awaas+ survey data following the prescribed 
procedure recommended by the Expert Committee constituted a t the MoRD to identify 
eligible beneficiaries from the Awaas plus survey data. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 8) 
 
Redefining the term “Kutccha House” 
The eligible beneficiaries under PMAY -G included all the houseless and households 
living in zero , o ne or two room Kutccha House as per Socio -Economic Caste Census 
(SECC) data. The definition of Kutccha House is as per the definition used/prescribed in 

27 
 
SECC 2011. The committee were informed that State Punjab, Assam,Uttar Pradesh 
and Tripura had requested  for revisiting the definition Kutccha House under PMAY -G. 
Accordingly, an Experts Committee which was constituted for the purpose 
recommended that house with durable foundation with burnt brick , stone , concrete 
blocks , etc. with cement mortar with DPC ; walls with durable materials like red burnt 
bricks , concrete blocks , etc , at least up to sill level ; the external surface of the walls 
with moisture degradable materials like ' lcra' panels , unburnt bricks , etc. protected 
with cement sand plaster a nd roof with durable materials llke RCC or RBC or CGI 
roofing sheet well anchored with a roof under structures which is further well anchored 
with walls / support system transferring the load to the ground , to be considered as a ' 
Pucca ' house , else the  house is to be categorised as a Kuchha house .. The Expert 
Committee had also recommended applicability of revised definition of kutcha house 
under PMAY - G for two States of Assam and Tripura only. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the rationale behind revising the definition specifically for two States only, 
when the proper implementation of the Scheme hinged on the definition of kutcha house 
in order to identify the beneficiaries . The Committee also take note of the fact that the 
Ministry had.  received several proposals from States for changing the definition of " 
kutcha houses " . This is indicative of the fact that even States thrust upon evolving 
definition of " kutcha houses " " for inclusion of every deserving poor as a beneficiary 
under P radhan Mantri Gramin AwasYojna . Therefore , the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry frame a robust selection criteria which Imbibes the 
changing phases of purchasing power of the homeless ; thus leaving no targeted 
beneficiary out of PMAY - G . 
Reply of the Government 
4 States namely Assam, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Punjab had requested the Ministry 
for revision in definition of kutcha house under PMAY -G and based on this request the 
Ministry had constituted an Expert Committee under chairmanshi p of Dr. Nagesh Singh, 
Retd. Additional Secretary (RD) with field experts as members of this Committee. The 
Committee held discussions and undertook field visits before giving its 
recommendations. Based on the recommendations of this Expert Committee, the 
definition of Kutcha house under PMAY -G was revised for the States of Assam and 
Tripura as under:- 
For the State of Assam & Tripura, the house with the CGI sheet roof and Kutcha wall 
may be considered as Kutcha house, whereas, wall with moisture degradable  materials 
like 'Icra' panels, unburnt bricks, etc. with external surface protected with cement sand 
plaster may be considered as pucca wall. 

28 
 
The requests received from States and the recommendations of this Expert Committee 
which has been accepted by the Competent authority in Ministry of Rural Development 
are detailed as under:- 
Name of 
the State 
Proposal/ Amendment 
Requested in definition of 
Kutcha house under PMAY-G 
Recommendations of the Expert 
Committee/ Decision communicated 
to the State 
Assam Houses with a Kutcha wall, but 
CGI sheet roof should also be 
provided Pucca house under 
PMAY-G (i.e. House with a Kutcha 
wall and CGI sheet roof to be 
considered as a Kutcha house) 
For the State of Assam, the house with 
the CGI sheet roof and Kutcha wall m ay 
be considered as Kutcha house, 
whereas, wall with moisture degradable 
materials like 'Icra' panels, unburnt 
bricks, etc. with external surface 
protected with cement sand plaster may 
be considered as pucca wall. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Punjab 
Inclusion of the ‘burnt brick’ as a 
predominant material of the wall of 
the dwelling room under the 
category of Kutcha wall. 
The masonry wall with burnt bricks and 
cement/ lime/ mud mortar as the 
predominant material of the wall of the 
dwelling room will be considered as a  
Pucca wall and house with the same 
cannot be categorized as a Kutcha 
house. Therefore, the proposal from the 
State was not agreed upon. 
Inclusion of the ‘wooden planks 
(balas)’ as a predominant material 
of roof of dwelling room under the 
category of Kutcha roof. 
The existing definition of the Kutcha 
house under PMAY-G is inclusive of the 
amendment requested by the State, 
therefore, does not require an 
amendment. 
The dwelling room either with the 
Kutcha wall or Kutcha roof to be 
considered as Kutcha house 
Such houses may be categorized as 
Semi-Kutcha /Semi Pucca houses which 
is well covered in the existing definitions 
and do not require any change. 
Tripura Houses with the Kutcha wall and 
CGI sheet roofing to be 
considered as elig ible for 
assistance under PMAY -G (i.e. 
House with a Kutcha wall and CGI 
sheet roof to be considered as a 
Kutcha house) 
For the State of Tripura, the house with 
the CGI sheet roof and Kutcha wall may 
be considered as Kutcha house, 
whereas, wall with moistur e degradable 
materials like 'Icra' panels, unburnt 
bricks, etc. with external surface 
protected with cement sand plaster may 
be considered as pucca wall. 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Houses having Pucca walls, but 
Kutcha roof be considered under 
the Kutcha house category. 
House having Pucca walls, but Kutcha 
roof is to be categorized under Semi -
Pucca house. Therefore, the proposal 
from the State was not agreed upon. 
  

29 
 
Based on the revised definition, the States of Assam & Tripura have identified 8.71 lakh 
& 1.83 lakh new households respectively from SECC 2011 database as eligible for 
inclusion in the PWL of PMAY -G. The Ministry has already allocated target of 8.17 lakh 
& 1.83 lakh houses to State Of Assam & Tripura from these newly identified households 
from SECC 2011 database. 
The Ministry would consider the proposals received from States/UTs for revision in the 
definition of Kutcha house as per their requirements in similar manner as done for the 
above mentioned 4 States. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 11) 
 
Monitoring of the Scheme 
The Committee understand that the States / UTs set up a dedicated Programme 
Management Unit (PMU) to undertake the tasks of implementation, monitoring and 
supervision of quality of construction at State / District Block and Pancha yat Level. The 
State Programme Management Unit is headed by the State Nodal Officer and other 
personnel were availed through deputation from line departments and by hiring 
personnel on contract basis. In addition, all data regarding beneficiaries, progress  of 
construction and release of funds are placed on AwaasSoft . This formed the basis for 
follow up on both the financial and physical progress of the scheme. The physical 
progress in construction is monitored through the photographs to be uploaded at ever y 
stage of construction.  AwaasApp was used by State Government for uploading the Geo 
- tagged photographs. Further, on completion of construction of the house, the 
photograph of the house is uploaded. This meant that the entire monitoring of the 
Scheme depended on the data available on AwaasSoft .  In this regard, the Committee 
specifically enquired as to whether the functionaries who were responsible for uploading 
information on " Awaas Soft from the site in villages were well equipped to handle these 
activities . The Ministry merely stated that the re was a component of administrative 
funds which are 2 % of the housing funds released to the State / UTs . Out of these 2 % 
funds of Central share , 0.3 % was retained at centre level and 1.7 % was released to 
the States / UTs for various activities of ad ministration of the scheme which included 
cost of setting up and operating Programme Management Unit Including hiring of 
personnel on contract and also training of officials and elected representatives of 
Panchayats including exposure visits . In addition,  the Ministry based on request 
received from States / UTs arranged for the visit of officers / officials of Rural Housing 
Division of the Ministry with officials from NIC team, PMU team to visit and provide 
necessary hand - holding to the field workers on usage of Awaas App and Awaas Soft 
for data entry and other functions. This implied that a pivotal role was played by the 
people who are responsible for uploading the data onto the AwaasSoft as the 
monitoring of the Scheme revolved on the data that was so u ploaded. The Committee 

30 
 
are of the strong view that instead of waiting for the State Government to send request 
for Imparting necessary training and provide adequate hand holding to the personnel of 
Programe Management Unit and field workers, the Ministry s hould organise periodic 
training to them so that they can upload accurate data on the AwashSoft App which 
inturn will facilitate effective monitoring too. Given the issues related to net connectivity 
in rural areas, the Committee are apprehensive about the  efficacy of the system in 
place.  
The Committee would like to be apprised as to what extent this system has been 
effective in monitoring the implementation of the Scheme. The Committee note that the 
meetings of DISHA Committee are an integral part of the monitoring aspect of the 
scheme. Therefore, the Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that State  Governments 
are geared up to convene DISHA meetings quarterly to monitor the progress of 
PMGAY thereby strengthening the mandate of the scheme and houses 
constructed thereof.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Rural Development emphasizes on regular monitoring and evaluation of  
the programmes being implemented in rural areas under its ambit. In order to enhance 
the efficiency and efficacy of its programmes, the Ministry has evolved a comprehensive 
system of  monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of its programmes. The 
purpose of National Level Monitors (NLMs) system is to strengthen all the rural 
development programmes and ensure effectiv eness, transparency and accountability in 
the implementation of the programmes. The findings are reviewed and shared with the 
States to discuss and suggest improvements in the implementation processes at the 
grass roots levels. 
The PMAYG dashboard provides  end-to-end insights to cater the analytical and 
strategic business intelligence needs to cater the physical and financial progress of 
PMAY-G scheme at a glance. The dashboard will be able to provide the actionable 
insights that include the single screen v isualization of entire physical and financial 
progress and state level reports drillable to block level, analyzing the gap/delays in 
release of instalments, speed of house construction, age -wise, category -wise data 
analysis in order to find out anomalies, outliers. Also, dashboard will be able to illustrate 
the trend analysis for sanction and completion progress using dynamic and 
customizable data visualization in close coordination with stakeholders. 
DISHA (District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee) is a monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that Schemes are implemented in accordance with the 
Programme Guidelines. The meetings of DISHA Committee provides a platform in 
which implementation of development Schemes in a District can be discussed and 
taking the valuable inputs from the elected representative including Members of 
Parliament, strategy for greater impact of the Programmes may be formulated. This 
Committee is chaired by Hon’ble Member of Parliament. The Ministry vide D.O. letter 

31 
 
dated 26th October, 2021 from the Secretary (RD) addressed to the Additional Chief 
Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries dealing with PMAY -G of all States/UTs 
have re-iterated the role of the Hon'ble Members of Parliament in implementation and 
monitoring of PMAY-G. It is mentioned that several communications have been sent to 
the states/UTs in regard to ensuring the meeting of DISHA Committees and also review 
of performance of the same in the APAR of the District Officer. 
Further, in the letter dated 8 th November 2021, Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development 
referring to the Framework for Implementation (FFI) of PMAY -G, all the Hon’ble MPs 
reminded to participate and head the district level Disha Committee wherein progress 
under PMAY-G is also to be reviewed. 
Based on the progress of the States/UTs reviewed through AwaasSoft, dashboard and 
other mechanisms, Ministry of Rural Development sends teams to poorly performing 
States/UTs for handholding support. In addition, a comprehensive module developed by 
MoRD on P MAY-G is available on iGoT under Mission Karmayogi and states/UTs are 
required to ensure registration on the portal and training of all the field functionaries on 
the subject. Further, Ministry also ensures resolution of  technical issues of States/UTs , 
as and when required, by deploying technical team through physical or virtual mode. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 12) 
 
Performance Audit  
While examining the subject, the Committee sought to know the monitoring 
mechanisms that were in place to ensure that the funds provided to the beneficiary for 
purchase of land were actually spent for that purpose. To this, the Ministry responded 
that providing land to landless beneficiaries for construction of houses is the 
responsibility of the States / UTs.  In response to the queries of the Committee, the 
Ministry admitted that there was no separate monitoring system set by the Ministry to 
ensure that funds were being utilized for the said purpose. The Ministry had further 
informed that a Performance Audit w as yet to be done with regard to PMAY - G. The 
Committee strongly hold that a scheme of such PAN India coverage with homeless 
being the subject needs review and audit periodically and thus the Committee would like 
to be apprised of the results of the Perfo rmance Audit of the scheme. The Committee 
were of the view that Social Self Help Groups could be registered for extending 
social audit to this housing scheme. The Ministry concurred to this and submitted 
that “ ...... your suggestion is also extremely useful for us ". The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The social audit is a formal review of an Organization’s endeavors, procedures, 
and code of conduct regarding social responsibility and their impact on society 
for implementation of a particular project. A social audit  is an assessment of 

32 
 
how well a policy is achieving its goals or benchmarks for social responsibility. 
Social Audit is one of the important provisions mentioned in the  FFI of PMAY-G. 
Accordingly, to simplify the process and to have better monitoring and transparency 
aspects in the said exercise, module on Social Audit under PMAY -G has been 
developed, but yet to be made live. However, all States/UTs vide this Ministry le tter 
dated 27thJanuary, 2022 were directed to conduct the social audit as per the social 
audit guidelines of PMAY -G and provide the data of social audit conducted since 2016 -
17 till date and along with proposed number of social audits for FY 2022 –23, the action 
on which is yet under progress in State/UTs.  Below is the status of Social Audit as on 
02.12.2022: 
  
S No State/UT Social Audit Conducted 
1 Uttar Pradesh 1,11,319 
2 Tripura 46,905 
3 Meghalaya 40,550 
4 West Bengal 12,547 
5 Uttarakhand 5,645 
6 Assam 542 
7 Mizoram 310 
8 Jharkhand 128 
9 Andhra Pradesh 124 
10 Bihar 116 
11 Himachal Pradesh 88 
12 Odisha 52 
Total             2,18,326  
  
The Evaluation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes in Rural Development Sector by NITI 
Aayog stated that the SHGs under DAY-NRLM are also involved in creating awareness 
among the beneficiaries of PMAY-G about the construction of durable houses, source of 
procurement of materials etc. 
Further the All India Performance Audit in respect of Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojan a-
Gramin is initiated by the DG Audit (Central Expenditure) is being conducted for the 
period 2017 -18 to 2021 -22 in respect of   1250 Gram Panchayats in 250 blocks in 97 
districts of 12 States, viz., Uttarakhand, Haryana, Bihar, West Bengal, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Uttar Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh. The field audit is being conducted from September, 2022 to December, 
2022. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 14 of Chapter I ) 
 

33 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 14) 
 
Provision of Drainage and Water Supply System 
The Committee during the course of examination of the subject wanted to know about 
the provision of some common services like drainage or water supply system and the 
arrangements that were in place for enabling these services. The Ministry submitted 
that there was no separate provision for drainage and water supply system under the 
scheme. The Ministry added that the beneficiary of PMAY - G needs to be provided 
access to safe drinking water in convergenc e with National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme of Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation or any other similar 
Schemes. On the issue of waste water management facility for the houses constructed 
under the scheme, the Ministry admitted that there was no  separate provision for waste 
water management under the Scheme. It was added that in order to ensure a cleaner 
and healthy environment for the households, the solid and liquid waste generated by the 
households needs to be treated. Accordingly, the State/U T Government may through 
convergence with Swachh Bharat Mission (G) or any other scheme of the State /UT 
Government to ensure proper management of solid and liquid waste. The Committee 
recommend that the PMAY - G be appropriately converged with the Schemes  for 
providing water and waste management in order to ensure that the scheme is 
implemented both in letter and spirit. The Committee strongly hold that the 
Ministry should take steps for inter - linking different schemes of Government of 
India and coordinate ( through a nodal officer ) in a way to ensure that the houses 
constructed under PMAY - G are habitable in all respects including water supply, 
drainage system, electricity connection etc. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should issue guidelines to State Government in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has already constituted a Committee on analysis of the degree of 
convergence and coordination with the line Ministries with whom the PMAY -G has been 
converged to provide benefits of electricity connection, LPG connection, Drinking water, 
toilet construction, etc. Study to assess the impact of convergence is already planned 
by the Ministry to be conducted through NIRD&PR. The Ministry is in consultation with 
the line Ministries for data transfer among MIS of the schemes with which PMAY -G has 
been converged, including D/o DWS so that the convergence benefits provided to the 
PMAY-G beneficiaries are available on AwaasSoft MIS. It is stated that a committee 
under the Chairperso nship of Additional Secretary, Department of Rural Development 
has been constituted comprising the members from the line Ministries to monitor and 
provide suggestions for effective convergence with the concerned schemes of the 
Central Government and State Govts.   
  
In order to capture the details of convergence among PMAY -G houses, a convergence 
module on AwaasSoft was made live since July 2021 and the States / UTs have been 

34 
 
asked to enter convergence data in it. The States /UTs in the vide letter dated 7 th June 
2022 have been requested to expedite enter the convergence details of the PMAY -G 
houses on the convergence module in the AwaasSoft.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 20 of Chapter I ) 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 15) 
 
Training of masons  
The Committee observe that in order to ensure quality in the construction of houses, the 
facet of Rural Mason training was imbibed in the scheme. Rural Mason Training was 
launched to contribute towards the availability of a skilled man - force in the rural areas 
for the construction of public works related to the rural infrastructure together with ample 
opportunities for further career progression to the trained and certified masons . The 
Ministry has partnered with the Construction Skil l Development Council of India 
(CSDCI) and National Skill Development Cooperation (NSDC) in the implementation of 
the RMT Programme. But the Committee is dismayed to note that not much has been 
done with regard to training the right number of masons requir ed under the PMAY - G 
Scheme. The Committee are aghast to note that only 50,621 masons have been 
certified till 21.10.2019 which is a miniscule percentage for the target of 2.945 crore 
houses to be constructed under the scheme. Quality of construction of h ouses in real 
terms rests much on the ones responsible for carrying the activity of not only building 
the base but even the structure. This seems qualitatively achievable with efficient 
masons who are well equipped with the knowledge of material, ratio of construction 
material to be used, execution of design of the house laid down in the modalities under 
PMAY - G etc.  
The Committee are of the firm view that availability of a skilled work force for the 
construction of houses in rural areas is imperative. Th e Committee observe from the 
data of utilization table of administrative expenses for the year 2019 -20 ( Appendix - ll) 
that out of 34 States / UTs only two States (Uttarakhand and Jharkhand) have actually 
incurred an expenditure on the head " Rural Mason Training Programme " ; the rest 32 
States / UTs have no allocation for such training . This mere percentage is indicative of 
the ineffectiveness in the implementation of Rural Mason Training (RMT) programme.  
The Committee strongly hold that Ministry shoul d make sincere efforts in gearing 
the Construction Skill Development Council of India (CSDCI) and National Skill 
Development Corporation (NSDC) in the Implementation of Rural Mason Training 
Programme and tune it in the full swing. An awareness programme to  attract 
labour work force to enroll in RMT should be launched and propagated at all 

35 
 
levels so that it reaches every comer of the country. The Ministry should 
coordinate with the States to concentrate mason training in the states where the 
construction targets form a major portion of the target set under PMAY-G.  
Reply of the Government 
To ensure quality construction of the houses Rural Mason Training program is being 
implemented under PMAY-G. As on 21/06/2022, under RMT, 2,47,112 candidates have 
enrolled out of which 1,96,716 candidates have been assessed and 1,65,241have been 
passed and certified.  
  
The workers who have required experience in construction sector are trained in 
Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) mode under the RMT program of the PMAY -G, to 
facilitate them for formal career progression.  
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 16) 
 
Land to LandlessBeneficiaries 
During the examination of the subject, the Committee found that out of the total universe 
of homeless, around four lakh beneficiaries were found to be eligible landless 
beneficiaries. The Committee observe that unavailability of land is one of the major 
reasons for low utilization of allocated fund in some States.2.66 lakh landless 
beneficiaries are yet to be provided land by the State Government. The responsibility of 
providing land to the landless beneficiaries rests with the State Governments. The 
Committee further observe the huge gap in the physical target and achievement. The 
Committee strongly view that providing of land is an absolute essential for landless 
beneficiaries under the scheme of PMAY - G as house comes later, first comes the 
land! The Committee is appreciative of the fact that the Ministry of Rural Development is 
pursuing the matter at the level of the Minister but the Committee also urge the Ministry 
to pursue the matter with the State Governments through Chief Ministers and Chief 
Secretaries to provide land to those beneficiaries who do not have land of their own. 
The Committee urge the Ministry to convene meetings with Chief Secretaries and take 
sincere steps in the States where the Government is not providing land. Regular 
monitoring at DISHA Committee meetings with special focus on landless beneficiary is a 
must. Land being a limited and scarce resource, the Committee expect the Ministry to 
take up the concept of building multi - storied houses on the same piece of land where a 
few hous es were to be constructed; the surplus land to be used for constructing 
common utility complexes. The Committee also suggest that the Ministry should evolve 
policies/methodologies to utilize waste or grazing land in a way to supplement the 
shortage of land  for landless beneficiaries. The Committee strongly feel that the 

36 
 
Ministry should take up the matter with the State Government on a regular basis 
so that no homeless is left out on the promise of non - availability of land.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Providing land to the landless PMAY -G beneficiaries for the construction of the houses 
is of utmost importance since they are among the most deserving beneficiaries in the 
Permanent Wait List (PWL) of the scheme. Further for achieving the house construction 
targets under PMAY-G availing land to such beneficiaries is very crucial. 
As reported by the States/ UTs (as on 06.06.2022), out of the total 4,40,931 landless 
beneficiaries identified in the PWL (SECC -2011) of PMAY -G so far 2,45,381 
beneficiaries have been pr ovided land/ financial assistance for land purchase so that 
they can construct houses. 
Further, important recent communications regarding availing land to landless 
beneficiaries are detailed below – 
  
i. The Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development and Pancha yati Raj vide letter D.O.No. J -
11014/01/2016-RH, dated 30.04.2021 to the Chief Minister of the States of 
Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Bihar, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, 
Assam, Odisha and Tamil Nadu requested to constitute task force under  the 
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary to expedite provisioning of land to the landless 
beneficiaries of the States with maximum landless beneficiaries. 
  
ii. The Deputy Director General, Rural Housing vide letter M.12018/2/2016 RH(M&T) -
Part-I (373369) dated 30.01.2022 requested concerned States/ UTS to expedite tagging 
of the landless beneficiaries and related data entry in the AwaasSoft using the module 
for landless beneficiaries. 
  
iii. The Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj vide lett er D.O.No. 
M-12018/2/2016-RH(M&T)-Part(1) dated 16.06.2022 to the Chief Minister of the States 
of Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Assam, Odisha, Bihar, Rajasthan, Kerala, West Bengal, 
Karnataka, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand requested to provide land to t he 
remaining landless beneficiaries in a time bound manner and further sanctioning of 
houses to them at the earliest with an aim that 'Housing for All' can be achieved within 
the stipulated time frame. 
  
Further, the Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development a nd Panchayati Raj, Government of 
India took up the issue of availing land to the landless PMAY -G beneficiaries with the 
Hon’ble Ministers/Lt. Governors/ Administrators in the States/UTs of the States in the 
meetings held on 24th, 27th, & 28th January 2022 to review the progress of PMAY -G. 
The issue is also being regularly taken up with States in different meetings and forums 
like EC meetings for the finalization of the Annual Action Plan, PRC meetings, regional 

37 
 
review meetings, etc. at the highest level of administration by the Secretary (RD), 
Additional Secretary (RD) and Deputy Director General (RD). 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 17) 
Value Addition  
The Committee note that the Ministry has taken up several research studies like those 
of “Evaluation of Governance Parameters of Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana - Gramin" 
conducted by National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP).   The Committee 
opine that the Ministry should imbibe suggestions received from different research 
studies into the operations of the scheme. The Committee would like to urge the 
Ministry to take inputs from elected representatives as they are aware of the ground 
realities of the region which can go a long way in strengthening the achievement of 
construction o f houses under the scheme . The Committee urge the Ministry to 
incorporate district wise dashboard on the portal of PMAY - G so as to equip the 
elected representatives with the information regarding the progress of houses 
being constructed in their area.  
Reply of the Government 
The PMAYG Scheme has end to end transaction based MIS called AwaasSoft besides 
newly developed dashboard.    The PMAYG dashboard provides end -to-end insights to 
cater the analytical and strategic business intelligence needs to cater the physical and 
financial progress of PMAY -G Scheme at a glance. The dashboard is able to provide 
the actionable insights that include the single screen visualization of entire physical and 
financial progress and state level reports drillable to blo ck level, analyzing the 
gap/delays in release of instalments, speed of house construction, age -wise, category-
wise data analysis in order to find out anomalies, outliers. Also, dashboard is able to 
illustrate the trend analysis for sanction and completion progress using dynamic and 
customizable data visualization in close coordination with stakeholders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
CHAPTER III 
 Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 18) 
 
Impact of COVID – 19 
The year 2020 witnessed outbreak of world pandemic COVID - 19 leading to nation -
wide lo ckdown, marring the working of several sectors; one essentially being the 
slowing down the pace of house construction under PMAY -G Scheme. The Committee 
were informed that the per day rate of house completion came down drastically. 
The Committee appreciate  the approach of the Ministry which took cognizance of the 
ground situation and issued letters and advisories to the States / UTs to take up PMAY -
G works with strict adherences to social distancing and wearing of protective gears so 
that construction can go in full swing. The Ministry issued guidelines to sanitize the field 
authorities to look into resuming work on houses left midway and even issued sanctions 
to beneficiaries against the 2020 -21 targets, The Ministry further informed that the 
lockdown perio d had been utilized to upload a campaign mode details of physically 
complete houses on Awaas -Soft . The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry 
and opine that backlog in construction for the year 2020 -21 should be completed 
without any delay, The Rural Mason Training (RMT) which had very humble start since 
Inception was heavily hit during COVID - 19 due to labourers returning home. The 
Committee, therefore, are of the strong view that Ministry should encourage more 
to join in RMT so that both the q uality of construction and number of houses to 
be constructed sees an upward incline in the times of new normal. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) implements Rural Mason Training (RMT) 
program under Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G) to address the issue 
of less availability of skilled masons in the rural areas so as to ensure quality house 
construction under PMAY -G. As on 21/06/2022, under RMT, 2,47,112 candidates have 
enrolled out of which 1,96,716 candidates have  been assessed and 1,65,241have been 
passed and certified.  
  
The workers who have required experience in construction sector are trained in 
Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) mode under the RMT program of the PMAY -G, to 
facilitate them for formal career progression. 
  

39 
 
Considering the need for the lower level QPs enabling training to the maximum number 
of the candidates with lower competencies, apart from the Rural Mason- (QP Code: 
CON/Q3603) additional two QPs listed below were developed – 
i. Rural Mason- Helper at NSQF level -2 (QP Code: CON/Q3604). 
ii. Rural Mason- Assistant at NSQF level -3 (QP Code: CON/Q3605). 
  
The same have been circulated with the States/ UTs. 
  
To promote the use of alternative/ green construction technologies, National 
Occupational Standards (NOS) on the bamboo structures as an elective and optional 
NOS on Compresses Stabilized Earth Block (CSEB) have been incorporated in the 
revised QP for Rural Mason Job role (QP Code: CON/Q3603). 

40 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 10) 
 
Need for Revision of Financial Assistance 
The Committee note that the targeted period of construction u nder the scheme of 2.95 
crore houses was from the year 2016 -17 to 2021 -22 ; only one year being left for 
construction of the targeted number of houses . The Committee observe that due to 
cost escalation of various construction materials and labour charges,  the beneficiaries 
are finding it difficult to complete construction of houses with the funds at their disposal. 
The Committee observe that seventy thousand rupees, the threshold limit of the loan 
that a homeless can raise, seem very meager In the phase of  rising prices of 
construction material and the Ministry could think of raising it further. The Committee 
are also of the view that owing to steady and continuous rise in the rates of labour, cost 
of building material and increase in the cost of other supp lies , it becomes imperative on 
the part of the Ministry to raise the amount of loan / financial assistance permissible 
under PMAY - G. The Committee strongly hold that the Ministry should revise the 
amount of financial assistance keeping in view the cost of inflation associated 
with the construction costs . The Committee recommend that the Ministry could 
even draw up a proposal to have " indexed cost of construction "as a baseline to 
sanction funds which would in real terms benefit the targeted beneficiaries . 
Reply of the Government 
While seeking approval of Union Cabinet for restructuring erstwhile rural housing 
scheme, it was proposed that the cost of construction would be Rs. 1.50 lakh for a 
Pucca houses with toilet in a 25 Sq.m. area @ Rs. 600 per Sq.ft. The unit assistance 
under PMAY-G (Rs. 1.20 lakhs/ Rs. 1.30 lakhs) alongwith support for unskilled labour 
from MGNREGS (90/95 mandays) and SBM -G (Rs. 12,000 assistance for construction 
of toilet) would be sufficient to construct a house of 25 Sq.m. This would be for a basic 
housing unit which the beneficiary can expand when more resources are available. As 
per Union Cabinet’s approval for implementation of PMAY -G, the Unit assistance under 
PMAY-G is Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakh in difficult areas, IAP districts 
and Himalayan States – Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, North Eastern States, UTs of 
Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. The unit assistance under erstwhile rural housing 
scheme till 31.03.2016 was Rs. 70,000/ 75,000 which was enhanced to Rs.1,20,000/ 

41 
 
Rs. 1,30,000 by th e Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 23 rdMarch, 2016 while 
approving restructuring of erstwhile rural housing scheme to PMAY-G.  
The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 8 thDecember, 2021 has approved the 
continuation of PMAY -G beyond March, 2021 till March, 2024 as per the existing 
norms of PMAY -G. The unit assistance under the scheme has been retained as 
same and the cost estimation for completion of remaining houses within 
cumulative target of 2.95 crore during FY 2021 -22 to 2023 -24 has been arr ived 
accordingly.   
Under PMAY -G, a total target of 2.70 crore houses had been allocated various 
States/UTs, out of this a total of 2.43 crore houses have been sanctioned to 
beneficiaries and 1 st instalment has already been released to 2.31 crore beneficia ries 
and 1.86 crore houses have been constructed as on 27.6.2022. The Ministry is targeting 
completion of 2.02 crore houses by 15 thAugust, 2022 and complete 2.95 crore houses 
by 31stMarch, 2022. 
Considering the above, at present, there is no proposal under  consideration in the 
Ministry for revision of the unit assistance provided under PMAY-G. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 11 of Chapter I ) 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 13) 
 
Quality of Construction 
During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee were informed that 
officers at the Block level and District level are to inspect only 10 % and 2 % of the 
houses respectively at each stage of construction. The Committee sought to know how 
the quality supervision of the other houses would be ensured and how the Ministry 
ensured that construction was in conformity to the House Design Typologies developed 
for the scheme. Replying to these the Ministry inter - alia stated that with the help of NIC 
they had developed a " House Quality Review Application " in Awaas Soft to review 
quality of the houses using captured geo - tagged photographs at the completed stage . 
The quality construction of the houses under PMAY - G is also being reviewed through 
field visits by the Common Review Mission team, officials from the Department of Rural 
Development and so on. Dwelling on the issue further, the Ministry Informed the 
Committee that since the beneficiaries were involved in construction of the houses, they 
ensured that the quality was good. Thus the Ministry categorically stated that there was 
no need for any change with respect to implementation and design in the programme. 
Drawing parallel with Indira Awaas Yojana, it was stated that owing to involvement of  

42 
 
contractors in Indira Awaas Yojana the quality of construction of houses were not good 
vis - à - vis the present condition of houses where beneficiaries were involved.  
Further, the Committee observe that the scheme for ' Housing for All does not 
provide for monitoring the quality of houses at different stages of construction. 
The Committee opine that the provision of PMAY - G scheme should have been 
parallel to that of Pradhan Mantri Gram SadakYojna(PMGSY) where the stages of 
construction are monitored . The Committee strongly hold that as houses 
constructed under PMAY - G are going to last and used for longer times , the 
quality of houses at different stages of construction should be evaluated . The 
Committee urge the Ministry to devise a mechanism in consultation with the State 
Governments through a joint meeting or so and appoint a nodal officer in every 
district who would inspect houses at different stages of construction ; thereby 
enriching both the monitoring aspect of the scheme as well as ensure the  quality 
of houses constructed thereof . The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Rural Development emphasizes on regular monitoring and evaluation of  
theprogrammes being implement ed in rural areas under its ambit. In order to enhance 
the  efficiency and efficacy of its programs, the Ministry has evolved a comprehensive 
system of   monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of its programmes. The 
purpose of National Level Monito rs (NLMs) system is to strengthen all the rural 
development programmes and ensure effectiveness, transparency and accountability in 
the implementation of the programmes. The findings are reviewed and shared with the 
States to discuss and suggest improvemen ts in the implementation processes at the 
grass roots levels. 
NLM undertake periodic visits to the States/UTs for review in respect of all schemes/ 
programmes of DoRD including PMAY -G. In addition, Central Teams are also deputed 
for undertaking review of houses constructed under the scheme.  
The time-tagged and geo -tagged photographs of the houses under PMAY -G are being 
captured at the different levels of the house construction using Awaas App and are 
being uploaded in the AwaasSoft MIS. To review the quali ty of the houses to some 
extent using the uploaded Geo -tagged photographs of the PMAY -G houses the MoRD 
has developed a 'House Quality Review Application'. Accordingly, the house quality 
review module is made live and State/UTs vide this Ministry letter da ted 5 thJanuary, 
2022 issued necessary directions along with the designed SOP to use the House quality 
review module for better monitoring of PMAYG houses at different levels of 
construction.  

43 
 
Further, the Hon’ble Union Minister of Rural Development, Govern ment of India has 
launched the Area Officer Monitoring Visit App on 21 st May 2021. The purpose of the 
App is to make real time inspection &evidence-based reporting of all the schemes of the 
Ministry of Rural Development including PMAY-G. This App facilitates the officials of the 
States/ UTs to record their field visit findings electronically/ online. The app also allows 
the officials to record time stamped and geo -tagged photograph of the houses. The 
Administrative Secretary dealing with implementation of P MAY-G have been asked to 
conduct at least 10 visits to ongoing PMAY-G houses per month and officers at the level 
of Additional Secretary/ Joint Secretary / Director/ State Nodal Officers or equivalent 
have been asked to conduct at least 15 visits to the on going PMAY -G houses per 
month. The findings of the field visits should be recorded on the Officers Monitoring Visit 
App.  
The MoRD is further in process of developing a module to assess the construction 
quality of the houses using the geotagged photographs  of the houses through AI based 
image analytics. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 17 of Chapter I ) 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER V 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 9) 
 
BANK LOAN FACILITY TO BENEFICIARIES 
Under PMAY - G, financial assistance is provided directly to the beneficiaries for the 
construction of the house. On the issue of the provisions for Bank loan facilities to the 
beneficiaries of rural areas for construction of house above the prescribed amount of 
1,20,000/- under the Scheme , the Committee were informed that there is a provision of 
availing a loan of 70000 in this scheme . In some States where the follow up is goo d the 
beneficiaries have availed the loan, but in some states it has not been implemented 
formally at Bank level. As a result, the beneficiaries had to go for informal loan which is 
costlier than the formal loan. The Ministry has taken up the matter of dev eloping small 
housing loan in consultation with Indian Bank Association and Department of Financial 
Services because rural housing is also a priority sector lending. If the Ministry can have 
this programmes the subsequent generations of beneficiaries, when  they grow up and 
get separated, can go for bank loan for further expansion of the house rather than for a 
total subsidy scheme from the Government. In response to one of the queries of the 
Committee, Ministry vide its written reply (of 19h July, 2021 ) ha s informed that the 
Sample loan product ( under PMAY - G ) has not been finalized till date. The Ministry 
had further informed that the Secretary (Rural Development) vide a DO letter dated 
23rdJune , 2021 had requested Secretary, Department of Financial Services (DFS) for 
expediting the development of loan product by convening the meeting by DFS 
immediately . Even after completion of four years of this scheme of PMAY - G and 
taking cognizance of  the fact that rural housing is also a priority sector lending, the 
Committee are pained to note that the Ministry has been inactive in modeling a 
mechanism of financial assistance to the beneficiaries. Therefore, the Committee would 
urge the Ministry to t ake effective steps so as to make financial assistance available to 
all the needy beneficiaries in time so that the scheme does not build houses merely on 
paper but in reality too. The Committee are apprehensive if the Ministry would write off 
the loan so sanctioned under PMAY - G and therefore , would like to be apprised of the 
mechanism through which formal institutional loan is made available to the beneficiaries 
and the way through which the Bank would recover the loan sanctioned under PMAY - 
G . The Committee are of the strong view that the Ministry should not push the " 
financial assistance " aspect to a further date rather complement the " sample 
loan plan " with " category wise " loan to the beneficiaries of SC , ST , minorities 
and other backward ca tegories . The Committee would like to be apprised If the 

45 
 
Ministry is finalizing an interest scheme coherent with the several categories of 
eligible beneficiaries under the scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
 Provision of institutional loan i.e. facilitating the beneficiary to avail loan upto Rs.70,000 
from Financial Institutions is one of the salient features of PMAY-G. 
It was decided for development of loan product in lines with the para 2.2 (i) of the 
Chapter 2 of the Framework For Implementation (FFI) of Pradhan Mantri Awaas 
Yojana- Gramin (PMAY-G)- 'If the beneficiary so chooses, he/she will be facilitated to 
avail loan of up to Rs.70,000/- from Financial Institutions'. 
The proposed draft loan product has been approved by the MRD and is under 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance through Integrated Finance Division of the 
Ministry. As per the approved loan product, the financial requirement would be Rs.60 cr 
for seeking the loan Rs.1400 cr to proposed 2.0 lakh beneficiaries @ 0.70 lakh over a 
period of two years i.e 2022-23 and 2023-24.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 8 of Chapter I ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
2 February, 2023              
Magha 13, 1944 (Saka) 
GIRISH  BHALCHANDRA  BAPAT 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
MINUTES OF THE F OURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES (2022-23) 
The Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee was held on Thursday, 02 February, 2023 at 
1500 hrs. in Room No.52B, Parliament House, New Delhi-110001 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan – Convener 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri P.P. Choudhary 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
8. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
9. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
10. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
11. Dr. K.C. Patel 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14. Shri Saikia Dilip 
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 

47 
 
16. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
17. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
18. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
      1.      Smt. Anita.B.Panda -   Additional Secretary 
2.      Shri Muraleedharan.P -   Director 
3.      Shri R.C.Sharma - Additional Director 
 
2.  XXX  XXX 
3.  XXX XXX 
4.   Two Reports, namely XXX and Action Taken Report on the Committee’s Original 
report on “Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojna” were adopted after due deliberations. 
The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification received from th e concerned Ministry and present the same 
to Lok Sabha. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 11th Report of the Committee on Estimates 
 (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 18 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. NO. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,11,12,14,15,16,17) 
14 
 Percentage of total recommendations 77.77% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(SI. No. 18) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
01 
 
 
5.55% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(SI. NO. 10,13) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
02 
 
 
11.11% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
(SI. No. 9) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
01 
 
 
5.55% 
 
 
 