24 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
Review of Progress of all AIIMS 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the 12 th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
Review of Progress of all AIIMS 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the 12th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 March, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2023 / Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
  

   CONTENTS                 Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2022-23)      (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iv) 
           
CHAPTER-I  Report          1 
 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted     22 
 by the Government         
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not   40 
 desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply  
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which    41 
 Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee   
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies   46 
 of Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the 16th Sitting of the Committee on estimates  
held on 16.03.2023 
 
53 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 12th Report of 
the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
55 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
 Shri Girish Bhalchandra  Bapat – Chairperson 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
6. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
13. Shri jual Oram 
14. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
15. Shri Saikia Dilip 
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
17. Dr. K.C. Patel 
18. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
19. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
20. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
21. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
22. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
23. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
24. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
25. Shri Prathap Simha 
26. Shri Pinaki Misra 
27. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
28. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
29. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
30. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
(ii) 

 
 
Secretariat                            
  
Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda Additional Secretary 
Shri  Muraleedharan. P Director 
Shri  Balram Sahu Deputy Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2022 -23) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Twenty-Fourth Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 12th Report of the Committee  (2021-2022) on the subject ‘ Review of 
Progress of all AIIMS' pertaining to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  
2.  The 12th Report of the Committee on Estimates  (2021-2022) was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 21 December, 2021 . The Government furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in the 12 th Report on 4th August, 2022. 
The draft Report was considered and approved on 16 March, 2023, by the Committee.  
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Go vernment on the recommendations 
contained in the 12th Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                 GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT 
16 March, 2023          CHAIRPERSON 
25 Phalguna, 1944 (Saka)                    COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This R eport deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twelfth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Review of Progress of all AIIMS”  pertaining to 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
2. The Twelfth Report  was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 December, 2021. It 
contained 18 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect to all the Observations/Recomme ndations have been received 
from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation. Para No.  1,4,5,6,7,9,13,14,16,17,18 
 Total -11 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation. Para No. 10 
Total -1 
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation. Para No. 2,3 
Total -2 
(Chapter-IV) 
(vi) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation. Para No. 8,11,12,15 
Total -4 
(Chapter-V) 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final Action Taken Reply in 
respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter –V, for which interim replies have 
been given by the Government, may be furnished to them within six months of the 
presentation of this Report to the House. 
5. The Committee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 2) 
6. In their recommendation contained in the original 12th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
Need for bringing parity in the status of all new AIIMS 
“On the issue of differences between the status of   AIIMS, New Delhi and other six new 
AIIMS, the Committee are informed that for years of their operation, these AIIMS 
remained outside the ambit of AIIMS Act and were governed by a Central Apex Society, 
therefore, some of the features of these AIIMS are different from AIIMS, New Delhi. For 
example, in AIIMS, New Delhi, some departments have been delegated greater 
financial and administrative powers in different centers and have their own 
administrative and pr ocurement officers like Rajendra Prasad Centre for 
Ophthalmology, Cardio & Neuro Centre and  National Cancer Institute. This is not the 
case with other AIIMS. In AIIMS, New Delhi there is a Director and Medical 
Superintendent, and a centralized structure is  there while in other AIIMS there are 
Executive Director and Head of Departments. In AIIMS, New Delhi, over the years, 
there are now 31 Specialties and 20 Super Specialties. Here teaching, learning of MD, 
MS, DM, MCH and patient care services  are done. How ever, in the new  upcoming 
AIIMS, there are 17 Super Specialties and 18 Specialties. AIIMS, New Delhi conducts 
Bachelors Programme (UG course) for five Para Medical Sciences and nine M.Sc. 
courses which is not the case with most other AIIMS. AIIMS, New Delh i also runs 33 
one-year Fellowship Courses in various Specialities which is not the case with other 
AIIMS.  AIIMS, New Delhi usually follows a time period of a month for applications to be 
received in respect of advertisements for vacant faculty positions whereas in other 
AIIMS, there is a system of rolling or running advertisements with one -year validity.The 
Committee strongly feel that when all the new AIIMS are being governed by the AIIMS 
Act 1956 as amended in the year 2012, there should not be any differences in terms of  

3 
 
delegated financial and administrative powers for procurement of equipment and in 
terms of having specialties and super specialties teaching in AIIMS, New Delhi and 
other AIIMS. If the differences will be continuing, people will contin ue to rush to AIIMS 
New Delhi instead of going to other AIIMS. As a result, the objective of PMSSY Scheme 
for correcting regional imbalances in the availability of affordable/reliable territory 
healthcare services will remain a distant dream.   Therefore, t he Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should take necessary 
measures to treat all the AIIMS at par with AIIMS, New Delhi.” 
 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under: 
“Financial and Administrative powers of different functionaries are defined in the AIIMS, 
Regulations, 2019, which are uniformly applicable to all the AIIMS. Financial powers of 
Directors of AIIMS have been delegated with the approval of Governing Body / Institute 
Body of respective AIIMS. Keeping in view a much bigger scale of operations of AIIMS, 
New Delhi as  compared to new AIIMS under PMSSY, the delegated financial power of 
Director, AIIMS, New Delhi is higher. As regards new AIIMS having lesser number of 
Specialty and Super -specialty Departments than AIIMS, New Delhi, it is stated that 
AIIMS at New Delhi ha s been functioning for more than six decades and has 
established itself as a premier Institute in the country and internationally. The number of 
super-specialty and super -specialty Departments in the Institute has grown over the 
years with advancements in medical sciences, availability of super -specialists and with 
the approval of the competent bodies of the Institute. As fa r as new AIIMS are 
concerned, there is provision for 18 specialty and 17 super -specialty Departments as 
part of setting up of the Insti tute. However, as the Institutes grow and depending upon 
the availability of super -specialists, these I nstitutes can also set up more Departments 
with the approval of their competent bodies.” 
8. The Committee in their original report, had recommended that there should 
not be differences between AIIMS, New Delhi and other AIIMS in terms of 
delegated financial and administrative powers for procurement of equipment and 
in terms of having Specialties and Super Specialties teaching. The Ministry has 
informed in their reply now that AIIMS, New Delhi has so grown because it has 
been functioning for more than six decades and established itself as a premier 
Institute in the country and internationally. It has been fur ther stated that as the 
other AIIMS grow, those can also set up more departments.  The Committee are 
of the view that when all AIIMS are governed through the same enactment  namely 

4 
 
amended AIIMS Act, there should be similarity in terms of delegated financial and 
administrative powers for procurement of equipment and in terms of having 
Specialties and Super Specialties in all AIIMS so that new AIIMS could also bring 
themselves at par with AIIMS, New Delhi .  Since 6 AIIMS are now nearly 11 years 
old, the Committee desire to be apprised of the Specialties added later for each of 
those, so as to know their actual growth in terms of patient services, as well as in 
the financial powers of their heads, if any. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 3) 
Need for parity in the post of Director across all AIIMS 
9. In their recommendation contained in the original 12 thReport, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“The Committee are surprised to note that except for AIIMS, New Delhi which is headed 
by Director (with the age limit of 65) while other new 16 AIIMS are being headed by 
Executive Director (with the age limit of 70) who is in -charge of the institution as a 
whole. The Committee are informed by the representatives of the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare during oral deposition as well as in their written replies that   Pradhan 
Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY), was announced on 15th August, 2003 to 
establish six new hospitals wi th modern facilities like those available at AIIMS, New 
Delhi. In pursuance of this announcement,  a proposal was taken to the Expenditure 
Finance Committee(EFC) in November 2004. The EFC approved the  setting up of six 
AIIMS-like apex healthcare institutes in the States of Bihar at Patna, Chhattisgarh at 
Raipur, Madhya Pradesh at Bhopal, Odisha at Bhubaneswar, Rajasthan at Jodhpur, 
and Uttarakhand at Rishikesh. The EFC also approved formation of a Central Apex 
Society under societies Registration Act, with t he responsibility for establishing and 
running these six AIIMS -like institutions. After obtaining the approval of the EFC, a 
proposal was taken to the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in March 2006 and 
CCEA approved six AIIMS -like institutions as well  as formation of a Central Apex 
Society, for establishing and running these institutions. While approving the Revised 
Cost Estimates(RCE),  because of cost escalation, a proposal was taken again to the 
Cabinet in February 2010. While approving the RCE, the Cabinet also underline the role 
of the Central Apex Society in establishing and running these six AIIMS -like institutions. 
Therefore, from 2006 to September 2012, these AIIMS -like institutions were not part of 
the AIIMS Act and existed outside it, governed by a Central Apex Society. In September 
2012, there was an amendment in the AIIMS Act, which was notified. This amendment 
incorporated these new AIIMS-like institutions in Section 27 (a) of the Act and provided  

5 
 
that all provisions of the Act shall apply to these institutions also. Once a decision was 
taken in September 2012 to make these six AIIMS as part of the amended AIIMS Act, 
the Central Apex Society ceased to exist. The Committee note that Article 11 of AIIMS 
Act provides that there shall be a Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Institute who 
shall be designated as the Director of the Institute.   Section 31 of AIIMS Regulations, 
2019 further provides in this regard that the Director shall have a term of five yea rs from 
the date of assumption of charge of the post or till he attains the age of sixty five years, 
whichever is earlier. 
In the meanwhile, with the aim of expeditious operationalization and to attract reputed 
faculty from AIIMS, New Delhi and other Insti tutes of National Importance (INIs), as well 
as other premier Institutions, to head new and upcoming AIIMS, it was a policy decision, 
decided in November 2018 with the approval of Department of Expenditure and Hon’ble 
Minister for Health & Family Welfare t o have a post of Executive Director (ED) to 
operate on either / or basis with the post of Director, who will act as CEO of the 
Institute.  CIB [Central Institute Body (Empowered Committee) of the new AIIMS] had 
approved two designations for new AIIMS.   One is Director where the provision of 65 
years remains as stipulated in the Act and the other nomenclature is ‘Executive Director’ 
with the provision of 70 years. 
 
On being asked to clarify whether there is an enabling provision in the Act to empower 
the Government to take such decision, the Committee are informed that  Section 11(4) 
of the Act says, “Subject to such rules as may be made by Central Government in this 
behalf, the Institute may appoint such number of other officers and employees as may 
be necess ary for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions and may 
determine the designation and grades of such officers and employees.”The Committee 
strongly feel that other officers and employees cannot be above the Director. The 
Secretary Ministry of Health in his candid submission before the Committee has stated 
that the Act does not make a reference to Executive Director. 
  
The Committee  note that the Act does not make a reference to Executive Director and 
the decision has been taken after taki ng the consent of CIB as well as the consent of 
Hon’ble Minister for Health & Family Welfare and the Ministry of Finance and 
Department of Expenditure with the aim of expeditious operationalization of the new 
AIIMS and to attract reputed faculty from AIIMS , New Delhi and other Institutes of 
National Importance (INIs),as well as other premier Institutions, to head new and 
upcoming AIIMS. The Committee acknowledge the urgency of the decision taken at the 
highest level at the time of setting up of new AIIMS bu t at the same time wish to 
emphasize that since 17 years has been completed after the approval of EFC for setting 

6 
 
up of new AIIMS and the Ministry have enough experience, now they must strictly follow 
the provision of the Act for appointment of Director in  each new AIIMS instead of 
appointment of Executive Director to head the new AIIMS. Further, when in any Institute 
of national importance in India including AIIMS Delhi, there is no provision of appointing 
any person for heading administrative posts above 65 years of age, the Committee wish 
to reemphasize that the provision of the Act of parliament should be maintained across 
all AIIMS and there should not be any scope of difference among them.  The Committee 
would like to see AIIMS as an epitome of medical excellence which shall only be 
possible with experienced talents coupled with physical viability; which does not seem 
viable with an age limit of 70 years.  
The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry should not overloo k the fresh talent and 
the care er o pportunities of the existing professors for the appointment to the post of 
Director in new AIIMS. Henceforth, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry 
of Health and Family welfare to take all measures not to make any compromises in the 
qualities of new AIIMS and to ensure the objective of the PMSSY i.e to augment quality 
medical education in the country and strictly adhered to the provision of the AIIMS Act.” 
  
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under: 
“Presently, AIIMS at Jodhpur, Raipur, Nagpur and Mangalagiri are headed by Directors 
as the Chief Executive Officers (CEO) . As has been infor med to the Committee earlier, 
with a view to attract reputed faculty from AIIMS, New Delhi and other Institutes of 
National Importance (INIs), as well as other premier Institutions, to head new and 
upcoming AIIMS, it was decided with the approval of Department of Expenditure and 
Hon’ble Minister for Health & Family Welfare to have a post of Executive Director (ED) 
to operate on either / or basis with the post of Director, who will act as CEO of the 
Institute.  In the case of ED, the appointment can be upto maximum age of 70 years, 
with the upper age limit for eligibility for consideration being 67 years.   The manner of 
selection of ED however would be the same as stipulated for the post of Director.   Also, 
the eligibility criteria in respect of qualification and experience for considerat ion for 
appointment as ED will be the same as the post of Director. 
  
Recommendation of the Committee has however been noted. Further, as stated above, 
post of Director / Executive Director is to operate on either / or basis, giving the Ministry 
to flexibility to appoint a Director as Chief Executive Officer of the Institute.” 
 

7 
 
11. While holding the view that the Ministry should not overloo k fresh talent 
and the career opportunities of the existing Professors for the appointment to the 
post of Director in the new AIIMS as well as physical viability of candidates of a 
comparatively younger age, t he Committee had noted that except for AIIMS, New 
Delhi, which is headed by  a Director (with an age limit of 65 years), the other 16 
new  AIIMS are being headed by an Executive Director (with  an age limit of 70 
years) as in -charge of the institution .  T he Action Taken reply of the Ministry 
stated that they have already informed the Committee regarding a policy decision 
taken with the approval of the Department of Expe nditure and the Hon’ble 
Minister for Health & Family Welfare regarding the  post of Executive Director.   
The Ministry have also justified it by stating that it is meant to attract reputed 
faculty from other premium institutions .  As many AIIMS have become f unctional 
over the time, the Committee desire to be apprised of faculty/EDs, AIIMS -wise, 
above the age of 60 years with their respective fields of expertise alongwith 
experience and decorations, if any, who have joined those AIIMS, as a result to 
the reported policy decision about CEOs/Directors/EDs of these institutions. 
  
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 5) 
12.         Proposal to set up more AIIMS-like institutions in the country 
“The Committee observe that the Ministry has plans to set up AIIMS in each State in a 
phased manner. The Ministry has received requests from Karnataka, Kerala, Goa, 
Tripura, Sikkim, Mizoram and Manipur for setting up AIIMS -like institutes in their States. 
During the course of e xamination, the Committee are informed that keeping in view the 
cost benefit analysis, presently, apart from AIIMS Guwahati, the Ministry is not actively 
considering any other AIIMS in the North East. The Committee note that the State 
Government of Kerala has identified four places viz. Thiruvananthapuram,   
Nettukaltheri, which is very near to the airport; the land in industrial estate in Calicut, the 
northern part of Kerala; Kottayam near Medical College; and HMT land, Kalamassery, 
but the request for sett ing up of AIIMS is still pending. During cross examination, the 
Ministry informed the Committee that it has requested the Ministry of Finance to convey 
'in-principle' approval for setting up of AIIMS in Kerala.  The Committee hope that the 
Ministry of Healt h and Family Welfare and Ministry of Finance, Department of 
expenditure will take proactive steps for setting up of AIIMS like institution in each State 
in the next phase of PMSSY and include it in the 15 th Finance Commission Report. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to reconsider the requests from other States and take 
necessary steps to set up an AIIMS like institute in each State in a time bound manner.” 
   

8 
 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under: 
“Recommendation of the Committee has been noted and matter will be pursued with 
the Ministry of Finance.” 
 
14. The Committee had observed that the Ministry has plans to set up AIIMS in 
each State in a phased manner  and that they have received request s from 
Karnataka, Kerala, Goa, Tripura, Sikkim, Mizoram and Manipur. In the case of the 
North Eastern region, the Ministry is statedly not actively considering any other 
AIIMS apart from Gu wahati keeping in view of the cost -benefit analysis.   The 
Committee would desire to know whether the Ministry has plans to upgrade RIMS 
or any other medical institutions in the NE region in view of the fact that only one 
AIIMS in Guwahati cannot be accessible/sufficient to all NE States’ residents for 
Specialty/ Super Spec ialty treatments.  In the case of Kerala, the Committee are 
happy that the Ministry has requested the Ministry of Finance to convey ‘in -
principle’ approval for setting up  AIIMS and have also stated that the matter will 
be pursued with the Ministry of Financ e. As the matter is still pending, t he 
Committee further reiterate that an AIIMS in Kerala needs to be set up early since 
State Government has already offered land near airport for the same.  AIIMS in 
other States should also be considered on priority basis and the details of steps 
taken by the Ministry in setting up of AIIMS like institutes or upgradation of 
existing institutes in States, whose applications are pending, should be furnished 
to the Committee within six months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 6) 
Need for fixing up of timelines for each step in the guidelines for setting up of 
new AIIMS 
  
15. In their recommendation contained in the original 12 th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“The process  of setting up of a new AIIMS at any place in India initiates with its 
announcement by the Finance Minister followed by offer of land site by the concerned 
State Government where the AIIMS is proposed to set.  
The Committee note  that initially the Ministry had not formulated any guideline for the 
implementation of the PMSSY and was guided by instructions issued from time to time 
and decisions taken by the Central Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) on case to  

9 
 
case basis.   This re sulted in various ad -hoc decisions taken with respect to fund 
management, selection of consultants, assignments of project task, award of 
management of contracts.  In the year 2018, a two -member Committee was constituted 
to draw up scheme guidelines for PM SSY with the experience and learning from prior 
cases.  
The Committee are informed that the Ministry had circulated the draft “Guidelines for 
implementation of PMSSY” to all stake holders i.e. State Governments for their input on 
the same. Report from some  of the States has been received. Reminder has been 
issued to all the State Governments by the Secretary, MoHFW to expedite comments in 
this regard.   However, based on the learning from implementation of the Scheme, the 
process of conceptualisation, execut ing and functionalization of project have been 
streamlined. 
The Committee note that now there is a well -defined check list/standard documentation 
for process of streamlining on setting up of AIIMS. However,  the Committee are pained 
to note that even after 18 years of announcement of PMSSY, the inputs from some of 
the State Governments on the draft guidelines for implementation of PMSSY are still 
awaited and no time line has been fixed for each step mentioned in the check list for 
establishment of new AIIMS as detailed in Chapter III. The Committee strongly feel that 
without prescribing the time lines in each action point in the guidelines, the Ministry 
would not be in a position to monitor the progress effectively.  Therefore, they desire the 
Ministry to fix prescribed timelines for each action plan and take concerted steps to 
adhere the prescribed timelines. They may be apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard.” 
  
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under:  
 
“Draft Guidelines for Implementation of Pradhan Mantri  Swasthya Suraksha Yojana 
(PMSSY) seeking comments/inputs of all Stakeholders were circulated vide  letter dated 
17th January, 2020 requesting to provide their valuable comments/feedback on the 
proposed Guidelines.  The comments from four states namely Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha and Sikkim have been received.   However, the comments from majority of the 
stakeholders have not been received so far. 
  
Though it was followed up with reminders, the respon ses have been received from very 
few States. One possible reason for this could be the COVID Pandemic, management 
of which has been the main focus of Health Departments at the Union as well as State 
levels. Meanwhile, a reminder dated 6th April,2022 has been issued to the all the States 

10 
 
/Union Territories (except Bihar, Odisha, M.P. and Sikkim as their comments received) 
and new AIIMS to send their comments by 30th April,2022 so that the Ministry could 
finalize the Guidelines for PMSSY. 
  
It is, however, worth mentioning that broad contours of the projects undertaken under 
PMSSY are well defined, which are as under: - 
 
 Setting up of new AIIMS inter alia involves: 
 
1. 750 or 960 bedded hospital 
2. 18/1-7 Specialty/Super-Specialty departments 
3. 100 MBBS/ 60 Nursing seats 
4. Focus on PG Education 
         Upgradation of GMCs involves: 
1. Creation of Super-specialty departments - ranging from 8 to 10 
2. Additional 150-200 beds 
3. Around 15 new PG seats 
4. Average cost: Rs. 200 crore - shared 60:40 between Centre and States 
5. HR and running cost to be provided by the State Govt.  
 
 
In the MoHFW the following indicative timelines for various stages for setting up 
of a new AIIMS have been envisaged, subject to project specific variations: 
  
S.No. Action Indicative Timeline 
1 Announcement of new AIIMS for a particular State D 
2 Letter sent from MoHFW 
to concerned State Government for offering three or four 
alternate sites with encumbrance free land measuring about 
 200 acres. While offering sites, the State Government to furnish 
commitment for four lane connectivity, water and electricity 
connection to cater for the requirement of proposed establishment 
,water drainage system etc. 
D+1 Week 
3 Details of site and commitment of State Govt. received E 
4 Evaluation of site as per Challenge Method after receiving details 
of site from State Government (including site inspection, 
constitution of Committees as per Challenge Method) and 
submission of report to Hon’ble HFM 
E+ 5 Weeks 

11 
 
5 Approval of site for esta blishment of AIIMS by Hon’ble 
HFM 
F 
6 Appointment of Agency for Pre-Investment Work F+ 1 week 
7 Preparation of Project Report by Agency, preparation of EFC Note 
in the Ministry, Submission of Note to Ministry of Finance for its 
concurrence 
F + 4 Weeks 
8 Concurrence of EFC G 
9 Preparation of Cabinet Note in the Ministry and circulation to all 
stakeholders 
G+1 week 
10 Approval of the Cabinet H 
11 Selection of Executing Agency to carry out the main work H+8 Weeks 
12 Award of work to EPC Contractor by Executing Agency 
[Issuance of RFP for appointment of Architectural Consultant for 
preparation of Master Plan & Concept Design for proposed AIIMS 
Selection and award of consultancy assignment to Architectural 
Consultant, Master Plan and Layout finalization,  Detailed drawing, 
technical sanction and floating of tenders for construction, Award 
of work] 
H+40 Weeks 
13 Construction Activities H+150 Weeks 
 
17. In their original report, t he Committee had noticed that no timelines had 
been fixed for each step mentioned on the check -list for establishment of new 
AIIMS. The y had, therefore,  recommended prescribing timelines for each action 
plan in the guidelines to monitor the progress effectively. In their reply, the 
Ministry ha ve informed that the projects unde rtaken under PMSSY are w ell-
defined and ind icative timelines are mentioned subject to project -specific 
variations, which are furnished with their reply.  From it, the Committee observe 
that approximately 4 year  time, excluding time involved in the other 
administrative processes, has been indicated for setting up of a new AIIMS.  The 
Committee, however, see that some of the new 16 AIIMS established between 
2015-2022, are yet to be fully functional.  Hence, they expect that timelines fixed 
would be adhered to and further steps be taken to reduce delays with regular real 
time monitoring and on-time approvals.  The Committee also expect all efforts to 
be made to finalize the “Guidelines for implementation of PMSSY”. 
 

12 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 7) 
18. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
 
“The Committee note that SARAL, a module based online platform, has been developed 
by AllMS, New Delhi which allows faculty to upload educational content related to their 
lectures for students to access. But  the Committee is astonished to note that SARAL is 
just specific to AIIMS, New Delhi. No other AIIMS have got any well defined module (as 
SARAL) of their own to impart medical education. The other AIIMS conduct training 
programme for its own staff including nurses and faculty as well as participants from 
other medical colleges for up gradation of their skills. The Ministry admitted that the 
suggestion of the Committee for the extensive use of e -learning has been noted for its 
implementation.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that the issue of medical 
education has to be given a thorough thought well before hand and recommend 
extensive use of e -learning as the need of the hour and also for the future. The 
Committee would like to urge the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to issue 
instructions/guidelines to all AIIMS to draft and put in place a comprehensive module for 
online medical education for benefitting all categories of staff. The Committee are of the 
view that AIIMS, New Delhi should take a lead and help other AIIMS to develop a 
module of their own with the inbuilt feature of integration with different modules of other 
AIIMS as well.” 
 
 
19. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under:  
 
“Steps have been taken by other AIIMS also in the direction of online medical 
education.  AIIMS, Raipur is adopting the SARAL, the module based online platform, 
developed by AIIMS , New Delhi.  AIIMS, Bhubaneswar is in the process of developing 
online learning modules for practical and clinical classes   for UG students naming the 
project as “Medsim 2”.   This project is in collaboration with C -DAC, Trivandrum and 
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham. AIIMS, Jodhpur is also using LMS (Learning 
Management System) for Executive program in Public Health Policy, Leadership and 
Management by School of Public Health both for UG and PG Courses.   AIIMS, 
Rishikesh has been usi ng Microsoft Teams application for online medical education, 
and the educational content related to lectures/classes are being shared through the 
Institute website. AIIMS, Patna is also planning to start SARAL module for faculty 
Members, teaching staffs an d Students. Learning Management System is in the 
process of being implemented in AIIMS at Bathinda and Raebareli on pilot basis.” 

13 
 
 
20. The Committee had noted that SARAL, a module based online platform , is 
being used for medical education at AIIMS, New Del hi. The  new AIIMS conduct 
training programmes for  their staff/faculty at other medica l colleges for 
upgradation of their skills. Hence, the Committee had urged the Ministry to issue 
instructions/guidelines to all AIIMS to draft and put in place a comprehensive 
module for online medical education for the benefit of all categories of staff and 
suggested that AIIMS, New Delhi should take a lea d in developing modules in 
collaboration with other AIIMS. Accepting the recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry, in their reply, have informed that AIIMS, Raipur is adopting SARAL 
and similar other modules are being adopted by other AIIMS at Bhubane swar, 
Rishikesh and Patna. The Committee are glad to note that AIIMS, Raipur has 
adopted the SARAL developed by AIIMS, New Delhi. The Committee strongly feel 
that all AIIMS should be encouraged to adopt the SARAL to maximize the usage 
of educational conten t provided by AIIMS, New Delhi. The Committee hope that 
the module developed by an AIIMS (other than New Delhi) has an inbuilt feature of 
integration with the modules being adopted by any other AIIMS. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 8) 
Need for handing over encumbrance free land for new AIIMS 
21. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
 
“The Committee observe that the land for setting up of AIIMS is required to be provided 
by the concerned State Government.   Requirement of land for setting up of new AIIMS 
is about 200 acres. The Committee are informed that the site offered by the State 
Government for AIIMS at Darbhanga is low lying and the site already has some 
construction like water ta nk, power station, post office, BSNL yard & office and Police 
Stations. Further, the site of AIIMS, Darbhanga was finalized subject to certain 
conditions to be fulfilled by the State Government.  The Committee are informed that the 
setting up of AIIMS in Manethi, Haryana was approved by Union Cabinet on 28.02.2019 
at a cost of Rs 1299 Crore. However, forest clearance for construction of AIIMS at the 
identified site could not be o btained by the State Govt. In the matter of AIIMS, Manethi, 
the Committee observe that an alternate land parcel measuring approx 175.85 acre in a 
village adjoining Manethi has been identified and the process for consent purchase of 
this land has b een initi ated. On the issue of  monitoring the clearance of land for 
construction of AIIMS, the Committee are informed that there are two mechanisms for 
monitoring. One is at the level of the Ministry which is headed by the Additional 
Secretary and Financial Advisor  in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and it has 

14 
 
the Joint Secretary of the concerned State Government as well as the executing agency 
to whom the work has been awarded.   The other mechanism is at the level of the Prime 
Minister’s Office. These mechanisms review the position of not only the transfer of land 
but also the progress of construction. After such regular monitoring there has been 
progress in some cases.   Keeping in view the delay in completion of new AIIMS which 
ranges from 2 to 12 years, the Committee wish that the existing two mechanisms to 
review the progress of new AIIMS will function in a pro -active manner in expediting the 
handover of encumbrance free land to the Ministry.   The Committee desire that in case 
of any further delay in get ting the clearance of land or any other issue, the Ministry 
should bring it to the notice of concerned Member of Parliament for taking up of the 
matter with their respective State Government. The Committee should be apprised of 
the progress made in this re gard.As pointed out at Manethi, the problem of 
environmental clearance should be taken up with Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change on urgent basis so that the revised deadline for completion of setting 
up of AIIMS is achieved in time.” 
  
22. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under:    
“On the matter of handing over of encumbrance free land for establishment of new 
AIIMS, it is stated that this Ministry is regularly taking up the matter with the concerned 
State Governments, i.e. Govt. of Bihar and Govt. of Haryana. Hon'ble M.P., Darbhanga  
is actively engaged in pursuing pending matters with the State Govt., i ncluding early 
handing over of encumbrance free land. I n respect of AIIMS in Haryana,  State 
Government has informed that the land purchase process has been finalized for land 
measuring 210 acres 3 Kanal 5 marla at Village MajraMustilBhalki in District Rewari. 
The matter has again been taken up at the level of Hon’ble Minister for Health & Family 
Welfare with the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Haryana vide letter dated 28.07.2022 for 
expediting acquisition of the identified land and its handing over to MoHFW.”  
23. The Committee had observed that encumbrance-free land for setting up  
AIIMS in Bihar and Haryana is required to be provided by the concerned State 
Governments.  However, considering the delay in handing over of encumbrance 
free land for setting up of new AIIMS, the Committee had urged the Ministry to 
regularly monitor and coordinate with other Central Ministries and State 
Governments and report the progress made in this regard.  The Committee are 
now happy to note from the Ministry’s reply that the y are regularly taking up the 
matter with the concerned State Governments  i.e. Govt. of Bihar and Govt. of 
Haryana. Availability of an alternate land in Rewari  in Haryana is also noted.  The  
Ministry has not yet reported the final outcome of various steps, therefore, t he 

15 
 
Committee desire to be furnished with the progress achieved in  the case of not 
only the two States, but also each of such newly sanctioned AI IMS, which are 
lagging behind  due to non-availability  of encumbrance free land. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No.11) 
Physical progress of All AIIMS 
24. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee note  that AIIMS in Raibareli was initially approved by Cabinet on 
05.02.2009.  And the revised cost of expenditure was approved by EFC on 22.06.2017.   
The Cabinet approved date of completion was April, 2020.    The revised date for 
completion has been shifted t o November, 2021.   Therefore, there is a delay of 1 year 
and 7 months.  In this AIIMS OPD Block, hospital and academic campus and residential 
complex have been completed.   MBBS classes and OPD facilities have been started.   
AIIMS Mangalgiri in Andhra Prade sh was approved on 07.10.2015.    The Cabinet 
approved date of completion was October, 2020 and the expected date for completion 
is December 2021.   Therefore, there is a delay of 1 year.   In phase I OPD block and 
residential complex have been substantially completed.  In phase II, 84% of hospital 
and academic campus have been completed; MBBS classes and OPD facilities have 
been started.   IPD for COVID 19 treatment with COVID lab facilities has been made 
functional.  The date of Cabinet approval for    AIIMS K alyani in West Bengal was 
07.10.2015.  The Cabinet approved date of completion was October, 2020 and the 
expected date for completion is November 2021.   Therefore, there is a delay of 1 year.   
In this AIIMS, OPD block and residential complex have been subs tantially completed in 
phase I.  In phase II, hospital and academic campus have been substantially completed. 
MBBS classes and OPD facilities have been started.   The Committee during their study 
visit to this AIIMS in the month of September 2021 had observ ed that syllabus for the 
MBBS classes were yet to be approved by the academic committee and there was no 
lab facilities for the MBBS students. AIIMS Gorakhpur in Uttar Pradesh was approved 
by the Cabinet on 20.07.2016.   The Cabinet approved date of complet ion was April 
2020 and the expected date for completion is November 2021.   There is 88.50% 
progress in construction in EPC mode.   MBBS classes and OPD facilities have been 
started.  AIIMS Bhatinda in Punjab was approved by the Cabinet on 27.07.2016.   The 
Cabinet approved date of completion was June 2020 and the expected date for 
completion is November 2021.   There is 88.70% progress in the construction in EPC 
mode.  MBBS classes and OPD facilities have been started.   AIIMS Guwahati in Assam 
was approved by the Cabinet on 24.05.2017.    The Cabinet approved date of 
completion was April 2021 and the expected date for completion is September 2022.   

16 
 
There is 57.50% progress in the construction in EPC mode.   Only MBBS classes have 
been started in this AIIMS.    AIIMS Bilaspur in Himachal Pradesh was approved by the 
Cabinet on 03.01.2018.   The cabinet approved date of completion is  December 2021 
and the expected date for completion is June 2022.   There is 72% progress in the 
construction through EPC mode.  Only MBBS classes have been started in this AIIMS.   
OPD facility is likely to start from December 2021.   AIIMS Madurai in Tamil Nadu was 
approved by the Cabinet on 17.12.2018.   The Cabinet approved date of completion is 
September 2022 and now this has been extended to October 2026.   The extended 
period is almost four years.   For this AIIMS site has been finalised, pre -investment work 
is in progress, preparatory survey by JICA Mission commenced in February 2020 and 
appointment of Project Management Consultant is in pr ogress.  Consultation with State 
Government and AIIMS Madurai is in progress to start MBBS classes from the current 
academic session from the temporary campus. AIIMS Dharbanga in Bihar was 
approved by the Cabinet on 15.09.2020.   The Cabinet approved date o f completion is 
September 2024 and it is expected to complete by this due date.   However, the 
Committee note that till date site at Dharbhanga has been finalised but the State 
Government is yet to handover the encumbrance free land.   AIIMS Samba in Jammu 
was approved by the Cabinet on 10.01.2019.   The Cabinet approved date of completion 
is January 2023 and it is expected to complete by this due date.   However, the 
Committee note that there is only 32% progress in the construction through EPC mode.   
AIIMS Avantipura in Kashmir was approved by the Cabinet on 10.01.2019.  The Cabinet 
approved date of completion is January 2025 and it is expected to complete by this due 
date. However, the Committee are concerned to note that there is only 6% progress in 
the cons truction through EPC mode.   AIIMS Deoghar in Jharkhand was approved by 
the Cabinet on 16.05.2018.  The Cabinet approved date of completion is February 2022 
and the expected date for completion is June 2022.   The Committee note that there is 
58% progress in  construction through EPC mode.   MBBS classes and OPD facilities 
have been started. AIIMS Rajkot in Gujarat was approved by the Cabinet on 
10.01.2019.  The Cabinet approved date of completion is October 2022 and it is 
expected to complete by this due date.   However, the Committee note that there is only 
12% progress in the construction through EPC mode.   Only MBBS classes have been 
started in this AIIMS.   AIIMS Bibi Nagar in Telangana was approved by the Cabinet on 
17.12.2018.  The Cabinet approved date of completion is September 2022 and now it is 
expected to complete by November 2023.   MBBS classes and OPD facilities have been 
started in this AIIMS.   AIIMS Manethi in Haryana was approved by the Cabinet on 
28.02.2019.  The Cabinet approved date of completio n is February 2023.  However, the 
Committee note that till date the encumbrance free land is yet to be handed over by the 
State Government.  

17 
 
From the above mentioned facts the Committee observe  that out of 16 AIIMS MBBS 
classes and OPD facilities have been started in 08 AIIMS.   Only MBBS classes have 
been started in 04 AIIMS.  The Committee further observe that all the 18 specialities are 
functional in all 06 AIIMS, namely, Bhopal, Bhub aneswar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and 
Rishikesh.  Out of 17 super speciality, the functionality statu s in Bhopal, Jodhpur and 
Patna is 14 respectively and in Bhubneshwar and Rishikesh it is 17 respectively.   The 
dedicated COVID facilities have been operational in all AIIMS.  
The Committee are aghast to note that in the six new AIIMS, viz Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, 
Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and Rishikesh, many super specialty wards are still non -
functional.  This pinpoint at a greater laxity towards improper achievement of the targets 
set over time.   Regarding the way forward to ensure completion of construction of all 
AIIMS in time and to make them fully functional the Committee are informed that regular 
review meetings of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are being held wi th executive 
agencies and State Governments.   The progress is also being monitored at the level of 
Prime Minister’s Office.   
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should constitute a Project Review Panel 
for each AIIMS which would evaluate both physic al targets of construction of buildings 
as well as medical facilities every quarter and report laxities, if any to the Ministry which 
can look into the difficulties and solve them in time.   The Committee are happy to note 
that the “use of drone” in evaluat ing the progress is one of the agenda of the Ministry.   
The Committee would urge the Ministry to initiate such review at the earliest in order to 
ensure timely completion of all AIIMS without further extension of time and make them 
fully functional at the earliest under intimation to them.”  
25. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under: 
“This Ministry has already Constituted a Project Review Committee (in accordance with 
Rule 141 of GFR, 2017) to review the n ew AIIMS projects. A web -enabled dashboard 
has also been deployed to facilitate project management and monitoring. At State Level 
also, there is provision for Review Committees to monitor  progress of new AIIMS 
projects in the concerned States. 
In respect of new AIIMS, it is to inform that construction work of AIIMS Raebareli, 
Nagpur, Kalyani and Bathinda has been completed. Further, construction work of AIIMS 
Mangalagiri, Gorakhpur and Bilaspur is in final stages of completion. This Ministry is 
making all efforts to complete other remaining AIIMS projects in a time bound manner.” 

18 
 
26. The Committee had observed that the physical progress of most of the new 
AIIMS far exceeded their completion dates as stipulated and Specialties/Super 
Specialties remained non -functional. The physical progress , at the time of 
examination of the subject, was as low as 6% of construction at AIIMS , 
Avantipura in Kashmir with a similar status to  AIIMS, Rajkot, AIIMS , Samba in 
Jammu, and AIIMS, Guwahati. AIIMS, Madurai was expected to be constructed in 
September 2022 but was extended by 4 years. In the case of AIIMS , Manethi, 
Haryana, and AIIMS, Darbhanga, Bihar, the encumbrance-free land is still pending 
pending to be handed over for construction.  The Ministry in their Act ion Taken 
Reply has stated that there is a Project Review Committee to review the progress 
of new AIIMS projects and also a web -enabled dashboard to facilitate project 
management and monitoring. The Committee strongly feel that the periodicity of 
meetings of Project Review Committee in the case of each AIIMS needs to be 
increased and the physical  progress achieved  thereof should be furnished to the 
Committee within six months of presentation  of this Report. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No.12) 
Dedicated Research Activities 
27. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The field of medicine is predominantly dependent on continuous research for its 
efficacy and development. Research and Development is an inherent feature of medical 
field. On being asked whether in all AIIMS, lab facilities are functional with respect to 
both research and for patients, the Committee are informed that Lab facilities are in 
place in all the six functional AIIMS which are used for both patie nt services and 
research activities.  Depending up on the functionalities of speciality and super specialty 
departments and availability of faculty, Institutes under take both extra mural and intra 
mural research.  There is however, no separate allocation by the Ministry for research. 
The Committee are of the strong view that the Ministry of Health and Family welfare 
should take up this matter with the Ministry of Finance, Department of expenditure to 
have a separate allocation for research activities and f ill up the required post of 
specialties and super specialties as it is linked with availability of lab facilities. 
The Committee note that the extramural research funding by Department of Science 
and Technology, D/o of Bio Technology, Indian Council of Med ical Research etc. have 
been taken up at AIIMS, New Delhi. However, the Committee are pained to note that 
institutions like AIIMS, New Delhi which is considered to be the epitome of health 
services does not fully spend funds under its research head.   The Committee observe 
that for the years 2018 -19, 2019 -20 & 2020 -21, the institution’s total receipts (for 

19 
 
research) were Rs. 1,162,738,574.28 lakh, Rs. 1647870753.89 lakh &Rs. 1643432507 
lakh respectively. The total expenditure (on research) during the year 20 18-19  isRs. 
1107715966 lakh, during the year 2019 -20 is   Rs. 1448611449 lakh and   during the 
year 2020-21 is Rs. 1218124390 lakh.   The Committee would like the Ministry to urge 
all the AIIMS to concentrate on research activities in full spirit, only then the full fledged 
development in the arena of medicine would be possible.   The Committee are of the 
firm view that in a country like India where affordable medical aid is one of the essential 
need for majority of the population, well founded research has to  be given full focus by 
pioneering medical institutions like AIIMS. 
On being asked whether research team from AIIMS has conducted any studies on 
chemical contaminated water canals of Punjab and Haryana which is the major cause of 
cancer in those  areas, the  Committee are informed that “no such study has been 
conducted”. Keeping in view the gravity of the situation the Committee desire the 
Ministry to undertake proper research on this aspect and suggest remedial measures 
for the same.” 
  
28. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under:  
“In all the AIIMS lab facilities are being used for both patient care and research. 
Regarding the unspent funds, this is related to extramural funds, which the Institute 
receives for research projects sponsored by other agencies. Institutes will be advised to 
improve utilisation of their research funds. Recommendation of the Committee for 
research on impact of chemical contaminated water canals of Punjab and Haryana on 
cancer cases in those areas will be pursued.” 
 
29. The Committee in their original report had noted that substantial amount of 
funds have  remained unutilised for extramural research by AIIMS, New Delhi  for 
the years 2018 -19, 2019 -20 & 2020 -21. The Committee had also raised the vital 
issue of chemical contamination in the water canals of Punjab and Haryana , 
which is the major cause of cancer in those areas. The Ministry  in their reply  has 
apprised the Committee  that the institute would be advised to improve utilisation 
of extramural funds and the recommendation of the Committee for research on 
the chemical contamination of water canals of Punjab and Haryana causing 
cancer would be pursued. The growing air pollution in Delhi -NCR as well other 
such cities  and respiratory/heart/liver/kidney diseases resulting from it, the 
overuse of antibiotics leading to their inefficacy in treatments etc. are other grave 
health challenges.  The Committee feel that it is high time that the medical 
fraternity engages in research to find out possible solutions for these challenges.  

20 
 
In view of this, the Committee would desire to be apprised of the action taken for 
full utilization of funds earmarked for medical research and also the result of the 
research/study on contamination of water canals of Punjab and Haryana causing 
cancer, as well as further active proposals on research by all AIIMS.  
 
 Observations/Recommendations (Para No.15) 
Authorized and existing specialist and super specialist in AIIMS, New Delhi 
 
30. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
  
“The Committee observe that the total sanctioned strength of faculty in AIIMS, New 
Delhi is 1115.  Against this the total in -position faculty is 746 in Regular posts  and 55 in 
Contractual.  The total vacancy is 314.   Out of total vacancy position of 314; 157 
vacancies are in upcoming Centres / Block / Facilities.The Committee are informed that 
efforts are being made to fill the vacancies. These vacancies would have bee n 
advertised in 2020 on regular basis with existing Reservation Roster, but were withheld 
due to Government instruction received from the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
vide letter dated 23.02.202 1 to re -draw the Reservation Rosters for recruitment of  
faculty in AllMS. The lnstitute is in the process of re -drawing the Reservation Roster as 
per Reservation in Teachers Cadre Act, 2019. A Committee has been constituted for 
the purpose and the Reservation Roster is being finalized and onwards vacant post w ill 
be advertised soon.The Committee hope that the Ministry would take appropriate action 
for filling up of the vacant posts without further loss of time and apprise them about the 
final action taken in this regard.” 
 
31. In their Action Taken Reply, the M inistry of Health and Family Welfare 
submitted as under: 
  
“Implementation of Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Teachers’ Cadre) 
Act, 2029 required redrawing of reservation rosters and necessary instruction in this 
regard was issued by MoHFW.  Accordingly, Reservation Roster of Assistant Professor 
has been finalized. Reservation Rosters for Faculty of Nursing, Medical Superintendent 
and Professors have been approved by Roster Committee and approval of Competent 
Authority is being obtained and  these rosters are being finalized. Further, 252 posts of 
Assistant Professor were advertised in November, 2021 for filling of the vacant posts 
except for 46 posts for which Recruitment Rules / Nomenclature was under revision. 
Recruitment process for these  posts will be finalized after finalization of Recruitment 
Rule /Nomenclature. 03 Vacant post of Associate Professor of College of Nursing and 

21 
 
01 vacant post of Medical Superintendent are going to be advertised soon. 96 
vacancies of Professor under Direct Recruitment for which selection process is not 
being held due to administrative reason.” 
 
32. The Committee had observed that 314 faculty positions were vacant out of 
total sanctioned strength of 1115 in AIIMS, New Delhi. The Ministry in its reply has 
informed that 252 posts  of Assistant Professors were advertised in November  
2021 and 46 posts are vacant due to non -finalization of Recruitment Rules/ 
Nomenclature. The Ministry has also stated that for 96 vacancies of Professors 
which are under Direct Recruitment, selection process is not being held  due to 
administrative reasons. The Committee hope that the senior faculty positions and 
other posts would be fulfilled.  The Committee further note that any delay in  
finalization of Recruitment Rules/Nomenclature causes delay in filling up 
vacancies. Hence, they feel that the Ministry should resolve the bottlenecks and 
report the progress made in filling up all vacant posts.  
  

22 
 
CHAPTER - II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 1) 
Introductory to the Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in the 
Report. 
Being introductory part, no action is required. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 4) 
Need for ensuring adequate Beds. 
The Committee note that at each six new functional AIIMS viz.  Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, 
Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and Rishikesh, the envisaged bed capacity was 960 beds 
respectively. The total sanctioned bed strength of functional AIIMS comes to 5760. 
Against this till date only 5602 beds were found to be operational in all AIIMS. The 
remaining158 beds will be available after the availability of Specialist and Super 
Specialists. Further,  the Committee observe that AIIMS Bhubaneswar had sent three 
proposals to open one Cardio Centre, Neuro Centre and Cancer Centre.   At present 
there are only 20 beds in this Centre.   The minimum requirements for each centre 100 
to 150 beds.  At present there is no action on these proposals.  As people in the eastern 
part of  India chew betel leaves, the cases oral cancer/dental patients are rising.   
Therefore, there is an urgent need to open a dental centre in AIIMS Bhubaneswar.   The 
Committee observe that from the year 2018 -19 to 2020 -21 there is less expenditure 
against the effective release by the   Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.   During the 
year 2018-19 against the release of Rs. 300.98 crore the expenditure was Rs. 288.29 
crore.  During the year 2019 -20 the expenditure was Rs. 401.84 crore against the 
release of Rs . 416.69 crore.   During the year 2020 -21 the expenditure was Rs. 450.88 
crore against the release of Rs. 477.85 crore.   During the year 2021-22 the expenditure 
is Rs. 75.57 crore against the release of Rs. 181.98 crore. The Committee deplore the 
underutilization of scarce budgetary resources, slow progress of opening up of many 
centres in AIIMS Bhubaneswar, availability of required beds and required specialists 
and super specialists.   The Committee strongly desire that the Ministry should make 
concerted eff orts to achieve the physical as well as financial targets and ensure the 
availability of sanctioned bed, specialties and super specialties.   The Committee further 
desire that the Ministry should apprise the Committee about the progress made in this 
regard. 

23 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The total beds capacity of 6 AIIMS is at present 5748 as against sanctioned bed 
capacity of 5760.   As per inputs available in this Ministry, Super -speciality departments 
in Cardiology, Neurology and Medical Oncology  are functional in AIIMS, Bhubaneswar. 
 As regards opening a Dental Centre in AIIMS Bhubaneswar, it is submitted that Dental 
Department in AIIMS, Bhubaneswar is functional.    
Indicative budgetary a llocations under three Grants -in-Aid Heads of the Institute are 
discussed and decided in the meetings of Standing Finance Committees (SFC)   of 
various Institutes. Actual release and utilisation of of Grants -in-Aid is also monitored by 
the SFC in order to e nsure effective utilisation of funds released. In order to have a 
more regular monitoring of utilisation of Grants -in-Aid and discuss other matters having 
financial implications, the Institutes have been advised to hold more regular meetings of 
SFS, i.e. 3 to 4 times in a year. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 5) 
Proposal to set up more AIIMS-like institutions in the country 
The Committee observe that the Ministry has plans to set up AIIMS in each State in a 
phased manner. The Ministry has received re quests from Karnataka, Kerala, Goa, 
Tripura, Sikkim, Mizoram and Manipur for setting up AIIMS -like institutes in their States. 
During the course of examination, the Committee are informed that keeping in view the 
cost benefit analysis, presently, apart fro m AIIMS Guwahati, the Ministry is not actively 
considering any other AIIMS in the North East. The Committee note that the State 
Government of Kerala has identified four places viz. Thiruvananthapuram,   
Nettukaltheri, which is very near to the airport; the land in industrial estate in Calicut, the 
northern part of Kerala; Kottayam near Medical College; and HMT land, Kalamassery, 
but the request for setting up of AIIMS is still pending. During cross examination, the 
Ministry informed the Committee that it has  requested the Ministry of Finance to convey 
'in-principle' approval for setting up of AIIMS in Kerala.  The Committee hope that the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Finance, Department of 
expenditure will take proactive steps for setti ng up of AIIMS like institution in each State 
in the next phase of PMSSY and include it in the 15 th Finance Commission Report. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to reconsider the requests from other States and take 
necessary steps to set up an AIIMS like institute in each State in a time bound manner. 
   
 

24 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted and matter will be pursued with the 
Ministry of Finance. 
  
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 6) 
Need for fixing up of timelines for each step in the guidelines for setting up of 
new AIIMS 
  
The process of setting up of a new AIIMS at any place in India initiates with its 
announcement by the Finance Minister followed by offer of land site by the concerned 
State Government where the AIIMS is proposed to set up.  
The Committee note that initially the Ministry had not formulated any guideline for the 
implementation of the PMSSY and was guided by instructions issued from time to time 
and decisions taken by the Central Project M onitoring Committee (PMC) on case to 
case basis.   This resulted in various ad -hoc decisions taken with respect to fund 
management, selection of consultants, assignments of project task, award of 
management of contracts.  In the year 2018, a two -member Committee was constituted 
to draw up scheme guidelines for PMSSY with the experience and learning from prior 
cases.  
The Committee are informed that the Ministry had circulated the draft “Guidelines for 
implementation of PMSSY” to all stake holders i.e. State Governments for their input on 
the same. Report from some of the States has been received. Reminder has been 
issued to all the State Governments by the Secretary, MoHFW to expedite comments in 
this regard.   However, based on the learning from implementatio n of the Scheme, the 
process of conceptualisation, executing and functionalization of project have been 
streamlined. 
The Committee note that now there is a well -defined check list/standard documentation 
for process of streamlining on setting up of AIIMS. H owever, the Committee are pained 
to note that even after 18 years of announcement of PMSSY, the inputs from some of 
the State Governments on the draft guidelines for implementation of PMSSY are still 
awaited and no time line has been fixed for each step me ntioned in the check list for 
establishment of new AIIMS as detailed in Chapter III. The Committee strongly feel that 

25 
 
without prescribing the time lines in each action point in the guidelines, the Ministry 
would not be in a position to monitor the progress  effectively. Therefore, they desire the 
Ministry to fix prescribed timelines for each action plan and take concerted steps to 
adhere the prescribed timelines. They may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Draft Guidelines for Implementation of Pradhan MantriSwasthya Suraksha Yojana 
(PMSSY) seeking comments/inputs of all Stakeholders were circulated vide  letter dated 
17th January, 2020 requesting to provide their valuable comments/feedback on the 
proposed Guidelines.  The comments from four states namely Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha and Sikkim have been received.   However, the comments from majority of the 
stakeholders have not been received so far. 
  
Though it was followed up with reminders, the responses h ave been received from very 
few States. One possible reason for this could be the COVID Pandemic, management 
of which has been the main focus of Health Departments at the Union as well as State 
levels. Meanwhile, a reminder dated 6th April,2022 has been issued to the all the States 
/Union Territories (except Bihar, Odisha, M.P. and Sikkim as their comments received) 
and new AIIMS to send their comments by 30th April,2022 so that the Ministry could 
finalize the Guidelines for PMSSY. 
  
It is, however, worth m entioning that broad contours of the projects undertaken under 
PMSSY are well defined, which are as under: - 
  
Setting up of new AIIMS inter alia involves: 
5. 750 or 960 bedded hospital 
6. 18/1-7 Specialty/Super-Specialty departments 
7. 100 MBBS/ 60 Nursing seats 
8. Focus on PG Education 
         Upgradation of GMCs involves: 
6. Creation of Super-specialty departments - ranging from 8 to 10 
7. Additional 150-200 beds 
8. Around 15 new PG seats 
9. Average cost: Rs. 200 crore - shared 60:40 between Centre and States 
10.HR and running cost to be provided by the State Govt.  

26 
 
In the MoHFW the following indicative timelines for various stages for setting up of a 
new AIIMS have been envisaged, subject to project specific variations: 
 
 S.No. Action Indicative Timeline 
1 Announcement of new AIIMS for a particular State D 
2 Letter sent from MoHFW 
to concerned State Government for offering three or four 
alternate sites with encumbrance free land measuring about 
 200 acres. While offering sites, the State Government to furnish 
commitment for four lane connectivity, water and electricity 
connection to cater for the requirement of proposed establishment 
,water drainage system etc. 
D+1 Week 
3 Details of site and commitment of State Govt. received E 
4 Evaluation of site as per Challenge Method after receiving details 
of site from State Government (including site inspection, 
constitution of Committees as per Challenge Method) and 
submission of report to Hon’ble HFM 
E+ 5 Weeks 
5 Approval of site for esta blishment of AIIMS by Hon’ble 
HFM 
F 
6 Appointment of Agency for Pre-Investment Work F+ 1 week 
7 Preparation of Project Report by Agency, preparation of EFC Note 
in the Ministry, Submission of Note to Ministry of Finance for its 
concurrence 
F + 4 Weeks 
8 Concurrence of EFC G 
9 Preparation of Cabinet Note in the Ministry and circulation to all 
stakeholders 
G+1 week 
10 Approval of the Cabinet H 
11 Selection of Executing Agency to carry out the main work H+8 Weeks 
12 Award of work to EPC Contractor by Executing Agency 
[Issuance of RFP for appointment of Architectural Consultant for 
preparation of Master Plan & Concept Design for proposed AIIMS 
Selection and award of consultancy assignment to Architectural 
Consultant, Master Plan and Layout finalization,  Detailed drawing, 
technical sanction and floating of tenders for construction, Award 
of work] 
H+40 Weeks 
13 Construction Activities H+150 Weeks 

27 
 
  
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 7) 
Need for robust online Medical Education 
  
The Committee note that SARAL, a module based online platform, has been developed 
by AllMS, New Delhi which allows faculty to upload educational content related to their 
lectures for students to access. But  the Committee is astonished to note that SARAL is  
just specific to AIIMS, New Delhi. No other AIIMS have got any well defined module (as 
SARAL) of their own to impart medical education. The other AIIMS conduct training 
programme for its own staff including nurses and faculty as well as participants from 
other medical colleges for up gradation of their skills. The Ministry admitted that the 
suggestion of the Committee for the extensive use of e -learning has been noted for its 
implementation.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that the issue of medical 
education has to be given a thorough thought well before hand and recommend 
extensive use of e -learning as the need of the hour and also for the future. The 
Committee would like to urge the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to issue 
instructions/guidelines to all AIIMS to draft and put in place a comprehensive module for 
online medical education for benefitting all categories of staff. The Committee are of the 
view that AIIMS, New Delhi should take a lead and help other AIIMS to develop a 
module of their own with the inbuilt feature of integration with different modules of other 
AIIMS as well. 
Reply of the Government 
Steps have been taken by other AIIMS also in the direction of online medical education.  
AIIMS, Raipur is adopting the SARAL, the module based online platform, developed by 
AIIMS New Delhi.  AIIMS, Bhubaneswar  is in the process of developing online learni ng 
modules for practical and clinical classes   for UG students naming the project as 
“Medsim 2”.  This project is in collaboration with C -DAC Trivandrum and Amrita Vishwa 
Vidyapeetham. AIIMS, Jodhpur is also using LMS (Learning Management System) for 
Executive program in Public Health Policy, Leadership and Management by School of 
Public Health both for UG and PG Courses.  AIIMS, Rishikesh has been using Microsoft 
Teams application for online medical education, and the educational content related to 
lectures/classes are being shared through the Institute website. AIIMS, Patna is also 
planning to start SARAL module for faculty Members, teaching staffs and Students. 
Learning Management System is in the process of being implemented in AIIMS at 
Bathinda and Raebareli on pilot basis. 
 

28 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 9)  
Need for well structured Recruitment Process 
The vision of balanced medical services across the geographical boundaries of the 
country has been one of the guiding forces for setting up of ne w AIIMS. But mere 
infrastructure would fail to serve the objective in the absence of well trained and 
qualified human resources. The requirement of posts for the New AIIMS has been 
worked out as per norms of Academic Council of AllMS, New Delhi. Based on t he 
recommendations on the expert committee various posts were finalized as required for 
each of the new AllMS.   A total of 4089 posts consisting of 8 project Cell posts, 305 
Faculty posts and 3776 Non Faculty posts have been sanctioned for each of the six 
functional AIIMS viz. Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and Rishikesh. The 
Committee note that at many AIIMS, there exist huge gaps between posts sanctioned 
and post filled up thereon, thereby affecting the strength of teaching faculty at differe nt 
AIIMS.  The Committee also note that various posts of specialists and super specialists 
remain vacant owing to lack of availability of requisite candidates.   The Committee note 
that at none of the six new AIIMS viz. Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur 
and Rishikesh, 305 number of faculty posts created has been filled up.   Against the 305 
number of posts, the posts filled up in each AIIMS is only 209, 189, 219, 134, 160 & 225 
faculty respectively.   This is indicative of the fact that at these AIIM S, only 68.5%, 
62.1%, 71.8%, 43.9%, 57.5% and 73.8% vacancies have been filled up respectively. 
Similarly is the case of non -faculty post at above mentioned six AIIMS. The number of 
non-faculty posts filled up are 1584, 1663, 2106, 1394, 2423 & 2974 respec tively. The 
Committee note that the Ministry should take urgent steps to fill up the vacancies in time 
so that medical education and services do not suffer owing to shortage of faculty posts. 
Even the task of redrafting of reservation roster in light of EWS quota should be sped up 
so that faculty positions (both regular and contractual) are filled up regularly. The 
Committee would also recommend the Ministry to explore the possibility of enlarging the 
ambit of ‘visiting faculty’ at each new AIIMS so as to e nrich the medical education and 
guidance till the time regular posts are filled up. 
  
The Committee note that in all the six AIIMS, the number of filled faculty posts and non -
faculty posts are both regular and contractual. There is no bifurcation in the re gular and 
contractual posts. The recruitment for contractual appointment is made against the 
vacancy of regular sanctioned posts when the process of regular appointment is 
delayed due to various administrative reasons such as non -finalization of Recruitmen t 
Rules. Contractual appointments are resorted against similar other sanctioned posts to 
meet the essential services when these posts are not available under regular 

29 
 
sanctioned posts and to meet urgent requirement of patient care services and other 
essential requirement. As per the information received from AllMS, no contractual 
appointment of faculty and non -faculty has been made as a replacement for the 
contractual manpower. 
The Committee are of the view that the absence of such bifurcation (between the 
regular and contractual appointment) will lead to corruption and malpractice and this 
may lead to compromise in the quality of education and services. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to evolve a policy decision to have clear 
cut bif urcation of appointment in various posts on regular and contractual basis.   The 
Committee wish to urge the Ministry to keep the contractual appointment to bare 
minimum so that the quality manpower is available for the Medical Education Service. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
In AIIMS, recruitment to various positions is done on need basis keeping in view the 
range of additional services and facilities added. The status of vacant posts at various 
AIIMS is monitored at various levels by the Government and vacancie s are advertised 
based on requirement. However, as high standards have to be maintained in selection, 
keeping in view the stature of these Institutes of National Importance, all the advertised 
positions could not be filled up. 
As informed to the Committee earlier, several facilitating provisions have been made to 
improve faculty strength in new AIIMS, which as enumerate as under :  
  
i. Constitution of Standing Selection Committee (SSC) in each new AIIMS to 
facilitate expeditious filling up of vacancies. 
  
ii. The upper age limit for direct recruitment against the posts of Professor and 
Additional Professor has been raised from 50 years to 58 years. 
  
iii. Filling up of vacant faculty posts in the new AIIMS by taking serving faculty 
from Government Medical C olleges/Institutes on deputation basis has been 
allowed. 
  
iv. Contractual engagement of retired faculty of Government Medical 
Colleges/Institutes up to 70 years of age has also been allowed. Walk -in-

30 
 
interview for engagement of faculty on contract basis ha s also been allowed as a 
stop gap arrangement. 
  
v. Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) card holders have been allowed to be 
appointed on faculty positions. 
  
vi. Visiting faculty scheme in new AIIMS has been formulated to allow national 
and international facu lty to work in new AIIMS for teaching and academic 
purposes 
  
vii. Down -grading of the posts of Additional/Associate Professor to the level of 
Assistant Professor has been allowed for a fixed period by the AIIMS with the 
approval of their respective Institute Body. 
  
viii. Temporary diversion has been allowed on loan basis for faculty from one 
Department to another, which may be filled up on contractual appointment. 
  
ix. Relaxation to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates    as per 
Rules/ Guidelines issued by DoP&T. 
  
x. Rolling advertisement with one-year validity have been allowed to expedite the 
recruitment of faculty after which fresh running or normal advertisement can be 
issued again depending upon faculty strength. 
  
xi. Constitution of a s ub-committee of the Governing Body of new AIIMS to 
consider and approve recommendations of the respective Standing Selection 
Committee. 
  
xii. Centralized recruitment for nursing cadres has been introduced. 
  
It is expected that the sanctioned posts of faculty are filled on regular basis. Contractual 
employment is only a short term measure to meet the urgent requirements of the 
Institute.  Therefore it may not be desirable to prescribe any formal bifurcation between 
regular and contractual appointment. A s recommended by the Committee, the Ministry 
regularly advises all the AIIMS to fill up sanctioned posts on regular basis.   
 
 
 

31 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 13) 
Need for separate budget allocation for each AIIMS 
The Committee note that Section 15 of the AIIMS ACT 1956 as amended in the year 
2012 has stated that : 
  
"The Central Government may, under appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, pay to 1[every Institute] in each financial year such sums o f 
money and in such manner as may be considered necessary by that 
Government for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions 
under this Act." 
  
The Committee are informed by the Ministry that the allocation is made for all the 
projects under PMSSY Division which include setting up of All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences (AIIMS) as well as up gradation of Government Medical Sciences (GMCs).  
 
This allocation is a combined allocation and not institute -wise. Allocation under the 
Capital Head i s used for Major Works and procurement of equipment form part of 
setting up of the project, whereas allocation under Revenue Head is provided to 
institutes, which are functional / partially functional to meet their requirements on salary 
and other administrative expenditure, including maintenance or purchase / replacement 
of medical equipment. 
  
The Committee are dismayed to note that,  when there is a provision in the Act to 
provide allocation to every institute in each financial year, the Government of Ind ia has 
not been making budgetary provision AIIMS wise. The Committee,  during the sitting 
held on 8 April 2021, were informed by  the representatives of the Ministry that there are 
16 AIIMS projects which are going on for which they require fund allocation under 
capital head to complete the civil works as well as procurement of machinery and 
equipment. They will require about Rs.49,800 crore in the next five years, whereas the 
availability of funds that has been indicated to the Ministry for the next five ye ars is 
about Rs. 39,000 crore. 
 
The Committee strongly feel that without earmarking an assured fund to each AIIMS   
the institute cannot plan their future requirements viz construction of building, additional 
machineries as a result that will lead to ad -hoc planning and they can not undertake the 
implementation work as per the plan.  The Committee note that   releases are made on 
the basis of progress of work, requirements projected by Executing Agencies(EAs). This 

32 
 
in a way has a cascading effect on the specif ic AIIMS which are on a slow pace and 
would further get neglected.    Therefore, the Committee wish to strongly recommend 
that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, must take up the matter with the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance to earm ark an assured fund allocation 
to each AIIMS in the Demands for Grants in each Financial year as per the provision of 
the AIIMS Act. 
Reply of the Government 
Other than the 6 AIIMS approved in Phase I of PMSSY, other 16 AIIMS are  at 
various stages of completion. The consolidated allocation under Capital Head of 
PMSSY is released to the Executing Agencies and Procurement Support Agency for 
completion of ongoing projects. Since funds for the services rendered by the EA and 
PSA are released directly by the Ministry to respective agencies on the basis of physical 
progress of individual projects,  AIIMS-wise earmarking of funds is not required.   As 
regards allocation under Revenue Head of PMSSY, out of which Grants -in-Aid is 
released to functional and partially functional AIIMS, it is stated that budget of each 
AIIMS for a financial year is discussed and decided by the Standing Finance Committee 
of respective Institutes. Institutes are therefore aware of their indicative allocation under 
three Heads of Grants -in-Aid, i.e. Salary, General and Creation of Capital Assets.   
However, the recommendation of the Committee to earmark   fund allocation to each 
AIIMS in the Demands for Grants in each financial year is agreed in respect of Revenue 
Head and necessary steps will be taken in this direction in consultation with the Ministry 
of Finance, starting with 6 functional AIIMS of Phase I of PMSSY. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 14) 
Need for adequate budgetary allocation for all AIIMS         
The Committee observe that under PMSSY, since years 2016 -17 to 2021-22, there is a 
gap between projected requirements and allocations at BE stage.   Except the years 
2018-19 and 2019 -20, there is a lesser allocation at RE stage in comparison to 
allocation at BE stage. During the year 2021 -22 against the proposed allocation of Rs. 
8965.14 crore the allocation at BE stage is Rs.7000 crore. The expenditure is 
Rs.3903.41 crore till 22 October 2021.   The Committee also observe that the 
expenditure is les s than the effective release for various AIIMS except few aberration.   
The Committee observe that from the years 2018 -19 to 2021 -22 AIIMS Bhopal could 
incur expenditure of Rs. 980.83 crore against the effective release of Rs. 1357.07 

33 
 
crore.   The percentag e of expenditure is 72.27%.   AIIMS Bhubneshwar could incur 
expenditure of Rs. 1216.58 crore against the effective release of Rs. 1377.50 crore.    
The percentage of expenditure is 88.31%. AIIMS Jodhpur could incur expenditure of Rs. 
1694.11 crore against th e effective release of Rs. 1822.10 crore.    The percentage of 
expenditure is 92.97%.   AIIMS Patna could incur expenditure of Rs. 1020.20 crore 
against the effective release of Rs. 1314.06 crore.    The percentage of expenditure is 
77.63%. AIIMS Mangalgiri c ould incur expenditure of Rs. 117.99 crore against the 
effective release of Rs. 196.87 crore.   The percentage of expenditure is 59.93%. AIIMS 
Kalyani could incur expenditure of Rs. 24.60 crore against the effective release of Rs. 
75.89 crore.    The percen tage of expenditure is 32.41%. AIIMS Guwahati could incur 
expenditure of Rs. 5.53 crore against the effective release of Rs. 19.9 crore.    The 
percentage of expenditure is 27.78%. AIIMS Bibi Nagar could incur expenditure of Rs. 
38.41 crore against the effe ctive release of Rs. 98.22 crore.    The percentage of 
expenditure is 39.10%.     AIIMS Gorakhpur could incur expenditure of Rs. 79.78 crore 
against the effective release of Rs. 122.82 crore.    The percentage of expenditure is 
64.95%. AIIMS Bhatinda could incur expenditure of Rs. 44.26 crore against the effective 
release of Rs. 75.46 crore.    The percentage of expenditure is 58.65%. AIIMS Deoghar 
could incur expenditure of Rs. 14.58 crore against the effective release of Rs. 62.25 
crore.   The percentage of e xpenditure is 23.42%. AIIMS Bilaspur could incur 
expenditure of Rs. 6.96 crore against the effective release of Rs. 17.53 crore.    The 
percentage of expenditure is 39.7%. AIIMS Raipur could incur expenditure of Rs. 
1105.65 crore against the effective relea se of Rs. 1416.58 crore.    The percentage of 
expenditure is 78.05%. AIIMS Rishikesh could incur expenditure of Rs. 1882.34 crore 
against the effective release of Rs. 2274.51 crore.    The percentage of expenditure is 
82.75%. AIIMS Raibareli could incur expenditure of Rs. 49.95 crore against the effective 
release of Rs. 181.15 crore.    The percentage of expenditure is 27.57%. AIIMS Nagpur 
could incur expenditure of Rs. 129.10 crore against the effective release of Rs. 222.54 
crore.   The percentage of expendi ture is 58.01%. AIIMS Vijaypur in Jammu has nil 
expenditure against the effective release of Rs. 1 crore. AIIMS Awantipur in J&K has nil 
expenditure against the effective release of Rs. 1.50 crore.    AIIMS Rajkot could incur 
expenditure of Rs. 9.10 crore a gainst the effective release of Rs. 18.46 crore.    The 
percentage of expenditure is 49.29%.     
The representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family welfare have submitted the fact 
that they need additional allocations for the running expenditure. Right now, they need it 
only for six AIIMS or some more where MBBS and OPD has been started. But once IPD 
start all the AIIMS will require running expenditure for operating expenses,  like 
providing services and salary or any additional capital investment for additional civil 
construction, procurement of additional  machinery or replacement of the existing 

34 
 
machinery.  They will require about Rs. 49,800 crore in the next five years, whereas the 
availability of funds that has been indicated to the Ministry for the  next five years is 
about Rs. 39,000 crore. 
  
Therefore the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to take up the matter with 
the Ministry of Finance at the highest level for providing additional allocations as per the 
requirement of each AIIMS. At the same time the Committee wish to emphasize the 
Ministry to ensure the full utilization of allocation. The Committee may be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard. 
  
The Committee observe that funding through Higher Education Financing Agency 
(HEFA) was  made available as an Extra Budgetary Resource to supplement the 
budgetary support for PMSSY.  HEFA funding was however discontinued vide O.M. No. 
13(04)PFC-II/2016 dated 7 -9-2020.  However no specific reason was assigned for the 
discontinuation.  It was further stated in the above mentioned O.M. that as regards the 
projects already approved under HEFA, further funding will be provided from the 
Budget, as needed.   No further borrowing shall be undertaken by HEFA in respect of 
these projects. 
  
As HEFA has been discontinued, the Committee desire the Ministry to ensure adequate 
budgetary provision for all AIIMS so that no projects of any AIIMS remain fund starved. 
Reply of the Government 
 Adequate budgetary provision is made available for execution of projects  under 
PMSSY. In case of any additional requirement, the same is taken up at RE stage with 
the Ministry of Finance. Progress of ongoing projects is not allowed to suffer for want of 
funds. 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 16) 
Irregularities in AIIMS Patna 
  
The Governing body of Patna AIIMS in its meeting held in the year 2012 had found 
some irregularities in appointment in various faculty  posts. Updating the status of  the 
enquiry and action taken against the appointee, the Committee were informed th at the 
report of the High Level Committee was placed before the lB, GB of AIIMS Patna. The 
GB in its 3'd meeting dated 18.02.2021 vide agenda no. 3/11 decided the following: 
  

35 
 
(a) GB accepted the recommendations of the High Level Committee and the     
recommendations of committee  constituted by the President of the lnstitute. 
(b) After accepting the recommendations of both committees, it was 
transpired that there was no irregularity in appointment of Faculty except for 
three cases viz. Dr.A.K .Saxena, Dr.Sushmita Das and Dr.AlokRanjan. 
(c) GB directed AIIMS Patna to initiate process of termination of services of 
these three Faculty members. 
  
Accordingly, a charge sheet dated 26.05.2021 has been issued to the three faculty 
members whose appointment was found irregular by the Governing Body. Reply from 
them has been received. IO/PO is being appointed for further necessary action. 
  
The Committee are distressed to note that even after lapse of long nine years, the 
position remains the same. The Committee deplore the callous attitude of the Ministry to 
such irregularities. Therefore, the Committee urge the Ministry to   complete the action 
as desired by the Governing body   at the earliest without any further loss of time and 
apprise them about the final action taken in this regard. 
The Committee also observe that for the post of Hostel Warden   some of the AIIMS has 
advertised for the post of Junior Warden and not the Senior Warden. The qualification 
for the post of Junior Warden is 10 th Pass. The Committee are  perturbed to note that   
for the reputed institutions like AIIMS downgrading the qualifications to such low will 
definitely have an adverse impact on the quality of Services. Therefore, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to examine this matter with utmost sin cerity and appo int quality 
persons to various posts with proper qualifications and apprise them the action taken in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The Governing Body of AIIMS, Patna in its meeting held on 18.02.2021 decided to 
initiate disciplinary proceeding under CCS (CCA) Rules 1965 against three Faculty 
Members viz.Dr. A. K. Saxena, Dr.Sushmita Das and Dr.AlokRanjan. Accordingly, 
charge Sheets ha ve been issued to them and   Inquiry Officer and Presenting Officer 
have been appointed. Preliminary Hearing has been conducted for these three cases on 
20th December 2021 at 11:00 Hrs. Next Date of Hearing has been scheduled in    
August, 2022. 
  
As per CIB decisions, AIIMS Patna is following Recruitment Rules of AIIMS Delhi and 
as per Recruitment Rule only post of Junior Warden (House Keeper) could be 
advertised. As per AIIMS Delhi Recruitment Rules, the qualifications for the post of 

36 
 
Junior Warde n (House Keeper), for which Advertisement has been issued is 
‘Matriculation from recognised Board/University, Experience in store keeping /Public 
Relation or Estate Management for not less than 1 Year or A certificate or formal 
training in Store Keeping/ M aterial management/ Public Relations/ Housekeeping’. 
Further, there is no post of Senior Warden at AIIMS Patna. However, the post of 
Warden (Hostel Warden) exists. 
  
At AIIMS Nagpur, the recruitment for Wardens was carried out in the year 2018 -2019 by 
its mentor institute, i.e. AIIMS Raipur. One male warden and one female warden have 
joined the institute and both of them possess minimum qualification of graduation.     
  
At AIIMS BBSR, out of 05 posts of Hostel (wardens), 03 posts have been filled up in 
2017 as per Recruitment Rules. 02 posts remained vacant due to non -availability of 
suitable candidates. Essential qualification as per the Recruitment Rules is graduation. 
 The post of Warden as sanctioned has neither been downgraded to Junior Warden nor 
the qualification as prescribed in the applicable rule has been altered. 10 Junior Warden 
(House Keeper) has also been sanctioned which is classified as Group - C post and it 
has never been advertised by this institute.   
  
At AIIMS Rishikesh, 05 posts of hoste l warden and 10 posts of Junior Warden (House -
keepers) have been sanctioned and all the sanctioned posts are utilized on ad -hoc 
appointment to fulfil functional need of the institute. However, all the posts of Hostel 
wardens have been advertised by the ins titute and efforts are being made to fill these 
posts by the end of this year. Also, as per the recruitment rules, no such provision of 
downgrading of qualification is observed for these posts.    
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No.17) 
Proficiency of New AIIMS 
  
18. “About the  steps being taken at all the new proposed AIIMS to make them 
proficient enough to provide same level of medical facilities and medical education as 
being provided in AllMS, New Delhi, the Committee are informed that AIIMS have 
adequate facilities to cater the needs of patient care. However, with the increasing 
patient load, innovations and advances in medical field, new facilities are incorporated/ 
advanced subject to availability of Specialists and Super Specialists. There is a h igh 
standard of selection of faculty in new AllMS. The educational qualification, research or 
teaching experience required for selection at new AIIMS are same as those for AllMS, 
New Delhi. To keep the skill level or knowledge base of faculty, updated, the y are sent 

37 
 
for training / attending the conferences from time to time.New AIIMS have student 
centered, problem based, integrated and community oriented teaching consisting of 
foundation course, medical ethics, evidence based medicine, clinical teaching. 
  
The Committee  note that there is large scale vacancies in many teaching and non -
teaching posts in various AIIMS. Various posts are of contractual in nature and there is 
delay in filling up of various posts. At present there is no provision of rotation/tran sfer of 
Faculties from one AI IMS to another AllMS. Till date  there is no spe cialties/Super 
specialties’ in  AIIMS Raipur in the field of gastroenterology, surgical gastroenterology, 
neurology, medical oncology and nuclear medicine. In AIIMS Patna , there is no 
specialties’/super specialties in the field of Nephrology, Neurology, Endocrinology and 
Metabolic diseases. In AIIMS Bhopal there are no specialties/super specialties in the 
field of gastroenterology, medical oncology and clinical haematology. In AIIMS Jodhpur, 
there are no specialties/super specialties in the field of medical oncology and clinical 
haematology. 
  
In view of the above backdrop the Committee are of the strong view that the Ministry 
should take necessary measures to fill up the above mentio ned posts in various AIIMS 
so that patients services can be provided in all the AIIMS. The Committee also wish to 
recommend that the Ministry should explore the feasibility to have    provision of 
rotation/transfer of Faculties from one AIIMS to another All MS, so that the quality of 
education as well as services in all the new AIIMS will be at par with AIIMS New Delhi.”  
Reply of the Government 
“On AIIMS specific observations of the Committee, following is submitted: 
  
i. AIIMS Bhopal is in process of advertising 94 Faculty posts pertaining to 
different streams including gastroenterology, medical oncology, clinical 
haematology very shortly. Upon completion of the proposed 
advertisement, the vacancies are expected to be redu ced drastically.  In 
regard to Non -Faculty posts, in the special GB meeting of the institute, it 
has been decided to hand over the recruitment exercise of Group B & C 
posts to 3 rd party, including PSUs or their empanelled agencies. AIIMS 
Bhopal has already  advertised Non -faculty group -A posts on deputation 
basis. 
ii. In AIIMS Jodhpur, department of Medical Oncology/Haematology is 
functional and one faculty member is working in the department. 
iii. In AIIMS Raipur,  all sanctioned specialities departments i.e. 18 are 
functional. The super -speciality department of Clinical Haematology and 
Medical Oncology is functional. However, the Department of Neurology, 

38 
 
Surgical Gastroenterology and Gastroenterology are not functional. The 
Department of Surgical Oncology is also not  functional. However, various 
Onco-surgical cases are being performed by the respective surgical 
departments of the Institute. All vacant posts of faculty members have 
been advertised to fill up on regular/deputation/contractual basis and the 
recruitment process is going on. 
iv. At AIIMS Patna, 4 Super -Specialty departments i.e. Neurology, 
Nephrology, Endocrinology & Metabolism and Medical Oncology 
&Haematology are not functional due to non -availability of suitable faculty 
members. A fresh advertisement after d own-gradation of posts has been 
advertised. Recruitment processes for advertisement dated 18.10.2021 for 
158 faculty posts and advertisement dated 18.02.2022 for 11 faculty posts 
are ongoing. Date of interview for both the advertisements will be declared 
soon.  Further, the Recruitment Rules for Non -Faculty posts is under 
consideration and once RRs are finalized; remaining Non -Faculty posts 
will be advertised accordingly. 
At present, there is no policy for mutual transfer of faculty from one AIIMS to 
another.” 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 18) 
Need for uniform syllabus for the MBBS courses in all AIIMS, rules and 
regulations for completing the course, conducting examination and a robust 
evaluation process. 
  
With respect to the syllabus of MBBS Courses for each new AIIMS, the Committee 
observe that the AIIMS in Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and 
Rishikesh have  MBBS course and the Academic curriculum have been   approved by 
the Standing Academic Co mmittee of the respective institute.   During the study visit of 
the Committee to AIIMS Kalyani, the Committee learnt that proper course structure has 
not been finalised by the Standing Academic Committee of that Institute.   The 
Committee are apprehensive o f the fact whether all the 16 new AIIMS are having the 
syllabus for their MBBS course or not.   Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to 
apprise about the status of the syllabus in all the new AIIMS.   The Committee are also 
of the view that all the A IIMS should have uniform syllabus for the MBBS courses in all 
AIIMS and they should follow proper rules and regulations for completing the course, 
conducting examination and a robust evaluation process. Therefore, the Committee 
wish to recommend the Minist ry of Health and Family Welfare to evolve mechanism to 
ensure to have uniform syllabus for the MBBS courses in all AIIMS, uniform rules and 
regulations for completing the course, conducting examination and a robust evaluation 
process. They may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  

39 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Post Graduate and Under Graduate courses in AIIMS, New Delhi are being 
conducted as per approval of Standing Academic Committee  and Governing Body. 
  
As in the case of AIIMS, New Delhi, all t he new AIIMS are independent autonomous 
bodies under MoHFW and are implementing MBBS Curriculum as approved by their 
Standing Academic Committee and Governing Body. AIIMS Deoghar, Mangalagiri, 
Nagpur, Bathinda, Bibinagar and Jammu follow the MBBS curriculu m, rules & 
regulations, examinations and evaluation process as per AIIMS Delhi. AIIMS Guwahati 
and AIIMS Gorakhpur are following the MBBS curriculum, rules & regulations, 
examinations and evaluation process as per their respective mentor institutes i.e. AI IMS 
Bhubaneswar and AIIMS Jodhpur.     At AIIMS Kalyani  syllabus & curriculum of AIIMS 
Bhubaneswar is being followed. At Bilaspur, the course structure of MBBS curriculum 
has been designed in accordance with NMC guidelines and the course curriculum 
involves various learning, examination and evaluation methods.  Similarly, at AIIMS 
Raebareli, the course structure of MBBS curriculum has been designed in consultation 
with faculties of major disciplines of UG course. The syllabus is covered in accordance 
with N MC guidelines.  AIIMS Patna has drafted and implemented MBBS curriculum 
based on the AETCOM module on NMC. It has incorporated all modules with minimal 
changes. This curriculum has already been implemented from MBBS 2020 batch 
onwards after approval from the standing Academic Committee of AIIMS Patna. 
  
Recommendation of the Committee to evolve mechanism to ensure to have uniform 
syllabus for the MBBS courses in all AIIMS, uniform rules and regulations for completing 
the course, conducting examination and a robust evaluation process has been noted for 
consideration in the appropriate forum. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
CHAPTER - III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 10) 
Need for well defined connectivity to AIIMS 
 
The Committee note that one of the conditions underlying the land site for AIIMS is four -
lane connectivity from Institute to the national highways shall be provided by the State 
Governments.  The Committee obse rve that most of the AIIMS are located in the 
outskirts area of the main cities.   During the Study Visit of the Committee to AIIMS 
Kalyani, the Committee observed that the distance between main city of Kolkata to 
AIIMS Kalyani is approximately 70 kms.  There is no proper fastest communication from 
the main city to the AIIMS.   The Committee feel that the issue of road connectivity 
should be taken up more stringently in all AIIMS and the Ministry should actively monitor 
road conditions so that four-lane connectivity is essentially met at each AIIMS project. 
Reply of the Government 
Proper connectivity to the site proposed by the State Government for setting up of an 
AIIMS is one of the main considerations while finalising  the site. In case any 
strengthening is required in the road connectivity to the site, it is specifically brought to 
the notice of the State Government with the understanding that the same will   be taken 
up by the State Government for necessary improvement. This is also reflected as one of 
the responsibilities of the State Govt. in the MoU signed with the State Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies have 
not been accepted by the Committee 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 2) 
Need for bringing parity in the status of all new AIIMS 
On the issue of differences between the status of   AIIMS, New Delhi and other six new 
AIIMS, the Committee are informed that for years of their operation, these AIIMS 
remained outside the ambit of AIIMS Act and were governed by a Central Apex Society, 
therefore, some of the features of these AIIMS are different from AIIMS, New Delhi. For 
example, AIIMS, New Delhi, some departments have been delegated greater financial 
and administrative powers in different centers and have their own administrative and 
procurement officers like Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmology, Cardio & Neuro 
Centre, National Cancer Institute. This is not the case with other AIIMS. In AIIMS, New 
Delhi there is a Director and Medical Superintendent, and a centralized structure is 
there while in other AIIMS there are Executive Director and Head of Departments. In 
AIIMS, New Delhi, over the years, there are now 31 Specialties and 20 Super 
Specialties. Here teaching, learning of MD, MS, DM, MCH and patient care services  are 
done. However, in the new  upcoming AIIMS, there are 17 Super Specialties and 18 
Specialties. AIIMS, New Delhi conducts Bachelors Programme (UG course) for five 
Para Medical Sciences and nine M.Sc. courses which is not the case with most other 
AIIMS. AIIMS, New Delhi also  runs 33 one -year Fellowship Courses in various 
Specialities which is not the case with other AIIMS.   AIIMS, New Delhi usually follows a 
time period of a month for applications to be received in respect of advertisements for 
vacant faculty positions wherea s in other AIIMS, there is a system of rolling or running 
advertisements with one-year validity. 
The Committee strongly feel that when all the new AIIMS are being governed by the 
AIIMS Act 1956 as amended in the year 2012, there should not be any differenc es in 
terms of delegated financial and administrative powers for procurement of equipment 
and in terms of having specialties and super specialties teaching in AIIMS, New Delhi 
and other AIIMS. If the differences will be continuing, people will continue to rush to 
AIIMS New Delhi instead of going to other AIIMS. As a result, the objective of PMSSY 
Scheme for correcting regional imbalances in the availability of affordable/reliable 
territory healthcare services will remain a distant dream.   Therefore, the Com mittee 

42 
 
strongly recommend that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should take 
necessary measures to treat all the AIIMS at par with AIIMS, New Delhi. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Financial and Administrative powers of different functionaries are defined in the AIIMS, 
Regulations, 2019, which are uniformly applicable to all the AIIMS. Financial powers of 
Directors of AIIMS have been delegated with the approval of Governing Body / In stitute 
Body of respective AIIMS. Keeping in view a much bigger scale of operations of AIIMS, 
New Delhi as compared to new AIIMS under PMSSY, the delegated financial power of 
Director, AIIMS, New Delhi is higher. As regards new AIIMS having lesser number o f 
Specialty and Super -specialty Departments than AIIMS, New Delhi, it is stated that 
AIIMS at New Delhi has been functioning for more than six decades and has 
established itself a  premier Institute in the country and internationally. The number of 
super-specialty and super -specialty Departments in th e Institute has grown over the 
years with advancements in medical sciences, availability of super -specialists and with 
the approval of the competent bodies of the Institute. As fa r as new AIIMS are 
concerned, there is provision for 18 specialty and 17 super -specialty Departments as 
part of setting up of the Institute. However, as the Institutes grow and depending upon 
the availability of super -specialists, these Institutes can also set up more Departments 
with the approval of their competent bodies. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I) 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 3) 
Need for parity in the post of Director across all AIIMS 
In their recommendation contained in the Original 12 th Report, t he Committee  had 
stated as under: 
“The Committee are surprised to note that except for AIIMS, New Delhi which is headed 
by Director (with the age limit of 65) while other new 16 AIIMS are being headed by 
Executive Director (with the age limit of 70) who is in -charge of the institution as a 
whole. The Committee are informed by the representatives of the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare during oral deposition as well as in their written replies 
that  PradhanMantrySwasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY ), was announced on 15th 
August, 2003 to establish six new hospitals with modern facilities like those available at 

43 
 
AIIMS, New Delhi. In pursuance of this announcement,  a proposal was taken to the 
Expenditure Finance Committee(EFC) in November 2004. The EF C approved 
the setting up of six AIIMS-like apex healthcare institutes in the States of Bihar at Patna, 
Chhattisgarh at Raipur, Madhya Pradesh at Bhopal, Odisha at Bhubaneshwar, 
Rajasthan at Jodhpur, and Uttarakhand at Rishikesh. The EFC also approved form ation 
of a Central Apex Society under societies Registration Act, with the responsibility for 
establishing and running these six AIIMS-like institutions. After obtaining the approval of 
the EFC, a proposal was taken to the Cabinet Committee on Economic Aff airs in March 
2006 and CCEA approved six AIIMS -like institutions as well as formation of a Central 
Apex Society, for establishing and running these institutions. While approving the 
Revised Cost Estimates(RCE), because of cost escalation, a proposal was ta ken again 
to the Cabinet in February 2010. While approving the RCE, the Cabinet also underline 
the role of the Central Apex Society in establishing and running these six AIIMS -like 
institutions. Therefore, from 2006 to September 2012, these AIIMS -like institutions were 
not part of the AIIMS Act and existed outside it, governed by a Central Apex Society. In 
September 2012, there was an amendment in the AIIMS Act, which was notified. This 
amendment incorporated these new AIIMS -like institutions in Section 27 (a) of the Act 
and provided that all provisions of the Act shall apply to these institutions also. Once a 
decision was taken in September 2012 to make these six AIIMS as part of the amended 
AIIMS Act, the Central Apex Society ceased to exist. The Committee note that Article 11 
of AIIMS Act provides that there shall be a Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Institute 
who shall be designated as the Director of the Institute.   Section 31 of AIIMS 
Regulations, 2019 further provides in this regard that the Direct or shall have a term of 
five years from the date of assumption of charge of the post or till he attains the age of 
sixty five years, whichever is earlier. 
In the meanwhile, with the aim of expeditious operationalization and to attract reputed 
faculty from AIIMS, New Delhi and other Institutes of National Importance (INIs), as well 
as other premier Institutions, to head new and upcoming AIIMS, it was a policy decision, 
decided in November 2018 with the approval of Department of Expenditure and Hon’ble 
Minister for Health & Family Welfare to have a post of Executive Director (ED) to 
operate on either / or basis with the post of Director, who will act as CEO of the 
Institute.  CIB had approved two designations for new AIIMS.  One is Director where the 
provision of 65 years remains as stipulated in the Act and the other nomenclature is 
‘Executive Director’ where the provision of 70 years. 
 
On being asked to clarify whether there is an enabling provision in the Act to empower 
the Government to take such decision, the Committee are informed that  Section 11(4) 
of the Act says, “Subject to such rules as may be made by Central Government in this 

44 
 
behalf, the Institute may appoint such number of other officers and employees as may 
be necessary for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions and may 
determine the designation and grades of such officers and employees.”The Committee 
strongly feel that other officers and employees cannot be above the Director. The 
Secretary Ministry of Health in his candid submission before the Committee has stated 
that the Act does not make a reference to Executive Director. 
  
The Committee  note that the Act does not make a reference to Executive Director and 
the decision has been taken after taking the consent of CIB as well as the consent of 
Hon’ble Minister for Health & Family Welfare and the Ministry of Finance and 
Department of Expenditure with the ai m of expeditious operationalization of the new 
AIIMS and to attract reputed faculty from AIIMS, New Delhi and other Institutes of 
National Importance (INIs),as well as other premier Institutions, to head new and 
upcoming AIIMS. The Committee acknowledge th e urgency of the decision taken at the 
highest level at the time of setting up of new AIIMS but at the same time wish to 
emphasize that since 17 years has been completed after the approval of EFC for setting 
up of new AIIMS and the Ministry have enough experience, now they must strictly follow 
the provision of the Act for appointment of Director in each new AIIMS instead of 
appointment of Executive Director to head the new AIIMS. Further, when in any Institute 
of national importance in India including AIIMS  Delhi, there is no provision of appointing 
any person for heading administrative posts above 65 years of age, the Committee wish 
to reemphasize that the provision of the Act of parliament should be maintained across 
all AIIMS and there should not be any s cope of difference among them. The Committee 
would like to see AIIMS as an epitome of medical excellence which shall only be 
possible with experienced talents coupled with physical viability; which does not seem 
viable with an age limit of 70 years.  
The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry should not overloo k the fresh talent and 
the care er opportunities of the existing professors for the appointment to the post of 
Director in new AIIMS. Henceforth, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry 
of Health and Family welfare to take all measures not to make any compromises in the 
qualities of new AIIMS and  to ensure the objective of the PMSSY i.e to augment quality 
medical education in the country and strictly adhered to the provision of the AIIMS Act.” 
Reply of the Government 
Presently, AIIMS at Jodhpur, Raipur, Nagpur and Mangalagiri are headed by Directors 
as the Chief Executive Officers (CEO) . As has been infor med to the Committee earlier, 
with a view to attract reputed faculty from AIIMS, New Delhi and other Institutes of 
National Importance (INIs), as well as other premier Institutions, to head new and 

45 
 
upcoming AIIMS, it was decided with the approval of Department of Expenditure and 
Hon’ble Minister for Health & Family Welfare to have a post of Executive Director (ED) 
to operate on either / or basis with the post of Director, who will act as CEO of the 
Institute.  In the case of ED, the appointment can be upto maximum age of 70 years, 
with the upper age limit for eligibility for consideration being 67 years.   The manner of 
selection of ED however would be the same as stipulated for the post of Director.   Also, 
the eligibility criteria in respect of qualification and experience for considerat ion for 
appointment as ED will be the same as the post of Director. 
  
Recommendation of the Committee has however been noted. Further, as stated above, 
post of Director / Executive Director is to operate on either / or basis, giving the Ministry 
to flexibility to appoint a Director as Chief Executive Officer of the Institute. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

46 
 
CHAPTER - V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 8) 
Need for handing over encumbrance free land for new AIIMS 
The Committee observe that the land for setting up of AIIMS is required to be provided 
by the concerned State Government.   Requirement of land for setting u p of new AIIMS 
is about 200 acres.  The Committee are informed that the site offered by the State 
Government for AIIMS at Darbhangais  low lying and the site already has some 
construction like water tank, power station, post office, BSNL yard & office and P olice 
Stations. Further, the site of AIIMS, Darbhanga was finalized subject to certain 
conditions to be fulfilled by the State Government.  The Committee are informed that the 
setting up of AIIMS in Manethi, Haryana was approved by Union Cabinet on 28.02.2 019 
at a cost of Rs 1299 Crore. However forest clearance for construction of AIIMS at the 
identified site could not be obtained by the State Govt. In the matter of AIIMS, Manethi, 
the Committee observe that an alternate land parcel measuring approx 175.85 acre in a 
village adjoining Manethi has been identified and the process for consent purchase of 
this land has b een initiated.  On the issue of  monitoring the clearance of land for 
construction of AIIMS, the Committee are  informed that there are two mechanisms for 
monitoring. One is at the level of the Ministry which is headed by the Additional 
Secretary and Financial Advisor in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and it has 
the Joint Secretary of the concerned State Government as well as the executing agency 
to whom the work has been awarded.   The other mechanism is at the level of the Prime 
Minister’s Office. These mechanisms review the position of not only the transfer of land 
but also the progress of construction.  After such regular monitoring there has been 
progress in some cases.   Keeping in view the delay in completion of new AIIMS which 
ranges from 2 to 12 years, the Committee wish that the existing two mechanisms to 
review the progress of new AIIMS will functi on in a pro -active manner in expediting the 
handover of encumbrance free land to the Ministry.   The Committee desire that in case 
of any further delay in getting the clearance of land or any other issue, the Ministry 
should bring it to the notice of concer ned Member of Parliament for taking up of the 
matter with their respective State Government. The Committee should be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard. 
  

47 
 
As pointed out at Manethi, the problem of environmental clearance should be taken up 
with Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change on urgent basis so that the 
revised deadline for completion of setting up of AIIMS is achieved in time.  
Reply of the Government 
On the matter of handing over of encumbrance free land for establishment of new 
AIIMS, it is stated that this Ministry is regularly taking up the matter with the concerned 
State Governments, i.e. Govt. of Bihar and Govt. of Haryana. Hon'ble M.P., Darbhanga 
is actively engaged in pursuing pending matters with the State Govt., inclu ding early 
handing over of  encumbrance free land. In respect of AIIMS in Haryana,   State 
Government has informed that the land purchase process has been finalized for land 
measuring 210 acres 3 Kanal 5 marla at Village Majra  Mustil Bhalki in District Rewa ri. 
The matter has again been taken up at the level of Hon’ble Minister for Health & Family 
Welfare with the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Haryana vide letter dated 28.07.2022 for 
expediting acquisition of the identified land and its handing over to MoHFW.   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter – I) 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No.11) 
Physical progress of All AIIMS 
The Committee note that AIIMS in Raibareli  was initially approved by Cabinet on 
05.02.2009.  And the revised cost of expenditure was approved by EFC on 22.06.2017.   
The Cabinet approved date of completion was April, 2020.    The revised date for 
completion has been shifted to November, 2021.   Therefore, there is a delay of 1 year 
and 7 months.  In this AIIMS OPD Block, hospital and academic campus and residential 
complex have been completed.   MBBS classes and OPD facilities have been started.   
AIIMS Mangalgiri in Andhra Pradesh was approved on 07.10 .2015.   The Cabinet 
approved date of completion was October, 2020 and the expected date for completion 
is December 2021.   Therefore, there is a delay of 1 year.   In phase I OPD block and 
residential complex have been substantially completed.   In phase II,  84% of hospital 
and academic campus have been completed; MBBS classes and OPD facilities have 
been started.   IPD for COVID 19 treatment with COVID lab facilities has been made 
functional.  The date of Cabinet approval for    AIIMS Kalyani in West Bengal wa s 
07.10.2015.  The Cabinet approved date of completion was October, 2020 and the 
expected date for completion is November 2021.   Therefore, there is a delay of 1 year.   
In this AIIMS, OPD block and residential complex have been substantially completed in 

48 
 
phase I.  In phase II, hospital and academic campus have been substantially completed. 
MBBS classes and OPD facilities have been started.   The Committee during their study 
visit to this AIIMS in the month of September 2021 had observed that syllabus for the  
MBBS classes were yet to be approved by the academic committee and there was no 
lab facilities for the MBBS students. AIIMS Gorakhpur in Uttar Pradesh was approved 
by the Cabinet on 20.07.2016.   The Cabinet approved date of completion was April 
2020 and t he expected date for completion is November 2021.   There is 88.50% 
progress in construction in EPC mode.   MBBS classes and OPD facilities have been 
started.  AIIMS Bhatinda in Punjab was approved by the Cabinet on 27.07.2016.   The 
Cabinet approved date of completion was June 2020 and the expected date for 
completion is November 2021.   There is 88.70% progress in the construction in EPC 
mode.  MBBS classes and OPD facilities have been started.   AIIMS Guwahati in Assam 
was approved by the Cabinet on 24.05.201 7.   The Cabinet approved date of 
completion was April 2021 and the expected date for completion is September 2022.   
There is 57.50% progress in the construction in EPC mode.   Only MBBS classes have 
been started in this AIIMS.    AIIMS Bilaspur in Himachal Pradesh was approved by the 
Cabinet on 03.01.2018.   The cabinet approved date of completion is  December 2021 
and the expected date for completion is June 2022.   There is 72% progress in the 
construction through EPC mode.  Only MBBS classes have been starte d in this AIIMS.  
OPD facility is likely to start from December 2021.   AIIMS Madurai in Tamil Nadu was 
approved by the Cabinet on 17.12.2018.   The Cabinet approved date of completion is 
September 2022 and now this has been extended to October 2026.   The ex tended 
period is almost four years.   For this AIIMS site has been finalised, pre -investment work 
is in progress, preparatory survey by JICA Mission commenced in February 2020 and 
appointment of Project Management Consultant is in progress.   Consultation with State 
Government and AIIMS Madurai is in progress to start MBBS classes from the current 
academic session from the temporary campus. AIIMS Dharbanga in Bihar was 
approved by the Cabinet on 15.09.2020.   The Cabinet approved date of completion is 
September 2024 and it is expected to complete by this due date.   However, the 
Committee note that till date site at Dharbhanga has been finalised but the State 
Government is yet to handover the encumbrance free land.   AIIMS Samba in Jammu 
was approved by the Cabinet on 10.01.2019.  The Cabinet approved date of completion 
is January 2023 and it is expected to complete by this due date.   However, the 
Committee note that there is only 32% progress in the construction through EPC mode.   
AIIMS Avantipura in Kashmir was approved by the Cabinet on 10.01.2019.  The Cabinet 
approved date of completion is January 2025 and it is expected to complete by this due 
date. However, the Committee are concerned to note that there is only 6% progress in 
the construction through EPC mod e.  AIIMS Deoghar in Jharkhand was approved by 
the Cabinet on 16.05.2018.  The Cabinet approved date of completion is February 2022 

49 
 
and the expected date for completion is June 2022.   The Committee note that there is 
58% progress in construction through EP C mode.   MBBS classes and OPD facilities 
have been started. AIIMS Rajkot in Gujarat was approved by the Cabinet on 
10.01.2019.  The Cabinet approved date of completion is October 2022 and it is 
expected to complete by this due date.   However, the Committee note that there is only 
12% progress in the construction through EPC mode.   Only MBBS classes have been 
started in this AIIMS.   AIIMS Bibi Nagar in Telangana was approved by the Cabinet on 
17.12.2018.  The Cabinet approved date of completion is September 2022 and now it is 
expected to complete by November 2023.   MBBS classes and OPD facilities have been 
started in this AIIMS.   AIIMS Manethi in Haryana was approved by the Cabinet on 
28.02.2019.  The Cabinet approved date of completion is February 2023.   However, the 
Committee note that till date the encumbrance free land is yet to be handed over by the 
State Government.  
From the above mentioned facts the Committee observe that out of 16 AIIMS MBBS 
classes and OPD facilities have been started in 08 AIIMS.   Only MBBS classes have 
been started in 04 AIIMS.  The Committee further observe that all the 18 specialities are 
functional in all 06 AIIMS, namely, Bhopal, Bhubneshwar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and 
Rishikesh.  Out of 17 super speciality, the functionality st atus in Bhopal, Jodhpur and 
Patna  is 14 respectively and in Bhubneshwar and Rishikesh it is 17 respectively.   The 
dedicated COVID facilities have been operational in all AIIMS.  
The Committee are aghast to note that in the six new AIIMS, viz Bhopal, Bhuba neswar, 
Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and Rishikesh, many super specialty wards are still non -
functional.  This pinpoint at a greater laxity towards improper achievement of the targets 
set over time.   Regarding the way forward to ensure completion of construction  of all 
AIIMS in time and to make them fully functional the Committee are informed that regular 
review meetings of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are being held with executive 
agencies and State Governments.   The progress is also being monitored at the level of 
Prime Minister’s Office.   
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should constitute a Project Review Panel 
for each AIIMS which would evaluate both physical targets of construction of buildings 
as well as medical facilities every quarter an d report laxities, if any to the Ministry which 
can look into the difficulties and solve them in time.   The Committee are happy to note 
that the “use of drone” in evaluating the progress is one of the agenda of the Ministry.   
The Committee would urge the M inistry to initiate such review at the earliest in order to 
ensure timely completion of all AIIMS without further extension of time and make them 
fully functional at the earliest under intimation to them.  

50 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter – I) 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 12) 
Dedicated Research Activities 
The field of medicine is predominantly dependent on continuous research for its efficacy 
and development.  Research and Development is an inherent feature of medical 
field. On being asked whether in all AIIMS, lab facilities are functional with respect to 
both research and for patients, the Committee are informed that Lab facilities are in 
place in all the six functional AIIMS which are used for both patient services and 
research activities.  Depending up on the functionalities of speciality and super specialty 
departments and availability of faculty, Institutes under take both extra mural and intra 
mural research.  There is however, no separate allocation by the Ministry for research. 
The Committee are of the strong view that the Ministry of Health and Famil y welfare 
should take up this matter with the Ministry of Finance, Department of expenditure to 
have a separate allocation for research activities and fill up the required post of 
specialties and super specialties as it is linked with availability of lab facilities. 
The Committee note that the extramural research funding by Department of Science 
and Technology, D/o of Bio Technology, Indian Council of Medical Research etc. have 
been taken up at AIIMS, New Delhi. However, the Committee are pained to note tha t 
institutions like AIIMS, New Delhi which is considered to be the epitome of health 
services does not fully spend funds under its research head.   The Committee observe 
that for the years 2018 -19, 2019 -20 & 2020 -21, the institution’s total receipts (for 
research) were Rs. 1,162,738,574.28 lakh, Rs. 1647870753.89 lakh &Rs. 1643432507 
lakh respectively. The total expenditure (on research) during the year 2018 -19  isRs. 
1107715966 lakh, during the year 2019 -20 is   Rs. 1448611449 lakh and   during the 
year 2020-21 is Rs. 1218124390 lakh.   The Committee would like the Ministry to urge 
all the AIIMS to concentrate on research activities in full spirit, only then the full fledged 
development in the arena of medicine would be possible.   The Committee are of the 
firm view that in a country like India where affordable medical aid is one of the essential 
need for majority of the population, well founded research has to be given full focus by 
pioneering medical institutions like AIIMS. 
On being asked whether research team  from AIIMS has conducted any studies on 
chemical contaminated water canals of Punjab and Haryana which is the major cause of 
cancer in those  areas, the Committee are informed that “no such study has been 
conducted”. 

51 
 
Keeping in view the gravity of the situ ation the Committee desire the Ministry to 
undertake proper research on this aspect and suggest remedial measures for the same. 
Reply of the Government 
           In all the AIIMS lab facilities are being used for both patient care and research. 
Regarding the unspent funds, this is related to extramural funds, which the Institute 
receives for research projects sponsored by other agencies. Institutes will be advised to 
improve utilisation of their research funds. Recommendation of the Committee for 
research on impact of chemical contaminated water canals of Punjab and Haryana on 
cancer cases in those areas will be pursued. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter – I) 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No.15) 
Authorized and existing specialist and super specialist in AIIMS, New Delhi 
 
The Committee observe that the total sanctioned strength of faculty in AIIMS, New Delhi 
is 1115.   Against this the total in -position f aculty is 746 in Regular posts  and 55 in 
Contractual.  The total vacancy is 314.   Out of total vacancy position of 314; 157 
vacancies are in upcoming Centres / Block / Facilities.The Committee are informed that 
efforts are being made to fill the vacancies. These vacancies would have been 
advertised in 2020 on regular basis with existing Reservation Roster, but were withheld 
due to Government inst ruction received from the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
vide letter dated 23.02.202 1 to re -draw the Reservation Rosters for recruitment of 
faculty in AllMS. The lnstitute is in the process of re -drawing the Reservation Roster as 
per Reservation in Te achers Cadre Act, 2019. A Committee has been constituted for 
the purpose and the Reservation Roster is being finalized and onwards vacant post will 
be advertised soon.The Committee hope that the Ministry would take appropriate action 
for filling up of the vacant posts without further loss of time and apprise them about the 
final action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government  
Implementation of Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Teachers’ Cadre) 
Act, 2029 required redrawing of reservation  rosters and necessary instruction in this 

52 
 
regard was issued by MoHFW.  Accordingly, Reservation Roster of Assistant Professor 
has been finalized. Reservation Rosters for Faculty of Nursing, Medical Superintendent 
and Professors have been approved by Roste r Committee and approval of Competent 
Authority is being obtained and these rosters are being finalized. Further, 252 posts of 
Assistant Professor were advertised in November, 2021 for filling of the vacant posts 
except for 46 posts for which Recruitment R ules / Nomenclature was under revision. 
Recruitment process for these posts will be finalized after finalization of Recruitment 
Rule /Nomenclature. 03 Vacant post of Associate Professor of College of Nursing and 
01 vacant post of Medical Superintendent are  going to be advertised soon. 96 
vacancies of Professor under Direct Recruitment for which selection process is not 
being held due to administrative reason. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter – I) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI              GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT 
16 March 2023       CHAIRPERSON 
25 Phalguna 1944 (Saka)     COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
The 16th Sitting of the Committee was held  on Thursday, the 16th March, 2023 
from 1 500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Room No. ‘52 -B’, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
           PRESENT 
  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan – Convener 
 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
8. Dr. K.C. Patel 
9. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
12. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
13. Shri Dilip Saikia 
14. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
16. Shri Prathap Simha 
17. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
18. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
  
 
 
 
 
 

54 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             1. Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda -       Additional Secretary 
           2. Shri Muraleedharan. P     -       Director 
 3. Shri R.C. Sharma  - Additional Director 
                    
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and briefed them about the agenda of the  sitting viz. c onsideration and 
adoption of three draft Report(s).  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following draft 
Reports: 
(i) Xxx xxx 
 
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee c ontained in their 12 th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Review of Progress of all AIIMS; and 
 
(iii) Xxx xxx 
 
4.       The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Action Taken Reports  
without any modifications and  authorised the C onvener to present the same to Lok 
Sabha. 
 
5. xxx xxx 
The Committee, thereafter, adjourned. 
 
 
  

55 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 12th Report of the Committee on Estimates 
 (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
(i)       Total number of recommendations/observations                    18 
 (ii)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted         11 
by the Government: 
(Sl. No. 1,4,5,6,7, 9,13,14,16,17,18) 
          Percentage of total recommendations               61.11% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s        2 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee:   
(Sl. No. 2, 3) 
 Percentage of total recommendations  11.11% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not                 1 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(Sl. No. 10) 
Percentage of total recommendations      5.56% 
 
 (v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of           4  
Government is still awaited: 
(Sl. No. 8,11,12,15)  
Percentage of total recommendations     22.22% 
 
 
 
 