14

MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION

REVIEW OF FUNDS ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION UNDER MPLAD
FUND SCHEME. -

COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2021-22)

FOURTEENTH REPORT

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

i CF.
«
roo ४

1

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


FOURTEENTH REPORT

COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2021-22)
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION

REVIEW OF FUNDS ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION UNDER
MPLAD FUND SCHEME

(Presented to Lok Sabha on 0.4 <0Y.-.2.022- )

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

an 2022/........1944(S)


CONTENTS Page No.

Composition of the Committee on.Estimates (2020-21) (ii)
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2021-22) (iii)
Introduction 1 ‘ ; " (v)
PART-1 i
CHAPTER-I Introduction 4
CHAPTER-II Project Allocation, Release and Utilization (2014-21) 6
CHAPTER-II Implementation of the Scheme 17
CHAPTER-IV Monitoring Mechanism 38
PART-II
Observations and Recommendations 44
APPENDICES

|. List of MPs of 17th Lok Sabha whose Installments of 2019-20 7 56

Under MPLADS have not been released till 30.06.2021

List of the Hon'ble MPs who requested for the release of MPLADS ¢0
fund after the suspension of MPLAD Scheme

Details of Amehdments in the MPLADS Guidelines with effect 623
from 2016
Circular No. E-4/2020-MPLADS(Pt) dated 24"" March, 2020 65

Circular on Settlement/closure of accounts of Ex- Members and 70
transfer/distribution of unspent balances of funds among the sitting
Members (LS/RS) *

‘’ ANNEXURES

Minutes of the-sitting of the Committee held on 19.11.2020 We
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 05.01.2021. 82

Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 31.03.2022

85


t

COMPOSITION COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-2021) COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-2021

Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat - Chairperson

(OFT EG छा. 9 Sa, 0

=
9

=
=

a)

=
eo

a
=

a

2

2x
a

ae
Oo @

i)
S

»

NNN
ge (eo BO

N
=

nN
a

NNN
= =

w
S

Members

Shri Kunwar Danish Ali

Shri Kalyan Banerjee

Shri Sudharshan Bhagat

Shri Pradan Baruah

Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan
Shri P.P. Chaudhary

Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar

Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan

Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal .

Shri. Dkarmendra Kumar Kashyap
Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya
Shri Dayanidhi Maran

Shri K. Muraleedharan

Shri-S.S. Palanimanickam

Shri Kamlesh Paswan

Dr. K.C. Patel

Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat

Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy ~
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy

Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha
Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma

Shri Prathap Simha

Shri Pinaki Misra

Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
Shri Kesineni Srinivas

“Shri Ajay Bhatt

Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma

(ii)


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2021-2022) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2021-2022
Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat — Chairperson

Members
Shri Kunwar Danish Ali

Shri Kalyan Banerjee '

Shri Sudharshan Bhagat re |
Shri P.P. Chaudhary

Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan

Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo

Shri Harish Dwivedi

9. Shri P. 0. Gaddigoudar

10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal

11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap

42. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya me =e
13. Shri Dayanidhi Maran :
14. Shri Pinaki Misra

15. Shri K. Muraleedharan

16. Shri Jual Oram **

47. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam

18. Shri Kamlesh Paswan

19. Dr. K.C, Patel

20. Col..Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore

21. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

St 9 कुक ate फूड

22. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat

23, Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy
24. Shri-Rajiv Pratap Rudy

25. Shri Dilip Saikia

26. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha

27. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma

28. ShriPrathap Simha

29: Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma
30. Shri Kesineni Srinivas

** Elected as a Member of Estimates Committee vide Bulletin Part-II no. 2897 dt. 29.07.2021

(iii) :


हुआ कुछ हक

Secretariat’

Smt Anita 8, Panda . - Joint Secretary
Shri Muraleedharan.P = - —._ Director

. %
Dr. Sheetal Kapoor - Committee Officer

(iv)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Fourteenth Report on
the subject “Review of Funds Allocation and Utilization under MPLAD Fund Scheme.”

2: Members of Parliament Local Area Development: Scheme (MPLADS) is a fully
funded scheme of Government of India where funds are released in.the form of Grants
in aid directly to the District Authorities. Under the scheme, Members of Parliament
recommend works of developmental nature to cater to the needs of the society. The
scheme is governed by a set of Guidelines, which have been compréhensively revised
from time to time. The overall improvement in the implementation of MPLAD Scheme is
attributed to the synergy attained by the cooperation of different stakeholders and
operational experience gained over the years, community participation and monitoring.

3. The Committee on Estimates (2020-21) selected the subject “Review of Funds
Allocation and Utilization under MPLAD Fund Scheme” for in-depth examination and

report to the House. The Committee on Estimates (2021-22) a d with the
examination of the subject. /

4. In this report, the Committee have dealt with various issues like delayed
submission of fund related documents and consequent delay in release of fund,
completion of abandoned projects, suspension of MPLAD scheme, centage charge by
PSUs, irregular third party physical evaluation, need for the audit of administrative
expenses, maintenance of facilitation centres etc. Also as per the Cabinet decision, the
MPLAD Scheme was non-operational for Financial Year 2020-21 and 2021-22 due to
COVID-19 Pandemic though later it was restored for part of Financial Year 2021-22.
The Committee have analyzed these issues/points in detail and have made
Observations/Recommendations in the report.

5. The Committee held two sittings on 19.11.2020 and 05.01.2021, to take oral
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the subject
at their sitting held on 31.03.2022.

6. The Committee wish to place on record their sincere thanks to the
representatives of ‘the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, who
appeared before them and placed their considered views on the subject and furnished
the information required in connection with the examination of the subject.

te For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee have -been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report.

NEW DELHI; . GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT
Bl_March, 2022 7 CHAIRPERSON
[0 Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES

(v)


PART -।
CHAPTER -।
INTRODUCTION #'

Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) is’ a apheme पु
launched by Government of India on 23rd December, 1993 for Development works and
creation of durable community assets. It is a Central Sector Scheme fully funded by the
Government of India under which funds are released in the form: of Grants-in-aid directly to
the District Authorities. The objective of the scheme is to enable Members of Parliament
(MPs) to recommend works of developmental nature with emphasis on the creation of durable
community assets based: on the locally felt needs; to be taken up in their
Constituencies/eligible areas. Right from the inception of the Scheme, durable assets of
national priorities with respect to drinking water, primary education, public health, sanitation
and roads, etc, are being created. In a way, the Scheme is founded. on the Participation of
. citizens in. identifying the gaps needed to provide assets which can further be the aspirations
and developmental requirements of the community. Such requirements are expressed :
through the public representatives and form the basis of the Scheme.

Implementation of the Scheme is governed by the Guidelines on MPLADS which were
first issued in February 1994 and have been updated from time to time, The Guidelines
issued covered the concept, implementation and monitoring: of the Scheme. The
latest Guidelines on MPLADS issued in June 2016 include instructions for implementation of *
the schemés announced by the Hon'ble Prime Minister such as Swachh Bharat Abhiyan,
Accessible India Campaign (Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan), conservation of water through rain
water harvesting, Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana and so on. An amendment in August, 2017

further incorporated. a condition that furnishing of Provisional. Utilisation Certificate ७५ the
* District Authority of at least 80% of the first installment of the previous Financial Year is a pre-
requisite for release of first installment of the current Financial Year,

1.2 Since its inception, the scheme of MPLAD was under the control’ of the Ministry of
Rural Development but from October 1994 onwards, it is being administered by Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSP). MoSPI, as the nodal Ministry, is
responsible for policy formulation, release of funds and monitoring the implementation of the
Scheme. A Department in each State/Union Territory (UT) is designated as the Nodal

1


Department with the overall responsibility of supervision, monitoring and co-ordination of
MPLADS implementation with the Districts and other line Departments. The funds are ,

released to the District Authorities, who are then responsible for the implementation of the
j Scheme.

Salient features of the Scheme:

1.3

Annual Report 2019-20 of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation

(MoSPI) outlines the salient features of the scheme 88:-

If;

iii.

vi.

vil.

vil.

MPLADS is a Central Sector Scheme fully funded by the Government of ‘India under
which funds are released in the form of Grants-in-aid directly to the District Authorities.

Works, developmental in nature, based on locally felt needs and always available for
the use of the public at large, are eligible under the scheme. Preference is given to
works relating to national priorities, such as provision of drinking water, public health,
education, sanitation, roads, etc. :

The funds released under the Scheme are non-lapsable, i.e. the entitlement of funds
not released in a particular year is carried forward to the subsequent years, subject to

‘eligibility,

The role of the Members of Parliament is limited only upto recommendation of works. —
Thereafter, it is.the responsibility of the District Authority to sanction, execute and
complete the works recommended by Members of Parliament within the stipulated time
period. © है पु

The District Authority is empowered to examine the eligibility of works, sanction funds
and select the Implementing Agencies, supervise the. overall execution, and monitor
the scheme at the ground level. The District Authorities get thé works executed through
the Line Departments, Local Implementing Agencies: or other Government Agencies,
as well as through reputed Non- Government Organizations.

The elected Lok Sabha Members can recommend works in their respective
constituencies. कि है

The Members of the Rajya Sabha can recommend works anywhere in the State from
which they are elected. Nominated Members of the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha can

‘Tecommend works for implementation, anywhere in the country.

There is no cost limit for works to be executed for the Government. However, for the
works meant for trust/society, there is a ceiling of €50 lakh for the lifetime of each
Trust/Society. An MP can recommend funds only upto 100 lakh in all in a financial
year, from MPLADS funds for works to Trusts/Societies.

MPLADS works can be implemented in areas affected by natural calamities like floods, ,
cyclone, hailstorm, avalanche, cloudburst, pest attack, landslides, tornado, earthquake,

drought, tsunami, fire and biological, chemical, radiological hazards, etc. MPs from the

non-affected areas of the State/UT can also recommend permissible works upto a

maximum of 25 lakh per annum in the affected area(s) in that State/UT.

2


a.

. In case, there is no sufficient tribal population in the Constituency of the Members of
Parliament in Lok Sabha, they are permitted to recommend upto 7.5% of their annual
entitlement earmarked for creation of community assets for the Scheduled Tribe areas,
in areas where such population is available outside their constituencies but within their
State of election. The creation of community assets can be recommended only in the
Notified Communiy Develpment (CD) Blocks with more than 50% tribal population and
primarily for the benefit of the tribal people.

The additional fund of ₹25 lakh would be permitted only for undertaking community
utility building works primarily for the benefit of tribal people exclusively in the notified
tribal CD Blocks with more than 50% tribal population. i

; The works undertaken and the beneficiary Trust/Society should otherwise satisfy all
other conditions of the MPLADS Guidelines. :

xi, If an elected Member of Parliament finds the need, to contribute MPLADS funds, toa

xii,

xiii,

xt

४.

XV.

place outside that State/UT or outside the Constituency within the State or both, the MP
can recommend eligible works, under these Guidelines upto a maximum of %25 lakh in
a financial year. Such a gesture on the part of an MP will Promote national unity,
harmony, and fraternity among the people, at the grass root level, :

All recommended eligible works should be sanctioned within 75 days from the date of *
‘receipt of the recommendation, after completing all formalities. The District Authority ©
shall, however, inform MPs.regarding rejection, if any, within 45 days from the date of
receipt of recommendations, with reasons thereof. :

All recommendations received in the office of the District Authority till the last day of the
term of the MP are to be executed, provided these are cligible and within the
entitlement of MPLADS funds of the MP.

The District Authority shall identify the Implementing Agency through which ‘the
Particular work recommended by an MP is to be executed.

The time frame for completion of works should be stipulated to the implementing
agency and should not normally exceed one year.

a


xvi.

xvii.

‘xviii,

Works once recommended by MPs, and sanctioned by District Authorities, can be
cancelled, if so desired by the MP, only if.execution of work has not commenced and

the cancellation does not lead to any contractual and financial liability/cost to the
Government,

MPLAD Scheme can be converged with Central and State Government Schemes
provided such works are eligible under MPLADS. Funds from local bodies can also be
pooled for MPLADS works. MPLADS funds ‘can also be recommended towards State
Government share by MPs in a Centrally Sponsored Scheme being implemented in
their constituencies, provided the works under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme are
permissible under MPLADS. However, MPLADS funds cannot be used to substitute
the public and community contribution in any Central/State Government
Programme/Scheme, which includes a component of such contribution. For instance
MPLADS funds can also be converged with MGNREGA Scheme of Ministry of Rural
Development with the objective of creating more durable assets. MPs may recommend
under MPLADS, works from out of the shelf of MGNREGA projects approved by the
Zila Panchayat for the year when recommendation is being made, and should have
been: sanctioned by the District Programme Coordinator which constitutes the
approved Annual Work Plan under MGNREGA of the district.

Community infrastructure and public utility ‘building works. aré permissible for a हु
registered Trust/ Society, provided:

a. The Trust/Society is engaged in social service/welfare activity and has been in
existence for at least 3 years.

b. It is well established, public spirited, non-profit making entity, enjoying a good
teputation in the area.

c. It should undertake to operate and maintain the assets created under MPLADS.

पं... Not more than 50 lakh can be spent for one or more works of a particular
society during the lifetime of such Trust/Society.

e. ‘The recommending MP or any of his farnily members (MP's spouse, parents,
brothers, sisters, children, grand-children and their spouses and their in-laws)
should not be President or Chairman or Member of the Management Committee
or Trustee, of the Trust/Society.

Roles and Responsibilities

1.4

Under the Scheme,: Members, of’ Parliament recommend works of developmental

nature in their constituency/areas for creations of durable community assets; based on the
locally felt needs. The areas identified as priority for recommended works include health and
family welfare, education, electricity, drinking water facility, irrigation facilities, non-

conventional energy sources. Under the scheme, the five stakeholders are namely, viz.

Members of Parliament, Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation (MoSPI), State

“4


- Nodal Department, District Authority (DC/DM) and the implementing agency. Each
stakeholder is entrusted with a set of responsibilities where the MPs are the prime
contributors on whose recommendation the work. initiates. The nodal Ministry, MoSPI, is:
another stakeholder who is endowed with the role of release of funds. along with proper
monitoring, account keeping & evaluation of developmental works thereof. Once the works
are recommended by MPs, the State Nodal Department (third stakeholder) has its role to play
where they coordinate & monitor the recommended works along with taking action on the
complaints received. The District Authority (fourth stakeholder) is entrusted with the role of
issue of administrative/financial sanction together with maintenance of various records/work
registers etc. They also maintain accounts & provide Facilitation Centres to the Members of
Parliament. It is the prime responsibility of the District Authority to undertake action with

“regard to submission of Monthly Progress Reports (MPR), Utilization Certificates & also look

into the aspect concerning Audit Reports. The final execution of the works’ under the scheme i

rests on the Implementing Agency(fifth stakeholder) who executes the works so sanctioned
under the scheme.


CHAPTER-II

PROJECT ALLOCATION, RELEASE AND UTILIZATION (2014-2021)

During the first financial year of the Scheme in 1993-94 an amount of २5 Lakh was

allotted to each MP which was increased to €1 Crore per annum per MP from 1994-95

onwards. This was further stepped up to €2 Crore in 1998-99 and presently it stands
enhanced to %5 Crore from the financial year 2011-12 onwards.

cr)

Entitlement
(in ₹ crore)

[1993-94
1994-95 to 1997-98
1998-99 to 2010-11
2011-12 onwards

When asked about the methodology/criteria being adopted for revision of budget

allocation under MPLAD Scheme, the Ministry made the following submission:

2.3

“This. is as per the decision of the Government in consultation with the M/o
Finance, The subject matter of annual entitlement under MPLADS has previously
been examined in detail in consultation with D/o Expenditure, M/o Finance.":

Details of allocation, release and utilization of funds under MPLAD Scheme for the last

seven Financial Years as furnished by the Ministry is as under:

TABLE
<in Crore
Budget (७01 Releases|Expenditure % of GOl% ०

Allocation

Releases [Expenditure
over Budgetlover Budge’
Allocation [Allocation

2634.94) 84.81
3628.01
3903.12
4076.29

‘Sea Siae| ieearemen ia
~, 5016.52 99,99)

3950.00)
3950.00)
3950.00)
3950.00)
3950.00)



“Expenditure may be greater than release in the corresponding ‘period, This is
not incongruous as funds are non-lapsable and unspéni funds as well as. the
interest accruing at the district level are utilized in the subsequent years,

POSITION OF MPLADS in 2020-21 & 2021-22: The.Union Cabinet in its
meeting held on 6" April decided riot to Operate MPLADS for FY 2020-21 and FY ~
2021-22, and as such there shall be no release of MPLADS installments during
these two years including the unreleased installments on or before
31.03.2020. Annual budgetary outlay for MPLADS' for FY 2020-21 had also
been placed at the disposal of D/o Expenditure, M/o Finance for managing the
health and economic impacts of COVID-19." :

@ The expenditure of funds is an Ongoing exercise. It is expected to
progressively increase with passage of time, Expenditure in the Ongoing FY

2020-21 is being incurred from the unspent balances available with the District
Authorities. ६

RELEASE OF MPLADS FUNDS ’
2.4 118 entitlement of MPLADS fund of an MP for a particular year is determined as under:

Period in the financial
ear as MP

Less than 3 months
Up to 9 months

50% of the annual allocation
100% of the annual allocation

More than 9 months

'. Release of Annual Entitlement

2.5. The Ministry has submitted the following guidelines which are to be adhered to in
Tespect of release of funds under MPLAD Scheme:

The annual entitlement of 5 Crore is released in two equal instalments of %2.5 Crore
each, by Government of India directly to the District Authority of the Nodal District of the
Member of Parliament concerned.

(a) First Instalment: At the time of the constitution of Lok Sabha and election of a
Rajya Sabha Member, the first installment of €2.5 crore is ‘released to the Nodal
District Authority without any documents.


In the remaining years, the first installment is released in the beginning of the financial
year subject to the following conditions: -

i. the second installment of the previous year was released for the MP concerned;

ii. subject to furnishing of the provisional Utilization Certificate of previous year covering
at least 80% of the expenditure of the first installment of the previous year; and

iii, the unspent balance of fund of the MP concerned is less than %03 Crore:

(b) Second Installment: The second installment of the MPLADS funds of a financial
year is released subject to the fulfillment of the following eligibility criteria: -

‘j, the unsanctioned balance amount available in the account of the District
Authority after taking into account the cost of all the work sanctioned is less than
₹1 Crore; : ;

; ii, the unspent balance of fund of the MP concemed is less than &2.5 Crore; and

iii, Utilization Certificate of the previous financial year and Audit Certificate for the
funds released for MP concerned in the year prior to previous year have been
furnished by the: District Authority in format prescribed in the Guidelines
respectively. 4

The above stipulations are calculated from the Monthly Progress Report for each
sitting and former MP term-wise separately. The Monthly Progress Report in the prescribed
format along with a copy of bank account statement/passbook is to be furnished by the
District Authority, The unspent balance of fund is verified from the PFMS ‘statement or bank
account statement of Hon'ble MP / Ex-MP.

Non-lapsable nature of funds

2.6 During the course of examination, the Ministry informed that funds released to the
District Authority by the Government of India are non-lapsable. Further, the Ministry clarified
the issue of funds under the scheme as under: (

“Funds left in the district can be carried forward for utilization in the subsequent
years. However, the total releasés in any year is governed by the overall budget
allocation for MPLAD Scheme to MoSPI. Thus, though the Rs.5 crore gets
notionally accumulated each year for an Hon'ble MP, any’amount not spent by
this Ministry goes back to Consolidated Fund of India at the end of the Financial
Year and does not remain with’ MoSPI.”

8


Utilization Certificate

2.7 As mentioned in the above para 2.4 (b)iii, one of the criteria for Telease of second
installment of a financial year is subject to submission of Utilization Certificate of the previous
financial year. In this connection, the Committee sought to know whether the guideline of
furnishing provisional Utilization Certificate of Previous year covering at least 80% expenditure
of the first installment of the previous year for the telease of first Installment in the beginning
of the financial year could be reconsidered, as furnishing 80% utilization in a gap of one-year
is a huge task. The Committee also inquired about the details of steps taken by the Ministry to

* address the issue of sluggish process of verification, approval and other formalities: at the
level of Nodal District Authorities in respect of projects and consequent delay in submission of —
Utilization Certificate. In this regard, the Ministry submitted as under:

“Furnishing of Provisional Utilization Certificate by the District Authority of at least
80% of the first Installment of the previous FY is a pre-requisite for release of first
installment..of the current FY. This Condition has been incorporated in the
MPLADS Guidelines vide an amendment in Aug, 2017 only after consultation
with M/o Finance and upon the findings of Third Party Physical Monitoring of
MPLADS. Presently, there is no proposal in the Ministry for revising 80% limit.”

Funds released under MPLADS are Teleased as grants-in-aid for creation of capital

assets (Assistance to District Rural Development Agencies/ Local Bod! ies),

" The Budgetary outlay for detailed Demand for Grants in ro MPLAD Scheme is as
* under: हु ad
2553 MP Local Area Development Scheme (Major Head)
00.101 Assistance to District Rural Development Agencies/ Local Bodies (Minor Head)
01 Grant Assistance ५
01.00.31-Grant-in-aid General,
01.00.35-Grant-in-aid for creation of capital assets
In view of this, furnishing of Utilization Certificates by the District Authorities is
necessitated to fulfil Rule 240 of General Financial Rules, 2017.

2.8 Responding to a specific query as to whether the respective District Authorities issue
Utilization Certificate as and when the MP recommends/sanctions a project/work or at the
: point when allotted fund is utilized for that particular project/work, MoSPI stated as under:
“Para 5.3 of the MPLADS Guidelines, inter alia, clearly stipulates as follows, “On

the completion of a work, the Implementing Agency shall quickly finalize the
i 7.


‘accounts for that work and shall furnish a work completion report and utilization

certificate and return the un-utilized balance (savings) and intérest amount within
’ 30 days to the District Authority concerned.” S

From above, it is clear that individual work-wise Utilization/completion Certificates

are received by the District Authorities from the implementing agencies at the

fleld level, which are then complled and consolidated at the level of the

respective District. Ministry receives consolidated Utilization Certificates from the

District Authorities against installments previously released to the District
Authorities 4

2.9 On being asked to explain the necessity of Utilization Certificate and whether it is
feasible for the Ministry to dispense with the Utilization Certificate without making

amendments in the guidelines prescribed under MPLAD Fund Scheme, the Ministry
submitted as under: +

“Rule 230(7) of General Financial Rules, 2017 inter alia states as follows, “When
recurring Grants-in-aid are sanctioned to the same Institution or Organization for
the same purpose, the unspent balance of the previous Grant should be taken
into account in sanctioning the subsequent Grant. For this purpose, the
Programme Division of Ministries/Department shall take help of PFMS Portal to
know the bank balance of the recipients before making each release. The
instructions of Department of Expenditure regarding the use of PFMS Portal for
Central Sector Schemes issued from time to time shall be strictly followed by all
Ministries/ Departments. The principles of ‘just in time release’, should be
applied for releases in respect of'all payments to the extent possible.”

Further, Rule 238(2) of General Financial Rules, 2017 inter alia stipulates as follows :

“In respect of recurring Grants, Ministry or Department concerned should release
any amount sanctioned for the subsequent financial year only after Utilization
Certificate in respect of Grants of preceding financial year is submitted. Release .
‘of Grants-in-aid in excess of seventy-five per cent of the total amount sanctioned
for the subsequent financial year shall be done only after utilization certificate
and the annual audited statement relating to Grants-in-aid released in the
preceding year are submitted to the satisfaction of the Ministry/Department
concerned. Reports submitted by the Internal Audit parties of the Ministry or
Department and Inspection Reports received from Indian Audit. and Accounts
Department and the performance reports if any received for the third and fourth
quarter in the year should also be looked into while sanctioning further Grants.”

Thus, from above, submission of Utilization..Certificate has been necessitated only
upon instructions/directions of M/o Finance from time to time. -

2.10 When asked to furnish the details of steps being taken to streamline the issue of
delayed ‘submission of requisite fund-related documents like Utilization Certificate, Provisional

10


Utilization Certificate and Audit Certificates by District Authorities, MoSPI in its written reply
stated as under: | i

“Ministry has time and again taken up the matter of sub-optimal utilization of
MPLADS funds with the State/UT Nodal Departments during the Annual Review
Meeting on MPLADS, the latest being 22nd All India Review ‘Meeting with
State/UT Nodal Departments on 17th January, 2020.

Allthe States/ UTs were directed to take up the cases rigorously where utilization”
is not up to the mark to improve the utilization of funds. The States/UTs have
been directed to ensure that funds released in a year are utilized in the same
year so that delay in release of funds could be minimized and instances of

parking / idling of funds in the bank accounts as unspent balance could be
reduced. Y

District Authorities have also been directed to speed’ up utilization (by following
due processes) and diligently follow the time line for sanction as prescribed in
Para 3.12 and 3.13 of MPLADS Guidelines.

The integrated MPLADS portal has facilities for online submission of Audit
Certificates, Utilization Certificates, Provisional Utilization Certificates and
Monthly Progress Reports. District Authorities have been advised to make utmost
utilization of these services/facilities on the MPLADS portal.

The Nodal Departments of the State/UT Governments are also impressed upon
by the Ministry to put in place an institutional mechanism to regularly review the
progress of implementation and utilization of funds under MPLAD Scheme, if not 7
done so far. They are time and again requested to convene meetings under the
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary/ Administrator of the State/UT with the District
Authorities and MPs at least once in a year and: send the Minutes of such
Meetings to the Ministry. :

Officers of the Ministry are deputed to visit various States/districts to review the
implementation of the Scheme which contributes positively to speed up the pace
of execution of works.”

Ministry also stated that the issues of delayed submission of fund-related documents
are pursued with the District Authority. The District Authorities discharge their duties and *
responsibilities under the superintendence of concerned State/UT Government.

2.11 During the course of examination, the Committee sought to know from the Ministry
about the details of non-coordination, if any, between District Nodal Officers and Officers of

Central Government leading to improper utilization of funds. In reply to this the Ministry .
submitted as under: :

11


“The problem of sub-optimal utilization of MPLADS funds may not be attributed to
lack of coordination between the District Authorities and the Ministry. MPLADS is
governed by the’set of guidelines (June 2016) and Ministry follows the same.

Ministry has time and again taken up the matter of sub-optimal utilization of
MPLADS funds with the State/UT Nodal Departments during the Annual Review
Meeting on MPLADS, the latest being 22nd All India Review Meeting with
State/UT Nodal Departments on 17th January, 2020. s

All the States/ UTs were directed. to take up the cases rigorously where utilization
is not up to the mark to improve the. utilization of funds. The States/UTs have
_ been directed to ensure that funds released in a year are utilized in the same
year so that delay in release of funds could be minimized. and instances of

parking / idling of funds in the bank accounts as unspent balance could be
"reduced. sos

‘District Authorities have also been, directed to Speed up utilization (by following
due processes) and diligently follow the time line for Sanction as prescribed in
Para 3.12 and 3.13 of MPLADS Guidelines.

The Nodal Departments of the State/UT Governments are also impressed upon
by the Ministry to put in place an institutional mechanism to regularly review the
progress of implementation and utilization of funds under MPLAD Scheme, if not
done so far. They are time and again requested to convene meetings under the
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary/ Administrator of the State/UT with the District
Authorities and MPs at least once in a year and send the Minutes of such
Meetings to the Ministry. Z के

Officers of the Ministry are deputed to visit various States/districts to review the
implementation of the Scheme which contributes positively to speed up the pace
of execution of works.

Release of funds under MPLADS is subject to submission of these fund-related
‘documents and them being found in order upon subsequent scrutiny along with
fulfilment of criteria of unspent and unsanctioned balance.

For the purpose of making release of MPLADS funds; - Ministry receives

‘consolidated Utilization Certificates from. the District Authorities against
instalments previously released to'the District Authorities. Individual Work-wise
Utilization/completion Certificates. are’received by the District Authorities from the
implementing agencies at the field level as MPLADS is implemented at the field
level within the aegis of Scheme architecture. The Utilization Certificates have to
be duly counter signed by the District Authority. Ministry lays specific emphasis
on the opening and closing figures, amount of interest accruing and details of
checks exercised by the District Authority while furnishing the Utilization
Certificate. है

The Monthly Progress Reports are dynamic in nature which keep changing ,
progressively with corresponding telease/expenditure and contain cumulative
details on physical and financial progress of works such as number of works
‘recommended, sanctioned, ongoing, information on unspent and unsanctioned
है 12


balances, amount received on distribution .from predecessor MP, . interest
accruing, number of inspections done by the District Authority etc, Every fresh
MPR received through the portal of the Ministry is duly scrutinized and. compared
by the Ministry with the previous MPR submitted by the District Authority and
discrepancies, if any, are taken up with the’ District Authorities for
taking appropriate action and submit rectified MPRs along with ‘clarification, on
the discrepancies so observed, A dedicated team of Officials is entrusted with
this task. All the clauses of Audit Certificate are minutely scrutinized and even
minor. discrepancies in. the wordings/figures are taken up with the District
Authorities who are then Tequired to take up the discrepancies with the Auditing

firm and re-submit rectified Audit Certificate’ along with the clause-wise action
taken report.” रब]

Suspension of MPLADS F und/Non-Release of Fund

22 The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 67 April 2020, has decided not to operate
MPLADS for FY 2020-21 and FY 2021-22, and as such there shall be no release of MPLADS
installments during these two years including the unreleased Installments on or before
31.03.2020. Annual budgetary outlay for MPLADS for FY 2020-21 has also been placed at
the disposal of D/o Expenditure, M/o Finance for managing the health and economic impacts
of COVID-19. However, the Committee observed that.installments for the financial year 2019-

" 20 were also not released for most of the MPs and when asked to specify reasons for the |
same, the Ministry submitted as under:

“Release of funds under MPLADS is subject to fulfilment of fund-related criteria
as mentioned in the guidelines and submission of fund-related documents and.
those documents being found ॥ order upon scrutiny along with fulfilment of
criteria of unspent and unsanctioned balance, Delayed submission of requisite
fund-related documents like Utilization Certificates, Provisional Utilization
Certificates and Audit Certificates, by the District Authorities, has a cascading
effect on release of pending instalments. The instalments of years prior to 2020-
21 have not been released in respect of certain Members of Parliament because
of delayed submission of the fund-related documents and subsequently due to .
the decision of the Union Cabinet not to Operate MPLADS for FY 2020-21 and
2021-22 and placing of the annual budgetary outlay for FY 2020-21 at the
disposal of M/o Finance for managing the adverse economic and health impacts
of COVID-19 pandemic. Hence, at present, the Ministry has no budget at its
disposal. These pending instalments will be released on re-operationalization of
MPLADS by the Government in accordance of the Expenditure Dept. and
availability of funds with the Ministry.”

“Additionally, expenditure in respect of funds allocated through the Central Sector

- Schemes through EAT module of PFMS has .been made mandatory on

instructions of M/o Finance. Accordingly, release of funds under MPLADS, after
49 5 .


first installment, .is to-be made only if the utilization of funds is booked through
EAT module of PFMS. Furthermore, even the first installment of the 47" Lok
Sabha was released. only upon registration of bank account on PFMS and
subsequent approval of the bank account by the Ministry.” lon

2.13 During the course of examination with regard to a specific query of the Committee as
to why previous years’ installments were not released, though it has been withheld only for
2020-21 and 2021-22, the representative of the Ministry who deposed before the Committee
stated as under:

"न the system under which any of the Government's funds get released when
there is a budget provision. The budget provision in the current year was given
Rs,3950 crore, But after the Budget was passed, the order that has been issued
with the approval of the highest authority of the Government is that during 2020-
2021 and‘ 2021-2022, instalments cannot be released. The second part is
important and where the answer lies that the fund of Rs. 3,950 crore minus Rs. -
40 crore for independent evaluations that was earmarked for evaluation of the
activities, etc., means that Rs. 3,940 crore stands resumed back for other
purposes relating to COVID-19. This is a conscious decision of the Government
that priority needs to be given for more important activities and accordingly for
some of the activities like these, Rs. 3,940 crore was allocated which were more
emergent and perhaps more important activities and the decision of the
Government has been that this funds now needs to be placed at the disposal of
the Finance Ministry for other purpose. As a result, here lies the answer and |am
open for further clarification." |, as a Secretary, in the Department of Statistics and
Programme Implementation would say that | have no fund / no sanctioned
budget for releasing money to anyone for this purpose. Releasing the fund
requires Budgetary provisions and sanction for the purpose for which it has been
approved on the floor of the House and in turn all other procedures have been
done.”

2.14 The list of MPs to whom installment(s) of the financial year 2019. On being asked as
to why-these installments were not released and the details: of the ‘head’ under which the
_ unreleased fund gets accumulated, MoSPI submitted as under:

“The unreleased funds out of annual budgetary outlay under MPLADS for any
FY with MOSPI at the end of the.FY do not remain with MOSPI and goes back to
Consolidated Fund of India. Pendency of release of MPLADS funds to the
- respective Nodal District is due to non-availability of requisite documents from
the Districts or not meeting the criteria of unspent and unsanctioned balance
stipulated in MPLADS Guidelines.”

14


2.15 * The Committee desired to know the status of release of ‘pending installments of

Financial Year 2019-20 and previous years in respect of Lok Sabha MPs, To this query,
Ministry replied as under: ij

the

"In respect of 17th Lok Sabha for the FY 2019-20, 102 installments are pending

for release (Refer Appendix-l), In Tespect of 16th Lok Sabha, the year-wise
Status of Pending installments is as under.” :

Financial Year Pending instalments in respect of

-Hon'ble MPs of 16th Lok Sabha
No. of instalments Amount (in =
: crore)

2018-19

4175

“

2.16 The list of MPs who have requested for the release of pending instalments after the
Suspension of MPLAD Scheme for two years is placed in Appendix- Il. When the Committee
Sought to know the decision taken in the matter of release of MPLAD Fund to Hon'ble

Members whose tenure would get over during the period when. MPLADS Fund remain
suspended, the Ministry clarified as under:

“The matter has already been taken up with M/o Finance and consultations are

ongoing. Currently, Ministry has no funds available under MPLADS for release of
pending instalments.” i

247° In response to a specific query of the Committee as to whether the suspended MPLAD |
funds for the financial years 2020-21 and 2021-22 would be released in the financial year
2022-23, as the Fund is non-lapsable and if any new projects/works could be recommended

as it takes substantial amount of time to get approval for the same, the Ministry made the
following submission in this regard:

a5


“As per Para 4.4 of the MPLADS Guidelines, funds released to the District
Authority by the Government of India are non-lapsable. Funds left in the district
can be carried forward for utilization in the subsequent years. However, the total
teleases in any year is governed by the overall budget allocation for MPLAD
Scheme to MoSPI. Thus, though the £5 crore gets notionally accumulated each
year for an Hon'ble MP, any amount not spent by this Ministry goes back to
Consolidated Fund of India at thé end of the Financial Year and does not remain
with MoSPI

- Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 6" April 2020°decided not to operate the
MPLADS for: FY 2020-21 and 2021-22 and place the funds of two years at the
disposal of the Ministry of Finance for managing the adverse impact of covid
pandemic. The Ministry has written to M/o Finance for greater clarity in the
matter and same will be communicated to the Committee as and when it is
received.

Consequent upon the decision of the Union Cabinet not to operate MPLADS for
FY 2020-21 and 2021-22, Ministry issued a detailed set of instructions vide
Circular dated 08.04.2020 to all the stakeholders. District Authorities have been
advised 1010 sanction/award any recommended work for which funds are either
not available or cannot be completed within the available funds as no more’funds
shall be released. Hon'ble Members have also been requested not to
tecommend any new work for which funds are not available in the accounts of
the District Authority.” :

2.18 Inquiring about the centage charged by PSUs for undertaking MPLADS projects, the
Ministry replied as follows:

Para 4.17.1 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “Excluding
‘Administrative Expenses as provided for in para 4.17, the Nodal Department,
District Authority or Implementing Agency shall not levy any expenses like
supervision charges, centage charges, salary of personnel, travelling expenses, °
_ etc. in the implementation and supervision of works including preparatory works
under the MPLADS”,

16


CHAPTER-III

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCHEME

" The MPLAD scheme is governed by a set of guidelines, which are revised from time
to time. The present guidelines along with subsequent revised circulars are available in,
public domain at: ; https:/Awww.mplads.gov.in/MPLADS/UploadedFiles/

. MPLADSGuidelines2016English_638.pdf, When the Ministry was asked about the existence
of any fixed timeline for the revision of the said guidelines andthe details of criteria adopted
by the Government for revision or making amendments in the guidelines, MoSPI informed
the Committee as under:

“Revision of the MPLADS Guidelines is not contingent upon any time-line. Since
the issue of the extant MPLADS Guidelines in June, 2016, twenty amendments

to various Paragraphs in the Guidelines have been made. Ministry takes up-the
amendments to MPLADS Guidelines on the basis of references teceived from
the stakeholders of the Scheme on a- case-by-case basis and
makes amendments based on the merit of the reference complying with the basic
objectives of the Scheme.: Further, holistic revision of the extant MPLADS
Guidelines shall be contingent upon the findings of the proposed third party
physical evaluation of MPLADS works in 216 districts during FY 2020-21 and
2021-22. The Request For Proposal (RFP) for the third party physical evaluation
of MPLADS is currently under way for selection of an independent third party
through a transparent process.”

The details of amendments made by the Ministry in the MPLAD Scheme Guidelines
in the recent past is at Appendix. Ill
3.2 The Ministry in its background note (furnished to the Committee) stated that under
the scheme, recommending of works by the Members of Parliament initiates the entire
series of activities of any project. Elected Members of Lok Sabha can recommend works
. within their Constituencies and Elected Members of Rajya Sabha can recommend works
within the State of Election. Nominated Members could recommend works anywhere in the
country. All Members have to opt for a district for the Purpose of executing works
recommended by them and overall coordination on their behalf under MPLADS. This district
is called the Nodal District.

The Nodal District Authority concerned is responsible for implementing the eligible
works recommended by the Member of Parliament and maintaining the details of individual
works executed and amount spent under the Scheme. The District Authority is required to

प्र


maintain a shelf of projects which is. only illustrative and not exhaustive. The District
Authority is expected to follow the established work scrutiny; technical, work estimation
tendering and administrative procedure of the State/UT Government concerned in the matter
of work execution and is responsible for timely and effective implementation of such works.
They have to get the eligible sanctioned works executed as per the established: procedure of
the State Government (in the matter of technical sanction, tender/non-tender, schedule of
rates, etc). The powers to grant administrative sanction/approval remains with District
_ Authority. Assets created under MPLADS are entrusted by District Authorities to User
_ Agencies (e.g. local bodies) for maintenance,

3.3 On being asked to furnish the criteria applied by the District Authorities for'selection of
implementing agency, the Ministry has made the following written submission in this regard:

“Para 2.11(a) of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “The District
Authority shall make the selection of an appropriate Implementing Agency
through which a particular work recommended.by an MP would be executed”,

Para 2.11(b) of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “the selection of
the Implementing Agency shall be undertaken in accordance with the State
Government rules/guidelines applicable for the purpose. While selecting an
implementing agency the Central Government agencies viz. CPWD, NBCC, etc
may also be considered by the State Government/District Authority. However, for
‘certain works in certain Central Government Ministries/Organizations ‘(like
Railways) where the Implementing Agency has necessarily to be the concerned
Central Government Ministry/Organization, the same is to be selected as the
Implementing Agency.”

3.4. When asked to provide the details of cases where the implementing agency has failed
to complete the allotted work in time along with the details of guidelines under which such

defaulting implementing agencies are dealt with, the Ministry in its written reply. furnished as
under: i

‘The Ministry takes due’ cognizance of such complaints/instances/grievances
which are brought to its notice. Complaints of delays/irregularities against
implementing agencies are redressed at the level of District Authority and on
unsatisfactory response from the District Authority; the matter is escalated by the
Ministry to the concerned State/UT Government under. whose superintendence
‘the District Authorities discharge their duties and responsibilities

MPLADS Guidelines already have provisions for action against implementing
agencies, Para’3.13 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “The
sanction letter/order shall stipulate a time limit for completion of the work to the

18


3.5

concerned,”

The Committee Sought to be apprised of the Monitoring mechanism that was put in

place to oversee the developments/progress made by the district authorities/implementing

agencies in respect to allotted Projects under MPLAD Funds, To this, the Ministry submitted
asunder: *

3.6 |

* “The role of the District Authority and Implementing Agency in review and supervision

of works is clearly laid down in Para 6.4 and 6.5 of the MPLADS Guidelines.

Para 6.4(i) of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “The District Authority
would be responsible for overall coordination and supervision of the works: under the

-scheme at the district level and inspect at least 10% of the works under implemehtation ”

every year. The District Authority should involve the MPs in the inspections of Projects.
to the extent feasible.” In addition. to this, Para 6.4(vi). of the MPLADS Guidelines
stipulates as follows, “The District Authority shall review, every month and in any case
at least once in every quarter, MPLADS works implementation with the Implementing

meetings and send a report of such review -meetings to Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation.” ° :

of the officers of the Implementing Agencies to tegularly visit the works spots to ensure
that the works are Progressing satisfactorily as per the prescribed procedure and
specifications and the time schedule,” In addition to this, Para 6.5(il) of the MPLADS
Guidelines stipulates as follows, “The Implementing Agencies shall furnish physical
and financial progress.of each work to the District Authority every month with a copy to

Para-6.5(i) of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “It will be the responsibility

* the concerned State Department. The Implementing Agencies should provide the

report also in the soft format. A work fegister should also be maintained by the -
implementing agencies Showing details of the physical and financial Progress of

visit made by the implementing agencies. Implementing Agency must inspect 100% of
the works.” Further Para 6.5(iil) of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “The
Implementing Agencies shall furnish completion report/certificates and utilization
certificates to the District Authority within one month of completion of the works.”

On being asked to furnish the details of action taken/being taken on respective district

authorities/implementing agencies for delay in commencement of projects and consequent
Non-utilization of funds, the Ministry submitted as under:

19


“Ministry takes due cognizance of cases which are brought to its notice, where
delay in utilization of funds and sanctioning of funds have taken place. Those
" cases are taken up with the respective State/UT Governments where-by Ministry
also impresses upon fixing of responsibility against erring Officers by the
State/UT Government as per provisions of Para 3.3.1 of MPLADS guidelines
which states that "In case, there is still any abandoned/suspended MPLAD work
under the Scheme, it shall be completed by the State Government from their own
funds. The State Government will also fix responsibility and take necessary
disciplinary action against the erring officials. The District Authority may ensure
that the funds must have been utilized as sanctioned earlier so that duplication of
allocation of funds does not take place". = ४ ‘

3:7 The Ministry also furnished in its background note that a Department in each
State/UT is. designated as. the Nodal Department with the overall responsibility ‘of
supervision, evaluation and coordination of implementation of the Scheme with the districts
and other line departments. The Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, as the
Nodal Ministry, is responsible for policy formulation, release of funds and evaluation of the
implementation of the Scheme. The Ministry releases the entitled funds to the Members and

“ monitors the overall position of funds released, cost of works sanctioned, funds spent. The
Ministry also monitors the receipt of Completion Reports, Utilization Certificates and Audit
Certificate from the District Authorities. It also receives the cumulative information on the

_ works recommended, sanctioned, expenditure incurred ete through the Monthly Progress
Reports-(MPRs).

3.8 When asked by the Committee to elaborate the mechanism in place for facilitating the
procedure of processing of proposal, estimates, tender, passing of bills and release of
payment to contractors within a stipulated time frame, the Ministry stated as under:

“Various. provisions in MPLADS guidelines ‘that facilitate the procedure of

processing of proposals, passing of bills, timely release of payments etc. are given
below:

As per Para 3.3 of the MPLADS Guidelines, “The District Authority ’shall identify
the Implementing Agency capable of executing the eligible work qualitatively,
timely and satisfactorily. The District Authority. shall’ follow the established work
scrutiny; technical, work estimation, tendering and administrative procedure of the
State/UT Government concerned in the: matter of work execution and shall be
responsible for timely and effective implementation of such works.

Para 3.12 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “All recommended
eligible works should be: sanctioned within 75 days from the date of receipt of the
recommendation, after completing all formalities. The District Authority shall,

20


however, inform MPs regarding rejection, if any, within 45 days from the date of
receipt of recommendations, with reasons thereof.

In case of the time limits mentioned in the section falling within the period of
operation of model code of conduct notified by the Election Commission, then
such period as notified by model code of conduct will not be included in the
teckoning of time limits

Para 4.15 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “The District Authority
shall release funds to the implementing agency in accordance with the State *
Government rules/guidelines applicable for the purpose

Para 3.14 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates. as follows, “Decision making
powers in regard to technical, financial and administrative sanctions to be
accorded under the Scheme, vest in the district level functionaries. To facilitate
quick implementation of projects under this Scheme, full powers should be
delegated by the State/UT Governments to the district functionaries. The District
Authorities will have full powers to get the works technically approved and financial
estimates prepared by the competent district functionaries before according the
final administrative sanction and approval. The District Authority should, before
sanctioning the work, ensure:that all clearances for such works should have been
taken from the competent authorities and the work conforms to the Guidelines.” -

As already evident from’above provisions, works under MPLADS are executed as .
per respective State Government's technical, administrative and financial rules.

And therefore the pace of execution of works under MPLADS varies from State to
State

Utilization of MPLADS Fund

3.9 As already mentioned, the MPLAD scheme ‘is governed by a set of guidelines. In this
regard, the Committee-sought to know if there is any provision in the extant guidelines which
, allows the MPs to utilize MPLADS fund for NGOs. The Ministry replied to the query as
follows:

“The relevant provisions of MPLADS Guidelines relating to allocation of funds, to
Trusts/Societies/NGOs are as follows: -

Community infrastructure and public utility building works are also permissible for
registered Societies/Trusts under the Scheme, provided that the Society/Trust is
engaged in the social service/welfare activity and has been in existence for the
preceding three years. The existence of the Society/Trust shall be reckoned
from the date it started its activities in the field, or the date of registration under
the relevant Registration Act, whichever is later. The beneficiary Society/Trust
shall be a’ well-established, public spirited, non-profit making entity, enjoying a
good reputation in the area. Whether such a society/trust is well reputed or not,
should be decided by the District Authority concerned on the basis of relevant
factors, like performance in the field of social service, welfare activities, non-profit

23


orientation of its activities, transparency of its activities and sound financial
position. ‘ ; ४०८

The ownership of the land may remain with the Society/Trust, but the structure
constructed with MPLADS funds shall be the property of State/UT Government.
The Society/Trust shall undertake to Operate, maintain and up keep the
asset created under MPLADS at its cost. If at any time, it is found that the
asset ~ created with MPLADS funds is not being
.used for the purpose for which the asset
was funded, the State/UT Government may take over the asset and proce
ed to recover from the Society/Trust, the cost incurred from MPLADS for the
creation of asset along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum calculated with
effect from the date of use of MPLADS fund: for the works concurred. A formal
agreement will be -executed by the Society/Trust with the.
District Authority in favour of the Governnient in advance for the purpose.
This si है
agreement will be registered under the relevant Registration Act on a non-
judicial stamp paper of Rs.10 or more, as is applicable in the State/UT. No stamp

duty would be required to be paid for registration as there is no formal transfer of
assets. ४

Not more than Rs. 50 Lakh, can be spent from MPLADS fund, for,one or more
works of a particular Society/Trust in the lifetime of that Society/Trust. If a Society
has already availed of MPLADS funds upto Rs. 50 Lakh, no more funds can be
recommended for that Society/Trust under the Scheme. From the financial year
‘2012-13, an MP can recommend funds, only upto Rs. One Crore in all, in a
financial year from MPLADS funds for works to Societies/Trusts. The
recommendation made by Hon'ble MPs for the period prior to the financial year
2012-13 is to be’ regulated as per the guidelines existing during that period,

The MPLADS funding is not permissible to a Society/Trust, if the recommending
MP or any of his/her family members is the President/Chairman or Member of
the Managing Committee or Trustee of the registered Society/Trust in question.
Family members would include MP and MPs spouse which would comprise their
parents, brothers and sisters, children, grandchildren and their ‘spouses and their

. In-laws, MPs may ensure the spirit of the guidelines is maintained by avoiding
circular or mutual funding of Trusts/Societies. भर

Further, when funds are recommended towards a Society/Trust by a Member of
Parliament and clarifications/documents as required under the Guidelines for
scrutiny before sanctioning are requested by the District Authorities, the said
Society/Trust should provide the requisite documents within a maximum period of
three months. from the date of receipt of the letter’ from the district
administration. In case the documents are not received even after a period of
three months, the district administration can send two reminders within a month.
If the required information is still not received, the recommendation by the MP
towards the Society/Trust may be treated as cancelled by the district
administration and intimation of the same may be given to the recommending
MP. :

22


Relaxed provision for most deprived Segments: For trusts/societies that run
charitable residential homes for orphans (anathalaya/yateemkhana), charitable
residential homes for old/aged persons, charitable residential homes for widows,
Charitable residential homes/colonies for lepers, charitable residential homes for
blind persons, charitable residential homes for spastic/mentally retarded children
or charitable residential homes for deaf and dumb children, the restriction of
getting MPLADS funds upto Rs.50 lakh in their. lifetime will stand relaxed. to Rs.1
crore. The total funds received from MPLADS under this relaxed dispensation will
be used only in and for the charitable and residential home/colony mentioned
afore (and not for any other purpose of the trust/society concerned). And the

funds will be utilised only for the purposes Provided for in para 3.21 of the
Guidelines. ‘ e

Both alded and un-aided educational institutions which are recognized by a
Board of Secondary Education/University and are run by trusts/societies are
- eligible for receiving MPLADS funds for all permissible items under the
Guidelines; the particular trust/society which runs the concerned educational
institution will be governed by ‘the maximum ceiling imposed on trusts/societies
under the Guidelines (para 3.21) [that is, Rs. 60 Lakh to one particular
trust/society in its life-time (as also that one honourable MP’ can recommend only
upto Rs. 1 Crore in one financial year to all trusts/societies taken together)] ‘

The additional amount of Rs.25 Lakh to be spent in the tribal areas
only: In order to encourage trusts and societies for the betterment of tribal
People, the ceiling of Rs. 50 Lakh Stipulated for building assets by trusts and
Societies in’ Para. 3.21.2 of the Guidelines, will be enhanced by 50% to Rs. 75 Lakhs
subject to conditions (a) The community building work are primarily for the benefit
of tribal people in tribal areas, (b) The works undertaken and the beneficiary
Trust/Society should satisfy all other conditions of Guidelines of MPLADS, records, etc.,
should be well-reputed and dedicated to community/public good. 2

Cooperative Societies:

__|. - Cooperative societies will be eligible for assistance under MPLADS at par
with registered trusts/societies. or:

_ 1. The cooperative society should be in existence for the preceding 3 years
and, in the opinion of the district authority, based on an objective assessment of

performance and records, etc., should be well-reputed and dedicated to

community/public good.

"मी. ~ The assistance will only be for community infrastructure and public utility
building works (which are permissible for trusts/societies under Para 3.21).

iv. The structure constructed with MPLADS funds will be the property of the
State/UT Government. (Para 3.21.1 of the Guidelines will be applicable mutatis
mutandis) e

v. The upper ceilings for assistance to trusts/societies (Rs.50 Lakhs to one
Particular trust/society in its lifetime and Rs.1 crore to all trusts/societies by one

23


MP in.one year) will be applicable. (Para 3.21.2 of the Guidelines will be
-»---—--applicable-mutatis-mutandis) —-——--------—--------- ण।ण।४ए

vi. The recommending MP or any of his/her family members Should not be an
office-bearer or member or having patronage of the cooperative ‘society. Mutual
funding by MPs will not be allowed. (Para 3.21.3 of the Guidelines will be
applicable mutatis mutandis)

vii. The works (of infrastructure and public utility buildings) should be strictly
~ non- commercial in nature.

vil, The works should be for the community or public at large. Individual or
family benefits will not be allowed.

x." Substitution of MPLADS funds for public and community contribution will -
Not be allowed (Para 3.20 of the Guidelines will be applicable)

x. The works'will be put to productive use. Their maintenance and operating
costs will be the responsibility of the recipient cooperative society.

xi, Office and residential buildings of cooperative societies will not be
allowed. Shelters for imparting training for skill development:

_ Shelters for.imparting training for skill development will be permissible in line
with the basic scheme of the MPLADS, with the stipulations that:

a. They will be admissible only for:

.1, government/government institutions (as per the general import of
MPLADS); and

2. registered trusts/societies (as per para 3.21 of the Guidelines on
MPLADS).

b, In both cases:
4. commercial activity will be prohibited

2. only such shelters will be permitted as are suitably and: specifically
designed for the purpose of imparting specialized skill training.

_ 3. the shelters may also be such as can be dismantled, transported and
firmly re-erected and re-used at another spot.

4, the shelters created under the MPLADS will be duly entered in the stock-
register of the recipient government institution or registered trust/society eligible
under para 3.21 of the Guidelines of MPLADS. The implementation will be
undertaken by .the District Authority as per the State Government rules,
guidelines and procedures.

3.10 As per the information furnished by the Ministry, the works meant’ for trust/society,
there is a ceiling of 50 lakh for the lifetime of each Trust/Society. An MP can recommend

24


funds only upto %100 lakh in all in a financial year, from MPLADS funds for works to
Trusts/Societies. The Committee, in this connection, pointed out that there are certain

‘societies which have about100 schools but‘as:per-the-extant guidelines;-assisting-all-these~-—~- ewe

schools with the ceiling of ¥50 lakh is not feasible. Replying to this specific point; the Ministry
stated as under: हे

"Para 3.21.2 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “Not more than ९50
lakh, can.be spent from MPLADS fund, for one or more works of a particular
Society/Trust in the lifetime of that Society/Trust. If a Society has already availed

of MPLADS funds upto %50 lakh, no more funds can be recommended for that
Society/Trust under the Scheme. From the financial year 2012-13, an MP can . .
recommend funds, only upto fone crore in all,.in a financial year from MPLADS
funds for works to Societies/Trusts.

However, Para 3.21.5 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows,

“For trusts/societies that run charitable residential homes for orphans (anathalaya /
yateemkhana), charitable residential homes for old/aged persons, charitable -
residential homes for widows, charitable residential homes/ colonies for lepers,
charitable residential homes for blind persons,. charitable residential homes for
spastic/mentally retarded children’ or charitable residential homes for deaf and
‘dumb children, the restriction of getting MPLADS funds upto %50 lakh in their
lifetime will stand relaxed to %1 crore. The total funds received from MPLADS
under this relaxed dispensation will be used only in and for the charitable and
residential home/colony mentioned afore (and not for any other purpose of the
trust/society concerned)”.

“The MPLADS guidelines fixes upper ceiling of amount which can be spent from |
MPLADS fund, for one or more works of a particular Society/Trust in the lifetime of
that Society/Trust. There is no limit on the number of schools.”

3.11. A-specific query-was raised by the Committee that if there is any provision in the extant

guidelines which allows the successor MP to complete the abandoned work that has been
“recommended and commenced during the tenure of predecessor MP by utilizing the funds’
_allotted to the previous MP and the fate of funds released to an MP who expires during
, his/her tenure. To this, the Ministry replied as under:

“Para 3.13 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “The sanction
letter/order shall stipulate a time limit for completion of the work to the
Implementation Agency. The time limit for completion of the works should
generally not exceed one year. In exceptional cases, where the implementation
time exceeds one year, specific reasons for the same shall be incorporated in the
sanction letter/order. The sanction letter/order shall also include a clause for
suitable action against the Implementation Agency in the event of their failure to’
complete the work within the stipulated time as per the State ‘Government

25


Procedure. A copy of the sanction letter/order shall be sent to the MP
es (-1(-[c -----“------- easement sears tb सकल as ++6०३२३/५००४ ८२५२४ SB

. As an abiding principle, works once sanctioned by the District Authority are to be

completed on mandatory basis. If the works are not completed within the
‘Stipulated time-line, Para 3.3.1 of the MPLADS Guidelines may be invoked which
Stipulates as follows, “In case, there is still any abandoned/ suspended MPLAD
Work under the Scheme,.it shall be completed by the State Government from
their own funds. The State Government will also fix responsibility and take
necessary disciplinary action against the erring officials. The District Authority
may ensure that the funds must have been utilized as sanctioned earlier so that
duplication of allocation of funds does not take place”. -

It is up to the willingness of successor Member of Parliament to recommend
amount from his MPLADS funds towards completion of a previously abandoned
projectiwork. The amount from the MPLADS funds of the new Member shall be
sanctioned by the District Authority towards the abandoned work only if the new
Member indicates his consent to do so formally on his letterhead.

The MPLADS Guidelines are so designed that on execution of the works
diligently as per the laid down procedure, the balance amounts/savings from the
works are refunded back to the District Authority from the implementing agency
within one month.(Para 6.5 (iv))

The funds of predecessor Members by successor Members cannot be utilized
directly. The unspent funds of the predecessor Members could be put to
‘appropriate use only upon completion of all the eligible works of the predecessor
Member and closure of the bank account of the predecessor Member and
transfer of the balance of funds of the predecessor Members to the bank account
of the successor Members. All of these tasks, which are broadly termed
“transfer/distribution of uncommitted balances of funds and closure of accounts",
are to be done by the District Authority as per the procedure laid down in details
at Para 4.7 to 4.10.1 of the MPLADS Guidelines.”

Utilization of MPLADS Fund for COVID-19 Pandemic

3.12 Taking into consideration the Covid-19 situation in the country, the ‘Committee sought
to know from the Ministry the latest details of all the Circulars/Notifications/Guidelines/Orders
- issued by the Ministry in the recent past in connection with the allocation and utilization of
MPLAD funds especially with regard to COVID-19 with special focus on grant for ambulances, ~
providing adequate number of oxygen cylinders or any other medical supplies; and if there
were any restrictions: on grants to be .given to Organizations, other than Government
hospitals, health centers, municipal hospitals. To this, the Ministry replied as under:-

“(i) The Circular dated 30-04-2021 on utilization of MPLADS funds for

purchase of testing, screening and other ‘equipment for prevention of covid-19

pandemic including setting up of independent Oxygen manufacturing plants in
४ 26


Government hospitals and dispensaries and corrigendum dated 13.05.2021 is at
Appendix IV

(ii) With regard to grant from MPLADS for ambulances, -it is stated that
Ambulances are already allowed to be purchased by the District Authorities/District
Chief Medical Officer of the District on the recommendation of a Member of
Parliament [para-3.25 of MPLADS Guidelines, 2016]. However, the operation of
ambulances/hearse services through private organisations which was permissible
under Para 3.25 of MPLADS Guidelines, 2012; has since been withdrawn vide this
Ministry's Circular No:C-66/2011-MPLADS-Vol.Ill, dated 5-6-2015. The MPLADS
Guidelines issued. in 2016 does not include the provision for operation of
ambulance/hearse services through private organization. The other relevant.

provisions of MPLADS Guidelines on grants to be given to Hospitals, Health Centres
are as follows:

MPLADS Guidelines allows purchase of vehicles, including equipment meant for
hospitals belonging to Central, State, UT and Local Self Governments.

Whenever a Member of Parliament recommends a new proposal for capital works for
construction of Government Hospitals, he may recommend purchase of movable
items (like furniture, equipment and not consumables). The proposal should
essentially be for, capital works and the allied expenditure on movable items
(furniture, equipment etc.) should not be more than 10% of the total cost.

Works of retrofitting of essential lifeline buildings, viz. Govt. hospitals, is permissible”

३.13 Taking cognizance of the fact that the Government has requested Hon'ble MPs to allot
= one crore. from their MPLAD Fund for COVID-19 treatment viz. medical testing, screening
and other facilities required to detect, contain and treatment of COVID-19 pandemic; the
Ministry was further asked to furnish the number and names of MPs who have allotted their
MPLADS fund for the said cause along with the details.and-quantum of MPLAD fund being

utilised for COVID-19 treatment, State/UT-wise. The Ministry made the following submission
in this regard:

“References were received from MPs in the month of March, 2020 for including
facilities for medical testing and screening under MPLADS for bolstering the

ongoing fight against COVID-19 which has been declared as a pandemic by
WHO.

(a) Accordingly, Ministry vide its Circular No. E-4/2020-MPLADS(Pt) dated
24th March, 2020 granted one-time dispensation under MPLADS for
purchase/installation of testing, screening and other facilities in connection with
COVID-19 in the Constituencies of the Members subject to fulfilment of certain
conditions. There was no upper limit for such contribution

(b) The Ministry vide its Circular No. E-4/2020-MPLADS (Pt III) dated 28th
March, 2020 issued exclusive instructions vide which sitting Members could
recommend releasé of MPLADS fund only for the cause of COVID-19 in a

27


prescribed format from eligible installments to/through such Fund/Central
Government pool or Head of Account (as decided by the Central Government).
Ministry would deduct the consented amount and release the remaining amount
to the concerned Nodal District Authority. Moreover, to facilitate the release of
eligible portion of the instalment, Ministry also provided one-time exemption in
furnishing of PUC, AuC, UC for FY 2020-21 in respect of sitting Members while
excluding Ex-Members.

(c) Consequent upon the decision of the Union Cabinet in its meeting dated
6th April, 2020 not to operate the MPLAD Scheme for FY 2020-21 & 2021-22
and accordingly the annual budgetary allocation for MPLAD Scheme for FY
2020-21 was placed at the disposal of D/o Expenditure, M/o Finance for
strengthening the efforts of the Government in managing the challenges of
COVID-19 and its adverse impact on society, Ministry notified the same and
issued instructions vide its Circular No. E-4/2020-MPLADS (Pt Il) dated 08th
April, 2020 to this effect. Hon'ble Members were requested to reprioritize their
recommendations, wherever feasible, as no release of installments under
MPLADS would be made. District Authorities were also requested to ensure that
costs for executing the recommendations of Members had to be met from the
already available funds with them.or cancelling the earlier recommended works.

(d) Vide this Circular, previous Circular dated 28th March, 2020 was
rescinded on being rendered redundant.

(e) Since the MPLAD Scheme at the field level is implemented by the
concerned State/UT Governments and the Members of Parliament send
recommendations of works/projects directly to respective Nodal District
Authorities, work-wise detailed status is not centrally maintained by the Ministry.
Therefore, details of MPLADS funds for purchase/installation of testing,
screening and other facilities in connection with COVID-19 are not maintained by
the Ministry.”

Requests from other Institutes

3.14 The Committee wanted to know if any proposals/suggestions have been received by
the Ministry from MPs for making amendments in the existing guidelines which may allow the
MPs to sanction some amount of the MPLAD Fund to some Institutes other than prescribed in

the extant guidelines, keeping in view the urgency/importance of the matter. MoSPI replied as
follows:

“No, this Ministry has not received any such proposal calling for amendment to the
MPLADS Guidelines that would enable Members to recommend works for a
particular institute only. “

Facilitation Centre for Hon’ble Members of Parliament

3.15 The Ministry apprised the Committee that there is a provision of Facilitation Centre at

District Collector office. The Capital cost of setting up of such facilities including equipment,
28 -.


furniture, etc. shall not exceed हैं 5 lakh and will be. met from MPLADS funds. The main
functions of the Facilitation Centres would be to Provide all'the MPs all the information at one

Place relevant for the effective implementation: of the scheme, If a District has been opted by |

more than one MP, the facilitation centre would provide service to’ ail the Members of
Parliament. These Facilitation Centres would work under.the direct contro! of the District

Authority and should have the Persons on contract with the adequate computer Operating -

knowledge to manage the centre. A data entry operator, if necessary, may be engaged
. through the outsourcing of the contract firm with the two per cent of the administrative

charges. It has further been Stated that if the data entry operator is engaged, his engagement i

shall be strictly casual, outsourced, contractual, it shall not be against any post and shall not,
in any form, be construed as a Government employment. It also says that’ no. liability,
administrative or legal or financial accrues on the Government State or the Centre, in future,
shall be the responsibility of the District Authority to make the engagement.

3.16 On being asked whether availing this Facilitation Centre is mandatory and if 2%
administrative charges would still be deducted from MPLAD Fund of an MP who is not willing
to avail this Facility, MoSPI stated as under:

“No, availing of Facilitation Centres is not mandatory. It is reiterated that Capital
Cost of setting up of such Faollitation Centres including equipment, furniture etc
Shall not exceed ₹ 5 Lakh and has to be met from MPLADS funds and it is not
inclusive in the 2% administrative charges. ° “taal :

of information on ongoing and complete works, Purchase of stationery, office
equipment * including computer hardware/software for MPLADS
Planning/monitoring, telephone /fax/postal charges etc.

The administrative expenses are regular expenses which are necessary for
implementing the scheme and may not be construed as the saine as the capital
Cost of setting up of the Facilitation Centres.”

3.17 The Ministry, further, stated that the 2% administrative expenses are part of annual

- entitlement of ₹ 5-Crore of an MP. The 2% administrative expenses from every installment
29


released by the Ministry in respect of the Hon'ble Member is shared among the Nodal District
Authority, Implementing District Authority and State Nodal Department in the following
manner: 0:2 % is allocated to the State Nodal Department, 1 % is allotted to the Implementing ,
District and 0.8 % is retained by the Nodal District.

3.18 In reply to the query of the Committee as to whether there is any mechanism to

monitor or keep a check on the proper/appropriate utilization of 2% administrative charges,
MoSPI stated as follows

“As per Part Ill in Para 4.17 of the MPLADS Guidelines, “a separate bank account for
administrative funds will be opened in a nationalized bank as well as a separate cash
book will be maintained for administrative expenditure incurred during the year by Nodal
Department at State level, as also by Nodal District and by the implementing district.

For the purpose of Utilization Certificate, the administrative expenses once distributed by
Nodal District would be considered as spent and separate Utilization Certificate will not
be necessary for these expenses.

3:19° When asked to furnish the Facility-wise details of Administrative Charges incurred by
the States during the last 5 years along with the details of steps taken by the Ministry to
ensure the incurring, of expenses on the facilities being provided against Administrative
Charges, MoSPI furnished the following information

“The range of functions and duties to be performed from Administrative Expenses
by the Nodal District, Implementing District and State Nodal Department is clearly
_ given at Para 4.17 (Il) of the MPLADS Guidelines.

“For the purpose ‘of Utilization Certificate, the administrative expenses once
distributed by Nodal District would be considered as spent and separate Utilization
Certificate will not be necessary for these expenses. Moreover, the administrative
expenses are to be incurred at the field level by District Authorities and State
Governments with the sole objective to better implement MPLADS. As such, the
details of facilities purchased/incurred from administrative expenses are not
sought by the Ministry.

Ministry has impressed upon the State Nodal Departments and District Authorities
the range of functions that could be performed from administrative expenses vide
its Circular No. C-42/2011 dated 08.08.2011. The utilization of administrative
expenses for proper implementation and monitoring of the. Scheme has been
reiterated during Annual Review Meetings with the States/UTs held by the Ministry
and various other fora, notably during the Open House Discussion with Rajya
Sabha Members held under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble MoS (Statistics & Pl) on
. 27.03.2018."

30


3.20 On being asked, whether it is feasible to discontinue the deduction of 2%
Administrative charges from MPLADS Fund and “requested to provide the details of

suggestions received by the Ministry in this regard along with the action taken by the Ministry
on such suggestion, MoSPI informed as under: '

“Ministry has so far not received any proposal to discontinue the administrative .
expenses. On the contrary, Ministry has received proposals for enhancing the
existing range of functions that could be performed from out Of administrative
expenses. During the 22™ Annual Review Meeting on MPLADS with the
States/UTs on 17.01.2020, Ministry received such suggestions. The suggestions
on administrative expenses shall be taken up for examination on the basis of the

feedback in the Evaluation Reports by the selected agency for the third party
physical evaluation of MPLADS works.” 5

Utilization of Unspent Balance

Secretary, MoSP! who was deposed before the Committee during oral evidence stated as
under:- j

need to move it for the concurrence of the Ministry of Finance, according.'to the
business rules of the Government. Accordingly, we will try our best. As |
mentioned in the earlier meeting and also in our written reply also, in these two
years when this scheme was Nonoperational, a good number of hon. MPs have

the reply that we have got. The first thing - there is an unspent balance in any
Constituency, it should be utilized. Accordingly, we have written to all the
authorities and all the Hon. Members. Again, we have tried to meet some of the
©xpectations. | can Say right now that we will Continue to impress upon the

written to Ministry Finance and that is under Correspondence. We will take up
your suggestion with them. Since the decision has not been Possible, it has been

31


informed to all concerned that the available.balance is to be utilized. That is the
nutshell | would like to submit.”

3.22 When asked to furnish the details of all written ‘communications of the Ministry to all
District Authorities and State/UT Governments impressing upon them to expedite the
: completion of works, settlement/closure of accounts of Ex-Members and
transfer/redistribution of unspent balances of funds among the sitting Members (LS/RS), the .

MoSPI replied:-

“The Circulars issued by the Ministry. to all -District Authorities and State/UT
Governments with copies to Members of Parliament impressing upon them to expedite
the completion of works, settlement/closure. of accounts of 'Ex-Members and

’ transfer/redistribution of unspent balances of funds among the sitting Members (LS/RS)
is at Appendix V.”

3.23 . ‘On being asked to provide the details and amount of MPLAD Fund available with the ~
respective Nodal Authorities at present, State/UT-wise and district-wise, the Ministry furnished
the following information: 7

“Ministry has conducted a comprehensive and elaborate in-house assessment of
quantum of funds available with District Authorities post. meeting of the Estimate
Committee on 19" November 2020 by rigorously following up with District Authorities
through .telephone, e-mail and letters to State/UT Nodal-Departments. Out of 545
Constituencies of Lok Sabha, data has been received from 481 Constituencies and
details are as under:

Fund available with Districts- 1250.30 Crore

Committed Liability- = 1550.71 Crore

Balance acted =% (- )300.4 Crore

out of which
Balance amount of sitting MPs a7 Lok Sabha)= & 59.5 Crore
Balance amount of Ex MPs (17" Lok Sabha) = & -359.9 Crore

Out of 193 Nodal Districts of Rajya Sabha, data is received from 169 Nodal
Districts and details are as under:

32


Fund available with Districts- ₹ 369.12 Crore
Committed Liability- ₹ 788.56 Gare
Balance amount = (- )419.44 Crore
out of which
Balance amount of sitting MPs- ₹ -147.34 Crore

Balance amount of Ex-MPs- ₹ -272.1 Crore

INEFFICIENT UTILIZATION OF FUNDS
3.24 The Ministry apprised the Committee that there are various issues/aspects responsible
for inefficient utilization of MPLADS fund which are as under:

a, Release of funds under MPLADS is Strictly subject to fulfillment of fund-related criteria
and submission of fund-related documents and those documents being found in order
upon scrutiny. Delayed submission of requisite fund-related documents for release like
Utilization Certificates, Provisional Utilization Certificates and Audit Certificates, by the’
District Authorities to the Ministry, results in delay in release of Pending installments.

9. Imposition of Model Code of Conduct during assembly/local body elections from time
to time creates periods of inactivity in operation of MPLADS during which execution of
fresh works get stalled which has a bearing on the submission of fund-related
documents by Nodal District Authorities to this Ministry.

७. As per Para 3.13 of the MPLADS Guidelines, the time limit for completion of the works
should generally not exceed one year, Since MPLADS is implemented at the field level
in accordance with State-specific administrative, financial and technical rules, pace of
execution/sanction of projects/works under MPLADS is hampered by failure to resolve
land related issues on time.

d. On some occasions, recommendations made by Members are not in accordance with ©
the provisions of the MPLADS Guidelines, leading to indecision on such
recommendations on part of the District’ Authority and compelling them to obtain

33


clarification from the Ministry on eligibility of such recommendations. This process in -
itself leads to considerable lapse of time.

. As per Para 2.11 of the MPLADS Guidelines, the District Authority makes the selection

of an appropriate implementing agency through which a particular work recommended
by an MP is to be executed. Failure to submit work-wise completion certificate by the

_ implementing agency to the District Authority, in turn, leads to failure on part of the

District Authority to submit the consolidated Utilization Certificate to the Ministry on
time. 1

Despite clear directions in the MPLADS Guidelines, State-level and District-level
Review Meetings under Chairmanship of appropriate authorities on implementation of
MPLADS often tend to club MPLADS with other State-specific issues and Schemes, .
unwittingly placing issues on MPLADS on the backburner.

3.25 On being asked to furnish the details of average time for which execution of fresh
works get stalled due to imposition of Model Code of Conduct during the term of a Member of
Parliament, the Ministry replied as under: है

“Para 3.12 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “All recommended
eligible works should be sanctioned within 75 days-from the date of receipt of the

. fecommendation, after completing all formalities. The District Authority shall,

however, inform MPs regarding rejection, if any, within 45 days from the date of
receipt of recommendations, with reasons thereof.

In case of the time. limits mentioned in the section falling within the period of
operation of model code of conduct notified by the Election Commission, then
such: period as notified by model code of conduct will not be included in the
reckoning of time limits”.

The pace of execution of works under MPLADS varies from State to
State. However, no such study has been made to find out average time for which
execution of fresh works get stalled due to imposition of Model Code of Conduct
during the term of a Member of Parliament.”

Remedial Measures for Inefficient Utilization of Funds

3.26 The Ministry submitted that following remedial measures were undertaken to address
the issue of inefficient utilization of MPLADS Fund:

Ministry has time and again taken up the matter of sub-optimal utilization of MPLADS ~
finds with the State/UT Nodal Departments during the Annual Review Meeting on

34


vi.

vil.

vill.

MPLADS, the latest during the océasion of 22™ All India Review Meeting with State/UT
Nodal Departments on 17" January, 2020.

All the States/ UTs were directed to take up the cases tigorously where utilization is not
up to the mark to improve the utilization of funds. The States/UTs have been directed
to ensure that funds released .॥ a year are utilized in the same year so that delay in
release of funds could be minimized and instances of parking / idling of funds in the
bank accounts as unspent balance could be reduced

District Authorities have also been directed to speed up utilization (by following due
Processes) and diligently follow the time line for sanction as prescribed in Para 3.12
and 3.13 in the MPLADS Guidelines

Ministry regularly follows up with the District Authorities 10 submit the fund-related
documents online for timely release of funds.

The integrated MPLADS portal has facilities for online submission of Audit Certificates
Utilization Certificates, Provisional Utilization Certificates and Monthly Progress
Reports. District Authorities have. been advised 10 make utmost utilization of these
Services/facilities on the MPLADS portal. The portal is further sought to be revamped ©
under NIIP which would include features for. geo-tagging of works done under
MPLADS and real-time updating of status of works/projects from the field level

To facilitate access to real time information to the stakeholders of this Scheme
development of a Mobile App for this purpose is under Process. The Mobile App is

expected to provide a handy Monitoring tool of the scheme for all stakeholders
including the general public.

Officers of the Ministry are deputed to visit various States/districts to review the
implementation of the Scheme which contributes Positively to speed up the pace of
execution of works.

The Nodal Departments of the State/UT Governments are also impressed upon by the
Ministry to put in place an institutional mechanism to regularly review the progress of
implementation and utilization of funds under MPLAD Scheme, if not done so far. They
are time and again requested to convene meetings under the Chairmanship of Chief

35


Secretary/ Administrator of the State/UT with the District Authorities and MPs at least
once in a year and send the Minutes of such Meetings to the Ministry.

TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY

3.27 Under MPLAD Scheme, following provisions have been stipulated for greater public
awareness and transparency:

a. A plaque carrying the inscription ‘Members of Parliament Local Area Development
Scheme Work’ indicating the cost involved, commencement, completion and
inauguration, date and the name of the MP sponsoring the project should be
permanently erected at the work place.

b. List of all completed and ongoing works with MPLADS funds should be displayed at
the District Authority Office and posted on the website for information of the general
public.

c. District Authorities are to provide information on any aspect of MPLAD Scheme, such
as works recommended by MPs, works sanctioned/not sanctioned, cost of works
sanctioned, implementing agencies; quality of work completed, etc., to the general
public in the manner as required under the Right to Information Act, 2005, as the
implementation of the scheme has been brought under the purview of the said Act.

3.28 Responding to a specific query that if in a particular constituency, a project was
recommended, approved and started during the tenure of a previous MP but the same project
gets completed during the tenure of next elected MP, in such case whose name would reflect
on the project's inauguration board, the representative of the Ministry during his deposition
stated as follows:

“Sir in para no. 3.22, it is clearly written that the name of the sponsoring MP will
be mentioned on the name plate.”

The Ministry in their written submission also furnished the following:

“Para 3.22 of the MPLADS Guidelines, inter alia, clearly stipulates as follows “For
greater public awareness, for all works executed under MPLADS a plaque
(stone/metal) carrying the inscription ‘Member of Parliament Local Area Development
Scheme Work’ indicating the cost involved, the commencement, completion and
inauguration date and the name of the MP sponsoring the project should be
permanently erected.”

36


3.29. During the course of examination, the Committee Sought to know if there is any

website or transparent mechanism through which the Hon’ble Member of Parliament or local

~»~----Public_can. check. the. details and- status-of-a- particular project-under MPLAD Scheme. To”
"this, MoSPI replied as under: d

- “Since Members send their recommendations directly to the Nodal District
Authorities and works under MPLADS are executed by the District Authorities
as per the respective State Government's technical, administrative and financial
tules, detailed information on works is not centrally at the District level.
However, the Ministry has made provisions for the District Authorities to enter
details of works/projects along with financial details on the MPLADS portal
(www.mplads.gov.in). Log -in IDs have already been given to the District -
Authorities to enter project/work-wise details, The same is visible to the general
Public through the tab “WMS report”. :

A revamped version of -MPLADS portal was launched in Jun, 2019 with

‘provisions for Hon'ble Members to make recommendations for works/projects
online. Further, implementing agency as a stakeholder has already been added
on the MPLADS portal to enlarge granularity of the data i.e. till the last mile,

Ministry provides training to District Authorities on integrated MPLADS portal
either by (i) calling Tepresentatives from the State/UT Governments and
imparting them training on the portal which is then intended to be further given
to District Authorities upon their return to the State on ‘creation of Master
Trainer principle’ or (ii) deputing teams of Officers of the Ministry to the State/UT
Headquarters to impart training to the District Authorities assembled for the
Purpose.

The integrated MPLADS portal has facilities for online submission of Audit
Cettificates, Utilization Certificates, Provisional Utilization Certificates and
Monthly Progress Reports. District Authorities have been advised to make
utmost utilization of these services/facilities on the MPLADS Portal. The portal is
now further sought to be revamped under NIIP which would include features for
“geo-tagging of works done under MPLADS and real-time updating of status of
works/projects from the field level. To facilitate access to real time information to
the stakeholders of this Scheme, development of a Mobile App for this purpose
is under process. The Mobile App is expected to provide a handy monitoring
tool of the scheme for all stakeholders including the general Public,

Ministry has also conveyed its requirements for development of Dashboard with
the following stipulation: “Multiple dashboard components can be shown
together on a single dashboard Page layout, creating a powerful visual display
and a way to consume multiple reports that often have a common theme.”

37


soc आय ett “SRP RY = omnten  a

MONITORING MECHANISM
MONITORING COMMITTEE

The Monitoring mechanism that is prevalent to oversee the implementation of the

Scheme is that there is a Monitoring Committee at District Level to keep a check on release of ;

funds, administrative’ sanction, proper and timely implementation of work, etc. The District
Authority shall review every month and, in any case, at least, once in every quarter MPLAD

works implementation with the Implementing Agency. It shall invite the MPs concerned to -.

such review meetings and send report of “such review meetings to the Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation. The composition of Officers of other implementing agencies
attending such Committee meetings is decided by the District Authority/ District-Collector.

4.2 In response to a specific query as to who is designated as Chairperson of such
Monitoring Committee, MoSPI informed’ the Committee that “as per Para 2.10 of the MPLADS
Guidelines, the District Authority/ District Collector, that is, the authorized district functionary
tesponsible for implementing MPLADS in the district.”

_ 4.3 During the course of examination, the Committee. was apprised by one of the

representatives of the Ministry that the State audits the expenditure incurred under MPLAD -

Fund Scheme. On being asked whether it is feasible to.change the Authority responsible for
Audit from State Authorities to Authority implementing the Scheme, MoSP1 in its written reply
submitted as. under:

“Works under MPLADS are executed by the District Authorities in accordance
with the respective State/UT Government's technical, administrative and financial
rules. *- i

Para 6.3(iii) of the MPLADs Guidelines stipulates, inter alia, as follows, “The
State/UT Government will review the audit objections and issues arising out of
the audit and utilization certificates.”

The role of the State.Government in auditing procedure is clearly mentioned at

‘Para 6.3(vil) of the MPLADS Guidelines, which stipulates as follows, “The

State/UT Government shall, out of the panel of auditors approved with

Accountant General of the State/UT, engage an Auditor for auditing of MPLADS

accounts of each District, Authority. For purpose of continuity, the same auditor
38

———— |


may ‘(if the State desires) continue for three years and any fresh appointments
should be made by January of a calendar year for the succeeding three financial
years,” ९

Para 5.4 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows, “The ‘District Authority
and Implementing Agencies will properly maintain MPLADS accounts. District
Authority will furnish Utilization Certificate every year in the form prescribed in the
Guidelines to the State Government and the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation. These accounts and Utilization Certificates will be
audited by the Chartered Accountants or the Local Fund Auditors or any
Statutory Auditors as per the State/UT Government procedure. The Auditors
should be engaged by State/UT Government for each District Authority on the
basis of the recommendation of the Accountant General of the State/UT
concerned. The District Authority will submit for every year the audited accounts,
reports and certificates to the State Government and the Ministry.of Statistics and
Programme Implementation. The normal audit procedures would apply under the
Scheme for auditing the accounts of the District Authority and Implementing
Agencies. in addition, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India will undertake
test audit and send reports to the District Authorities, the State Government and
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.”

4.4 On being asked if there is any CAG Report on the MPLAD Fund Scheme and to
" furnish the latest report of CAG on the Scheme, MoSPI replied as follows: i

“The CAG Performance Audit Report of CAG of MPLADS for FY 2010-11. The
said document is already available in public domain and could be found /
downloaded on the web link: https://cag.gov.in/en/audit-report/details/2341.”

Issues of MPLAD Scheme in DISHA Committee

4.5 On being asked whether represéntative(s) of MoSPI also participate in the DISHA
Committee Meetings and if any steps are being taken for raising the issues of MPLAD Fund
Scheme in DISHA Committee Meetings, MoSPI replied-as under:

“The representatives of the Ministry and Statistics and Programme Implementation
do not participate in the DISHA meeting. E

The integration of information on MPLAD Scheme with DISHA Dashboard is being
done in active consultation and collaboration with M/o Rural Development.

Initially MPLADS Schemé was on-boarded on DISHA Dashboard in
March, 2018 to display the district-wise physical and financial progress to DISHA
Committee. Thereafter, MPLADS MIS/Dashboard was strengthened and year-wise
work details were also captured on MPLADS MIS / Dashboard. Subsequently
MPLAD Scheme on DISHA. Dashboard was 18-01
boarded during December, 2020, with additional parameters such as:

39


1) Year-wise entitlement 2) Year-wise release 3) Year-
wise expenditure by categories and 4) MP's pending installments.
As on date, following information is available on DISHA ‘Dashboard:

Total recommended amount (District-wise, Year-wise)
Total sectioned amount (District-wise, Year-wise)
Total Fund released (District-wise, Year-wise)

Total expenditure (District-wise, Year-wise)

Total works recommended (District-wise, Year-wise)
Total work sanctioned (District-wise, Year-wise)

Total work completed (District-wise, Year-wise)"

“4.6 When asked if it is mandatory to take up issues of MPLAD Scheme in DISHA
Committee Meetings and whether the Ministry has received any complaint for not taking up
issues of MPLAD Scheme in DISHA Committee Meetings, the Ministry stated as under:

“No instructions have been issued by the Ministry for taking up matters of
MPLADS in DISHA meetings as the concept of formation of District Development
Coordination and Monitoring Committees at rural and urban districts of the country
has been floated and notified by M/o Rural Development and DISHA Committee

- Guidelines have also been framed by M/o Rural Development. No complaint
related to DISHA Committee Meetings has come on record of the Ministry.”

Performance and Achievements

4.7 During the course of examination, the Committee sought to know if the Ministry had
conducted any assessment of the works under MPLAD funds (since its inception in 1993) to
find out achievements of objectives of the Scheme. To this query of the Committee, the
Ministry in its written submission furnished as under: :

“Since the inception of the MPLAD Scheme in 1993, 24,87,018 number of works
have been recommended, 22,05,653 number of works have been sanctioned
and 20,05,830 number of works have been completed.

Latest/last Review Meeting with State/UT Nodal’ Departments was held on
47.01.2020 wherein the issues viz. non-release of instalments due to non-receipt
of fund-related documents from District Authorities, slow utilization of MPLADS
funds, convening of State/District-level review meetings, full operationalisation of
the MPLADS portal and closure of accounts of Ex-Members were taken up for
detailed discussion.

40


The Ministry had started the initiative of third party physical Monitoring of
MPLADS works in the year of 2007-08 and NABARD Consultancy Services
(NABCONS) was engaged for Third Party Monitoring. In the first phase in 2007-
08, 30 districts; in the second phase in 2008-09, 43 districts; in the third phase in
2009-10, 60 districts and 75 districts in the fourth phase in 2010-11 were
covered by NABCONS.

The report of 208 Districts submitted by NABCONS were examined and
feedback / observations of this Ministry sent to the concerned: District Authorities
with a copy to their respected State Nodal Department for seeking/clarifying the
factual position and taking corrective measures, whenever required,

The Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC) Ltd. was subsequently engaged for
third party physical monitoring of works in 100 selected districts covering 50
Districts each in North Zone and West Zone in the year 2012-13. As in the case

lacunae found in the implementation were communicated to the concerned
Districts Authorities for their comments and requisite remedial action, wherever
required.

Findings:

Both the monitoring agencies had, inter alia, found that the MPLAD Scheme is a
unique Scheme; having the characteristic features of decentralized development
and has resulted in creation of good quality assets, which have positive impacts
on the local economy, social fabric and the physical environment. In its report,
NABCONS had specifically mentioned that at the macro level, the achievement

groups and sections of peoples is experienced/ensured for identification of
works/facilities required as per the “felt needs” and wish list of the local people.

However, the third party physical monitoring of MPLADS work had revealed a
few shortcomings/lacunae in the implementation of the Scheme; some of which
are sanction of ineligible works, encroachment of MPLADS assets, non-existence
of MPLADS assets, diversion of use of MPLADS assets, delay in financial
sanction and completion of works and works awarded to ineligible trust/societies,

Action Taken:

Suitable action against the erring officials. In other cases, suitable rectification
measures were suggested such as removal of encroachments, eviction of
unauthorized occupants, restoring the assets to its intended use and erection of
plaques in all work sites. ‘

Further, directions were issued to the Districts/State Governments for following
the established’ work scrutiny; technical, work estimation, tendering and

41


administrative procedure of the State/UT Government concerned in the matter of
work execution, taking commitment from the user agency for maintenance,

furnishing of Work Completion Report immediately after completion of ‘work,
maintenance of relevant Registers/records, etc.

The concerned District Authorities had furnished the action taken reports/factual
status on the issues highlighted in the reports. i

In view of the findings of the two agencies, adherence to the provisions of
MPLADS Guidelines is reiterated in various meetings and State visits made by
the officers of this Ministry. Also, the Guidelines have been ‘suitably modified like
fixing the limit of unspent balance for release of funds so as to ensure optimal
utilization of these funds. The integrated MPLADS Portal has also been co-
integrated with the provisions stipulated in the Guidelines so as to enable
monitoring the works done under the scheme.”

4.8 While deposing before the Committee, the Ministry informed that out of 3960 crore
provided for the MPLAD Fund Scheme, 210 crore was usually kept aside for the third-party

evaluation of the Scheme. When the Ministry was asked to provide the details about the

manner in which this = 10 crore was utilized for the third-party evaluation of the Scheme,
MoSPI stated as under:

“₹10 Crore allotted to the Ministry under the Head “Professional Services” is for
selection of an independent agency for third party evaluation of MPLAD Scheme
through Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) Process for Procurement of
Consultancy Services laid down in General Financial Rules, 2017.

During FY 2020-21, Ministry intends to undertake the work of Third Party
Evaluation of MPLADS works in 216 Nodal Districts throughout the country
through selection of an independent agency.” :

4.9 The Ministry had also been asked to furnish the details of the mechanism ,if any, to

monitor the appropriate/efficient utilization of 10 crore meant for third-party evaluation. To
this, MoSPI furnished as under:

‘The deliverables have been linked to the payment schedule and time-frame for
completion of the exercise has also been laid down. All these have been duly

incorporated in the Request for Proposal (RFP) document floated for the
purpose.”

4.10 On being asked to provide the details of criteria/process adopted for selection of
agency as third party for monitoring/evaluation of the Scheme along with the details of
functioning of such agencies, MoSPI furnished as follows:


“The selection of the agency for Third Party Evaluation of MPLADS works in 216
Nodal Districts shall be done through Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS)
Process for Procurement of Consultancy Services laid down in General Financial
Rules, 2017.

The proposals have been invited from prospective bidders under the ‘Two bid’
system. The criteria for evaluation of technical bids haye also been clearly
mentioned in the RFP document such as average annual turnover, total number
of completed works/studies costing ₹50 lakhs and above, number of States/UTs
covered in multi-state projects, organizational strength and infrastructure, quality
and, experience of technical personnel and self-assessment and presentation on
plan of work.

Further, technical bids are to be analysed and evaluated by a Consultancy
Evaluation Committee (CEC) constituted by the Ministry. The CEC shall record in

detail the reasons for acceptance or rejection of the technical proposals analysed
and evaluated by it.

The Ministry shall.open the financial bids of only those bidders who have been
declared technically qualified by the Consultancy Evaluation Committee.”

43


PART Il :
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

An Overview

MPLAD Scheme is envisaged to provide a mechanism for the Members of
Parliament to recommend works of developmental nature for creation of durable
community assets, with a provision of basic facilities including community
infrastructure, based on locally felt needs. The Scheme has been initiated on the
idea of “participation of citizens in identifying the gaps of the country” so that
- the benefits accrue to the general public. Every Member of Parliament is
allocated a fund of % 5 crore annually which he/she can utilize in implementing

developmental programmes in various areas for the welfare of general public.

The release of funds under MPLADS is subject to fulfillment of fund-
related criteria as mentioned in the Guidelines, as amended from time to time 20
times, and scrutiny of fund-related documents. Further, those documents upon
scrutiny should conform to the criteria stipulated for fulfilment of unspent and
unsanctioned balance. However, delayed submission of requisite fund-related
documents like Utilization Certificates, Provisional Utilization Certificates and
Audit Certificates, by the District Authorities, has a cascading effect on release
of pending instalments leading to subsequent delay in the ongoing projects.

MPLAD Funds were suspended owing to the COVID-19 pandemic for the
financial years 2020-21 and 2021-22. However, the restoration of MPLAD funds
during the remaining part of the financial year 2021-22 got approved, with
release of MPLADS fund at the rate of = 2 crore per Member of Parliament in one
instalment. The Ministry clarified further that from 2022-23 to 2025-26, funds
would be released under the scheme at the rate of = 5 Crore per annum to each
of the MPs in two instalments of & 2.5 crore each.

The examination of the scheme by the Committee and their
Observations/Recommendations on the issues relating to release of funds,
Utilization Certificate, suspension of MPLAD funds, delayed submission of fund-
related documents, abandoned projects/works, centage surcharge. by PSUs,

Funds for various Trusts/Societies, requiests from institutes other than


prescribed in the guidelines, facilitation centres, non-utilization of funds, need

for transparent mechanism and issues with monitoring committee are detailed in
the succeeding Paragraphs.

Release of MPLADS “telease of MPLADS Fund
setease of MPLADS Fund

The Committee note that both at the time of constitution of Lok Sabha
after General Elections and after the election of a Rajya Sabha Member, first
installment of €2.5 crore is released to the Nodal District Authority without any
documents. However, in the remaining years, one of the criteria for releasing the
first installment in the subsequent years is furnishing of the Provisional
Utilization Certificate of previous year Covering at least 80% of the expenditure
of the first installment of the Previous year. The Committee view this condition of
furnishing 80% utilization in a gap of almost one year as an impediment when
the region-wise conditions and circumstances in each State hugely differ from
one another. The Committee observe that the criteria of furnishing Utilization
Certificate for the release of second installment of a financial year is both
cumbersome and time consuming procedure as obtaining and furnishing
Utilization Certificate involve different authorities, paper work and several
formalities. This invariably leads to delay in release of funds and also delay in
payments to respective agencies/contractors resulting in stalling of ongoing
projects and cost escalation.

Hence, the Committee urge the Ministry to review the aforesaid criteria
and bring appropriate amendments in the guidelines so as to simplify and
expedite the process of fund release. The Committee recommend that there
should be a mechanism put in place to facilitate the Process of proposal, its
estimates, tender, passing of bills and release of payment to contractors within a
Stipulated time frame which would help in smooth implementation of the
projects under the MPLAD Scheme.

Suspension of MPLADS Fund of MPLADS Fund

The Committee note that MPs constantly receive several requests from
general public/Societies/Trusts from their respective constituencies to carry out
various developmental works/create assets for the welfare of the people. With

45


MPLADS Funds having been suspended during COVID-19 pandemic for two
years, i.e, 2020-21 and 2021-22, MPs have not been able to recommend any new
project and thus these requests from general public/Societies/Trusts have not
been entertained. The Committee strongly desire that ag COVID 19 pandemic
situation in the country has eased, for the present M.P.s, the MPLADS Fund of
5h year may be released during 40 year, in advance, in order to enable the MPs ,
to recommend/sanction projects on aforementioned requests.

The Committee also recommend that there should be a fixed timeline of
half yearly release of installments during a financial year. The Committee hope
that early release of second installment of a particular year would ensure timely

remittances to the respective company/contractors so that the projects are
carried out smoothly.

As it was decided not to operate MPLADS for FY 2020-21 and FY 2021-22,
thus there was no release of MPLADS installments during these two years
including the unreleased installments on or before 31.03.2020. Annual
budgetary outlay for MPLADS for FY 2020-21 was placed at the disposal of D/o
Expenditure, M/o Finance for managing the health and economic impacts of
COVID-19. However, during the course of examination of the subject, the
Committee observed that installments for the financial year 2019-20 were also
not released for most of the MPs. The Committee note that there are certain
sanctioned/approved projects which have been completed or are at the stage of
completion but due to non-release of previous installments, payments for such
projects/works are still pending which unfortunately resulted in projects being
abandoned mid-way. To overcome this, the Committee now call upon the
Government to make appropriate arrangements to release pending installments
of previous years in order to clear the committed liabilities under MPLAD

Scheme and 140 help people derive benefits from erstwhile dead/abandoned
projects under MPLADS.

Delayed Submission of Fund-Related Documents

The release of funds under MPLADS is subject to fulfillment of fund-

related criteria as mentioned in the Guidelines and submission of fund-related


Of requisite fund-related documents like Utilization Certificates, Provisional
Utilization Certificates and Audit Certificates, by the District Authorities, has a
cascading effect on release of pending installments.

The Committee, during the course of examination, found certain instances
wherein funds were not released even though the requisite documents were
submitted by the concerned District Authorities to the Ministry. The Committee
also found that due to lack of coordination between District Nodal Officers and
Central Ministry, release of installments got delayed. Taking cognizance of this,
the Committee would like the Ministry to have a re-look into this aspect of
documentation so that the issue of delay in release of funds could be minimized.
The Committee opine that timely release of funds is vital as implementing
agencies/contractors will stop work if payment is pending. The Committee
reiterate that no work of developmental nature should stand idle.

Completion of Abandoned Projects/Works Projects/Works

The Committee observe that on several occasions certain projects/works
which were duly proposed, Sanctioned, approved and had commenced during
the tenure of predecessor MP were left abandoned. In some instances, those
Project were found neither functional nor in a condition to be used, during the
tenure of successor MP. The Committee observe that although the successor
MP does recommend completion of such Projects/works, the State Governments
are reluctant to complete the carry over projects/works. The Committee view this
as a serious loophole and urge the Ministry to take up the matter with the State
Authorities/Nodal District Authorities to identify such Projects (which are lagging
due to change of elected representative as abandoning any project/work mid-
way would be a sheer wastage of funds)and take steps to get them completed in
time. The Committee recommend that the Ministry has a role inter-alia to
evaluate MPLAD Scheme and hence need to seek information on such
abandoned projects from each State and put in place a strong monitoring
mechanism to ensure that the sanctioned Projects are completed in time. The

Committee also opine that the unused fund allotted to the predecessor MP
47 .


should be utilized for the completion of such abandoned projects/works with
minimal delay in documentation process. The Committee would like to have a

State/UT/MP wise status report on such projects for the last three terms of Lok
Sabha.

Time-bound settlement

Under the MPLAD scheme, the funds of predecessor MP cannot be utilized
directly by successor MP. The Committee are informed that the unspent funds to
the tune of % 1723 crore of the predecessor Members could be put to appropriate
use only upon completion of all the eligible works of the predecessor Member
and closure of the bank account of the predecessor Member and transfer of the
balance of funds of the predecessor Members to the bank account of the
successor Members. The Committee note that this entire process of
"transfer/distribution of uncommitted balances of funds and closure of
accounts” is a time consuming process and & 1723 crore is standing to the
credit of such cases. The Committee expect the Ministry to identify the problems
inherent with such huge amount of funds lying idle. They call upon the Ministry
to ensure that the Saving Bank account of the predecessor MP linked to
MPLADS is closed and fund transferred to the MPLADS account of the
successor MP in a time bound manner, as prescribed under MPLAD guidelines
and the Committee are apprised of the progress in this regard.

Specific Guidelines for educational societies/trusts

The Committee note that as per extant guidelines of MPLAD Scheme,
there is a ceiling of 50 lakh for the lifetime of each Trust/Society from MPLADS
funds. The Committee have found that some trusts/societies are engaged in
community service since long and hence operate several institutions. For
instance, there are certain societies which have about. 100 units/schools under
their purview but due to existing provisions in the guidelines, MPs cannot
recommend funds for such large number of schools. The Committee view this
provision as a hurdle for the development of education system/infrastructure in
the country. They, therefore, opine that the Ministry should enhance the ceiling
of %50 lakh, so as to enable the MPs to recommend/sanction significant amount
of fund for the purpose. The Committee also recommend that in order to assist


more and more schools and for better future of education system in the country,
the purview of MPLAD Scheme should be expanded and MPLAD Scheme
guidelines amended in a way so as to allow the MPs to recommend/sanction
fund for the development/betterment of Government-Aided schools in the
country as well.
Requests from Other Institutes

During the course of examination, the Committee have found that on
various occasions, MPs receive requests from certain institutes, which are not.
included in the extant guidelines, for sanction of MPLAD fund for various
developmental works. In such cases, MPs are not ina position to assist them
even if the institutes/organizations seem deserving. To cite an instance, the
Committee are aware of certain Ambulance providers where the ownership of
the vehicles are with the Zila Parishads/Corporations yet their maintenance
aspects are better handled by a Non-profit organisation/NGO. Since it is the
prime responsibility of the elected representatives to look into such
grievances/practical difficulties of public/institutes/societies, the Committee feel
that the MPLADS guidelines should be suitably amended to enable MPs to
recommend such  projects/works or help deserving Non-profit
organizations/NGOs too under MPLADS Scheme. Overall, the Committee
recommend that the purview of the MPLAD Scheme should be broadened so as
to enable the MPs to assist more and more number of institutes/recommend
works of developmental nature thereby ensuring creation of durable community
assets for the betterment of education system/infrastructure in the country.

Centage Charge by PSUs

The Committee note that the Ministry has authorized several PSUs like
1866 Ltd. to undertake various projects/works under MPLAD Scheme while at
the State level the same is being accomplished by State Corporations. Both the
PSUs & State Corporations provide supervisory, architectural and other
institutional support for implementation of quality work under the MPLAD
Scheme. The Committee, further, note that as per the extant MPLADS
Guidelines, centage charged by the PSUs has not been allowed. This often leads

to disputes at the district level with reference to the centage which has to be
49


10.

11.

charged by the PSUs officially. The Committee view that since all these PSUs do
not draw money from the Central Budget, the Ministry should make appropriate
amendments in the guidelines including upper ceiling-on centages that can be
allowed to CPSUs and State PSUs both, for projects/works under MPLADS.

Need for Facilitation Centre

The Committee note that under the scheme, ‘there is a provision of
Facilitation Centre at District Collector office. The Capital cost of setting up of
such facilities including equipment, furniture, etc. is not to exceed %5 lakh and
will be met from 2% Administrative Charges of MPLADS funds. The main
function of the Facilitation Centres is to provide relevant information to all MPs
at one place for the effective implementation of the scheme. The Ministry have
further apprised the Committee that 2% administrative expenses from every
installment released by the Ministry in respect of the Hon’ble Member is shared
in such a proportion that 0.2 % is allocated to the State Nodal Department, 1 % is
allotted to the Implementing District and 0.8 % is retained by the Nodal District.

The Committee are astonished to note that in cases where even an MP is
not availing the Facilitation Centre, still 2 % administrative expenses continue to
be deducted from every installment released to the Member. The Committee
express their dismay as they find the deduction of 2% administrative charges
from MPLADS Fund of the MP, even though Facilitation Centre is not availed,
should not be done. In light of this, the Committee urge the Ministry to
appropriately amend the provision relating to deduction of. administrative

charges from the MPLADS Fund, where the services of Facilitation Centre is not
availed.

Need for the audit of Administrative Expenses

Under the MPLAD guidelines, there is a provision of 2% Administrative
Expenses which gets deducted for the Facilitation Centre at the District Collector
Office. The 2% Administrative Expenses, from every instalment released, in
respect of Hon’ble Member is shared by the Nodal Authority, Implementing
District Authority and State Nodal Department in the given ratio. The Committee
observed that the Administrative Expenses once distributed by the Nodal District


12,

. would be considered as Spent & separate Utilization Certificate would not be

necessary for those expenses. Taking view of the fact that the cost of Facilitation
Centre is borne out of 2% administrative expenses deducted from the MPLADS
Fund allocated to the MPs, the Committee are of the firm view that the Ministry
should strictly monitor and keep a check on the appropriate utilization of these
expenses. The Ministry should also ensure that strict action should be taken
against those found guilty of any misappropriation in this regard. The Committee
strongly feel that this 2% Administrative Expenses is essentially public money
and there should be a mandatory audit to ascertain its proper usage. The
Committee would urge the Ministry to frame guidelines in this regard in
consultation with District Authorities so that they may get notified from the next

financial year onwards. The Committee may. be apprised of the steps taken in
this regard.

Non-Utilization of Non-Utilization of Funds

The Committee observe that under MPLADs Scheme large amount of
funds remain unutilised/lapsed on several occasions as recommended projects
could not commence due to delay in obtaining technical clearance, financial
clearance, administrative clearance etc. The Committee expect the Ministry to
issue instructions to the Nodal District Authorities that all the
clearances/formalities involved in obtaining the approval for recommended
Projects/works may be done in a time-bound manner through online Single
Window System and strict action should be taken against those found guilty of
deliberately delaying the Process since such projects are recommended for
the welfare/interest of the general public and all round development of
their area.

The Committee also recommend that in case where certain
recommended/sanctioned project could not commence on time, there
should be a valid reason for the same and it should be timely intimated to
the concerned MPs so as to enable them re-allocate the fund to
another/new projectiwork which would considerably help in appropriate
and optimal utilization of MPLADS fund.

51


13,

Ease in availability of Real Time Data

The Committee note that the Ministry is maintaining a website/dashboard
which reflects real-time status/progress of various projects/works being carried
out under MPLAD Scheme in the country; to enable MPs as well as the general
public to check the status/progress of these projects/works. But the Committee
are astonished to note that most of the elected representatives do not get any
information regarding the. status of their recommended works from Zila
Parishad/ the District Administration. In order to ensure that maximum number
of people are aware of this website/dashboard, the Committee note that the
Ministry have in the past instructed the State Government/Nodal District
Authorities to take necessary steps/measures in this regard along with
disseminating information with regard to its features/operations and given
training too. However, the desired impact is still not seen. The Committee
strongly feel that there is an urgent need to review the existing Dashboard on
MPLADS of MOSPI and develop such an online Portaljweb-based MIS which
ensures that the information in respect of different programmes/projects/works
under MPLAD Scheme gets generated and updated timely. It will help the MPs
as well as all the stakeholders including general public get updated/real-time
information about the status and progress of these programmes/projects/works.
The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry should continue to strive towards
developing an elaborate and user friendly dashboard of MPLADS Portal for the
Members of Parliament specifically, wherein they can log into their e-account to
view the minutes and circulars/notifications with respect to developmental
works related to their respective constituencies. An automated sms alert
mechanism should also be put in place so that the Members of Parliament could
get notifications related to uploading of circulars etc. on Member’s specific
dashboard. Also, a copy each of the said notifications should automatically
reach all State Secretaries/UT administrators, who, thereafter, can endorse it to
all the DMs/DCs posted in their State/UT. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken in this regard. ©


14,

15.

Monitoring Committee Committee

Implementing Agency every month and in any case, at least, once in every
quarter. Further, the District Authority is to invite the MPs concerned to such
review meetings and send report of such review meetings to the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation. In view of this, the Committee urge
the Ministry to ensure that review meetings are convened regularly by the
Monitoring Committee for effective implementation of the MPLAD Scheme and
attention be drawn on various lacunae — which hinder the
implementation/execution of the Scheme. Ensuring that the reports of such
teview meetings’ are received within the stipulated time would enable the
Ministry to take immediate necessary steps based on the
observations/recommendations Contained in reports and help in addressing the
issues/lacunae so brought forth.

Third Party Physical Evaluation Party Physiéal Evaluation

revision of the extant MPLADS Guidelines ‘which would be based upon the
findings of the Proposed third party physical evaluation of MPLADS works in 216
districts during financial years 2020-21 and 2021-22. The Committee are further
informed that the Request for Proposal (RFP) for the third party physical
evaluation of MPLADs is currently in process wherein an independent third party
would evaluate MPLADs work through a transparent Process. The Committee
are happy to note that MOSPI is actively engaged in the up-gradation of MPLADs
Scheme via amendments in its extant guidelines and pn date twenty
amendments have been made to improvise works under the scheme. In view of
this, the Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that works sanctioned
under MPLADS do not get merely delivered rather stay operational for years to
come. The Committee hope that their recommendations would be placed before
the selected Third Party Evaluator. They would urge the Ministry to update them

53


16.

शा

also on the status of the third party physical evaluation done for the works
sanctioned under the scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised about

action taken by MOSPI on the report of Third Party evaluation team at the
appropriate time.

Full Utilization of Funds for Third Party Evaluation

The Committee note that the Ministry sets aside = 10 crore annually for the
Third party evaluation of the developmental works/projects created under
MPLAD Scheme. The amount of % 10 crore is allocated'to the Ministry under the
head ‘Professional Services’ for selection of an independent agency for third
party evaluation through Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) Process. The
Committee observe that the Ministry has been irregular in conducting third party
evaluation owing to which हैं 10 crore (meant for such evaluation) gets
surrendered. The Committee take serious note of this lapse and urge the
Ministry to frame upon a mechanism which would ensure annual evaluation for a
sample of projects every year. A dedicated unit must be set up in the Ministry
which would priorities regular evaluation without any lapse. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the results of the previous third party
evaluations conducted by the Ministry and action taken thereof.

Time Bound Action

The Committee observe that the Para 3.13 of MPLAD guidelines have
provision for action against defaulting implementing agencies. As per the
guidelines, the sanction letter should necessarily mention the time limit for
completion of the work which should generally not exceed one year. The
Committee note that the sanction letter must include a clause for suitable
action against the implementation agency in the event of their failure to
complete the work as per government procedure. The Committee are glad to
note that the MPLAD guidelines are.envisioned to achieve the results but the
Ministry has the onus to bring to action the provisions under the guidelines.
They urge the Ministry to take concerted efforts with utmost dedication for timely
completion of sanctioned development works. Hence, the Committee would

like to be apprised of the cases where ‘suitable’ actions were taken against


18.

defaulting agencies on unsatisfactory response received from the District
Authority.

Creation of Subordinate unit/Office

The Committee observe that the concept of Monitoring Committees at
district level is designed to keep a check on timely release of funds, completion
of developmental work, etc but there is no direct supervision of works by the
MOSPI in each State/District. MPLADS, being a Central Scheme, comes under
the purview of MOSPI for its role in release of funds, monitoring, account
keeping and evaluation, hence the Committee strongly feel that MOSPI should
establish a dedicated monitoring unit so as to have a direct look at the progress
of developmental works sanctioned under MPLADS. Once an online portal with
real-time data is developed, monitoring the progress against each indicator
would be easy for this dedicated unit and transparency and speed in the scheme
implementation could be achieved. At present, the Ministry awaits and relies
upon the Reports (quarterly) of the Monitoring Committees for further actions
with respect to release of funds, sanction letters etc. The Committee are of the
strong opinion that having a unit would definitely identify any problems at State
level and better coordinate with State Governments to streamline and implement

the MPLADS projects in a time bound manner, as the MPLADS is implemented
at the field level.

NEW DELHI; : GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT
|_March, 2022 March, 2022 CHAIRPERSON
है fo Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES

55


Aphe helix

>>“ नीम नल

i
List of MPs of 17" Lok Sabha whose Installments of 2019-20 Under MPLADS have not
been releaséd till 30.06.2021 न :
S.No | State Name Member Name Nodal Constituency 7 | ७७86 | No. | Instal Yoar
1] ASNisiands ~~ | Sha Kuldeep Rel | SOUTH ANBAMA ANDAMAN AND and 2049-2020
«०0 Sharma NICOBAR ISLANDS | [nstaliment
ee Andhra Pradesh | Shi Balashowry oa: oman ISTINA 15: लक [ate | BOIS 2020
Vallabbheneni Installment
ea funachal Pradesh 7 oem ‘api Gao ठप ‘ARUNACHAL EAST | ond 2076-020
Instatiment
ee ५ की को Sha Maulana DAUBRT DHUBRI end 2018-2020
Ajmal Badruddin Instaliment
= Assam : eres Dilip Saikia 1 आन WANGALOO ate | RIS HOI
Instaliment
5 | Assam आकर Hern Sing | KARBIANGLONG | AUTONOMOUS nd 2ois-aded
Bey DISTRICT(ST) Instaiiment
7 | Assam S ‘Shri Pradyut NOWGONG NOWGONG tnd ‘2018-2020 |
90600 . Instaliment
L 8 | Assam ‘Shi Tel DIBRUGARH DIBRUGARH ‘2nd 2018-2020
| Rameswar : Installment
9 | Assam ‘Shi Rajdeep Roy | Stichar ‘tachar nd 2018-020
Installment
10 eine ‘Shit Chandan ‘SHEKHPURA NAWADA nd 2018-2020
Singh me Installment
Tt | Bina’ T-Shi Chirag "GAMUT हद JAMUNSE) “| 2018-2020
| Paswan
छा कर | Shi Dinesh any WADHEPURA 2078-2020
~"} Chandra Yadav * | Installment
का Bihar Shei Gira} Singh | BEGUSARAI BEGUSARAT nd BOT8-2020
Instatiment
‘She Radha Mohan | MOTHIHART PURVI CHAMPARAN | and हा
Singh (E.CHAMPARAN) i lnstaliment
| =
Sha Raj Kumar BHOJPUR(ARRAH) | ARRAA tan 2019-2020
Singh . | instalment
‘Shi Rajiv Pratap, | SARAN ‘SARAN nd किछ्छब्छ 1
Rudy i Instaliment oa
हे Bihar Rajiv Ranjan | TARHISARAT HUNGER ane Brera
(Laisn) Singh | Instatinent
18°) Ghar TS Ram Krpal | PATNA PATALIPUTRA Bnd 2018-3620" 1
| Yaday Installment
19 | Gina ‘Sha Ravi Shanker | PATNA "ATA SARIB ana 2019-2020
Prasad listatiment
“झा Bihar ~ "TD Sanjay BETTIAH PASCHIM 2nd “| 30782020
| Julswal (W.CHAMPARAN) | CHAMPARAN Installment
3] OGN Havel | Shi Mohanbnal | DADRA AND NAGAR | DADRA& NAGAR | and WEI
Sanjibhai Delkar | HAVEL! HAVELI (ST) Installment
| Den Dr. Harsh COMMISSIONER CHANGIN CHOWK 1 ana ख़हझफठ
Vardhan NORTH DELHI पे Installment
MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION
=
a Gujarat Dr. Bharatiben BHAVNAGAR BHAVNAGAR [Falmer | 218-2020
1 Dhirubhai Shyat Instaliment
श्र Gijaral Di, Mahendrabhal | SURENDRANAGAR | SURENORANAGAR | and 2019-7020
Kalubhal : Installment
Munjpara es
९5 Dr. Arvind Kumar | RORTAK ROVTAK क्र 2019-2020
Shanna : -tnstaliment



267 Haryana Shi Krishan है; FARIDABAD FARIDABAD. nd 2010-2020
purjar Anstaliment
List of MPs of 17" Lok Sabha whose Installments of 201 9-20 Under MBLADS have not
been released till 30.06.2021
‘S.No [ State Name] Weber Weme | Name b ioe — ist pe — iency | instal fo. ] No. instal Year
27 | Himachal Pradesh | Shri Ram Swarcop | MANDI ‘and 2019-2020
Sharma . Installment
ga Jharkhand Eom Annpuma 7 कक ०58५, ee | ॥४आए७॥ | 2019-2020
Instaliment
28 | Jharkmand Sivi Geeta Kora__| CHAIBAS ‘SINGRSHUM(ST) tnd ore7027
(W.SINGHBHUM) os} instalment.
| 30 | ऊऋऋकंग ‘Sh Jayant Sinha: Cees HAZARIBAGH | tamen | 2019-2020
Instatiment
31 | Jharkhand Dr. Nishikant nce | ध्वज । 2nd 2019-2020
Dubey Instaitment
32 | Karnataka ‘Shi Gangasandra_ | TUMAKURU TUMKUR - 2nd 2010-2020
‘Siddeppa 5 Installment
io Basavaroj
33 | Kemataka [Sn LS, Teas BENGALURU BANGALORE nd BO18-2000
Surya URBAN SOUTH Installment
34 | Karnataka ‘Shi Ramesh BIJAPUR BIJAPUR(SC) end 2019-2020
Chandappa © ‘nstaliment
zy 4 Jigaiinagl के 5
30 | Kametake 1 DrUmesh Jadhav | RALABURAGI GULGARGA(SC) tad 2O1S-200
| } Instaliment
36 | Kerala | Sha. Rajmohan KASARAGOD KASARAGOD | itstotmen | 2949-2020
1 Unnithan’ vos} Instaliment
37 "Lakshadweep | Shi Fazal BLP eto TAKSHADWEER(ST) | and 2016-2020
| Mohammed Installment
38 | Madhya Pradesh | Sha Mi Des | BETULIST) Ind ESET}
Uikey . Instaliment
$ | Madhya Pradesh 7 | Shr Rakesh TABALPUR JABACPOR "3nd 2018-2020
Singh Installment
40 | Raharashira Dr. Jaisidheshwer | SOLAPUR SOLAPURISO) 2nd POTS BHI
| Shivachary “*) installment
॥ Mahaswamiji
H
हैंड Maharashtra ‘Shri Omprakash OSMANABAD OSMANABAD ‘nd 2019-2020
Bhupalsinh Alias. > Installment
Pawan
Rajenimbalkar
ik Maharashtra | Shil Prateprao BULDANA BULDHANA nd 2018-2020
Jadivay Instaliment 5
fhe Waharasnire Dy Priam (cama im ees Ord 219-2000
Gopinath Munde Instatienent
44 | Maharashtra Siw Raosaheb TAN TRINA nd PaaS)
| Patit Danve Installment
“AS | Maharasnira’ + Shei Sanjay(Kaka) | SANGLT ‘SANGLI and 2019-2020
Ramchandra Pati) . Installment,
ee Manipur Dr. Lorho §: SENAPATI OUTER 2nd 2019-2020
Proze MANIPUR(ST) | Instaliment
o 47 | Manipur Dr. Ranjan Singh IMPHAL EAST * INNER MANIPUR: 2nd 2019-2020
Rajkumar 7 हे Installment
48"| Nagaland ‘Shi Tokheho: (allan NAGALAND | and ब्ल्ह्ण्छ
Yepthomi Installment
| at है 3
|. “| iene ‘Sha Basania KALAHAND/ KALAHAND! ttm | 2016-20;
Kumar Panda * Instaliment
ee Odisha ‘Shri Pratap BALASORE BALASORE | अन्तर! 2019-2020
‘Chandra Sarangi +] Instaliment
31 | Gdisha ‘Smi, Sangeeta BOLANGIR BOLANGIR “and 2018-2020
Kkumad Singh Deo : Installment

51



छा Rajosinan Sivi Dewi TALORI TALOR 2nd Bis20 |
Mansingram Patel हे Installment ‘
7: - साफ
List of MPs of 17" Lok Sabha whose Installments of 2019-20 Under MPLADS have not
been released till 30.06.2024
S.No | State Name [ Member Name -*] [ Nedalpistrict «| [ Gonsttuency | | instal No. | instal Year
a Rajasthan ‘Shei Narendra THONIHUNU THUNHUND 777 and 018-2020
Kumar है : . 2 | Installment
4 | Rajasthan igre Om 8 KOTA KOTA बैंड] 2019-2020
instaliment
88 | Rajasiiian ‘Shit Rajyavardhan pean iemr a JAIPUR RURAL 2nd 2018-2020
Singh Rathore Instaliment
Be! Rajasthan “| Sha Suenbir Singh [| TONK TONK-SAWAI ‘and Oie-2020
Jaunapuria ~ | MADHOPUR Instaliment
87 | Tami Nadu [oer Chellakumar | KRISHNAGIRI KRISHNAGIRI T and Tois-2020 1
j, Installment |
Sa | Temi Nadu GHAAKP. NAMAKKAL RAMARKAL = 2618-2000
..| China} पु Installment
Li 1 dae जय
Ea Tami Nadu [Sha Andale — | NUGIRIS NILGIRISTSC) (कक | Wis 2080
Raja Instaliment
78H | Tamil Nadu | SRD Ravikumar | VILLOPURAM ViLUPPURAM(SG) | 2nd 2018-2020
४ ६ Installment
1 | Tami Nadu ‘Sh Onanush M | TIRUNELVELI TENKASISC) | ७0०४ | 2079-2020
a (जा Installment
@2 | Tamu Nadu 1 She Gautham VILLUPURAM | KALLAKURICHT [Fane | __| 2010-2020 |
| 5० | Sigamani Pon Installment 1
छठ 1 पक] Wad छाई Jayakumar | TIROVALLUR FIRUVALLURGC) [Fauna | 2019-2020
Instaliment |
छ [Tamil Nadu Shi K Shanmuga | COIMBATORE POLLAGHT | Rad BG78-2020°
Sundaram Installment
rs pas ‘Binil Nady | Sha TIRUPUR TIRUPPUR nd 2019-2020
| Subbarayan instaliment
| ee "Tama Nadu ‘Sh Kani Ke RAMANATHAPURAM | RAMANATHAPURAM rata | 2018-2020
Navas installment
[~ rant Nady क्र. Kenimazhi | TUTCORIN THOOTHURKUDI Bnd more-2020 1
Kerunanidh Installment
68 | Tamil Nado Shi Kart P BIVAGANGA SIVAGANG हा 2019-2020
Chidambaram Instatiment, ॥
3) ee [tama Nadu गत Selvaraj | THIRUVARUR NAGAPATTINAM(SC) | 2nd "2019-2020
"5 Instaiinvent
76 | Tami Nadu Shei Manickam VIRUOHUNAGAR ViRUDHUNAGAR 2nd “eo78-2020 7 |
Tagore 8 instaiment
71 | Tonw Nadu Shri PR. COIMBATORE COIMBATORE 2nd 2519-2020
Natarajan Installment
72 | temiNedu- | Shas. not ee Rate | ere)
Venkatesan S Inetaliment
eae कि 105८ aS aS
के | Tamil Neda झा 8. THANJAVUR WAYIAT T | and 218-2020
... | Ramatingam Installment
7a | Tami Nao SHS. VELLORE ARARKONAM 3d
Jagathrakshakan Insteliment
at
75 | Yami Nadu झत बह ee SALEM [Ft | ee
Parthian Installment
al — Nadu She Thumaa ARIVA CHIDAMBARAMSC) | 2nd Bow 2020
Vatavan Thot Instaliment
_| 7 | Telangana: Siw Aseduddin | HYDERABAD.‘ | HYDERABAD 2nd 2019-2020
Owdsi है Installment
7 78 | Taangena Sha Kishan Reddy | HYDERABAD 7 ee | @nd BO TS-2020
Gangapuram + Instatiment
79 | Uliar Prades Sh Ala Komar cai’ ae and 2018-2020
Singh Instaliment



sin Bhanu Pratap | JALAUN

EA Uilar Pradesh JALAUNISC) 2nd PO1F2000
Singh Verma Instalimen
List of MPs of 177 Lok Sabha whose Installments of 2019-20 Under MPLADS have not
_द 200७1 released till 30.06.2021
| SNo | [StafoName | Name . ‘Mamber Name 0७410 “छा District [ Sonate] [ mstatNo. | ‘No, | instal Year
Bi | Ullar Pradesh Shri Harish BASTI TBASTI | and Wis-2020
Dwivedi Instaliment
|" छ 1 War Pradesh जात Kirt Vardhan el ee te 2nd 21-2020
Singh ३! Jostaliment
(tg SS
2 | Uilar Pradesh Shi im ‘ileal 11 ng | atm ख़ाब्छछ
i हि Azam Khan Installment
84 | Ultar Pradesh Shri Shyem Yadav | JAUNPUR ar a | aa | 2070-2020
Singh कै _| instatiment
85 | Ullar Pradesh Smt Sonia a | BAR “RAE BARELI and BOS2020
Gandhi Instaliment
| ‘Ulleraknand aa Oe ee | HARIDWAR HAROWAR 2nd 7 S-2020
Poknnyal Nishark Installment
7 | Uttarakhand Shri Tirath Singh | PAURIGARRWAL | GARAWAL | rte | I)
Rawat Instaliment
cy Sha Abhishek ‘SOUTH TWENTY DIAMOND 2nd wTe2020 7
Banerjee FOUR PARGANAS | HARBOUR Installment
| | West Bangal ‘Shri Abu Taher MURSHIOABAD MURSTIDABAD and
हे 7
ie | Khan Installment
BO | West Bengal ‘Sha Aqun Singh | NORTH TWENTY BARRACKPUR 2nd 2018-2020
FOUR PARGANAS Installment
te : b =
Bi] West Bengal Shi Babut PASCHIN ASANSOL, 7 | ane ew il
Suprlyo BARDHAMAN: “| Installment
‘82 | West Bengal Sha Choudhury | SOUTH TWENTY MATHURAPUR(SC) | 2nd 2018-2020
Mohan Jatua FOUR PARGANAS, Installment
‘Shei Jyolirmay pec | PURULIA hd posi
‘Singh Mahato: Installment
Ba] West Bengal 7 ‘Sha Kunar Jhargram JHARGRAMIST) vane “) 2078-000
Ag Hembram + | tnstatiment
S| Wesl Bengal Tis. Mimi SOUTH TWENTY TADAVPUR Vand 2O1S-2020
Chakraborty FOUR PARGANAS {nstatiment है
A hn हक 01२
‘West Bengal Bint Nusrat Jahan | NORTH TWENTY BASIRHAT a2 2010-2020
P Rui FOUR PARGANAS Instatiment
87 | West Bergat 1 का. Praia हा SOUTH TWENTY JOYNAGARISGY 2nd ae
+ | Mondal FOUR PARGANAS installment
| ‘Weal Bengal Shit Raju Bisia GARJEELING | DARJEELING tad
= Instaiiment
Weal Bengal SHES. PURBA BAROHAMAN- nd BOTS-20AT
Abluwali BAROHAMAN DURGAPUR Jnstaliment
10 | Weat Gengar Prot. Saugata WORTH TWENTY DUM DUM and BisZ020
Roy FOUR PARGANAS «| Installment
FOI | West Bengal She Saumilra BAI BISHNUPURISC) | 2nd 2079-2020
Khan || Instatiment
702 | West Bengal Dr. Subhas | BANKURA 2nd 2018-2020
Sarkar «Instaliment
—



suspension of MPLAD Scheme

List of the Hon'ble MPs requested for the release of MPLADS fund after the|

ia

No. Name of the MP RS/LS MP and State
= Shri K V P Ramachandra Rao Siam

2| Shri Ve Vaithilingam

3 | Adv Shri Adoor Pakash

7® LS MP Attingal Kerala

[__ «| Shri K Muraleedharan

17" LS MP Vadakara Kerala

5| Shri Thirumaa Valavan Thol

17" LS MP
Chidambaram Tamilnadu

6 | Shri K Jayakumar

170 LS Tiruvallur, Tamilnadu

thy
-7| Ady Shri A M Asif PEE महल
8| Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 417" LS MP Maval, Maharashtra
‘ हुँ के 1778 MP.
| Shri Manish Tewari Anandpur Sahib Punjab
| ४७ | Shri Suresh Gopi pee omnetet,

41 | Shri Dayanidhi Maran

47" LS Chennai Central, Tamilnadu

12 | Sha B. Manickam Tagore

177 LS Virudhnagar, Tamilnadu

|_12| She PK Kunhalikutty

417" LS Malappuram, Kerala

cel eimer aPrakash ७ 9  [रि७ MP, Teelang

RS MP, Telangana

ri Amar Patnaik |

RS MP Odisha

iz 16 | Shri Achyutananda Samanta

47" LS Kandhamal, Odisha

Shri Prabhat Jha

Ex-RS MP, Madhya at
Pradesh

See Shri B K Hariprasad
४ 19 | Shri Dhal Singh Bisen

47" LS Balaghat, Madhya Pradesh ce

Ex-RS MP कर |
Karnataka

Shri Vivek Narayan Shejwalkar

| iri Vivek Naraye
21 | Shri N Gokulkrishnan. ‘
22 | Shri Narendra Sawaikar

16" LS South Goa, Goa

177 Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
RS MP Puduchei

|_ 23 | Shri Ramen Deke

6" LS Mangaldoi, Assam

24 | Shri KitkAzad

26 | Shri Rahul Shewale

75" & 167 LS Darbhanga, Bihar
| 26 | Shri Nihal Chand 17" LS Sriganganagar, Rajasthan”
|

46" and 17" LS Mumbai South Central, }

Maharashta |

2 | Shri Manoj Rajoria _ 17०15 Karauli, Rajasthan g
1_ 28 | Shri Gopal Narayan Singh RS MP Bihar

29 | Shri Anant Kumar Hegde

|» | Shri Chandra Pal Singh Yadav

0:७४ वि Shri Sanjay Seth
=i

RS MP Uttar

16% LS and 17"
LS Uttar Kannada Karnataka

Pradesh
RS MP Uttar
Pradesh (for previous term)

ze | Smt Renuka S. Saruta

177 LS Sarguja,

60

हम 10: 5.1......",..1 अमिनिािलिकिल न Bo लत कल


2 RS MP. =
33 | Shri Praful Patel Maierashira
24 | Shri MV Rajeev Gowda RS MP Karnataka
25 | Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya © RS MP Assam
| 96 | Shri Ram Nath Thakur RS MP Bihar
| Shri Mansukhbhai,D Waswa 17th LS MP
E 120 हि. Bhanich Gujrat
2 CN Annadurai TLS MP i
| 3s A 2 Tiruvannamalai, ——
ri Vinayak 8 Raut 7 ‘ 16th and 17th LS MP RATNAGIRI- hs
39 SINDHUDURG,
a ai
\_ 40 | Shri HD Devi ia 1001 LS MP Hassan and for 17th LS MP Hassan
वक्ता ie
| 6 | Shri Ram M.N. Kinjarapu Srikakulam ahd for 16th L$ MP’Srikakulam
| Shri Samsher S. Manhas RS MP Jammu & Kashmir, Nodal
| 4] rane Dist.- Jammu
17 Shit Or K Keshava Rao oo आर सता MP Andhra
49 | Pradesh
Shri Santosh K Gangwar 16th LS and 17th LS MP Bareilly Const. Uttar
44 Pradesh a
Shri Nazir Ahmed Laway RS MP Jammu &
45 Kashmir |
[_4¢| Shri Tokheho yepthomi me 17th LS Nagaland
147 | Shri Hishey Lachungpa RS MP Sikkim
% [Tse Ba Rameshwar Teli 16% LS MP Assam ॥
! Shri Ajay Pratap Singh RS MP Madhya
49 : Pradesh MP
| 9 | Shri Prabhas Kumar Singh 16th LS MP Bargarh Odisha
511 Shri Umesh 8 Patil 47th LS MP Jalgaon Maharashtra
52 | Ms. Jaskaur Meena 17th LS MP Dausa, Rajasthan
83 | Shri A Vijaykumar Re ee हाय 5
84 | Shri Brij Lal RS MP Uttar Pradesh, Sidharthnagar y
+ 95 | Smt. Geeta Alias Chandraprabha RS MP Uttar Pradesh, Oraiya ...
| _56 | Shri M Shanmugam, “TRS MP, Tamil Nadu
87 | Shri Suresh Kodikunnil LS MP. Kerala
58 | Shri 5.1. Baseheer 17015 MP, Kerala
59 | Shri Ramyhar Haridas 17th LS MP, Kerala
| _-60 | Shri hibi eden 17th LS MP, Kerala
| 9 | Shri 5 Jothimani 417th LS MP, Tamil Nadu
| 62] Shri $ R Parthiban 17th Lok Sabha Tamil Nadu 4
| 63 | Shri Agatha K Sangma 17th LS MP, Meghalaya
| 84 | Shri Lorho. 3 Pfoze ey 47th LS MP, Manipur
[65 | Shri Renuka Singh 17th Lok Sabha Chhattisgarh
[68 | Shri Adhir Ranjan Choudhary 17th Lok Sabha West bengal
| 87 | Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 17th Lok Sabha Bihar
82 | Shri Gaurav Gogol T 17th Lok Sabha Assam |
1_ 59 | She Sanjay Jaiswal - 160 & 17th Lok Sabha Bihar
70 | Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 16th LS MP, Bihar
| | Shri Sanianu Sen RS MP, West Bengal
72 | Shri Abu Hassan Choudhary “| 16th & 17th LS MP, West Bengal



22 Kalyan Banerjee

17th LS MP, West Bengal

Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal

46th & 17th LS MP, West Bengal

Shri Tariq Anwar

Sh. Vanga Geetha Viswanth,
Shri Amar Patnaik

{6th LS MP, Bihar : |
17th LS MP, Andhra Pradesh
RS MP, Odisha =

Sh. Manne Srinivas Reddy
Shri Asacluddin Owais!

hatabdi Roy
॥ Lal Meena

i! Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil

i
रू]

LS MP, Telangana
16th and 17th LS, telangana
Tents, Telangana
17th LS , West Bengal ‘
T7ihLS, Rajasthan
RS MP, Maharashtra

TAHLSMP,Maharashta

i
ah

16th LS Maharashtra

Qo


a
uF

3

Aine

Details of Amendments in the MPLADS Guidelines with effect from 2016

Subject

Utilization of MPLADS funds for persons with disabilities

Inclusion of Gramin Banks / Regional Rural Banks in the
Guidelines on MPLADS

3.

Date of issue

150 September, 2016

70 September, 2016

Release and Management of MPLADS funds in respect of

Rajya Sabha MPs re-elected without break
ee ne ae 7 = है

. Financial assistance to be. provide

under MPLADS to
differently abled persons with disabilities

||

Submission of Utilization Certificate and Audit Certificate for
release of O2nd instalment of MPLADS funds

1070 September, 2016
(067 October, 2016

(0200 November, 2016

6.

Ti

nstallation of fixed Wi-Fi system. in educational institutions,

villages and selected locations

Provision of Solar Lighting Systems

he

है (00 December, 2016

1280 November, 2016

Release of MPLADS funds

[ 9. | Equipment for Skill Development and Training

[29# December, 2016

46" February, 2017 ~

“110.

. [Release of MPLADS funds
. Utilization of MPLADS funds for SC/ST inhabited areas

Selection of the Implementing Agency

_.. 23" February, 2017

28" August, 2017

18" September, 2017

13. |Allocation of MPLADS funds for the works of Trusts/ Societies  |25"" September, 2017

44. |Clarification on One MP-One Idea Scheme under MPLAD 01५ December, 2017
Scheme

15. |All Implementing Agencies will carry out expenditure using 030 January, 2018
PFMS-EAT module with immediate effect

46. |Utilization of Administrative Expenses under MPLADS

417. \Contribution for rehabilitation works in state of Kerala 1180 September 2018

"118, Revised Procedure for taking up rehabilitation and (260 October, 2018

reconstruction works in areas affected by.severe calamity under
IMPLADS.

19. |Admissibility of laptop as an eligible item under MPLADS 25"" February, 2019

63


MP in a Lok Sabha Constituency (Fund not committed for
orks of the predecessor MP)

21. Purchase of Stubble Clearing and Super Seeder Machines
lunder MPLADS_ ~* a

19" October 2020


Ayre 00)» TW

Circular No. E-4/2020-MPLADS(PL)
Government of India
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
MPLADS Division |

ores

East Block-6, Level-5,
RK. Puram, New Delhi-110066
Dated: 3a"April 2021

Subject: Extension of one-time dispensation under MPLADS for purchase.
of testing, screening and other facilities and setting-up of independent
oxygen manufacturing plants in Govt, Hospitals/Dispensaries as a one-time
measure in connection with COVID-19-reg.

References have recently been received from Honorable Members of

Parliament and District Authorities for oxtending the one-time dispensation under
MPLADS for purchase of testing, screening and other facilities in connection with
COVID-19 which was notified vide this Ministry's Circular of even’ number dated
24.03.2021 and which was intended to be restricted to only FY 2020-21. On the same
line, referencés are also being received to allow utilization of funds from MPLADS for
setting up of independent oxygen manufacturing plants in Government
Hospitals/Dispensaries.

2 Keeping in view the continuing threat to human life posed by the Tampaging
COVID-19 pandemic, it has been decided to extend the one-time dispensation under
MPLADS for purchase of testing, screening and other facilities in connection with
COVID-19. It has also been decided to allow setting-up of independent
oxygen manufacturing plants in Govt. Hospitals/Dispensaries aa a ono-
time measure till the end of FY 2021-22 or further orders, whichever is
cartier,

8... It may be appreciated that at present MPLADS has been made non-operational
and budgetary outlay for FY 2020-21 and 2021-22 has already been placed at the
disposal of M/o Finance for managing the adverse economic and health impacts of
COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, the recommendations from Hon'ble Members for


purchase of testing, screening and other facilities in connection with COYID-19 may be
proceeded from the funds available in the savings account of Nodal District Authority
for the respective constituency / Member of Parliament and only after due assessment
and honoring of existing committed liabilities by the District Authorities.

1

4. This issues with the approval of the Competent ‘Authority, 2686: n'a
है >_ hee दया, 3 o 2s
Sy <i
(RAJ KRISHAN BHORIA)
- Director (MPLADS)
To है है

1, The Nodal Secretaries of States/UTs
2, The Commissioners of Corporations of Delhi/ Kolkata/ Chennai
3,, All Distriet Collectors/ District Magistrates/ Deputy Commissioners

Copy for kind information to:

. 28 to Hon'ble Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha

PS to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha

. P§ to Hon'ble MoS(1/C), Statistics & PI

. All Hon'ble Members of Parliament (Rajya Sabha/ Lok Sabha)
. PPS to Cabinet Secretary

Secretary/ Director General (C & A)/ Additional Secretary/Additional Secretary &
FAY DDG (Admin) / Director (MPLADS) / DS (MPLADS)

7. Additional Director, Committee on MPLADS Branch, Lok Sabha Secretariat
8, Director; Committee on MPLADS Branch, Rajya Sabha Secretariat

9. Allconcerned Officers/Officials in MPLADS Division, M/o Statistics & PL
10. NIC-MOSPI with the request to upload on the MPLADS portal

or eswn pe


प Government of India
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
MPLADS Division

RA ME

CORRIGENDUM i
. East Block-6, Level-6,
R.K. Puram, New Delhi-110066
Dated: 13 May, 2021

Subject: Extension of one-time dispensation under MPLADS for purchase of
testin; ie bet marae and other facilities and setting-up of independent oxygen
manw ring plants in Govt. Hospitals/Dispensaries as a one-time measure in
connection with COVID-19-reg, :

Circular No. E-4/2020-MPLADS(P¢): In partial modification of this
Ministry's circular of even no. dated 30.04.2021, the date-mentioned in opening para

of the circular mentioned as 24.03.2021, Shall be read as 24.03.2020,

(Raj Krishan Bhoria)
Director (MPLADS)
To
1. The Nodal Secretaries of States/UTs
2, The Commissioners of Corporations of Delhi/ Kolkata/ Chennai

3. All District Collectors/ District Magistrates/ Deputy Commissioners 4

- Copy for kind information to:

PS to Hon’ble Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha

PS to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha

PS to Hon’ble MoS(I/O), Statistics & PI

All Hon’ble Members of Parliament (Rajya Sabha/ Lok Sabha)

PPS to Cabinet Secretary :

Secretary/Director General (C & A)/ Additional Secretary/Additional
Secretary & FA/ DDG (Admin) / Director (MPLADS) / DS (MPLADS)

7, Additional Director, Committee on MPLADS Branch, Lok Sabha Secretariat
8, Director, Committee on MPLADS Branch, Rajya Sabha Secretariat

9, All concerned Officers/Officials in MPLADS Division, M/o Statistics & PI
10. NIC-MOSPI with the request to upload on the MPLADS portal

oe कक 4०-१०


Member of Parliament Local Area Development Stheme

sahil भारत सरकार
सांह्यिकी एवं कार्यक्रम कार्यास्वयन मंत्रालय
सरदार पंटेल भवन, नई feet -110001
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
, MINISTRY OF STATISTICS & PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
दे 38804 PATEL BHAVAN, NEW DELHI-110001
संयम ey FAX 1011-23364197
E-mail ?mplads @nic.in

F.No.C-66/2011-MPLADS-Vol. 1

To

(1) The Commissioners,
Corporations of Kolkata/ Chennai/ Dethi
(2) #1 District Collectors/Distriet Magistrates/ Deputy Commissioners

Sub: Purchase of Ambulances/Hearse Vans,

Sir/Madam,

In supersession of the earlier instructions contuined in the Guidelines ‘on
' MPLADS, it has been decided to amend para 3.25 in the Guidelines as below:

Para 3,25; Ambulances/Hearse Vans are allowed to. be purchased by the

District Authority/District Chief Medical Officer on the recommendation of
a Member of Parliament.

2. ...It has also been decided to amend para 10 in Annexure Tl - A of the
Guidelines on MPLADS as below:

Para 10; Ambulances/Hearse Vans (para 3.25)

(a) Ambulances are already allowed to be purchased by the’ District
Authorities/District Chief Medical Officer of the District on the
recommendation of a Member of Parliament. 4
(b) The Ambulances / Hearse Vans will be purchased..on the
recommendation of the Member of Parliament. and after examination by a
three - membered Committee: consisting of District Magisttate/District
Collector as Chairman and District: Chief Medical Officer & one
representative of District Magistrate / District Collector as Members.

(०) The ownership of the Ambulance’/ Hearse Vans purchased will rest
> with the District Authority / District Chief Medical Officer and will be under
the general supervision of the District Chief Medical Officer.


(9) User charges will be fixed by the District Authority
(on the recommendation of an appropriately formed Committee) who would
be responsible to ensure that thecharges so fixed’ are reasonable and
affordable for the common man ‘

(ce) The District Collector / District Magistrate will 11007 the services
provided by these Ambulances / Hearse Vans, to ensure maximum benefit to
the public.

(f) Bach Ambulance / Hearse Van so. purchased will have bold markings -
on both sides, stating: “Ambulance / Hearse Van, purchased with

‘Government of India, MPLADS funds, contributed by MP.”

-(g) ‘The District Authority will:put up public-notices at prominent places

in the Government Hospitals, Municipal / Panchayat Offices etc., together
with the contact numbers, about the provision of Ambulance / Hearse Van
by the Member of Parliament from his / her MPLADS funds.to enable the
public to avail the services ofthe Ambulance / Hearse Van and. to: lodge
complaints in the cases of misuse or non-use so as to enable the District
Authority to take necessary action afler proper enquiry into those
complaints. :

This issues with the approval of Competent Authority.

Director (MPLADS)

Copy forinformation to: +:

me

Awpw

. All Hon*ble Members of Parliament (Lok Sabin ajyaSabha) =~
..The Secretaries, Nodal Departments dating with © MPLADS

(All States/UTs) °

. Rajya Sabha Committee on MPLADS, Rajya Sabha Sectt,, New Delhi
. Lok Sabha Committee on MPLADS, Lok Sabha Sectt., New Delhi

. To all concerned i, MPLADS Division |

. NIC for uploading on the MPLADS website

७८४ i ome


Ajpod\x

Reminder IV
File No. C-38/2015-MPLADS
Government of India
Ministry of Statistics
MPLADS Division
कक 4 के के
‘East Block-6, 1.2ए०-5,'
R K Pum, New Delhi-110066
Dated: 23.04.2021
OFFICE MEMORANDUM

Subject: Settlement and closure of savings bank accounts of former Members of
Parliament after elapsing of stipulated time-period of 21 months-reg,

Kind reference is invited ( this Ministry's O.M. of even number dated 14th May, 2020
and subsequent reminders dated 16.07.2020, 31.08.2020 and 01.01.2021 on the above cited
subject (copy attached) where it was Tequested to expedite the closure of accounts and send
closure report to this Ministry. However, it has been observed that many bank accounts are yet
to be closed and closure documents along with necessary documents are yet to be received by
this Ministry. \ ’

2. The position of savings bank accounts of former Members of Parliament has been

reviewed again and it has been found that so far, closure details of few accounts have been
: received during the last one year . It may also be recalled that. Ministry had also circulated a

list of FAQs (copy enclosed for ready reference)vide its O.M. of even number dated
16.07.2020, which is meant to serve as a guide for the District Authorities and to facilitate
closure of accounts for MPLADS. The process of settlement and closure of Savings Bank

accounts is not optimal despite repeated directives and telephonic conversations with District °

Authorities. A number of accounts of former MPs of Lok Sabha as well as the Rajya Sabha
who left the office on 30.08.2019 or before of your State a yet to be closed. Revised
Consolidated lists of such accounts of 14"Lok Sabha’ 15" Lok Sabha, 16"Lok Sabha and Rajya
Sabha prepared, showing closed (during August 2020 to 20.04.2021) and yet to be closed
accounts, are attached herewith (Annexure-J, HW, 417 and IV respectively).

oe
Pa

५ ५ लि व


2.
It is therefore again Tequested, in the interest of just and fruitful utilization of

uncommitted funds for execution of MPLADS works by sitting MPs, to expedite the process

of closure/settlement of accounts and furnish the details as per enclosed format to this Ministry
Positively by 31st May, 2021

Enclosure: As above. — ‘ tt a
a5 04 759)
oy
(Tanseer Qamar

Joint Secretary (MPLADS)
js.mplads@mospi.gov.in

mplads @nic.in
To,

\.Chief Secretaries of States/UTs - (with the Tequest to issue suitable directions to”
the concemed District Authorities to expedite the closure of accounts and forward a
consolidated outcome report to the Ministry by 31st May, 2021).

2, The Nodal Secretaries of States/UTs
3, The Commissioners of Corporation of Delhi/Kolkata/Mumbai/Chennai.

4. All District Collectors/District Magistrates/Deputy Commissioners/District Planning
Officer/Project Director/Collector & Development Commissioner.

Copy for kind information to:
1, All Hon’ble Member of Parliament (Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha).
2, NIC-MOSPI with the request to upload on the MPLADS portal.


©38/2015:PLADS
Government of india -. -
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation

(MPLADS Divistor
Enst:Block-6, Level 687
R. ६. Puram, New-Delhi~110066,
: Dated: 24" May; 2020
OFFICE MEMORANDUM

: Subject: Settlement and closure of Savings Bink’ accounts: of former Members ot
Parliament after elapsing of stipulated time-period of 21 months- regarding.

‘The undersigned Is dicected to say that the Members of! Parliament ‘Local Area
evelopmant Schéme (MPLAUS) enivisogas the settlement -and cldsure: of Savings, Bank
५. Becountd of former Members, of Parliament who heve-demitted office after elapse of the
» Stipulated time period 61 24 months. 1९ ls noticed that’ ४087 accounts, having an overall

aggrogate balance of Rs 1723 crore, aro still actve"and remain’ 10. be settled, closed and
unspent balance transferred to'the current Incumbent in accordance with modified Para 4.7
and Para 4.8 ond existing Pare 4,9. and 4.10 of the MPLADS Guidelines. |

2 In particular, ॥ & seoh that 3 leege number uf accounts opened by Nodal, bistiit
Authority belonging to the MPs:of 14”, 15% and 16" {for those MPs who datnitted Office

before dissolution of 16" LS due to death, resignation ote) Lok Sabha and farmer Members-

“of Ralya Sabha who demitted office on of beforé 30.06.2018 are not yet.closed even after
cumpletion of 21 months, Consolidated lists of suc accounts (compiled by this Ministry on
the basis of reports recelved from the field) of former MPs of Lok Sabh ७ wells the Ralye
Sabha pénding closure are: at Annexes 1 ta IV. The details are also avallable on the MPLADS
portal, =| nee,

3, ttisplso.relterated that pursuant to the dedston of ih. Cabit derision not to
operate the MPLAD Scheme for FY 2020-24 arid 2024-22) the budgetary grat for FY 2020-
21.In respect of the MPLADS has already been placed at the di i Ministry ‘of Finance
for managing the economic énd health Impacts of (0010-19 rsh
roloase of MPLADS funds is envisaged! tiring the rext tyib finaiical years Indhidjdg’ pending
instalments unreleased 09 on 34,03,2020 has already been Issued itd Hon'ble MPs have
heen requested fo reprioritte their recommended work based on the avalablé-urispent
finds.

4, This may be accorded PRIORITY as several Hon'ble Member of Parliament have been
‘approaching this Ministty for release of instalinents Which were due 23 6h. 31" March 2020
to complate the recommended works and full! thelt committed: abilities. Hon'ble
Members have been seperately requested to re-prioritise their. recommended works and
have therh completed from the total averall unspent furids avallable at the district level.

job ७५२४ ae Ra:



a

॥ View of the above, tt 8 requested that closure of accounts of former MPs. and

trarisfer/ re-distribution the uncommitted balance to the successor sitting Ms may be
expedited and closure report Sent १०३४७ Ministry ०१३६" June, 2020:

Enclosure: As above.

To,

4.

2
3.
4

|e
oh OS 20
(Tanweee Qaiar Mohammad)
" Joint Secretary (MPLADS)
A.mplads@mospl.gov.in

Chief Secratartas of Statas/UTs— +
Bs * » शाह the requast-to "Issue sultable directiotis

to” the concerned District: Authorities. to
‘expaaite the closure of aecounts and forward

.°& consolidated “outcome report to the
Ministry by 5" June, 2०20. ४

‘The Nodal Secretarles of States/UTs, |. .

The Commissioners of Corporation of Delhi/Kolkata/Mumbal/Chennoi

All District Collectors/District Maglstrates/Deputy Commissioners

Copy for kind information to;

py eene

a
8
a

All Hon'ble Member of Pallament (Rajya Sabha/ Lok Sabha)
PSto Hon'ble Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha

PS to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha

PS to Hon'ble MoS(I/C), Statistics & PI

PPS to Cabinet Secretary

Secretary/Director General (C & Al/Additionst Secretary (Pil/Additional Secretary &
FA/DDG (Admin)/ Director (MPLADS}/05 (MPLADS)

Additional Director, Committee on MPLADS Branch, Lok Sabha Secretariat

Director, Committee-on MPLADS Branch, Rajya Sabha Secretariat.

All concerned Officers/Offictals in MPLAQS 00501, M/o Statistics & PI

10. NIG-MOSPI with the request to upload on the MPLADS portal

Enelovurest
{Annenures | to tv)



File No. C-38/2015-MPLADS

Government of India
Ministry of Statistics
MPLADS Division
coveey
East Block-6, Level-5,
RK Puram, New Delhi-110066
Dated: 16.07.2020
OEPICR MEMORANDUM |

Subject: Settlement and closure of savings bank accounts of former
posi bi of Parliament after elapsing of stipulated time-period of 21
months-reg.

Kind reference is invited to this Ministry's 0.M. of even number dated 14% May,
2020 on the above cited subject (copy attached) where it was requested to expedite the
closure of accounts and send closure report to this Miniatry by igt* June, 2020,
However, it has been observed that there are many bank accounts yet 10 be closed and
closure documents along with necessary documents are yet to be received by this
Ministry.

2, The position of savings bank accounts of former Members of Parliament has been
reviewed again and it has been found that so far closure details of approximately 50
accounts amounting to Rs, 50 crores only have been received during the intervening
period. The process of settlement and closure of Savings Bank accounts is not optimal
despite repeated directives of this Ministry, A number of accounts of former MPs af Lok
Sabha as well as the Sabha who left the offieé on 30.09.2018 or before uf your
State are yet to be cle Ey) negli) fleck eee ek pecan rpc
15% Lok Sabha, 160 Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha prepared in consultation with NIC-
MOSPI, showing closed and yet to be closed accounts, are attached herewith (Annexure-
1, HI, HT and 1V respectively).

3. ‘Tho unspont balunce to the tune of about Rs 1693.24 Crore (some new accotints
after elapsing of stipulated time-period of 21 months have also been added) in the
accounts of Ex-MPs is seen lying/idling, the reason for which could purely be attributed
to slow pace of utilization of funds, Majority of these aceounts do not need any
additional Infusion of MPLADS funds and are ripe for transfer to the successor MPs in
accordance with modified Para 4.7, Para 4.8, Para 4.9 and 4.10 of the MPLADS
Guidelines, for better and fruitful utilization of MPLADS funds. This could go along way
in addressing the issue of paucity of funds ‘being faced in executing development
projects/works due to COVID-19 pandemic, के

4 While following up the matter, it was found that many District Authorities are
facing doubts and have raised queries in the matter of closure of bank accounts in
respect of MPLAD Scheme. Based on the experience shared by District Authorities with


the Officials of the Lard a ey have been compiled to serve as a guide for the
District Authorities and to facilitate closure of accounts for MPLADS and the same is
placed at Annexure-V. a

5... Itis again Pieler! to expedite Veal pied of closure of accounts and furnish
the details as par format to this Ministry positively by 150 August, 2020,

“४3,
OF 203°
(Tanveer Qamur Mohammad)

4 Joint Secretary (MPLADS)
js:mplads@mospi.goy.in

Enclosure: As above.

To,

1, The Nodal Secretaries of States/UTs (with the request to issue suitable
directions to the concerned District Authorities to expedite the closure of accounts and
forward consolidated gutootie reparl lo the Ministry: bby 11 August, 2620.)

2, The Commissioners of Corporation of Delhi/Kolkata/Mumbai/Chennai,

3, All District Collectots/District Magistrates/Deputy Commissioners/ District Planning
Officer/Project Directar/Collector & DEV.Commissioner.

Copy for kind information to:
1. All Hon'ble Member of Parliament (Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha).
2. NIC-MOSPI with the request to upload on the MPLADS portal,



He


“ee


File No, C-38/2015-MPLADS (Computer No, 9039 ) hg 271
Receipt No : 272300/2021/NAD 28

File No. C-38/2015-MPLADS
Government of India
Ministry of Statistics
MPLADS Division 4५
५ leek
East Block-6, Level-6,
२. K. Puram, New Delhl-110066
Dated: 01.01.2021

Subject:- Settlement and closure of savings bank accounts of former Members
of Parliament -regarding.

Kindly refer to the exercise done by this Ministry with regard to the collection of >
data relating to ‘the MPLADs Furid in the month of November 2020. Based on the data
collected through letters/emails/Google links/Telephones/ whatsapp etc, the. MPLADS
Division has complied the fund position of MPs of Lok. Sabha and RajyaSabha(both sitting
and ex) State-wise and nadal district-wise. The. compiled data with respect to your state
and nodal districts is enclosed herewith,

2. It Is ‘requested to review the data {copy —_ enclosed)
and make suggestions, if any, to ease the: problem of committed liability in your
State/Nodal Districts,

5. Tt ig further raquosted that the unspent balance available in the accounts of Nodal
Districts belonging to EX-MPs of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha may be
transferred/redistributed in accordance with para 4.7,4.8,4:9 and 4.10 of MPLADs
Guidelines.

4, The data related to the uncommitted balance with regards to some nodal districts,
if not provided yet, may be 71906 available to the Ministry at the earliest.

5. Arreport may be sent to this office 0५7० January, 2021.
6 This Issues with the approval of the Competent Authority. - J

Enclosure: As above,

ture
( Sudha Meena )
Under Secretary TO Government of India

To
District Collectors/District Magistrates/Deputy Commissioners/District Planning
Officer/Project Director/Collector & DEV. Commissioner.
Copy to:~
as The Chief Secretaty of State/UT - (with kind request to issue suitable directions to
the concerned District Authorities to expedite the closure of accounts and forward a
consolidated outcome report to this Ministry),

2: The Nodal Secretaries of State/UT.

गो

Generated from eOffice bv SAVITRI RAMANI, SSO, MOSPI on 22/04/21 12:06 PM


MINUTES OF SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21)

The Committee sat on Thursday, the 197 November, 2020 from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in

Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat - Chairperson

MEMBERS

Z Shri Kunwar Danish Ali

3 Shri Sudharshan Bhagat

4‘ Shi P.P, Chaudhary

5 — Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan

6 Thiru Dayanidhi Maran

7 she K. Muraleedharan

8 Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore

9 Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

40 Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy

44 Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy

12. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha

43 Shri Pinaki Misra

14 Shri Kesineni Srinivas

45 Shri Ajay Bhatt

16. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh

है.


SECRETARIAT.

4s Smt. B. Visala - Director
० Shri २.5. Negi - Deputy Secretary ss
WITNESSES a
4. ° Or. K, Shivaji हे - Secretary, M/o Statistics & Programme
i Implementation
2 Ms. Mamta Saxena - Director-General (C&A), M/o Statistics &

Programme Implementation

a Ms. T. Rajeswari - Additional Secretary(Pl), M/o Statistics &
है Programme Implementation

4. Shri T.Q. Mohammad - Joint Secretary(MPLADS), M/o Statistics &
Programme Implementation

2s At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee and
briefed them about the agenda of the Sitting viz. an evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) in connection with thé examination of the subject
‘Review of Funds Allocation and Utilisation under MPLAD Fund Scheme’. After a brief discussion, the
representatives of MoSP! were called in to depose before the Committee.

3, The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of MoSPI and asked them to introduce
themselves to the Committee and drew their attention to Direction §5(1) of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. The Members of
the Committee requested the Chairperson that instead of the Ministry making a presentation they
might be allowed to examine the representatives of the Ministry as they had already gone through the

background material and Power Point presentation. The Chairperson acceded to the request of the
Members.

4, ‘Thereafter, the Members raised several queries on the issues related to the subject which
inter-alia included release of suspended MPLAD Funds for the financial years 2020-21 and 2021-22
in the financial year 2023-24; release of pending instalments of sanctioned MPLAD funds of previous
years; mode of making payments to the contractors for the already completed projects or projects


near completion; indicating the name of MP on the name plate of the project from whose fund the
project was completed; non-utilization of funds; transparency in the MPLAD Scheme: Geotagging of
MPLAD projects; utilisation of MPLAD funds for Government aided schools/crematoriums and burial
grounds; implementing ageticy for approved projects; lack of coordination between District Nodal
Officers and Officers of Central Government MPLAD Office; whether funds could be utilised for
religious places like Temples, Churches, Masjids etc.; monitoring mechanism for timely completion of
projects, provision of separate office for MP at District Collector's office with computer, furniture and
assistant, Centage surcharge charged by PSU agencies, etc..

5. The queries of the Members were duly responded to by the representatives of the Ministry.
The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses for giving useful information and asked them to furnish
written replies to the points which could not be responded to during the Sitting.

6 The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been kept.on record.

The Committee then adjourned. then ad ourned,

8}


MINUTES OF ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21)

The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 5" January, 2021 from 1130 hrs. to 1340 hrs. in
Committee Room No.

‘2! First Floor, Block-A, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New
Delhi. y

PRESENT

Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat - Chairperson’

MEMBERS

2.  Shti Kunwar Danish Ali

3 Shri'Kalyan Banerjee

4 Shri P.P. Chaudhary

5 shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan

6 Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap

7 917 |. Muraleedharan

8 Dr. K.C, Patel

9 Col, Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore

40 Shri Kesineni Srinivas

11. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh

8x


SECRETARIAT

a. Smit. B. Visala - Director
2: Smt. A. Jyothirmayi - Additional Director i
WITNESSES
ths Dr. K. Shivaji - Secretary, M/o Statistics & Programme
i implementation
2: Ms. Mamta Saxena - Director-General (C&A), Mio Statistics &

Programme Implementation

3, Shri T.Q. Mohammad - Joint Secretary (MPLADS), M/o Statistics &
Programme Implementation

Ua At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee and

briefed them about the agenda of the Sitting viz. further evidence of the representatives of the

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) in connection with the examination of
the subject ‘Review of Funds Allocation and Utilisation under MPLAD Fund Scheme’. After 8 brief
discussion, the representatives of MoSPI were called in to depose before the Committee.

3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of MoSPI and asked them to introduce
themselves to the Committee and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.

4. Thereafter, the Members raised several queries on the issues related to the subject which
inter-alia included release of pending installments of MPLAD Funds for the financial year 2019-20 and
previous years; suggestion to increase MPLAD Fund; amendment to existing guidelines; latest status
of allocation of remaining amount for the year 2019-20; utilization of MPLAD fund for COVID-19
treatment; cut-off date for release of funds for the year 2019-20; discrimination in releasing MPLAD
Fund; logic/intent/object behind getting Utilisation Certificate; Pros and Cons for dispensing Utilisation
Certificates; timely release of the fund every year, delay in completion of sanctioned/approved
projects due to non-release of funds; review meetings in respect of MPLAD works/projects; distinction
between utilization by an-MP and utilization at site; efficient utilization of MPLAD Fund; provision for a


“separate office/facilitation centre for MP at District’ Collector's office with computer, furniture,
assistant/typist/data entry operator and mode of remuneration to such assistant/typisvdata entry
operator; 2% Administrative Charges; CAG Report on MPLAD Fund Scheme; Fund for DISHA
Committee meetings; scholarship to OBC students; a real time dashboard reflecting the status of

MPLAD projects/works; release of 5" Year MPLAD Fund in advance in 4” Year; effective/proper
implementation of MPLAD Fund Scheme, etc. :

5. The queries of the Members were duly responded to by the representatives of the Ministry.

The Chairperson informed that this was the last sitting on this subject and then thanked the witnesses

for giving useful information and asked them to furnish written replies to the points which could not be
responded to during the Sitting.

6 The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

gy


MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2021-2022) .

The Committee ‘sat on Thursday, the 31" March, 2022 from 1600 hrs. to 1650 hrs. in Room

No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
(
: PRESENT |

Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat - Chairperson

Members.
2. Shri Kunwar Danish Ali
3. Shri Sudharshan Bhagat
4. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi
6. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
ts Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
8. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap
9. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya
10. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan
12). Dr. K.C, Patel
13. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy
14, Shri Dilip Saikia
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
16. Shri Prathap Simha
47. Shri Kesineni Srinivas
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Muraleedharan.P  - Director
2. Smt. Geeta Parmar - Additional Director

2: At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. The

Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports and adopted the same with some
additions/modifications as shown in Annexure A and 8 respectively:

(i) XXX XXX XXX XxX XxX

(ii) Draft Fourteenth Report of the Committee on Estimates(17th Lok Sabha) the subject
‘Review of Funds Allocation and Utilisation under MPLAD Fund Scheme’ pertaining
to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. y

3. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the basis of
factual verification received from the concerned Ministry and present the same to Lok Sabha.

4. XXX XXX XXX EK XXX

The Committee, then, adjourned.


AMENDMENTS/MODIFICATIONS MADE BY T'

FOURTEENTH REPORT

ANNEXURE '8'

HE COMMITTEE IN THE DRAFT

Page | Para Line iin apelin = eS ee z aS pe

No. No. No. :

49 8 - During the “course. of During the course of examination

i examination the | the Committee have found that on
Committee: -have | found | various occasions, MPs receive

that on various occasions
MPs receive requests
from. certain institutes,
other than prescribed in

the extant guidelines, to’

sanction MPLAD fund for
Various developmental
works. -In case where
certain:.institutes are -not

Covered in.the MPLADS.

guidelines, MPs a

"| a position to“assist™them=

even if the institute seem
deserving. The Committee
view that it is the prime
responsibility of the
elected representatives-to
look into various
tequests/grievances of
public/institutes/societies

and accordingly
‘recommend
Projects/works * for their

welfare and development.
The Committee, therefore.
recommend that ‘the

| purview’ of ..the... MPLAD.

Scheme should be
broadened so as to enable

‘the MPs: to assist .more

and more. number of
institutes and recommend
works of developmental
nature thereby ensuring
creation of durable
community assets for the
betterment of education
system/infrastructure in
the-country Si २६

requests from certain institutes
which .are not included in the
extant guidelines, for sanction of
MPLAD fund for: various
developmental works, In such
cases, MPs are not in a position
to assist them even the
institutes/organizations seem
deserving. To cite an instance; the
Committee are aware of certain
Ambulance providers where the
F ownership of the vehicles are with
the Zila Parishads/Corporations
yet their maintenance aspects are
better ‘handled by a Non profit
organisation/NGO. Since itis the
Prime-responsibility of the elécted
représentatives-to look into such |
grievances/practical -difficulties: of |
public/institutes/societies. the
Committee feel that the MPLADS
guidelines should be suitably
amended. to enable. MPs ‘to
‘tecommend such . projects/works
or help deserving © Non profit

organizations/NGOs 100. under
-MPLADS Scheme. i
Overall the Committee

‘recommend: that the purview of

‘the -MPLAD Scheme should be |:

broadened so as to enable the

MPs to assist. more and more |’

number of institutées/recommend
works of developmental nature
thereby ensuring: creation of
durable community assets for-the
betterment _ of edlication
system/infrastructure in the
country ‘