MINISTRY OF FINANCE

DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN UNION BUDGET

[Action taken by Government on the Observations! Recommendations contained
in the Twenty-First Report (167 Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]

COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2020-21)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

[Action taken by Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained
in the Twenty-First Report (160 Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]

(Presented to Lok Sabha on 9; 25292")

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21 )

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER |

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

Report

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by Government

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government's replies

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government's replies have not been accepted
by the Committee

Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of Government are still awaited

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee (2020-
2021) on Estimates held on 04.02.2021

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-
First Report of the Committee on Estimates (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Structural Changes in Union
Budget'


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 2020-21)

Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat — Chairperson

जा Mae ae ge ONE
SSENSSRSRSNSSEIsaReSaS

Cin

SS जप 1 का ann

Members

Kunwar Danish Ali

Shri Kalyan Banerjee

Shri Pradan Baruah

Shri Sudharshan Bhagat

Shri Ajay Bhatt

Shri P.P. Chaudhary

Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan

Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal

Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap
Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya
Shri Dayanidhi Maran

Shri K. Muraleedharan

Shri S.S. Palanimanickam

Shri Kamlesh Paswan

Dr. K.C. Patel

Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat

Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy

Shri Francisco Sardinha

Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma

Shri Prathap Simha

Shri Dharambir Singh

Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
Shri Kesineni Srinivas

Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma

SECRETARIAT
Smt. 8. Visala - Director
Smt. A. Jyothirmayi - Additional Director

Dr. Sheetal Kapoor - Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2020-21) having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Sixth
Report on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Twenty-First Report (16" Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject

“Structural Changes in Union Budget.”

2 The Twenty-First Report (16" Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates was
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.12.2016. Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations were received from the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Economic Affairs on 10.07.2020. The draft Report was considered and

adopted by the Committee (2020-2021) at their sitting held on 4" February, 2021.

3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/

Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report of the Committee is given in

Appendix-ll .

NEW DELHI; GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT,
9 February, 2021 CHAIRPERSON,
Magha 2-2, 1942 (Saka) ESTIMATES COMMITTEE.


CHAPTER -।

REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the subject ‘Structural Changes in Union
Budget’ pertaining to the Ministry of Finance(Department of Economic Affairs).

1.2 The Twenty First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 09.12.2016, It
contained 04 Observations/Recommendations, Action Taken Replies on all these
Observations/Recommendations were received from the . Ministry of
Finance(Department of Economic Affairs) on 10.07.2020.

1.3 Replies to the Observations and Recommendations contained in the Report
have broadly been categorized as under:-

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
SI. Nos. 1,2,3,4 (Total 04)

(Chapter-Il)

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government's reply:

SI. Nos. Nil (Total Nil)
(Chapter-Ii!)

(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government's replies
have not been accepted by the Committee:

SI. Nos.Nil (Total Nil)
(Chapter-IV)

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of
Government is still awaited:

SI. Nos. -Nil- (Total Nil)
(Chapter-V)

1.4 The Committee desire that the response to comments contained in
Chapter | of this Report should be furnished to them expeditiously.
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on their’

recommendations.

--


A. Merger of Railway Budget with the Union Budget r of Railw: udget with the Union Budget

(Observation/Recommendation No.1) No.1

1.6 The Committee considered the proposal of the Government to merge the
Railway Budget with the Union Budget and present a single budget starting with the
budget of 2017-18. The Committee note that the need for a separate Railway Budget
was felt as early as 1921 when the Railways appointed an Expert Committee known
as Ackworth Committee. The Ackworth Committee recommended for separation of
the railways finances from general finances of the Government of India. The
recommendation was placed in the Legislative Assembly which passed a resolution
on 24 Sept. 1924 for separation of the Railway Budget from the General Budget
known as Separation Convention. The First Railway Budget was presented on
20" February 1925. The Committee take note of the submission of the Government
that the Constitution provides for presentation of Annual Financial Statement showing
the estimated receipts and expenditure of the GOI for the ensuing financial year
known as the Budget. Notably, there is no constitutional provision for presenting a
separate Railway Budget. The Ministry of Finance also testified that the practice of
separate budget essentially creates an unnecessary legislative and bureaucratic
exercise and therefore, submitted that presentation of a single budget would enhance
good governance. Allaying the apprehension that the merger of the Railway Budget
with General Budget will impinge on the autonomy of the Railways which is a
departmental commercial undertaking of the Government, the representative of the
Ministry of Finance assured the Committee that the Ministry of Railways will continue
to enjoy the same functional. and Operational autonomy without any external
interference. The Committee were also assured that the Chairman Railway Board,
Railway Board Members and the General Managers will continue to enjoy same
financial powers. The Chairman Railway Board, in his independent testimony,
submitted categorically that with the merger of Railway Budget with the General
Budget, the financial autonomy of the railways will remain intact as per the decision of
the Cabinet. The representatives of both the Ministries of Railways and Finance also
assured the Committee that the railway component of the Budget including allocation
of resources will continue to be Prepared by the Railway Ministry which will be
incorporated by the Ministry of Finance in the one consolidated Budget. Further, the
Railways will present their detailed Demands for Grants and the key highlights of the
Railways will form an integral part of the expenditure Budget ४०1.॥. Besides, the
Committee were apprised that with the presentation of a single consolidated Budget
for the Union of India , there will be a single Appropriation Bill which will save the time
of Legislature for passing separate Appropriation Bills.

Taking note of the assurance of the Ministry of Finance and the affirmation of
the Railway Board that there will be no dilution of the operational, functional and
financial autonomy of the Railways and the Railway Board will continue to prepare the
railway components of the Union Budget based on their professional expertise, proven

my


experience and the need for constant improvement in the Railways, the Committee
accord their concurrence to the Proposed merger of the Railway Budget with the
General Budget Subject to the conditions contained in the subsequent
recommendations.

on 1.2.2017 after merger of Railways' estimates (both receipts and expenditure) as
part of General Budget.

1.8 The Committee appreciate that the Department has implemented the
concurrence of the Committee on Estimates to the then Proposed merger of the
Railway Budget with the General Budget and presented the Union Government

furnishing Action Taken Replies, the Department has not mentioned anything
about the presentation of Union Government Budget in the subsequent years
(i.e. 2018-2019, 2019-2020 & 2020-2021) as well as the compliance of assurances
of the Ministry of Finance and affirmation of Railway Board for not diluting the
Operational, functional and financial autonomy of the Railways and also

Budget based on their professional expertise, Proven experience and the need
for constant improvement in the Railways. The Committee take serious view of
such an indifferent attitude of the Department and desire that the Department
furnish the information regarding the presentation of Union Government Budget
in the subsequent years (i.e. 2018-2019, 2019-2020 & 2020-2021) as well as the
compliance of assurances of the Ministry of Finance and affirmation of Railway

experience and the need for constant improvement in the Railways. The
Committee desire that in future, the Department furnish the information sought
within the stipulated period.

Be


B. Advantages to accrue to the Railways to accrue to the Railways
(Qbservation/Recommendation No.2) No.2

1.9 The Committee noted that the Rail Budget gave full Opportunity to the Members
Of Parliament to highlight the inadequacies of the Railways and make concrete
suggestion for expansion, modernisation, safety and security of the Railways. The
Committee also note that the Rail Budget is discussed threadbare in the Lok Sabha for
at least 2/3 days. For instance, during 2015-16, the Rail budget was discussed

discussions. Further, the Committee were assured by the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance that after the merger of Railway Budget with General Budget (i)
Ministry of Railways will continue to function as a departmentally run commercial
undertaking, (ii) Railways will meet all their revenue expenditure including ordinary
working expenses के

and pay and allowances, pensions payable to employees, from their revenue receipts,
(iii) Railways will get exemption from Payment of dividend to general revenues, and its
capital at large would stand wiped off, (iv) Ministry of Finance will provide Gross
Budgetary Support (GBS) to Ministry of Railways towards meeting part of capital
expenditure; (v) Railways may continue to raise resources from the market through
extra budgetary Resources at present to finance its capital expenditure, (vi) With
Capital-at-charge wiped off and the need for dividend payment by railways being done
away with, the. subsidy payment to Railways (towards dividend relief and other
concessions, including reimbursement of losses on Operation of stratregic lines) will be
discontinued.

Considering the solemn assurance of the government that the Railway would
continue to function as a departmentally run commercial undertaking; with its full
functional and financial autonomy; that the Railways will get exemption from payment
of dividend and that the Ministry of Finance will provide gross budgetary support to the
Ministry of Railways for making part of capital expenditure, the Committee approve the
proposal of the merger of Rail Budget with the General Budget with the fulfillment of
these undertakings but subject to the rider that the Ministry of Finance will extend
adequate budgetary support given the dire Conditions of the Railways and its socio-
economic and strategic contribution in nation building. Further, the Committee reiterate
that the Railways shall continue to get reimbursement of losses on Operation of
Strategic lines. The Committee are sanguine that the working and finances of the
Railways would continue to be discussed in the House for adequate duration so that
the rights of the Members to discuss the Railways Demands for Grants and to call the
Railways to account are not infringed or diluted in any manner.

1.10 The Department of Economic Affairs vide its Action Taken Replies have stated
that the views/observations of Committee on Estimates have been noted and the
Ministry of Railways would continue to function as a departmentally run commercial
undertaking with

Pe


full functional autonomy even after merger of Railway Budget with General Budget. The
Department has also stated that the Railways continued to receive adequate gross
budgetary support towards meeting part of its capital expenditure. Railways were also
provided reimbursement of losses on operation of strategic lines. The Table given
below shows the budget support and reimbursement of losses on operation of 'strategic
lines! to Railways:

(‘in crore )
Year Gross Budget Support to Reimbursement of
Railways operation of strategic lines

017-18
018-19
019-20 (RE
70000

1.11 The Committee note from the Action Taken Replies that the Department
has noted the views/observations of the Committee that the Ministry of Railways
would continue to function as a departmentally run commercial undertaking with
full functional autonomy even after merger of Railway Budget with General
Budget. The Committee also note that the Department will extend adequate
budgetary support towards meeting part of its capital expenditure. The
Committee further note that the Railways were also provided reimbursement of
losses on operation of strategic lines. However, the Committee express their
displeasure that the Department in its Action Taken Replies has not dealt with
issues such as the financial autonomy, exemption from payment of dividend,
discussion on working and finances of Railways in the House. The Committee
urge upon the Department to furnish complete information as sought by the
Committee.

C. Merger of Plan and non-Plan classification

(Qbservation/Recommendation No.3)

1.12 The Committee noted that the Expenditure Budget of the Government
comprises of Plan and Non-Plan expenditure. According to the General Financial
Rules( Rule 78), plan expenditure representing expenditure on plan outlays approved
for each scheme or organisation by the Planning Commission (erstwhile) and indicating
the extent to which such outlays are met out of budgetary provisions shall be shown
distinctly from the other (Non-Plan) expenditure in the accounts as well as in the budget
documents. The Committee were apprised that following the decision of the Union
Cabinet on 21 September,2016, the Plan and Non-Plan distinct heads of accounts
would be done away with from the Union Budget from the Budget 2017-18 as also
announced by the Finance Minister in the Budget Speech of 2016-17. The Committee
were further informed that the decision was taken after indepth examination of the
recommendations

-5-

of the high level expert Committee, (Dr. C. Rangarajan Committee), the Administrative
Reforms Commission (Shri Veerappa Moily) as well as by the Expenditure


Management Commission (EMC) (Shri Bimal Jalan Committee). The representative of
the Ministry of Finance submitted that the bifurcation of expenditure as Plan and Non-
Plan expenditure gave a fragmented view of the resource allocation creating difficulty in
ascertaining the cost of delivery of services and the link between financial outlays and
outcomes. Further, with the abolition of the Planning Commission and with the removal
of plan and non-plan distinction, the focus of budgeting and expenditure classification
will shift to a revenue and capital expenditure as envisaged in the Constitution.
However, notably, with the abolition of Planning Commission and its replacement by
NITI Ayog and doing away with the plan and non-plan expenditure, the Committee note
that the entire resource allocation would be done by the Ministry of Finance. The
Secretary, Deptt of Economic Affairs testified that the single financial control in the
nodal Ministry of Finance would bring greater efficiency in resource allocation and
lead to tigorous

financial control. Taking note of the testimony of the Secretary DEA, Ministry of
Finance, that doing away with the plan and non-plan classification of expenditure will
help bring a clear distinction between capital and revenue expenditure which
is essential for analytical purposes, transparency and efficient policy decision making,
and help in better assessment of the operating cost of Government, the investments
made and measuring the efficiency of governmental activities, the committee concur in
the proposal of the Ministry of finance with respect to abolition of plan and non-plan
expenditure classification. The Committee however would like to be apprised of
the impact of the decision on developmental programmes and _ activities of
the Government in course of time. Further, the Committee recommend that the expert
advice of the NITI Ayog ought to be given full weightage and consideration in the
matter of allocation of resources for developmental programmes so that there is more
judicious allocation of resources despite concentration of excessive financial powers in
a single Ministry. Further, and more importantly, suitable instructions/guidelines be
issued to ensure that the classification of expenditure as revenue and capital is done
with fidelity and rationally so as to overcome wrongful booking of expenditure and to
promote transparency and efficiency.

1.13 The Department of Economic Affairs vide its Action Taken Replies has stated
that the concurrence of Committee on Estimates on the proposal of Ministry of Finance
for abolition of Plan and Non Plan expenditure classification has been noted. The
Department has also stated that the NITI Aayog has been providing strategic policy
vision for the government and for evolving a shared vision of national development
priorities, sectors and strategies with the active involvement of States. NITI is entrusted
with development Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) functions including: (i) to monitor
progress and efficacy of strategic and long term policy and programme frameworks and
initiatives to help innovative improvements, including necessary mid-course corrections;
and (ii) to actively monitor and evaluate the implementation of programmes and


1.14 ‘The Committee note that the Department has implemented the Proposal
for abolition of Plan and Non-Plan Expenditure Classification. The Committee
also note that the Department has informed about. giving of full weightage and
consideration to the expert advice of NITI Ayog in the matter of allocation of
resources for developmental Programmes. However, the Committee are
dismayed to note that the Department has not mentioned anything about the
impact of the decision on developmental Programmes and activities of the

ensure proper classification of expenditure as revenue and capital. The
Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the requisite information in the
matter at the earliest, as this would ensure to overcome incorrect classification
of expenditure and also to Promote transparency and efficiency.

0. Reorganization of the number of Demands for Grants of the number of Demands for Grants:
(Observation/Recommendation No.4) No.4

1.15 It may be recalled that based on the 12th report of the Committee on Estimates
(16th Lok Sabha), the Ministry of Finance reduced the number of Demands for Grants
from 109 to 98 (excluding the 16 DFGs of the Railways) starting with the fiscal year

plan expenditure classification, suitable amendments are effected to the GFR to
facilitate booking of expenditure correctly under the revenue and capital heads based
On intelligible rules.

a


1.16 The Department of Economic Affairs vide its Action Taken Replies has stated
that the merger of Plan and Non Plan classification ‘in budget and accounts has the
concurrence of Comptroller & Auditor General of india. Further, the General Financial
Rules, 2005 have been comprehensively reviewed with the aim of Promoting simplicity
and transparency in the Government financial system and procedures subsequent to
merger of Plan and Non Plan classification in budget and accounts. The revised GFRs,
viz. General Financial Rules, 2017 have been published on 11.2.2017.

The recommendations of the Committee on Estimates made in its 21° Report
(2016-2017) (16 ™ Lok Sabha) have been considered and implemented in full.

1.17 The Committee note that the Comptroller & Auditor General of India has
given concurrence for the merger of Plan and Non Plan classification in budget
and accounts. The Committee also note that the Department has
comprehensively reviewed the General Financial Rules, 2005 with the aim of
promoting simplicity and transparency in the Government financial system and
Procedures subsequent to merger of Plan and Non Plan classification in budget
and accounts and the revised GFRs, viz. General Financial Rules, 2017 have
been published on 11.2.2017. However, the Committee observe that the
Department has neither clearly indicated the amendments made in General
Financial Rules, 2005 nor furnished the amended portions of General Financial
Rules, 2017 for ready reference of the Committee. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Department apprise the Committee of the amendments made in
General Financial Rules, 2005 and forward the same to the Committee at the
earliest.


Chapter-il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNMENT

Merger of Railway Budget with the Union Budget of Railway Budget with the Union Budget
{Observation/Recommendation No.1) No.1

The Committee considered the proposal of the Government to merge the
Railway Budget with the Union Budget and present a single budget starting with the
budget of 2017-18. The Committee note that the need for a separate Railway Budget
was felt as early as 1921 when the Railways appointed an Expert Committee known
as Ackworth Committee. The Ackworth Committee recommended for separation of
the railways finances from general finances of the Government of India. The
recommendation was placed in the Legislative Assembly which passed a resolution
on 24 Sept. 1924 for separation of the Railway Budget from the General Budget
known as Separation Convention. The First Railway Budget was presented on
200 February 1925. The Committee take note of the submission of the Government
that the Constitution provides for presentation of Annual Financial Statement showing
the estimated receipts and expenditure of the GOI for the ensuing financial year
known as the Budget. Notably, there is no constitutional provision for presenting a
separate Railway Budget. The Ministry of Finance also testified that the practice of
separate budget essentially creates an unnecessary legislative and bureaucratic
exercise and therefore, submitted that presentation of a single budget would enhance
good governance. Allaying the apprehension that the merger of the Railway Budget
with General Budget will impinge on the autonomy of the Railways which is a
departmental commercial undertaking of the Government, the representative of the
Ministry of Finance assured the Committee that the Ministry of Railways will continue
to enjoy the same functional and Operational autonomy without any external
interference. The Committee were also assured that the Chairman Railway Board,
Railway Board Members and the General Managers will continue to enjoy same
financial powers. The Chairman Railway Board, in his independent testimony,
submitted categorically that with the merger of Railway Budget with the General
Budget, the financial autonomy of the railways will remain intact as per the decision of
the Cabinet. The representatives of both the Ministries of Railways and Finance also
assured the Committee that the railway component of the Budget including allocation
of resources will continue to be prepared by the Railway Ministry which will be
incorporated by the Ministry of Finance in the one consolidated Budget. Further, the
Railways will present their detailed Demands for Grants and the key highlights of the
Railways will form an integral part of the expenditure Budget ४०।.॥. Besides, the
Committee were apprised that with the presentation of a single consolidated Budget
for the Union of India , there will be a single Appropriation Bill which will save the time
of Legislature for passing separate Appropriation Bills.

-9-


Taking note of the assurance of the Ministry of Finance and the affirmation of the
Railway Board that there will be no dilution of the operational, functional and financial
autonomy of the Railways and the Railway Board will continue to prepare the railway
components of the Union Budget based on their professional expertise, proven
experience and the need for constant improvement in the Railways, the Committee
accord their concurrence to the proposed merger of the Railway Budget with the
General Budget subject to the conditions contained in the subsequent
recommendations.

Reply by the Government

The Department of Economic Affairs vide its Action Taken Replies has stated
that the concurrence of the Committee on Estimates to the proposed merger of Railway
Budget with the General Budget has been noted. The Department has also stated that
the Union Government Budget for 2017-2018 was presented to Parliament on 1.2.2017

after merger of Railways' estimates (both receipts and expenditure) as part of General
Budget.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-l)

Advantages to accrue to the Railways to accrue to the Railways
(Qbservation/Recommendation No.2) No.2

The Committee noted that the Rail Budget gave full opportunity to the Members
Of Parliament to highlight the inadequacies of the Railways and make concrete
Suggestion for expansion, modernisation, safety and security of the Railways. The
Committee also note that the Rail Budget is discussed threadbare in the Lok Sabha for
at least 2/3 days. For instance, during 2015-16, the Rail budget was discussed
thoroughly on 11&12 March and 21 April, 2015 and 298 Members participated in the
discussions. Further, the Committee were assured by the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance that after the merger of Railway Budget with General Budget (i)
Ministry of Railways will continue to function as a departmentally run commercial
undertaking, (ii) Railways will meet all their revenue expenditure including ordinary
working expenses and pay and allowances, pensions payable to employees, from their
revenue receipts, (iii) Railways will get exemption from payment of dividend to general
revenues, and its capital at large would stand wiped off, (iv) Ministry of Finance will
provide Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) to Ministry of Railways towards meeting part

of capital expenditure; (v) Railways may continue to raise resources from the market
through

-10-


extra budgetary Resources at present to finance its Capital expenditure, (vi) With
capital-at-charge wiped off and the need for dividend payment by railways being done
away with, the subsidy payment to Railways (towards dividend relief and other
concessions, including reimbursement of losses on Operation of stratregic lines) will be
discontinued.

Considering the solemn assurance of the government that the Railway would
continue to function as a departmentally run commercial undertaking; with its full
functional and financial autonomy; that the Railways will get exemption from payment
of dividend and that the Ministry of Finance will provide gross budgetary support to the
Ministry of Railways for making part of capital expenditure, the Committee approve the
proposal of the merger of Rail Budget with the General Budget with the fulfillment of
these undertakings but subject to the rider that the Ministry of Finance will extend
adequate budgetary support given the dire conditions of the Railways and its socio-
economic and strategic contribution in nation building. Further, the Committee reiterate
that the Railways shall continue to get reimbursement of losses on Operation of
strategic lines. The Committee are sanguine that the working and finances of the
Railways would continue to be discussed in the House for adequate duration so that
the rights of the Members to discuss the Railways Demands for Grants and to call the
Railways to account are not infringed or diluted in any manner.

Reply by the Government

The Department of Economic Affairs vide its Action Taken Replies that the
views/observations of Committee on Estimates have been noted and the Ministry of
Railways would continue to function as departmentally run commercial undertaking with
full functional autonomy, as hithertofore, even after merger of Railway Budget with
General Budget. The Department has also Stated that the Railways continued to
receive adequate gross budgetary support towards meeting part of its capital
expenditure. Railways were also provided reimbursement of losses on operation of
Strategic lines. The Table given below shows the budget support and reimbursement
of losses on operation of ‘strategic lines' to Railways:

( crore )
Railways operation of strategic lines
(40172 80 0 eh] 43418 (ea cas aa
2018-19 52838
2019-20 (RE Pee
2020-21 (BE 70000

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-l)

-11-


Merger of Plan and non-Plan classification
(Qbservation/Recommendation No.3)

The Committee noted that the Expenditure Budget of the Government comprises
of Plan and Non-Plan expenditure. According to the General Financial Rules( Rule 78),
plan expenditure representing expenditure on plan outlays approved for each scheme
or organisation by the Planning Commission (erstwhile) and indicating the extent to
which such outlays are met out of budgetary provisions shall be shown distinctly from
the other (Non-Plan) expenditure in the accounts as well as in the budget documents.
The Committee were apprised that following the decision of the Union Cabinet on 21
September,2016, the Plan and Non-Plan distinct heads of accounts would be done
away with from the Union Budget from the Budget 2017-18 as also announced by the
Finance Minister in the Budget Speech of 2016-17. The Committee were further
informed that the decision was taken after indepth examination of the
recommendations of the high level expert Committee, (Dr. C. Rangarajan Committee),
the Administrative Reforms Commission (Shri Veerappa Moily) as well as by the
Expenditure Management Commission (EMC) (Shri Bimal Jalan Committee). The
representative of the Ministry of Finance submitted that the bifurcation of expenditure
as Plan and Non-Plan expenditure gave a fragmented view of the resource allocation
creating difficulty in ascertaining the cost of delivery of services and the link between
financial outlays and outcomes. Further, with the abolition of the Planning Commission
and with the removal of plan and non-plan distinction, the focus of budgeting and
expenditure classification will shift to a revenue and capital expenditure as envisaged in
the Constitution. However, notably, with the abolition of Planning Commission and its
replacement by NITI Ayog and doing away with the plan and non-plan expenditure, the
Committee note that the entire resource allocation would be done by the Ministry of
Finance. The Secretary, Deptt of Economic Affairs testified that the single financial
control in the nodal Ministry of Finance would bring greater efficiency in resource
allocation and lead .to rigorous financial control. Taking note of the testimony of the
Secretary DEA, Ministry of Finance, that doing away with the plan and non-plan
classification of expenditure will help bring a clear distinction between capital and
revenue expenditure which is essential for analytical purposes, transparency and
efficient policy decision making, and help in better assessment of the operating cost
of Government, the investments made and measuring the efficiency of governmental
activities, the committee concur in the proposal of the Ministry of finance with respect to
abolition of plan and non-plan expenditure classification. The Committee however
would like to be apprised of the impact of the decision on developmental programmes
and activities of the Government in course of time. Further, the Committee recommend
that the expert advice of the NITI Ayog ought to be given full weightage
and consideration in the matter

-12-


of allocation of resources for developmental programmes so that there is more
judicious allocation of resources despite concentration of excessive financial powers in
a single Ministry. Further, and more importantly, suitable instructions/guidelines be
issued to ensure that the classification of expenditure as revenue and capital is done
with fidelity and rationally so as to overcome wrongful booking of expenditure and to
promote transparency and efficiency.

Reply by the Government

The Department of Economic Affairs vide its Action Taken Replies has stated
that the concurrence of Committee on Estimates on the proposal of Ministry of Finance
for abolition of Plan and Non Plan expenditure classification has been noted. The
Department has also stated that the NITI Aayog has been providing strategic policy
vision for the government and for evolving a shared vision of national development
priorities, sectors and strategies with the active involvement of States. NITI is entrusted
with development Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) functions including: (i) to monitor
progress and efficacy of strategic and long term policy and programme frameworks and
initiatives to help innovative improvements, including necessary mid-course corrections;
and (ii) to actively monitor and evaluate the implementation of programmes and
initiatives, including the identification of the needed resources so as to strengthen the
probability of success and scope of delivery. The Department has further stated that its
Ministry has been reviewing constantly the quality of expenditure, with more emphasis
on revenue-capital perspective at the time of devising the schemes/programmes. It
has been the endeavour of the Ministry to maintain transparency and efficiency on the
classification of expenditure.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-l)

0. Reorganization of the number of Demands for Grants: of the number of Demands for Grants:
{Observation/Recommendation No.4)

It may be recalled that based on the 12th report of the Committee on Estimates
(16th Lok Sabha), the Ministry of Finance reduced the number of Demands for Grants
from 109 to 98 (excluding the 16 DFGs of the Railways) starting with the fiscal year
2016-17. Notably, with the merger of both the Union Budget and Railways Budget, the
Ministry of Finance also propose to merge the 16 DFGs of the Railways into one single
DFG, with the result, the Ministry of Railways will have only one DFG instead of 16.
Consequently, the total number of DFGs for Government of India will change. The
Committee have no objection to the proposed reorganization of the Demands for
Grants in the context of merger of both the Budgets and abolition of Plan — Non-Plan
classification in the budget documents provided the same is approved by the C&AG in

-13-


terms of article 150 of the Constitution. Further, the Committee would like the Ministry
of Finance to amend the GFR suitably so that, while doing away with the plan and non-
plan expenditure classification, suitable amendments are effected to the GFR to
facilitate booking of expenditure correctly under the revenue and capital heads based
on intelligible rules.

Reply by the Government

The Department of Economic Affairs vide its Action Taken Replies has stated
that the merger of Plan and Non Plan classification in budget and accounts has the
concurrence of Comptroller & Auditor General of india. Further, the General Financial
Rules, 2005 have been comprehensively reviewed with the aim of promoting simplicity
and transparency in the Government financial system and procedures subsequent to
merger of Plan and Non Plan classification in budget and accounts. The revised GFRs,
viz. General Financial Rules, 2017 have been published on 11.2.2017.

The recommendations of the Committee on Estimates made in its 21 ** Report
(2016-2017) (16 " Lok Sabha) have been considered and implemented in full.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-!)

-14-


CHAPTER-III

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES

-Nil-

-15-


CHAPTER - IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

-16-


CHAPTER - ५४

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

-Nil-

NEW DELHI; GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT,

9 February, 2021 CHAIRPERSON,
Magha 2° , 1942 (Saka) ESTIMATES COMMITTEE.
+


APPENDIX-|

MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON

ESTIMATES (2020-2021)

The Committee sat on Thursday, the 4" February, 2021 from 1100 hrs. to
1135 hrs. in Committee Room No. 3, Block-A, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe
Extension Building, New Delhi.

10.

it.

t2.

13;

14.

15.

PRESENT

Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat - Chairperson

Members
Shri Sudharshan Bhagat

Shri P.P. Chaudhary

Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan

Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal

Shri Dayanidhi Maran

Shri S.S. Palanimanickam

Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy
Shri Francisco Sardinha

Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
Shri Prathap Simha

Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo

SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. 8. Visala - Director
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi - Additional Director

3. ShriR. 5. Negi - Deputy Secretary


2 At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the
following draft Reports:

(i) Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the 21% Report (16" Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
Estimates on the subject “Structural Changes in Union Budget”
pertaining to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs).;

(ii) Report on the subject “Estimates and Functioning of National
Highway Projects including Bharatmala Projects" pertaining to the
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways; and

(iii) Report on the subject “Review of Performance of the scheme Khelo
India” pertaining to the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
(Department of Sports).

3 After some deliberations, the Committee finalised and adopted the Draft
Report at SI. No (i) and (iii) above without any amendments. In respect of Draft
Report on the subject “Estimates and Functioning of National Highway Projects
including Bharatmala Projects" some Members gave suggestions which were agreed
to by the Committee. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make any
consequential changes and finalize the draft Reports on the basis of factual
verification by the concerned Ministry and present the same to Lok Sabha.

4 see

The Committee, then, adjourned.

* does not pertain to this Report


APPENDIX - II

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONT,
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government

(SI. Nos. 1, 2, 3 & 4)

Percentage of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply

Percentage of total Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government's
replies have not been accepted by the Committee

Percentage of total Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
Government is still awaited.

Percentage of total Observations/Recommendations

AINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

100%
Nil

Nil

Nil

Nil

Nil

Nil