29 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 
 
Estimates and Policy Aspects of the Ministry of Development of North 
Eastern Region 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 18th 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 
Estimates and Policy Aspects of the Ministry of Development 
of North Eastern Region 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 18th 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on                 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
.........August 2023/........ Sravana 1945 (Saka) 
 

     CONTENTS          Page No. 
 
      
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2023-24)          (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iii) 
           
             
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee on Estimates 
held on 07.08.2023 
 
23 
II. Analysis Of Action taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 18th Report of 
 the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)………….. 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I Report  1 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government         
7 
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
20 
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
21 
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
reply of Government is still awaited 
22 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
2.  Kunwar Danish Ali 
3.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4.  Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
6.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7.  Shri Saikia Dilip 
8.  Shri Harish Dwivedi 
9.  Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
10.  Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
11.  Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12.  Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
13.  Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
14.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
15.  Shri Pinaki Misra 
16.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
17.  Shri Jual Oram 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
20.  Dr. K.C. Patel 
21.  Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
22.  Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
23.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
24.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
25.  Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
26.  Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
27.  Shri Prathap Simha 
28.  Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
29.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
30. Shri R. P. Singh Patel* 
 
*    Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II, Para No. 7096, dated 28th 
July, 2023. 

iii 
 
Secretariat                            
  
1. Smt.  Anita Bhatt Panda Additional Secretary 
2. Shri  Muraleedharan. P Director 
3. Dr. (Smt.) Sheetal Kapoor  Committee Officer 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates ( 2023-24) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Twenty-Ninth Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 1 8th Report of the Committee (202 2-23) on the subject ‘Estimates and 
Policy Aspects of the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region ‘        
 
2.  The 18th Report of the Committee on Estimates (2022 -23) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 20th December, 2022. The Government furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in the 1 8th Report on 14 June, 2023. 
The draft report was considered and approved on 07.08.2023 by the Committee. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 18th Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI;  
7 August, 2023         
16 Sravana,1945 (Saka) 
 
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Eighteenth Report  
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Estimates and Policy Aspects of the Ministry 
of Development of North Eastern Regio n” pertaining to the Ministry of Development o f 
North Eastern Region.  
2.       The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.12.2022. It contained 
11 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have been received  from the Ministry 
of DONER. 
 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-   
  
(i)       Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation Para No 1,2,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 and 11 
    
      Total: 10 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation  NIL          
        Total: 00 
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)     Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation   NIL          
                                    Total:00 
(Chapter-IV) 
  
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:  
   Recommendation Para No. 3                                                                                   
                             Total: 01 
(Chapter-V) 
  
 

2 
 
4.       The Committee desire that   Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final Action Taken Reply in 
respect of the recommendation contained in Chapter -V for which interim reply have 
been given by the Government may be furnished to them within six months of the 
presentation of the  Report to the House. 
 
5.       The C ommittee will now deal with the  Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
 Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 3) 
 
 Need for special schemes for the socio-economic realities of NER 
6. In their recommendation contained in the original 18 th Report, the 
Committee had stated as under :- 
 
 One issue in NER identified by the Department is lack of target population 
in adequate numbers or lack of demand from the States to absorb funds 
completely. In this scenario, the  Committee are of the view that the Central 
Ministries/Departments should formulate/devise schemes specific to NER taking 
into account unique needs and aspirations and socio -economic realities of the 
local people, to avoid lapsing of their 10% GBS. Moreove r, as MDoNER has also 
endorsed the view that remaining funds can be used in some other schemes, the 
State Departments need to follow the advice. Hence the Committee desire that the 
Ministry plan a video conference with the NER states on the matter and advi se 
them accordingly in future. 
 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Development of North Eastern 
Region submitted as under: 
Ministry of DoNER, during the quarterly review meetings under 10% GBS, has 
requested all State Governments to send their  suggestions/ changes they require in the 
existing schemes of  various Central Ministries/ Departments directly to the concerned 
Ministries/ Departments with a copy to MDoNER  so that NER -specific schemes can be 
designed and existing schemes can be modifie d suitably. The response of the State 
Governments in this regard is not very encouraging. All Ministries and Departments 
have been requested to extend maximum handholding support to the NER states and 

3 
 
the Ministries have agreed to do so.  Matter will again  be taken up during subsequent 
review meetings. 
 
8. In view of the lack of demand from NE States leading to lapsing of funds, t he 
Committee had felt the need for schemes specific to NER taking into account 
unique needs and aspiration and socio economic realities of the local people. The 
Ministry, in the Action Taken reply, have stated that they had requested all State 
Governments to send their suggestions  albeit their response is not found to be 
very encouraging. The Committee are further informed that M oDNER has also 
requested all Ministries/Departments to extend maximum handholding support to 
the NER States. While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee  
feel that active association with the State Governments of NER is the only 
solution to carry forward the Government’s initiatives for the long -term growth of 
the region Hence they urge MoDNER to continue to work closely with 
Ministries/Departments of all North Eastern States so that Schemes specific to 
NER may be formulated  and 100% utiliz ation of funds therefore is completed  
without delay. The Committee further emphasize that NER specific schemes need 
to be finalized in a time bound manner . Since the Ministry of DoNER has asked 
the State Governments to send their suggestion directly to con cerned 
Ministries/Departments, with a copy enclosed for themselves, it would be 
worthwhile to contact all the Ministries/Departments also to ascertain receipt of 
any suggestions from NER Governments.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 7) 
 
Ensuring maximum utilization of 10% GBS 
9. In their recommendation contained in the original 18 th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“The North -Eastern Region in the country is one of the regions enriched with 
ample natural resources, which, if skilfully utilised, can contribute not only to the 
development of the region but also would make it financially prosperous. The 
Committee note th at several regions in the North -East Region have natural 
valuable resources, one such being bamboo. Available huge potential in Bamboo 

4 
 
sector needs holistic development plans and requisite enthusiasm on the part of 
implementing Ministry. The Committee appr eciate the efforts of Ministry of 
DoNER, which conducts regular review meetings with all the Ministries to ensure 
maximum utilization of 10 percent GBS resources and, except the Ministry to 
make concerted efforts to utilise the natural resources including bamboo, of NER 
through appropriate projects, in order to maximize proper usage of earmarked 
funds. 
 
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Development of North Eastern 
Region submitted as under: 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
11. The Committee had urged the Ministry to devise ways and means through 
which natural resources could be tapped appropriately to reap benefits, 
specifically in the NER  states; bamboo being one such identified natural 
resource. The  Ministry, in their Action T aken reply, have stated that the 
recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of (a) the resources which are identified by the Ministry for fuller 
utilization and (b) the ways/schemes through which Ministry propos es to do the 
same. 
  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 10) 
 
Need for piped water and better connectivity 
 
12. In their recommendation contained in the original 18 th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“The Committee observe that piped water is still not a reality for several districts 
in the North Eastern States. Taking cognizance of this, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to take up the matter with Ministry of Jai Shakti so that piped water 
reaches every household under ‘Jal Jeevan Mission'. Another major issue 
limiting the physical progress of the North East region is connectivity by road, 
rail and air. Frequent landslides and hostile terrain used to make 
construction/maintenance activities difficult and expensive, but not anymore as 

5 
 
under various latest initiatives, the Government is willing to face the challenges 
head on. In this context, the Committee would also like to highlight the fact that 
operation of night flight is still a distant dream for many North Eastern Airports. 
Hence they would urge the ministry to work in close liaison with Ministry of Civil 
Aviation so that 'night landing' of flights could be enabled in different 
international airports in the North Eastern region.” 
 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Development of North Eastern 
Region submitted as under: 
Government  of India is implementing Jal Jeevan Mission, since August, 2019 in 
partnership with States, to provide tap water connection to every rural household by 
2024.  Jal  Jeevan Mission was launched after subsuming restructuring the erstwhile 
National Rural drinking Water Programme (NRDWP). Water is a state subject as such 
it is the State who plan, design, approve, implement, operate and maintain wa ter 
supply system and this department supplements the efforts of the State Government  
by providing technical and financial assistance.  Under NRDWP, the aim was to 
provide piped water supplied in every habitation at the service level of 40 litters per 
capita per day (lpcd) whereas, under JJM, the focus has been shifted from coverage 
of habitation to coverage of every rural household i.e. to provide water of prescribed 
quality on regular and long -terms basis through tap water connection at the service 
level of 55 lpcd, by 2024. 
 
Committee’s recommendation for taking up the matter “ regarding enabling of 
night landing of flights in International airports of NER”   with  Ministry of Civil Aviation  
has been noted for compliance.  
 
2. At the time of launch of J JM on 15.08.2019, 2.83 lakhs rural household of NER 
were having tap water connection. Since then, more than 47.94 lakh tap water 
connections have been provided and as such as on 08.05.2023, out of 94.87 lakh total 
rural household 50.76 lakh are having provision of tap water supply in their premises. 
The State wise details is enclosed as Annexure. 

6 
 
3. Under JJM , the year wise details of financial allocation, release expenditure of 
Ne States is as under:                                                                   
       (Amount in ₹ Crore) 
Financial 
year 
Gross budgetary Allocation Release Expenditure 
2019-20 10,000.66 1,200.62 1,050.07 674.67 
2020-21 11,000.00 2,551.44 1,570.03 2,088.59 
2021-22 45,011.00 9,261.85 8,982.36 6,052.62 
2022-23 55,000 10,115.10 8,979.28 8,384.07 
 
14. While commenting on the basic infrastructure facilities in NER, t he 
Committee had interalia noted that night landing of flights in different NER States 
was still a distant dream and hence, had urged the Ministry to take up the matter 
with Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Ministry, in their Action Tak en reply, have 
stated that the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
The Committee expect that MoDNER being nodal Ministry for overall development 
of NER States must proactively  pursue this matter with Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
They would like to be apprised of the outcomes/reply from Ministry of Civil 
Aviation regarding ‘night landing’ at international airport s in the NER for better 
connectivity.  
  

7 
 
Chapter – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 1) 
 
 
 Need for 'increase in the Budget allocation of MDoNER 
 The Committee note with concern that BE for 2021 -22 for MDoNER has 
been ₹ 2,410 crore only against MDoNER’s demand of about ₹ 5,000 crore and is 
even less than not only the BE of 2019-20 but also the RE the actual Expenditure 
of 2019-20. BE for 2020 -21 was ₹ 3,048 crore, which was reduced to 60 per cent 
level only, that is, ₹ 1,860 crore. The department has been able to use 100 p er 
cent of REs in 2019 -20 and 2020 -21 which was much less than the 
projected/demand. The committee are of the view that the rich natural and 
human resources available in the region could not be utilized to the full extent 
due to geo -political conditions of  the region, hence investments to strengthen 
the infrastructure of DoNER with 100% utilization of available resource is a must. 
The lack of infrastructure, in the view of the committee, has not only affected the 
prospects of economic development in DoNER, but also created division among 
various ethnic groups at the cost of social harmony. It is well known fact that 
NER, sharing international boundaries, is already a very sensitive part of the 
country and hence their complete integration with the rest of the  country should 
be of paramount importance. Hence, to avoid regional imbalances in 
developmental activities, a permanent administrative mechanism which is 
established to ensure unhindered flow of funds required for development 
including contribution from a ll Government Ministries need to be continuously 
monitored and strengthened. 
  
The Committee have been informed that as part of their next five years’ vision for 
the North East Region, MDoNER have projected a requirement of ₹ 50,000 crore 
plus for the 15 th Finance Commission five-years period which has already started 
from 2021-22. In view of the foregoing, the Committee strongly recommend that 
Department of Expenditure may make suitably higher allocation of Budget for 

8 
 
MDoNER for the coming five years so that MDoNER can implement their schemes 
and projects in NER satisfactorily for greater positive impact in the overall 
development of the NER. 
Reply of the Government 
All the proposed schemes (including packages BTC, KAATC and DHATC) of 
MDoNER has already bee n approved by the Cabinet for the 2022 -23 to 2025 -26 with 
the consolidated outlay of ₹ 19482.20 crore. Accordingly, allocation of Budget may be 
proposed to seek from Ministry of Finance to utilize the resources optimally. The 
requirement of additional reso urces will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance during 
forthcoming pre-Budget meetings.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 2) 
 
Capacity building mechanism/infrastructure of NE States 
The Committee have observed, during the course of examination of the subject, 
that for certain Ministries/Departments like the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare, their 10% GBS for NER could not be spent fully due to poor capacity in States 
for formulation of projects as per schematic guidelines and lack of knowl edge of 
Schemes and procedural guidelines and not having the capacity to get the right project, 
right proposal, right estimation, right outreach and right outlook. The Committee are of 
the strong view that MDoNER in coordination with NEC and NITI Ayog shou ld conduct 
regular capacity building programmes for preparing any proposal under the Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes which will be compatible with the guidelines of the Central 
Ministries so that there is a very little chance of rejection on the ground of para meters 
set in the guidelines not being met. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the extant policy of the Government, all non -exempted Central Ministries / 
Departments (currently 55) are mandated to spend at least 10% of their Gross 
Budgetary Support (GBS) to Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes for 
North Eastern Region (NER).  All non-exempted Ministries/Departments, barring a few, 
are spending 10% of their mandated GBS for NER. Central Ministries/Departments 
have spent around ₹  4.20 lakh crore in North Eastern Region since 2014-15 under 10% 
GBS. A few of the Ministries/Departments have even gone beyond the required 

9 
 
minimum for NER (10% of GBS). The aggregate expenditure of all non exempted 
Ministries/ Departments have exceeded overall RE (Revised Est imate) allocation by 
103% and 113% in 2021-22 and 2022-23 respectively. 
 However, certain Ministries/Departments like Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare (DoAFW) have not been able to spend fully  the required minimum 10% GBS, 
due to various factors, including limited drawdown in entitlement -based schemes like 
PM-KISAN, Fasal Bima Yojana, etc. and 80% allocation of the DoAFW is for these 
schemes. NER states are also lagging behind in taking advantage of various CS and 
CSS schemes due to lack of informa tion and low capacity of implementing agencies 
that require pro -active support of Central Government Ministries/Departments.  
MDoNER, in its various review meetings, has urged all Central Government Ministries/ 
Departments to provide handholding support to  the NER States and help them in 
capacity building for ensuring that full benefits of the schemes reach NER. Due to 
constant efforts of the Ministry, the aggregate expenditure in NER under 10% GBS has 
exceeded RE allocation during the last two years. 
Further to effectively oversee the expeditious implementation of work and for 
bolstering the development roadmap, MDoNER has set -up state -wise eight 'Field 
Technical Support Units (FTSUs)' which work as facilitators on the ground between 
each State Government a nd MDoNER for the progress on Schemes and initiatives in 
NER. They have been stationed in the respective State Headquarters in the North 
East. 
Each state FTSU has one State coordinator & 2 Project associates. They are 
responsible for monitoring the current development projects and share their regular 
reports with MDoNER. Along with state Projects, these FTSUs also help track the 
progress of the major ongoing Central Government projects in the Region.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 4) 
 
Monitoring of Progress of projects funded under NLCPR or NESIDS 
The Committee note that the NLCPR Scheme has been discontinued with 
effect from December, 201 7 except for meeting committed liabilities for the 
projects already sanctioned till date. It is pertinent to mention that 1635 projects 

10 
 
worth ₹ 16,233 crore have been sanctioned under NLCPR Scheme. The 
Committee are further informed that NESIDS has replace d NLCPR since 
December, 2017 to cater to the needs of development of North -East region. The 
Committee are happy to note that funds have been released over the time yet 
believe that mere funds release cannot guarantee development North-East region. 
The Committee strongly feel the need for a monitoring system to be put in place 
to assess the pace of ongoing projects in North -East region funded by either of 
the schemes i.e. NLCPR ( those already sanctioned before  December 2017 ) and 
NESIDS (since  December 2017 ). The Committee would urge the Ministry to 
consider undertaking an evaluation study with respect to projects (ongoing) till 
date, in collaboration with National Institutes of prominence, so that lacunae, if 
any, are identified at initial stages only remedia l measures taken well in time. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the plan of the Ministry in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
To assess the pace of ongoing projects in North -East region funded by NLCPR 
(those already sanctioned before  December 2017 ) and NESIDS (since  December 
2017), regular review of projects are being done through review meetings at higher 
levels with the State Governments of NE Region. 
 
Since the review of projects started during December, 2021, the number of 
ongoing projects under NLCPR have come down to 334 from 441 as result of the these 
review meetings conducted at various levels with State Governments. 
 
Besides, technical inspections of projects costing more than 20 crore are being 
done before release of last installment and also before formal closure of the projects by 
the Ministry on receipt of Completion Certificate from State Governments, as per 
NLCPR guidelines.   
 
As regards to evaluation study w.r.t. ongoing projects, Ministry has engaged  
(NEDFi)   to propose different scope of services and deliverables for Specific projects, 

11 
 
for different stages of project execution/ implementation, as the case may be, as per the 
following broad classification/ scope: 
 
Pre-construction/ Implementation stage 
 
i. Examination of project documentation with respect to extant rules, regulations, 
norms, guidelines, etc. of all relevant stakeholder agencies such as line 
Ministries of Government of India, State Governments, etc. 
ii. Report on targeted beneficiaries of the scheme 
iii. Review of Land requirement/availability & other clearances to begin construction 
Examination of bid documentation & bid process 
iv. Review of Project Implementation Plan and procurement process 
v. Review of Site preparation 
vi. Review of Project Management Mechanisms/ Structure s (e.g. PERT/ CPM 
Charts) 
vii. Report on targeted beneficiaries of the scheme 
 
Construction/Implementation stage 
i. Report on Physical Progress of the project 
ii. Report on Financial progress & fund utilization 
iii. Report on Quality Assurance systems and Project quality 
iv. Report on Social Infrastructure and aesthetics 
v. Report on variations with respect to relevant extant rules, regulations, 
guidelines, norms, etc. 
vi. Report on cost variations and time overruns 
vii. Report on remedial measures to improve physical & financial progress  and 
quality of the project 
viii. Report on safety and Health aspects 
ix. Report on Beneficiary participation in the project 
 
 Post Construction/ Implementation Stage technical monitoring 
i. Report on Assets created 

12 
 
ii. Report on functionality & usage 
iii. Requirement of Operation & maintenance (O&M) 
iv. System of Operation & maintenance (O&M) 
v. Report on social and environment impact analysis 
vi. Report on user/ Beneficiary satisfaction 
vii. Report on capacity created 
viii. Report on overall performance and sustainability of the assets created 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 5) 
 
Need for full utilization of Budget allocation 
The committee observe that many of the Ministries/Departments have not 
spent 100% of their mandatory 10% GBS for NER and that shortfalls have been 
noticed in all major Ministries. For example, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution has had shortfalls of ₹ 12,072.89 in 2020 -21, ₹ 19,037.249 in 2019-20 
and ₹ 17330.5 in 2018-19. Similarly, Department of Rural Development, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways etc have had 
shortfalls in each of the last three years. The committee, therefore, urge the 
Government to ensure 100% spending of the mandatory 10% GBS for NER by all 
the 54 non -exempted Departments/Ministries, who are implemen ting Central 
Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes in the NER. The committee 
would urge upon MDoNER to confirm whether the mandatory 10% GBS for NER 
by the non-exempted Ministries is scheme/project wise or as a whole. If the same 
is overall 10% GB S, shortfalls can be set right by way of re -appropriation in 
consultation with DoE. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In the FY 2022 -23, Department of  Food & Public Distribution, Department of  
Rural Development, Ministry of  Housing & Urban Affairs and Ministry of  Road 
Transport & Highways have spent 181%, 357%, 104% and 100% of their RE allocation 
under 10% GBS. Further, as per the extant policy of the Government, all non -exempted 
Central Ministries / Departments (currently 55) are mandated to spend at least 10 % of 
their Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) to Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored 

13 
 
Schemes for North Eastern Region (NER).The 10% expenditure is not required to be 
made scheme wise/ project wise. Overall expenditure of the Ministry/ Department 
across schemes is included in 10% GBS. As per D/o Expenditure’s O.M No. 72(08)/PF -
11/2017 dated 5.5.2017, DoNER is also  empowered to recommend re -appropriation of 
funds  from Ministries which have low absorption capacity to the Ministries who have 
higher absorption capacity to ensure 100% utilization of funds under 10% GBS. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 6) 
 
Leveraging of NLCPR pool 
The Committee has noted that so far, Ministry of Finance has not allowed 
any resources against or out of NLCPR pool for funding some important projects 
of Central Ministries or Departments, which were recommended by the MDoNER, 
except for adjusting expendi ture made by the Ministry of DoNER under NLCPR 
scheme. As this NLCPR is being maintained on proforma basis and not as a 
reserve pool in public accounts as was envisaged as per the Cabinet approval or 
the Budget announcement made by the then Finance Ministe r in 1998 -99, the 
actual flow of resources from this pool has to happen through annual budgetary 
allocation by the Ministry of Finance, which can be made in the budget 
allocations of the Ministry of DoNER. As per data furnished by MDoNER, till 2019 -
20, the estimated provisional balance in the said pool is over ₹ 90,000.00 crore. 
The Committee noted that MDoNER has already taken up the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance for allowing leveraging of this NLCPR pool for undertaking 
certain important projects fo r North Eastern Region. For the same, MDoNER, 
along with North Eastern Council, has statedly got a shelf of projects worth more 
than ₹  60,000.00 crore from the North Eastern States. The Committee agree that 
the Ministry of Finance needs to come into the p icture and suggest appropriate 
mechanism and modalities to allow leveraging of NLCPR pool of about ₹ 
90,000.00 crore for funding other important projects/schemes of MDoNER and 
other Ministries/Departments in the NER. They therefore, desire that the same be  
conveyed to the Ministry of Finance for suitable action at their end on the matter. 
 

14 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Finance vide its OM No 2(4) -B(S)2017 dated 17.4.2023 has  
informed MDoNER that NLCPR is a notional fund and is not maintained in Public 
Account. The Non -Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) scheme, which was 
started in 1998 -99, is funded from unutilized amount of the 10%  earmarked GBS of 
non-exempted Ministries/Departments which has now been replaced with North East 
Special Infrastructure Development Scheme (NESIDS) in 2017 -18. The outlay of newly 
launched scheme (launched in 2022 -23), Prime Minister’s Development Initiative for 
North East Region (PM-DevINE) is based on average annual saving on account of 10% 
GBS in North Easte rn Region by 55 non -exempted Ministries/ departments. The un -
utilized amount includes both entitlement based schemes as well as non -entitlement 
based schemes. Saving in entitlement based scheme like PM -KISAN, NFSA, PMJAY, 
MNREGA etc is on account of limite d population in North Eastern States. Ministry of 
Finance has stated that savings under such (entitlement based) schemes cannot be 
used to provide additional funds for NER projects. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 7) 
 
Ensuring maximum utilization of 10% GBS 
The North-Eastern Region in the country is one of the regions enriched with 
ample natural resources, which, if skilfully utilised, can contribute not only to the 
development of the region but also would make it financially prosperous. The 
Committee note that several regions in the North -East Region have natural 
valuable resources, one such being bamboo. Available huge potential in Bamboo 
sector needs holistic development plans and requisite enthusiasm on the part of 
implementing Ministry. The Commit tee appreciate the efforts of Ministry of 
DoNER, which conducts regular review meetings with all the Ministries to ensure 
maximum utilization of 10 percent GBS resources and, except the Ministry to 
make concerted efforts to utilise the natural resources in cluding bamboo, of NER 
through appropriate projects, in order to maximize proper usage of earmarked 
funds. 
 

15 
 
Reply of the Government- 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
 
Comment of the Committee 
Please see Para 11 of Chapter-I 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 8) 
 
Need for committed efforts to avail international aids 
 The Committee noted that NEC has entered into strategic partnerships with 
several premier institutes working for the development of the North East Region. 
The Dr APJ Adbul Kalam Centre for Policy Research and Analysis is one such 
institutes located in the campus of IIM, Shillong. The Committee is appreciative of 
the fact that such strategic partnerships are the need of the hour for overall 
development of the cri tical section of the NER. They would like to be apprised of 
the strategic plans/proposals worked out/ operationalised, if so, since the 
involvement of such premier institutes. The Committee would also like the 
Ministry to continue exploring such possibilit y of involving institutions with 
domain expertise to benefit from their suggestions for innovative and area 
specific development models, which certain underdeveloped regions might have 
opted for and suitable for NER too, while scaling developmental goals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 9) 
Strategic Partnerships 
 “North East Rural Livelihood Project”, one of its kind and a World Bank 
aided project has been formulated considering the peculiarities of remotely 
located North Eastern Region of the country. The Committee, during one of the 
evidences, have found that a s imilar project of the World Bank of higher order 
has not fructified till now. The Committee lament the fact that international aid 

16 
 
has not been tapped fully, which otherwise, would have given the desired 
impetus to the development of North East. The Commit tee expect the Ministry to 
avail any such opportunities, where international aid is proposed either for a 
region or for any North Eastern District in particular, with requisite enthusiasm 
and vigour. 
 
Reply of the Government 
At present, there is no separate project assisted by World Bank for rural livelihood 
sector implemented by MDONER. However, the National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM) and National Urban Livelihood Mission are two schemes of Government of 
India that are under implementation in the Livelihood Sector, implemented by concerned 
Ministries (Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs). 
However, the recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 10) 
Need for piped water and better connectivity 
The Committee observe that piped water is still not a reality for several 
districts in the North Eastern States. Taking cognizance of this, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to take up the matter with Ministry of Jai Shakt i so that piped 
water reaches every household under ‘Jal Jeevan Mission'. Another major issue 
limiting the physical progress of the North East region is connectivity by road, 
rail and air. Frequent landslides and hostile terrain used to make 
construction/maintenance activities difficult and expensive, but not anymore as 
under various latest initiatives, the Government is willing to face the challenges 
head on. In this context, the Committee would also like to highlight the fact that 
operation of  night flight is still a distant dream for many North Eastern Airports. 
Hence they would urge the ministry to work in close liaison with Ministry of Civil 
Aviation so that 'night landing' of flights could be enabled in different 
international airports in the North Eastern region. 
Reply of the Government 
Government of India is implementing Jal Jeevan Mission, since August, 2019 in 
partnership with States, to provide tap water connection to every rural household by 

17 
 
2024.  Jal Jeevan Mission was launched after subsuming restructuring the erstwhile 
National Rural drinking Water Programme (NRDWP). Water is a state subject as such 
it is the State who plan, design, approve, implement, operate and maintain water 
supply system and this department supplements the efforts of the State Government  
by providing technical and financial assistance.  Under NRDWP, the aim was to 
provide piped water supplied in every habitation at the service level of 40 litters per 
capita per day (lpcd) whereas, under JJM, the focus has been shifted fro m coverage 
of habitation to coverage of every rural household i.e. to provide water of prescribed 
quality on regular and long -terms basis through tap water connection at the service 
level of 55 lpcd, by 2024. 
Committee’s recommendation for taking up the ma tter “ regarding enabling of 
night landing of flights in International airports of NER”   with  Ministry of Civil Aviation  
has been noted for compliance.  
2. At the time of launch of JJM on 15.08.2019, 2.83 lakhs rural household of NER 
were having tap wat er connection. Since then, more than 47.94 lakhs tap water 
connections have been provided and as such as on 08.05.2023, out of 94.87 lakhs total 
rural household 50.76 lakhs are having provision of tap water supply in their p remises. 
The State wise detailsis enclosed as Annexure. 
3. Under JJM , the year wise details of financial allocation, release expenditure of 
Ne States is as under:                                                                     
       (Amount in ₹ Crore) 
Financial year Gross budgetary Allocation Release Expenditure 
2019-20 10,000.66 1,200.62 1,050.07 674.67 
2020-21 11,000.00 2,551.44 1,570.03 2,088.59 
2021-22 45,011.00 9,261.85 8,982.36 6,052.62 
2022-23 55,000 10,115.10 8,979.28 8,384.07 
 
Comment of the Committee 
Please see Para 14 of Chapter-I 
 
 
 

18 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 11) 
Other Issues 
 Apart from the above, certain other issues are predominantly peculiar to 
the development of NER. The Committee hold that NER has abundance 
opportunities not only in matters of tourism and scenic beauty but also is home 
to peculiar flora and fauna, including medicinal plants and herbs. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to explore the possibilities and come up with MoUs with 
different medical institutions/Department of AYUS H in the country which can 
undertake studies and explore the untapped sources of medical plants found in 
NER. 
Reply of the Government- 
As per the information furnished by Ministry of Ayush ; National Medicinal Plants 
Board (NMPB), Ministry of Ayush, Governm ent of India is presently implementing 
“Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management 
of Medicinal Plants” throughout the Country including the North Eastern Region (NER) 
States. For implementation and monitoring of NMPB’s Scheme, annual grant is 
released to Regional Cum Facilitation Centre (North Eastern Region) and Nucleus 
Centre Maintenance Grant to State Medicinal plants Boards (SMPBs) of NER.  
 
So far no MoU as such, has been signed by NMPB with any Institute / 
Department of Ayush in the Country which can undertake studies and explore the 
untapped sources of medical plants found in NER. 
 
However, under the Scheme, for development of Medicinal Plants Sector, project 
based support is provided to:  
 
 State Forest Departments for Conservation, Resource Augmentation of medicinal 
plants and Support to JFMCs / BFMCs for value addition, drying, warehousing 
etc.  
 Research & Development projects on various aspects of medicinal plants to 
Government as well as private universities / r esearch institutions / organizations 
across the Country. 

19 
 
 For establishment of Herbal Gardens, Quality Planting Material etc. and also for 
organizing seminars / workshops for dissemination of awareness among people 
about medicinal plants. 
 
 NMPB has released a total of ₹ 57.76 crore to States of North Eastern Region 
(NER) for above mentioned activities with respect to development of Medicinal Plants 
Sector during 2017-18 to 2022-23. 
 
Suggestion of the Committee has also been noted for further compliance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***** 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER III 
 Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies 
NIL 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
NIL 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER V 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 3) 
 
NEED for special schemes for the socio-economic realities of NER 
One issue in NER identified by the Department is lack of target population 
in adequate numbers or lack of demand from the States to absorb funds 
completely. In this scenario, the Committee are of the view that the Central 
Ministries/Departments should form ulate/devise schemes specific to NER taking 
into account unique needs and aspirations and socio -economic realities of the 
local people, to avoid lapsing of their 10% GBS. Moreover as MDoNER has also 
endorsed the view that remaining funds can be used in som e other schemes, the 
State Departments need to follow the advice. Hence the Committee desire that the 
Ministry plan a video conference with the NER states on the matter and advise 
them accordingly in future. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of DoNER, during the quarterly review meetings under 10% GBS, has 
requested all State Governments to send their suggestions/ changes they require in the 
existing schemes of  various Central Ministries/ Departments directly to the concerned 
Ministries/ Departments with a copy to MDoNER  so that NER -specific schemes can be 
designed and existing schemes can be modified suitably. The response of the State 
Governments in this regard is not very encouraging. All Ministries and Departments 
have been requested to extend maxi mum handholding support to the NER states and 
the Ministries have agreed to do so.  Matter will again be taken up during subsequent 
review meetings. 
Comment of the Committee 
Please see Para 8 of Chapter-I 
NEW DELHI;  
  August, 2023         
  Sravana,1945 (Saka) 
 
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 
 

23 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
  
The Committee sat on Monday, the 7 th August, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs in Room No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
 3. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
 4. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
 5. Shri Dilip Saikia 
 6. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
 7. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
 8. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
 9. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
10. Dr. K.C. Patel 
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
12. Shri Jual Oram 
13. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
14. Shri Pratap Simha 
15. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
16. Smt Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
17. Shri R.K.Singh Patel 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda  -       Additional Secretary 
           2. Shri Muraleedharan. P     -       Director 

24 
 
                              
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following three draft Reports: 
(i) XXX  XXX   XXX 
(ii) Action Taken Report on the subject ‘Estimates and Policy Aspects of 
the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region’; and 
(iii) XXX  XXX   XXX. 
 
3.       The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Reports. The 
Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
present the same to Lok Sabha. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
  
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 18th Report of the Committee on Estimates 
 (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 11 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. NO. 1,2,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 and 11) 
10 
 Percentage of total recommendations 90.91% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(NIL) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
00 
 
 
00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(NIL) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
00 
 
 
    00% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final  reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
(SI. No. 3) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
01 
 
 
9.09% 
 
 