11

MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT

REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE OF PRADHAN MANTRI
GRAMIN AWAAS YOJNA

COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2021-22)

ELEVENTH REPORT

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


ELEVENTH REPORT

COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2021-22)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT

REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE OF PRADHAN MANTRI
GRAMIN AWAAS YOJNA

Presented to Lok Sabha on 5 August, 2021

Hat Ie

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

SAugust, 2021/ Shravana, 1942(S)



EC No.

Price ©

©2021 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok

Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2019-20)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2021 -22)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER!
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER Ill
CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

Vil

PART -।
INTRODUCTION
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCHEME
PERFORMANCE OF PRADHAN MANTRI GRAMIN
AWAAS YOJNA
OTHER ISSUES AND CONSTRAINTS

PART - Il

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

ANNEXURES

ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES UTILISED BY STATES IN
FY 2019-20

STATE WISE RELEASES AND UTILIZATION IN LAST 4
YEARS AND CURRENT FY 2020-21 UNDER PMAY-G
YEAR-WISE/STATE-WISE DETAILS OF THE FUNDS
RELEASED AND FUNDS UTILISED FROM THE YEAR
2016-17 ONWARDS

SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED ABOUT DEFINITION OF
KUTCHA HOUSE FROM DIFFERENT STATES

YEAR WISE DETAILS REGARDING HOUSE
COMPLETION, TARGETS SET-STATE-WISE

STATE WISE SANCTION UNDER PMAY-G FOR THE
YEARS 2016-17, 2017-18 AND 2018-19

STATE WISE BREAK UP OF CENTRAL RELEASE

APPENDICES
Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates
(2019-20) held on 18.09.2019

Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates
(2019-20) held on 18.09.2019

Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee on
Estimates (2020-21) held on 11.08.2020

Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates
(2020-21) held on 13.10.2020

Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee on Estimates
(2021-22) held on 02.08.2021.

PAGE
(ili)
(iv)
(v)
vi

as

€+

|
१५
१६
११

1०|

Los
196



COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2019-20) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2019-20)

o PAX Bwqas

11.

12.
13,
14.
15,
16.
वा.
18.
19.
20.
21.

23,
24.

25.

26,
27.
28.
29.
30.

Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat - Chairperson

Members

Kunwar Danish Ali

Shri Kalyan Banerjee

Shri Sudharshan Bhagat

Shri Pradan Baruah

Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan
Shri P.P. Chaudhary

Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
Shri Dilip Ghosh

Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal

Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap j
Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya
Shri Dayanidhi Maran

Shri K. Muraleedharan

Shri S.S. Palanimanickam

Shri Kamlesh Paswan

Or. K.C. Patel

Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat

Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy

Shri Francisco Sardinha

Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma

Shri Prathap Simha

Shri Dharambir Singh

Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
Shri Kesineni Srinivas

Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare

Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma

iil


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21) OF THE CO! TTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21

Shri Girish Bhalchancra Bapat — Chairperson

Members
2. Kunwar Danish Ali
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Shri Pradan Baruah
5. Shri Sudharshan Bhagat
6. Shri Ajay Bhatt
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
8. Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan
9... Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
10. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal :
12. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap
13. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya
14. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
15. — Shri Pinaki Misra
16... Shri K. Muraleedharan
17. Shri 5.5. Palanimanickam
18. Shri Kamlesh Paswan
19. Dr. K.C. Patel
20. Col, Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
21... Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
22. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
23. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy
24. — Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
25, — Shri Francisco Sardinha
26, Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma
27. Shri Prathap Simha
28. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
29... Shri Kesineni Srinivas
30, Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma

iv


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2021-2022) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2021-2022

Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat — Chairperson
Members

zs Shri Kunwar Danish Ali

3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee

4. Shri Sudharshan Bhagat

8, Shri P.P. Chaudhary

6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan

hh Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Harish Dwivedi

9. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar

10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal

Ue Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap
12. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya
13. Shri Dayanidhi Maran .
14, Shri Pinaki Misra

15, Shri K. Muraleedharan

16. Shri Jual Oram **

17. Shri 5.5. Palanimanickam

18. Shri Kamlesh Paswan

19. Dr. K.C. Patel,

20, Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
21. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

22. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat

23. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy
24. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy

25. Shri Dilip Saikia

26. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha
27. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma

28, Shri Prathap Simha

29, Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma
30. Shri Kesineni Srinivas

** Elected as a Member of Estimates Committee vide Bulletin Part-II no, 2897 dt, 29.07.2021


SECRETARIAT

4. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Director

2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi - Additional Director

3. Dr. (Smt.) Sheetal Kapoor - Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do Present this Eleventh Report on
the subject ‘Review of Performance of Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana.’

2. Providing shelter for poor has been a colossal challenge for India, and the
problem is more Prominent in rural areas. Various international resolutions such as
International Covenant for Economic, Social and Cultural Change Rights, Vancouver
Declaration on Human settlements, etc., have recognized adequate housing as a part
of the right to an adequate standard of living. Public housing programme has been a
major focus area of the Government as an instrument of poverty alleviation. In view of
the commitment of the Government to Provide ‘Housing for All’ and to address the gaps
identified in the implementation of rural housing programme, IAY was restructured into
Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana (PMAY-G) w.e.f April 2016,

3. The Committee on Estimates (2019-20) selected the subject ‘Review of
Performance of Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojna ' for in-depth examination and
report to the House, The Committee on Estimates (2021-22) and (2020-2021)
continued with the examination of the subject.

4, In this report, the Committee have dealt with various issues like selection
criteria, |and to landless beneficiaries, value addition, redefining the term “kutcha house’
physical targets and achievements made, provision of drainage and water supply
System, quality of construction, training of masons and performance audit of the
scheme, The Committee have analyzed these issues/points in detail and have made
Observations/Recommendations in the report.

6. The Committee held three sittings on 18.09.2019, 11.08.2020 and 13.10.2020,
to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development, The
Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the subject at their sitting held
on 02.08.2021.

6. The Committee wish to place on record their sincere thanks to the
representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development, who appeared before them and
placed their considered views on the subject and furnished the information required in
connection with the examination of the subject.

€. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report.

NEW DELHI; GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT
4 August, 20214 CHAIRPERSON
13 Shravana, 1943 (Saka) COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES

vii


REPORT
Part I

Chapter |

Introduction

Providing shelter for poor has been a colossal challenge for India and the
problem is more prominent in rural areas. Various international resolutions such
as International Covenant for Economic, Social and Cultural Change Rights,
Vancouver Declaration on Human settlements, etc,, have recognized adequate
housing as a part of the right to-an adequate standard of living. Public housing
Programme has been a major focus area of the government as an instrument of
poverty alleviation. Rural Housing Programme as an independent programme
Started with Indira Awaas Yojna (IAY) in January 1996, Although IAY addressed
the housing need in rural areas, certain identified gaps like lack of transparency
in selection of beneficiaries, low quality of houses, lack of technical supervision,
lack of convergence and weak mechanism for monitoring were limiting the
impact and outcomes of the Programme. In view of the commitment of
the Government to provide ‘Housing for All' and to address the gaps identified in
the implementation of rural housing programme, IAY was restructured into
Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G) w.e.f April 2016.

1.2. The overall target is to construct 2.95 Crore houses during the period
2016-17 to 2021-22, wherein 1 Crore houses were set to be achieved in Phase-|
(2016-17 to 2018-19) and 1.95 Crore houses in Phase-I! (2019-20 to 2021-22).

SALIENT FEATURES

1.3 Following are the salient features of Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-
Gramin:

1. Houses to have a minimum size of 25 sq.mt including a dedicated area for
hygienic cooking,

2. Provision of toilets at = 12,000/- and 90/95 days of unskilled wage labour
under MGNREGA over and above the unit assistance.

1


3.
4.

5:

Facilitating willing beneficiaries to avail loan from Financial Institutions for
an amount of up to 70,000.

identification and selection of beneficiaries is based on the housing
deficiency and other social deprivation parameters in Socio Economic
Caste Census (SECC)-2011 data and verification by Gram Sabhas. While
devising the procedure for identification of beneficiaries, utmost emphasis
has been assigned to verification of priority lists by Gram Sabhas. To
ensure swift and prompt disposal of grievances/complaints pertaining to
the verification process, a robust Appellate mechanism for grievance
redressal has been put into place at the State Level. As on 10" August,
2020, 1.36 crore households out of 4.04 crore have been rejected by
Gram Sabhas on grounds of having a pucca house, migration, death etc.
and remaining households have been found eligible to receive assistance

_ after conclusion of the Appellate proceedings.

Earmarking for focus groups; 60% of the funds are earmarked for
SCs/STs and 15% for minorities. States/UTs should ensure that as far as
possible at least 5 % of beneficiaries are from among persons with
disabilities.

FUND SHARING PATTERN

14

iti,

Under PMAY-G, the fund sharing pattern is as under:

Grants under the Scheme are released by the Centre and States in the
ratio of 60:40 except for North-Eastern and Himalayan states including UT
of Jammu and Kashmir where the funding pattern is in the ratio of 90:10
by the Centre and the States, For UTs including the UT of Laddakh, 100%
funds are provided by the Centre.

Out of the annua! budgetary provision for PMAY-G, 95% are earmarked

* for construction of new houses under PMAY-G. This included 2%

allocation towards Administrative Expenses for administering the Scheme
at the Central and State level. The remaining 5% of budgetary grant is
retained at the Central Level as reserve fund for special projects in order
to meet exigencies arising out of extra ordinary situations like floods,
cyclones, earthquakes, etc.

Financial Assistance is released to States/UTs in two installments of 50%
each as per provisions of Framework for implementation of PMAY-G.

ERSTWHILE INDIRA AWAAS YOJANA VIS-A-VIS PRADHAN MANTRI
GRAMIN AWAAS YOJANA

1.5

Apprising the Committee about the salient features, aims/objectives,

focus groups, budget allocation, funding pattern, targets set and targets achieved
in the Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana vis-a-vis Indira Awaas Yojana, the
Ministry of Rural Development in its written reply furnished the following
information :-


Parameter

Identification of
Beneficiaries

Rural BPL Households

Caste Census
(SECC 2011)

1.20 lakh in
plains (= 1,30
lakh in hilly |

हैं 70,000/- (75,000/- for
ifficult areas/ Hilly and LAP
district)

i Unit assistance

reas and IAP

Upto a minimum of 20 sq,
t.

Under 18५ scheme, th
inistry was designated t हि
x the annual allocation fo ain
the States/UTs broadly on 1
(8 basis of 75% weightag
‘0 housing shortage in rural

| argeis set and
lachieved

ave constructed!22,
lunder IAY from 2015-16 to
2019-20 as on 1.11.2019,



onvergence

as shared — between

State Governments in th

ratio 75:25. In the case o
North Eastern States th
atio is 90:10, The cost o
roviding house sites was|
hared 50:50 between]
overnment of India and
State Governments,
iovernment of India
provided the full cost in
respect of Union Territories
(UTs).

|Government of India and}

Governments
in the ratio of
0: 40. In th
se of Ni
Eastern

tates and
Himalayan
‘States, ॥18|
ratio is 90:10.
Government
of India;
provides — th
ull cost i
respect 0
Union
erritories
(UTs).

Beneficiary
gets
212,000/- as
assistance for
construction

f toilet under

wachh
Bharat

INo convergence

Mission (9),



chemes of}

‘or provisio:

Nationalized banks wereloptional loan
instructed .by the RBI 100० upto
rovide loans upto |€ 70,000/- fo

Additional 20,000/- per house at anlconstruction
resources/loan |interest rate of 4% periof the house.
annum under thelAn __ interes

(DRI) Scheme to SC/STlof 3 percen
beneficiaries for loan upt



BUDGET ESTIMATES AND ACTUAL EXPENDITURE(INCLUDING EXTRA
BUDGETARY RESOURCES)

Chapter Il

FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

ES

ACTUAL EXPENDITURE(INCLUDING EXTRA
ARY ES

The Ministry has furnished the following details of Budget Estimates,

Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure for the past five years |

(2 in Crore)
किम:
eC Re Expenditure

(iv)

016-16 10025 10025) 10,107.92
016-17 15000 16078.6) 16,074.37

altel
21000 19600.00] 29,986.91**

020-21 19500 Mee

* It includes ₹ 7,329.43 crores released from Extra Budgetary
Resources, i.e. NABARD Loan

“* It includes ₹ 10,678.80 crore released from Extra Budgetary
Resources, i.e. NABARD Loan

‘It includes ₹ 10811.02 crore released from Extra Budgetary
Resources, i.e. NABARD Loan

As per the data furnished by the Ministry, the actual expenditure
under the scheme was managed from Budget allocation till the
financial year'2016-17. However, since 2017-18 EBR was availed
from NABARD to consolidate actual expenditure by an amount of
% 7,329.43 crores in 2017-18 as EBR from NABARD apart from the
RE of % 22,832.31 crore. Since then, every successive year has
seen actual expenditure strengthened with EBR to reach an amount
of 29,986.91 crore in 2018-19 & ₹ 28.930.63 crore in 2019-20.

Under Phase —| of PMAY-G, Union Cabinet had approved हछार of

₹ 21,975 crore. However, an amount of € 18008,23 crore had been
sourced as EBR from NABARD.


Under Phase-ll for the year 2018-20, Ministry of Finance had
approved EBR of & 20,000 crore. However, an amount of = 10811.02
crore had been sourced as EBR from NABARD.

2.2 To the apprehension of the Committee as to whether the estimated fund
requirement for achieving Phase-I! target was sufficient and whether the
Ministry would be able to achieve the targets fixed for Phase-Il, the Ministry
Submitted as under:-

PMAY-G for FY 2020-21, Further, an additional EBR of ₹ 25,324
crore has been sought from MoF for FY 2020-21 to enable Ministry
to fulfil financial requirements of States/UTs.

The estimated fund requirement for Phase-II will be Sufficient to meet
the targets. By ensuring availability of funds to States and regular
monitoring of physical Progress at State, District and Block level, the
Ministry is targeting to achieve the targets for Phase-||, However,
due to outbreak of COVID-19 and subsequent nationwide lockdown,
the progress of house Completion was affected, Being cognizant of

the set momentum and efforts of the States/UTs, the Ministry of
Rural Development is confident that the target of construction of 2.02
Crore houses under PMAY-G by 15! August, 2022 and 2.95 crore
houses by 31st March, 2024 will be achieved".

2.3... With regard to current allocation for clearing backlogs and current targets,
the Ministry further submitted:-

“The GBS allocated for FY 2020-21 i.e. ₹ 19,500 crore is higher than
the previous FY 2019-20 i.e ₹ 19,000 crore. In addition to this,
Ministry has submitted demand of = 35324 crore as EBR for the year
2020-21. The Ministry of Finance has provided an amount of EBR of
₹ 10000.00 crore so far for the year 2020-21


As per the Cabinet approval received for PMAY-G Phase | and
Phase -Il, PMAY-G has’ been granted the permission to seek
additional funds as Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) over and
above the budgetary grant from lending institutions ie NABARD for
making releases to States/UTs for smooth implementation of the
Scheme. The details of EBR availed for PMAY-G since 2016,
inclusive of Current Financial Year (CFY) are given in below table,

(2 in Crores)

EBR
Availed

* Demand raised from NABARD against approved amount of
EBR of % 10000.00 crore’.
2.4 It is evident from the above Table that for the year 2017-18, 2018-19 and
2019-20, the release from GBS has been short of the Revised Estimates. Also,
the EBR availed from NABARD has seen an upward trend from % 7,329 crore in
2017-18 to 10,879 crore in 2018-19 to ₹ 10,811 crore in 2079-20.

FUND MANAGEMENT
2.5 Information regarding head-wise/year-wise details of Administrative

expenses allocated/utilised for administering the Scheme at Central and State
Levels is as under:-

“As per the new Admin Fund Module on AwaasSoft, admin fund
shall bs booked under the following heads by the States/UTs:

—_. $$ 3...

Sub-heads



The Administrative Expenses utilized by States in Fy 2019-20 as
per AwaasSoft is given in Annexure-|".

2.6 The Ministry of Rural Development, submitted following information on
year-wise details of Reserve Fund retained at the Central Level and its utilization
from the year 2018-17 till 2018-19;-

“AS per Framework for Implementation (FFI) of PMAY-G,
there is a Provision for rehabilitation/ relocation of families
whose houses have been completely/ Substantially damaged
On account of natural disasters Including Floods, under
Special Projects of the scheme. 5% of the annual central
allocation under PMAY-G is retained at the Central
Government level for financing the Proposals under Special
Projects received from the States. The beneficiary
households identified by the State Government for Providing
assistance under Special Projects should be those
households that are listed in the Permanent Wait List (PWL)



(Zin lakhs)

Financial

—

017-18 [Tamil Nadu

371.3697)

371.3697

EUNDING PATTERN

2.7. Elaborating the details of the Framework under which financial assistance
was released to the States/UTs and at what stage the first and second
instalments of funds were released to the States by the Ministry, the Ministry
submitted the following:-
“As mentioned In FFI, the annual central allocation to the
States/ UTs is released in two instalments. The first
instalment is equal to 50% of total annual financial

allocation and the second instalment is equal to the annual
allocation minus first instalment and applicable deductions.

_ 10


Release of 1" instalment

The 1* instalment for the State / Union Territory as a whole
is released at the beginning of the financial year to the
States / UTs that have availed the 2” instalment or have
submitted complete proposal thereof in the previous
financial year,

Release of 207 instalment

The States will submit a Proposal for release of 2nd
instalment, The Proposal to be submitted should be based
on achievement of prescribed physical and financial
Progress on AwaasSoft enclosed with the duly signed copy
of the report from AwaasSoft by the Competent Authority,

As mentioned in 10,5,2 of Framework For Implementation
(FFI) for PMAY-G, the release of second instalment to the
State is subject to the following conditions:

४ Utilisation of 60% of total available funds on
AwaasSoft,

2. Achievement of the physical progress as per the
Prescribed criteria and indicators as given below:-

Criteria

| tediontor जी।

Target Fixing

100 percent

95 percent of

Current year Target

Issue of Sanctions

Freezing of
Current year Beneficiary he sa of
Accounts

100 percent of
aed a the sanctions in
Current year| instalment tems of
pole Fund Trane

Tal r
beneficiary Orders (FTO)

80 percent of
Sanction

Previous
year

House constructed

11


*If the 2nd instalment is claimed in the next financial year,
then the expression ‘current year will be construed as
financial year in which ‘st instalment was teleased. The

‘previous year’ as mentioned above will also be construed
accordingly”.

2.8 While furnishing the details with regard to Targets set and Achieved,
Budget Allocation, Extra Budgetary resources received, Actual Expenditure
during the period from year 2016-17 till 2018-19, the Ministry: of Rural
Development in its written replies furnished as under :-

(रे in crores and No in units)
2016-17 2017-18 —«i2018-19
argetset_ |4277994 3204663 2516481

arget
Achieved 3640808 2591031 2245768
IPMAY-G*
Budget

10678.8

Extra
47281.2843

“ Figures reported by States/UTs on AwaasSoft as on 4.11.2019

7329.43

55812.8608

* Utilization is reported against the Total Available

Funds which includes Central Share, State Share,

Miscellaneous Receipts and Interest Accrued”
2.9 The Table above pinpoints the fact that construction of houses lag behind
the targets set for the successive three years starting from 2016-17 to 2018-19,
The target of houses to be constructed fell short by 6,37,186, 6,13,632 and
2,70,713 in the years 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 respectively.

2.10 Budget Allocation, Extra Budgetary resources received, Actual
Expenditure from the year 2016-17 till 2018-19,

12


Financial oe "न Budgetary
Year fa ss lie xpenditurs

was short of the BE for the year 2017-18 by ₹ 168 crore and ₹ 1400 crore for the
year 2018-19, Additionally, EBR was Sanctioned from NABARD for both the
years 2017-18 and 2018-4 9. For the first three years of the Scheme, a total of a
हें 18008.23 crore was Sanctioned as EBR from NABARD through which an”

amount of € 75962,47 crore was managed to be the total expenditure under .
the scheme.

F FUND UTILISATION UTILISATION

2.13 The data on the rate of interest on the loans received from NABARD and
the details of loans received and repayment of principal amountinterest to
NABARD s0 far under the Scheme, as furnished by the Ministry of Rural
Development, is as under:-


“The EBR has been availed for the years 2017-18 and 2018-19.
The details of amounts availed and rates of interest applicable are
as under:-

2018-19

10678.80 Cr. (availed in five
% 7329.43 Cr (availed in three tranches

है Amount
———
rancheiin'=) Rate hi 814,40 (05.10.2016| 6.77%
2
a a
Se a

ai

The interest payment is done semi-annually. Each loan shall be
repayable to NABARD within 10 years from the date of
disbursement including moratorium period of 5 years. Principal
amount shall be paid in equal instalments at the interval of six
months’.

2.14 On being asked about shortfall in achievements with respect to physical
achievement of 85.94% and 75.09% in the year 2015-16 and 2016-17 and
expenditure of ₹ 82.92 crore and % 1058 crore in excess to Revised Estimate
respectively, the Ministry of Rural Development stated as under:

"It is to be noted that the cost of unit assistance is shared between
Central and State Governments in the prescribed ratio. Therefore,
the expenditure reported from AwaasSoft comprises of
expenditure made from both central and state share.

The reason for shortfall in achievement is because PMAY-G came
into effect from 11 April, 2016 and launched by the Hon’ble Prime
Minister on 20" November, 2016. Scheme implementation had to
start with validation of SECC data by Gram Sabhas, preparation of
Priority Lists and their uploading on AwaasSoft, Registration of
beneficiaries etc. before sanction of a house, Once the
infrastructure came into place and the capacities of the personnel
built, the performance of the scheme picked up pace”.

14


2.15 The year-wise/State-wise details of the funds released and funds utilised
from the year 2016-17 onwards furnished by the Ministry is at Annexure-Ill,

2.16 State

2.17 To th

wise break up of central allocation is at Annexure Vil.

8 concerns of the Committee regarding low cumulative financial

Utilisation rate, diversion of funds to other States, non- utilization in case of a few
States, the Ministry in a written note submitted as under :-

“The expenditure reflected on AwaasSoft is made by the State/UT
against the cumulative fund available in State Nodal Account
(SNA) with the State/UT which includes Opening Balance of
Previous year, Central Share, State Share, Interest Accrued and

Miscel
separ

llaneous income. However, no expenditure is being reported
‘ately against the Central share releases or the State share

releases as all funds from different sources are credited to
the single bank account 1.8. SNA and therefore expenditure is

made
of the

against the Total Fund Available (TFA) in SNA irrespective
fund source.

Further, the TFA with States/UTs @$ On 17:11,2020 is = 35279.81

crore

which includes Opening Balance of  10002.84 crore, the

Central Share Releases of % 15007.66 crore, State Share
releases of % 9517.40 crore, Miscellaneous income of 701.49

crore
made

and interest accrued of %. 50.42 crore. The total expenditure
39 on 17.11.2020 is ₹ 21388.76. crores against the TFA of ₹

35279.81 crore ie 60.62 %, However, if the expenditure is taken
against the Central and State fund releases only i.e 24525.06

crore,

then the expenditure is 87.21 % of Central and State share

releases for FY 2020-21.

Major

reasons that have been attributed for low utilization in some

States are listed below :

1. Unavailability of Land: 2.66 lakh landless beneficiaries are yet to
be provided land by State Governments. The responsibility of
providing land to the landless beneficiaries’ rests with the State
Governments.

2. Cessation of work for some time on account of imposition of Model

Code

of Conduct due to Parliamentary/ Assembly/ Panchayat

slections. As these elections are scheduled in a staggered manner
Separately, collectively lot of time is wasted.

3. Delay
Govt,

in release of both Central and State's share by the State
to the State Nodal Account from which payments are made.

4. Migration of beneficiaries-both temporary and permanent
5. Death of beneficiaries

15


6. Occurrence of natural calamities like floods in major PMAY-G
implementing states

7. Reduction in pace of implementation due to outbreak of COVID-
19 pandemic”.

2.18 Regarding the steps taken by the Ministry for handholding and improving
the performance with regard to low utilization of funds by States/UTs, it was
submitted that:

Push for 100% sanction of allocated targets

Dynamic performance ranking of States

Ministry is continuously following up the issue of

landlessness and requesting States /UTs to accord top

priority and allocate land to landless beneficiaries. The
matter has been taken up at highest level in the States/

UTs. Hon'ble Minister, RD also reviewed this issue

through VC meetings with State/UT RD Ministers held in

the month of May, 2020. Continuous persuasion has led
to State specific schemes to provide land to the landless,

8.9. in Bihar, Assam, Maharashtra etc.

4. With respect to migration / death’ unwilling beneficiaries
the Ministry has issued guidelines in consultation with
States / UTs to delete such names.

5. The Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development has also
written to Hon'ble Chief Ministers of States and
LG/Administrators of UTs to review the Progress of
PMAY-G at their level.

6, Review of progress through monthly VC at the level of

Secretary / Special Secretary/Addl. Secretary/Deputy Dy.

General, Ministry of Rural Development.

Se

To ensure faster completion of houses, States/ UTs have
been requested to:-

1. Focus on completion of those houses where 2nd
or 3rd instalment of funds has been released to
beneficiaries.

2. Prepare a month-wise target for completion of
houses for monitoring and convey the same to
MoRD.

3. Review the low performing districts separately.

4. Separate review of States /UTs with high target,
poor performing States/UTs and delayed houses
in States/ UTs.

16


5. Timely availability and release of funds to the
tes/UTs

8, Bringing on board Associations of Construction

material Manufacturers / Suppliers to ensure
sustained availability of the same.”

17


Chapter-lll
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCHEME

ASSESSMENT OF REQUIREMENT OF HOUSES

During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee sought to
know about the assessment made by the Ministry with regard to the total number
of houseless households, households living in kutcha and dilapidated houses in
rural areas as on 11 April 2016 and at the end of the year 2018-19. Further the
Committee also wanted to know if the Ministry would be able to provide pucca
houses with basic amenities to all those households by 2022 in order to achieve
the aim “Housing for All’ of PMAY-G. To this, the Ministry of Rural Development
made the following written submissions;-

‘) The Working Group on Rural Housing for the Twelfth
Five Year Plan (2012-17), has estimated the total housing
shortage in rural areas as 4.367 crore units.

ii) As per Census 2011, 3.47 crore rural families are
either houseless or live in houses of temporary nature, in
which both walls and roofs are made of materials which need
frequent replacement.

lil) In addition, as per Socio Economic and Caste (SECC)
2011, 4.03 crore rural families are either houseless or living in
Zero, one or two-room house with kutcha roof or wall.

iv) Combining the data sets of Census 2011 and SECC
2011 and accounting for houses constructed since 2011 and
houses under construction till 311 March 2016, it was
estimated that 2.95 crore houses, would need to be
constructed to meet the objective of “Housing for All’ in rural
areas, This does not account for demand that would / had
arisen from the time the programme commenced from 151
April 2016.

v) The total number of 2.57 crore households had been
identified as on 15th September, 2016 for providing financial
assistance under PMAY-G after due verification by Gram
Sabhas and after completion of Appellate Process, Whereas,
the Permanent Wait List (PWL) as on 31st, October, 2019
stands at 2.52 crore’.

18



Selection of sSection of Beneficiaries
saaenon of Beneficiaries

fii,

The beneficiaries Of PMAY-G are identified by the Gram
Sabha based on the housing deprivation Parameters as per
Socio-Economic and Caste Census Gata of 2011.The universe
Of eligible beneficiaries under PMAY-G Includes all the

houseless and households living in Zero, one or two room
kutcha houses as per SECC data, subject to the exclusion

iS done Category-wise viz,, SCs/STs, Minorities and
Others, Households are prioritized Category-wise based on
houselessness followed by the number of coms; zero, one
and two rooms,
The priority lists so Prepared are verified by the Gram Sabha
for Wah

Gram Panchayat, The complaints regarding deletion or change
in ranking can be submitted to the Appellate Committee
constituted by the State Government who would resolve such
complaints,

After the Appellate Process is complete, the Category-wise
Permanent Waitlist of the Gram Panchayat is finalised which is
widely published and entered on the website of PMAY-G."

were either houseless or living in Z8F0, one or two room house with kutcha roof
and wall, as per SECC 2011 data) was sent to the State/UT Government for
verification by the Gram Sabha, the Ministry of Rural Development furnished as

‘The lists were forwarded to the States/UTs in FY 2015-16 through
AwaasSoft when the Department of Rural Development was in
Process of restructuring the erstwhile JAY into PMAY-G.”

The Priority lists 50 Prepared are verified by the Gram Sabha to
check for ineligible beneficiaries and changes in Priority, Necessary
Changes in the list are made based on the minutes of Gram Sabha

19


indicating the above changes. The lists approved by the Gram Sabha
are widely publicized within the Gram Panchayat. The complaints
regarding deletion or change in ranking can be submitted to the
Appellate Committee constituted by the State Government who
would resolve such complaints.

3.3(a) On being asked about the system in place to check the final
decision of Gram Sabha, Secretary Rural Development during an
oral deposition before the Committee stated that

" the verification is being carried out by the officers’.
3.4 During oral evidence, when it was brought to the notice of the
representatives of the Ministry about the instances where the final list prepared
by the Gram Sabha have been manipulated by Vikas Mitra or Tolasevak who

resort to corrupt practices, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development stated
that:

“इसको चेंज करने का अधिकार विकास मित्र या जो भी इस तरह के पैरा वर्कर्स हैं,
उनको नहीं है। ग्राम सभा का जो मैन्डेट है, उसको नॉमर्ली मान लिया जाता है।
अगर उसमें भी किसी को आपत्ति रह जाती है तो उसके लिए सीनियर लेवल पर
पदाधिकारियों की समिति सामान्यतः बनती है। मैं अपने झारखंड के अनुभव के
आधार पर कह सकता हूँ कि वह एडीएम लेवल की कमेटी रहती थी और उसमें
सीमियर लेवल के दो और मेम्बर्स होते थे। उनको मौके की जाँच करके अपने
अपेलैंट पर निर्णय देना था। अगर इस तरह की कहीं पर कोई वारदात हो रही है तो
वह त्रुटिपूर्ण है। वह इस प्रक्रिया का अंग तो बिल्कुल ही नहीं है। यदि कोई धमकी
देकर ले रहा है तो वह गलत हो रहा है।"

3.5 During oral evidence, the matter regarding vetting of the final list of Gram

Sabha by the Disha Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development
submitted that:

“सर, स्टेट की यह समिति हाल ही A बनी है। इसलिए, इस सिस्टम को
ऑपरेशनलाइज़ होने में थोड़ा टाइम लगेगा। हम लोग इसे फॉलो-अप कर रहे हैं।

सभापति महोदय, आपने एक महत्वपूर्ण प्रश्न पूछा था कि वर्ष 2011 में जो
सोशियो इकोनॉमिक कास्ट सेन्सस हुआ है, उसके बाद भी कई लोगों के नाम छूट
गए हैं, उनको शामिल करने की क्या प्रक्रिया है। जब वर्ष 2011 में सोशियो
इकोनॉमणछिक कास्ट Beet हुआ तो उसमें जो एक्सक्लूजन क्राइटेरिया था,
जिसके संबंध में कई माननीय सदस्यों ने चर्चा की है। मैं उस संबंध में आगे

20



शामिल करने का क्या प्रॉसेस है। इसके लिए वर्ष 2017-18 में एक सर्वे कराया
गया था। उस सर्वे का नाम 'आवास प्लस' रखा गया था। यह इस कारण भी
जेनरेट हुआ था कि जब ग्राम सभा में सोशियो इकोनॉमछिक कास्ट सेन्सस का
वेरिफिकेशन करने के लिए सूची भेजी गई थी, तो ग्राम सभा को चह हक नहीं था

कमेटी बनाई गई थी।

कमेटी ने इन सभी फैक्टर्स और फिजिकल्र वेरिफिकेशंस के आधार पर सजेशन
दिया कि हम लोग परमानैंट वेटिंग लिस्ट में जो नम्बर आई थी, उसको आधा
बैटेज दें और जुलाई से दिसम्बर, 2018 के बीच में जो 76th round of national

कॉम्प्लिकेटेड लगता है, लेकिन बहुत आसान है।

21


सर, मैं एक उदाहरण देना चाहता हूं कि मान लीजिए HS वर्ष 2016-17 में एक
करोड़ लोगों ने काम किया, वर्ष 2017-18 में एक करोड़ लोगों ने काम किया, वर्ष
2018-19 में भी एक करोड़ लोगों ने काम किया, वह संख्या कुत्न मिलाकर तीन
करोड़ हो गई। किसी ग्राम पंचायत में इन तीन वर्षों में इसी तरह तीन लाख
लोगों ने काम किया। हम ने तीन सालों का अनुपात ग्राम पंचायत के लिए
निकाला, तीन सालों का अनुपात पूरे राज्य के लिए निकाला, उसके अनुपात में
राज्य का जो भी लक्ष्य इस प्रकार से निर्धारक्षित हुआ था, हम a उसको बांट
दिया। यह बहुत सिम्पत्न कैलकुलेशन है। यह बहुत आसानी से कैलकुल्लेट कर
लिया जाता है।

प्राइवेटाइजेशन के बारे में भी कमेटी की रेकमेंडेशन आई थी। मंत्रालय ने कमेटी
की रिपोर्ट स्वीकार कर ली है और उसके आधार पर राज्यों को क्रियान्वयन के
लिए निदेश दिए गए हैं।*

3.6 Replying to a specific query as to whether there was any proposal to
extend the Scheme to persons under the category of ‘below poverty line’, the
Ministry furnished the following:-

“Under the revamped rural housing scheme, the houses are provided
to the houseless households as per the housing deprivation
parameters of SECC-2011. As of now, there is no proposal to extend
the scheme to people below poverty line”.

3.7 - The Ministry also stated :-

. As per the framework for implementation of PMAY-G, there
is multilayered’ prioritization within the universe. of eligible
PMAY (G) beneficiaries. Priority will first be assigned on the
basis of parameters reflecting housing deprivation in each
category viz., SC/ST, Minorities and Others. To begin with,
households will be prioritized based on houselessness
followed by the number of rooms; zero, ane and two rooms,
in that order. In a particular social category viz., SC/ST,
Minorities and Others, households which are houseless or
living in houses with lower number of rooms shall not be
ranked below households living in houses with higher
number of rooms. Within the above priority groups,
households that fulfill the criteria of “comipulsory inclusion’,
as defined in SECC will be further elevated. Automatically
included households shall not rank lower than other
households within a priority group. Inter se priority within the
two sub groups viz. households which are automatically
included and otherwise, will be determined based on their

22



cumulative deprivation scores, The Scores will be calculated
from the socio-economic parameters given below with each
having equal weight,

. Households with no adult member between age 16 to 59

. Female headed households with no adult male member
between age 16 to 59

‘ Households with no literate adult above 25 years

. Households with any disabled member and no able-bodied
adult member

. Landless Households deriving the major part of their

income from manual casual labour
. Households with higher deprivation scores will be ranked
higher within the sub groups”.

3.8... Onbeing asked whether a Poor person having a hut would be eligible for
8 house under the Scheme, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development who
deposed before the Committee Stated as under :-

“सर, सोशियो इकोनॉमिक कास्ट सेँंसस में जो जीरो, वन, टू- होमलैस, एक कच्चा
कमरा, कच्ची दीवार, कच्ची छत और दो कच्चे कमरे, कच्ची दीवार, कच्ची छत
यह हमारा यूनिवर्स है। इससे हम दो करोड़ 54 त्राख, जैसा हमने बताया कि उसका
वैलिडेशन ग्राम war के दूवारा हुआ, उसका फिर जियो टैगिंग हुआ। अगर जियो 1
टैंगिंग में सही निकला तो उसी को घर दिया गया।" <

3.9 To a specific query as to whether the Ministry had received any h
Suggestion to change the criteria of identification of beneficiaries under 018:
Scheme and the action taken thereon, if any, the Ministry in its written reply
made the following submission:-

“The Ministry of Rural Development has received some suggestions
from a few State Governments for change/ modifications in the criteria
for identification of beneficiaries and change in the definition of the
house under the scheme”,

PREDOMINANT MATERIALIPREDOMINANT
OF WALL OF DWELLI
ROOM

rass/ thatch / bamboo, etc.
Plastic/ polythene
Mud/ unburnt brick

23


Machine made tile
Burnt brick

Stone

Slate

GL

Stone packed with mortar
.|,/ Metal/ asbestos sheets
Burnt bricks Concrete

metal’ asbesto:

Machine mace tile

Grass/ thatch/ bamboo, etc
Plastic/ Polythene
Mud/ unburnt brick
food Stone not packed with

Pucca {Mortar

.|./ Metal’ Asbesto:
heets Concrete

|Grass/ thatch/ bamboo, ete
Plastic/ Polythene
Pucca iMud/ unburnt brick
ul Wood Stone not packed with
mortar

rass/ thatch/ bamboo:
ud, etc, ‘

lastic/ Polythene Hand
ade tiles

3.10 The details with respect to States are at Annexure IV.

3.11 Clarifying the issue as to what defined a ‘kutcha house’, the Ministry of
Rural Development submitted to the Committee as under:-

“Currently, as per the provisions of the scheme, the universe of
eligible beneficiaries under PMAY-G includes all the houseless and
households living in zero, one or two room kutcha houses as per
SECC data, subject to the exclusion process. Prioritisation of
beneficiaries for providing assistance under PMAY-G is done
category-wise viz., SC/ST, Minorities and Others’.

3.12 The definition of a Kutcha House as per the SECC 2011 is as follows:
“A Committee of experts has been constituted by the Ministry to.
define the kutcha houses, Based on the recommendations of the

committee, Kutcha houses may be re-defined and the same may be
communicated to the concerned stakeholders’.

३.13. In reply to another query regarding the definition of kutcha houses as
redefined by a Committee of Experts constituted by the Ministry to define the
same, the Ministry in its written reply has furnished as under ;-

24


3.14 Th

“In this regard, it is stated that under PMAY-G, the definition of kuchha
house is as per the definition of kuchha house used/prescribed in
Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011. States including Punjab,
Assam, Uttar Pradesh and Tripura had requested for revisiting the
definition of kuchha house under PMAY-G. Accordingly, with the
approval of Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development, an Expert
Committee was constituted under the chairmanship of Late Dr.
Nagesh Singh, former Additional Secretary (RD), with experts from
various departments including NITI Aayog, NIC, HUDCO, CSIR-CBRI
as members for considering the Proposals from the States for
revisiting the definition of kuchha house under PMAY-G.

The Committee recommended that the house with durable foundation
with burnt brick, stone, concrete blocks, etc, with cement mortar with
DPC; walls with durable materials like red burnt bricks, concrete
blocks, etc. at least up to sill level; the external surface of the walls
with moisture degradable materials like ‘Icra’ panels, unburnt bricks,
etc. protected with cement sand Plaster and roof with durable
materials like RCC or RBC or CGI foofing sheet well anchored with a
roof understructures which is further well anchored with walls/ support
system transferring the load to the ground, to be considered as a
‘Pucca’ house, Else the house is to be categorised as a Kuchha
house.

The Committee also recommended applicability of revised definition of
Kuchha house under PMAY-G for 2 States of Assam & Tripura only.
Similar proposals received from other States /UTs in future can be
dealt with by MoRD separately and as per recommendations,

The final report’ recommendation of the Committee has been
accepted by the Competent Authority".

Ministry stated as under :-

“Under PMAY-G, as per the approval of Union Cabinet, the
beneficiaries are identified based on housing deprivation parameters
prescribed under Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011 subject
to due verification by Gram Sabha and Completion of Appellate
Process”

3.15 Regarding the criteria for identification of various focus groups under the
Scheme and the year-wise details of overall Percentage of beneficiaries fixed for

25

'& Committee sought to know the differences between genuine poor and
eligible beneficiaries, the procedure for identification of the same and whether
these identities were same as far as PMAY-G was concerned. To this, the


these focus groups, the Ministry of Rural Development furnished the following
information :-

“ Under the scheme, the houses are allocated to the beneficiaries
based on housing deprivation parameters of SECC 2011 and the
priority is set based on category of the households i.e. SC/ST,
minority and others and houselessness. There are no specific focus
groups identified under the scheme

60% of the targets of houses are allocated to SC/ST. Further, as far
as possible, 15% of the total funds are to be earmarked for Minorities
at the National Level for households to be covered as per SECC
2011 as verified by Gram Sabhas.

In the scheme of PMAY-G, while deciding the inter-se priority among
the beneficiaries who are to be provided assistance, households with
any disabled member and no able bodied adult member have been
accorded additional deprivation score so that such households are
given priority while allotment of houses. Keeping in view the
provisions of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, the
States have to ensure that as far as possible 5% of the beneficiaries

at the State Level are from among the persons with benchmark
disabilities”

3.16 , The Secretary who deposed before the Comniittee elaborated the criteria
of ‘automatic inclusion’ as under :-

“सर, मैं कमेटी के समक्ष दो तथ्य रखना TEM जो हमारा ऑटोमेटिक
इन्प्क्ल्रूजन का क्रायटेरिया है, उसके अनुसार जिसके पास eee एवं एक कमरे का
कच्चा मकान है, उसको हमें किसी भी हालत में इसमें शामिल करना है। इसमें यह
नहीं है कि उसके पास ठीवी हों या न हो, या कोई और चीज़ हो या न हो, ऐसा नहीं
है। वह इसमें ऑटोमेटिकली इन्कलूड हो जाएगा। यह डश्यू नहीं है, लेकिन पूरे देश
में यह संभावना है और किसी भी देश में, जहां इतनी बड़ी संख्या में लोग हों, वहां हो
सकता है कि थोड़ी डिफरेंट पोज़ीशन हो। जहां तक सिंगल रूम तक के हाउसहोल्ड,
कच्चे मकान का प्रश्न है, वह इसमें ऑटोमेटिकली इन्कलूड हो जाता SI

* सर, दूसरा यह भी है कि जिसका दो रूम तक का कच्चा मकान है, सामान्यतः: हम
उनके पास यह एक्सपेक्ट करेंगे, क्योंकि जब वर्ष 2009 में यह क्राइटेरिया
निर्धारित हो रहा था तो उस समय के प्लानिंग कमीशन ने सभी एक्सपर्ट्स को
aot करके, दो-तीन जगहों पर पायलट करके यह क्राइटेरिया निर्धारित किया
था। समय बदलता है, समय के हिसाब से एसेट ओनरशिप भी बदलती है। यह हो
सकता है कि परिसंपत्तियों के स्वामित्व के स्वरूप में परिवर्तन हुआ है।

26


मैं एक चीज और आपकी नजर में त्राना चाहूंगा कि जो सोशियो इकोनॉमिक कास्ट
सेंसस ऑटोमैटिक एक्सक्त्रूजन में क्राइटेरिया था, उसमें मोबाइल फोन का उल्लेख
नहीं था, उसमें लैंडलाइन फोन का उल्लेख था। आज मोबाइल फोन सब के पास él
अगर आप बाकी क्राइटेरिया देखेंगे तो काफी एग्जोस्टिव BI"

3.17 During oral evidence when it was brought to the Notice that during survey,
Some time the genuine beneficiary have been left out and the names of fake
beneficiaries have been included clarifying this issue, the Secretary stated :

“जैसा आपने कहा कि सर्व में अपात्र लोग जुड़ जाते हैं और पात्र ल्लोग नहीं जुड़ते
हैं। इसमें कई स्टेजेज पर फिल्टरिंग हो जाती है। एक, जब यह ग्राम सभा में
जाती है, यदक्षि ग्राम सभा ठीक से deer हो रही है तो वहां पर छंट जाना
चाहिए। दूसरा, आपने देखा होगा कि हम उसके घर के सामने चित्र लेते हैं।
पुराना घर और नया घर जिस साइट पर बनना है तो वह भी छंटनी का एक
जगह है। इसके अलावा जो व्यक्ति इसको स्वीकृत कर रहा है, उसकी भी कहीं न
कहीं इसमें जिम्मेदारी बनती है। इसी कारण आप देख रहे हैं कि बहुत लोगों के
नाम सर्वे में जुटने के बाद भी आज तक हम उनको घर स्वीकृत नहीं कर पा रहे
CIP लि के कलश शक इस प्रोग्राम की डिजाइन में यथासंभव कोशिश की गई है
कि जो अपात्र लोग हैं, उनको न मिले और जो पात्र ल्लोग हैं, उन्हीं को मिल्रे। मुझे
आशा है कि आवास प्लस से जो लिस्ट निकलेगी, उसमें जो पात्र ल्लोग छूटगए
होंगे, उनको हम शामिल कर सकेंगे।' »

3.18 When pointed out that in Rajasthan approximately 7 lakh 14 thousand
data has not been uploaded in the APP, the Secretary stated that :

सर, हम लोग तो यही अनुमान कर सकते हैं कि राज्य सरकार खुद अपने पैसा से
उनको बनवाए। इसके लिए दो साल का मौका दिया गया' है।"

3.19 The Secretary who deposed before the Committee Stated as under :

“इसको डिसाइड करने के ल्लिए क्या क्राइटेरिया हो, इस पर हम ल्लोग काम कर रहे
er"

27


National Database for identification of houseless households

3.20

To a specific query as to whether the functionaries who were responsible

for uploading information on “AwaasSoft” from the site in villages were well
equipped (in terms of facilities and skill set) to handle, the Ministry in its written
reply submitted:-

3.21

“Under PMAY-G, there is a component of Administrative funds which
are 2% of the housing funds released to the States/UTs. Out of these
2% funds of Central Share, 0:3% are retained at Centre Level and
1.7% are released to the States/UTs for various activities of
administration of the scheme which includes cost of setting up and
operating Programme Management Units (PMUs) including hiring of
personnel on contract and also training of officials and elected
representatives of Panchayats including exposure visits. In addition,
the Ministry, on the request received from States/UTs arrange for the
visit of Officers/ Officials of Rural housing Division of the Ministry with
Officials from NIC team, PMU team to visit and provide necessary
hand-holding to the field workers on usage of AwaasApp &
AwaasSoft for data entry and other functions”.

When asked whether the Ministry had created any National Data Base for

identification of houses constructed under the Scheme, the Ministry of Rural
Development in its written reply furnished the following information :-

“rsa 7*क 99 99

“The houses to be constructed as well as the houses at different
stages of completion included the completely completed houses
along with financial details are reported on PMAY-G transaction
based MIS: "AwaasSoft” which is in public domain. The following
parameters are available as part of the database:

. Beneficiary Name

Registration No,

Village
Father's/Mother's Name
House allotted to
Sanction No.
Sanctioned amount
Installment(s) Paid
Amount Released

House Status including geotagged & time stamped photos of the house at
different stages of construction’.

28


PROCEDURE FOR PREPARATION OF PERMANENT WAITING LIST OF FOR PREPARATION OF PERMANENT WAITING LIST OF
BENEFICIARIES AND INCLUSION OF LEFT OUT PEOPLE

3.22 Toa specific query as to whether the Ministry had initiated any proposal to
include |eft-out landless people in the list of Permanent Waiting List, the Ministry
of Rural Development submitted as under:-

“It is stated that a survey was conducted by the States/UTs during
2018-19 to capture details of the households, who though eligible but
could not be part of the PWL including landless households. The
States/UTs have captured details of 3.67 crore households in the
country. Subsequently, an Expert Committee was constituted by the
Ministry for finalization of the AwaasPlus data uploaded by
States/UTs. The Committee had submitted Its report and the same
has been accepted by the Ministry. Allocation of targets from
AwaasPlus List has to be done in consultation with Ministry of |
Finance. Accordingly, the approval of Ministry of Finance was sought
and the Ministry of Finance has concurred to the proposal of this
Ministry. The Ministry has allocated targets-to 31 GKRA districts of
Uttar Pradesh from AwaasPlus list as per the methodology
suggested by the Expert Committee. The provision of land for
landless beneficiaries is State Governments responsibility, and
similar procedure will be followed for beneficiaries in AwaasPlus fist’.

3.23 Responding to a post-evidence query regarding the proposal initiated/to
be initiated by the Ministry to consider the Wait List of the beneficiaries under the
Scheme, the Ministry in its written reply provided the following information :-

“The Permanent Wait List (PWL) under PMAY-G has been derived
from the Socio-Economic Cast Census -2011 data. The PWL
includes:all the houseless and households living in zero, one or two- -
room houses with kutcha wall and kutcha roof as per SECC data,
subject to Gram Sabha verification. The houses are sanctioned
according to the PWL as per priority of the beneficiary therein.

Further, the Ministry of Rural Development has developed mobile
application AwaasPlus for capturing details of such potential
households including geo-tagged photograph of the present dwelling.
The details of the households captured using the mobile application
would be verified and validated and the final list of households
prepared thereafter would be included in the Permanent Wait List.

An Expert Committee was constituted by the Ministry for finalization
of the AwaasPlus data uploaded by States/UTs. The Committee had
Submitted its report and the same has been accepted by the
Ministry, Allocation of targets from AwaasPlus List to PWL has to be
done in consultation with Ministry of Finance. Accordingly, the

29



approval of Ministry of Finance has been sought and now the
" Ministry is in the process of preparing the final AwaasPlus list as per
the methodology suggested by the Expert Committee”.

3.24 Regarding the logical and feasible methodology being adopted by Expert
Committee to identify the beneficiaries for inclusion in the Permanent Waiting
List (PWL), the Ministry of Rural Development submitted as under :-

“The recommendations of the AwaasPlus Expert committee for target
setting and identification of eligible beneficiaries are given below —

4. The Committee recommended that for target allocation to the
States/UTs, Ministry may consider using PWL of PMAY-G and
NSSO 76th round data in the proportion of 50:50. The committee
also highlighted building of safeguards that target allocated to a
State / UT is not more than the AwaasPlus data

2. For computation of GP/Block/District wise targets and distribution
of targets to GPs, the state/UT wise targets may be distributed in
proportion of the MGNREGS person-days of the GP/Block/District
vis-a-vis the MGNREGS person-days generated at the state/UT
level.

3. For priority setting at the GP level, the committee recommended:
the following —

~ Generate AwaasPlus list post exclusion & inclusion criteria
application

« Prioritization using three parameters viz. MGNREGS person-days,

Family size, Age profile of the Head of the Househcld (HoH), with

equal weight

Deprivation score computation and grouping

Revision of the priority list on the basis of the deprivation scores

Gram Sabha verification

The target of 5,54,266 to 31 Garlb Kalyan Rozgar Abhiyan districts

of Uttar Pradesh have been allocated based on the

recommendations of the Expert Committee.”

3.25 During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee sought
details regarding the process for selection of beneficiaries out of the applicants,
the criteria adopted, how the distribution had taken place and criteria for
choosing such applicants at the District level. In its written reply, the Ministry of
Rural Development furnished following information:-
“In order to propose a strategy for analysis of additional households
recorded, an Expert committee was constituted by the Ministry

under the chairmanship of Dr. Nagesh Singh, former Additional
Secretary, DORD . A mult-pronged approach was adopted by the

30



Expert Committee members for AwaasPlus data analysis which
included desk analysis, field visits and exploration of additional data
sources within the Government ecosystem.

After vetting of different approaches, the committee recommended
using National Sample Survey data of 76th Round along with
MGNREGS data and existing PWL of PMAY-G for analysis. The
committee chose to consider these databases for allocation of
targets to the States / UTs and also prioritizing the households in
Awaas + database. The NSS data was considered since it is more
recent, ie. it captures data from July 2018 to December 2018; is
neutral, ie. it has been collected by third party. NSS data can also
be segregated state-wise and district-wise.

The Committee finally recommended that the targets may be
computed using PWL of PMAY-G and NSS 76th round data in the
proportion of 50:50, Although NSS 76th round data is more recent
and is from a third party, still the data of PWL cannot be discounted
as it has been verified by the Gram Sabhas and depicts the real
position on the ground.

For computation of GP/Block/District wise targets and distribution of
targets to GPs, the following methodology was proposed —

4. Galculate the total number of MGNREGS person-days generated in the
- time period 2016-19 for all GPs in the state

2. Calculate the % share of MGNREGS person-days utilized by a GP as a %
of the total person-days generated by the state for 2016-19

3. Using the multiplication factor computed above in step 1 (b), calculate the
target for individual GPs by multiplying the same with the target allocated
to the state

4. Collate the GP-wise data to arrive at Block wise and District wise targets
in a state ५

For priority setting at the GP level, the committee recommended analysis
using existing parameters for inclusion and exclusion as per PMAY-G
guidelines, calculation of deprivation category by considering person-days
worked under MGNREGS, family size and age profile of the head of the
household, followed by calculation of deprivation scores of households as
per PMAY-G guidelines. The committee recommended that the list
prepared thereafter be circulated to the Gram Panchayats for verification
and certification by Gram Sabha".

3.26 While submitting details about the Report of the Committee constituted for
addition/deletion of names in the list prepared in 2011, the Secretary of Rural
Development in his deposition stated as under :-

31


“लोगों ने मुख्य समस्या रिपोर्ट की है कणि जो सोशियों इकोनॉमणिक कास्ट
BETH हुआ, उसमें लोग छूट गए हैं और उनको शामिल्र करने का क्या प्रॉसेस है।
इसके लिए वर्ष 2017-18 में एक सर्वे कराया गया था। उस सर्वे का नाम आवास
प्लस' रखा गया था। यह इस कारण भी जेनरेट हुआ था कि जब ग्राम सभा में
सोशियो इकोनॉमणिक कास्ट सेन्सस का वेरिफिकेशन करने के लिए सूची भेजी गई
थी, तो ग्राम सभा को यह हक नहीं था कि उसमें नया नाम जोड़े, लेकिन वे पात्र
लोगों का नाम जोड़ने के लिए अनुशंसा भेज सकते थे। इसके अलावा कई लोगों ने
कहा है कछि ग्राम सभा ने Sy डेलिजेंस नहीं किया है, तो यह कुछ दिनों तक खोल
कर रखा गया था, लोगों को यह कहा गया था कि अगर आप इसके लिए पात्र हैं तो
आवेदन करें। उसके आधार पर सूची बनाई जाएगी और उसका सत्यापन करके,
आपको उसमेँ शामिल करने के बारे में निर्णय किया जाएगा। यह सर्वे 2019 तक
खुला रखा गया था। इसे 7 मार्च, 2019 को erat कर दिया गया था।*

3.2. Responding to a query regarding the poor registration of beneficiaries in
the year 2020-21, the Secretary of Rural Development stated that :-

“इसके दो मुख्य कारण हैं। एक तो कोविड-19 का फैक्टर सबसे बड़ा है कि हम
लाभार्थियों के पास बिजिट नहीं कर पा रहे हैं, इसके कारण बहुत-से स्थानों से
Blea नहीं आ पा रहे हैं। दूसरा बड़ा कारण यह है कि जो परमानेंट वेट लिस्ट है,
उसमें बहुत-से लोग हैं, जिंस समय लिस्ट बनी थी, हो सकता है कि वे उस समय
एलिजिबल हाँ, लेकिन आज के दिन में उन लोगों के पक्के मकान बन जाने के
कारण वे इन-एलिजिबल हैं। उन सब लोगों को हटाने की जरूरत हैः

3.28 When asked about the reasons for lesser beneficiary registration in

comparison to target allocation in the year 2019-2020 and 2020-21, the Ministry
replied:~ से

“Out of the total target of 2.23 crore allocated to the States/UTs so
far, 2.02 crore beneficiaries are eligible for registration and
sanctioning of houses to them, Out of 2.02 crore, 1.96 crore
beneficiaries have already been registered upto 31.12.2020. Below
are the main reasons for lesser beneficiary registration in comparison
to target allocation in the year 2019-2020 & 2020-21:-

a. Outbreak of COVID-19 Pandemic

b. Landlessness among beneficiaries and responsibility of
providing land to the landless resting with the State
Governments.

c. Assembly/ Panchayat elections in States
d, Migration-both temporary and permanent

32


e. Death of beneficiaries
f, Beneficiaries unwilling to construct the houses"

LAND TO LANDLESS BENEFICIARIES

3.29 When asked about the construction of houses in specified zones only, the
Secretary of Rural Development in his deposition stated :-

"The beneficiary construct on his own land. In most cases, they
choose the land where they are already living”.

3.30 To another query regarding the permission to construct house on
government/abandoned land unauthorisedly occupied by the landless people,

the Secretary of Rural Development deposing before the Committee stated as
under:-

“| want to assure you and the hon. Members that not one landless
person we want to leave behind. It is for this reason, Sir, when you
saw that instead of one crore houses we were expected to construct,
we could sanction only about 96 lakh. Four lakh houses were of poor
people and landless people. State Governments in Maharashtra,
Bihar, Odisha and Rajasthan were not able to provide land for them. |
am giving this example because Maharashtra and Bihar then came up
with a scheme where the State Government were giving = 50,000 in
the case of Maharashtra, and in Bihar, € 60,000 to the beneficiary to |
purchase these lands where Government is not able to give a
habitable land for a house. In other cases, the figure in West Bengal Is
about 13.35 lakh, where these many houses have already been
completed”.

3.31 With respect to providing land to landless beneficiaries irrespective of the
fact that 60 and 40 percent financial benefits are shared by Central and State
Governments, the Secretary deposed as under :-

“The State Governments have to provide the land, If they are not able
to provide Government land, like Maharashtra and Bihar, they have
come up with a scheme to allow the beneficiary to purchase private
land to construct the house. What we ensured is we do not knock out
the name of a landless from our permanent wait list. Suppose a
person is not able to get the land this year, we would not knock out the |
name of that person and that person would remain first in the wait list
next year so that before 2022 it is ensured that not even a single
landless person is left’.

33


3.32 On being asked to explai

given their land from their own

Secretary of Rural Development during oral evidence stated as under:-

“Sir, on the land issue, out
3,26,090 are those for which
far through the State

land is provided by
Nadu, the beneficiaries
the Chief Secretary an
Ministers also. Whi
provide = 50,000
contribution and we are pr
60:40 basis. That is the m
provided by the

3.33 Toa specific query as to
Governments to buy land for al

Governments. As 10
the State Government. For exal
have not got land ५
10 the hon. Minister
at they nav
from their own side

n cases wherein the State Government had

pocket and was also spending money, the

of 1 crore houses that we took up, only
we have not been able to provide land so
0. Members mentioned, the
mple, in Tamil
et. We have approached
has written to the State
Tamil Nadu is that they
over and above their State's
oviding = 1.20 lakh under PMAY-G on
oney which is available but the land is

e been doing in

State Government’.

whether the Ministry extended help to State

\iotment to landless peneficiaries of the Scheme,

the Ministry furnished the following:-

“The beneficiaries under PI
houses are being given high
to landless beneficiaries for

UTs' responsibility, t

hey are advised/ e!

MAY-G with no land to construct their
priority under the scheme. Providing land
construction of houses being the States’ /

couraged to provide land to

avon penofigaries ५2 fom ine Cerial_aovermert_ft beneficiaries urgently. There is no dedicated financial assistance is no icated financial assista!
to_the \diess_beneficiaries from the Cent lovernment for

purchasing the land”. land”.

3.34 Asked if the Mi
land avail

inistry had

“Providing land to the lan

construction of the houses is

the scheme since they are amo!

the Permanent Wait
the year wise sub-targets
availing land to such benefi
available to the landless
under the purview of
instructed time and agai
landless beneficiaries under

States/UTs in the zona

able to landless beneficiaries of the Scheme, the Mini
reply submitted to the Committee a

List (PWL)

beneficiaries for the
State / UT
in for

| workshops, Performance Revi

issued any instructions to the States to make
stry in its written
s under:-

dless PMAY-G_ beneficiaries for the
‘one of the most important objectives of
most deserving beneficiaries in
of the scheme. Further for achieving
and cumulative targets under PMAY-G
ciaries is very crucial. Since making land
house construction is
Governments, they have been
the same. The issue of providing land to

PMAY-G is being regularly taken up with

ing the

iew Committee

34


(PRC) meetings, Empowered Committee (EC) meetings, Video
conferences, etc’.

3.35 Elaborating on the various measures undertaken by providing land to
landiess beneficiaries, the Ministry enumerated the following:-

4. Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development, vide his 0.0. dated 5th
September, 2018 addressed to the CMs of All States and
Administrator! Lt. Governor of UTs, advised them to assess the
landlessness among PMAY-G beneficiaries and expedite action
to provide them land.

2. DO letter dated 4th January, 2019 from the Additional Secretary
(Rural Housing) to the Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal
Secretary! Secretary of RD of All States/UTs for expediting action
to provide land to all the landless beneficiaries under PMAY-G.

3. Hon'ble Minister of State, Rural Development, vide DO letter
dated 16th September, 2019, addressed to Chief Ministers of all
States and Administrator! Lt. Governor of UTs, advised them to
address the issue of landless beneficiaries in their States.
Further, the example of State Government of Bihar was also
cited, which is running "Mukhymantri Awaas Sthal Kray Sahayy
Yojana" for providing financial assistance of ₹ 60,000 to the
beneficiary to buy land. All States/UTs were requested to initiate
similar schemes to provide land to landless beneficiaries at the
earliest in their States/UTs.

4. The name of the landless beneficiaries will be at the top of the list
and their can never be deleted from PWL till they got the house.”

3.36 Further on the issue, the Ministry furnished that some of the state specific
schemes for supporting the landless beneficiaries which have been shared with

other states/UTs with request to provide land to landless on priority and they are
as under:-

1, Bihar: Under Mukhymantri Awaas Sthal Kray Sahayta Yojana,
financial assistance for the site purchase of INR 60,000 is provided,

2. Maharashtra: Under Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gharkool Jaga
Kharedi Arth Sahayy Yojana, financial assistance (up to INR 50,000/-
) for the site purchase

3, Assam; Financial assistance (up to % 50,000/-) to the landless
beneficiaries

4. Odisha: Under Vasudha Scheme government land is sought for &
allotted for the house construction. If suitable government land Is not
available, the Government purchases the suitable land and makes it
available to the landless beneficiaries.

35



3.37 Inapresentation made before the Committee during oral evidence, the
Ministry provided the following information:-

LANDLESS BENEFICIARIES
STATUS AT DIFFERENT DATES

ee
दंड 1910॥833 beneficiaries ___—_—Provided lane _. Landless beneficiaries Provided land

31% March 2019 422,298 92,287 (22%)
25" June 2019 4,23,381 97,291 (23%)
19" March’2020- -4,25,008 4,46,439 (34%)
40" September 2020_4,48,053 181,319 (4100) _ September 2020 4,48,053 1,81,319 (41%

3.38 On being asked about the list of selected beneficiaries who were in the
category of ‘landless’ and also number of them who were provided land under
the Mukhya Mantri Bhumi Adhigrahan Yojana in the state of Bihar, the Ministry in
its written reply furnished as under :- :

“The status of landless beneficiaries in the PWL of PMAY-G in the
State of Bihar is as given below-

identified landles: कं et to ४
teers pie te

0,000 B82 (3.41%)

(As on 19th March 2020)

Mukhya Mantri Bhumi Adhigrahan Yojana is being implemented by
the State from its own resources. It is stated that it is the
responsibility of the State Government to provide land to landless

beneficiaries”.
Non-cooperation of the State Governments

3.39 When asked if there were any guidelines under which the Ministry could
intervene if there was non-cooperation from the State Government in
implementing the Scheme, the Ministry replied:-

36


“The DISHA Committee at the district level, headed by an Hon’ble
Member of Parliament, monitors progress and implementation of
PMAY-G also.

The performance of the States in implementation of PMAY-G are
also monitored through Performance Index Dashboard. This creates
a healthy competition among the States and districts for improving
their performance.

Additionally, National Level Monitors also visit PMAY-G houses to
assess the progress and processes followed under the scheme
during their field visits.

However, there are not such defined guidelines for the states which
are not following the PMAY-G guidelines. As per MoRD, whichever

states are following the guidelines, will be eligible for funds from the
centre’.

3.40 On being asked to cite the cases of non-cooperation from the State

Government(s) in implementing the Schemes, the Ministry in its written reply
stated as under :-

“lf the State/UT is not following the FF] of PMAY-G for
implementation of the scheme, the Ministry has the right to recover
the funds released to the State/UT. This is also incorporated in
Clause 5.5.1 of Framework for Implementation (FFI) of PMAY-G in
respect of construction under PMAY-G through Contractors and not
the beneficiaries.

The State of Telangana has not been implementing PMAY-G.
Accordingly, the Ministry has taken the step of adjusting the funds
released under PMAY-G in the next releases to be made under
MGNREGS.”

Financial assistance to beneficiaries

3.41 In a written reply to a specific query as to whether there was any proposal
to increase the amount of financial assistance provided by the Central
Government under the scheme in order to minimise the difference between the

financial assistance and actual cost of construction of a house, the Ministry
provided as below:-

“Financial assistance under PMAY-G has been increased from
70,000/- in plain areas to % 1,20,000/- and from % 75,000/- 0 हैं
1,30,000/- for Hilly States, difficult areas and IAP Districts. In

37


addition, a PMAY-G beneficiary is also provided 90/95 days of
unskilled wages in convergence with MGNREGS and हें 412,000/- for
construction of toilet from SBM-G or MGNREGS.

The cost of unit assistance is shared between Central and State
Governments in the ratio 60:40 in plain areas, 90:10 for North
Eastern, Himalayan States, UT of J&K and 100% in case of other
UTs. From the annual budgetary grant for PMAY-G, 95% of funds is
released to States/UTs for the construction of new houses under
PMAYG. This also includes 2% allocation towards Administrative
expenses. 5% of the budgetary grant is retained at the Central Level
as reserve fund for Special Projects. The annual allocation to the
states is based on the Annual Action Plan (AAP) approved by the
Empowered Committee.

However, States/UTs are allowed to top-up the financial assistance
in order to enlarge the financial pool of the beneficiary for
construction of houses. Details of the top-up provided by few
States/UTs is as under :- :

te |

= 30,000 for SC/ST
eneficiaries

700,000 (SCs), &
A '1,00,000 to 1,50,000
hea Beedest (STs) and ₹ 80,000 for
thers

- Other States like Odisha and Gujarat provide incentives to the
beneficiaries for completion of houses before time’.

3.42 Replying to the query whether there was any need to increase assistance
from the Gentral Government considering that the assistance under the scheme
was not enough for homeless to build a house even though they had sites, the
Secretary submitted:-

x there is no bar on the State Government to top up the amount, if
it wants to, over and above what the provision is. If you recall, the

38


unit cost of a house has moved from % 75,000 to  1,50,000 primarily
because at that time when we did the design typology study which |
have also shared with you, you will find that majority of the building
designs were such that the unit could be completed for  1,60,000, ₹
1,70,000, and % 1,80,000. We did look at the cost at that point of time
and also provided a window for borrowing up to 70,000 from banks.
In some States where the cost of construction has gone up
substantially, | have given the example of Tamil Nadu in that context.
Kerala is another example. Kerala has fixed the unit cost at
% 4,00,000, Our contribution is only up to what we provide. They are
providing the rest of the amount’. =

3.43 The Committee sought to know as to when the Ministry had arrived at the
cost estimate of the houses to be constructed and if there was any proposal to.
review the cost estimate owing to cost escalation. To this, the Secretary, Rural
Development who deposed before the Committee stated as under:-

"महोदय, कई माननीय सदस्यों ने कॉस्‍्ट से संबंधित मुद्दा उठाया है। कॉस्ट का
FRET एक जनरल मुदंदा है। कमेटी की पिछली बैठंक में भी इस पर चर्चा की गई
थी। हमारे मंत्रालय का यह मत है कि इसे ग्रांट के रूप में लेना चाहिए। हम लोग
इसका पूरा Hike कंपेनसेट नहीं कर रहे हैं। बेनिफिशियरी को भी कुछ sree
लगाने की जरूरत हो सकती है। आपने देखा होगा कि हमने स्कीम की जो डिज़ाइंस
दी हैं, उसमें भी महात्मा गांधी नरेगा और अन्य स्कीम्स से कंवरजेंस की बात कहीं
गई है। यह स्कीम के डिज़ाइन में ही शामिल है। इसके कॉन्सेप्ट को फिक्स्ड कॉस्ट
के रुप में रखा गया था। कुछ स्कीम्स थोड़ी ओपन एंडेड होती हैं, जैसे 'प्रधान मंत्री
ग्राम सड़क योजना' जो कि वर्ष 2000 से wer रही है। हम इसकी Hee को
निश्चित तौर पर कंपेनसेट करने की कोशिश करते हैं। मंत्रालय मैं अभी pie के
रिविज़न का कोई प्रस्ताव नहीं है। हम लोगों ने एक इवैल्यूएशन नेशनल्र इंस्टीट्यूट
ऑफ पब्लिक फाइनमैंस एंड पॉलीसी से करवाया था। यह चार-पांच वर्ष पुराना है,
लेकिन उन्होंने कहा था कि जो राशि दी जा रही है, वह घर के हिसाब से पर्याप्त है।"

3.44. When asked if the Ministry had received any suggestion to authorise
District Cooperative Banks in rural areas to provide financial assistance to the
beneficiaries of the Scheme, the Ministry furnished the following information:-

“The Ministry releases funds to States/UTs through treasury mode. It
is State discretion to select bank of their choice and open account in
any bank. The Ministry has not issued any instructions to the
States/UTs on the matter. The States/UTs are the ground level
implementing agency under PMAY-G, The assistance Is released in
form of installments to the beneficiaries through Direct Benefit
Transfer vide Funds Transfer Orders into his/her registered bank

39



account! post office account. As per Framework for Implementation
(FFI) of PMAY-G, there is no preference to any bank and also does
not bar the beneficiaries from registering their bank account
maintained with Cooperative Banks on AwaasSoft. There is no
proposal received from States/UTs for inclusion of Cooperative
Banks under PMAY-G’.

BANK LOAN FACILITY TO BENEFICIARIES BENEFICIARIES

3.45 On the issue of the provisions for Bank loan facilities to the
beneficiaries of rural areas for construction of house above the prescribed
amount of % 1,20,000/- under the Scheme, the Secretary of Rural Development
deposing before the Committee submitted :-

“माननीय सांसद ने बहुत महत्वपूर्ण विषय रखा है। जब योजना अनुमोदित की गई
शी तो 70 हजार रुपये तक लोन लेने की व्यवस्था भी इसमें की गई थी। लेकिन कई
जगहों पर इसको औपचारिक रूप से चालू करने में बैंकों के स्तर पर उस गति से
आगे नहीं बढ़ाया गया, जिसके चलते कई बार जो परिवार घर बनाते हैं, वह
इनफॉर्मल लोन लेते हैं। फॉर्मल इंस्टीट्यूशन का लोन सस्ता मिलेगा, इसको हम
लोग बैंको के साथ पुश कर रहे हैं। हम लोगों की कोशिश होगी कि इसको हम और
सुविधाजनक बना सकें, तांकि घर के अलावा जो और बड़ा घर बनाना चाहते हैं तो
बैंक का लोन भी साथ में हो जाए। कुछ जगहों पर राज्य रुतर पर जहाँ फॉलो-अप
अच्छा है, कई जगहों पर लोन दिलाया है, लेकिन लार्ज स्केल पर यह नहीं हो पाया
है। हम इसका प्रयास करेंगे।” ,

3,46 About the efforts made by the Ministry to make available the bank loan
facllity to the beneficiaries of the Scheme, the Ministry in its written reply stated:-

“Under PMAY-G financial assistance is provided directly to the
beneficiaries for construction of house. Further under the scheme
provision, if the beneficiary so chooses, he/she will be facilitated to
avail loan of upto % 70,000 from Financial Institutions.

Further, the Ministry has taken up the matter of developing rural
housing loan product for Rural Housing sector in consultation with
Indian Bank Association and Department of Financial Services’.

Earlier we had four per cent management cost. Even now also, we
have the same management cost. Many States have recruited junior
engineers for the supervision. Some States have also enrolled for the

40


MGNREGS junior technical assistant posts for the supervision of
houses. These are some of the basic things.

| wanted to mention that your last point is also absolutely valid.
Families will keep becoming nuclear families as children will grow up
and they will set up new homes. The Socio-economic census was
done in 2011-12. Since then, this point was raised. That is why, a lot
of additions will be there in the next generation only.

But having said that, the time has to be drawn for saying that for a
family, we will provide assistance for one generation or for two
generations. In a manner, this awaas soft plus exercise is carried out
to close this chapter. We have held a number of meetings with IBA.
We are trying to develop and provide some good loan products
because the rural housing is also a priority sector lending. If we can
have programmes so that subsequent generations, when they grow
up and separate, can go for bank loan rather than for a total subsidy
scheme from the Government.”

RURAL MASON TRAINING

3.47 During the course of examination, the Committee wanted to know whether
any facility was available for providing construction related technical knowledge
to the beneficiaries at the time of construction of houses under the scheme. To :
this, the Ministry submitted as under:-
“In the para 6.2.2.1 of Framework for implementation of PMAY-G
(FFI of PMAY-G), the States/ UTs have been advised to provide the

beneficiaries a bouquet of options of house designs according to

local conditions, using appropriate technology suitable to the region
of their residence.

In the para 6.2.2.3. of FFI of PMAY-G the States have been advised
that, along with the sanction order, the beneficiary should be
provided a menu of options of the identified house designs and
technologies which include the following details:

« The plan, layout and detailed cost estimates of the house designs.

+ The quantity of materials required and the tentative cost of construction for
different levels viz. foundation, lintel level, roof etc., for each identified
house design.

+ Provide list of the trained masons and their contact details.

+ Intimate the location of demonstration houses of different house design

typologies constructed, so that the beneficiary can have a walk-through
experience.

41


+ Contact details of all the material suppliers in the vicinity who deal with
specific requirements of the house design type.” ;
3.48 The details regarding house completion against the targets set, compiled
State-wise and Year wise, is at Annexure V.

3.49 On the various issues like management of expenditure on Rural Mason
Training, details of the amount allocated and spent for the training, agencies
authorized to procure material and impart this training, location, system of skill
certification and other relevant details, the Ministry of Rural Development in its
written reply made the following submission'-

“Rural Mason Training is supported through Admin Funds. Out of the

total admin funds which is 2% of the overall budget for the year 2019-

20, 1.7% is transferred to the States and remaining 0.3% retained at the

Centre. 20% of Admin Funds transferred to the State are allocated for

Rural Mason Training. Payment to Training provides on-boarded by the

States is as per common norms, i.e. INR 46.7per hour for the present
- year”.

3.50 On further query regarding the sufficiency of 50621 masons to construct

the number of houses required’ to be constructed under the PMAY-G, the
Ministry submitted:-

“Training & Certification of Rural Masons under the Rural Mason
Training of PMAY-G is an ongoing process.

As on 18.8.2020, a total of 1,53,868 candidates have enrolled under
RMT, out of which 1,07,533 have been assessed and 77,870
candidates have passed and certified”.

3,51 In reply to a specific query as to whether the Ministry has any proposal to
link Mason Training under the Scheme with Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas
Yojana (PMKVY) so that they would be awarded certificate in respect of the
training undergone, the Ministry in its written reply provided the following
information :-

“The Rural Mason Training program under PMAY-G is being
implemented with the support of National Skill Development
Corporation (४500) and Construction Skill Development Council of
India (CSDCI). The training is imparted based on the qualification pack
developed by the CSDCI and approved by the Qualifications
Registration Committee (QRC) at NSDC. Post-training, candidate on

42



passing in the assessment carried out by the assessment agencies
affiliated to CSDCI are being awarded with the certificate by the
NSDC.

However, currently no proposal is under consideration for linking of
RMT Programme with Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikyas Yojana
(PMKVY)"
3.52 Replying to a query with regard to certification of the process adopted by
the Construction Sector Skill Council and the extent of particication of the
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship, of which the Construction
Sector Skill Council is a body, the Ministry of Rural Development furnished the
following :~

“Rural Mason Training under PMAY-G is being imparted as per the
Qualification Pack (QP) for ‘Rural mason job role(QP -
CON/Q3603)' which is as level -4 in the National Skill Qualification
Framework.

The training is being imparted by the Training Providers (TP) affiliated
to Construction Skill Development Council of india (CSDCI) who are
on board by the States/ UTs for the purpose. Further, the assessment
of the trained candidates is being done by the third-party assessors
affiliated with 05001, The candidate passed in the assessment would
be then certified as ‘Rural Mason’ by the Construction Skill
Development Council of India (CSDCI),

In order to bring about uniformity and standardization in the
implementation of various Skill Development Schemes by different
Central Ministries / Departments, the Government of India has
approved constitution of a Common Norm Committee under the
chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship as the apex body to update and suitably revise the
Common Norms. The CSDCI is required to carry out the trainings
within the purview of ‘common norms”

3.53 Regarding the rate revision of the training centres under Deen Dayal
Upadhyaya -Gramin Kaushal Yojna (DDU-GKY), the Secretary of Rural
Development who deposed before the Committee stated as under :- ‘

"मैं आपको इससे अवगत कराना चाहता हूं कि डीडीयू-जीकेवाई में ट्रेनिंग प्रोवाइडर्स
को जो पेमेंट किया जाता है, उसका मिनिस्ट्री ऑफ स्किल डेवलपमेंट एंड
एंटरप्रेल्योरशिप की कॉमन कॉस्ट नॉर्म कमेटी द्वारा निर्धारित होते हैं। हमने उनकी
इस बात को रेफरेंस किया है, क्योंकि Seer मिनिस्ट्री ने जो गाइडलाइंस निकाली हैं,
उनके आधार पर अभी के जो हैं, वे थोड़े अव्यवहारिक हो गए हैं, लेकिन यह हमारे
मंत्रालय के अधिकार क्षेत्र में नहीं है, इसलिए हमने उनको रेफर किया है। जहां तक

43


मुझे जानकारी है, उन्होंने ऐसा कोई परिवर्तन करने के इंकार किया है। हम उनके
साथ इस मैटर को परस्यू कर रहे हैं। “


Chapter IV

PERFORMANCE OF PRADHAN MANTRI GRAMIN AWAAS
YOJNA

Physical Targets Set and Achievements Made Made

The Ministry of Rural Development provided the following information with
regard to the achievement of targets (both physical and financial) during the last
five years;

Physical Targets:

hysical

Target |P’

18,22,289 (IA’
Houses)

42,82,454 32,14,495*
32,33,800 44,54,493
25, 14,646) 47,33,445

60,00,00 21,91,804*|

* includes completed PMAY-G and IAY houses of current and
previous years as per AwaasSoft on 06.08.2020. _ ‘

4.2 Responding to a query as to whether the houses constructed under Indira
Awaas Yojana (IAY) were also accounted for in the Targets set and Targets
achieved under Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana, the Ministry submitted as
under :-

“Under PMAY-G, as per the approval of the Union Cabinet, the

beneficiaries are identified based on housing deprivation
parameters prescribed under Socio-Economic Caste Census

45


43

(SECC) 2011 subject to due verification by Gram Sabha and
Completion of Appellate Process. The target set under PMAY-G is
based only as per SECC selection criteria, the target does not
include the pending IAY houses,

However, the year wise progress of construction of JAY and PMAY-
G houses are reported separately and cumulatively on AwaasSoft.”

To another query as to whether the physical targets set for the

construction of houses under Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana had been
achieved during the years 2016-17, 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20, the Ministry
in its written reply has provided the following information :-

=
eS

4.5

“After launch of the scheme in the year 2016 on November 20,
preliminary implementation framework regarding preparation of
Permanent Wait List, registration of eligible beneficiaries on MIS,
geo-tagging of existing sites and account verification was formalized
and activities started at the ground level. The construction began
primarily from the financial year 2017-18. With the efforts of the
States/UTs in maintaining consistent pace of house completion, the
Ministry could achieve record completion of 1 crore houses on 23rd
March 2020."

The following reasons were attriouted for delayed achievement |

Landlessness among beneficiaries and responsibility of providing land
to the landless resting with the State Governments.

Delay in sanction by State.

Unwillingness of some beneficiaries to construct the houses
Migration of the beneficiaries, both temporary and permanent
Imposition of Model Codes of Conduct during various elections in the
intervening periods

Rains and floods

Delay in release of State's share by the State Govt.

Non availability of construction material, especially sand

. Death of beneficiaries

10. Land dispute

11. Disruption on account of Covid pandemic

©@NH GROWN

Detailing the measures taken by the Ministry and the strategy evolved to

accomplish the pending targets, the following were submitted :

i. Push for 100 percent sanction of targets.

ii. Initiatives taken towards completion of delayed houses are
as follows:.



ill,

vi.

vil,

vill.

State-wise analysis of delayed houses and regular
follow-up,

Regular alerts through emails and SMSs to all levels
In the State Govt on delayed houses

Allowing completion of delayed houses upto
September, 2020,

Negative marking in Performance Index for those
houses which are delayed beyond 12 months time

Ministry is continuously reviewing the issue of
landlessness and requesting States /UTs to accord top
Priority and allocate land to landless beneficiaries. The
matter has been taken up at highest level in the States/
UTs. Hon'ble Minister, RD also reviewed this issue
through VC meetings with State/UT RD Ministers held
in the month of May, 2020. Continuous persuasion has
led to State specific schemes to Provide land to the
landless, e.g. in Bihar, Assam, Maharashtra ete,

With respect to migration / deathy unwilling beneficiaries
the Ministry has issued guidelines, in consultation with
States / UTs, for necessary action.

The Hon'ble MRD has requested Hon'ble Chief Ministers
of States and LG/Adnamnistrators to review the progress
of PMAY-G at their level.

Review of progress through monthly VC at the level of
Secretary / Additional Secretary/Deputy DG, Ministry of
Rural Development.

To ensure faster completion of houses, States/ UTs
have been requested to do the following:-

Focus on completion of those houses where 2nd or
3rd instalment of funds has been Teleased to’
beneficiaries.

Prepare a month-wise target for completion of houses
for monitoring and convey the same to MoRD

Review the low performing districts separately.

Separate review of States /UTs with high target, poor
performing States/UTs and delayed houses in States/
UTs.

Timely availability and release of funds to the States /
UTs

a7


ra Bringing on board Associations of construction material
manufacturers / suppliers to ensure sustained
availability of the same.”

4.6 Submitting the roadmap for completion which included setting up of interim

deadlines to accelerate the overall pace of completion, the Ministry stated as
follows:~

« Sanction of all targeted houses of FY 2020-21 by 31st
October 2020

« Allocation of targets for FY 2021-22 from PWL and AweasPlus
by 31st October 2020

* Completion of remaining houses of Phase-| and ॥ by 31st
March 2021."

47 Efforts undertaken by the Ministry during COVID and response mounted

for addressing rural distress through various advisories issued/ VC meeting, are
as follows:

1, Advisories by MoRD to the States/UTs to take up PMAY-G
works with strict adherence to social distancing and
compulsory wearing of face mask/ protective face cover :

2. Focus on completion of those PMAY-G houses where the
beneficiaries have received 2nd and 3rd instalment which are
released directly from States/UTs to the beneficiaries

3. Engaging workers, not exceeding 2-3 workers excluding the
beneficiary in house construction activity except at roof casting
stage t

4. Maximum sanctions to beneficiaries to be issued against the
2020-21 targets.

5.  Sensitizing the field level authorities to imperatives of
maintaining social distancing, mandatory use of face mask,
including home-made protective face covers and repeated
washing of hands with soap and water. है

6. Advisories for completion of houses, which were incomplete
due to temporary migration of the beneficiaries, as many such
beneficiaries returned to their respective villages owing to
COVID crisis.

7. Rural Mason Training especially through Recognition of Prior
Learning (RPL) mode”.

48



4.8

4.9

Detailing status of activities under PMAY-G during the ongoing pandemic,
the Ministry submitted as under :-

“However, due to outbreak of COVID-19 and subsequent nation-
wise lockdown, the progress of house completion was affected.
Being cognizant of the ground situation, the Ministry took necessary
steps to ensure completion and uploading of houses on AwaasSoft
while maintaining social distancing, wearing of masks and taking
suitable precautions. Henceforth, the completion activity picked up
gradually. Now, with the set momentum and efforts of the
States/UTs, the Ministry of Rural Development is confident that the
target of construction of 2.95 crore houses under PMAY-G .by
March 2022 will be achieved".

On being asked about the bifurcation of PMAY-G and IAY in the Physical
Achievement in the year 2019-20 and first 08 months of the year 2020-21,
Ministry replied as under :-

“The target for FY 2020-21 is 70,00,000 houses under PMAY-G out
of which a target of 61,50,000 houses has been allocated to the
States/UTs till date, Due to outbreak of COVID-19 and subsequent
nation-wise lockdown, the progress of house completion was
affected bringing down the per day rate of house completion. On
account of manifold steps taken by the Ministry, the completion
activity picked up gradually.

Now, with the set momentum and efforts of the States/UTs, -the
Ministry of Rural Development is confident that the target of
construction of 2.95 crore houses under PMAY-G by 2022 will be
achieved."

the

४2

4.10 Physical break up of PMAY-G and IAY houses for FY 2019-20 and 2020-
21 is as under:

4.11

As per AwaasSoft on 10.9.2020

While replying to a query as to whether there was any coordination
Meeting held between Centre and States to resolve the issues relating to the

49


implementation of this Scheme, the Secretary of Rural Development who
deposed before the Committee stated as under :-

“So, my submission is that with all the State Governments, we have
been trying to build a partnership. Our teams visit the States for field
verification and validation. We also hold quarterly Performance
Review Committee Meetings. Every morning, | can see how many
houses have been completed, and for how long they are pending. So
based on the progress, periodically, almost every week, | speak to
every Chief Secretary that your State is lagging behind, and you
should speed up. When you visit our site, PMAY - Gramin, you will
find the Performance Index there. The States also know it. Nobody
wants to slip in the Performance Index. The States which are doing
well and are at the top — | have mentioned some of those States —
they are very keen to remain at the top. They keep following up. But
from a few States, we are trying to seek their cooperation’.

MONITORING MECHANISM MECHANISM

4.12 Responding to the queries with respect to the monitoring mechanisms that
were there to ensure that the funds provided to the beneficiary for purchase of

land were actually spent for that purpose, the Ministry of Rural Development in
its written reply submitted as under :-

“As providing land to landless beneficiaries for construction of
houses is the responsibility of the States’ / UTs’, there is no
separate monitoring system set by the Ministry to ensure that funds
are being utilized for the said purpose. However, the Ministry -
advises the States/UTs from time to time to provide land to landless
beneficiaries”.

4.13 Ona query regarding registering Social Self Help Groups for extending
social audit to this housing Scheme, the Secretary deposed as under :-

“Sir, thank you for suggestions. In fact, our focus has been on the
poorer women and the deprived households. They must get a

community voice. So, your suggestion is also extremely useful for
us.”

4.14 Detailing the policy of monitoring with respect to the quality of
construction of houses under PMAY-G and whether the quality of construction

50



could be checked through AwaasSoft or AwaasApp, the Ministry stated as
under:-

“Steps taken by the Ministry to augment quality construction of the
houses under the scheme

i. As per Framework for implementation of the scheme, the States /
UTs to include Technical Expert in the field of house construction
including alternate technologies in the Project Management Units
(PMUs) at the State & District level.

ii. To avail the skilled workforce for the construction of quality houses,
the Ministry has launched the RMT program under PMAY-G in
partnership with the Construction Skill Development Council of India
(CSDC!) and National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC), As on
47.11.2020, a total of 1,69,647 candidates have enrolled under RMT,
out of which 1,29,072 have been assessed and 92,299 candidates
have passed and certified.

iii, MoRD with the help of IIT-Delhi, United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and CSIR-Central Building Research Institute
(CSIR-CBRI) had undertaken state-specific studies in 18 states out of
which for 15 States it was completed and for the same 15 State
house designs were developed, validated and incorporated in the
PAHAL for the development of house design typologies appropriate
to local geo-climatic and cultural context with disaster-resillent
feature. As an outcome of the study, MoRD has published a
compendium of region-specific house designs with the name ‘Pahal’
which includes 108 house designs for 64 housing zones in 15
States.

iv. States are being encouraged to construct demonstration houses on
region-specific house design typologies for PMAY-G beneficiaries to
visit, experience and opt for. The guidelines. for the same has been
issued by the MoRD.

v. Houses constructed under PMAY-G are being geotagged at different
stages of construction, which has been further linked with the release
of subsequent installments of financial assistance. This supports
evidence-based monitoring of the houses being constructed,

vi. The quality of the houses being reviewed to some extent using these
captured geotagged photographs in the AwaasSoft through

.  AwaasApp.

vii, A meeting was organized with building materials manufacturers and
suppliers’ associations to augment the sustained availability of good
quality construction materials under PMAY-G.

vii. A day-long consultation workshop with leading academic institutes of
Architecture, Engineering and Rural Development and state/ UT
government was convened by the MoRD, Avenues for collaboration
with the academic institutes in the implementation of PMAY-G and
quality construction of houses were explored in the consultation. As
an outcome of the consultation MoRD issued guidelines for the
collaboration among the academic/ technical institutes and State’

51



government for effective implementation of the PMAY-G for adoption
by the States/ UTs.

ix. The IT-based portal Rural Housing Knowledge Network (RHKN) for
comprehensive knowledge on house design typologies, construction
technologies, costing & resources is being developed by the MoRD,
National Institute of Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (NIRD-PR),
\IT Delhi and NIC have been on-boarded for the same.

x. The quality construction of the houses under PMAY-G is also being
reviewed through field visits by the CRM team, officials from the
DoRD, etc”.

Supervision and Quality Control Mechanism

4.15 When asked about the supervisory authority that was bestowed to
supervise the quality of house at the time of construction, the Secretary of
Ministry of Rural Development stated as under :-

“इसी के लिए राज्य सरकारों ने अलग-अल्रग तरीके से फेसिल्रिटेट किया है, जैसे -
ओडिशा में घर रजिस्ट्रेशन होने के बाद उसे बताया जाता है कि बात्रू, सीमेंट और
स्टील कहां से और किस रेट में मिल्रेगा ताकि वह सही खरीदी कर सके। दूसरा,
मिस्त्री की ट्रेनिंग है। हम मिस्त्री की ट्रेनिंग भी ट्रैक करते हैं। हमने आवास सहायक
बनाए हैं और उनको रिसोर्सैंस भी दिए हैं ताकि वे सपोर्ट कर सकें।*

4.16 In the information furnished by the Ministry it was stated that officers at
the Block level and District level are to inspect only 10% and 2% of the houses
respectively at each stage of construction. The Committee sought to know how
the quality supervision of other houses was ensured, Further, the Committee
also wanted to know how the material procured/used by the beneficiary was of
standard quality, the construction conformed to the House Design Typologies
developed for the scheme and how the village level functionaries to whom
houses sanctioned under PMAY-G were tagged and facilitated construction was
in @ fair and proper manner. Clarifying these issues in its written reply, the
Ministry of Rural Development furnished as under :-

“

. To avail the skilled work force for the construction of houses,
DoRD has launched Rural Mason Training (RMT) Program
under PMAY-G. As on 25" October 2019, 50,621 masons
have been trained and Certified.

52


Houses constructed under PMAY-G are being geo-tagged at
different stages of construction, which has been further linked
with release of subsequent installments of financial assistance,
This supports evidence-based monitoring.

MoRD with the help of NIC has developed a “House quality
review application” in AwaasSoft to review quality of the
houses using captured geotagged photographs at the
completed stage, On request from some of the States the
provision is also being given to States for use.

Consultation for collaboration- A day long consultation
workshop with leading academic institutes of Architecture,
Engineering and Rural Development was organized in the
presence of Minister Rural Development in the month of
January 2018. Avenues for collaboration with the academic
institutes in the implementation of PMAY-G and quality
construction of houses were explored during the consultation.
On the same-lines draft guidelines for collaboration with
technical/ academic institutes have been prepared and shared
with all the States/ UTs for their inputs, :

Draft guidelines for construction of demonstration houses on
region specific house design typologies for inputs/ suggestions
have been shared with the States / UT.

The IT based portal Rural Housing Knowledge Network
(RHKN) for Comprehensive knowledge on construction
technologies, costing & resources is being revamped. National
Institute of Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (NIRD-PR)
and NIC have been on-boarded for the same.

The quality construction of the houses under PMAY-G is also
being reviewed through field visits by the CRM team, officials
from the DoRD, ete. :

MoRD, with the help of IIT-Delhi, United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and CSIR-Central Bullding Research |
Institute (CSIR-CBRI) had undertaken state-specific studies in
18 states for the development of house design typologies
appropriate to local geo-climatic and cultural context. As an
outcome of the study, MoRD has published a compendium of
region-specific house designs under the name ‘Pahal’ which
includes 108 house designs for 64 housing zones in 15 States.
MoRD in collaboration with Global Green Growth Institute
(GGGI) and United States Agency for international
Development (USAID) is in the process of developing a
framework for greening the houses under PMAY-G.

The workshop was organized with building materials
manufacturers and suppliers’ association to augment
sustained availability of good quality construction materials
under PMAY-G,

Proposal of demo-house construction by CBRI in the States of
Assam and Uttar Pradesh is under consideration at the
Ministry.”

53


4.17 To the query, if the scheme provided for social or third party audit it was
replied as follows:

“The Framework For Implementation of PMAY-G provides for
conducting of Social Audits as per para 9.6. As per the FFI of PMAY-
G the Social Audit Units set up under MGNREGA are to be roped in
to facilitate conduct of Social Audit of PMAY-G as well. Resource
persons identified by the SAU at different levels may be involved with
the Gram Sabha in conducting Social Audit.

National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj
(NIRD&PR) is involved for facilitation of training of resource persons
and auditors for conducting Social / Internal Audits.

As per para 9.5 of the Framework For Implementation of PMAY-G

"The State will ensure that the account of PMAY-G at the State level
and the administrative fund account at the district level is audited by a

_ Chartered Accountant selected from a panel approved by the CA&G.
The auditing should be completed before 31° August of the next
financial year. All the PMAY-G Accounts at all the levels shall also be
open to audit by CA&G as well as by the Internal Audit Wing of the
Pay and Accounts office of the Ministry of Rural Development’.

4.18 The Committee enquired about providing technical knowledge at the time
of construction of the house by the beneficiaries and were of the view that if
technical knowledge was provided to the beneficiaries, there would be no
problem to the next generation of the beneficiaries to construct one more storey
to the house. The Secretary put forth his submissions as:-

“सर, जैसा कि आपने महाराष्ट्र के बारे में बताया है। महाराष्ट्र में भी हाउसिंग के
. सात से आठ अलग-अलग प्रोग्राम्स चल रहे Sl ट्राइबल्स के अलग हैं। #० the
technical supervision, Sree स्पेसिफिक हाउसेज की जूनियर इंजीनियर्स को
रिस्पोंसिबिलिटी दी है। ६800 we had four per cent management cost.
Even now also, we have the 2% management cost. Many States
have recruited junior engineers for the supervision, Some States

have also enrolled for the MGNREGS Junior technical assistant posts
for the supervision of houses. These are some of the basic things.

| wanted to mention that your last point is also absolutely valid.
Families will keep becoming nuclear families as children will grow up
and they will set up new homes. The Socio-economic caste census
was done in 2011-12, Since then, this point was raised. That Is why,
a lot of additions will be there in the next generation only.

54



But having said that, the time has to be drawn for saying that for a
family, we will provide assistance for one generation or for two
generations".

4.19 During the cross examination of the representatives of the Ministry of
Rural Development, the Committee enquired about the monitoring through
AwaasSoft and AwaasApp by geo-tagging of houses, working of AwaasApp
where there was poor internet connectivity, policy for implementation of provision
for monitoring of stages of construction and quality of construction as has been
done in the case of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana. In response, the

Secretary of Rural Development who deposed before the Committee stated as
under :-

“आवास ऐप पुअर इंटरनेट कनेक्टिविटी वाले स्थानों पर ऑफलाइन मोड में
काम करता है। जैसे ही यह गुड इंटरनेट कनेक्टिविटी वाले ज़ोन में आता है, तो
बहाँ से अपल्रोड कर दिया जाता है।

महोदय, इस कार्यक्रम की अवधारणा थोड़ी अलग है। इसके कॉन्सेप्ट के अनुसार
बेनिफिशियरी इसे अपना घर समझकर बनाएगा। अगर सरकार फंडिंग नहीं
करती है, तो वह उसे अपने डिज़ाइन, टेस्ट, एस्थेटिक के हिसाब से ढालने की
कोशिश करेगा। हम शायद इसे अच्छी तरह से नहीं दिखा पा रहे हैं, लेकिन
आपको यह जानकार बहुत खुशी होगी कि लोगों ने बहुत ही अच्छे डिज़ाइंस बनाए
हैं, जिन्हें देखकर यह सोचने पर बाध्य होना पड़ता है कि लोग इतनी राशि में भी
इलने बढ़िया घर कैसे बना रहे हैं। हम जिन लोगों को समाज के निचले स्तर पर
समझते हैं और हमें लगता है कि वे अच्छा घर नहीं बना पाएंगे, तो यह हमारी
धारणा को गल्नत साबित करता है। ये घर एस्थेटिक के हिसाब से और क्वॉलिटी
के हिसाब से भी सर्वोत्कृष्ट हैं। हमें लगता है कि इस कार्यक्रम के इम्प्लीमेंटेशन
और डिज़ाइन में कोई परिवर्तन की आवश्यकता बेनिफिशियरी को छोड़ कर नहीं
होनी चाहिए। हम देखते हैं कि 'इंदिरा आवास योजना' की मुख्यतः कमी यह थी
कि हम उसमें कॉन्ट्रैक्टर के माध्यम से निर्माण करवाते थे और उसकी क्वॉलिटी
उतनी अच्छी नहीं होती थी, जितनी अच्छी क्वॉलिटी अभी बेनिफिशियरी के
दवारा निर्मित घरों की है। किसी राज्य की परिस्थिति भिन्न-भिन्न हो सकती है
और हम उसे स्पेसिफिकली एग्ज़ामिन कर सकते हैं।"

55


MONITORING BY THE DISHA COMMITTEE

4.20 When asked whether the Ministry had held any common meetings of the
representatives of the Centre and States to assess the performance under the
Scheme and what was the outcome of such common meetings, the Ministry
made the following written submission:- i

4.21

“The States/UTs has set up a dedicated Programme Management Unit
(PMU) to undertake the tasks of implementation, monitoring and
supervision of quality of construction at State / District / Block and
Panchayat Level. The State PMU is headed by the State Nodal Officer
and other personnel may be availed through deputation from line
departments and by hiring of personnel on contract basis. Similar
provisions are there for the District and Block level PMU. Additionally,
the following provisions for monitoring are in place —

All data regarding beneficiaries, progress of construction and release
of funds, including photographs and inspection reports are placed on
AwaasSoft and form the basis for follow up on both the financial and
physical progress of the scheme.

The physical progress in construction is monitored through the
photographs to be uploaded at every stage of construction. The State
Government to use the AwaasApp for uploading the Geo-tagged
photographs. A photograph is uploaded on completion of construction
of the house. :

Common Review Mission, National level Monitors and Area Officers of
the Ministry also visit PMAY-G houses during the field visits, to the
extent possible to assess the progress, procedure followed for
selection of beneficiaries ete.,

The Project Management Unit (PMU) at the State level undertakes the
tasks of implementation, monitoring and quality supervision. Every

. house sanctioned under PMAY-G Is 3180 tagged to a village level

functionary (Gram Rozgar Sahayak or any other village level worker)
whose task is to follow-up with the beneficiary and facilitate
construction.

The PMAY-G guidelines aiso have the provision for a formal Sacial
Audit to be conducted in every Gram Panchayat at least once in a
year, involving a mandatory review of all aspects.”

When asked to elaborate on the coordination and monitoring of the

DISHA Committee meetings and the steps taken by the Ministry to Hold

frequent/regular meetings of DISHA Committee, the Ministry submitted:-

“A large number of significant and ambitious programmes have
been rolled out by the Government of India which has a potential of
delivering developmental impact at the grassroots level and

56



4.22

therefore, it is imperative that for ensuring convergence of these
programmes a holistic mechanism has to be put in place for
ensuring effective monitoring of these programmes. Accordingly, a
two tier DISHA Monitoring system has been evolved for monitoring
of key projects/programmes by the elected members. First tier is
operational at District Level under the Chairmanship of Members of
Parliament, Second tier works under the Chairmanship of
respective Chief Minister/Administrator to resolve issues of
important and emergent nature related to implementation of
development schemes cf Government remaining unattended, for
want of the apex level coordination. These committees could
monitor the implementation of the programme in accordance with
Prescribed procedures and guidelines and promote synergy and
convergence for greater impact of programmes.

DISHA Guidelines provides that meetings of District Level DISHA
Committees should be held at least once in every quarter. The
Ministry of Rural Development is vigorously pursuing with State
Governments for holding DISHA meetings as stipulated in the
Guidelines. Special Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development vide
letter No. H-11013/02/2017 -DISHA dated 3rd March 2020
addressed to Chief Secretaries of States requested them to ensure
that DISHA meetings are held as per Guidelines. Further, Ministry
vide its letter dated 9th July 2020 advised States to conduct DISHA
Committee meetings through online mode”.

The Committee wanted to know whether the Ministry appointed
representatives of the Centre to participate in DISHA Committee meetings. To.

this pointed query, the reply of the Ministry was :-

“As per State Level DISHA Committee Guidelines, one
Tepresentative of Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) namely
Area officer for the respective States/UTs of the Ministry of Rural
Development has been a member of the Committee. For District
Level DISHA Committee, if need arises, representative of Ministry

of Rural Development participate in the DISHA Committee
meetings".

4.23. On being asked to furnish the details of sittings (i.e. DISHA Committee
meetings or other meetings) convened by the States during last 5 years either on
the subject 'Review of performance of PMAY-G' or this subject taken up with
other subjects and such sittings which have been headed by the Chief Minister of
States concerned, the Ministry of Rural Development furnished as under :-

57



"District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committees
(DISHA) were formed by the Ministry of Rural Development in June,
2016 under the chairmanship of concerned Members of Parliament
with a view to fulfill the objective of better coordination among elected
representatives in monitoring the progress of major projects aimed at
socio-economic transformation at the district level including PMAY-G.
Such Committees, constituted in 698 Districts of the country, have
convened 3103 meetings since 2016. Further, the State Level
DISHA Committees headed by Chief Ministers/Administrators have
also been formed w.e.f. 31% May 2018 with the objective of monitoring
the implementation of Government of India schemes and resolving the
issues of emergent nature at the apex level in the States/UTs. As per
the information available with this Ministry, rural development
schemes, including PMAY-G, have been part of agenda of the State
Level DISHA Committee meetings held on 21st December 2018 in
Tripura and 12th October 2020 in Uttarakhand under the
Chairmanship of respective Chief Ministers.

4.24 During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee sought to
know if there was any alternative to DISHA Committee in cases wherein if the
States showed their reluctance to hold or discuss the implementation of the
various schemes introduced by Government of India. Further the Committee
wanted to know if there could be any alternative in this regard. To this, the
Ministry submitted as under:-

“DISHA is a unique intervention and its meetings and provide a
platform where issues of high importance and urgent matters in
implementation of developmental schemes can be discussed and 8
robust review mechanism can be developed with the participation of
_ all stake holders of the society including elected representatives.
DISHA is an effort to improve development coordination and
monitoring within the Constitutional framework of responsibilities
‘assigned to Central, State and Local Governments. As stated
above, more than 3100 meetings of District Level DISHA
Committees have been reported by States since their formation in
the year 2016. So far as State Level DISHA Committees have
been formed in June 2018 only and it will take some more time to
strengthen this system. Ministry of Rural Development is vigorously
pursuing with State Governments for holding DISHA Committee
meetings as per DISHA Guidelines’.

4.25 On being asked if the Ministry felt there was a need for involving the

Members of Parliament in the DISHA Committee Meetings, the Ministry has been
made the following submissions:-

58


“DISHA is a two-tier Monitoring System evolved for monitoring of
key projects/programmes by the elected members. First tier is
Operational in 698 districts, under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble
Members of Parliament representing the District and Second tier i.e,
State Level works under the Chairmanship of respective Chief
Ministers. As per State Level DISHA Committee guidelines, Hon'ble
Members of Parliament shall be nominated by Ministry of Rural
Development in State Level DISHA Committee and a proposal for
criteria for nomination of Hon'ble MP to the State Level DISHA
Committee has been concurred by the Ministry of Parliamentary

Affairs and the Ministry would be making nominations of Hon'ble
MPs shortly”.

4.26 To another query as to whether the Ministry had received any
Suggestion(s) to make the vetting of the list of beneficiaries by DISHA Committee
compulsory, the Ministry has categorically stated as under,

“Ministry has not received any suggestlon(s) to make compulsory
the vetting of list of beneficiaries under PMAY-G by DISHA
Committee. It may be noted that the list generated from the SECC
was vetted by the Gram Sabha and further grievances against the
decisions of the Gram Sabha were subject to consideration by the Pe
Appellate Committee.” 3

4.27 Dwelling on the subject further, the Committee wanted to know whether
the Ministry had made the holding of DISHA Committee meetings mandatory:
Further, information was also sought as to whether any instructions were issued
to the Chief Ministers of the States by the Ministry in this regard, Furnishing
replies to these queries, the Ministry of Rural Development submitted:-

“The Para 6 of State Level DISHA Committee Guidelines provides
that meetings of DISHA Committee should be held at least once
in every six months. Similarly Para 6 of District Level DISHA
Committee Guidelines provides that meetings of DISHA should be *
held at least once in every quarter. Hon'ble MRD has drawn
attention of Chief Ministers of State towards this provision vide his
0.0. Letters No. Q-13016/02/2018-DISHA, dated 31% May, 2018
and 0.0. Letter No. Q-13016/01/2017-(pt), dated 4" June, 2020 to
Chief Ministers of States requested them to convene mestings of
State Leve| DISHA Commitee as per Guidelines”,

4.28 Asked if the Ministry had received any complaints against any of the

States for not conducting meeting of DISHA Committee, the Ministry stated as
under:

59



4.29

* Ministry has received complaint about non-convening of DISHA
Committee meetings by Districts/States in Tamil Nadu, Bihar,
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Karnataka and the matter was
taken up with State Governments to hold meeting as per the
Guidelines’.

Regarding the action taken by the Ministry against those States which had

not adhered to the instructions issued by the Ministry, it was submitted that:-

*Their attention has also been drawn towards the provision
contained in Para 8 of DISHA Guidelines that regularity of the
DISHA meetings and follow up on its decisions will be regularly
monitored at the time of making releases to States under Central
and Centrally Sponsored programmes.”

4.30 Toa query as to whether the Ministry was going to initiate a proposal to
make changes in the composition of the DISHA Committee in view of the
reluctancy of the States to held DISHA meetings, the Ministry of Rural
Development replied as under :-

4.31

“More than 3100 meetings have been reported by States since their
formation in the year 2016. Ministry is vigorously pursuing with
States to conduct District and State Level DISHA Committees as
prescribed in the Guidelines. IT initiative such as DISHA Dashboard
and Meeting Management Software have also been taken by the

. Ministry to encourage States to hold regular meetings of DISHA

Committees. It is anticipated that these interventions combined with
consistent persuasions will certainly help in sensitizing the District
authorities to convene DISHA Committee meetings
regularly. Ministry as per vision of formation of DISHA Committee
ie. Development with Coordination is pursuing with the States for
regularly holding of DISHA Committee meetings. Besides, various
initiatives i.e. nomination of nodal officer, permission to hold DISHA
Committee meetings through audio-video mode being taken to
make DISHA Committees more effective and result oriented”

On being asked as to when the provision of conducting DISHA

Committee Meetings under the Chairmanship of Rural Development Minister of
State Governments was introduced; the number of DISHA Committee Meetings
been conducted under the Chairmanship of Rural Development Ministers of
State Governments during the last 5 years; and. if any lists were maintained with


respect to. DISHA Committee meetings held in the last 5 years, the submission
of the Ministry was:-
“As State Level DISHA Committee Guidelines, the Chairperson of
the State Level DISHA Committee should be Chief Minister of the
State/UT with Legislature. In case of UTs without Legislature Lt,
Governor/Administrator as the case may be shall be the

Chairperson. The Minister of Rural Development of the concerned
State/UT shall normally be designated as Co-Chairperson”.

4.32 The Committee sought the views of the Ministry on the need for making
the monitoring of execution/implementation of all Central Government Schemes
at State and District level mandatory. To this, the Ministry submitted:~

“As per para 5 of DISHA Committee Guidelines DISHA will cover all
non- statutory schemes of Government of India. However, the
statutory schemes are also being included with the approval of the
concerned administrative Ministry/Department. The Ministry of Rural
Development has sought willingness of administrative ministry for
inclusion of their schemes in DISHA Monitoring. system. Presently,
43 Schemes are included in the list of schemes to be monitored by
DISHA Committee’. :

4.33 Emphasising the importance of DISHA meetings, the Committee sought
the views of the Secretary w.r.t. making entries in the ACRs of the officers who
are responsible for convening the DISHA meetings. The Secretary in his.
deposition before the Committee said :-

"सर, हम लोगों ने स्टेट को रिक्वेस्ट किया है कि डिस्ट्रिक्ट लेवल की कमेटी
जिसमें माननीय सदस्य चेयरमैन या को-चेयरमैन होते हैं, उनकी एनुअल सीआर
लिखी जाती है, उसमें भी इस बात का जिक्र करें कि उन्हें कितनी dock करनी थीं
और उन्होंने कितनी dock Ft"

4.34 In a written submission it was further added:-

“So far as inclusion of conducting DISHA meeting in ACR of District
Magistrate is concerned, Secretary (Rural Development ) vide his
letter No. Q-13016/01/2017- DISHA dated 30th September 2020 has
already requested State Governments to include convening of
DISHA Committee meetings in Annual Performance Appraisal of
District Collectors”.

61



4.35 Apprising the Committee about the status of uploading the minutes of the
DISHA meeting, the Ministry furnished the following information:

"80 far as matter of uploading of Minutes of DISHA Meeting is
concerned, to ensure timely action, uploading the Minutes of the
meeting on this website is vital and Department of Rural
Development has a website for uploading the Minutes of the meeting
of DISHA Committee . As per para 8 B of District Level DISHA
Committee Guidelines, the Member Secretary of DISHA committee
is required to ensure that proceedings of meetings are immediately
uploaded on website of the Ministry of Rural Development. The
matter of uploading of minutes of DISHA Committee has also been
taken up with States from time to time. Recently in Performance
Review Committee (PRC) Meeting with States held on 28th August
2020, need for uploading of Minutes of DISHA Committee on
Ministry's website was reiterated. Further, to support the functioning
of DISHA Committee, and to facilitate structured and effective
meetings, 8 web portal called ‘DISHA Meeting Management’ (DMM)
has been developed. It is an end to end meeting management
system which schedules meeting date, time, venue, and sets the
meeting agenda, prepares and publishes meeting notices and
minutes, record the proceedings and assign action points, also
monitors action points through the dashboard. Recently, this
software has been used in 4 Districts of Tamilnadu to conduct
DISHA Committee meetings in February and March 2020 on pilot
- basis and this software intended to be used to conduct DISHA
Meetings. It is anticipated that these interventions combined with
consistent persuasions will certainly help in strengthening the DISHA
Monitoring system’.

62


Chapter V

Other issues and constraints

CLOSURE OF ERSTWHILE INDIRA AWAAS YOJANA

Regarding the backlog of Indira Awaas Yojana houses at the end of the
year 2015-16, the Ministry in its written reply provided the following information :-

“Tentative number of incomplete IAY houses as on 1st April 2016

was 51.93 lakh".

5.2 Replying to a query as to whether the backlog was accounted for in
Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana and if so, the number of Indira Awaas
Yojana (|AY) units taken up and completed after 2015-16, the Ministry in a

written submission stated as under :-

Under PMAY-G, as per the approval of Union Cabinet, the
beneficiaries are identified based on housing deprivation parameters .
prescribed under Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011
subject to due verification by Gram Sabha and Completion of
Appellate Process. The target set under PMAY-G is based only as
per SECC selection criteria, the target does not include the pending

IAY houses.

The table below highlights the backlog and the completion rate of
IAY houses since 1st April ,2016. The states/UTs are reporting
progress on IAY house completion and have all indicated timelines
for completion of the incomplete [AY houses in their Annual Action

Plan for 2020-21.
entative number of incomplete IAY houses [54.93
s on 1st April 2016 (1) lakh

Number of [AY houses completed in the 39100 39 lakh
nancial year 2017-18 (8) fe

=
nancial year 2018-19 (0
inancial year 2019-20 (D) :

63



Number of incomplete IAY houses which can
lbe completed as communicated by the
jstates/UTs in AAP 2020-21

7.52 lakh

5.3 When the Committee enquired about the status of the closure of
incomplete Indira Awaas Yojana houses and details thereon, the Ministry in its
written reply furnished as under :-

"To achieve the objective of “Housing for all’ by 2022 the erstwhile
rural housing scheme IAY was restructured into Pradhan Mantri
Awaas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G) from April 1 2016. After that the
States/UTs were advised to complete pending IAY houses as soon
as possible and it was also communicated that IAY scheme will be
discontinued by March 31, 2018.

Hence there was a need to complete the pending IAY houses and
settle the IAY accounts. In this regard the States/UT's were
. requested to provide information on various parameters in respect of
pending IAY houses to take a view and assess financial liability
towards completing theses houses. The information provided by ‘the
respective States/UT’s has been compiled to take a view about the
funds available with the states and the funds required by the states to
complete their pending |AY houses. The information is sought: from
States/UTs during Annual Action Plan (AAP) meetings for PMAY-G.

A meeting with the States/UTs to discuss modalities for the closure of
IAY scheme and settlement of accounts was held on 26th July 2018
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Rural Development. It was
decided that no funds will be released from 1st April 2018 for |AY and
funds will be released only on reimbursement mode i.e, the States /
UTs would complete the IAY houses using their own State resources
and then after completion of the houses they may claim
reimbursement. This would ensure speedy closure of IAY houses
and avoid accounting overlap with existing PMAY-G scheme.

The issue of pending IAY houses Is reviewed in the review meeting,
Performance Review Committee (PRC) meeting and other meetings
being held with the States/UTs.

During the PRC Meeting held on 25" August, 2020, States/UTs have

been communicated that pending IAY houses to be completed by
319 December, 2020.”

64


5.4 Furnishing information regarding findings of Performance Audit of IAY by
CA&G and action taken by the Ministry against the agencies/ persons
responsible for deficiencies pointed out in the Performance Audit, the Ministry
submitted as under :-

“Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) launched in January 1996 as an
independent scheme

The findings of Performance Audit of IAY by CA&G are mentioned as
under;

Non-assessment of housing shortage

Low quality of house and lack of technical supervision
Weak mechanism for monitoring

Lack of transparency in selection of beneficiaries.

Lack of convergence

Loans not availed by the beneficiaries

OaroNn>

To address the gaps in the rural housing program and in the view of
Government's commitment to provide “Housing for All” by 2022, the
scheme of IAY has been restructured into Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana
— Gramin with effect from 1* April 2016."

PROVISION FOR COMMUNITY SHELTERS/HALL/TOILETS FOR PUBLIC
USE(RECOMMENDATION TO BE MADE ON THIS ISSUE)

§.5 To a specific query as to how many houses were built together in any
area and if any space was earmarked for construction of a community hall or
public toilet for public use in future and if any funds were provided, the Secretary
of the Ministry who deposed before the Committee stated as under-

“No, Sir, it can be done by convergence. For example, in many
States, we have taken it up with MGNREGS funds where community
halls have come up though it is not done everywhere.”

5.6 It was further added that :

There is no separate provision for providing space for construction of
community hall and toilet for public. However, there is provision for
toilet construction for PMAY-G beneficiary in convergence with
Swatch Bharat Mission.”

65



PROVISION FOR COMMUNITY SHELTERS UNDER THE SCHEME FOR
OLD/ABANDONEDIDESTITUTE PERSONS

5.7 During the examination of the subject, the Committee enquired if a
community type shelter for poor and age-old people would be built wherein such
poor people or vagabonds could get the shelter. The Ministry was also asked if a
policy for building such a community shelter uncer the scheme was in the
making. To this, the reply the Ministry was :

“At present, there is no such proposal is under consideration in
PMAY-G scheme”.

DRAINAGE AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS

5.8 The Committee enquired about the provision of some common services
like drainage or water supply system and how the contribution and arrangement
were made for these services. The Secretary of Ministry of Rural Development
who deposed before the Committee elaborated as under '-

“The toilet is a twin-pit tollet which they are able to build or manage.
Under the MGNREGA, in many places, they have constructed soak
pits. They have used some MGNREG funds to do the drain or
something”.
5.9 The Committee further enquired about the drainage of water used for
washing clothes and utensils and the availability of water and water connection in
the house. In this context, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development replied ;-

"महोदय, उस पानी के लिए पत्थर डालकर एक स्ट्रक्चर बनाया जाता है।
एमजीएनआरईजीएस के तहत Hee प्रदेश, तेलंगाना और महाराष्ट्र में ज्यादा
हुआ है।.

It varies from State to State. In some States there is household piped
water connection, for example in Sikkim, Gujarat, and States where
there is already a large number of villages having that connection.
Bihar, for example, is now doing it under the Finance Commission
funds.”

66


5.10 Regarding the provision for drainage and water supply systems and
whether there was any proposal to provide these systems under the Scheme,
the Ministry of Rural Development in its written replies furnished as under :-

“There is no separate provision fer drainage and water supply
system under the scheme. However, the beneficiary of PMAY-G
needs to be provided access to safe drinking water in convergence
with National Rural Drinking Water Program (NRDWP) of
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation or any other similar
schemes.” :

WASTE WATER MANAGEMENT

5.11. When asked whether there was any provision for Waste Water
Management and whether the Ministry had initiated any proposal to provide
Waste Water Management facility for the houses constructed under the scheme,
the Ministry submitted that :-

“There is no separate provision for Waste Water Management under
the scheme. However, to ensure a cleaner and healthy environment ;
for the households, the solid and liquid waste generated by the +

households needs to be treated. Accordingly, the State / UT
Government may, through convergence with Swachh Bharat Mission
(G) or any other-scheme of the State / UT Goverment, ensure कं
management of Solid and Liquid Waste”. है.

67


PART-II

OBSERVATIONS! RECOMMENDATIONS

4. An Overview of PMAY-G

The salient features of the Scheme were to have houses with
minimum area of 25 sq. metres including a dedicated area for hygienic
cooking, provision of toilets at = 12,000/- and 90/95 days of unskilled wage
labour under MGNREGA over and above the unit assistance. Loans could
be availed from Financial Institutions for an amount of upto ₹ 70,000/- for
willing beneficiaries. Identification and selection of beneficiaries is based
on the housing deficiency and other social deprivation parameters in Socio
Economic Caste Census (SECC)-2011 data and verification by Gram
Sabha, To ensure swift and prompt disposal of grievances/complaints
pertaining to the verification process, an Appellate mechanism for
grievance redressal was put in place at the State Level. The Scheme
envisaged funds being earmarked for focus groups. 60% of the funds were
earmarked for SC/ST and 45% for minorities. States were to ensure that as
far as possible at least 5% of beneficiaries were from among persons with
disabilities. As on 107 August, 2020, 2.68 crore households were found
eligible to receive assistance.

,. The Committee note that the annual allocation under PMAY-G to the
states is based on the Annual Action Plan (AAP) approved by the
‘Empowered Committee and the fund to States /UTs is released in two equal
installments. One of the major constraints identified in quality house
construction is the lack of the sufficient number of skilled masons. To
address this, Ministry of Rural Development under the PMAY-G launched
pan-India training and certification programme of Masons in the
States/UTs, namely “Rural Mason Training (RMT).”

The examination of the scheme by the Committee and their
observations/recommendations on the issues relating to budgetary

68


provisions, financial expenditure, physical targets and achievements,
quality of construction, land to landless beneficiaries, selection of
beneficiaries, monitoring and implementation of the scheme of PMAY-G are
detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.

2 Allocation of Resources

Out of the annual budgetary provisions for PMAY-G, 95% were
earmarked for construction of new houses under PMAY-G. This included
2% allocation towards Administrative Expenses for administering the
Scheme at the Central and State level. The remaining 5% of budgetary
grant was retained at the Central Level as reserve fund for special projects
in order to meet exigencies arising out of extraordinary situations like
floods, cyclones, earthquakes, etc.

To ensure timely release of Central share and State share from the
treasury to the State Nodal Account (SNA) for Scheme implementation, the
Committee note that apart from regular monitoring of funds status in State
Nodal Account(SNA), meetings through VCs with States to highlight the
need for timely release of funds to ensure Scheme implementation were
also carried out. The Committee were apprised that letter from Secretary,
Rural Development to States were sent with respect to budget provision for
PMAY-G in respect of targets allotted for 2020-21.

Having taken cognizance of the measures taken by the Ministry, the _
Committee would urge the Ministry to ensure that these measures are
effective and do not merely remain as wishes on the Paper. The Committee
hope that the monitoring through the correspondence undertaken in this
regard would bring about the desired results. The Committee may ‘be
apprised of the progress made in this regard.

3, Allocation of Funds

The financial requirement for the implementation of the Scheme
initially was through annual budgetary provision. However, in the Interim
Budget Speech 2019, apart from the budgetary allocation, Extra Budgetary
Support was announced in order to meet the budgetary gap of PMAY-G.

69



The additional funds as Extra Budgetary Resources was over and above
the GBS and it could be sought from lending institutions ie. NABARD for
making releases to States/UTs for smooth implementation of the Scheme.
Out of the annual budgetary provision for PMAY-G, 95% are earmarked for
construction of new houses under PMAY-G. This includes 2% allocation
towards Administrative Expenses for administering the Scheme at the
Central and State level. The remaining 5% of budgetary grant is retained at
the Central Level as reserve fund for special projects in order to meet
exigencies arising out of extraordinary situations like floods, cyclones,
earthquakes, etc. Financial Assistance is released to States/UTs in two
installments of 50% each as per provisions of Framework for
Implementation of PMAY-G. The Central share requirement for construction
of 70 lakh houses for FY 2020-21 is to be met from GBS and EBR. Out of
which 2 19,500 crore has been provided as the Gross Budgetary Support
(GBS) and the balance is to be met through Extra Budgetary Resources to
be raised through NABARD. Out of this, Ministry of Finance had approved
% 10,000 crore for PMAY-G for FY 2020-21, Further, an additional EBR of @
25,324 crore has been sought from Ministry of Finance for FY 2020-21 to
enable Ministry to fulfil financial requirements of States/UTs. The
Committee were assured that the fund requirement for Phase-ll would be
sufficient to meet the targets. The Committee hope that by ensuring the
availability of funds to States and regular monitoring of physical progress,
the Ministry would be able to achieve the targets for Phase-II. Given the
fact that the Ministry has exhibited confidence that the target of
construction of 2.02 crore houses under PMAY-G by 45" August, 2022 and
2.95 crore houses by 31° March, 2024 would be achieved,the Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.

4. Utilisation of Funds

During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee
noted that the expenditure reflected on AwaasSoft is made by the State/UT
against the cumulative fund available in State Nodal Account(SNA) with the
State/UT which includes Opening Balance of previous year, Central Share,
State Share, Interest Accrued and Miscellaneous income. However, no

70


expenditure is being reported separately against the Central share releases
or the State share releases as all funds from different sources are credited
to the single bank account i.e. SNA and therefore expenditure is made
against the Total Fund Available (TFA) In SNA irrespective of the fund
source. Further, the TFA with States/UTs as on 17.11.2020 is ₹ 35279,81
crore which includes Opening Balance of % 10002.84 crore, the Central
Share Releases of  15007.66 crore, State Share releases of हैं 9517.40
crore, Miscellaneous income of हैं 701.49 crore and interest accrued of ¢
50.42 crore. The total expenditure made as on 17.11.2020 is ₹ 21388,76,
crores against the TFA of & 35279.81 crore i.e 60.62 %. The Committee find
that the percentage of fund that has been utilized vis-a-vis the total fund
available is definitely not encouraging in ensuring the achievement of
targets that have been set. The Committee would call upon the Ministry to
ensure that the necessary measures taken in this regard are effectively
implemented so that the remaining amount available in the SNA. is
gainfully utilized.Further, the Committee opine that the reviews that are
undertaken would have the intended outcome and not merely remain on
paper.

5. Number of Houses constructed

The PMAY-G Scheme envisaged to provide pucca houses with basic
amenities to all houseless households and households living in kutcha and
dilapidated houses in rural areas by 2022, It commenced on 1" April, 2016. The
assessment of the beneficiaries was made combing the data sets of Census 2011
and Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011, houses constructed since 2011
and houses under construction till 31" March, 2016. The estimation was that 2.95
crore houses would have to be constructed to meet the objective of ‘Housing for
All’ in rural areas. Also, as on 15" September, 2016, 2.57 crore households were
identified for providing financial assistance under PMAY-G after due verification
by Gram Sabhas and after completion of Appellate Process. The Committee
observe that during the year 2016-2017 against the target of construction of
42,82454 houses, the achievement was 32,14,495. For the years 2017-18, 2018-19
and 2019-20 the target of construction of houses were 32,33,800, 25,14,646 and

71



60,00,000 respectively. However, the target of houses completed for these
successive years were 4454493, 4733,445 and 21,91,804 respectively. The target
for the year 2020-21 was 44,25,494 houses. Out of these, 40,60,503 houses had
been sanctioned (status as on 15.07.2021)and 3399538 number of houses have
been constructed, During the year 2021-22 against the target of 1,49,30,760
PMAYG houses, 11,11,811 houses have been completed as on 15.07.2021.Against
the target of construction of 2.95 crore houses during the period from 157
September, 2016 till 15” July, 2021 the total houses constructed is only
1,57,06048.There is a shortfall of 1,37,93,952 houses and only an year is left to
reach the target of providing pucca houses with basic amenities to all houseless
households and households living in kutcha and dilapidated houses in rural areas
by 2022. The Ministry has attributed various reasons for the delayed achievement
and has initiated measures to accomplish the pending targets. The Committee
view the tardy progress in the construction of House under PMAYG seriously. In
view of the above backdrop, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry to review
the targets and achievements of completion of houses periodically with due
diligence and ensure its completion so that more homeless get houses within
their means. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this
regard.The Committee expect the Ministry to identify the problems inherent
with the slow pace of construction of houses and apprise them of the steps
taken in this regard.

6. Identification of Beneficiaries

While examining the procedure adopted by the Ministry for identifying genuine
poor, the Committee found that the beneficiaries of PMAY-G were identified by the
Gram Sabha based on the housing deprivation parameters as per SECC 2011.
The universe of eligible beneficiaries under PMAY-G included all the houseless
and households living in zero, one or two room kutcha houses as per SECC data,
subject to the exclusion process. Prioritization of beneficiaries for providing
assistance was done category-wise viz SC/ST, Minorities and others. The
households were prioritized category-wise based on houselessness followed by
the number of rooms i.e. zero, one and two rooms. These priority lists that were
80 prepared were verified by the Gram Sabha to check for ineligible beneficiaries
and changes in priority. The necessary changes made in the list were based on
the minutes of Gram Sabha and these lists which were approved by the Gram

72


such complaints, Once the Appellate process was complete, the category-wise
Permanent Waitlist (PWL) of the Gram Panchayat got finalized and it was widely
Published and entered on the website of PMAY-G. From the above, the Committee
find that in the Procedure that is adopted for listing out the eligible beneficiaries,
Gram Sabha is the authority finalizing the tists and the Appellate Committee
constituted by the State Government would resolve complaints that come forth.
The implementation of the Scheme is based on the lists so finalized at the grass

scheme can help in avoiding duplicacy and would even ensure that the
benefit reaches the deserving ones. The Committee would like to be
informed of the Steps taken in this regard,

५

Lis Selection Criteria

During the Course of examination with respect to implementation of
the Scheme the Committee were given to understand that as per the.
framework for implementation of PMAY-G, there is a multilayered
prioritization within the universe of eligible PMAY(G) beneficiaries. ;



During the course of examination, the Committee found that in a few
cases the contact number of Panchayat Pradhan was mentioned against
the name of beneficiaries, Propounding financial dilution of the scheme,
The Committee are of the firm view that such breeding grounds of
corruption could only be eradicated to a great extent if the State
Government nominates a Government official who would cross check facts
before finalizing the list of beneficiaries. The Committee recommend the
Ministry to revise the guidelines of the scheme in such a way that inclusion
of name of beneficiaries, are henceforth, verified by a government official
and only after such authentication the names should be included in the list
of beneficiaries,

The Committee observe that at the time when Socio Economic Caste
Census was carried out in 2011, owning of Television sets and mobile
phones were categories as “comfort” items of high extrinsic value, But
with the passage of time, the situation in the country has changed and
Prices of such electronic gadgets have come down drastically in a way that
a homeless household could even afford to have a mobile phone. The
Committee are of the firm view that due to ever changing dynamics of
ownership pattern of Physical goods, a static selection criteria do not
appear befitting. The Committee expect the Ministry to evolve dynamic
selection criteria which is efficient enough in churning out the “real poor”
and segregating the undeserving from the targeted beneficiaries. This has
elevated the threshold limits and therefore the Committee strongly desire
the Ministry to have a relook in the selection criteria.

8. Redefining the term “Kutcha House”

The eligible beneficiaries under PMAY-G included all the houseless
and households living in zero, one or two room kutcha houses as per
Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) data. The definition of kutcha
house is as per the definition used/prescribed in SECC 2011. The
Committee were informed that States including Punjab, Assam, Uttar
Pradesh and Tripura had requested for revisiting the definition of kutcha
house under PMAY-G, Accordingly,. an Expert Committee which was
constituted for the purpose recommended that the house with durable

74



transferring the load to the ground, to be considered as a ‘Pucca’ house,
else the house is to be categorised as a Kuchha house.. The Expert
Committee had also recommended applicability of revised definition of

“kutcha houses”. This is indicative of the fact that even States thrust upon
evolving definition of “kutcha houses” for inclusion of every deserving
Poor as a beneficiary under Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awas Yojna.

Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry
frame a robust Selection criteria which imbibes the changing phases of
Purchasing power of the homeless; thus leaving no targeted beneficiary
out of PMAY-G,

9. BANK LOAN aa AN FACILITY TO BENEFICIARIES TO BENEFICIARIES
a AR ACILITY TO BENEFICIARIES

Under PMAY.G, financial assistance is provided directly to the
beneficiaries for the construction of the house.On the issue of the

75


not been implemented formally at Bank level. As a result,the beneficiaries
had to go for informal loan which is costlier than the formal loan. The
Ministry has taken up the matter of developing small housing loan in
consultation with Indian Bank Association and Department of Financial
Services because rural housing is also a Priority sector lending. If the
Ministry can have this Programmes the subsequent generations of
beneficiaries, when they grow up and get separated, can go for bank loan
for further expansion of the house rather than for a total subsidy scheme
from the Government. In response to one of the queries of the Committee,
Ministry vide its written reply (of 19" duly, 2021) has informed that the
Sample loan product (under PMAY-G) has not been finalized till date. The
Ministry had further informed that the Secretary (Rural Development) vide
3 DO letter dated 23" June, 2021 had requested Secretary, Department of
Financial Services (DFS) for expediting the development of loan product by
convening the meeting by DFS immediately.

Even after completion of four years of this scheme of PMAY-G and taking
cognizance of the fact that rural housing is also a priority sector lending,the
Committee are pained to note that the Ministry has been inactive in modeling a
mechanism of financial assistance to the beneficiaries. Therefore, the Committee
would urge the Ministry to take effective steps so as to make financial assistance
available to all the needy beneficiaries in time so that the scheme does not build
houses merely on paper but in reality too, The Committee are apprehensive if the
Ministry would write off the loan so sanctioned under PMAY-G and therefore,
would like to be apprised of the mechanism through which formal institutional
loan is made available to the beneficiaries and the way through which the Bank

would recover the loan sanctioned under PMAY-G.The Committee are of the
strong view that the Ministry should not push the “financial assistance”
aspect to a further date rather complement the “sample loan plan” with
“category wise” loan to the beneficiaries of SC, ST, minorities and other
backward categories. The Committee would like to. be apprised if the
Ministry is finalizing an interest scheme coherent with the several
categories of eligible beneficiaries under the scheme.

10. Need for Revision of Financial Assistance

76



The Committee Note that the targeted period of construction under
the scheme of 2.95 crore houses was from the year 2016-17 to 2021-22;
only one year being left for construction of the targeted number of houses.

Committee observe that seventy thousand rupees, the threshold limit of
the loan that a homeless can raise, seem very meagre in the phase of rising
Prices of construction material and the Ministry could think of raising it
further. The Committee are also of the view that owing to Steady and
continuous rise in the rates of labour, cost of building material and
increase in the Cost of other supplies, it becomes imperative on the part of
the Ministry to raise the amount of loan/ nancial assistance Permissible
under PMAY-G. The Committee strongly hold that the Ministry should

recommend that the Ministry could even draw up a Proposal to have.
“indexed cost of construction” as a baseline to sanction funds which
would in real terms benefit the targeted beneficiaries.

11. Monitoring of the Scheme

The Committee understand that the States/UTs set UP a dedicated
Programme Management Unit (PMU) to undertake the tasks of
implementation, monitoring and supervision of quality of construction at
State/District Block and Panchayat Level, The State Programme
Management Unit is headed by the State Nodal Officer and other personnel
were availed through deputation from line departments and by hiring
Personnel on contract basis. In addition, all data regarding beneficiaries,
Progress of construction and release of funds are Placed on AwaasSoft.
This formed the basis for follow up on both the financial and physical

Geo-tagged photographs. Further, on completion of construction of the

77


house, the photograph of the house is uploaded. This meant that the entire
monitoring of the Scheme depended on the data available on AwaasSoft.

In this regard, the Committee Specifically enquired as to whether the
functionaries who were responsible for uploading information on
“AwaasSoft from the site in villages were well equipped to handle these.
activities. The Ministry merely stated that there was a component of
administrative funds which are 2% of the housing funds released to the
State/UTs. Out of these 2% funds of Central share, 0.3% was retained at
centre level and 1.7% was released to the States/UTs for various activities
of administration of the scheme which included cost of setting up and
Operating Programme Management Unit including hiring of personnel on
contract and also training of officials and elected representatives of
Panchayats including exposure visits. In addition, the Ministry based on
request received from States/UTs arranged for the visit of officers/officials
of Rural Housing Division of the Ministry with officials from NIC team, PMU
team to visit and provide necessary hand-holding to the field workers on

usage of AwaasApp and AwaasSoft for data entry and other functions.

This implied that a pivotal role was played by the people who are
responsible for uploading the data onto the AwaasSoft as the monitoring of
the Scheme revolved on the data that was so uploaded. The Committee are
of the strong view that instead of waiting for the State Government to send
request for imparting necessary training and Provide adequate hand
holding to the personnel of Progrrame Management Unit and field workers,
the Ministry should organise periodic training to them so that they can
upload accurate data on the AwashSoft App which inturn will facilitate
effective monitoring too. Given the issues related to net connectivity in
tural areas, the Committee are apprehensive about the efficacy of the
system in place. The Committee would like to be apprised as to what
extent this system has been effective in monitoring the implementation of
the Scheme.

The Committee note that the meetings of DISHA Committee are an
integral part of the monitoring aspect of the scheme, Therefore, the
Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that State Governments are geared

78



Constructed thereof.

12, Performance Audit

Purpose. To this, the Ministry responded that Providing land to landless
beneficiaries for construction of houses is the responsibility of the
States/UTs, In response to the queries of the Committee, the Ministry
admitted that there was no Separate monitoring system set by the Ministry
to ensure that funds were being utilized for the said Purpose, The Ministry
had further informed that a Performance Audit was yet to be done with
regard to PMAY-G, The Committee Strongly hold that a scheme of such
PAN India coverage with homeless being the Subject needs review and
audit Periodically and thus the Committee would like to be apprised of the:
results of the Performance Audit of the scheme, The Committee were of the-
view that Social Self Help Groups could be registered for extending social
audit to this housing scheme, The Ministry concurred to this and
submitted that “...... your suggestion is also extremely useful for us”, The
ke to be apprised of the Steps taken by the Ministry in
this regard,

13. Quality of Construction

During the course of examination of the Subject, the Committee were
informed that Officers at the Block level and District level are to inspect
only 10% and 2% of the houses respectively at each Stage of construction.
The Committee Sought to know how the quality Supervision of the other
houses would be ensured and how the Ministry ensured that construction



scheme. Replying to these the Ministry inter-alia stated that with the help
of NIC they had developed a “House Quality Review Application” in
AwaasSoft to review quality of the houses using captured geo-tagged
photographs at the completed stage. The quality construction of the
houses under PMAY-G is also bein reviewed through field visits by the
Common Review Mission team, officials from the Department of Rural
Development and so on. Dwelling on the issue further, the Ministry
informed the Committee that since the beneficiaries were involved in
construction of the houses, they ensured that the quality was good. Thus
the Ministry categorically stated that there was no need for any change
with respect to Implementation and design in the programme. Drawing
parallel with Indira Awaas Yojana, it was stated that owing to involvement
of contractors in Indira Awaas Yojana the quality of construction of houses
were not good vis-a-vis the present condition of houses where
beneficiaries were involved.

Further, the Committee observe that the scheme for ‘Housing for All’
does not provide for monitoring the quality of houses at different stages of
construction. The Committee opine that the provision of PMAY-G scheme
should have been parallel to that of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna
(PMGSY) where the stages of construction are monitored. The Committee
strongly hold that as houses constructed under PMAY-G are going to last
and used for longer times, the quality of houses at different stages of
construction should be evaluated. The Committee urge the Ministry to
devise a mechanism in consultation with the State Governments through a
joint meeting or so and appoint a nodal officer in every district who would
inspect houses at different stages of construction; thereby enriching both
the monitoring aspect of the scheme as well as ensure the quality of
houses constructed thereof. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the steps taken in this regard.

14, Provision of Drainage and Water Supply System
The Committee during the course of examination of the subject wanted to know

about the provision of some common services like drainage or water supply
system and the arrangements that were in place for enabling these services. The

80


Government of India and coordinate (through a nodal officer) in a way to
ensure that the houses constructed under PMAY-G are habitable in all
respects including water Supply, drainage System, electricity connection
etc, The Committee recommend that the Ministry should issue guidelines
to State Government in this regard,

18, Training of masons

The Committee Observe that in order to ensure quality in the
construction of houses, the facet of Rural Mason training was imbibed in
the scheme. Rural Mason Training was launched to Contribute towards the
availability of a skilled man-force in the rural areas for the construction of
public works related to the rural infrastructure together with ample


certified till 21.10.2019 which is a miniscule percentage for the target of
2.945 crore houses to be constructed under the scheme. Quality of
construction of houses in real terms rests much on the ones responsible
for carrying the activity of not only building the base but even the
structure. This seems qualitatively achievable with efficient masons who
are well equipped with the knowledge of material, ratio of construction
material to be used, execution of design of the house laid down in the
modalities under PMAY-G etc.

The Committee are of the firm view that availability of a skilled work
force for the construction of houses in rural areas is imperative. The
Committee observe from the data of utilization table of administrative
expenses for the year 2019-20 (Appendix-ll) that out of 34 States/UTs only
two States (Uttarakhand and Jharkhand) have actually incurred an
expenditure on the head “Rural Mason Training Programme”; the rest 32
States/UTs have no allocation for such training. This mere percentage is
indicative of the ineffectiveness in the implementation of Rural Mason
Training (RMT) programme.

The Committee strongly hold that Ministry should make sincere
efforts in gearing the Construction Skill Development Council of India
(65001) and National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) in the
implementation of Rural Mason Training Programme and tune it in the full
swing. An awareness programme to attract labour work force to enroll in
RMT should be launched and propagated at all levels so that it reaches
every corner of the country. The Ministry should coordinate with the
States to concentrate mason training in the states where the construction
targets form a major portion of the target set under PMAY-G.

16, Land to Landless Beneficiaries

During the examination of the subject, the Committee found that out
of the total universe of homeless, around four lakh beneficiaries were
found to be eligible landless beneficiaries. The Committee observe that
unavailability of land is one of the major reasons for low utilization of
allocated fund in some States.2.66 lakh landless beneficiaries are yet to be
provided land by the State Government. The responsibility of providing

82



land to the landless beneficiaries rests with the State Governments. The
Committee further observe the huge gap in the physical target and
achievement. The Committee strongly view that providing of land is an
absolute essential for landless beneficiaries under the scheme of PMAY-G
as house comes later, first comes the land! The Committee is appreciative
of the fact that the Ministry of Rural Development is pursuing the matter at
the level of the Minister but the Committee also urge the Ministry to pursue
the matter with the State Governments through Chief Ministers and Chief
Secretaries to provide land to those beneficiaries who do not have land of
their own. The Committee urge the Ministry to convene meetings with Chief
Secretaries and take sincere steps in the States where the Government is
not providing land. Regular monitoring at DISHA Committee meetings with
special focus on landless beneficiary is a must. Land being a limited and
scarce resource, the Committee expect the Ministry to take up the concept
of building multi-storied houses on the same piece of land where a few
houses were to be constructed; the surplus land to be used for
constructing common utility complexes. The Committee also suggest that
the Ministry should evolve policies/methodologies to utilize waste or
grazing land in a way to supplement the shortage of land for landless
beneficiaries. The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry should take up
the matter with the State Government on a regular basis so that no
homeless is left out on the premise of non-availability of land.

17. Value Addition

The Committee note that the Ministry has taken up several research
studies like those of “Evaluation of Governance Parameters of Pradhan Mantri
Awaas Yojana - Gramin" conducted by National Institute of Public Finance and
Policy (NIPFP). The Committee opine that the Ministry should imbibe suggestions
received from different research studies into the operations of the scheme. The
Committee would like to urge the Ministry to take inputs from elected
representatives as they are aware of the ground realities of the region which can
go a long way in strengthening the achievement of construction of houses under
the scheme.The Committee urge the Ministry to incorporate district wise
dashboard on the portal of PMAY-G so as to equip the elected

83


representatives with the information regarding the progress of houses
being constructed in their area.

18. Impact of COVID-19

The year 2020 witnessed outbreak of world pandemic COVID-19
leading to nation-wide lockdown, marring the working of several sectors; ,
one essentially being the slowing down the pace of house construction
under PMAY-G Scheme. The Committee were informed that the per day rate
of house completion came down drastically.

The Committee appreciate the approach of the Ministry which took
cognizance of the ground situation and issued letters and advisories to the
States/UTs to take up PMAY-G wotks with strict adherences to social
distancing and wearing of protective gears so that construction can go in
full swing. The Ministry issued guidelines to sanitize the field authorities to
look into resuming work on houses left midway and even issued sanctions
to beneficiaries against the 2020-21 targets. The Ministry further informed
that the lockdown period had been utilized to upload a campaign mode
details of physically complete houses on Awaas-Soft. The Committee
appreciate the efforts of the Ministry and opine that backlog in
construction for the year 2020-21 should be completed without any delay.
The Rural Mason Training (RMT) which had very humble start since
inception was heavily hit during COVID-19 due to labourers returning
home. The Committee, therefore, are of the strong view that Ministry
should encourage more to join in RMT so that both the quality of
construction and number of houses to be constructed sees an upward
incline in the times of new normal.

NEW DELHI: SHRI GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT
4 August, 2021 Chairperson
13 Shravana, 1943 (Saka) Committee on Estimates

84



Annexure -।
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES UTILISED BY STATES IN FY 2019-20

a ५० 0.00 0.00 be | ne be be |

i
100 | 0.00 | 0.00 | 0.00 | pase.) (0.00 | [00 | poo]
BIHAR poo | 0001 | 000 | (0.00 peo |

CHHA-
15
4 GARH 0.00 0.00 [0.00 co 0.12 29.20 0.00 0.00 0.30

P | ‘al 000 | (0.00 | [0.00 | 70 70 6७ का poo | 000 |

GUJA-
6 |RAT boo | ०० | 0.00 boo | 0० |

ND
9 |KASHMIR हे 0.00 0.00 0.00 ba |

MADHYA
12 IPRADESH)o.



1.73 110.68 han | ® 1.10

S| RIPURA 9.06 .00 p00" | 0.00 | poo | 0.00 | ००७ | 000 | 0.00 | poo

UTTAR
# PRADESHO.00 | po | 0०0 | 0० | 0० | 0०० | boo | boo | 0०0 | 0० |
UTTARA-

25 |KHAND how | 0.00 jo.00 9.00 10.00 {0,00 baal 0.00 (0,00

i i la |
EST

bs BENGAL bagi a boo | ० | hata! 0.20 /11.67 hie ho | hon |
NDAMA
N

है NICOBAR
DADRA
AND
NAGAR
28 |HAVEL! | a | a 0.00 0.00 a | | |
DAMAN
| AND DIU |o,00 0० | x | has hos | ai hon | hon | a hon |

0.00 {0.00 a 00 (0.00 a | | | |

LAKSHA-

30 ०७६६? |o.00 0.00 boo | 0०० | poo | 0.0 | 0०० | poo | p00 | poo |
PUDU-

31 |CHERRY 0.00 0० | 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0.00 0०० । poo | 0०० | poo |
NDHRA

32 |PRADESH|0.00 ०० | 0.00 0.00 |o.00 00 boo | poo | pon | 0,00
KARNA-

83| AKA poo | poo | ००० | 0०० | 0० | 00 10.00 poo | 2.00 | 00
cana
ANA ०० | 0०० | 0० | 0०० | poo | boo | boo | bao | 0०० | 0०० |
Total 2.55 eal ००0 | [0 | 6.49 1087 [124.87 [18-48 | sila? fae |

SS



Annexure Ii
STATE WISE RELEASES AND UTILIZATION IN LAST 4 YEARS
AND CURRENT FY 2020-21 UNDER PMAY-G
(Rs. In crores)
ee आया गा कऋा- अजय टप्त
Central |Utilisa. | Utitisa. Utilisa. Utilisa.
Release’ jon Release tion* ion**
ANDA-
MAN

ANO a 96 = | | | 0.00 90.00
NICO.
BAR

1389 10७७ | weser [2४७  िक्रा छा |

5०
|]
4
४5
8
8
2
8
8
S
8
2
8
Mia

BIHAR

i
धर
।

d
di

GARH

GUJARAT
HARYANA 1
HIMACHAL

PRADESH

JAMMU
AND
KASHMIR
SHAR.
KHAND

KARNA-
TAKA

Kerala (10% |

ieee [om | [०७ | bn | [०० |

MADHYA

z , 2467.91
PRADESH [7०४ | वर ied | 158 2 | 2201.90 levers | nat [or
MAHA. | 78७0 |
RAsHTRA | 73686 [५०७ | ai |

MANIPUR 57.87 il [coo | 58,65 18582 _|

mizoram | 2403 _| 00 bea | (2926 | eon _|

ge fon [oe fe for fee |

ORISSA 1494.53 | 47762 _|

Pumas | 7655 | 000 “few (9७ 0७ —]

RAJAS-
mar निकल वन्य
Sica [119 | [ 200 9 [oa Lome]



fen fon Tw Jao foe few Tower

[ase | किन कप [ans fra [ono eos
peeves _| 29331.08 [44788.84

** Includes Extra Budgetary Resources , Le. NABARD Loan as below
2017-18: Rs.7,329.43 crores
2018-19: Rs, 10,878.80 crore
2019-10: Rs. 10811,02 crore
“AS per AwaasSoft as on 21,9,2020. Utilization is against Central Release,
State Release, Interest Accrued and Misc receipts.

88



Annexure. ॥|

YEAR-WISE/STATE-WISE DETAILS OF THE FUNDS RELEASED AND FUNDS
UTILISED FROM THE YEAR 2016-17 ONWARDS

(Rs. In Crores )

pre

entral ही Central entral
, Central |Utili- , Central
ee Release 220 तिलक Release Allocatio

NDHRA |56200.2 /21712.7|
661.14 1210.97 b | boo bow
166961 ,6 |164213.5 poo | i 4408.49 |116399.3

3805302 नल 4
0257.08 [5 0.0 Pane

0
a ae
569.57 [284.79 534 | 0.00

21901.8 268805.9 peaeos 4 6881051
i 4 39 7
85059.6 36527.4 [0364.1
2 १

8913.72 2 [8682.26] 26 0.00 | 239,560 4026.45

४

181109. 83815.9 62507.1
4 ihe

a

1469.940 |, ५४ 44

/22683.11

18814.3
173352.4 |275971.0
|

39150,26

7392.15

963894 1487626.8 |795717.8 1 595919
i 3 i i 0



LAND 3 |

511871, 149462, 729783 logo r16a 0 312405.9 688186.2 202335.0 329032,4 (4585704
20 jORISSA ६3 vs 7 a ;

30

pe मल
21 |PUNJAB (7488.00 7559.10 2995.20 |1602.06 2888.65
be | 187393, (7153.1 [3387.6 1467459.3 |189566.2

9

18688,2
000 976.05
741405.6
2

132041, |69059.7 ह
NADU |91 7

|
1 ‘al |]
bs | ELAN- 0.00 | 14263.3 |

ANA e | ooo |
2007S [SEA 3482.01 1531.95 25118.73 ०० | 765.980 (9888.51
4 ian As
432890. |223980. oO 298544.5 40०४ 233592.9 [277585.8
9 5

7 8 477818.9

UTTARA- |13216.0

28 | '484,09 |4996.55 8162.31 ooo | 9698.300 6060.01 | |
bo WEST  [s31772. 139863:[1/ 3128. 455666.0 |797224.1 4444181,5 437284.7 [03814 | |
BENGAL [00 74 6 9 2 4 90 |

NDA- : =
30 |MAN AND/262.51 |196.3 | 326.98 (33.07 ५० | 0.000 0

78,93 (282.83

छ

330.88 ina’ | 800.00 94

0.000

oo | poo | b |

108897 2466793. 2988986, 5581286. | 925454. |2033105. 4728128.
8.25 42 14 08 66 72

=
*Figrues reported by States/UTs on Awaassoft as on 4.11.2019 which includes |AY
houses also

Utilization is reported against the Total Available Funds which includes Central Share,
State Share, Miscellaneous Receipts and Interest Acrrued



Annexure -IV

SUGGESTIONS RECEIVED ABOUT DEFINITION OF KUTCHA HOUSE FROM

DIFFERENT STATES

modification in identification off Action Taken/ Decision taken by MoRD
beneficiaries requested

Andhra Pradesh:

(a) The State Government had)
conducted their own survey called
“SMART PULSE SURVEY" and
requested for using the same fo
identification of beneficiaries unde
PMAY-G instead of SECC 2011
data

Since the request was not in conformi
to the Cabinet Approval, hence th

(b) The following items may be|fequest could not be agreed to,

deleted from the 13-point automati
exclusion criteria

« Motorized two-wheeler
+ Own a refrigerator

+ Own Land line phone/Smart
Phone.

An expert committee was constituted b'
the Competent Authority of MoRD :
considering the proposals received from
States regarding change in definition o
kutcha house. The oa
recommended following in respect
request of Assam:

House with CGI sheet roof with the
combination of

i. Durable foundation with burnt brick,

Assam: Requested for including) stone, concrete blocks, etc. with cemen
households having houses with| mortar with DPC: —

kutcha wall and CGI sheet roofing
under PMAY-G li, Walls with durable materials like red
burnt bricks, concrete blocks, etc. at
least up to sill level; the external surface!
of the walls with moisture degradab
materials like ‘Icra' panels, unbui
bricks, etc. protected with cement sand
plaster

iii, Roof with CGI sheet well anchored!
with 8 roof under-structure, which i
further well anchored with walls/ suppo!
system transferring the load to thi
ground. iv.RCC bands at the plinth,

|


= sill, lintel and roof/gable level,
and the corners are reinforced by!
vertical steel bars.

to be considered as a Pucca house,
else the house is to be categorized a

Kutcha house, Accordingly, State
was informed with the approval of the’
competent authority,

kutcha house, The committee
recommended following in respect ०
request of Tripura:

House with CGI sheet roof with the
combination of

i. Durable foundation with burnt brick,
Stone, concrete blocks, etc, with cemen
mortar with DPC;

burnt bricks, concrete blocks, etc. a
least up to sill level; the external surface
of the walls with moisture i
materials like 'Iora' Panels, unburn'
bricks, etc. protected with cement sand
plaster

il, Walls with durable materials like re

Tripura: Requested for including|
households having houses wit
kutcha wall and CGI sheet roofing]
under PMAY-G

iil. Roof with CGI sheet well anchored
with a roof under-structure, which 7
further well anchored with walls/ Suppo:
system transferring the load to  thel
ground. iv.RCC bands at the plinth,
window sill, lintel and roof/gable level,
and the corners are feinforced by|
vertical steel bars.

to be considered as a Pucca house,
else =e house is to be categorized as,
Kutcha house, Accordingly, Sta’
was informed with the approval of the
competent authority,

Punjab:

a) Requested for —_ changing| (a) An Expert Committee was constituted

cae of kutcha house ai by the Competent Authority of MoRD fo

categorizing:- considering the proposals received fro}
States regarding change in definition ०
kutcha house. ‘The committee!
recommended following in respect off
request of Punjab:

7


material of the wall of the dwelling}

foom under the category of kutchal
wall

(ii) wooden planks (balas) a
Predominant material of roof
dwelling room under the category
kutcha roof

' ; हर वि वा wal wih but brs cement/ lime/ mud mortar as
() burnt brick as a predominant,

5

(i) The masonry wall with bumt bricks

Predominant material of the wall of the
dwelling room will be considered as a
Pucca wall and house with the sam

cannot be categorized as a Kutcha}
house.

(ii) The existing definition of the Kutch
house under PMAY-G js inclusive of th
amendment requested by the State,

(ill) Such houses may be categorized

(iil) Dwelling room either with kutch
wall or kutcha roof to be considered
as kutcha house

(b) The State requested fo!
removing exclusion criteria, viz,
having two-wheeler/ refrigerator
telephone etc, Further tequested fo.
Slate specific exclusion criteria to be}
included considering the socio

as|
Semi-Kutcha /Semi Pucca houses which]
is well covered in the existing definition

and do not require any change.

(b) Since the request was not in
conformity to the Cabinet Approval,
hence the request could not be agreed!
to, हे

€conomic condition of the State,
Uttar Pradesh: Requested Ke:
changing definition of kutcha hou:
for allowing inclusion of households,

having houses with Pucca walls bu
kutcha roof under PMAY-G

having two-wheeler/ refrigerator/
telephone etc. Further requested fo
State specific exclusion criteria to be
included considering the socio.
@conomic condition of the State.

Kerala: The State requested for '
removing exclusion criteria, viz '

An Expert committee was constituted 0५
the Competent Authority of MoRD fo:
considering the proposals received from
States regarding change in definition o

kutcha house. The committee!
recommended following in respect 06
request of Uttar Pradesh:

House having Pucca walls, but Kutehal
roof maybe categorized under Semi
Pucca house,

Since the request was not in conformi
to the Cabinet Approval, hence th
request could not be agreed to,

Ie

43


Annexure -V

YEAR WISE DETAILS REGARDING HOUSE COMPLETION, TARGETS
SET-STATE-WISE

3016-17 «| 2017-18 2018-19

™
: State Name Target |Compl.| Target Compl.) Target
| 1 AR PR | PR. 9034}

2 [ASSAM 21969

3 BIHAR
CHHATTISGA

| RH
Is | con

6 GUJARAT

185576)
424969

637658

11904
4874]

159052)

IKERALA 12700, 9872
ra
12|MADHYA PR, 423572| 389532| 369007] 565914 530400832100
MAHARASHTR
a 230422! 199320) 150934|113323| 68464 43352|289700| 3685
14|MANIPUR 9740| 8237 id |g | od [sg 8900
| ol 0. 17200

47INAGALAND 84 41 0
18/ODISHA 3961021355080] 340498) 294566] 255958 2024891 585000 | 28525
PUNJAB 10000, 9604 3826 | 0 |g | |
20/RAJASTHAN asad 796 223629 212497] 213204 nn ae 647

21 8॥00॥ __| 1 1025 |g |g dd
22 HAMIL NADU _| NADU _| 176338) 121545]130214 8/200000| 235

23/TRIPURA 23730 23015) | 10500
UTTAR

24/PRADESH 575258] 560634
UTTARAKHAN
D

28
Lal EST
26IBENGAL

27/AND.& NIC,

280 &N HAVEL! |
29/DAMANE, DIU

i151 MEGHALAYA. | 17030) | 12956 3715)
Mizoram _| 4806 | 2281 | 4794
81



४६४



ANNEXURE- VI

STATE WISE SANCTION UNDER PMAY-G FOR THE YEARS 2016-17, 2017-18

AND 2018-19
Sanctions Made!
State Name | Year (2016-17) |. Year Year

2018-19

HIMACHAL

8 |PRADESH
ane AND
9 ASHMIR

9 |
RKHAND

ee Te 9 1527
| 34253] 197190
504381| 615326] —— ee a ee डा
[206372 | 232903 348960
iy पक aes. ej
90816 113499) St

1486 0]
159054 230864 es
11 |KERALA 3985| 13349) 0
MADHYA |
12 |PRADESH 389628 448106 565176
13 |MAHARASHTRA | 142473 | | 226078) 65104
= aaa |
14 |MANIPUR 0 9748

3997

223080
0

‘AMIL NADU 129539
RIPURA 1259
UTTAR PRADESH 306156
25 _|UTTARAKHAND ~ 4061
26 WEST BENGAL [375198 |
NDAMAN AND |
27 NICOBAR 262 193) 500
DADRA AND
28_INAGAR HAVEL 750 297 4568

29 IDAMAN AND DI

79037

0
3129837

0
0
0
8

250855:



ANNEXURE. vil
STATE WISE BREAK UP OF CENTRAL RELEASE

(Rs. In Lakhs)

Release Release
through GBS through EBR Total release to state

ANDHRA PRADESH

[0.09] a a ee
2_JARUNACHAL PRADESH a ae re का

107468.01] 35929.39
197974.38 } —— eae

|

0.00 0.00 [| ood

| 2235230 0.00 22052 36

58923.41] __65641.00 [as
| 0.00 0.00 0.0

343404.08| 25419163) ea हर -८

DADRA & NAGAR
HAVEL!



APPENDIX-1

MINUTES OF 4'" ATES OF 4° SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2019-20) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2019-20

The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18 September, 2019 from 1130 hrs. to
1330 hrs. in Committee Room No. '2', ‘A’ Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension

Building, New Delhi

PRESENT
Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat — Chairperson
MEMBERS
2. Kunwar Danish Ali
3... Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Shri Sudharshan Bhagat
5. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
7... Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundaria
9. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
10. Dr. K.C. Patel
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
12. Shri Francisco Sardinha
13. Shri Prathap Simha
14, Shri Dharambir Singh
15. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma
16. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare
SECRETARIAT
Dr. Preeti Srivastava - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Vipin Kumar - Director
3. Shri R.S. Negi - Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
1. Shri Amarjeet Sinha - Secretary,
Ministry of Rural Development
४ २ Shri Prasant Kumar - Additional Secretary,
Ministry of Rural Development
3: Shri Gaya Prasad - Deputy Director General,

Ministry of Rural Development

१९


2 At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee and briefed them about the agenda of the Sitting. After a brief disucussion, the

representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development were called in to depose before the
Committee.

3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Rural
Development and requested Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development to give a brief
Overview on the subject ‘Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana’ to be discussed in the
sitting and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
regarding confidentiality of the Proceedings of the Committee, :

4, The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development made a comprehensive power point
Presentation on the Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana(PMAY-G) giving details of
findings of performance audit of Indira Awaas Yojana by C&AG ‘in 201 4, shortcomings in
the erstwhile Indira Awaas Yojana. The representatives also gave a presentation on
various aspects of Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana such as Beneficiary Selection
Procedure; financial assistance; status of Progress; salient features; convergence with
other programmes for basic amenities; House Design Typologies; Compendium of Rural
Housing Typologies-PAHAL; Good Governance Framework; e-Governance in Direct
benefit transfer/Awaasapp-Mobile Inspection/Evidence-based monitoring/convergence;
Performance Index in States/UTs; year-wise ach ievements in house completion; average
number of days involved in completing the construction of one house; financial discipline;
Quality Construction and timely completion; State-wise Awaas+Data; Land to Landiess
Beneficiaries etc,

5. The Members raised several queries and sought detail/clarification which mainly
included the following :-

* Difference between the norms of earlier scheme (Indira Awaas Yojana) and
the Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana

Diagram of inside portion of the house

Registration under the scheme

PAHAL compendium

Financial assistance and construction cost of house

Whether any space is kept for construction of a community hall or a toilet
for public use in the future

eeecse

* Whether any specific areas/zones identified where the houses are to be
constructed

¢ Whether construction on govt./abandoned Jand unauthorisedly occupied by
the landless people permitted

* Status of allotment of land by various States /

* Share of contribution of Central and State Governments. in construction

cost
94


* Making available the land to landless people or Provision of funds for land
acquisition by Central or State Governments

* Status of completed houses in various States

Alternate arrangement for stay of beneficiary during the period of

construction of new house

Time period involved in the construction of house

Responsibility ta construct houses

Terms of release of instalments for construction

System in place for, maintenance and Supervision/monitoring of the quality

of house constructed

State-wise floor area and design

Any proposal to make available the funds for community halls

Provision for drainage & water supply systems

Waste water management

Provision, if any, for assistance for house Construction for family member

Separated from joint family

Targets achieved by various States etc,

eeees # ० ० ० .

6. Some of the queries of the Members were duly responded to by the representatives
of the Ministry.

7 The verbatim Proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been kept on record.

The Committee, thereafter, adjourned for the lunch break.

160


APPENDIX-2 |

MINUTES OF 5" SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2019-20) OF 5" SITTING OF THE COMMI TEE ON ESTIMATES (2019-20'

The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18" September, 2019 from 1400 hrs. to
1500 hrs. in Committee Room No. '2' ‘A’ Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension |
Building, New Delhi,

PRESENT
Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat — Chairperson

MEMBERS

Kunwar Danish Ali
Shri Kalyan Banerjee
Shri Sudharshan Bhagat
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap
Shri Mohanbhal Kalyanjibhai Kundaria
Shri Dayanidhi Maran
9. Dr. K.C. Patel
10. Shri Prathap Simha
11. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma
12. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare

9०. ४ छ छा # ७ (3

SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. Preeti Srivastava - Joint Secretary
2 Shri Vipin Kumar - Director
3. Shri R.S. Negi - Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES

9] Shri Amarjeet Sinha - Secretary,

Ministry of Rural Development
2. Shri Prasant Kumar - — Additional Secretary,

Ministry of Rural Development
3, Shri Gaya Prasad - Deputy Director General,

Ministry of Rural Development

2 After the lunch break, the Committee sat again for continuing the evidence of

the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development on the subject ‘Pradhan Mantri

) Gramin Awaas Yojana’ took up for discussion by the Committee in its sitting heid at 1130
hours on 18.09.2019. The Chairperson requested the Secretary, Ministry of Rural
Development to respond to the queries raised by the Members.

to|

Se rere se eee eS ee


3. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development responded to the queries of the
Members and gave clarifications/details on the subject ‘Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas
Yojana’. He mentioned in detail the payment schedule and system followed in different
States and the training programmes run for the help of beneficiaries. He also mentioned
that Gram Panchayat data of the status of completion of houses in different States is
available online in public domain. He also clarified the eligibility criteria for allotment of

houses to various categories; system of allotment of houses to persons with disabilities;

houses sanctioned for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Minorities/Persons with
Disabilities; loans and other facilities available to families constructing houses;
Programme Review Committee Meeting; fund sharing pattern in erstwhile Indira Awaas
Yojana and Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana; engagement of National level
Monitoring institutions for maintaining quality hub for house: extension of social audit:
technical supervision; management cost: responsibility to repay loan taken from National
Rural Road Development Agency etc..

4, The Members raised several queries and sought details/clarifications on various
aspects relating to the scheme such as on allotment of house to a person not covered
under Below Poverty Line(BPL); criteria for allotment of houses to people belonging to
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Minorities; criteria for allotment to disabled
Persons; provision for bank loan in rural area; need to increase financial assistance from
Central Government; possible assistance from Central Government to State Government
to buy land for landless people; intervention of Centre in case of non-cooperation from the
State Governments; DISHA Committee Mesting; inspection/vigilance mechanism under
the scheme; community type shelter for poor people; policy to construct shelters for age
old people; issue of registering Social Self Help Group; facility to provide technical
knowledge at the time of construction of house; Loan taken from NABARD for
implementation of the scheme; liability to repay NABARD Joan etc.

5. Some of the queries of the Members were duly responded to by the representatives
of the Ministry. The Chairperson asked the witnesses to furnish written replies to the
points which could not be responded in the meeting.

6. The verbatim proceedings of the silting of the Committee has been kept on record.

The Committee, thereafter, adjourned.

joo


APPENDIX-3

MINUTES OF 2nd SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21) F 2nd SITTING OF THE COM! EE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21

The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 117" August, 2020 from 1130 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in
Committee Room No. ‘2’, A Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat — Chairperson

Members
Kunwar Danish All
Shri Sudharshan Bhagat
Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan
Shri P.P. Chaudhary
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan
th Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
13. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
14, Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
16, Shri Pinaki Misra
1४ 8) Smt.Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo

99 99 3४७४७ ४ 6७6३

SECRETARIAT
1, छा. Kavita Prasad - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. 8. Visala - Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi - Additional Director
4, Shri R.S. Negi - Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
A Shri Narendra Nath Sinha - Secretary,
Ministry of Rural Development
2. Shri Prasant Kumar > Special Secretary, है
Ministry of Rural Development
3. Shri Gaya Prasad - Deputy Director General,
Ministry of Rural Development
rk At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee

and briefed them about the agenda of the sitting viz. (i) Consideration and adoption of the
draft report(s) and (ii) further evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural
Development in connection with the examination of the subject ‘Review of performance of
Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana.

16०५

eet


3. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following draft |
Reports;

(i) Action Taken Report on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
23 Report (16" Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the subject
‘Medical Education and Health Care in the Country’ pertaining to Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare and

(il) Action Taken Report on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
28" Report (16" Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates on the subject
‘Central Armed Police Forces and Internal Security Challenges — Evaluation and
Response Mechanism’ pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs.

4, The Committee after due deliberations adopted both the draft Reports without any
modifications. The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Action
Taken Reports on the basis of factual verification by the concerned Ministry and present the
same to Lok Sabha.

5, After the conclusion of the consideration and adoption of the draft reports,
the witnesses of Ministry of Rural Development were ushered in. The Chairperson then
welcomed the representatives of the Ministry and drew their attention to Direction 55 (i) of the

Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the
Committee.

6. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development, after introduction, gave a brief overview
on the subject ‘Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana’ and made a comprehensive power
point presentation on the Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana (PMAY-G) giving details of
findings of performance audit of Indira Awaas Yojana by C&AG in 2014: shortcomings in the
erstwhile Indira Awaas Yojana; Beneficiary Selection Procedure; financial assistance: status
of Progress;salient features; convergence with other programmes for basic amenities: House
Design Typologies; Compendium of Rural Housing Typologies-PAHAL; Good Governance
Framework; e-Governance in Direct Benefit Transfer/Awaasapp-Mobile
Inspection/Evidence-based monitoring/convergence; Performance Index in
States/UTs; year-wise achievements in house completion; average number of days

involved in completing the construction of one house; financial discipline; Quality Construction
and timely completion; State-wise Awaas+Data; Land to Landless Beneficiaries etc.

104

ea ७४५५७ >रभ+ाा९७०»+०००७०७००.....



te The Members raised several queries and Sought clarifications on the issues which
inter-alia included the following :-

i) Alleged blackmailing/corruption in the name of ‘Appellate’ by the officials, |
ii) Accessibility of the representatives of the people to the Mobile Application |
introduced under the scheme. |
iil) — Total cost of the house under the scheme. |
First and last State in overall ranking in the progress of the scheme.
Vv) Emphasis to give priority to Nationalised banks for Providing financial |
assistance.
vi) Need to consider house asa very priority subject specially in rural area.
vil) Progress of the scheme. |
Vil) Performance of States and Centre in Coordination.
ix) Suggestion to hold frequent meetings of DISHA Committee regularly.
x) Irregularities and shortcomings in the scheme.
2). Suggestion to change the criteria of identification of beneficiaries.
xii) Challenges in the scheme.
xill) Shortcomings in 2011 SECC Survey, |
Xiv) Inclusion of left-out landless people in the list PMAY-G Scheme,
Xv) Need to issue instructions to States by Centre for making availability
of Land to landless beneficiaries,
xvi) Increase in financial assistance under the scheme in view of COVID-19
pandemic and increase jn cost of raw material,
xvii) Recovery from ineligible beneficiaries,
xviil) Construction of houses in accordance with the need of the beneficiaries.
xix) Alleged malpractice/corruption in the implementation of the Scheme in
some States.
xx) Misuse of the scheme in some States,
xxl) Instances of non-functioning of Awaas App. |
xxil) Suggestion for qual distribution of funds to all districts in a State
xxill) Creating of national data base for identification of the household,
xxiv) Feasibility of pre-fab structure under the scheme.

xxv) Linking of Mason Training under the scheme with PMKVY scheme to get
certification

8. The queries of the Members were duly responded to by the representatives of the
Ministry.

9. The verbatim Proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been kept on record,

The Committee, thereafter, adjourned.

[०६४०


APPENDIX-4

MINUTES OF 5™ © es OF § SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 2020-2

The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 13" October, 2020 from 1130 hrs. to
1345 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi,

PRESENT
Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat - Chairperson

Members
Kunwar Danish Ali
Shri Kalyan Banerjee
Shri Sudharshan Bhagat
Shri P.P. Chaudhary
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
Thiru Dayanidhi Maran
Shri K. Muraleedharan
10. Dr. K.C. Patel
11. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
13, Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
10 Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
16. Shri Francisco Sardinha
17. Shri Prathap Simha
18. Shri Pinaki Misra
19. Shri Ajay Bhatt

PON 92 छा # wp

SECRETARIAT
1. Smt, 8. Visala - Director
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi - Additional Director
3. Shri R. S. Negi - Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
4 Shri Nagendra Nath Sinha - Secretary,
Ministry of Rural Development
2, Smt. Alka Upadhyaya - Additional Secretary,
Ministry of Rural Development
3 Shri Gaya Prasad - Deputy Director General,
Ministry of Rural
Development
a At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the

Committee and briefed them about the agenda of the Sitting viz. further evidence of

the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development in connection with the
examination of

los



“2.

the subject ‘Review of performance of Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana’
(PMAY-G). After a brief discussion, the representatives of the Ministry of Rural
Development were called in to depose before the Committee,

3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Rural
Development and requested Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development to give a brief
updated overview on the Subject ‘Review of performance of Pradhan Mantri Gramin
Awaas Yojana’ to be discussed in the Sitting and drew their attention to Direction
55(1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the
Proceedings of the Committee.

4. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development, after introduction made a
comprehensive power point Presentation on the Yojana giving details of size of
houses; Increased Assistance; Additional Assistance; Beneficiary Selection
Procedure; Direct Benefit Transfer through PFMS; Monitoring through AwaasSoft
and AwaasApp; Convergence with other programmes; Quality Construction and
Timely Completion; Use of. fegion specific climate responsive housing
designs/technologies; Assistance under PMAY-G; Progress Status; Year-wise
House Completion; Financial Requirements; E-Governance in PMAY-G;
Performance Index; Appellate Process; Complaint cases and Redressal Status:
Performance Review by DISHA Committee; Status of land provided to Landless
Beneficiaries; Allocation of remaining target from Awaas+ Survey; Challenges in
PMAY-G; Strategy for achievement of targets, etc,

5. The Members raised several queries on the issues pertaining to DISHA
Committee Meetings which _ inter-alia included Chairman of Committee
meetings, directions to Chief Ministers by Government of India if no DISHA
Committee meetings were held, alternative to DISHA Committee, Report of the
Committee constituted for addition or deletion of names from the list of beneficiaries
of PMAY-G, reaching the targets fixed for Phase-II , sufficiency of funds for ach ieving
Phase-ll targets , escalation in cost of construction of houses, Status of houses in
the States where fund allocation was low due to different designs based on the
climatic conditions of the areas, monitoring of quality of construction through
AwaasSoft or AwaasApp notwithstanding poor internet connectivity, increase in

[ ay



assistance from Central Government, construction of housing complexes to
accommodate more people, reasons for lesser beneficiary registration in comparison
to target allocation in the year 2019-2020 & 2020-21, issues with regard to change in
the criteria for selection of beneficiaries and so on.

6, The queries of the Members were duly responded to by the representatives
of the Ministry, The Chairperson then asked the witnesses to furnish written repiles
to the points which could not be responded in the Sitting.

iss The verbatim Proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been kept on
record.

The Committee, thereafter, adjourned.

[०68



APPENDIX-5
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2021-22)

The Committee sat on Monday, the 2" August, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 1530
hrs. in Room No, 52-B, Chairperson’s Office, Parliament House, New Delhi,

PRESENT
Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat -
Chairperson
Members
ea Shri Kunwar Danish Ali
3, Shri Kalyan Bannerjee
4. Shri Sudharshan Bhagat
5. Shri P.P. Chaudhary
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
7. Shri Harish Dwivedi
8. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap
9. Shri K, Muraleedharan
10. Dr. K.C. Patel
11, Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
12. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy |
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy |
14. Shri Dilip Saikia |
18. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma |
16. Shri Francisco Cosme. Francis 98116 Sardinha,
17 Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma
18 Shri Kesineni Srinivas
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt, Jyochnamayi Sinha - Director
2. Smt.A. Jyothirmayi - Additional Director
a At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the

Committee, The Committee then took up for Consideration the draft Report on the
Subject ‘Review of Performance of Pradhan Mantri Gramin Awaas Yojana’ pertaining
to the Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee adopted the report without

Bennett |


any modifications. The Chairperson requested the Members to Send any
Suggestions if any by 03 August, 2021,

3. Then, the Committee authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report
on the basis of factual verifi

cation by the concerned Ministry and Present the same to
Lok Sabha,

The Committee, then, adjourned,