31 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF DEVELOPMENT OF SOLAR PARKS 
AND ULTRA MEGA SOLAR POWER PROJECTS - A REVIEW 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2023-24) 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
____________________________________________________ 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  

THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF DEVELOPMENT OF SOLAR PARKS 
AND ULTRA MEGA SOLAR POWER PROJECTS - A REVIEW 
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 December, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 

                   CONTENTS                          Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2022-23)    (iii) 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2023-24)    (iv) 
 
Introduction           (v) 
          
           PART - I 
Chapter-I          Introductory          1  
Chapter-II        Solar Parks          4 
Chapter-III        Scheme and its Elements        8 
Chapter-IV        Challenges and other issues      22 
 
                PART-II 
                       Observations/Recommendations                  30 
     
               PART-III 
           ANNEXURES 
 
    (i)  Annexure I -      State-Wise Estimated Solar Energy Potential in the  
      Country                                   37                                               
 (ii) Annexure II -     State/UT-Wise Data for Solar Insolation     38 
(iii) Annexure III -     Solar Park-Wise CFA Disbursed (in lakh)     40 
(iv) Annexure IV -     Year-wise Expenditure incurred on the Scheme   42 
(v) Annexure V -       Mode-wise approval of Solar Parks     43 
(vi) Annexure VI -     Details of Solar Projects Developers (SPDs)  
       inside Solar Parks         45 
(vii) Annexure VII -   List of Approved Solar Parks      50  
        

(viii) Annexure VIII - List of Solar Parks with Date of In-Principle Approval  
      where Solar Projects are not commissioned  
      either Fully Or Partially      53 
(ix) Annexure IX  -    List Of Solar Parks Affected With Land Issues   54 
(x)  Annexure X   -    Park-wise major issues and interventions made  
      by Ministry        55 
 
  
                  APPENDICES 
 
   (i) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 14.09.2022    58 
  (ii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 06.12.2023    61 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
 
 Shri Girish Bhalchandra  Bapat – Chairperson 
 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
6. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
13. Shri jual Oram 
14. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
15. Shri Saikia Dilip 
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
17. Dr. K.C. Patel 
18. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
19. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
20. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
21. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
22. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
23. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
24. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
25. Shri Prathap Simha 
26. Shri Pinaki Misra 
27. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
28. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
29. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
30. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Shri Saikia Dilip 
8. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
9. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
10. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
13. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
14. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
15. Shri Pinaki Misra 
16. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
17. Shri Jual Oram 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
20. Dr. K.C. Patel 
21. Vacant $ 
22. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
23. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
24. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
25. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
26. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
27. Shri Prathap Simha 
28. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
29. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
30. Shri R. K. Singh Patel * 
*    Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 7096 dated 28 th 
July, 2023 
$  Vacancy created due to resignation of Col.  Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore, Member of  
Lok Sabha, vide CB-I note dated December 08, 2023. 

 
 
Secretariat 
   
Smt.  Anita B. Panda                                    -                        Additional Secretary 
Shri  Muraleedharan. P                                 -                        Director 
Smt. Anju Kukreja                                         -                        Deputy Secretary 
Shri  Srikanth Singh R                                  -                        Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Thirty-First Report on 
the subject “Implementation of Development of Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power 
Projects - A review’’ 
 
2. India, with its large population and rapidly growing economy, needs access to clean, 
cheap and reliable sources of energy. India lies in the high solar insolation region, 
endowed with huge solar energy potential with most parts of the country having abo ut 
300 days of sunshine per year with annual mean daily global solar radiation in the range 
of 4.5 -6.5 kWh/m2/day. In this backdrop, with a view to examine various aspects of 
Solar Energy and its development in the Country, the Committee on Estimates (2022 -
23) selected this subject for in -depth examination and report to the House. Committee 
on Estimates (2023-24) continued with examination of the Subject. 
 
3. In this Report, the Committee have dealt with various aspects Solar Power 
development in the Countr y such as concept of Solar Parks and its working, timelines 
for development of Solar Parks, Financial model of the Scheme, Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA), various modes for selection of Solar Power Park Developers 
(SPPDs), Challenges in implementation of the Solar Parks Scheme etc   The 
Committee have analysed these issues in detail and made 
observations/recommendations in the report. 
 
4. Committee on Estimates took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy on the subj ect on 14 th September, 2022. The Committee also 
held informal discussions on the subject during its study visits on 4th July, 2022 at Sawai 
Madhopur and 19 th August, 2023 at Rameshwaram.  The draft Report was considered 
and adopted by Committee on Estimate s (2023 -24) at their sitting held on 6th 
December, 2023. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy for furnishing material, written replies to list of points and 
tendering evidence before them. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI;  
6 December, 2023              
15 Agrahayana,1945 (Saka) 
                               DR. SANJAY JAISWAL  
                            CHAIRPERSON 
    COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 

1 
 
REPORT 
PART I 
Chapter I 
INTRODUCTORY 
I. Solar Energy Scenario: 
1. India, with its large population and rapidly growing economy, needs access to clean, 
cheap and reliable sources of energy. India lies in the high solar insolation region, 
endowed with huge solar energy potential with most parts of the country having about 
300 days of sunshine per year with annual mean daily global solar radiation in the range 
of 4.5 -6.5 kWh/m2/day. In this backdrop, the implementation of 'Development of Solar 
Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects' is a critical and transformative initiative 
aimed at harnessing the vast potential of solar energy to meet the growing energy needs 
of our country. This ambitious undertaking represents a comprehensive strategy to 
accelerate the deployment of solar power infrastructure, fos ter sustainable development, 
and address environmental concerns.  Solar energy, as a clean and renewable resource, 
holds tremendous promise in mitigating climate change and reducing our dependence on 
fossil fuels. The 'Development of Solar Parks and Ultra M ega Solar Power Projects' 
program seeks to create an ecosystem that fosters the development of solar power 
projects on a massive scale. In this review, the Committee will delve into the key aspects 
of this initiative, including its objectives, the technolo gies and infrastructure involved, its 
economic and environmental impact, and the challenges and opportunities it presents. 
 
2. The Solar Park is a concentrated zone of development of solar power generation 
projects, by providing to developers an area that is well characterized, properly infra -
structured and where the risk of the projects can be minimized as well as the facilitation 
of the permitting process.  Starting with the ‘Charanka Solar Park’ in Gujarat, and closely 
followed by the ‘Bhadla Solar Park’ in Rajasthan, Solar Parks have quickly emerged as a 
powerful instrument for the rapid development of Solar Power Projects in the country. 
These parks have obtained their initial impetus from the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar 
Mission (JNNSM), which provided the policy framework and roadmap for solar power 

2 
 
development in the country. Charanka Solar Park in Gujarat is an example, envisioned 
as a pioneering first -of-its-kind large scale solar park in India with clear land and 
transmission connectivity. A solar p ower developer can get fully developed land along 
with transmission facilities and can, therefore, set up a power project immediately. The 
solar parks not only enable the States to meet their policy targets for solar power and 
renewable purchase obligations, they also contribute towards the ambitious targets put in 
place by the JNNSM. In addition, the clean power generated by these solar projects play 
a role for reducing India’s carbon footprint, promote high end technical investments and 
empower local comm unities. MNRE, through this scheme envisaged development of 
similar solar park across India. 
 
3. Large size projects have a potential to bring down the cost of Solar Power. Therefore , 
Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects, each having capacity of 500 MW or abo ve have been 
planned in India. Major  chunks of land are available in some States. There are some 
developers who are keen to take up very large projects. Land has been identified in 
Gujarat, Rajasthan, J&K (Leh and Kargil) and Madhya Pradesh etc. 
 
4. On the environ mental front, this review will examine how 'Development of Solar Parks 
and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects' aligns with sustainability goals. Solar energy is 
inherently clean, producing no greenhouse gas emissions during its operation. By 
replacing traditional fossil fuel -based power sources with solar energy, the program 
contributes to reducing air pollution, conserving natural resources, and safeguarding 
ecosystems. 
II. Solar Energy Potential 
5. Given below is the Solar Energy Potential in the country, as furnished by the Ministry: 
       
“Based on availability of land and insolation, National Institute of Solar Energy, an 
autonomous institute under aegis of this Ministry, has assessed the solar energy 
potential in the country.” List of State-wise solar potential, as submitted by the Ministry, is 
given at Annexure-I 

3 
 
6. The target of Solar Energy installation achieved in last 5 years as furnished by the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in July, 2023, is given as under: 
(a) Installed solar capacity increased by ~200% with addition of ~45 GW 
(b) 70 GW solar projects has been bid out  
(c) Important schemes & targets: 
• Solar Park scheme – 40 GW 
• PM-KUSUM scheme – 30.8 GW 
• Residential Rooftop Solar Phase 2 – 4 GW 
• CPSU scheme – 8.2 GW  
(d) Solar PV manufacturing capacity  
• Module capacity increased by 15 GW (150%) 
• Cell capacity increased by 3 GW (100%) 
 
7. However, the implementation of large -scale solar projects also comes with its set of 
challenges, such as land acquisition, grid integration, and resource availability. This 
review will provide insights into these challenges and potential solutions to address them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
Chapter-II 
I. Solar Parks 
1) (a) Concept of Solar Park 
Solar parks, also known as solar energy parks or solar farms, are dedicated areas or 
facilities where large-scale solar photovoltaic (PV) or solar thermal systems are deployed 
to generate electricity from sunlight. These solar parks are designed to harness solar 
energy efficiently and contribute significantly to the production of clean, renewable 
energy. The concept of solar parks encompasses several key elements: 
i. Large-Scale Solar Installations:  Solar parks are characterized by the presence of 
numerous solar panels or solar collectors, often covering vast expanses of land. These 
installations can vary in size, ranging from a few hectares to hundreds of hectares, 
depending on the capacity of the solar park. 
ii. Optimal Sunlight Exposure:  Site selection is crucial for solar parks. They are typically 
situated in regions with high solar irradiance, where they can receive abundant su nlight 
throughout the year. This ensures that the solar panels can generate electricity efficiently. 
iii. Efficient Energy Generation:  The primary purpose of solar parks is to generate 
electricity from sunlight. Solar panels or collectors in these parks convert  solar energy 
into electricity through the photovoltaic effect (for PV systems) or by concentrating solar 
heat to produce steam (for solar thermal systems). 
iv. Grid Integration: Solar parks are connected to the electrical grid, enabling the electricity 
generated to be distributed to homes, businesses, and industries. Grid integration allows 
for a stable and reliable power supply. 
v. Environmental Benefits:  Solar parks are environmentally friendly and produce clean 
energy. They have no direct emissions of greenhou se gases or air pollutants during 
operation, which helps mitigate climate change and reduce environmental impact. 
vi. Economies of Scale:  Solar parks take advantage of economies of scale, making them 
cost-effective for electricity generation. By deploying a la rge number of solar panels in a 
centralized location, the cost per unit of electricity generated is often lower compared to 
smaller, distributed installations. 

5 
 
vii. Maintenance and Operation: Maintenance and operation of solar parks involve regular 
cleaning, in spection, and repairs to ensure that the solar panels continue to function 
efficiently. This may include the replacement of faulty components or cleaning of dust 
and debris. 
viii. Land Use Considerations:  Solar parks require a significant amount of land, which c an 
raise land use and land management issues. These projects often involve land lease 
agreements or land acquisition, which need to be carefully managed. 
ix. Community and Stakeholder Engagement:  Local communities and stakeholders often 
have an interest in solar park projects. Effective engagement and consultation with these 
groups are important to address concerns, ensure public support, and maximize the 
benefits to the community. 
x. Solar panels, which are made up of photovoltaic cells, are installed in rows and  arrays on 
the ground or mounted on structures like trackers and fixed -tilt racks. These panels are 
designed to capture sunlight and convert it into electricity. 
Solar panels, which are made up of photovoltaic cells, are installed in rows and arrays on 
the ground or mounted on structures like trackers and fixed -tilt racks. These panels are 
designed to capture sunlight and convert it into electricity. 
2) There have been some recent Projects where floating Solar panels are also installed 
above water bodies, f or instance, in Ramagu ndam, Andhra Pradesh. Concerns about 
their upkeep and maintenance are being addressed by the Ministry. 
(b) Working of Solar Parks 
(i) Solar Panels Installation 
(ii) Sunlight Absorption 
The solar panels absorb sunlight and convert it into direct current (DC) electricity through 
the photovoltaic effect. When sunlight strikes the photovoltaic cells, it generates an 
electric current. 
 

6 
 
(iii) Inverters 
The DC electricity generated by the solar panels is then sent to inverters, which convert it 
into al ternating current (AC) electricity. AC electricity is the standard form of electricity 
used for residential and commercial applications. 
(iv) Power Distribution 
The AC electricity generated by the inverters is then sent to a substation within the solar 
park. This substation contains transformers and other equipment to adjust the voltage of 
the electricity and ensure it's compatible with the electrical grid. 
(v) Grid Connection 
The electricity is then fed into the electrical grid. Solar parks are usually connected to  the 
local or regional power grid, allowing the electricity generated to be distributed to homes, 
businesses, and industries in the surrounding area. The grid connection also enables 
excess electricity to be transmitted to other regions if needed. 
(vi) Monitoring and Maintenance 
Solar parks have monitoring systems in place to track the performance of the solar 
panels and ensure they are operating efficiently. Maintenance crews periodically inspect 
and clean the panels to ensure they continue to generate electricity at optimal levels. 
(vii) Energy Storage  
Some Solar Parks incorporate energy storage systems like batteries. These batteries 
store excess electricity generated during sunny days and release it during periods of low 
sunlight or at night, ensuring a more consistent power supply. 
(viii) Environmental Considerations 
Solar parks are designed to have minimal environmental impact. The land on which they 
are built may still be used for farming or other purposes, and efforts are made to mitigate 

7 
 
any ecological disruption. Additionally, solar energy generation produces no greenhouse 
gas emissions, contributing to a reduction in carbon emissions. 
 (c) Capacity of Solar Parks: 
8. The capacity targeted for development of a Solar Park  under the Scheme is in the range 
of 500 MW a nd above. However, smaller parks ~20 MW have also been allowed in hilly 
States in view of the difficult terrain and where there is shortage of non-agricultural land.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
Chapter-III 
Scheme and its Elements 
9. The Scheme for "Development of Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects" as 
submitted by the Ministry of  New and Renewable Energy (MNRE)  was rolled out on 12 
December 2014 for setting up at least 25 Solar Parks each with a capacity of around 500 
MW and above with a target of 20,000 MW of solar power installed capacity in a span of 
5 years from 2014-15 to 2018-19.  The capacity of the Scheme was then enhanced from 
20,000 MW to 40,000 MW on 21 March 2017 to set up at least 50 Solar Parks by 2025 -
26. Total capacity when operational, will generate around 80 billion units of green 
electricity per year which in turn will lead to abatement of around 80 million tonnes of CO2 
per year over its life cycle. Therefore, t he Scheme will significantly contribute to achieve 
the 'Panchamrit' targets regarding energy transitions announced by Hon’ble Prime 
Minister.  
 
10. The program's core objectives include the establishment of Solar Parks, which are large-
scale solar installations dedicated to harnessing solar energy efficiently, and the 
promotion of Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects, which are significant solar power ventures 
designed to cater to the energy demands of industries and regions. This multifaceted 
approach is expected to contribute si gnificantly to increasing the share of renewable 
energy in the global energy mix and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  The Scheme 
aims to provide all the infrastructural requirements for Solar Power Projects created by a 
park developer so that Solar Proje ct Developers can be set up expeditiously. This would 
also give impetus to solar energy generation and encourage project developers and 
investors in cost -reductions, technical improvements and achieving large skill target of 
Solar Power Development in the country. It would enable States to bring in significant 
investment from project developers, meet its Solar Renewable Purchase Obligation 
(RPO) mandate and provide employment opportunities to local population.  
 
 

9 
 
11. On being asked about the achievement of obje ctives of the scheme in the country, the 
Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“The Government have sanctioned 50 Solar Parks with aggregate capacity of 37,990 MW 
in 12 States across the country, so far. Against this sanction, 11 solar parks with 
aggregate capacity of 8,521 MW have been completed and 7 Solar Parks with aggregate 
capacity of 3,985 MW have been partially completed. In these parks, Solar Projects of 
aggregate capacity of 10,237 MW have been developed.” 
 
I. Highlights of the Scheme 
12. Highlights of the Scheme are given as under: 
(a) Solar Parks: These are dedicated areas for solar power generation, typically on a large 
scale, where multiple solar panels and installations are deployed. They provide a 
consolidated and efficient approach to harness solar energy. 
(b) Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects: These are massive solar power projects that are 
designed to generate a significant amount of electricity, often catering to the energy 
needs of industries, regions, or even entire country. 
(c) Technological Advancements: The initiative leverages advanced solar technologies, 
such as high -efficiency solar panels, energy storage systems, and smart grid integration 
to ensure optimal energy generation and utilization. 
(d) Economic Impact: The program has  the potential to create jobs, stimulate economic 
growth, and attract investments in the renewable energy sector. It can also contribute to 
reducing energy costs for consumers. 
(e) Environmental Benefits: Solar power is a clean and sustainable energy source th at 
reduces greenhouse gas emissions and environmental pollution. The initiative aligns with 
sustainability goals by conserving natural resources and safeguarding the environment. 
(f) Challenges: The implementation of large -scale solar projects may face challen ges such 
as land acquisition, grid integration, and resource availability. These challenges need to 
be addressed to ensure the success of the program. 

10 
 
13. Further, in this regard, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:  
“The following Solar Pa rks have been inaugurated/dedicated to the nation/foundation 
stone laid by Hon’ble Prime Minister: 
(i) 750 MW Rewa Solar Park in Madhya Pradesh 
(ii) 50 MW THDCIL project in Kasargod Solar Park, Kerala  
(iii) 600 MW Jhansi Solar Park in Uttar Pradesh  
(iv) 75 MW Solar Project at Mirzapur in UP Solar Park. 
• Some of the world’s largest parks like 2000 MW Pavagada Solar Park in Karnataka, 1400 
MW Anathapuramu Solar Park & 1000 MW Kurnool Solar Park in Andhra Pradesh, 10 00 
MW Bhadla Ph-III Solar Park in Rajasthan, 750 MW Rewa Solar Park in Madhya Pradesh 
have been developed under the scheme. 
• First Solar Park of capacity 20 MW has been developed in North -Eastern State of 
Mizoram. 
• Seven floating Solar Park of aggregate capacity 2039 MW have been approved. 
• Two largest solar parks of capacities 4750 MW and 3325 MW to be developed by NTPC 
Renewable Energy Ltd. and Gujarat State Electricity Corporation Ltd. (GSECL) 
respectively are approved under the scheme. These parks are part  of the 30,000 MW RE 
park planned to be developed in Khavda of Kutch District of Gujarat for which foundation 
stone had been laid by Hon’ble Prime Minister.” 
 
II. Criteria for selection of Solar Parks 
14. As regards  the criteria for sanctioning and setting up of Solar Parks, the Ministry has 
stated that the Quality of Solar radiation received at the place plays an important role in 
sanctioning of Solar Parks by the Ministry. When asked about the study if any, conducted 
by the Ministry to determine the Quality of Solar radiation in all the States of India, the 
Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“Under Solar Radiation Resource Assessment (SRRA) project of this Ministry, a network 
of 115 automatic solar radiation monitoring s tations has been set up across India. One of 

11 
 
the main aims of SRRA is to provide investment grade bankable solar radiation data to 
the solar industry, project developers, decision makers in the financing institutions & 
policy and also to the specific commu nity. It is envisaged that this data will also be used 
for the improvement and validation of satellite-derived solar radiation data for India.  
The project was completed in two phases, 51 stations in Phase -I (2011) and 60 stations 
in Phase -II (2014). All these SRRA stations are fully automatic, grid independent and 
records one second data and after integration transmits one -minute data to the Cent ral 
Server. All stations identify and measure both solar (GHI, DHI &DNI) & weather 
parameters such as, temperature, humidity, pressure, rain, fall, wind speed and direction 
and also host of other derived parameters. 
  
Under this project, National Institute  of Wind Energy (NIWE) had prepared the Solar 
Radiation Atlas, a first of its kind combining satellite-derived data and the world’s largest 
high-quality network of simultaneously measured solar ground data available at 
https://maps.niwe.res.in/resource_map/map/solar/.” 
State-wise data for solar insolation as provided by the Ministry is given as under: 
 
“NISE has assessed the solar energy potential of about 750 GW in the country. NIWE 
has been entrusted to set up Solar Radiation Resource Assessment Stations and 121 
stations have been set -up across the country. The State -wise details of solar insolation 
data (in Kwh/m2) are given at Annexure-II. 
 
III. Timelines for Development of Solar Park: 
15. The Ministry has submitted the following information about the timeline for d evelopment 
of Solar Parks: 
 
Sl. No. Milestone Timelines 
1. Date of issue of in-principle approval Zero Date 
2. Submission of Detailed Project Report (DPR) 4 months from zero date 
3. Land acquisition (not less than 50% land 
acquired) 
8 months from zero date 

12 
 
Sl. No. Milestone Timelines 
4. Financial Closure 11 months from zero date 
5. Award of work for pooling stations 14 months from zero date 
6. Receipt of material on site for pooling stations 17 months from zero date 
7. Completion of construction of pooling stations & 
land development  
24 months from zero date 
 
IV. Financial Model of the Scheme 
 
16. The Solar Power Park Developers (SPPDs) are entrusted with developing the Solar 
Parks, developing the land and providing necessary infrastructure like road connectivity, 
transmission infrastructure etc. Significant investment is also to be made in the operation 
& maintenance of the Solar Park, emplo ying staff and other activities etc. The entire cost 
of development including cost involved in acquisition of land forms the total cost of the 
project for which an estimate is prepared beforehand by the SPPD. Based on this 
estimate, the SPPD formulates a recovery model which includes: 
 
i.          One-time development charges on per MW basis; 
ii.         Recurring charges like O&M charges, land lease, etc; 
iii.        Central Financial Assistance (CFA) from MNRE; and   
iv.        Debt, depending on the availability and requirement of funds. 
 
17. On being asked about the components included in the recovery model, the Ministry has 
furnished the following information: 
 
“The SPPDs entrusted with development of the park will develop the land/water body and 
provide necessary infrastructure like road connectivity, transmission etc. They will also be 
responsible for operation & maintenance of the park.  

13 
 
Accordingly, the SPPD prepares an estimate for the cost of development of the park. The 
Central Financial Assistance (CFA) amount admissible from MNRE is deducted from the 
estimated cost and the balance amount is recovered from the Solar Project Developers 
to whom the plots  in the park are being allotted. Charges are also recovered from the 
Solar Project Developers for  regular maintenance of the park in the form of Operation 
and Maintenance charges.” 
 
18. Further, detailing about the financial model of the Solar Parks, the Ministry has 
submitted: 
“Projects inside Solar Parks are set up either under Developer Mode or under E PC Mode 
or any combination of both. The cost of Park Development is recovered by the SPPDs 
from: 
• One-time up-front development charges on per MW basis as advance from the SPDs. 
• CFA received from MNRE. 
• The SPPD may also put in some equity or can raise loan,  depending on the availability of 
funds and requirement.  
• The SPPD also collects recurring charges like land lease, O&M charges etc. for 
maintenance of the Parks. 
In most cases, the Park Developer collects one -time up-front development charges from 
the project developers selected through competitive bidding process and develops the 
park.” 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
V. MNRE Support: 
19. When asked about the financial support being given by the Ministry  of New and 
Renewable Energy for SPPDs, the Ministry in its written replies has stated as follows: 
“The SPPD is provided a CFA of up to ₹25 Lakh for preparing Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) of the Solar Park, conducting surveys etc. The CFA for preparation of DPR is 
provided based on capacity of the Solar Park and is given as under: 
Sl. No. Capacity range of Solar Park CFA for preparation of DPR 
(in ₹) 
1. Up to 100 MW Up to ₹ 10 lakh 
2. More than 100 MW & up to 500 MW Up to ₹15 lakh 
3. More than 500 MW Up to ₹25 lakh 
 
20. Further, the Ministry has clarified that in addition, CFA of ₹ 20 lakh/MW or 30% of the 
project cost including Grid -connectivity cost, whichever is lower, is provided for 
development of the Solar Park infrastructure. The mode -wise CFA pattern provided 
under the scheme is given as under: 
Mode for selection 
of SPPD  
CFA 
Mode-1 ₹12 lakh/MW for internal infrastructure to SPPD& 
₹8 lakh/MW for external infrastructure to CTU/STU 
Or  
30 % of the project cost, whichever is lower 
Mode-2 
Mode-3 
Mode-4 
Mode-5 
Mode-6 No CFA 
Mode-7 
₹20 lakh/MW to CTU/STU for external infrastructure only 
Or  
30% of the project cost, whichever is lower 
 
Mode-8 
₹20 lakh/MW for internal infrastructure only to SPPD 
(Transmission costs are socialised) 
Or 

15 
 
Mode for selection 
of SPPD  
CFA 
30 % of the project cost, whichever is lower 
 
 
21. When queried about the Milestone for release of CFA to SPPDs and CTUs/STUs, the 
Ministry has stated the following: 
 (b) Milestones for release of CFA to SPPD:  
Sl. 
No. 
Milestone % of subsidy 
disbursed 
1. Land acquisition (not less than 50% land acquired) 20% 
2. Financial Closure 20% 
3. Award of work for pooling stations 20% 
4. Receipt of material on site for pooling stations 25% 
5. Completion of construction of pooling stations & land 
development  
15% 
Total 100% 
  
 
(c) Milestones for release of CFA to CTU/STU:  
Sl. 
No. 
Milestone % of subsidy 
disbursed 
1. On award of work 50% 
2. On receipt of material at site and upon verification by 
SECI 
20% 
3. On successful commissioning 30% 
Total 100% 
 
 
 

16 
 
VI. Central Financial Assistance 
22. When asked about disbursement of Central Financial Assistance (CFA) both for DPR and 
for achieving the milestones for different Solar Parks, the Ministry has furnished the 
following information: 
“The park-wise details of CFA disbursed both for DPR and for achieving the milestones 
of the Solar Projects are given at Annexure-III 
 
23. On being asked about the details of Expenditure incurred under the Scheme, the Ministry 
has submitted as under: 
“The Solar Park Scheme is one of the schemes under the budget head: Grid -Interactive 
Renewable Power (Solar Power) which includes several other schemes of this Ministry. 
Therefore, no separate budget allocation is made for the Solar Park Scheme. The year -
wise details of expenditure made under the Scheme from 2014 -15 onwards are given at 
Annexure-IV 
 
VII. Scheme Implementing Agency:SECI 
24. The success ful execution of the 'Development of Solar Parks and Ultra Mega Solar 
Power Projects' initiative relies significantly on the presence of a capable and efficient 
Scheme Implementing Agency. Th is Agency plays a pivotal role in coordinating, 
facilitating, and monitoring the various aspects of this ambitious program. 
 
25.  As regards the Scheme Implementing Agency , Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
in its written replies submitted as under: 
 
“The agency for implementing the scheme is Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI). 
SECI implements the scheme and handles fund being made available under the scheme 
on behalf of Government of India. Further, Indian Renewable Energy Development 
Agency Limited (IREDA) acts as the implementing agency for the parks being developed 
by SECI.” 
 

17 
 
26. On being asked about the reasons for designating IREDA as an implementing agency of 
the Scheme for the Solar Parks being developed by SECI, Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy has submitted as under: 
“SECI is the nodal agency for implementing the Scheme, responsible for due diligence of 
various activities as per the guidelines of the Scheme, and also responsible for handing 
the funds. SECI is also developing  Solar Parks in the role of SPPD and this creates a 
situation where, SECI as the implementing agency of the Scheme has to undertake the 
due diligence process for its own Parks. In order to avoid such conflict of interests, 
IREDA has been designated as the implementing a gency only for the Solar Parks being 
developed by SECI.” 
 
VIII. Modes for selection of SPPDs 
 
27. When asked about the various modes for selection of SPPDs, Ministry has submitted as 
under: 
“The States/UTs, where park is to be developed, designates an agency for the 
development of Solar Park, termed as Solar Power Park Developer (SPPD). Depending 
upon type of park developers and land availability, 8 Modes have been introduced from 
time to time for park development. Most parks have been sanctioned under Mode-8.  
The details of these modes are as under: 
Mode Brief 
Mode-1 The State designated nodal agency undertakes development & 
management of Solar Park.  
Mode-2 A 50-50 JV is set up between State designated nodal agency and SECI 
for development & management of Solar Park. 
Mode-3 The State designates SECI as the nodal agency. 
Mode-4 Private entrepreneurs promote Solar Parks with or without equity 

18 
 
Mode Brief 
participation from the State Government or its agencies. 
Mode 4A: If the land is provided by the State Government or any State 
Government agency, then the SPPD may be se lected based on open 
bidding on development and O&M charges. 
Mode 4B: If the land is arranged by the SPPD, then the SPPD may be 
selected based on open bidding on developed land and O&M charges. 
Mode-5 
Mode 5A: CPSUs having its own land or land taken on lease/right to use 
basis may develop the park either on its own or through EPC mode. 
Further, the CPSU may set up the power plants with its park either 
through EPC mode or by calling bids for developers. 
Mode 5B: CPSUs having its own land or land taken on lease/right to use 
basis may select SPPD 
 based on open bidding on development and O&M charges.  
Mode 5C: In case the CPSU does not have land then the CPSU may 
float tender for setting up solar park by any third party having its own 
land. Also, the bidding for selection of SPPD would be based on his 
quoted price of developed land per MW and the O&M charges. 
Mode-6 Solar Park by private entrepreneur without CFA.  
Mode-7 
SECI will act as the SPPD and arrange land from both Government and 
private parties. The project developers are selected through competitive 
bidding process. The park development activities and costs are under 
the scope of project developer and the entire CFA is made available to 
set up external evacuation infrastructure. 
Mode-8 
CPSU/State PSU/Government organization/their subsidiaries or the JV 
of above entities can act as SPPD. The entire CFA  is made available for 
setting up of internal infrastructure only. Transmission costs are 
socialized. 
 
28. Mode-wise Details of Approved Solar Parks as furnished by the  Ministry (in MW) is given 
at  Annexure-V: 
 
 
29. On being asked about the reasons for Mode 8 being most attractive than other Modes for 
park development, Ministry has furnished the following information: 

19 
 
“In order to expedite development of Solar Parks and encourage the State Governments 
to facilitate the SPPDs in acquisition of land and in obtaining necessary clearances etc., 
a new Mode (Mode-8) was introduced. A total of 29 Solar Parks of aggregate capacity of 
over 24 GW have been approved under this Mode. The Mode-8 is comparatively 
attractive for the following reasons: 
i) The entire CFA of ₹ 20 Lakh/MW or 30% of the cost of development of the park is 
provided for development of internal infrastructure of the park. 
ii) Any augmentation/strengthening and/or creation of external power evacuation 
infrastructure may be done by CTU and therefore, its cost will be socialized. 
iii) A facilitation charge of ₹0.05/unit of power being generated from the projects in the parks 
is p rovided to the States in order t o encourage the State Governments to provide 
necessary assistance to the SPPDs in identification & acquisition of land, to facilitate in 
obtaining all required statutory clearances etc.  
iv) The SPPD or any of its individual promoters having trading license, may act as a trader of 
power being produced in the park, for which they would be entitled to claim a margin of 
₹0.07 /unit.” 
 
30. All the States and Union Territories are eligible for getting benefit under the Scheme. 
The Solar Parks are developed by the State Governments & their agencies, CPSUs and 
private entrepreneurs or joint ventures of any of them. The implementing agency is 
termed as Solar Power Park Developer (SPPD) and are selected in any of the eight 
modes as per the Solar Park Scheme.  
 
31. Key Responsibilities of SPPD, as furnished by the Ministry are as under: 
“The activities that are essential for the SPPD are as under: 
1. Acquisition of land; 
2. Getting land related all clearances and plotting of land; 
3. Developing approach road to the Solar Park and access road to each plot; 
4. Developing internal transmission system, pooling station(s) and transmission lines from 
pooling station(s) and maintaining it; 

20 
 
5. Making arrangement to connect to the grid i.e., ISTS or State Transmission Network; 
6. Flood mitigation measures like flood discharge, internal drainage etc.; 
7. Required power during construction; 
8. Telecommunication facilities; 
9. Providing water supply for solar panel cleaning and other application. They are also 
advised to minimize water usage by employing robotic or dry cleaning.” 
 
Details of Solar Projects Developers (SPDs) inside Solar Parks (as on 30 -09-2023) as 
furnished by the Ministry is attached at Annexure-VI 
IX. Details of solar Parks approved 
32. On being asked as to how the Ministry ensured that the sanctioned Solar Parks are 
completed within the stipulated time period, Ministry in its replies stated as under: 
“As per the Scheme guidelines, the parks are to be completed within a period of 2 years 
from date of in -principle approval. However, while implementing the scheme, it is 
experienced that due to innate challenges in developing the park, the timeline of 
implementation is generally longer.  
Giving due consideration to the challenges being faced by the park developers, Ministry 
makes all efforts to resolve the issues and also granted extension from time to time 
wherever required. 
Further, in order to expedite the pace of development of Solar Parks, the Central Public 
Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) have been engaged by introducing a new mode (Mode -8) 
for implementation. A facilitation charge of ₹0.05/unit of power being generated from the 
projects in the p arks is also provided to the States Governments in order to encourage 
the States to provide necessary assistance to the Solar Power Park Developers (SPPDs) 
in identification & acquisition of land, to facilitate in obtaining all required statutory 
clearances, monitoring the progress, fixing the park charges, etc. This facilitation charge 
is paid only on the quantum of power that is exported outside the state from that park and 
only if no such charge is levied under the State Government policy. A total of 28 Solar 
Parks of aggregate capacity of over 24 GW have been approved under this mode.”            
 

21 
 
The list of approved/installed Solar Parks as submitted by the Ministry is given at 
Annexure-VII : 
 X. Present Status of implementation of the Scheme 
33. The details indicating present status of the Scheme as furnished by the Ministry is given 
below: 
o Capacity approved     : 37,990 MW ( 50 Parks in 12 States) 
o Projects commissioned inside Solar Parks : 10,237 MW 
o Land allotted/acquired   : 1,73,000 acres 
o Major Parks developed and its capacity 
o Pavagada Solar Park (2000 MW)    
o Ananthapuramu-I Solar Park (1400 MW) 
o Bhadla-III Solar Park (1000 MW)   
o Kurnool Solar Park (1000 MW) 
o Rewa Solar Park (750 MW)   
o Bhadla Ph–II Solar Park (680 MW) 
Major Parks under development and its capacity: 
o NTPC REL RE Park (4750 MW)  
o GSECL Park (3225 MW)      
o GICPL Parks (2375 MW)    
o RRVUNL Park (2000 MW)    
o RSDCL Parks (2000 MW)   
o Jalaun Parks (1200 MW) 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
Chapter IV 
Challenges and other issues 
 
34. When asked about the reasons for lagging behind the target of 20 000 MW of Solar 
Power installed capacity by 2018 -19 and again commissioning of only 10,137 MW of 
projects so far, which is far below the set targets, the Ministry in their written replies 
stated as follows: 
 
“The pace of impl ementation of the scheme was hampered due to various reasons like 
delay in acquisition of clear land, conflicts while acquiring land leading to court cases, 
tying up of Power Purchase Agreements (PPA), Great Indian Bustard (GIB) issue, refusal 
by State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) to approve tariffs even when such 
tariffs have been discovered through tariff based competitive bidding and lack of interest 
in the scheme by some State Governments. 
Despite these challenges, Ministry managed to set up 10,237 MW solar projects in 
various Solar Parks. It is also submitted that the Ministry had cancelled few Solar Parks 
on account of slow progress or on requests of the State Governments. It is also 
mentioned that out of the 20 thousand MW sanctioned und er Phase-1 of the Scheme, 17 
Solar Parks with aggregate capacity of 12,171 MW are currently active, in which Solar 
Projects of 9891 MW have been set up in 15 Solar Parks.” 
 
Details of the Solar Parks, which are yet to be commissioned are given at 
Annexure-VIII. 
 
35. On being asked as to whether the completion of the said Scheme is likely to be achieved 
within the fixed timelines, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
 
“The time line of the Solar Park scheme has been extended till March, 2026. As per the 
scheme guidelines, the parks are to be completed within a period of 2 years from date of 

23 
 
in-principle approval. However, while implementing the scheme, it is experienced  that 
due to innate challenges in developing the park, the timeline of implementation is 
generally longer.  
Giving due consideration to the challenges being faced by the park developers, Ministry 
makes all efforts to resolve the issues and also granted ext ension from time to time 
wherever required.  
Further, in order to expedite the pace of development of Solar Parks, the Central Public 
Sector Undertaking (CPSUs) have been engaged by introducing a new mode (Mode – 8) 
for implementation. A facilitation charg e of ₹ 0.05/unit of power being exported outside 
the host State from the projects in the parks is also provided to the State Governments, 
in order to encourage the States to provide necessary assistance to the Solar Power 
Park Developers (SPPDs) in identif ication & acquisition of land, to facilitate in obtaining 
all required statutory clearances, monitoring the progress, fixing the park charges, etc. 
This facilitation charge is paid only on the quantum of power that is exported outside the 
state from that p ark and only if no such charge is levied under the State Government 
policy. A total of 25 Solar Parks of aggregate capacity of over 23 GW have been 
approved under this mode.” 
 
I. Challenges in implementation of Solar Parks 
 
36.The major challenges in implemen ting the scheme inter -alia involve the acquisition of 
clear land, mismatch in timelines between solar projects and power evacuation 
infrastructure, environmental issues like Great Indian Bustard (GIB) issue in Rajasthan 
and Gujarat; regulatory challenges i n States (example – Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat) like 
non-approval of solar tariff by SERCs even after the tariff is discovered through 
competitive bidding process, on the pretext of lower tariff discovered in other States. 
Further, some States are not taking keen interest in developing the Solar Parks. The 
COVID pandemic had also decelerated the pace of implementation to considerable 
extent. 
 

24 
 
37. When asked about the challenges/issues being faced during the development of Solar 
Parks, the Ministry in their written replies has submitted the following: 
(i) Land: Land is a very critical input for development of Solar Park. The requirement of land 
is approximately 4-5 acres per MW for the setting up of Solar Parks. Land for the setting 
up of Solar Park is generally identified by the State/UT Government unless the SPPD has 
its own land. The States are encouraged to identify sites receiving good solar radiation 
and sites which are closer to CTU/STU, preferably locations with spare transmission 
capacities and water availability. The private entrepreneurs selected by the State 
Government as SPPD are free to arrange their own land for setting up the Solar Park. 
Land is generally taken on long term lease from Government as well as private sources.  
The acquisition of land for Solar Park is one of the biggest challenges.  
(ii) Difference in gestation period between solar parks and transmission 
infrastructure: The gestation period of development of Solar Park is ~ 24 months, while 
the creation of transmission infrastructure requires~36 -48months. Therefore, matching 
the implementation period of both the system s is a real challenge. The identification of 
RE potential zones and  planning for transmission infrastructure accordingly has 
addressed this challenge to a considerable extent. 
(iii) Forest issues: The earlier planned common transmission system for Barethi Solar Park 
(630 MW) and Chhatarpur  Solar Park (950 MW) was falling under Panna tiger reserve. 
Subsequently, separate sub-stations were planned for both the parks. 
(iv) Imposition of BCD: In some Solar Parks such as Kalpi Solar Park (65 MW) and NHPC 
Solar Park in Odisha (40 MW), the work has stal led subsequent to imposition of BCD, 
due to rise in imported module costs.  
(v) Sub-judice matters: In Solar Parks such as Dholera Solar Park (1000 MW) in Gujarat 
and Kadapa Solar Park (1000 MW) in Andhra Pradesh, solar projects of 700 MW and 
750 MW respectively are subjudice before APTEL, due to non -adoption of tariff by State 
regulators, even after the tariff was discovered through competitive bidding.  
(vi) Tariff approval issues:  Refusal to approve tariffs in floating Solar Parks in Kerala, 
Odisha, Madhya Prades h as the tariffs discovered were higher in comparison to the 
ground-mounted solar projects. 

25 
 
(vii) GIB issue: The progress of Phalodi-Pokaran Solar Park (750 MW) and Nokh Solar Park 
(925 MW) were hampered due to GIB issue in Rajasthan. 
The COVID -19 pandemic had a  significant impact on various sectors, including 
renewable energy. During the pandemic, the Solar Park development in India faced 
several challenges, including Labour and Supply Chain Disruptions, Administrative and 
Regulatory Delays, etc.                                  
 
38. As per the information furnished by the Ministry,  Land is stated to be a very critical input 
for development of Solar Park. Out of 2.2 Lakh acres of land identified, around 1.6 lakh 
acres have been acquired/ allotted for approved Solar Parks. When asked about evolving 
a policy for utilizing the huge land parcels available with various Ministries/ Central 
Government PSUs for achieving the targets of development of Solar Parks, the Ministry 
has stated: 
“The Solar Park Scheme encourages poss ibility of utilizing areas like cold and hot 
deserts, water surface in big reservoirs, canal bunds and sides of highways for setting up 
of Solar Parks, if found suitable. Under this Scheme, various CPSUs are already utilizing 
land/water bodies available with them, for setting up of Solar Parks.” 
 
39. When asked about the details of the sanctioned Solar Parks that are facing issues in 
acquisition of land, the Ministry has stated:  
“The issue related to acquisition of land have  been observed in many Parks. The list of 
such Parks is given at Annexure-IX.  
 
 
II. Steps taken/proposed to address the challenges 
40. On being asked the measures taken to overcome the challenges being faced in 
implementation of the scheme, Ministry has stated: 
“Though Solar Park has various benefits like assured availability of developed land 
& necessary infrastructure, power evacuation facility etc., it has some inherent issues and 
challenges and the Ministry has taken initiatives as given below: 

26 
 
(i) Land: In order to overcome this issue, a new mode (Mode -8) of implementation was 
introduced in June’2020 with a provision to incentivize the States for providing necessary 
assistance to the Solar Power Park Developers (SPPDs) in identification & acquisition of 
land, to facilitate in obtaining all required statutory clearances, monitoring the progress, 
fixing the park charges etc. 
A facilitation charge of ₹ 0.05/unit is provided to the States Governments for the quantum 
of power being exported outside the State from the projects in the Park. 
 
(ii) Difference in gestation period between solar parks and transmission infrastructure 
 
The identification of RE potential zones and planning for transmission infrastructure 
accordingly has addressed this challenge to a considerable extent. MNRE in coordination 
with Ministry of Power, CEA, CTU and States is making concerted efforts to complete the 
Green Energy Corridor (GEC) and other transmission projects timely so that renewable 
energy projects do not have to suffer due  to lack of reliable evacuation/transmission 
Infrastructure. Efforts are also made to match the timelines between park development 
and power evacuation infrastructure development through meetings with the concerned 
stakeholders. 
(iii) Through various review meet ings with all stakeholders and written communications 
efforts are being made by the Ministry to resolve the above issues in order to streamline 
development of Solar Parks.” 
 
41. On being asked about the Steps taken by the Ministry for expediting the developmen t of 
Solar Parks and as to how the Ministry’s intervention has helped in reducing this 
problem, the Ministry in their written replies has stated: 
 
 “There are various challenges and issues arising during development of Solar Parks. 
The Ministry makes efforts to resolve these issues for expeditious implementation of 
Solar Parks. The Park-wise major issues and interventions made by this Ministry are at  
Annexure-X: 
 
 

27 
 
III. Solar Parks in Hilly States 
42. Ministry has informed that the capacity for development of a Solar Park as per the 
Scheme was in a range of 500 MW and above. However, 5 smaller parks of approx. 20 
MW have also been allowed in hilly States in view of the difficult terrain and where there 
is shortage of non-agricultural land.  
 
43. On being asked about the reasons for slow progress of installation of Solar Parks in hilly 
States, the Ministry has replied as follows:  
“Although there is potential for setting up of solar PV projects in hilly States including NE 
region, the tariff discovered there, is comparatively higher due to lower insolation, difficult 
terrain and higher logistic costs. Therefore, DISCOMs seem to be no t very keen to 
procure solar power at discovered tariff. A Solar Park of capacity 20 MW in Meghalaya 
was approved by MNRE in 2015. The tariff discovered in the park was not acceptable by 
the local DISCOM and the Solar Park was eventually cancelled by MNRE in 2022. 
Similarly, another Solar Park of capacity 20 MW in Manipur was also cancelled in 2022, 
due to very slow progress . One Solar Park of 20 MW capacity has been successfully 
commissioned in Mizoram and is operational.” 
IV Floating Solar parks 
44. Floating solar parks, also known as floating solar farms or floating photovoltaic (FPV) 
systems, are a type of solar power generation facility where solar panels are installed on 
bodies of water, such as lakes, reservoirs, ponds, and even the sea. Floating  solar parks 
are gaining popularity as a viable renewable energy solution, particularly in regions with 
limited available land for conventional solar installations. These systems provide a way to 
harness solar energy efficiently while conserving land and o ffering potential benefits for 
water management and aquatic ecosystems. 
These innovative solar installations offer several advantages and come with their own set 
of unique features: 
(i) Solar Panel Installation: Solar panels used in floating solar parks are ty pically mounted 
on floating platforms or structures that can support the weight of the panels. These 
platforms can be anchored or tethered to prevent drifting. 

28 
 
(ii) Increased Efficiency: Water bodies often have a cooling effect on solar panels, which 
can help i mprove their efficiency. This is because solar panels tend to overheat when 
installed on land, and elevated temperatures can reduce their output. The cooling effect 
of water helps maintain a more optimal temperature for solar panels. 
(iii) Land Conservation: Floating solar parks can be deployed without using valuable land 
resources. This is especially important in densely populated areas where land is at a 
premium or when the water body is already in use for other purposes, such as irrigation 
or recreation. 
(iv) Reduction in Evaporation: In regions with water scarcity, floating solar panels can help 
reduce water evaporation from the surface of reservoirs and ponds, which can be a side 
benefit in addition to electricity generation. 
(v) Improved Water Quality:  The shade prov ided by the floating panels can reduce the 
growth of algae and other aquatic plants, improving water quality and reducing the need 
for chemical treatments in some cases. 
(vi) Environmental Considerations:  When designed and managed responsibly, floating 
solar parks can have a minimal environmental impact. Careful planning is essential to 
mitigate any potential disruption to aquatic ecosystems. 
(vii) Grid Connection: Just like traditional solar parks, floating solar parks are connected to 
the electrical grid, allowing the electricity generated to be distributed to homes and 
businesses. 
(viii) Floating Solar Farms in Different Water Bodies:  Floating solar installations can be  
deployed on a variety of water bodies, including natural lakes, artificial reservoirs, 
wastewater treatment ponds, and even the open sea. The choice of water body depends 
on local conditions and requirements. 
45. The Ministry has approved 7 Floating Solar Par ks with a total capacity of 2039 MW in 
various States out of which none have been commissioned so far. When asked about the 
steps taken to fast track the Floating Solar Parks struck at various phases, the Ministry 
has submitted as under: 

29 
 
“The cost of float ing Solar PV projects is higher in comparison to the ground -mounted 
solar PV projects, due to the cost of the floatation system. Therefore, the tariff discovered 
is also higher, which is often not accepted by the DISCOMs. This ultimately delays the 
park de velopment. However, in order to fast -track the development of Solar Parks 
including floating Solar Parks, Ministry conducts various meetings to address the issues 
faced by the park developers.” 
 
V Monitoring Mechanism 
 
46. Effective monitoring of solar parks is crucial to ensure optimal performance, reliability, and 
safety of the solar power generation system.  
An effective monitoring mechanism for solar parks not only ensures efficient energy 
generation but also extends the lifespan of the system, reduces maintenance costs, and 
helps in meeting performance and compliance standards. It is essential for maximizing 
the return on investment and contributing to the success of renewable energy projects. 
When asked about the existing monitoring mechanism for effective implementation of the 
different components of the Scheme, the Ministry has stated: 
“The Solar Parks are monitored regularly based on the progress reports received from 
the SPPDs on a monthly basis. Further, review meetings are also held with the park 
developers, transmission utilities & the corresponding States to review the progress and 
address their issues from time to time. Field visits are also carried out by MNRE/SECI 
officials to find out the on-site progress. 
In addition, the State s have been advised to form a Committee headed by the Principal 
Secretary/Secretary (Power/Energy/Renewable Energy) of the State Government s 
having members from CEO of SPPD, head of the SNA and three experts in the field of 
renewable energy and power system  to monitor the progress of the Park, address the 
issues arising in implementation of the Solar Park Scheme, fixing of park development 
charges etc.” 
 

30 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. The Committee note that India, endowed with a huge solar energy potentia l, 
could be a game changer in mitigating the ill -effects of fossil fuel use. The Scheme 
to establish Solar Parks a nd Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects by Ministry is a 
critical step in right direction. The MNRE, being nodal Ministry, has to put in 
concerted efforts so that solar energy surges as the main renewable energy source 
in the times to come. The Committee observe  that there is significant potential for 
Solar Energy generation under Mode 8 of the Scheme which entails collaboration 
with CPSU/State PSUs/ Government organizations/their subsidiaries or the Joint 
Ventures. The Committee note with the approval of total of 29 Solar Parks having 
aggregate capacity of over 24 GW, only 9.3 GW has been actually commissioned.   
Taking cognizance of the gap between ac tual and approved capacity, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to devise a stringent mechanism through which 
delays are minimized/eliminated at the first place itself.  The Ministry should keep 
periodic check (say quarterly or so) on different   stages of dev elopment of solar 
parks so that the time lapse of setting up and commissioning of solar parks are 
minimized. The Committee would like to be apprised of the previous interventions, 
the Ministry made in the past and the ways and means through which it would 
continue to strengthen the process of setting up of solar parks.  Therefore, the 
Committee stress upon to have effective monitoring and review mechanism at 
senior level so that the targeted capacity could be achieved within the timeline.  
2. The Committee observe that the l and constitutes the crux in the 
development of Solar Parks. The requirement of land is approximately 4 -5 acres 
per Megawatt (MW) for setting up of Solar Parks. Land for the setting up of Solar 
Park is generally identified by the State/UT Government unless the SPPD has its 
own land.  The Ministry in their written submission has stated that out of 2.2 Lakh 
acres identified, around 1.73 lakh acres have already been acquired/ allotted for 
approved Solar Parks. Further, the Committee have been informed that a total of 19 
Solar Parks with an approved capacity of 9596 MW are facing several challenges in 
acquirement of land including issues such as legal disputes and delay in land 

31 
 
allocation by State Governments.  The Committee strongly fee l that assisting State 
Governments in providing fair and timely compensation to land owners would 
provide a great boost to the solar park developers alongwith ensuring ease in 
getting environmental clearances. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to  
take up the matter with the State Governments so as to ensure acquisition of land 
in a time bound manner. The Committee also suggest the Ministry to set up a 
monitoring Unit/Cell at the highest level for having issues of stakeholders and 
keeping a regular check on Solar Park Developers. 
3. The Committee note that, under the solar park scheme, CPSUs/SECs are 
primarily the implementing agencies, designated to establish 7 solar parks of a 
combined installed capacity of 5970 MW.  Taking cognizance of the fact that  
generation/transmissions are yet to begin from these 7 solar parks, the Committee 
feel that MNRE being the nodal Ministry has to take up the responsibility of 
dedicated leadership in a way to sensitize/ motivate CPSUs like NTPC, NHPC, SECI 
etc. so th at the latter gear up their operations. The Committee firmly believe that  
with combined efforts the timeline for setting up of solar parks shall be  achieved 
without any further delays.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard.  
4. The Committee note that the total amount for CFA is estimated to be ₹ 4,050 
crore, yet only ₹ 1803.79 crore have actually been disbursed till date.  The 
Committee find such low disbursement as one of the major bottlenecks in the 
development of s olar parks. For the setting up of solar parks, Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA) up to ₹ 25 lakh per Solar Park for the preparation of Detailed 
Project Report (DPR)  is provided by the Ministry .  Additionally , CFA upto ₹ 20.00 
lakh per Megawatt or 30% of t he project cost, including Grid -connectivity 
expenses, whichever is lower, upon achieving the specified project milestones  is 
also prescribed in the Scheme. Further, Solar Energy Corporation of India Ltd. 
(SECI) disburses the approved grant in line with th ese milestones. The Committee 
would like to urge the Ministry to analyse the reasons associated with lower 
disbursements. A strong fund flow is imperative for successful development of 
any project and the Committee would like the Ministry to put in place a n inherent 

32 
 
system of audit wherein reasons for low disbursements are highlighted and the 
Ministry is in a position to take timely remedial measures for the same. They would 
like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
5. The Committee further fin d that one of the major constraints in timely 
commissioning of Solar Parks is the difference in gestation period between 
development of Solar Parks and transmission infrastructure.  The gestation period 
of development of Solar Park is  24 months, whereas the  construction activities of 
transmission infrastructure require 36 to 48 months. This incongruity results in 
delays in the development of Solar Parks. The Committee are informed that the 
Ministry is taking several steps such as identification of Renewable Energy (RE) 
potential zones, planning for transmission infrastructure accordingly etc. 
Additionally, MNRE in collaboration with the Ministry of Power,  Central Electricity 
Agency (CEA), Central Transmission Utility (CTU) and the States has initiated 
steps to complete the Green Energy Corridor (GEC) and other transmission 
projects on time. The objective is to ensure that Solar Parks do not have to suffer 
from lack of reliable evacuation and transmission Infrastructure. The Committee 
desire to be informed abo ut the latest progress made in development of 
transmission infrastructure like Green Energy Corridor etc. Furthermore, the 
Committee strongly recommend th e speedy construction of Intra -State and Inter -
State transmission systems to facilitate the efficient transfer of power generated 
from Solar Parks. The Committee also urge for setting up of Solar Energy 
Management Centers (SEMCs) to enhance forecasting of Solar Power generated 
from Solar Parks. These centres would also support grid operators in managing 
the variability and intermittency inherent in renewable power sources. 
6. The Committee have  been informed that one of the challenges to meet the 
target of 40 GW by 2023 -24 is delay in finalizing Power Purchase Agreements 
(PPAs) between SPPDs and States/DISCOMS after finalization of tenders. This 
delay can be attributed to several factors, includ ing lack clear directions from 
parent Ministry, a protracted internal approval process, involvement of multiple 
Ministries, lack of prior experience within the Government Departments etc.  The 
potential consequences of this situation are multifaceted including delay in project 

33 
 
implementation, changes in scheme regulations, costs and incentives, developers 
withdrawing from projects and financial losses for the entities involved.  T aking a 
serious view of this situation , the Committee recommend the Ministry to establish 
a single window system  which would minimize the  complexities of internal 
approval process reducing  the involvement of multiple Ministries . The Committee 
firmly hold that the Ministry should collaborate with specialized agencies to 
develop stand ardized model  formats for PPAs and fix definite time period for 
different levels of approval.  These models can serve as templates, simplifying the 
negotiation process and expediting the overall execution of Solar Power Projects.  
7. The Committee note tha t several Solar Projects are stalled due to refusal by 
State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) to approve tariffs, even when 
such tariffs have been determined through tariff based competitive bidding. 
Additionally, certain Solar Parks like Dholera  Solar Park (1000 MW) in Gujarat and 
Kadapa Solar Pa rk (1000 MW) in Andhra Pradesh are currently under litigation  in 
the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL), leading to further delays in 
completion of Solar Projects. While Ministry have  statedly  tried to resolve the 
matter through various communication and review meetings at the highest level 
but the matter is yet to be resolved. In light of these challenges, the Committee feel 
that the Ministry need to find a permanent solution to this problem and explore the 
possibility of implementing alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, such as 
arbitration and reconciliation  forum to enable the stakeholders to reach  at 
mutually agreed solution; in a bid to avoid project delays.  
8. The Committee have  observed that  several Solar Projects like Kalpi Solar 
Park (65 MW) have been delayed because Solar Power Project Developers (SPPDs) 
are facing difficulties in acquiring Solar modules and Solar photovoltaic with a 
capacity of (PV) Cells due to levy of Basic Cust oms Duty(BCD). Further, on 
09.03.2021, Ministry issued an Office Memorandum announcing the imposition of 
Basic Customs Duty on solar cells and modules. As per this announcement, w.e.f. 
1 April, 2022 , any import of solar PV modules would attract 40% basic C ustoms 
Duty (BCD), while the import of solar PV cells would have a 25%  BCD. The 
Committee understand that these high import duties were imposed to reduce the 

34 
 
influx of cheaper Solar components from China and to promote the domestic 
production of those items.  To encourage the growth of the domestic Solar module 
industry, the Government also introduced a Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme. However, despite these measures, the domestic industry has not yet 
reached its full potential, and the combination of  high import duties and the 
Approved List of Modules and Manufacturers (ALMM) has led to a shortage of 
modules in the country, im pacting ongoing solar projects.  The Committee 
strongly hope   that the matter should be taken up with the Ministr y of Finance on 
an urgent basis. Since the BCD rates need to be reevaluated, and a more balanced 
approach has to be taken to ensure that stall ed Solar Projects are completed 
according to their planned timelines,  the Committee would like to  be  apprised of 
the progress made in this regard. 
 
9. The Committee observe that India has made significant progress in its Solar 
(PV) manufacturing capacity with 6 GW for solar PV Cells and approximately 38 
GW for solar PV modules. This represents a substantial increase from 2020 when 
India had the  solar cell  capacity of 3 GW, which has doubled to 6 GW as of March 
2023. Similarly the solar PV module capacity, meanwhile, has grown from 15 GW to 
38 GW during the same period of time. The Committee appreciate that Ministry has 
taken significant steps such as creating “favorable” policy environment by 
introducing the PLI scheme, and establishing a list of approved  modules and 
manufacturers. These measures have played a pivotal role in doubling India’s solar 
cell and PV module capacity since 202 0. These measures are expected f or 
prospering domestic Solar manufacturing i ndustry towards achieving 110 GW of 
solar PV module capacity by fiscal 2026, with an additional 72 GW of new 
manufacturing capacity set to come up within the next three years. This 
substantial expansion will establish self -sufficiency and make India the second-
largest PV manufacturing country globally following China. Nevertheless, to 
further strengthen domestic manufacturing, the Committee feel that additional 
steps are required to be initiated and therefore recommend that Government 
should consider extend ing the existing PLI scheme to cover other ancillary 

35 
 
components, such as glass and ethylene vinyl acetate which are used in Solar 
panel lamination.  There need to be sufficient incentives to encourage electricity 
consumption among solar PV manufacturers, a longwith subsidies to support the 
initial capital costs involved in setting up production facilities. The Committee also 
desire that the exemptions from excise duty and Zero import duty on raw materials 
should be implemented to reduce the manufacturing cos ts. The Ministry should 
also work on providing Viability Gap Funding (VGF) and low interest rate loans to 
domestic manufacturers to enhance their financial viability.  
 
10. The Committee are well aware of the challenges being faced by several Solar 
Parks in Rajasthan such as Phalodi -Pokaran Solar Park (750 MW) and the Nokh 
Solar Park (925 MW) in relation to the endangered Great Indian Bustard(GIB) issue. 
These majestic birds are on the brink of extinction, with less than 100 remaining in 
the natural habitat. Given their size, any collision with the power lines proves fatal 
for such birds, and the network of power lines stemming from solar plants have 
also formed a deadly web a round the GIB habitat. As a result their population has 
significantly dwindled over the l ast few years. Furthermore, it has been learnt that 
on 19.04.2021, Hon’ble Supreme Court has passed an order in M. K. Ranjitsinh  & 
Ors. V. Union of India & Ors., outli ning direction and measures to be taken 
particularly regarding the conversion of over-head power transmission lines into 
underground power lines in the areas identified as Priority and Potential habitats 
for the Great Indian Bustard (GIB).  In this regard,  Hon’ble Supreme Court had also 
constituted a three member Committee comprising of wildlife experts and 
Scientists for the purpose of assessing the feasibility of laying underground power 
lines. Acknowledging the gravity of the issue, the Committee feel the need to strike 
a rig htful balance between wildlife c onservation, especially Great Indian Bustard 
and development of Green Energy initiatives. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
explore advanced technological methods like microwaves for wireless 
transmission of solar power from solar parks in such critical locations to protect 
these endangered species.  

36 
 
11. The Committee note that several Solar Projects are experiencing delays in 
finalization of their external power evacuation systems and transmission 
infrastructure primarily because these projects are located in forest areas. This 
situation has apparently caused delay in implementation of projects like Barethi 
Solar Park (630 MW) and Chhatarpur Solar Park (950 MW), which are situated 
within Panna Tiger res erve. The Committee feel that the Ministry Should 
collaborate with all relevant stakeholders viz. Ministry of Environment Forest and 
Climate Change, Central Electricity Authority (CEA), Central Transmission Unit 
(CTU)/State Transmission Unit (STU), Solar P ower Park Developers (SSPDs) and 
other concerned Ministries/Department s of the Union and the States, to evolve a 
comprehensive action plan, to ensure hassle free and time bound external power 
evacuation systems and transmission infrastructure for solar parks, especially for 
those located in forest areas.  
 
12. The Committee note that the floating Solar Parks are facing maintenance 
issues. The SECI and MNRE are reportedly deliberating highly automated solutions 
to address those. The Committee desire to be furnished the action taken on this 
issue. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI;  
6 December, 2023              
15 Agrahayana,1945 (Saka) 
                               DR. SANJAY JAISWAL  
                            CHAIRPERSON 
    COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
Annexure-I 
 
STATE-WISE ESTIMATED SOLAR ENERGY POTENTIAL IN THE COUNTRY 
Sl. No. State/UT Solar Potential (GWp) #  
1.   Andhra Pradesh 38.44 
2.   Arunachal Pradesh 8.65 
3.   Assam 13.76 
4.   Bihar 11.20 
5.   Chhattisgarh 18.27 
6.   Delhi 2.05 
7.   Goa 0.88 
8.   Gujarat 35.77 
9.   Haryana 4.56 
10.   Himachal Pradesh 33.84 
11.   Jammu & Kashmir 111.05 
12.   Jharkhand 18. 18 
13.   Karnataka 24.70 
14.   Kerala 6.11 
15.   Madhya Pradesh 61.66 
16.   Maharashtra 64.32 
17.   Manipur 10.63 
18.   Meghalaya 5.86 
19.   Mizoram 9.09 
20.   Nagaland 7.29 
21.   Odisha 25.78 
22.   Punjab 2.81 
23.   Rajasthan 142.31 
24.   Sikkim 4.94 
25.   Tamil Nadu 17.67 
26.   Telangana 20.41 
27.   Tripura 2.08 
28.   Uttar Pradesh 22.83 
29.   Uttarakhand 16.80 
30.   West Bengal 6.26 
31.   UTs 0.79 
TOTAL 748.98 
 
# Assessed by National Institute of Solar Energy 

38 
 
Annexure-II 
STATE/UT-WISE DATA FOR SOLAR INSOLATION 
S.NO State/UT 
Lowest level of 
Insolation 
"KWh/m^2"2 
Highest level of 
Insolation 
"KWh/m^2" 
Average 
Insolation 
"KWh/m^2" 
1.  
Andaman&Nicobar 4.182 5.391 4.671 
2.  
Andhra Pradesh 3.736 6.097 4.808 
3.  
Arunachal Pradesh 2.949 3.810 3.508 
4.  
Assam 3.964 4.718 4.259 
5.  
Bihar 3.696 5.196 4.606 
6.  
Chandigarh 3.433 4.650 4.410 
7.  
Chhattisgarh 4.072 5.370 4.629 
8.  
Goa 4.555 5.839 5.076 
9.  
Gujarat 3.927 5.942 4.874 
10.  
Haryana 3.282 4.733 4.439 
11.  
Himachal Pradesh 3.507 4.922 4.374 
12.  
Jammu & Kashmir 2.797 5.533 4.238 
13.  
Jharkhand 3.568 5.431 4.615 
14.  
Karnataka 4.191 6.181 4.938 
15.  
Kerala 3.665 6.241 5.232 
16.  
Ladakh 3.272 5.239 4.660 
17.  
Madhya Pradesh 3.357 5.692 4.834 
18.  
Maharashtra 2.068 6.255 4.894 
19.  
Manipur 4.008 4.820 4.341 

39 
 
20.  
Meghalaya 3.803 4.308 4.087 
21.  
Mizoram 3.989 4.839 4.284 
22.  
Nagaland 3.823 4.115 3.989 
23.  
Odisha 3.092 5.377 4.691 
24.  
Pondicherry 4.429 5.737 4.847 
25.  
Punjab 3.014 5.219 4.275 
26.  
Rajasthan 4.104 6.184 4.975 
27.  
Sikkim 3.293 3.817 3.544 
28.  
Tamil Nadu 4.266 5.884 5.052 
29.  
Telangana 4.544 5.739 5.044 
30.  
Tripura 3.180 4.411 4.133 
31.  
Uttar Pradesh 3.175 5.426 4.492 
32.  
Uttarakhand 3.626 4.634 4.373 
33.  
West Bengal 3.519 4.591 4.149 
 
Note-Data is not available for Delhi, Daman&Diu and Dadra&Nagar Haveli and 
Lakshadweep 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
Annexure-III 
SOLAR PARK-WISE CFA DISBURSED (in lakh) 
S. No. Name of Park Capacity approved  
(MW) 
CFA disbursed 
34.   Ananthapuramu-I Solar Park 1400 24480.5 
35.   Kurnool Solar Park 1000 20025.0 
36.   Kadapa Solar Park 1000 5425.0 
37.   Ananthapuramu-II Solar Park 500 9124.8 
38.   Solar Wind Hybrid Park 200 25.0 
39.   Rajnandgaon Solar Park 100                0 
40.   Radhnesada Solar Park 700 5615.0 
41.   Pavagada Solar Park 2000 35194.5 
42.   Kasaragod Solar Park 105 882.0 
43.   Rewa Solar Park 750 13633.5 
44.   Mandsaur Solar Park 250 2548.5 
45.   Neemuch Solar Park 500 1560.5 
46.   Agar Solar Park 550 1723.5 
47.   Shajapur Solar Park 450 1800.0 
48.   Sai Guru Solar Park  500 217.1 
49.   Dondaicha Solar Park 250 625.0 
50.   Vankal Solar Park 20 58.0 
51.   Bhadla-II Solar Park 680 4489.7* 
52.   Bhadla-III Solar Park 1000 11069.8* 
53.   Bhadla-IV Solar Park 500 6025.0* 

41 
 
54.   Phalodi-Pokaran Solar Park 750 1825.0* 
55.   Fatehgarh Phase-1B Solar Park 421 25.0 
56.   Nokh Solar Park 925 6685.0 
57.   Solar Park in UP 365 3801.0 
58.   Jalaun Solar Park 1200 25.0 
59.   Mirzapur Solar Park 100 10.0 
60.   Lalitpur Solar Park 600 25.0 
61.   Jhansi Solar Park 600 25.0 
             
Note: There are some solar parks for which no CFA has been released. 
* Other than this, CFA of ₹ 11440.0 Lakhs released to RVPN for development of External 
Transmission System for Bhadla II (680 MW), Bhadla III (500 MW) &Bhadla  IV (250 MW) 
Solar Parks.  
CFA of ₹12000.0 Lakhs released to PGCIL for development of External Transmission 
System for Bhadla   III (500 MW), Bhadla IV (250 MW) and PhalodiPokaran Solar Park 
(750 MW)” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
Annexure-IV 
YEAR-WISE EXPENDITURE INCURRED ON THE SCHEME 
Sl. No. Financial Year Expenditure incurred 
(₹ in Crore) 
1.  2014-15 155.88 
2.  2015-16 368.13 
3.  2016-17 117.48 
4.  2017-18 430.51 
5.  2018-19 267.13 
6.  2019-20 227.54 
7.  2020-21 68.18 
8.  2021-22 207.33 
9.  2022-23 676.10 
10.  2023-24 149.84 
Total 2518.29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
Annexure-V 
MODE-WISE APPROVAL OF SOLAR PARKS 
Sl. 
No. 
Solar Park Mode 
1 
Mode 2 Mode 
4 
Mode 
5 
Mode 
8 
Capacity 
1 Ananthapuramu-I Solar Park - 1400 - - - 1400 
2 Kurnool Solar Park - 1000 - - - 1000 
3 Kadapa Solar Park - 1000 - - - 1000 
4 Ananthapuramu-II Solar Park - 500 - - - 500 
5 Solar Wind Hybrid Park - - - 200 - 200 
6 Rajnandgaon Solar Park - - - - 100 100 
7 Radhnesada Solar Park 700 - - - - 700 
8 Dholera Solar Park Ph-I 1000 - - - - 1000 
9 NTPC RE Park - - - - 4750 4750 
10 GSECL RE Park - - - - 3325 3325 
11 GIPCL RE Park Ph-I - - - - 600 600 
12 GIPCL RE Park Ph-II - - - - 1200 1200 
13 GIPCL RE Park Ph-III - - - - 450 450 
14 Kaza Solar Park - - - - 880 880 
15 Kinnaur Solar Park - - - - 400 400 
16 Floating Solar Park - - - 100 - 100 
17 Deogarh Solar Park 20 - - - - 20 
18 Palamu Solar Park 20 - - - - 20 
19 Garwha Solar Park 20 - - - - 20 
20 Simdega Solar Park 20 - - - - 20 
21 DVC Floating Park Ph-I - - - - 755 755 
22 DVC Floating Park Ph-II - - - - 234 234 
23 Pavagada Solar Park - 2000 - - - 2000 
24 Kalaburgi Solar Park - - - - 500 500 
25 Kasaragod Solar Park - 105 - - - 105 
26 Floating Solar Park -   - - 50 50 
27 Rewa Solar Park - 750 - - - 750 
28 Mandsaur Solar Park - 250 - - - 250 
29 Neemuch Solar Park - - - - 500 500 
30 Agar Solar Park - - - - 550 550 
31 Shajapur Solar Park - - - - 450 450 
32 Omkareswar Floating Park - - - - 600 600 
33 Chhattarpur Solar Park - - - - 950 950 
34 Morena Solar Park - - - - 1400 1400 
35 Barethi Solar Park - - - - 630 630 

44 
 
36 Sai Guru Solar Park  - - 500 - - 500 
37 Dondaicha Solar Park 250 - - - - 250 
38 Vankal Solar Park 20 - - - - 20 
39 Solar Park in Odisha - - - 40 - 40 
40 Floating Solar Park  Ph-I - - - - 100 100 
41 Floating Solar Park Ph-II - - - - 200 200 
42 Bhadla-II Solar Park 680 - - - - 680 
43 Bhadla-III Solar Park - - 1000 - - 1000 
44 Bhadla-IV Solar Park - - 500 - - 500 
45 Phalodi-Pokaran Solar Park - - 750 - - 750 
46 Fatehgarh Ph-1B Solar Park - - 421 - - 421 
47 Nokh Solar Park 925 - - - - 925 
48 Pugal Solar Park  - - - - 1450 1450 
49 RVUN Solar Park - - - - 1310 1310 
50 Solar Park in UP - 365 - - - 365 
51 Jalaun Solar Park - - - - 1200 1200 
52 Mirzapur Solar Park - - - 100 - 100 
53 Kalpi Solar Park - - - 65 - 65 
54 Lalitpur Solar Park - - - - 600 600 
55 Jhansi Solar Park - - - - 600 600 
56 Chitrakoot Solar Park - - - - 800 800 
Total 3655 7370 3171 505 24584 39285 
  
Note: No parks are sanctioned under Mode-3, 6 & 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 
Annexure-VI 
DETAILS OF SOLAR PROJECTS DEVELOPERS (SPDS) INSIDE SOLAR PARKS (AS 
ON 30-09-2023) 
Sl. No. Name of the Solar 
Park Name of SPD Capacity 
(MW)  
1 
Ananthapuramu 
Solar Park (1400 
MW) 
NTPC 250 
SB Energy Solar Private Limited 250 
Sprng Agnitra Pvt. Ltd. 250 
Ayana Ananthapuramu Solar Private Limited 250 
Tata Power Renewable Energy Limited 100 
Azure Power Thirty-Six Pvt Ltd 50 
Athena Karnal Solar Power Pvt Ltd 150 
IndiGrid Solar-I (AP) Private Limited 100 
Sub-Total 1400 
2 
Kurnool Solar Park 
(1000 MW) 
Aarish Solar Power Pvt. Ltd. 50 
Aashman Energy Pvt. Ltd. 50 
Divyesh Power Pvt. Ltd. 50 
Elena Renewable Energy Pvt. Ltd. 50 
Pratyash Renewable Pvt. Ltd. 100 
SEI Baskara Power Pvt. Ltd. 50 
SEI EnerStar Renewable Energy Pvt. Ltd. 50 
SEI Mihir Energy Pvt. Ltd. 50 
Shreyas Renewable Energy Pvt. Ltd. 50 
Zuvan Energy Pvt. Ltd. 50 
SBG Cleantech Two Ltd. 350 
Azure Power India Pvt Ltd 100 
Sub-Total 1000 
3 
Ananthapuramu-II 
Solar Park (500 
MW) 
Andhra Pradesh Power Generation Corporation 
Limited 400 
Yet to be identified 100 
Sub-Total 500 
4 
Kadapa Solar Park 
(1000 MW) 
Solairedirect Energy India Private Limited 250 
SB Energy Seven Private Limited 250 
Sprng Soura Kiran Vidyut Pvt. Ltd. 250 
Ayana Kadapa Renewable Power Private Limited 250 
Sub-Total 1000 
5 Ramaguri Solar Park 
(300 MW) SECI (EPC Mode) 300 

46 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Solar 
Park Name of SPD Capacity 
(MW)  
6 Rajnandgaon Solar 
Park (100 MW) Tata Power Renewable Energy Limited 100 
7 
Radhanesda Solar 
Park (700 MW) 
Engie 200 
Tata Power Renewable Energy Limited 100 
Gujarat Industries Power Company Ltd 100 
Gujarat State Electricity Corporation Limited 200 
SJVN GEL 100 
Sub-Total 700 
8 
Dholera Solar Park 
(1000 MW) 
Tata Power Renewable Energy Limited 400 
Vena Energy 100 
ReNew 200 
SJVN 100 
TEQ 200 
Sub-Total 1000 
9 
NTPC RE Park 
(4750 MW) 
NTPC (EPC Mode) 2455 
NTPC (Yet to be finalized) 2295 
Sub-Total 4750 
10 
GSECL RE Park 
(3325 MW) 
NHPC 200 
SJVN GEL 200 
RNTPC REL 200 
GIPCL 600 
Yet to be identified  2125 
Sub-Total 3325 
11 GIPCL Ph-I RE Park 
(600 MW) Yet to be identified 600 
12 GIPCL Ph-II RE 
Park (1200 MW) Yet to be identified 1200 
13 GIPCL Ph-III RE 
Park (575 MW) Yet to be identified 575 
14 Floating Solar Park 
by SECI (100 MW) Yet to be identified 100 
15 
DVC Ph-I Floating 
Solar Park (755 
MW) 
Yet to be identified 755 
16 
DVC Ph-II Floating 
Solar Park (234 
MW) 
Yet to be identified 234 
17 Pavagada Solar Park 
(2000 MW) 
Yarrow Infrastructure Limited 50 
Fortum FinnSurya Energy Private Limited 100 
Tata Power Renewable Energy Ltd, 400 

47 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Solar 
Park Name of SPD Capacity 
(MW)  
Parampujya Solar Energy Private Limited, 150 
ACME Solar Holdings Pvt Ltd 100 
Renew Solar Power Pvt Ltd 350 
SBE Five Ltd 200 
Azure Power India Pvt Ltd. 100 
Giriraj Renewables Pvt Ltd 300 
Fortum Solar India Private Ltd 250 
Sub-Total 2000 
18 Bidar Solar Park 
(500 MW) Yet to be identified 500 
19 
Kasaragod Solar 
Park (105 MW) 
IREDA (EPC Mode) 50 
THDCIL (EPC Mode) 50 
MIMS 5 
Sub-Total 105 
20 NHPC Floating Solar 
Park (50 MW) Yet to be identified 50 
21 Mandsaur Solar Park 
(250 MW) NTPC (EPC Mode) 250 
22 
Rewa Solar Park 
(750 MW) 
Mahindra Renewables Private Limited 250 
Acme Solar Ltd 250 
Arinsun clean Energy Ltd 250 
Sub-Total 750 
23 
Neemuch Solar Park 
(500 MW) 
TP Saurya 330 
Aljomath Energy & Water 170 
Sub-Total 500 
24 
Agar Solar Park (550 
MW) 
Avaada Energy 200 
Beempow Energy 350 
Sub-Total 550 
25 
Shajapur Solar Park 
(450 MW) 
NTPC REL 325 
Taletuttayi Solar Project Nine 125 
Sub-Total 450 
26 Chhatarpur Solar 
Park (450 MW) Yet to be identified 450 
27 
Omkareshwar 
Floating Solar Park 
(600 MW) 
NHDC 88 
Amp Energy 100 
SJVN Ltd 90 
Yet to be identified 322 
Sub-Total 600 
28 Barethi Solar Park Yet to be identified 630 

48 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Solar 
Park Name of SPD Capacity 
(MW)  
(630 MW) 
29 Sai Guru Solar Park 
(500 MW) Matter under Arbitration 500 
30 Dondaicha Solar 
Park (250 MW) TP Saurya 250 
31 
Vankal Solar Park 
(20 MW) 
Sukhbir Agro Energy Ltd. 15 
ATA Renewables Pvt. Ltd. 5 
Sub-Total 20 
32 Solar Park NHPC 
(40 MW) Yet to be identified 40 
33 Floating Solar Park 
Ph-I (200 MW) Yet to be identified 200 
34 Floating Solar Park 
Ph-II (100 MW) Yet to be identified 100 
35 
Bhadla Ph II Solar 
Park (680 MW) 
NTPC (EPC MODE) 260 
Rising Sun EnergyPvt.Ltd 140 
Yarrow Infrastructure limited 70 
Solaire Surya Urja Private Limited 140 
Fortum Finn Surya Energy Private limited 70 
Sub-Total 680 
36 
Bhadla-III Solar Park 
(1000 MW) 
Acme Solar Holding Pvt Ltd. 200 
SBG Cleantech One Ltd 300 
Hero Solar Energy Pvt Ltd 300 
SBE Four Ltd 200 
Sub-Total 1000 
37 
Bhadla IV Solar Park 
(500 MW) 
Phelan Energy India RJ Pvt Ltd 50 
Clean Sustainable Energy Pvt Ltd 100 
SB Energy 3 Pvt Ltd 100 
Azure Power India Pvt Ltd 200 
Renew Solar Power Pvt Ltd 50 
Sub-Total 500 
38 
Phalodi Pokaran 
Solar Park (750 
MW) 
Adani Solar Energy RJ ONE Solar Pvt. Ltd. 600 
Yet to be identified 150 
Sub-Total 750 
39 
Fatehgarh Ph IB 
Solar Park (421 
MW) 
NTPC Ltd. 296 
Adani Hybrid Energy Jaisalmer Four Limited 125 
Sub-Total 421 
40 Nokh Solar Park Rising Sun 190 

49 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Solar 
Park Name of SPD Capacity 
(MW)  
(925 MW) NTPC REL (EPC Mode) 735 
Sub-Total 925 
41 Pugal Solar Park Ph-
I (1000 MW) Yet to be identified 1000 
42 Pugal Solar Park Ph-
II (1000 MW) Yet to be identified 1000 
43 
RRVUL Solar Park 
(2000 MW) 
NLC India  810 
Coal India (EPC Mode) 1190 
Sub-Total 2000 
44 Kalpi Solar Park (65 
MW) NHPC (EPC Mode) 65 
45 
UP Solar Park (365 
MW) 
Rattan India2 Solar Pvt Ltd 50 
Enviro Solar Pvt Ltd 75 
Azure Venus Pvt Ltd 40 
SJVN Ltd 200 
Sub-Total 365 
46 Jalaun Solar Park 
(1200 MW) Yet to be identified 1200 
47 Mirzapur Solar Park 
(100 MW) Yet to be identified 100 
48 Jhansi Solar Park 
(600 MW) Yet to be identified 600 
49 Lalitpur Solar Park 
(600 MW) Yet to be identified 600 
50 Chitrakoot Solar 
Park (800 MW) Yet to be identified 800 
Total 37490 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
Annexure-VII 
LIST OF APPROVED SOLAR PARKS  
Sl. No. State Name of Park Name of the SPPD Capacity 
approved  
(MW)  
Projects 
installed 
so far 
(MW) 
1.  
Andhra 
Pradesh 
(5 Parks, 4200 
MW)  
Ananthapuramu-I Solar 
Park 
AP Solar Power 
Corporation Pvt. Ltd. 
(APSPCL); A JVC of 
SECI, APGENCO 
and NREDCAP 
1400 1400 
2.  Kurnool Solar Park 1000 1000 
3.  Kadapa Solar Park 1000 250 
4.  Ananthapuramu-II Solar 
Park 500 400 
5.  Ramagiri Solar Park 
Solar Energy 
Corporation of India 
(SECI) Ltd. 
300 0 
6.  
Chhattisgarh 
(1 Park, 100 
MW) 
Rajnandgaon Solar 
Park SECI Ltd. 100  0 
7.  
Gujarat 
(7 Parks, 
12150 MW) 
Radhnesada Solar Park Gujarat Power 
Corporation Limited 
(GPCL) 
700 500 
8.  Dholera Solar Park  1000 300 
9.  NTPC RE Park  NTPC Renewable 
Energy Ltd. 4750 0 
10.  GSECL RE Park 
Gujarat State 
Electricity 
Corporation Ltd. 
(GSECL) 
3325 0 
11.  GIPCL RE Park Ph-I Gujarat Industries 
Power Company Ltd 
(GIPCL) 
600 0 
12.  GIPCL RE Park Ph-II 1200 0 
13.  GIPCL RE Park Ph-III 575  0 
14.  
Jharkhand 
(3 Parks, 1089 
MW) 
SECI Floating Solar 
Park SECI Ltd. 100 0 
15.  DVC Floating Solar 
Park Ph-I Damodar Valley 
Corporation (DVC) 
755 0 
16.  DVC Floating Solar 
Park Ph-II 234  0 
17.  Karnataka 
(2 Parks, 2500 
MW) 
Pavagada Solar Park 
Karnataka Solar 
Power Development 
Corporation Pvt. Ltd. 
(KSPDCL); JVC of 
KREDL & SECI 
2000 2000 
18.  Kalburgi Solar Park 
Karnataka 
Renewable Energy 
Development Ltd 
500 0 

51 
 
Sl. No. State Name of Park Name of the SPPD Capacity 
approved  
(MW)  
Projects 
installed 
so far 
(MW) 
(KREDL) 
19.  Kerala 
(2 Parks, 155 
MW) 
Kasargod Solar Park 
Renewable Power 
Corporation of Kerala 
Limited (RPCKL); A 
JVC of SECI & KSEB 
105 100 
20.  Floating Solar Park NHPC Limited 50 0 
21.  
Madhya 
Pradesh 
(8 Parks, 4680 
MW) 
Rewa Solar Park Rewa Ultra Mega 
Solar Limited 
(RUMSL); A JVC of 
Madhya Pradesh Urja 
Vikas Nigam Limited 
(MPUVN) & SECI 
750 750 
22.  Mandsaur Solar Park 250 250 
23.  Neemuch Solar Park 500 0 
24.  Agar Solar Park 550 0 
25.  Shajapur Solar Park 450 0 
26.  Omkareswar Floating 
Solar Park 600 0 
27.  Chhatarpur Solar Park 950 0 
28.  Barethi Solar Park NTPC Renewable 
Energy Ltd 630 0 
29.  
Maharashtra(2 
Parks, 750 
MW) 
Sai Guru Solar Park  M/s Sai Guru Mega 
Solar Park Pvt. Ltd. 500 0 
30.  Dondaicha Solar Park 
Maharashtra State 
Electricity Generating 
Company Ltd. 
(MAHAGENCO) 
250 0 
31.  
Mizoram 
(1 Park, 20 
MW) 
Vankal Solar Park 
Power & Electricity 
Department 20 20 
32.  
Odisha 
(3 Parks, 340 
MW) 
Solar Park by NHPC NHPC Limited 40 0 
33.  Floating Solar Park Ph-I NHPC Limited & 
GEDCOL 100 0 
34.  Floating Solar Park Ph-
II 
NHPC Limited & 
GEDCOL 200 0 
35.  
Rajasthan 
(9 Parks, 8276 
MW) 
Bhadla-II Solar Park 
Rajasthan Solar Park 
Development 
Company Ltd. 
(RSDCL); subsidiary 
of RRECL 
680 680 
36.  Bhadla-III Solar Park 
M/s Surya Urja 
Company of 
Rajasthan Ltd 
(SUCRL); A JVC of 
State Govt. & IL&FS 
Energy 
1000 1000 

52 
 
Sl. No. State Name of Park Name of the SPPD Capacity 
approved  
(MW)  
Projects 
installed 
so far 
(MW) 
37.  Bhadla-IV Solar Park 
M/s Adani 
Renewable Energy 
Park Rajasthan 
Limited (AREPRL); A 
JVC of State Govt. & 
Adani Renewable 
Energy Park Ltd. 
500 500 
38.  Phalodi-Pokaran Solar 
Park 
M/s Essel Surya Urja 
Company of 
Rajasthan Limited 
(ESUCRL); A JVC of 
State Govt. & Essel 
Infraprojects Ltd 
750 300 
39.  Fatehgarh Phase-1B 
Solar Park AREPRL 421 421 
40.  Nokh Solar Park 
RSDCL 
925 0 
41.  Pugal Solar Park Ph-I 1000 0 
42.  Pugal Solar Park Ph-II 1000 0 
43.  RVUN Solar Park 
Rajasthan Rajya 
Vidyut Utpadan 
Nigam Ltd (RRVUNL) 
2000  0 
44.  
Uttar Pradesh 
(7 Park, 3730 
MW) 
Solar Park in UP 
Lucknow Solar Power 
Development 
Corporation Ltd. 
(LSPDCL); A JVC of 
UPNEDA & SECI 
365 240 
45.  Jalaun Solar Park Bundelkhand Saur 
Urja Limited (BSUL); 
A JVC of NHPC & 
UPNEDA 
1200 0 
46.  Mirzapur Solar Park 100 0 
47.  Kalpi Solar Park 65 26 
48.  Lalitpur Solar Park TUSCO Ltd; A JVC of 
THDC & UPNEDA 
600 0 
49.  Jhansi Solar Park 600 0 
50.  Chitrakoot Solar Park 800 0 
Total 37990 10137 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
Annexure-VIII 
 
“LIST OF SOLAR PARKS WITH DATE OF IN-PRINCIPLE APPROVAL WHERE 
SOLAR PROJECTS ARE NOT COMMISSIONED EITHER FULLY OR PARTIALLY 
 
Sl. No. Solar Park Date of in-principle 
approval  
Capacity (MW)  
1.  Ramagiri Solar Park 11-Nov-2021 300 
2.  Rajnandgaon Solar Park 31-Mar-2022 100 
3.  NTPC RE Park  12-Jul-2021 4750 
4.  GSECL RE Park 12-Aug-2021 3325 
5.  GIPCL RE Park Ph-I 24-Sep-2021 600 
6.  GIPCL RE Park Ph-II 24-Feb-2022 1200 
7.  GIPCL RE Park Ph-III 31-Mar-2022 575 
8.  SECI Floating Solar Park 4-Apr-2019 100 
9.  DVC Floating Solar Park Ph-I 24-Feb-2022 755 
10.  DVC Floating Solar Park Ph-II 31-Mar-2022 234 
11.  Kalburgi Solar Park 26-Apr-2021 500 
12.  Floating Solar Park 8-Dec-2020 50 
13.  Neemuch Solar Park 28-Jan-2020 500 
14.  Agar Solar Park 29-Jan-2020 550 
15.  Shajapur Solar Park 30-Jan-2020 450 
16.  Omkareswar Floating Solar Park 17-Sep-2020 600 
17.  Chhattarpur Solar Park 17-Sep-2020 950 
18.  Barethi Solar Park 17-Sep-2020 630 
19.  Sai Guru Solar Park  29-Sep-2015 500 
20.  Dondaicha Solar Park 17-Dec-2015 250 
21.  Solar Park in Odisha 19-Mar-2020 40 
22.  Floating Solar Park Ph-I 8-Dec-2020 100 
23.  Floating Solar Park Ph-II 24-Feb-2022 200 
24.  Nokh Solar Park 18-Jul-2017 925 
25.  Pugal Solar Park Ph-I 24-Feb-2022 1000 
26.  Pugal Solar Park Ph-II 31-Mar-2022 1000 
27.  RVUN Solar Park   31-Mar-2022 2000 
28.  Jalaun Solar Park 17-Sep-2020 1200 
29.  Mirzapur Solar Park 2-Mar-2021 100 
30.  Lalitpur Solar Park 13-Oct-2020 600 
31.  Jhansi Solar Park 13-Oct-2020 600 
32.  Chitrakoot Solar Park 18-Aug-2021 800 
 
 

54 
 
Annexure-IX 
LIST OF SOLAR PARKS AFFECTED WITH LAND ISSUES 
Sl. No. Solar Park Capacity  (MW)  
1.   Kadapa Solar Park 1000 
2.   Solar Wind Hybrid Park 200 
3.   Kaza Solar Park 880 
4.   Kinnaur Solar Park 400 
5.   Deogarh Solar Park 20 
6.   Palamu Solar Park 20 
7.   Garwha Solar Park 20 
8.   Simdega Solar Park 20 
9.   Kalaburagi Solar Park 500 
10.   Dondaicha Solar Park 250 
11.   Phalodi-Pokaran Solar Park 750 
12.   Fatehgarh Phase-1B Solar Park 421 
13.   Pugal Solar Park 1450 
14.   Solar Park in UP 365 
15.   Jalaun Solar Park 1200 
16.   Mirzapur Solar Park 100 
17.   Lalitpur Solar Park 600 
18.   Jhansi Solar Park 600 
19.   Chitrakoot Solar Park 800 
  TOTAL 9596 
 

55 
 
Annexure-X 
The Park-wise major issues and interventions made by this Ministry 
Sl. 
No. 
Solar Park Challenges/Issues Ministry’s intervention 
1.  Kadapa Solar Park, 
Andhra Pradesh  
(1000 MW) 
250 MW solar projects already 
commissioned. For the balance 750 
MW, tariff discovered in the 
competitive bidding was adopted by 
APERC subject to certain 
amendments to PSA. 
The developers have challenged 
the conditional approval of PSA by 
APERC in APTEL. APTEL has 
issued final orders on 27.02.2020 in 
favour of developers. The order of 
APTEL is yet to be adopted by the 
State Govt. 
Ministry through various 
communications to the 
highest level and review 
meetings has tried to resolve 
the issue.The matter is yet to 
be resolved. 
2.  Ananthapuramu-II 
Solar Park, Andhra 
Pradesh (500 MW) 
Solar Park is developed and 400 MW 
solar project  is also commissioned. 
For the balance 100 MW capacity, 
tender is to be issued by the 
State/SPPD. 
State Govt. has been 
requested several times to 
finalize bidders for this 100 
MW capacity. 
3.  Dholera Solar Park, 
Gujarat (1000 MW)  
300 MW solar projects already 
commissioned. For the balance 700 
MW capacity, discovered tariff has 
not been accepted by State 
Regulator. GUVNL has re - tendered 
this capacity. However, the 
developers of initial tender moved to 
APTEL for stay of retender and 
APTEL’s final order is pending. 
State Govt. has been 
requested to resolve the 
issue in multiple review 
meetings. 
4.  SECI Floating Solar 
Park, Jharkhand 
(100 MW) 
Delay in approval of Solar Park cost 
and charges by the State Govt. 
State Govt has been 
requested to form 
suchCommittee for the same 
5.  NHPC Floating 
Solar Park, Kerala 
(50 MW) 
Initial tariff discovered in the bidding 
was not accepted by the State 
DISCOMs. Tender reissued by the 
SPPD, which is yet to be finalized. 
State Govt./SPPD have been 
requested to expedite the 
tender process and accept 
the discovered tariff. 
6.  Neemuch Solar 
Park, Madhya 
Pradesh (500 MW) 
Mismatch in the readiness of the park 
infrastructure and external power 
evacuation system 
Ministry through various 
review meetings taken up the 
issue with CEA, CTU, PGCIL 

56 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Solar Park Challenges/Issues Ministry’s intervention 
7.  Agar Solar Park, 
Madhya Pradesh 
(550 MW) 
and SPPDs to minimize the 
time mismatch. 
8.  Shajapur Solar 
Park, Madhya 
Pradesh (450 MW) 
9.  Omkareswar 
Floating Solar Park, 
Madhya Pradesh 
(600 MW) 
Initial tariff discovered in the bidding 
was not accepted by the State. 
Tender reissued by the SPPD, which 
is yet to be finalized. 
State Govt./SPPD have been 
requested to expedite the 
tender process and accept 
the discovered tariff. 
10.  Chhatarpur Solar 
Park, Madhya 
Pradesh (950 MW) 
 
 
 
  
Delay in finalization of external power 
evacuation system due to forest area. 
The matter was taken up in a 
review meeting by the 
Ministry with CEA & CTU.The 
earlier planned common 
transmission system for 
Barethi Solar Park (630 MW) 
and Chhatarpur Solar Park 
(950 MW) was falling under 
Panna tiger reserve. 
Subsequently, separate sub -
stations were planned for 
both the parks and the forest 
related issue was resolved. 
11.  Barethi Solar Park, 
Madhya Pradesh 
(630 MW) 
12.  Floating Solar Park 
Ph-I, Odisha  
(100 MW) 
Initial tariff discovered in the bidding 
was not accepted by the State 
DISCOMs. Tender reissued by the 
SPPD, which is yet to be finalized. 
State Govt./SPPD have been 
requested to expedite the 
tender process and accept 
the discovered tariff. 
13.  Floating Solar Park 
Ph-II Odisha  
(200 MW) 
14.  Phalodi-Pokaran 
Solar Park, 
Rajasthan 
(750 MW) 
The Solar Park faced challenges like 
GIB issue and court case w.r.t. land 
allotment.  
The matters were taken up in 
various review meetings. 
Both the issues are now 
resolved. 
15.  Nokh Solar Park, 
Rajasthan 
(925 MW) 
The Solar Park faced challenges like 
GIB issue and RoW issue. 
The matters were taken up in 
various review meetings. 
Both the issues are now 
resolved. 
16.  Pugal Solar Park 
Ph-I, Rajasthan 
(1000 MW) 
Allotment of land is pending with the 
State Govt. 
In various review meetings, 
the State Govt has been 
requested to expedite 

57 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Solar Park Challenges/Issues Ministry’s intervention 
17.  Pugal Solar Park 
Ph-II, Rajasthan 
(1000 MW) 
allotment of land. Land 
allotment is under process. 
18.  Jalaun Solar Park, 
Uttar Pradesh 
(1200 MW) 
  Allotment of Govt. land is pending 
with the State Govt. 
The matter has been taken 
up in various review 
meetings andthe State 
Govt.has been requested to 
expedite allotment of land. 
The land rule for allotment is 
finalized by the UP Govt. The 
land will be handed over 
shortly. 
19.  Mirzapur Solar 
Park, Uttar Pradesh 
(100 MW) 
20.  Kalpi Solar Park, 
Uttar Pradesh (65 
MW) 
26 MW solar project  already 
commissioned. The balance capacity 
is stalled as the EPC contractor is 
unable to procure modules for 
remaining capacity due to levy of 
BCD. 
The matter is taken up with 
the Ministry of Finance. 
21.  Lalitpur Solar Park, 
Uttar Pradesh (600 
MW)  
Allotment of Govt. land is pending 
with the State Govt. 
The matter has been taken 
up in various review 
meetings and the State Govt 
has been requested to 
expedite allotment of land. 
The land rule for allotment is 
finalized by the UP Govt. The 
land will be handed over 
shortly. 
22.  Jhansi Solar Park, 
Uttar Pradesh (600 
MW)  
23.  Chitrakoot Solar 
Park, Uttar Pradesh 
(800 MW) 
 
 

58 
 
MINUTES OF TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 14th September, 2022 from 1122  hrs. to 
1220 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
                                      PRESENT 
 
 Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat – Chairperson 
 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
4.  Shri Kesineni Srinivas(Nani) 
5. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
6. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
7. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
8. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
9. 
10. 
Dr. K.C. Patel 
Shri. Pinaki Mishra 
                          SECRETARIAT 
 
             1.         Shri. Muraleedharan. P - Director 
   2.         Smt. Geeta Parmar -  Additional Director  
 REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
1. Shri Indu Shekhar Chaturvedi                   - Secretary 
 
2. Shri Dilip Nigam                                         -  Advisor 
 
3. 
 
Smt Suman Sharma                                   - 
 
 MD, SECI 
   
4. Shri VimalendraAnnand Patwardhan         -  JS & FA 
  

59 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Secretary and other officials  of 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy to the sitting of the Committee convened to 
have a briefing by the Ministry on th e subject ‘Implementation of Development of Solar 
Parks and Ultra Mega Solar Power Projects - A review’ Their attention was also drawn to 
Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ about the confidentiality of the 
proceedings of the Committee.   
4. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy made a power 
point presentation highlighting the Overview of the RE Sector, concept and schematic 
representation of Solar Parks, various modes of development of Solar parks, working of 
Solar parks, Milestones for development of CFA, timelines for development of Solar 
parks, list of appro ved parks, the present status and expenditure on Solar park 
development etc 
 
5.   The Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised several queries on the 
issues relating to less number of Solar parks commissioned so far if compared to the 
target, feasibility of  the policy for allowing one State investing for Solar Park 
development in other States, involving State/Central PSUs in Solar park development, 
study of Quality of Solar radiation in various States,  feasibility of utilizing the vast lands 
of Minis tries of Defence , Railways for Solar Park development, feasibility of 
development of floating Solar parks along India’s vast coastlines, impact on 
temperature, research in tidal power, vertical solar panels along cultivable land etc. 
6.         The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry and asked them 
to furnish written replies, on the points, for which information was not readily available, 
within two weeks. 
7.         The witness, then, withdrew. 
8.    A verbatim record of the proccedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

60 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2023-
2024) 
  
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 6th December, 202 3 from 1 500 hrs. to 
1545 hrs. in Main Committee Room Ground Floor, Parliament House  Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
      PRESENT 
  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson  
          Members 
 
   
1. Kunwar Danish Ali 
2. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
4. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
5. Shri Saikia Dilip 
 6. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
 7. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
 8. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
 9. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
12. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
13. Shri Prathap Simha 
 
 
  
       SECRETARIAT 
 
             1. Shri Santosh Kumar  -       Joint Secretary 
           2. Shri Muraleedharan. P     -       Director 
 3. Smt. Anju Kukreja  - Deputy Secretary                           
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the draft 

61 
 
Report on the subject ‘Implementation of Development of Solar Parks and Ultra Mega 
Solar Power Projects - A review’. 
 
3.       The Committee after due deliber ations adopted the draft Report . The Committee 
then, authorised the Chairpers on to finalize the draft Report  on the basis of factual 
verification received from the concerned Ministry and present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
4. xxx xxx xxx xxx 
    
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 