21 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF VARIOUS INITIATIVES UNDER CGHS 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
ASSESSMENT OF VARIOUS INITIATIVES UNDER CGHS  
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.02.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
.........February, 2023/........Magha, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 

 
     CONTENTS         Page No. 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2022-23)    (iii) 
 
Introduction           (v) 
          PART-I 
CHAPTER-I  Introductory        1 
  
CHAPTER-II    Initiatives And Achievements     4 
CHAPTER-III Budget of CGHS       9 
CHAPTER-IV Opening of new CGHS wellness centers   11 
CHAPTER-V  Functioning of Allopathic Wellness Centres and  
AYUSH Wellness Centres      12 
CHAPTER-VI Health care organisations (Hospitals & Diagnostic  
Centres) empanelled under CGHS    14 
CHAPTER-VII Infrastructure       20 
CHAPTER-VIII Staffing under CGHS      21 
   
 
          PART-II 
        Observations/Recommendations     26     
     
         PART-III 
          ANNEXURE      39 
   
  
                  APPENDICES 
(i) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 21.06.2022   43 
(ii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 24.08.2022   45 
(iii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 02.02.2023  47 
 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
 Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat – Chairperson 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
6. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
13. Shri jual Oram 
14. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
15. Shri Saikia Dilip 
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
17. Dr. K.C. Patel 
18. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
19. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
20. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
21. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
22. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
23. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
24. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
25. Shri Prathap Simha 
26. Shri Pinaki Misra 
27. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
28. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
29. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
30. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 

iv 
 
Secretariat                            
  
1. Smt.  Anita Bhatt Panda Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P Director 
3. Shri  Kuldeep Pegu Under Secretary 
   
 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, do present this twenty -first Report on the subject ‘Assessment of 
various initiatives under CGHS’. 
2. The CGHS, a contributory health Scheme mainly for serving/retired central Government 
employees and their family members, started in the year 1954 in Delhi. Over a period time, the scheme 
has expanded in the scope of services, as well as coverage across the country and as on June, 2022 CGHS 
has been extended to 75 cities. Under the scheme, a m ammoth number of 40.29 lakh beneficiaries are 
being provided Healthcare facilities through 334 allopathic wellness centres and 97 Ayush centres/units. 
Further, new wellness centres are proposed to be set -up in 16 cities to cater to the needs of 
beneficiaries residing in those cities. In addition, CGHS ‘panchayats’ are being held by the Ministry in 
various CGHS covered cities, to assess the functioning of the scheme. 
3. The Committee on Estimates (2022 -23) selected the subject ‘Assessment of various initiati ves 
under CGHS’ for in-depth examination and report to the House. 
4. In this Report, the Committee have dealt with various issues like budget of CGHS pending dues 
to empanelled hospitals, infrastructure of CGHS centres, vacancies and recruitments, process of Referral 
under CGHS, ambit of cashless treatment, working hours of centres and e -Sanjeevani, rates for 
treatment/diagnosis and performance Audit of CGHS payment system by C&AG. The Committee have 
analyzed these issues/points in detail and have made Observations/Recommendations in the report. 
5. The Committee held two sittings on 21 -06-2022 and 24 -08-2022 to take oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family welfare. The Committee considered and adopted 
the draft Report on the subject at their sitting held on 2 February, 2023. 
6. The Committee wish to place on record their sincere thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, who appeared before them and placed their considered views on 
the subject and furnished the information required in connection with the examination of the subject. 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
02 February, 2023 
 13 Magha,1944(saka) 
GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 

1 
 
Report 
Narration 
Part I 
 
Introductory  
 
The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) is a contributory health 
scheme mainly for serving / retired Central Government employees and their 
families. The scheme was started in 1954 in Delhi. Since then, the scheme has 
continued to expand in the scope of services as well as coverage across the 
country over a period of time. 
1.2  CGHS has witnessed a major leap in the last 7 years. In June, 2022, the 
Ministry informed the Committee that the scheme has been extended from 25 
cities in 2014 to 75 citi es in 2022. Healthcare facilities are now being provided 
through 334 Allopathic Wellness Centres and 97 AYUSH Centres /Units. It 
serves 13.97 Lakh Primary Cardholders and 40.29 Lakh    beneficiaries, 
expanding from 10 Lakh primary Card holders and 34 Lakh b eneficiaries in 
2014. 
1.3 The Ministry informed the Committee about the salient features of CGHS 
as under: 
 Salient Features of CGHS/ Facilities available to beneficiaries 
(a) CGHS provides comprehensive OPD facilities and medicines through its 
large network of Wellness Centres, polyclinics and labs – Details thereof are at 
Annexure –A 
(b) CGHS has empanelled 1622 Private Hospitals and 240 Diagnostic Centres 
in different cities for providing indoor treatment facilities and carrying out 
investigations. 
(c) CGHS Wellness Centres refer the beneficiaries to Government hospitals 
/specialists of empanelled Hospitals for expert consultation and on the basis of 
their recommendation, the patients are referred to private empanelled hospitals 
as per their choice for indoor medical treatment. 
(d) CGHS beneficiaries are permitted for seeking OPD consultation from 
specialists at Private hospitals empanelled under CGHS after being referred by 
any Medical Officer/CMO of CGHS Wellness Centre. 
(e) Direct Consultation from Specialists at empanelled hospitals in respect of 
elderly CGHS beneficiaries aged 75 years and above. 

2 
 
(f) Medicines are issued against the prescription of CGHS doctors and other 
Government doctors and as per the prescribed procedure and are supplied from 
the dispensary store.   The medicines not available in the dispensary are 
procured through Authorized Local Chemist and provided to patients. 
(g) CGHS provides specialist consultatio n t hrough CGHS Specialists at 
Polyclinics, Central Government Hospitals and also from Specialists of 
empanelled hospitals after referral from CGHS.   In addition, GDMOs with 
Specialist qualifications also provide specialist consultation. 
1.4 As regards the procedure for taking treatment by  CGHS beneficiaries, 
the Ministry furnished the following information to the Committee:-  
Procedure for taking treatment at CGHS empanelled private hospitals and 
diagnostic centres: 
The beneficiary has the option to decide about the institution where he / 
she wants to take treatment or undergo diagnostic test after 
a  Government  Doctor  has prescribed the same without requirement of any 
other referral (permission) letter. 
For listed investigations, there is no requir ement of any other permission 
after a specific investigation has been advised by a Government Specialist or a 
Medical officer of CGHS Wellness centre. The investigation may be undertaken 
from any of the empanelled diagnostic labs. 
In case a beneficiary has  been referred to a private empanelled, for 
unlisted investigations/treatments procedure CMO I/c shall submit the 
prescription to competent authority for consideration in case of pensioner 
beneficiaries. Serving CGHS beneficiaries shall seek permission fro m their 
Department for the same. 
Treatment on Cashless Basis 
As per the terms and conditions of empanelment in vogue, the empanelled 
Health Care Organisations (HCOs) are to provide treatment on cashless basis 
to the following categories of beneficiaries:- 
• Members of Parliament; 
• Pensioners of Central Government drawing pension from central Civil 
estimates; 
• Ex-Members of Parliament; 
• Freedom Fighters; 

3 
 
• Serving employees of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (including 
attached / subordinate offices under t he Ministry of Health & family 
Welfare);and 
• Such other categories of CGHS cardholders as notified by the 
Government.  
CGHS empanelled hospitals are also required to extend credit facility to all 
CGHS beneficiaries in case of emergency treatment. 
  
Serving employees of other Ministries / Departments are required to 
make payment at the time of treatment and obtain medical reimbursement from 
their respective Ministries / Departments. 
1.5    When the Committee sought to know the reasons for not extendin g 
cashless treatment facilities to serving employees of all Ministries/Departments, 
the Ministry, in a written reply, submitted as under : 
             “Since the payment/ reimbursement system under CGHS in case of 
serving employees is decentralized i.e. t he concerned Ministry/ Department 
where such employee is working makes payment through its Budget Head, it is 
not possible to extend cashless treatment to other Ministries/ Department.”  
1.6 With a view to assess various initiatives taken by the Ministry for overall 
improvement of the CGHS system and also to examine as to whether 
measures/initiatives so taken have actually benefited CGHS beneficiaries, the 
Committee selected this subject for in -depth examination. In the process, t hey 
dealt with various issues related to the subject like budget of CGHS, pending 
dues to empanelled Hospitals, grievances of beneficiaries relating to claims, 
vacancies and recruitments, infrastructure in CGHS centres,  need for regular 
interaction of CGHS officials with local MPs, performance Audit of CGHS 
payment system by C&AG, etc.  
 The Committee analysed these issues in detail and made various 
observations/recommendations in this Report , as contained in the next 
chapters. 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
CHAPTER-II 
INITIATIVES AND ACHIEVEMENTS 
2.1 When asked by the Committee about initiatives and achievements under 
CGHS during the period 2014 -22, t he Ministry submitted the following 
information:- 
 ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER CGHS DURING 2014-2022 
Opening of New Wellness Centres and First Aid Posts 
State /UT Cities 
Andhra Pradesh Guntur, Nellore, Rajahmundry, Vijayayawada, 
Visakhapatnam 
Assam Dibrugarh, Silchar 
Bihar Chhapra, Darbhanga, Gaya, Muzaffarpur 
Chhattisgarh Raipur 
Delhi & NCR Indirapuram and Jharodakalan ,Mayur  Vihar 
Phase-2 , Patparganj, Dwarka Sector 23,   Sonipat 
and Faridabad 2 
  
Goa Goa 
Gujarat Gandhi Nagar , Vadodara 
Haryana Ambala 
Himachal Pradesh Shimla 
Jammu & Kashmir Srinagar 
Jharkhand Dhanbad 
Kerala Kochi, Kannur, Kozhikode 
Madhya Pradesh Indore, Gwalior 
Maharashtra Nashik 
Manipur Imphal 
Nagaland Kohima 
Odisha Berhampur, Cuttack 
Punjab Amritsar, Jalandhar 
Puducherry Puducherry 
Rajasthan Ajmer, Jodhpur, Kota 
Tamil Nadu Tiruchirapalli , Tirunalveli 
Tripura Agartala 
Uttar Pradesh Agra, Aligarh, Baghpat, Bareilly, Gorakhpur, 
Moradabad, Varanasi 
  
West Bengal          Jalpaiguri, Siliguri 
  
New First Aid Posts in Delhi at Shastri  Bhawan and at Narmada Block, BD 

5 
 
Marg, New Delhi. 
  
Infrastructure Related achievements : 
New Buildings for CGHS WC and offices:   Sheikh Sarai, Dwarka Sector 9, 
Dwarka Sector -23, Mayur  Vihar phase -2, Patparganj, CGHS Bhawan at 
Sector-13 RK Puram for CGHS(HQ), Delhi and Wellness Centres Vikaspuri and 
Vasant Kunj 
CGHS Wellness Centres/ 
Units 
As on March 
2014 
As on March 
2022 
Proposed 
expansion 
No. of Allopathy Wellness 
Centres  
254 334 10 more to be 
opened shortly 
(including in 6 new 
cities) 
No of AYUSH Wellness 
Centres/ Units    
85 97 41 more to be 
opened shortly 
  
Governance & IT related initiatives : 
The Ministry has taken following recent initiatives for improvement of CGHS 
after 2014:- 
i.        Simplification of referral system under CGHS 
ii.       Print your own CGHS Card 
iii.      Online transfer of same CGHS card on transfer to another City in respect 
of serving employees also 
iv.      Provision for OPD consultation from Specialists of CGHS empanelled 
hospital after referral from CGHS Wellness Centre / CGHS Specialist 
v.       Direct Consultation from Specialists at empanelled hospitals in respect of 
elderly CGHS beneficiaries aged 75 years and above 
vi.      Preventive health check -up for CGHS pensioner beneficiaries aged 75 
years and above (Primary card holders) 
vii.     Post-operative treatment in respect of critically ill beneficiaries is simplified 
with one time permission without the need for revalidation from time to time. 
     The consultation /investigations are permitted u nder these follow -up cases. 
The medical conditions covered are : 

6 
 
a.       Post Cardiac Surgery Cases including Coronary Angioplasty. 
b.       Post Organ Transplant Cases (Liver, Kidney, Heart, etc.). 
c.       Post Neuro -Surgery Cases/Post Brain Stroke case s requiring regular 
follow-up treatment. 
d.       End Stage Renal Disease/follow up cases of Liver Failure. 
e.       Cancer treatment. 
f.       Auto-immune disorders like Rheumatoid Arthritis requiring regular follow -
up. 
g.       Neurological disorders lik e Dementia, Alzheime r’s disease, Parkinson’s 
disease, etc. 
viii.    CGHS facilities have been extended to retired employees of Autonomous 
Bodies/Statutory Bodies, whose serving employees are already covered under 
CGHS in all CGHS covered Cities.                             
ix.      Guidelines for consideration of reimbursement in excess of the approved 
rates pertaining to medical claims have been revised. 
x.       A High Powered Committee for grievance redress al of CGHS 
beneficiaries pertaining to medical claims has been constituted in compliance of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Shiv Kant Jha Vs UoI. 
xi.      Helpline for information and for lodging Complaints. 
xii.     Aadhaar based Attendance system at CGHS Wellness Centres for 
punctuality. 
xiii.    Online appointment for consultation with Medical Officers at CGHS, 
Wellness Centres. Online transfer of CGHS card on account of transfer from 
one CGHS covered city to another CGHS covered City in respect of serving 
employees also. 
xiv.    Online payment of CGHS subscription through Bharatkosh Portal in 
respect of Pensioners. 
xv.     Online submission and settlement of Grievances through CGHS website. 
xvi.    Paperless settlement of Hospital Bills by CGHS through NHA -IT Platform 
initiated from 01.06.2021. 

7 
 
xvii.   Approval of Department of Expenditure, Min istry of Finance to open 16 
new Wellness Centres which includes cities like Panchkula, Mysuru, Nas hik, 
Aurangabad, Chandrapur, Coimbatore. 
xviii.   CGHS – ‘Panchayat’  shall be held in every CGHS City for assessment of 
functioning of CGHS in India , under which Senior Officers of Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare /CGHS will interact with various stakeholder groups like 
CGHS beneficiaries, HCOs, Pensioners’ Associations, etc. 
COVID -19 related initiatives : 
1.       CGHS Medical Officers and Staff have been part of the fight against 
COVID-19 Infection – performing duties at Air-ports and Quarantine Centres. 
2.       Special Provisions to CGHS beneficiaries in view of the COVID -19 
Infection: 
i.        Option to purchase OPD Medicines for Chronic illnesses till 30th 
April 2022 and claim reimbursement. 
ii.       Opening separate ‘Fever Clinic’ at Wellness Centres for screening 
beneficiaries for Fever and other suggestive symptoms and referral to  
Nodal Centres. 
iii.      Directed CGHS Wellness Centres to provide assistance to COVID 
19 +ve CGHS beneficiaries under Home Quarantine and permission to 
such CGHS beneficiaries to purchase one Pulse Oxymeter (@ ₹ 1200/-
)  per family. 
iv.      Tele- consultation facility with Govt. Specialists through e -
Sanjeevani. 
v.       Fortnightly webinar on COVID and other health topics. 
2.2 During oral evidence of the Ministry representatives, they further 
explained their fresh initiatives and reforms as under :  
“The Finance Ministry had agreed to open sixteen new wellness centres 
in new cities like Panchkula, Mysore, Nashik, Aurangabad, Chandrapur, 
and Coimbatore. We are now in the process of opening it. Some of them 
have already been opened and in some places, we a re locating 
buildings. In Nashik, it has already been opened. In Chandrapur and 
Aurangabad – which are in Maharashtra – we have found buildings with 

8 
 
BSNL and we will be opening it shortly. We have already identified 
doctors and other staff.  
  Apart from t hat, we have brought in three other reforms. Two 
years ago, when the pandemic started, we started webina rs. हम अपने  
सभी बेनननिनियरीज़ के निए वेनबनार  करते  हैं। वह महीने  में दो बार  होती हैं। It is 
about wellness and general awareness about various diseases and 
conditions. It has been very successful. The webinar’s room size is 800 
participants. Normally, about thousand people attend it. This is the one of 
the three reforms. 
  Secondly, we hav e started CGHS panchayats. It was our internal 
initiative that we should go to various places where we have CGHS and 
we should meet the hon. elected representatives -- MPs, MLAs, and local 
area representatives -- as well as stakeholders, union leaders, 
pensioners’ associations, etc. So far, we have held these CGHS 
panchayats at five cities and we are covering three more cities every 
month. So, the idea is that within six months, the entire country should be 
covered. This is the second reform. 
  The third re form which coincided with the pandemic was the 
introduction of tele consultation service. It started in a small way when 
the first wave of pandemic hit. But in January, our hon. Minister of Health 
and Family Welfare, Dr.Mansukh Mandaviya reviewed it and sa id that it 
should be made round the clock from morning to evening six days a 
week. We have done it. Specialists of various specialities are available 
online. We have revamped our CGHS website so that it is easy to use 
and easy to navigate all services, inc luding accessing e-Sanjeevani, that 
is, tele consultation and the portal of each beneficiary. So, these are the 
reforms that we have made on the system side”. 
                                              
 

9 
 
CHAPTER-III 
Budget of CGHS 
3.1 The details with regard to budget allocation/ revised estimate for CGHS 
during the period 2013 -14 to 2021 -22, as furnished by the Ministry, are as 
under: 
Year Revised Estimate (₹ in crores) 
2013-14 1747.56 
2014-15 1781.93 
2015-16 2019.00 
2016-17 2154.49 
2017-18 2890.82 
2018-19 3108.41 
2019-20 4036.08 
2020-21 4324.20 
2021-22 4463.00 
 
3.2    On being asked to furnish details of funds allocated to CGHS but 
subsequently surrendered during the last 5 years, the Ministry in their post 
evidence reply has submitted the following information : 
Details of Amount surrendered during last 5 years are as under: 
Year Revised Estimates (₹ in crore) 
Savings w.r.t Revised Estimates 
(₹ in crore) 
2017-18 2890.82 57.11 
2018-19 3108.41 125.41 
2019-20 4036.08 69.88 
2020-21 4344.62 107.76 
2021-22 4463 94.97 
 
3.3    When asked about the specific reasons for surrendering the allocated 
funds, the Ministry, further, in their post evidence reply stated as under : 
The main reasons for savings are as under: 
i. Savings on account of non-filling of vacant posts. 
ii. DDOs under CGHS are located in 24 cities, while PAOs are located in 5 
cities. Therefore, if there is a query or objection by PAO at the fag end of 

10 
 
financial year, it becomes difficult to resubmit bills physically again during 
the same financial year. 
iii. Construction of buildings under CGHS are taken up by CPWD and 
although budget is transferred under Capital Head, CPWD fails to utilize 
the budget during the same financial year due to various factors. 
3.4 With regard to budget allocation for CGHS the Secretary, Ministry of 
health and Family informed the Committee as under: 
“This has increased from ₹ 2,800 crore (six years ago) to roughly ₹ 4000 
crore (after six years)……. What we collect as subscription is not even 
one-fourth of the value of medical treatment that is provided. So, it is 
highly subsidized subscription -based service….Therefore, you would 
realize that the demand is always more and the Budget is short.” 
3.5  On being specifically  asked as to why the budget allocated for CGHS 
wellness centres/AD, CGHS Pune remain unutilised an d surrendered 
subsequently the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare informed as 
under: 
“.....as far as the CGHS’s national budget is concerned, we  always 
demand for more and we never surrender any fund. So, what perhaps 
could have been surrendered is the C apital amount for constructing a 
building, but for healthcare needs, we use the heads of accounts. We 
need more than what is given to us and we as k for more money in 
Second and Third Supplementaries which the Parliament always gives 
us. ” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
Opening of new CGHS Wellness Centres. 
4.1  As per the Ministry, opening of new wellness centres are considered as 
per actual norms and subject to availability of resources. O pening of wellness 
centres is also subject to approval of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance for creation of new posts.  
4.2 As per norms , at least 6000 Central Government Employees are to be 
there for opening of CGHS wellness centre in a new city. The existing norms 
also mandate  that there has to be at least 2000 primary card holders for 
opening a CGHS wellness centre in an existing CGHS covered city. The 
expenditure for opening of new wellness centre is m et from overall CGHS 
budget and no separate budget is allocated for the purpose. 
4.3    On being asked by the Committee, as to whether the Ministry has 
submitted any proposal to the DoE, Ministry of Finance for increasing the 
number of Wellness Centres and  doctors in major cities and other places , 
where there is huge concentration of beneficiaries, the Ministry has stated as 
under : 
 “D/o Expenditure has conveyed the approval for opening of 16 new 
CGHS Wellness centres on 05.04.2021. The 16 new Wellness Cen tres 
have been approved for the following locations: 
  
  
New Wellness Centres in existing Cities 
  
Delhi & NCR  - Ghaziabad region (2), Narela (1) and Soni pat 
(1 regularization of temporary centre) 
 
 Chandigarh – 1 (2nd Wellness Centre) 
  
New Wellness Centres in new Cities 
  
Panchkula (1), Gwalior  (1 regularization of temporary  centre), 
Kannur (1 regularization of temporary  centre), Kozhikode (1 
regularization of temporary  centre), Nas hik (1), Aurangabad (1), 
Ichhapur(1 upgradation of extension  counter ), Wadi(1) in Nagpur 
, Mysuru(1) , Coimbatore(1) and Chandrapur(1)” 
 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER-V 
Functioning of Allopathic Wellness Centres and AYUSH Wellness Centres. 
5.1  The Committee have been informed that the number of Allopathic 
Wellness Centres increased from 254 in the year 2014 to 334 in 2022. As far as 
AYUSH centres under CGHS are concern ed there were only 85 AYUSH 
centres under CGHS prior to 2018, while several C GHS covered cities did not 
have even a single Ayurvedic or Homeopathy unit. The numbers of AYUSH 
units have increased to 97 in 2022. 
5.2   On being asked about the steps taken/contemplated to strengthen the 
treatment under Indian system of Medicine for CGH S beneficiaries, the Ministry 
has informed that 26 more Ayurvedic units and 27 Homeopathy units under 
CGHS are proposed to be opened as per the details given below:-    
Ayurvedic (26) 
Guwahati, Vishakhapatnam, Gandhinagar, Faridabad, Shimla, Jammu, Ranchi, 
Bhopal, Jabalpur, Indore, Shillong, Dehradun, Ghaziabad, Greater Noida, 
Indirapuram, Noida, Sahibabad , Chandigarh, Raipur, Puducherry, Aizawl, 
Agartala, Panaji, Gangtok, Imphal, Itanagar 
Homeopathy (27) 
Visakhapatnam, Gandhinagar, Faridabad, Gurgao n, Shimla, Jammu, Ranchi, 
Bhopal, Jabalpur, Indore, Shillong, Dehradun, Ghaziabad, Greater Noida, 
Indirapuram, Noida, Sahibabad, Chandigarh, Bhub aneswar, Raipur, 
Puducherry, Aizawl, Agartala, Panaji, Gangtok, Imphal, Itanagar. 
5.3 It has further been infor med that the Ministry of AYUSH, Cadre 
controlling Authority for AYUSH medical officers, has been requested to recruit 
53 medical office rs. Also SSC has been requested for recruitment of 53 
Ayurvedic and Homeopathic Pharmacists.  
 The Ministry has further a dded that the following 12 AYUSH units have 
been started by pooling of available resources,- 
i).  6 Ayurveda Units at  Jabalpur, Bhopal, Raipur, Gandhi Nagar, Goa and 
Indore.    
ii).  6   Homoeopathic Units at Imphal, Agartala, Sh illong, 
Bhubaneswar,   Gurugram and Gandhi Nagar.  

13 
 
5.4      During evidence, responding to a specific concern raised by the 
Committee regarding punctuality of doctors at the centres, the Ministry informed 
about the Aadhaar enabled Attendance System for doctors/sta ff and the 
monitoring of punctuality as under : 
“अटेंडेंटस अब आधार  इनेबल्ड  हैं,  जो सेंट र िी देखी  जा सकती हैं नक डॉक्टर  ने  नकतने  बजे 
िॉनिन नकया और  नकतने  बजे वह नडस्पेंसरी से बाहर  िया। इसक े अिावा हमार े  पास सेंट र िी डेटा  
रहता  है। हम प्रनतनदन  चेक कर  सकते हैं नक एक डॉक्टर  ने  एक नदन  में नकतने  मरीज  देखे , 
क्ोोंनक सब- क ु छ काडड  से होता है। पहिा पेिेंट डॉक्टर  ने  नकतने  बजे देखा ,  आखखरी  पेिेंट 
नकतने  बजे देखा  और  पूर े  नदन  में नकतने  पेिेंट्स को देखा , यह सब हमें ऑनिाइन  नदखता  है। 
हम ननयनमत  रूप  से इसको चेक भी करते  रहते  हैं। खासतौर  पर  जब निकायतें आती हैं, तो हम 
उस डॉक्टर  का िॉनिन टाइम, आने - जाने  का समय, उसने  नकतने  पेंिेंट्स देखे  आनद को देखते  
हैं। अत: क ें द्रीय रूप  से भी सतक ड ता रहती  है।“  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
Health care organisations ( Hospitals & Diagnostic Centres ) empanelled 
under CGHS 
6.1 The Ministry has informed that a total number 1888 HCOs (1685 
Hospitals and 203 Diagnostic centres) have been empanelled under CGHS. As 
per Memorandum of Agreement, credit/ cashless treatment facilities are 
provided at empanelled HCOs to CGHS pensioner beneficiaries, Hon’ble MPs 
and other entitled categories of beneficiaries. Serving employees avail 
treatment at HCOs and get expenditure reimbursed from concerned office/ 
Department. Hospital Bil ls in respect of pensioners are paid by CGHS from 
Pension & Other Retirement Benefits (PORB) Head.  
6.2    As regards the procedure for empanelment of Hospitals, the Ministry, 
during their oral evidence stated as under: 
“ नदल्ली के अनतररक्त  जो भी जिह हैं, वहाों पर  क ों टीन्यूअस एम्पेनिमेंट होता है और  यह वॉिोंटरी 
होता है। जो भी ऑिेनाइजेिोंस आती हैं, वह आकर  अिर  नमननमम  ररक्वायरमेंट पूरी  कर  रही  हैं 
तो एम्पेनि हो सकती हैं। जो मेमोर ें डम ऑि एग्रीमेंट होता है, उसमें क्र े नडट  या क ै ििैस ट र ीटमेंट 
ि ै नसनिटी एम्पेनल्ड  हॉखस्पटल्स या एचसीओज़ में पेंिनसड और  ऑनर े बि  एमपीज़ या जो भी िोि 
उसक े निए एनटाइटल्ड  हैं, उन  सब को नमिती हैं। सनविंि एम्प्लॉइज़ इन  क ें द्रोों में जाकर  क ै ि 
देकर  अपना  इिाज करवा  सकते हैं। पेंिनसड के जो हॉखस्पटि नबल्स होते हैं, वे पीओआरबी  हैड  
से सीजीएचएस द्वारा पे होते हैं।’’   
6.3 On being asked as to the remedies available to CGHS beneficiaries in 
case of denial of consultation/treatment or HCOs demanding rates higher than 
CGHS approved rates for treatment, as there were complaints with regard to 
discriminatory treatment given to CGHS beneficiaries, the Ministry in their 
written reply has stated as under: 
“As per the terms and conditions of Memorandum of A greement (MoA) 
signed with the empanelled hospitals, hospitals cannot deny treatment 
and charge more than CGHS rates. In case of violation, requisite action 
as per MoA is taken . In case of overcharging, excess amount over and 
above CGHS rates is recovered from the empanelled hospital from their 
pending bills and refunded to the beneficiary. Guidelines are in place to 
consider reimbursement of medical claims in excess of approved rates in 
cases where the treatment has been taken in non -empanelled CGHS 
hospitals in emergency. Guidelines are also in place for granting 
permission/ approval for unlisted treatment procedures / investigations, if 
recommended by the Specialist of Government Hospital/ CGHS 
empanelled hospital”.  

15 
 
6.4     On being further asked about w hether empanelled hospitals have raised 
any issue with the Ministry regarding the rates of treatment/diagnosis under 
CGHS, the Ministry, in their post evidence reply has stated as under : 
“The last such revision was made in October 2014 in Delhi and 2015 i n 
other Cities. However, addition of new procedures and revision of some 
rates is a continuous process. For Cancer surgery treatment Tata Cancer 
Hospital rates of 2012 were adopted and they are considered as 
reasonable by private hospitals also. In additio n, some corrections were 
made in 2014 rates for Kidney Transplant surgery in Feb 2015. Rates 
for new procedures / investigations are added from time to time on the 
recommendations of Technical Committee. 15 procedures and 
investigations were added on 14.01.2020, 25 Procedures on 03.06.2020, 
21 procedures on 11.02.2021”.  
 
6.5 As regards payments to HCOs/empanelled hospitals, the Committee 
desired to know whether some outstanding payments to private 
Hospitals/diagnostic centres are pending with the Ministry in respect or CGHS. 
In reply, the Ministry admitted that there is some time leg between submission 
of bills by hospitals and their settlement, as older bills are cleared; new bills get 
added up. Bills are processed on First-In First Out basis. Presently, hospital bills 
amounting to about ₹ 1500 crore are in different stages of Processing, o ut of 
which bills worth about ₹ 350 crore  are ready for payment and clarification have 
been sought from hospitals in respect of bills worth about ₹ 300 crore. Bills 
worth ₹ 1083 crore have been cleared during the current Financial year 2022 -
23. 
 The Ministry has also informed that since June,  2021, credit hospital bills 
are uploaded on NHA -IT platform for online processing by NHA and online 
payment by CGHS in a paperless transparent mode.  
6.6  During evidence, the Committee desired to know as to how long it 
normally takes to clear any bill submitted by a hospital and whether CGHS has 
any norm or criteria for clearing bills. The Secretary, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare informed as under:  
“What we have done is that we have converted the entire system to a 
digital online system. So, all our private empanelled hospitals/diagnostic 
centres or path labs submit their bills to us, the CGHS, online. They do not 
come physically and do not give us papers. They submit the bills online. 
All the bills which are of less than ₹ 500 are not even checked by the 
system and are passed automatically. The bills which are from ₹ 500 to ₹ 
10,000 undergo a two per cent representative sample check, and then 
they are passed. The problem arises in bills which are of higher value, that 

16 
 
is each bill is more than ₹ 10,000. Those bills are checked very minutely 
by doctors of CGHS. That is where it takes time. There are instances 
where we find that the submission made by the hospital itself is faulty. For 
example, a patient has been admitted for six days but the bill is for more 
than those six days. Those are the bills which are then sent back. This 
digital system is now one -year old. You will appreciate that these digital  
systems take time to stabilise. This has stabilised in the last one year. 
Now these problems have reduced greatly.”  
6.7 In response to a suggestion by the Committee to consider payment of 
80-90% of the total outstanding dues to a hospital till the final settlement of the 
bills, in the interest of beneficiaries, the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family 
welfare, submitted as under:  
“....What we have done is that whatever is the total quantum of 
outstanding payment of a particular hospital, we have permitted the CGHS to 
pay fifty per cent advance so that that particular hospital does not feel that they 
have not received the money”.  
6.8  Further, when asked as to whether any empanelled hospital has 
withdrawn their services to CGHS beneficiaries due to non -payment of pending 
dues, the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare informed the 
Committee as under: 
 “...when the system transited to the digital platform, there was a delay in 
payment of bills of private empanelled hospitals from CGHS. As a result, 
some of them did withdraw their services in the sense that they 
demanded cash first and then they admitted those patients. ...A t that 
point in time, there was above ₹ 1100 crore worth of CGHS bills which 
were pending across the country for payment because of the digital 
system not stabilising.  ...So, from June till date, we are now in end 
August, the pendency from ₹ 1100 odd cror e has come down to ₹ 400 
crore. We have liquidated the remaining outstanding dues. Majority of 
hospitals, for example there was Ruby Hall in Pune, there is Max chain of 
hospitals, Fortis chain of hospitals, and Apollo, have resumed their 
cashless services.  In some hospitals of Max, where the payments are 
getting liquidated, services are still disrupted. Otherwise, the situation is 
now back to normal and these hospitals are providing cashless services”.  
6.9  On being asked whether the Ministry conducted or propose to conduct 
any review or any performance audit to ascertain the treatments being provided 
by empanelled hospitals to CGHS beneficiaries, the Ministry in their written 
reply has stated as under: 

17 
 
“A Performance audit covering the period 2016 -17 to 20 20-21 was 
conducted by C&AG, among others, to examine payment of Hospital Bills 
by CGHS. Draft Recommendations of the Audit were as under: -  
• CGHS may include penalty clause in the MoA with the HCOs so that they 
may submit the bills in the prescribed time frame. 
• Processing and settlement of claims at Bill Clearing Agency (BCA)/ 
CGHS level may be done as per prescribed timeline. 
• E-Claim system may be integrated with Master database of beneficiaries 
to enable BCA to verify the authenticity of beneficiary as well as with 
PFMS to maintain the transparency.   
• E-claim system shall pre -validate data captured viz. beneficiary ID field 
should only accept valid beneficiary ID and no null data in Card ID, 
Beneficiary name field etc. 
•  SMS alert system may be generated for the beneficiaries (availing credit 
facilities) regarding their treatment/expenses at the time of discharge.  
• Excess, irregular, unauthorized payments, burnt bill, untraceable bills 
and bills pending for expert opinion may be reconciled a nd 
settled/recovered.  Unutilized amount lying with BCA and HCOs may be 
recovered.  
• CGHS should monitor the validity of the existing Performance Bank 
Guarantee (PBG) so that fresh PBG may be obtained if the previous 
PBG had expired. Further, CGHS should en sure the amount of the PBG 
will be maintained intact being a revolving guarantee by receiving the 
bank guarantee for penalty amount to be recovered by the CGHS”.  
6.10     The Ministry, on being asked about the status of implementation of each 
of the recom mendations contained in the performance audit report of CAG, 
submitted the following information in their post evidence written reply : 
Recommendations Action Taken Report 
CGHS may take action against the HCOs, 
which   are   repeatedly   submitting   inflate
d bills against the terms and conditions of t
he Memorandum    of   Agreement, so that 
such instances are minimized. 
Additionally, automatic validation control sys
tem   should   be   included   in   the   IT Plat
form   to   restrict   the   item   wise   claim a
mount to the CGHS approved rate. 
It is accepted that there is difference 
in claimed amount and approved am
ount. The deductions are on account
 of scrutiny of bills as per CGHS rate
s. 
  
However, in the new NHA-IT platfor
m on which hospital bills are being p
rocessed, there are triggers in the so
ftware to flash suspected/fraudulent 
claims which can be scrutinized thor
oughly. 
  

18 
 
At present it would not be possible t
o make automatic revalidation of ite
ms under conservative system on a
ccount of multiple variable factors   t
hat come into play in respect of an i
ndividual claims. 
Excess, irregular, unauthorized payments m
ay be recovered from the concerned HCOs. 
The Bill Clearing Agency (BCA) stop
ped making initial payments to HCOs
 since 2015. Therefore, there is no sc
ope of excess payment to HCOs sinc
e then. However, final report of audit 
is being examined and isolated case
s of excess payments, if any, will be t
aken care of. Similarly, cases of pay
ment of bills of Serving employees, w
ho are not entitled for availing cashle
ss facilities, but where the payment w
as released by the BCA/CGHS to the
 HCOs are also being examined.  
Bill processing has now shifted to IT 
platform of National Health Authority,
 since June, 2021. There is no scope
 of occurrence of such errors in the I
T system. 
CGHS may prescribe strict deadlines for su
bmission of claims and may also include pe
nalty clause in the MoA with the HCOs so t
hat they submit bills in the prescribed time f
rame. 
Revised Timelines are being finalize
d in consultation with empanelled H
COs and will be incorporated in the 
new Memorandum of Agreement at t
he time of extension/ renewal of emp
anelment.  
CGHS may identify bottlenecks and take re
medial action so that  processing and settle
ment of claims at BCA/CGHS level may be 
done as per the prescribed timeline. 
The bill processing has shifted to 
NHA-IT Platform since June, 2021
 for expeditious settlement thereof,
 in more transparent and paperles
s environment., these issues shall 
be taken care of.  
The decision in respect of the bills  destroye
d by fire of ₹17.03 crore and  lost/untraceabl
e bills amounting to ₹4.86 crore which were f
orwarded by BCA for  approval is yet to be t
aken by CGHS. 
  
All such bills may be reconciled and settled. 
The matter is under examination in t
he Ministry.  

19 
 
Unutilized amount lying with BCA and amou
nt recoverable from HCOs may be reconcile
d and recovered. 
The matter is being examined for iss
ue of instruction to UTI -ITSL to retur
n the amount of ₹ 38.70 crore to Pay
 & Accounts Officer of the Ministry, f
or reconciliation. Recoveries from H
COs, if any shall be made thereafter. 
CGHS may ensure that all the empa nelled 
HCOs must have NABH/NABL certification 
or QCI recommendation within specified tim
eline. 
Since 2017 only those HCOs which 
are either NABH/NABL accredited or
 QCI recommended are considered f
or empanelment. 
CGHS should monitor the validity of the exi
sting PBGs so that fresh ones may be obtai
ned if the previous ones had expired. Furth
er, being a revolving guarantee, CGHS sho
uld ensure that the amount of the PBG is m
aintained intact, by receiving the bank guar
antee for penalty amount recovered by the 
CGHS. 
GFR 2017 provisions in this regard a
re followed. 
SMS alert system may be generated for the
 beneficiaries availing credit facilities regard
ing their treatment/expenses at the 
time of discharge. 
This is being examined in consultatio
n with NHA and NIC. 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER-VII 
Infrastructure. 
7.1 The Committee have been informed that majority of CGHS owned 
buildings of wellness centres are relatively new and do not require major 
repair/renovation works. Some minor repairing renovation work is got done 
through Central Public Works Department (CPWD). It has further been informed 
that CGHS have adequate funds both for maintenance of existing buildings as 
well as construction of new buildings and that delay  in starting or completing 
construction/renovation/maintenance work of buildings lies on the part of CPWD 
but not due to unavailability of funds.  
7.2     Further, when asked to furnish details of the number of proposals 
received for renovation and construction of new buildings for CGHS, the 
Ministry in their post evidence written reply submitted as under : 
Year Proposals received for 
constructions                 
Proposals received  for 
Renovations 
2020 10 11 
2021 6 3 
2022 1 0 
 
7.3  On being asked about how many CGHS Wellness centres are currently 
housed in rented building across the country, the Ministry in their written reply 
has stated that at present 122 CGHS wellness centres are housed in rented 
buildings. 
7.4      With regard to repairing and maintenance of rented buildings, the 
Committee have been informed that an SOP has been put in place to ensure 
that maintenance is done by the owne rs. Further, the Ministry also claimed that 
they were unaware of the owners of the bui ldings housing the wellness centres 
located in Bandra (Mumbai) and Pusa Road (Delhi).  
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER-VIII 
Staffing under CGHS 
8.1  As regards staffing under CGHS, the Committee has been furnished the 
details of the sanctioned and existing strength of Doctors/ medical officers and 
other staff, as under: 
Staff  GDMO/Specialists Other Staff 
Sanctioned strength  1994  5054 
Existing strength  1504  3339 
 
8.2  On being asked about the steps being taken to recruit/depute separate 
officers/staff to manage the administrative responsibilities in CGHS centres to 
lessen the burden on doctors, so that they can devote complete attention to 
treatment of patients, the Ministry, in its written reply, has informed as under: 
 
“There are 25 sanctioned posts of Administrative Officers under CGHS. As 
per the Recruitment Rules these posts are to be filled up by departmental 
promotion or through Deputation. Only 8 Posts could be filled up as there 
are no eligible CGHS Staff for promotion to the post of Administrative 
Office₹ For deputation there was lukewarm response. Medical officers are 
engaged to perform the administrative functions and also to perform 
technical jobs like medical scrutiny of bills, etc. as an interim measure and 
shall be replaced as and when the posts of A dministrative officers are 
filled up”.  
 The Ministry further elaborated that Additional Directors (AD) of CGHS 
cities function as the administrative head s and that administrative and clerical 
staff pos ted in the office of ADs assist  them in the discharge of their official 
duties as Administrative head. Presently, there is no separate sub -cadre of 
Administrative and management personnel under Central Health Services.  
8.3  On being further asked to furnish details of recruitment process 
undertaken during the last three financial years to fill up vacancies, the Ministry 
in its written reply has informed as under: 
“Recruitment of Medical Officers is made by CHS division of MoHFW 
regularly through UPSC. 
Other Staff  

22 
 
Due to absence of expertise    and infrastructure at the offices of 
Additional Directors and consequent piling up of vacancies, a decision 
was taken to fill the posts of other staff through Staff Selection 
Commission for uniformity and transparency.   
SSC has already been requested for filling up of Gr oup C vacant 
posts. In this regard, follow up with the concerned authorities is being 
done to ensure speedy processing. In this regard, all concerned 
Additional Directors have been directed to submit all vacanc ies of Group 
C updated as on 31.03.2022 to the respective zonal heads (if not done 
already) for onward submission to SSC. In addition, letters have also 
been sent to all zonal head (ADs) to approach the respective regional 
offices of Staff Selection Commis sion (SSC) on fast track basis for 
confirmation of vacancies already submitted to SSC and also follow -up 
for any procedural formalities as and when the window/portal of SSC 
opens on priority basis, so that recruitment process for vacant posts may 
be completed at the earliest. 
Earlier in CGHS, the recruitment was being done City -wise by 
engaging Govt. agencies for conduc ting examination. Each CGHS City  
had to go through all the processes for recruitment even for one vacant 
post & agencies were being paid separately for each recruitment process 
leading to increased expenditure, wastage of time as well as manpower. 
Even candidates also applied for different recruitment process separately 
and accordingly, had to pay examination fee for each recruitment 
process. In order to streamline the recruitment process in CGHS, 
integrated recruitment was implemented in CGHS by dividing CGHS 
Cities in four zones for recruitment purpose, wherein zonal heads (AD) 
are compiling the vacancies city -wise for each category of posts and 
conducting integrated recruitment examination. To further streamline the 
recruitment process, the zones for CGHS cities have been re -organized 
(into 9 zones) in conformity with the corresponding regional offices of 
SSC and to make the Integrated recruitment in CGHS more efficient.  
All Additional Directors have already been directed to hold regular 
DPCs for all promotional posts and subsequent reminders have also 
been sent in this regard. Also, all ADs have also been directed to ensure 
where DPC gets delayed due to any reason, the same may be brought to 
the notice of the Directorate of CGHS for taking necessary measures in 
that regard“.  

23 
 
8.4 Replying to a query from the Committee during evidence about filling up 
of existing vacancies, the Ministry informed as under: 
“Doctors are recruited by the Ministry’s CHS Division, through UPSC by 
the Central Health Service annual exam, which is a Group A service of 
the Union.  Every year we get a quota of officers recruited by them.  
There is always a mismatch betwee n the numbers that we get and our 
requirement.  For the next two years, we have planned to over peg our 
requirement so that we get more docto rs.  This is for the allopathic 
doctors. 
 For AYUSH doctors, the cadre control is with the Ministry of 
AYUSH.  Once they are recruited, they post them with the CGHS. 
 The third stream is, paramedics, which includes mostly nurses 
and pharmacists.  Till about three years ago, the recruitment was done 
locally by the ADs concerned.  They had difficulty, and there were 
complaints.  So, we approached the SSC and they have agreed.  Two 
years ago, they took up this responsibility and started recruiting people.  
Meanwhile, this pandemic came.  So, things got slightly delayed.  But 
now we have started receiving panels to make app ointments out of 
that.  Things will slightly improve, and maybe over two to three years 
we will have a better number.”  
8.5     On being asked about any time bound plans to ensure that all vacant 
posts are filled-up, the Ministry in their post evidence wri tten reply submitted as 
under : 
“For paramedical posts, Integrated Recruitment System has been 
implemented in CGHS, wherein the CGHS cities all over India have 
been divided into nine (09) zones in conformation with the regional 
offices of Staff Selection C ommission. The respective Zonal 
Head/Additional Directors (ADs) will undertake the recruitment process 
of CGHS staff through the concerned regional offices of Staff Selection 
Commission. For clerical posts, requisition has been sent to SSC (HQ) 
for selection of candidates through centrally conducted examinations. 
  
Every year Combined Medical Service examination is being conducted 
by UPSC  for filling up of the posts of GDMOs. 349 vacancies were 
reported to UPSC for recruitment of Medical Officers through CM SE- 
2021. The interview for the same is going on in UPSC. 314 vacancies 
have been reported to UPSC for recruitment of Medical Officers 
through CMSE - 2022. The written examination for same has already 
been conducted by UPSC. 

24 
 
For filling up of the regular va cancies of Non-Teaching Specialist Sub -
Cadre of CHS, 109 vacancies have already  been reported to UPSC for 
recruitment of Non -Teaching Sub-cadre of CHS. Further 20 vacancies 
will be reported to UPSC shortly on receipt of NOC from DoPT and 
Ministry of Defenc e.  Pending recommendations form UPSC, 
concerned units/organizations are permitted to make contractual 
appointments against the vacant posts, as a stop -gap arrangement, in 
public interest”.  
 
8.6     The Committee desired to know about the number of retired doctors 
appointed to work at various CGHS Centres and the age limit fixed for such 
retired doctors for appointment. In reply, the Ministry has furnished the following 
information : 
S. No. CGHS City Number of Doctors 
01 Jaipur 01 
02 Kanpur 09 
03 Chennai 08 
04 Meerut 14 
05 Nagpur 05 
06 Lucknow Nil 
07 Hyderabad Nil 
08 Dehradun 03 
09 Jabalpur 11 
10 Patna 02 
11 Pune 03 
12 Shillong 01 
13 Mumbai 23 
14 Kolkata 12 
15 Bhubaneswar 03 
16 Guwahati 04 
17 Prayagraj 14 
18 Chandigarh 09 
19 Ranchi 02 
20 Ahmedabad 12 
21 Bhopal 02 
22 Bangalore 05 
23 Trivandrum Nil 
24 Delhi (HQ) 143 
Total 286 
    Age limit is upto 70 years for engagement of retired Doctors on Contract 
basis.  
 

25 
 
8.7  During evidence, on the suggestions of the Committee that the Ministry 
should strive for recruiting permanent or regular staff in all positions, on the 
lines of recruitment of GDMOs, the Ministry responded as under: 
“......whenever Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance sanctions 
a new CGHS  dispensary, they sanction with the conditionality that they 
are approving only the post of doctor and pharmacist; for other posts 
they make it a condition that they have to be taken on contract ”.  
8.8    On being asked further the reasons specified  by De partment of 
Expenditure (Ministry of Finance ) for not sanctioning recruitment of permanent 
staff in Group C and D positions at CGHS Wellness centres, the Ministry, in 
their post evidence written reply submitted as under :  
“There is no ban on filling of v acant posts of Group C. The Group ‘D’ 
posts have been abolished as per recommendations of 6 th CPC. The 
work of Safai Karmacharis and Security has been outsourced”.  
8.9    Observing that large number of posts of Specialists are lying vacant in 
CGHS, the Co mmittee desired to know the reasons for non -filling up of these 
vacancies. In response, the Ministry, in their post evidence written reply 
submitted as under : 
“The Main reason for vacancies in the Grade of Specialist and GDMOs 
is the low joining rate of t he candidates recommended by the UPSC 
based on the requisition sent by the M/o Health & Family Welfare. Other 
reasons include preference of GDMOs to pursue Post -Graduation 
studies and Super Speciality study by Specialists and Resignation, 
Superannuation, Voluntary Retirement, death etc. in the cadre”.  
 
  

26 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Utilization of Budgetary allocation 
1. The Committee observe that the initiative to provide a specialised 
medical service on subsidised rates to Government employees through CGHS 
has been a very useful step by the Government which is being expanded over 
the years. They note that the allocation of budget to CGHs has been 
continuously increased over last five Financial years as the network of CGHs 
coverage has reached to 75 cities now. From an allocation of ₹ 2,890.82 crore 
in the year 2017 -18, the allocation has risen to ₹ 4,495 crore in the current 
Financial year. They further note with satisfaction that the utilisation of budget 
has been more than 95% of the total allocation during these years. The 
Committee do expect that CGHS shall spend 100% budget in the coming years. 
While responding to the query regarding reasons for surrendering of allocated 
funds, the Ministry has stated ‘savings on account of non -filling of vacant posts’ 
as one of the reasons. The stated reason of the Ministry is not acceptable, as 
allocated budget is meant for complete utilisation as per demands raised by the 
Ministry and not for savings. 
 The Committee further observe that a number o f new Wellness Centres 
have been approved on 05.04.2021 to be established in various cities. 
However, no separate or special allocation have been made in the 2021 -22 
Budget to meet the expenditure on opening of new wellness centres. The 
Committee, therefor e, would like to be apprised of any financial grant during 
supplementary stage in the current year for the same. They strongly 
recommend the Government to set aside a percentage of budget allocation or 
create a sub -Head under the Capital Head to meet expen diture relating to 
establishment of new wellness centres, since no separate Budget is allocated 
for the purpose. The Committee, feel that such a step will enable the Ministry to 
set a time -bound date and target for completion of the process to open new 
wellness centres. It will also enable the Ministry to review and evaluate the 

27 
 
progress of the work vis -a-vis the financial allocation. As the Government has 
changed the timelines for presentation and approval of Demands for Grants of 
various Ministries by Par liament to ensure proper and optimum utilisation of 
funds, the Committee, are hopeful that the Ministry will initiate necessary action 
in line to streamline the process of budgetary allocation and expenditure. 
 The Committee, are surprised to know the fact  that the limited presence 
of PAOs is one of the reasons for savings/surrender. Hence, they are of the 
opinion that the Ministry must review that location / posting place of DDOs and 
PAOs, because of which bill payments are getting delayed and on many 
occasions are not being settled and paid during the current financial year. 
CGHS centres/set -ups are spread all over the country, but as per information 
furnished by the Ministry, PAOs are located only in 5 cities. The Committee, 
desire that the Ministry must take up this matter with the Controller General of 
Accounts (CGA), Ministry of Finance, to explore the possibility of increasing the 
number of PAOs, so that the settlement of budgetary expenditure could be 
completed in a time bound manner within the financial year. 
 
Need for augmenting Wellness centres 
2. The Committee note that as per norms there has to be atleast 6,000 
Central Government employees for opening of CGHS wellness centre in a new 
city and atleast 2,000 primary card holders for opening CGHS wel lness centre 
in an existing CGHS covered city . The Committee, however, are aware that 
there still are many cities and towns where there is a sizable number of Central 
Government employees/beneficiaries, but no CGHS wellness centres are 
functioning in such cities due to the existing norms. The Committee would also 
like to highlight the fact that there are many Central Government employees 
posted in remote towns/cities of the country, particularly in the North East and 
other hilly States, who are unable to av ail benefits under CGHS. Such 
beneficiaries have to travel long distances to reach the nearest CGHS centres 
to address their medical needs. The Committee, are of the opinion that, this 

28 
 
scenario, apart from being financially draining on the beneficiaries, a lso affects 
the productivity of employees. Therefore, the Committee would like the Ministry 
to revise norms/guidelines for establishing CGHS Wellness Centre in a new city 
in such a way as to include Central Government employees, pensioners and 
their depend ent family members for meeting the criteria of 6000. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  Such 
review must be undertaken inter-alia also with the objective of exploring the 
possibilities of establishing centres in towns and cities, where it doesn’t meet 
the existing norms. They feel that the Government needs to consider relaxation 
of existing norms or create new norms for opening new wellness centres 
particularly for beneficiaries of hilly and difficult States viz. Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir, UT of Ladakh and North Eastern States. The 
Committee are also of the opinion that the Government should consider 
onboarding retired doctors of the State Governments on contract basis, in such 
cities/towns in the initial phase till the process of recruitment of doctors is 
completed for posting in such locations. 
 
Need to review Infrastructure  
3. The Committee, note from the subm ission of the Ministry that majority of 
the CGHS owned buildings housing the wellness centres are relatively new and 
do not require major repair/renovation work. The Committee are, however, not 
convinced as beneficiaries visiting the centres have often hig hlighted poor 
infrastructure of some of the wellness centres viz. shabby buildings, broken 
windows, lack of proper sitting arrangements, lack of proper lights, cleanliness 
and availability of other basic amenities, etc. The Committee, therefore are of 
the opinion that the condition of available infrastructure, including condition of 
the buildings should be regularly reviewed by the Estate Management Division 
of the Ministry and necessary renovation or maintenance work planned 
accordingly. A well maintained building or infrastructure will create a healthy 
and positive atmosphere in the centres. As the Ministry has already submitted 

29 
 
that sufficient funds are available for maintenance of existing buildings, the 
Committee recommend that the fund must be judiciou sly used for the upkeep 
and maintenance of wellness centres, rather than surrendering funds at the end 
of a financial year. As the Ministry has submitted that during the period/year 
2020-2022, 17 proposals for construction and 14 proposals for renovation o f 
buildings have been received, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
details of those projects/CGHS centres and the status of their 
constructions/renovations. 
4. As regards CGHS centres operating in rental buildings, the Committee 
note that 122 C GHS wellness centres are housed in rental buildings. The 
Committee were surprised as well as intrigued by the submission of the Ministry 
that some rental buildings viz. Bandra (Mumbai) and Pusa Road (Delhi), to 
name a few, are so old that the names of owne rs of those buildings are 
unavailable in official records. The Committee are unable to comprehend as to 
how this arrangement is carried on without the name of an owner. They urge 
upon the government to maintain proper records of all CGHS centres housed in 
rental buildings, as payments or funds for rent, etc. are debited from 
Government exchequer. Considering that rental buildings have their own set of 
problems such as the premises, recurring expenditure including payment of 
rent, review of lease agreement, etc. apart from having to face the whims and 
fancies of the owners, the Committee, strongly recommend the Government to 
take necessary steps to construct its own buildings at all the cities/locations 
where CGHS centres are presently functioning from rented  premises. As the 
Ministry has informed that land for building CGHS centres at suitable locations 
are required to be allotted by State Government, the Committee, further 
recommend the Government to vigorously pursue with the concerned State 
Governments for allotment of land for the purpose. As some closed PSUs have 
valuable land/buildings at prime locations, the Ministry can explore utilisation of 
such properties too.   
 

30 
 
AYUSH units/centres under CGHS 
5. The Committee are happy to note the steps taken by th e Ministry to 
strengthen the process of consultations and treatment under Indian system of 
medicine for CGHS beneficiaries, which is gaining worldwide popularity now. 
The Committee also note with satisfaction that the number of AYUSH units 
under CGHS have increased to 97, from 85 prior to 2018. However, the 
Committee have observed that the number of beneficiaries visiting the AYUSH 
units for treatment/consultation are very less as compared to the number of 
beneficiaries visiting allopathic wellness centres.  Reasons could be either the 
beneficiaries do not have sufficient information on the benefits of Indian system 
of medicines or are just reluctant to go for consultation or treatment due to 
various inhibitions. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the M inistry 
along with their proposals to expand the CGHS AYUSH units to new cities, 
must also strive to promote the process and benefits of treatment under Indian 
system of medicines through their Department of AYUSH. The Committee, 
believe that such measures taken by the Ministry will be in consonance with the 
vision of the Government to ensure optimal development and propagation of 
indigenous AYUSH system of healthcare in the country.  
Staffing- Need to fill up vacancies 
6. The Committee are concerned to not e that around 30 percent of 
sanctioned strength of Doctors, paramedical and administrative staff for all 
CGHS set-ups in the country are lying vacant. It is really worrisome that out of 
the sanctioned strength of 1997 doctors, 490 posts are lying vacant. No wonder, 
patients are made to wait for long time in CGHS dispensaries due to non -
availability of doctors. The Committee, while taking note of the steps taken by 
the Ministry to fill -up the vacant posts, recommend the Ministry to pursue 
strongly with the c oncerned recruiting Departments/Agencies so that the 
recruitment process can be completed expeditiously. The Ministry should not 
shrug off its responsibilities by leaving it to the UPSC/SSC or other recruiting 
agencies to complete the recruitment process. Since providi ng medical 

31 
 
assistance under CGHS  is their responsibility, they must constantly follow up 
with them to ensure that the process is not delayed . Medical service being an 
essential and emergency service, recruitment to vacancies should be the top 
priority for the Government. The Committee are of the view, that opening or 
operating CGHS centres without sufficient doctors has no meaning and causes 
inconvenience to beneficiaries. 
7. The Committee observe that beneficiaries are facing inconvenience at 
CGHS centres due to poor doctor -beneficiary ratio. Most of the CGHS centres 
have around 2 doctors only present at a time and long lines of patients can be 
witnessed outside their chambers any time. The Committee would therefore 
urge upon the Government to prepare a road map for the future, considering 
that the number of beneficiaries are increasing every year, whereas the number 
of sanctioned strength of doctors remaining static. The Committee are of the 
view that such pro -active step would help the Governm ent to make proper 
assessment of the number of doctors which will be required in future, to cater to 
the needs of growing number of beneficiaries. 
8. The Committee also note that number of posts in the grade of Specialist 
and GDMOs are lying vacant, due to  low joining rate of candidates 
recommended for appointment, as well as preference of GDMOs to pursue 
further studies. The Committee recommend that the Government review the 
terms and conditions of services in the grade of Specialist and GDMOs and 
make nec essary amendments or changes in the service conditions to attract 
bright candidates. The Committee are convinced that such a step will help the 
government in addressing the low joining rate of candidates, as well as attrition 
of incumbents. 
Process of Referral under CGHS 
9. The Committee are aware of the fact that  for availing treatment in a 
CGHS empanelled private hospital, a patient is required to obtain a referral from 
CGHS dispensary. However, at pr esent, the referral process is  cumbersome. 
Once a patient is referred to any private empanelled hospital , if the doctor (at 

32 
 
the empanelled hospital) prescribe s any tests/investigation/treatment, the 
CGHS beneficiary needs to return to the dispensary and get referral from the 
CGHS docto r for the prescribed tests/investigation/treatment. The Committee, 
have observed that this process where a patient has to get referral done every 
time tests/investigations/treatment are prescribed by the doctor at any private 
empanelled hospital  adds to th e woes of a patient with poor health. The 
Committee, would like to believe that CGHS has been envisioned for seamless 
treatment of the beneficiary, rather than troubling the beneficiary with 
procedures/rules to obtain referrals time and again, once he or s he has 
obtained initial referral from any CGHS dispensary. As most of the Government 
procedures are digitised, t he Committee would like the Ministry to review the 
archaic referral system and recommend the Ministry to come up with 
appropriate solutions to ensure that patients, once being referred by dispensary, 
need not visit multiple times there for obtaining referral on subsequent 
tests/investigations/indoor treatment as prescribed by private empanelled  
hospitals. The Committee feel that this would also re duce the long queues 
witnessed outside CGHS dispensaries and will also help in reducing the 
workload on doctors. The Committee would like to be updated on the action 
taken in this regard. 
Need for efficiency in supply of medicines. 
10.    Under CGHS, the medicines which are not available in the dispensary 
are indented and procured through Authorised local Chemists and provided to 
the beneficiaries. The Committee, have observed that in certain cases the 
medicines which are indented are not procur ed in time and the beneficiaries 
have to procure it by themselves from open market. This creates inconvenience 
as well as dissatisfaction among beneficiaries, who are making regular 
contributions to the Central Government Health Scheme. Also, it has come t o 
the notice of the Committee that in many cases, the bid/contract of the 
Authorised local Chemist are not renewed well in time and the dispensary is not 
in a position to supply the medicines. The Committee strongly hold that when 

33 
 
any beneficiary is contributing under CGHS, it is the primary responsibility of the 
dispensaries to provide not only medical consultations, but also requisite 
medicines at the earliest. The Committee would like the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare to look into the cases where in bids/contracts were not 
renewed/not awarded afresh on time, leading to delays in procurement and 
subsequent distribution of medicines. The Committee, would like to be apprised 
of the changes/reforms brought into the guidelines for local purchase of 
medicines, so as to ensure uninterrupted supply of the same. 
Need for relaxation in the process of direct consultation 
11. Under CGHS, beneficiaries aged 75 years and above can go directly to 
any private CGHS empanelled hospital and take consultations from the doctor 
for any ailment. The Committee, appreciate the existing guidelines bu t they are 
of the view that these guidelines of direct consultation should be extended to all 
the beneficiaries aged 60 years and above. Fixing age bracket o f 75 years for 
availing direct private consultations must have been done with a vision to 
provide relief to aged beneficiaries. The Committee, would like the Ministry to 
review its guidelines and consider appropriate amendments so as to bring all 
the CGHS beneficiaries aged 60 years and above in the ambit of direct private 
consultation. This would be in consonance with existing set up and would not 
lead to additional expenditure because as such pensioners/beneficiaries aged 
60 years and above receive cashle ss treatment from private empanelled 
hospitals. Once beneficiaries 60 years and above are put under one category of 
seeking direct private consultation, the mounting pressure on doctors would be 
really manageable with the existing 70% workforce. Also, the beneficiaries aged 
60 and above would be saved from visiting dispensaries for the mere sake of 
getting referral. The Committee, would recommend the Ministry to take 
appropriate action and apprise them.  
 
 

34 
 
Need to expand the ambit of Cashless treatment 
12. The Committee note the submission of the Ministry regarding certain 
categories of beneficiaries being provided treatment on cashless basis. The 
Committee have also observed that serving employees of 
Ministries/Departments, except those serving in the M/O H ealth and Family 
Welfare and its subordinate offices, are not entitled for this facility. In this 
regard, the Committee are not convinced by the reason specified by the Ministry 
in their submission for not extending cashless treatment to 
employees/beneficiaries of all Ministries/Departments. The Committee have 
been informed that processing and payment of hospital bills pertaining to CGHS 
pensioner beneficiaries are being completed on the IT -platform of NHA. The 
Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that it is high time the Ministry consider 
using IT platforms for the benefit of all stakeholders, as far as cashless 
treatment are concerned. 
 Beneficiaries may not have the required resources or the time to apply 
for drawing Advances during certain circumstan ces. The Committee, therefore, 
would like to underline the importance of extending the facility of cashless 
treatment to all beneficiaries including serving employees of all 
Ministries/Departments. The Ministry may consider using the NHA -IT platform 
or exp lore the possibility of developing a new software or IT platform for the 
common use of all Ministries and Departments, to streamline the process for 
payment/reimbursement of cashless treatment. Through such a software/IT 
platform, the expenditure with rega rd to the concerned Budget Head can be 
monitored and payment/reimbursement to beneficiaries by all Ministries and 
Departments streamlined. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the 
Ministry to seriously consider expanding the ambit of cashless treat ment and 
apprise them of the action proposed/taken. 
Working Hours of centres and e-Sanjeevani 
13. The Committee are aware that CGHS wellness centres start functioning 
early in the morning and closes by mid -day/afternoon. The Committee, feel that 

35 
 
the existing working hours of the centres are one of the reasons for huge rush 
of beneficiaries witnessed at a given time in the centres. Ideally the wellness 
centres need to be kept functioning till the evening hours for the convenience of 
those in -service benefici aries who may need consultations after office hours 
and also to manage the huge rush usually witnessed at the centres. Hence, the 
Ministry may also consider making the centres functional during evening hours, 
at those locations where the rush of beneficiar ies is too high, on a pilot basis. 
The Ministry may also consider appointing retired doctors or work out a 
mechanism to depute senior resident doctors of Government hospitals, to 
attend to beneficiaries during additional working hours and also to manage 
efficiently the workload of incumbent doctors of such centres. At the same time, 
the Committee appreciate the e -Sanjeevani initiative of the Ministry to start an 
online consultation service for patients, although the same is at an initial phase 
presently. Th e Committee recommend that e -Sanjeevani can be a boon to 
elderly and immobile patients in particular provided it ensures an efficient 
service as well as streamlining of medicines availability nearby. 
Punctuality of doctors  
14. The Committee are constraine d to note a very common complaint that 
doctors posted in some CGHS centres, on many occasions, are not found to be 
present during duty hours or are granted leave without posting any substitutes. 
It can cause immense hardship to the serious patients, partic ularly in current 
COVID surges. Nonetheless, the Committee acknowledge the efforts made by 
the Government to ensure regular attendance of doctors, including installation 
of biometric attendance system at CGHS centres etc. and desire to strictly 
monitoring and reviewing attendance of doctors and other staff in the CGHS 
periodically. The Committee  also recommend deputing substitute doctors 
whenever an incumbent is granted leave, so that beneficiaries visiting the 
centres do not face any inconvenience. The Committee also urge upon the 
Government to display the names of doctors going on leave on the notice board 
of the centres well in advance, for the information of beneficiaries. Sending such 

36 
 
information on registered mobile numbers of area beneficiaries would be most 
appreciated. 
 
Payment/settlement of bills of empanelled hospitals. 
15. The Committee, note that bills amounting to ₹ 1500 crore are in different 
stages of processing for payment to HCOs/empanelled hospitals, while the bills 
worth ₹ 1083 crore have been cleared during the current financial year 2022-23. 
The Committee are happy to note tha t since June, 2021, credit hospital bills are 
being uploaded on NHA -IT platform for online processing by NHA and online 
payment by CGHS in a paperless and transparent mode. However, the 
Committee, have also observed that many bills due for payment, are car ried 
over to the next financial year owing to various reasons, which is affecting the 
credibility of CGHS with regard to timely payment of bills to hospitals. It 
ultimately translates in refusal of treatment to CGHS beneficiaries by some of 
the empanelled hospitals or demand for a security deposit before starting the 
treatment. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to work out 
a mechanism for fixing a timeline for fast settlement and payment of bills to 
hospitals for example, the hospitals may be directed to submit all bills relating to 
credit facilities provided to beneficiaries during a particular month by the 10 th 
day of the following month and CGHS must initiate action for settlement and 
payment of all such bills by the 30 th day of that mont h. The Committee, also 
urge upon CGHS to consider payment of 80% of the total outstanding due to a 
hospital till final settlement/payment of the bills, if there is any discrepancy or 
lacunae in the bills submitted by those hospitals. Such a step will be in  the 
interest of both the beneficiaries and hospitals and will also address various 
grievances related to denial of treatment by hospitals in the wake of non -
clearance of outstanding dues by CGHS. 
16. The Committee, notice that a Performance Audit covering  the period 
2016-17 to 2020 -21 was conducted by C&AG, to examine payment of hospital 
bills by CGHS. However, the Committee, have observed that some of the 

37 
 
recommendations are still under consideration of the Government. It is worth 
mentioning that in line with the recommendations of the Committee in the above 
para, the C&AG has also highlighted the need for a prescribed timeline for 
submission/settlement of claims by hospitals and imposing penalty on hospitals 
for non -adherence to such timelines. During evi dence, the Committee, were 
informed that revised timelines are being finalised and will be incorporated in 
the new MoA to be signed with HCOs. The Ministry also submitted their action 
taken on the matters raised by C&AG. The Committee, hope that the proced ure 
pending is since completed and therefore, would like to be apprised of action 
taken in this matter. 
 
17. As regards rates for treatment, the Committee, have been informed that 
the revision of rates for treatment/diagnosis under CGHS was last undertaken in 
October, 2014 in Delhi and in the year 2015 in other cities. It has been informed 
that for cancer and kidney surgeries, rates were revised. However, virtually a 
decade has nearly passed. The Committee observe that the rates for treatment 
or diagnosis u nder CGHS are very low as compared to prevailing rates of 
hospitals in general now. This scenario appears to be one of the prime reasons 
that hospitals are reluctant to provide treatment to CGHS beneficiaries. The 
Committee also learn that many empanelled hospitals have shown scant 
interest for renewal or extension of MoA for empanelment due to the wide gap 
in rates fixed by CGHS in comparison to prevailing general rates or market 
rates. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government, to put in place a 
mechanism to review the rates of treatment/diagnosis under CGHS every year 
and make those reasonable enough to attract the interest of a wider number of 
hospitals. 
 
 
 

38 
 
Need for regular interaction with local MPs. 
18. The Committee were informed about CGHS P anchayat initiative by the 
Ministry between the Ministry and elected representatives at few cities during 
the evidence. The Committee underline the need for regular healthy interaction 
between public representatives and Government Organisations/Departments  
with regard to monitoring and effective delivery of public services. Till now, there 
is hardly any interaction between the CGHS set ups/officials and local MPs of 
the area or region of any CGHS set -up, apart from the 5 cities claimed by the 
Ministry. As t hey stated to cover the entire country within 6 months, i.e. 
December, 2022, the Committee desire to be apprised of the dates and cities 
concerned in all CGHS Panchayats till date. The Committee would also like to 
know about any concrete steps further take n, based on the feedback of these 
Panchayats. Further, they recommend the Government to devise a mechanism, 
to ensure that every CGHS set -up in the country regularly interacts, preferably 
every 3 months, with the local MP. The Committee strongly feel that such an 
initiative will help in strengthening the services delivered by CGHS, as Members 
of Parliament apart from being public representatives, are also beneficiaries 
themselves, hence their feedback in such interactions will greatly benefit CGHS. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 02 February, 2023 
 13 Magha,1944(saka) 
GIRISH BHALCHANDRA 
BAPAT 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 
  

39 
 
Annexure –A 
State-wise CGHS Wellness Centres 
 
Sl. 
No.  
State / Union Territory City Allopathic 
Wellness 
Centres 
AYUSH 
Units 
1 
Andhra Pradesh Guntur 1 0 
Nellore 1 0 
Rajahmundry 1 0 
Vijayawada 1 0 
Visakhapatnam 2 0 
2 
Assam Guwahati 5 1 
Dibrugarh 1 0 
Silchar 
1 
    
3 
Bihar Chappra 1 0 
Darbhanga 1 0 
Gaya 1 0 
Muzzafarpur 1 0 
Patna 5 2 
 4 Chhattisgarh Raipur 2 0 
 5 Delhi Delhi 88 35 
 6 Goa Panaji 1 0 
 7 Gujarat Ahmedabad 8 2 

40 
 
  
  
Gandhinagar 1 0 
Vadodara 1 0 
  
 8 
  
  
Haryana 
  
*Under Administrative 
control of CGHS, Delhi 
Ambala 1 0 
Faridabad* 1 0 
Gurgaon* 2 1 
Sonipat* 1 0 
 9 Himachal Pradesh Shimla 1 0 
10 
Jammu & Kashmir (UT) Jammu 2 0 
Srinagar 1 0 
11 
Jharkhand Dhanbad 1 0 
Ranchi 3 0 
 12 Karnataka Bengaluru 10 4 
13 
Kerala Thiruvananthapuram 3 0 
Kannur 1 0 
Kozhikode 1 0 
Kochi 1 0 
14 
Madhya Pradesh 
  
Bhopal 2 0 
Gwalior 1 0 
Jabalpur 5 0 
Indore 1 1 
  
 15 
  
Maharashtra 
  
Mumbai 26 5 
Nagpur 12 3 
Pune 9 2 

41 
 
  Nashik 1 0 
 16 Manipur Imphal 1 0 
 17 Meghalaya Shillong 2 1 
 18 Mizoram Aizawl 1 0 
 19 Nagaland Kohima 1 0 
20 
Odisha Berhampur 1 0 
Bhubaneshwar 3 1 
Cuttack 1 0 
  
 21 
Punjab Amritsar 1 0 
Jalandhar 1 0 
 22 Puducherry Puducherry 1 0 
23 
Rajasthan Ajmer 1 0 
Jodhpur 1 0 
Jaipur 7 2 
Kota 1 0 
 24 Sikkim Gangtok 1 0 
25 
Tamil Nadu Chennai 14 4 
Tiruchirapalli 1 0 
Tirunalveli 1 0 
 26 Telangana Hyderabad 13 6 
 27 Tripura Agartala 1 0 
 28 Uttrakhand Dehradun 3 0 

42 
 
 29 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Uttar Pradesh 
  
*Under Administrative 
control of CGHS, Delhi 
  
Agra 1 0 
Prayagraj 7 2 
Aligarh 1 0 
Baghpat 1 0 
Bareilly 1 0 
Ghaziabad* 1 0 
Gorakhpur 1 0 
Greater Noida* 1 0 
Indirapuram* 1 0 
Kanpur 9 3 
Lucknow 9 3 
Meerut 6 2 
Moradabad 1 0 
Noida* 2 0 
Saharanpur 1 0 
Sahibabad* 1 0 
Varanasi 2 0 
30 
West Bengal Jalpaiguri 1 0 
Kolkata 19 3 
Siliguri 1 0 
 31 Chandigarh (UT) Chandigarh 1 0 
  Total 
  
334 97 

43 
 
 

44 
 
 

45 
 
 

46 
 
 
 
  

47 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2022-23) 
 
The Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee was held on Thursday, 02 February, 2023 at 
1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Room No.52B, Parliament House, New Delhi-110001 
PRESENT 
 Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan – Convener 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri P.P. Choudhary 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
8. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
9. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
10. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
11. Dr. K.C. Patel 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14. Shri Saikia Dilip 
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
16. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
17. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
18. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
 

48 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
       1.     Smt. Anita.B.Panda -   Additional Secretary 
2.      Shri Muraleedharan.P -   Director 
3.      Shri R.C.Sharma - Additional Director 
 
2.  XXX  XXX  XXX 
3.  The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following two 
draft Reports: 
 i)  Assessment of various initiatives under CGHS. 
 ii) XXX  XXX  XXX  
 
4. The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Reports. The 
Committee then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the bas is of 
factual verification received from the concerned Ministry and present the same to Lok 
Sabha. 
The Committee, then, adjourned.   
  
 