23 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
Review of Funds Allocation and Utilization under MPLAD Fund Scheme 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the       
14th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
 
 
 
 TWENTY-THIRD  REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Review of Funds Allocation and Utilization under MPLAD Fund Scheme 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the      
14th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 March, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2023 / Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
 
      
  

CONTENTS          Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2022-23)    (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iv) 
  
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee on 
Estimates held on 16th March, 2023  
 
42 
II. Analysis Of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the           
14th Report of the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) 
 
44 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I Report  1 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government         
15 
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s reply 
34 
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
35 
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final reply of Government is still awaited 
41 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
 Shri Girish Bhalchandra  Bapat – Chairperson 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
6. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
7. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
13. Shri jual Oram 
14. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
15. Shri Saikia Dilip 
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
17. Dr. K.C. Patel 
18. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
19. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
20. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
21. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
22. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
23. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
24. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
25. Shri Prathap Simha 
26. Shri Pinaki Misra 
27. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
28. Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
29. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
30. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 

iii 
 
Secretariat                            
  
1. Smt.  Anita Bhatt Panda Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan. P Director 
3. Dr.  (Smt.) Sheetal Kapoor Committee Officer 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2022 -23) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Twenty-Third Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 14 th Report of the Committee (2021 -22) on the subject ‘Review of 
Funds Allocation and Utilisation under MPLAD Fund Scheme’ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
2.  The 14th Report of the Committee on Estimates (2021 -22) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 4th April, 2022. The Government furnished their replies indicating action taken 
on the recommendations contained in the 14 th Report on 18 October, 2022. The draft 
report was considered and approved on 16 March, 2023, by the Committee. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 14th Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI 
16 March, 2023         
25 Phalguna ,1944(Saka) 
GIRISH BHALCHANDRA  BAPAT 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the ir Fourteenth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘ Review of Funds Allocation and 
Utilisation under MPLAD Fund Scheme ’ pertaining to the Ministry of Statistics an d 
Programme Implementation. 
  
2.       The Fourteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 04.04.2022. It contained 
18 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have been receive d from the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-   
  
(i)       Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation. Para No 1,2,3,4,6,7,8,10,12,13,14,15 and 16 
    
      Total: 13 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation. Nil           
        Total: 00 
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)     Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation. 5,9,17 & 18         
                       Total:04 
(Chapter-IV) 
  
 
(iv) Observations/Recomm endations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:  
 Recommendation. No. 11                                                                                   
                 Total: 01 
(Chapter-V) 
  

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final Action Taken Reply in 
respect of the recommendation contained in Chapter -V for which interim reply has been 
given by the Government  may be furnished to them within six months of the 
presentation of the Report to the House. 
 
5.       The Committee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
 Observations/Recommendations(Para No 2) 
 
Release of MPLADS funds 
6. In their recommendation contained in the original 14 th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“The Committee note that both at the time of constitution of Lok Sabha after 
General Elections and after the election of a Rajya Sabha Member, first installment of 
₹2.5 crore is released to the Nodal District Authority without any documents. However, 
in the remaining years, one of the criteria for releasing the first installment in the 
subsequent years is furnishing of the Pro visional Utilization Certificate of previous year 
covering at least 80% of the expenditure of the first installment of the previous year. The 
Committee view this condition of furnishing 80% utilization in a gap of almost one year 
as an impediment when the region-wise conditions and circumstances in each State 
hugely differ from one another. The Committee observe that the criteria of furnishing 
Utilization Certificate for the release of second installment of a financial year is both 
cumbersome and time consu ming procedure as obtaining and furnishing Utilization 
Certificate involve different authorities, paper work and several formalities. This 
invariably leads to delay in release of funds and also delay in payments to respective 
agencies/contractors resulting in stalling of ongoing projects and cost escalation. 
Hence, the Committee urge the Ministry to review the aforesaid criteria and bring 
appropriate amendments in the guidelines so as to simplify and expedite the process of 
fund release. The Committee recom mend that there should be a mechanism put in 
place to facilitate the process of proposal, its estimates, tender, passing of bills and 
release of payment to contractors within a stipulated time frame which would help in 
smooth implementation of the projects under the MPLAD Scheme. 
 
 

3 
 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“Simplification of Procedure for release of funds under MPLADS 
The condition of furnishing of Utilization Certificate for release of funds has been 
incorporated in MPLADS Guidelines in consonance with the provisions of GFR. 
However, the Ministry is in the process of comprehensive revision of MPLADS 
Guidelines and implementation of Revised Fund Flow Procedure introduced by Ministry 
of Finance vide their O.M., dated 9-3-2022 wherein the Ministry intends to put in place a 
system under which District Authorities will not be required to wait for the actual funds to 
be released by the Ministry as they will be allocated drawing limits for the entire financial 
year and the ac tual funds will flow to vendors directly on real time basis. Therefore, the 
funds under the Scheme are expected to be released, utilized and monitored in a more 
efficient manner. 
Implementation of Projects 
As per para 3.3 of MPLADS Guidelines, the District  Authority shall identify the 
Implementing Agency capable of executing the eligible work qualitatively, timely and 
satisfactorily. The District Authority shall follow the established work scrutiny; technical, 
work estimation, tendering and administrative p rocedure of the State/UT Government 
concerned in the matter of work execution and shall be responsible for timely and 
effective implementation of such works. Following provisions already exist in extant 
MPLADS Guidelines for expeditious implementation of projects under MPLADS:- 
All recommended eligible works should be sanctioned within 75 days from the 
date of receipt of the recommendation, after completing all formalities. The District 
Authority shall, however, inform MPs regarding rejection, if any, within 45 days from the 
date of receipt of recommendations, with reasons thereof. In case of the time limits 
mentioned in the section falling within the period of operation of model code of conduct 
notified by the Election Commission, then such period as notified by model code of 
conduct will not be included in the reckoning of time limits.  
The sanction letter/order shall stipulate a time limit for completion of the work to 
the Implementation Agency. The time limit for completion of the works should generally 
not exceed one year. In exceptional cases, where the implementation time exceeds one 
year, specific reasons for the same shall be incorporated in the sanction letter/order. 
The sanction letter/order shall also include a clause for suitable action against the 
Implementation Agency  in the event of their failure to complete the work within the 
stipulated time as per the State Government Procedure. A copy of the sanction 
letter/order shall be sent to the MP concerned. 
Decision making powers in regard to technical, financial and admini strative 
sanctions to be accorded under the Scheme, vest in the district level functionaries. To 
facilitate quick implementation of projects under this Scheme, full powers should be 
delegated by the State/ UT Governments to the district functionaries. The District 

4 
 
Authorities will have full powers to get the works technically approved and financial 
estimates prepared by the competent district functionaries before according the final 
administrative sanction and approval. The District Authority should, before  sanctioning 
the work, ensure that all clearances for such works have been taken from the 
competent authorities and the work conforms to the Guidelines.” 
8. The Committee had urged the Ministry to review the criteria of furnishing of 
Provisional Utilizatio n Certificate of previous year for releasing the first 
installment in the subsequent year since such a condition leads to delay not only 
in release of funds but also in payments to agencies/contractors. The Ministry, in 
the Action Taken reply, have stated that they are in the process of comprehensive 
revision of MPLAD Guidelines and implementation of Revised Fund Flow 
Procedure. The Committee are further informed that the Ministry intends to put in 
place a system where District Authorities would be allocate d drawing limits for 
the entire financial year in order to simplify the procedures. The Committee 
appreciate that the Ministry has taken steps to make actual funds available to 
vendors on real time basis by setting up drawing limits. The Committee would 
like to know as to how the drawing limits are proposed to be earmarked and the 
way it would be governed / reviewed. The Committee would like to be apprised 
about the procedure specified in this regard. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 3) 
 
Suspension of MPLADS Fund  
9. In their recommendation contained in the original 14 th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“The Committee note that MPs constantly receive several requests from general 
public/Societies/Trusts from their respective cons tituencies to carry out various 
developmental works/create assets for the welfare of the people. With MPLADS Funds 
having been suspended during COVID -19 pandemic for two years, i.e., 2020 -21 and 
2021-22, MPs have not been able to recommend any new project and thus these 
requests from general public/Societies/Trusts have not been entertained. The 
Committee strongly desire that as COVID 19 pandemic situation in the country has 
eased, for the present M.P.s, the MPLADS Fund of 5th year may be released during 4t h 
year, in advance, in order to enable the MPs to recommend/sanction projects on 
aforementioned requests.  
The Committee also recommend that there should be a fixed timeline of half 
yearly release of installments during a financial year. The Committee hope  that early 

5 
 
release of second installment of a particular year would ensure timely remittances to the 
respective company/contractors so that the projects are carried out smoothly.   
As it was decided not to operate MPLADS for FY 2020 -21 and FY 2021-22, thus 
there was no release of MPLADS installments  during these two years including the 
unreleased installments on or before 31.03.2020. Annual budgetary outlay for MPLADS 
for FY 2020 -21 was placed at the disposal of D/o Expenditure, M/o Finance for 
managing the health and economic impacts of COVID -19. However, during the course 
of examination of the subject, the Committee observed that installments for the financial 
year 2019 -20 were also not released for most of the MPs. The Committee note that 
there are certain sanctioned/approved projects which have been completed or are at the 
stage of completion but due to non -release of previous installments, payments for such 
projects/works are still pending which unfortunately resulted in projects being 
abandoned mid-way.  To overcome this, the Committee now call upon the Government 
to make appropriate arrangements to release pending installments of previous years in 
order to clear the committed liabilities under MPLAD Scheme and to help people derive 
benefits from erstwhile dead/abandoned projects under MPLADS.”             
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“Release of MPLADS Fund of 5th year in 4th year, in advance 
  
Release of MPLADS Funds of 5th year in 4th year in advance is not feasible as 
same is not in consonance with the provisions of GFR. However, the Ministry is in the 
process of comprehensive revision of MPLADS Guidelines and implementation of 
Revised Fund Flow Procedure introduced by Ministry of Finance vide their O.M., da ted 
9-3-2022 wherein the Ministry intends to put in place a system under which District 
Authorities will not be required to wait for the actual funds to be released by the Ministry 
as they will be allocated drawing limits for the entire financial year and the actual funds 
will flow to vendors directly on real time basis. Therefore, the funds under the Scheme 
are expected to be released, utilized and monitored in a more efficient manner. 
  
Release of installments of previous years 
  
Release of funds under MP LADS is strictly subject to fulfillment of fund -related 
criteria and submission of fund -related documents and those documents being found in 
order upon scrutiny along with fulfillment of criteria of unspent and unsanctioned 
balance. Delayed submission of r equisite fund -related documents like Utilization 
Certificates, Provisional Utilization Certificates and Audit Certificates, by the District 
Authorities, has a cascading effect on release of pending installments. 
  

6 
 
The Ministry is releasing pending insta llments under MPLADS as soon as the 
fund related criteria is fulfilled and the fund related documents, as provided in MPLADS 
Guidelines, are submitted by the District Authorities. During the FY 2021 -22, 766 
installments of ₹1729.5 crore were released including 289 installments of ₹ 722.50 crore 
for the FY 2019 -20 and 106 insta llments of ₹ 265 crore pertaining to the period prior to 
FY 2019 -20. Similarly, during the FY 2022 -23 (till 31.08.2022), 367 insta llments of           
₹ 836.5 crore have been released inc luding 30 instal lments of ₹ 75 crore for the FY 
2019-20 and 111 installments of ₹ 277.5 crore pertaining to the period prior to FY 2019 -
20”. 
 
11. In the wake of an unprecedented situation of the two years (2020 -22) of 
COVID pandemic, when the MPs were unable to recommend any projects and the 
MPLAD funds were suspended, the Committee had brought attention to the fact 
that several projects, which have either been completed or were out at the final 
stage of completion, had to wait, owing to non release of previous installments. 
Hence, the Committee had urged the Ministry to make appropriate arrangements 
for timely release of funds. In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry had stated 
that the MPLAD guidelines are set for comprehensive revision wherein drawi ng 
limits for entire financial year would be made for District Authorities thereby 
making funds under the scheme to be utilized and maintained efficiently. Since 
the MoSPI is contemplating comprehensive changes in the fund release 
guidelines, the Committee  would like to be apprised of the mechanism in which 
drawing limits would be rationalised for District Authorities across the country. 
They hope that the revised guidelines would ease the processes of funds release 
thus paving the way for early start of completed projects. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 5) 
 
Completion of Abandoned Projects/Works 
12. In their recommendation contained in the 14 th Report, the Committee had stated 
as under: 
“The Committee observe that on several occasions certain project s/works which 
were duly proposed, sanctioned, approved and had commenced during the tenure of 
predecessor MP were left abandoned. In some instances, those project were found 
neither functional nor in a condition to be used, during the tenure of successor M P.  The 
Committee observe that although the successor MP does recommend completion of 
such projects/works, the State Governments are reluctant to complete the carry over 
projects/works. The Committee view this as a serious loophole and urge the Ministry to  
take up the matter with the State Authorities/Nodal District Authorities to identify such 

7 
 
projects (which are lagging due to change of elected representative as abandoning any 
project/work mid-way would be a sheer wastage of funds) and take steps to get t hem 
completed in time.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry has a role inter-alia to 
evaluate MPLAD Scheme and hence need to seek information on such abandoned 
projects from each State and put in place a strong monitoring mechanism to ensure that 
the sanctioned projects are completed in time. The Committee also opine that the 
unused fu nd allotted to the predecessor MP should be utilized for the completion of 
such abandoned projects/works with minimal delay in documentation process. The 
Committee would like to have a State/UT/MP wise status report on such projects for the  
last three terms of Lok Sabha.” 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 “Provisions in MPLADS Guidelines to take care of Abandoned Projects 
Para 3.13 of the MPLADS Guidelines provides that “The sanction letter/order 
shall stipulate a time limit for completion of the work to the Implementation Agency. The 
time limit for completion of the works should generally not exceed one year. In 
exceptional cases, where the implementation time exceeds one year, specific reasons 
for the same shall be incorpor ated in the sanction letter/order. The sanction letter/order 
shall also include a clause for suitable action against the Implementation Agency in the 
event of their failure to complete the work within the stipulated time as per the State 
Government Procedu re. A copy of the sanction letter/order shall be sent to the MP 
concerned.”  
       Also, para 3.23 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates that “List of all completed and 
ongoing works with MPLADS funds should also be displayed at the District Authority 
Office and posted in the website for information of the general public. For public 
awareness, details of completed works may be displayed in prominent places like 
Tehsil/Niabat/Sub-Tehsil/Block/Gram Panchayat offices also.”  
       As an abiding principle, work s once sanctioned by the District Authority are to be 
mandatorily completed. If the works are not completed within the stipulated time -line, 
Para 3.3.1 of the MPLADS Guidelines may be invoked which stipulates as follows: 
       “In case, there is still any  abandoned/ suspended MPLAD work under the Scheme, 
it shall be completed by the State Government from their own funds. The State 
Government will also fix responsibility and take necessary disciplinary action against the 
erring officials. The District Authority may ensure that the funds must have been utilized 
as sanctioned earlier so that duplication of allocation of funds does not take place”. 
      It is up to the willingness of successor Member of Parliament to recommend amount 
from his MPLADS funds towards completion of an abandoned project/work. The amount 

8 
 
from the MPLADS funds of the new Member shall be sanctioned by the District 
Authority towards the abandoned work only if the Member indicates his consent to do so 
formally on his letterhead. 
      The MPLADS Guidelines are so designed that on execution of the works diligently 
as per the laid down procedure, the unspent funds/savings from the works are refunded 
back to the District Authority from the implementing agency.  
Evaluation of works done under MPLADS 
      The Ministry has been getting the works done under MPLAD Scheme, evaluated 
periodically through an agency independent of this Ministry. Last such evaluation was 
done in the year 2021 when this Ministry engaged an independent agency for carryin g 
out the monitoring/evaluation of works done under MPLADS in selected 216 Nodal 
Districts during the period from 01.04.2014 to 31.03.2019. The final findings/report of 
the evaluation, has been sent to the District Authorities and State Nodal Department fo r 
further appropriate action.  
Status of Abandoned Projects 
      State/UT/MP wise status report on such projects for the last three terms of Lok 
Sabha is being collected/compiled and same will be submitted in due course. “ 
14. The Committee had noted that  developmental works commenced during 
the tenure of predecessor M.P. were mostly left abandoned even when the 
successor M.P. would recommend completion of such projects; State 
Governments being reluctant to carry forward such projects/works. The 
Committee note from the Action Taken reply of the Ministry that as an abiding 
principle, works, once sanctioned by the District Authority , are to be mandatorily 
completed. The Ministry has further indicated the willingness of successor 
Member of Parliament as the so le driver in getting the abandoned work (of 
predecessor M.P. ) completed. Since t he Committee had suggested it based on 
the ground experience of most of the MPs , hence, w hile reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee would like the Ministry to  identify the works of 
developmental nature which are still incomplete not only due to lack of funds but 
also lack of proper attention of the District Authorities. The Committee would ask 
the Ministry to take up the matter with the State authorities and is sue instructions 
to them in tune with the MPLAD guidelines so that completion of development 
works neither remain halted nor stay non -functional. Also as desired by the m, a 
State/UT/MP wise status report on abandoned projects for the last three terms of 
Lok Sabha must be prepared and furnished to them within one month of the 
presentation of the Report. 

9 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 9) 
 
Centage Charge by PSUs 
15. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee note that the Ministry has authorized several PSUs like 
NBCC Ltd. to undertake various projects/works under MPLAD Scheme while at the 
State level the same is being accomplished by State Corporations. Both the PSUs & 
State Corporations provide supervisory, archi tectural and other institutional support 
for implementation of quality work under the MPLAD Scheme. The Committee, 
further, note that as per the extant MPLADS Guidelines, centage charged by the 
PSUs has not been allowed. This often leads to disputes at the  district level with 
reference to the centage which has to be charged by the PSUs officially. The 
Committee view that since all these PSUs do not draw money from the Central 
Budget, the Ministry should make appropriate amendments in the guidelines 
including upper ceiling on centages that can be allowed to CPSUs and State PSUs 
both, for projects/works under MPLADS.” 
 
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“Para 4.17.1 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates as follows:- 
“Excluding Admi nistrative Expenses as provided for in para 4.17, the Nodal 
Department, District Authority or Implementing Agency shall not levy any expenses like 
supervision charges, centage charges, salary of personnel, travelling expenses, etc. in 
the implementation an d supervision of works including preparatory works under the 
MPLADS”.  
The suggestion for allowing centage charges to CPSUs and State PSUs for 
projects/works under MPLADS has been examined and is not found to be feasible for 
inclusion in the MPLADS Guidelines.” 
17. The Committee had observed that under MPLADs, centage charged by 
PSUs has not been allowed which often leads to disputes at the district level  
which causes delay in completion of the project or even abandonment of the 
project. The Committee feel laying of centage charges by PSU justified because 
many PSUs do not get funds under the C entral Budget. The Ministry in their 
Action Taken reply, have stated that excluding the administrative expenses (as 
provided for in para 4.17 of the MPLAD guidelines),  the nodal department, District 

10 
 
Authority or Implementing Agency shall not levy any expenses in the 
implementation and supervision of developmental works. While noting the 
existing provisions with regard to administrative charges, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to take a relook since it is in the process of renewing MPLADs 
guidelines. The Committee expect the Ministry to allow centage charged b y PSUs 
in the cost of developmen tal works so that the efficiency and expertise of PSUs 
are utilised fully for completion of sanctioned projects within the timeline.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 11) 
 
Need for the audit of Administrative Expenses  
18. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“Under the MPLAD guidelines, there is a provision of 2% Administrative 
Expenses which gets deducted for the Facilitation Centre at the District Collector Office. 
The 2% Administrative Expenses, from every installment released, in respect of Hon’ble 
Member is shared by the Nodal Authority, Implem enting District Authority and State 
Nodal Department in the given ratio. The Committee observed that the Administrative 
Expenses once distributed by the Nodal District would be considered as spent & 
separate Utilization Certificate would not be necessary f or those expenses. Taking view 
of the fact that the cost of Facilitation Centre is borne out of 2% administrative expenses 
deducted from the MPLADS Fund allocated to the MPs, the Committee are of the firm 
view that the Ministry should strictly monitor and keep a check on the appropriate 
utilization of these expenses. The Ministry should also ensure that strict action should 
be taken against those found guilty of any misappropriation in this regard.  The 
Committee strongly feel that this 2% Administrative Exp enses is essentially public 
money and there should be a mandatory audit to ascertain its proper usage. The 
Committee would urge the Ministry to frame guidelines in this regard in consultation with 
District Authorities so that they may get notified from the  next financial year onwards. 
The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard”. 
 
 

11 
 
19. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“The suggestion has been noted and same is being examined in consultation 
with the stakeholders to see if it is feasible for inclusion in the MPLADS Guidelines.” 
 
20. The Committee had noted that Administrative Expenses once distributed, 
were considered as spent and there was no system in place to monitor its usage. 
Taking view of this, the Committee had recommended for audit of 2% 
Administrative Expenses. The Ministry in their Action Taken reply had indicated 
that the issue of audit of Administrative Expenses would be examined with the 
consultation of stakeholders for its feasibility. Th e Committee are happy to note 
that the Ministry has agreed to examine the feasibility of audit of Administrative 
Expenses and would like to be apprised of the progress / steps taken in this 
regard. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 17) 
 
Time Bound Action  
21. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee observe that the Para 3.13 of MPLAD    guidelines have 
provision for action against defaulting implementing agencies. As    per the guidelines, 
the sanction letter sh ould necessarily mention the time  limit for completion of the work 
which should generally not exceed one year. The Committee note that the  sanction 
letter must include a clause for suitable    action against the implementation agency in 
the event of their failure to complete the work as per government    procedure. 
The Committee are glad to note that the MPLAD  guidelines are envisioned   to achieve 
the results but the Ministry has the onus to bring to action the provisions under the 
guidelines.  They urge the  Ministry to take concerted efforts with utmost dedication for 
timely completion of sanctioned development  works. Hence, the Committee would like 
to be apprised of the cases where  ‘suitable’ actions were taken against defaulting 
agencies on unsatisfactory response received from the District Authority.” 
 

12 
 
22. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“Para-3.13 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates that “the sanction letter/order 
shall stipulate a time limit for completion of the work to the Implementation Agency. The 
time limit for completion of the works should generally not exceed one year. In 
exceptional cases, where the implementation time exceeds one year, specific reasons 
for the same shall be incorporated in the sanction letter/ord er. The sanction letter/order 
shall also include a clause for suitable action against the Implementation Agency in the 
event of their failure to complete the work within the stipulated time as per the State 
Government Procedure. A copy of the sanction lett er/order shall be sent to the MP 
concerned.” 
       Also, para-3.14 of the MPLADS Guidelines stipulates that “Decision making powers 
in regard to technical, financial and administrative sanctions to be accorded under the 
Scheme, vest in the district level functionaries. To facilitate quick implementation of 
projects under this Scheme, full powers should be delegated by the State/ UT 
Governments to the district functionaries. The District Authorities will have full powers to 
get the works technically approve d and financial estimates prepared by the competent 
district functionaries before according the final administrative sanction and approval. 
The District Authority should, before sanctioning the work, ensure that all clearances for 
such works have been take n from the competent authorities and the work conforms to 
the Guidelines”. 
       In a federal structure, it may not be feasible to conceive of any mechanism to have 
direct superintendence on the functioning of the District authorities, however, Ministry 
takes cognizance of such cases, which are brought to its notice wherein the 
implementation agency failed to complete the work within stipulated time as per 
government   procedure. Such cases are taken up with the respective State/UT 
Governments whereby Mini stry also impresses upon fixing of responsibility against 
erring Officers by the State/UT Government besides reiterating adherence to the 
provisions of MPLADS Guidelines.” 
23. The Committee , while noting that Para 3.13 of MPLAD guidelines have 
provision for action against defaulting implementing agencies , had urged the 

13 
 
Ministry to take concreted efforts so that the developmental works do not suffer 
from time overrun. They had also urged the Ministry to apprise them of the rest of 
the cases where suitable action had been taken against defaulting agencies. The 
Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the y take cognizance of the 
delayed cases as and when brought to their notice and then the cases are taken 
up with the respective State/UT Governme nts. The Committee feel that being a 
nodal Ministry, MoSPI should devise a mechanism/portal where in data pertaining 
to works/projects under MPLAD funds are maintained and monitored regularly. 
The Committee would like the Ministry to involve State authorities/implementation 
agency and integrate technology in a way  that data pertaining to developmental 
works are maintained, reviewed and monitored in an effective way. The 
Committee further feel that delays of any kind , if highlighted in an integrated 
portal, would enable the Ministry to take appropriate action in tim e. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 18) 
 
Creation of Subordinate unit/Office  
24. In their original recommendation, the Committee had stated as under: 
“The Committee observe tha t the concept of Monitoring Committees at district level is 
designed to keep a check on timely release of funds, completion of developmental work, 
etc., but there is no direct supervision of works by the MOSPI in each State/District.  
MPLADS, being a Centr al Scheme, comes under the purview of MOSPI for its role in 
release of funds, monitoring, account keeping and evaluation, hence, the Committee 
strongly feel that MOSPI should establish a dedicated monitoring unit so as to have a 
direct look at the progress  of developmental works sanctioned under MPLADS.  Once 
an online portal with real -time data is developed, monitoring the progress against each 
indicator would be easy for this dedicated unit and transparency and speed in the 
scheme implementation could be achieved.  At present, the Ministry awaits and relies 
upon the Reports (quarterly) of the Monitoring Committees for further actions with 
respect to release of funds, sanction letters etc. The Committee are of the strong 
opinion that having a unit would definitely identify any problems at State level and better 
coordinate with State Governments to streamline and implement the MPLADS projects  
in a time bound manner, as the MPLADS is implemented at the field level.” 
 

14 
 
25.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“The MPLAD Scheme has a very robust monitoring mechanism at Central, State/UT, 
District level with well-defined roles and responsibilities:- 
a. At the central level: The Ministry holds meetings in the States and also at the 
Centre to review the implementation of the MPLAD Scheme (Para 6.2 of MPLADS 
Guidelines). 
b. At State / UT level: A committee is constituted under the Chairmanship of the 
Chief Secretary/Development Commissioner/Additional Chief Secretary to review 
MPLADS implementation progress with the District Authorities and MPs at least once in 
a year. The Nodal Department Secretary and other Administrative Department 
Secretaries should also participate in such meetings (Para 6.3 of MPLADS Guidelines). 
c. At District Level: Th e District Authority reviews, every month and in any case at 
least once in every quarter, MPLADS works implementation with the Implementing 
Agencies. The District Authority shall invite the MPs concerned to such review meetings 
and send a report of such re view meetings to Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (Para 6.4 of MPLADS Guidelines).” 
26.  The Committee had observed that there is no direct supervision of works 
by Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation in each State/Distric t 
and had thus recommended for the establishment of a dedicated monitoring unit 
in each State so as to have a direct look at the progress of developmental works 
sanctioned under MPLADS. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have 
remained silent about establishment of any monitoring unit rather they have 
elaborated the protocols of meetings for reviewing of implementation of the 
MPLAD Scheme. The Committee are aware of the protocols of the meeting s 
however these protocols are generally not adhered to by District and State 
Authorities. Hence, while reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee 
feel that the Ministry need to revise guidelines in a way so that every State in the 
country has a ‘monitoring unit  / mechanism ’ so as to  review the progress of 
developmental works 0being carried out with MPLAD funds. With technological 
solutions / portals / IT applications, such a monitoring is no longer a tedious task. 
Hence, they expect that the Ministry, being nodal in supervision of de velopmental 
works under MPLAD funds, should positively consider the proposal of setting up 
of the ‘monitoring unit’ and apprise them of the steps to be taken in this regard. 
 
 

15 
 
Chapter – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 1) 
 
Introductory to the Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in the 
Report. 
 
Being introductory part, no action is required. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 2) 
 
Release of MPLADS funds 
The Committee note that both at the time of constitution of Lok Sabha after General 
Elections and after the election of a Rajya Sabha Member, first installment of ₹2.5 crore 
is released to the Nodal District Authority without any documents. However, in the 
remaining years, one of the criteria for releasing the first installment in the subsequent 
years is furnishing of the Provisional Utilization Certificate of previous year covering at 
least 80% of the expenditure of the first installment of the previous year. The Committee 
view this condition of furnishing 80% utilization in a gap of almost one year as an 
impediment when the region -wise conditions and circumstances in each State hugely 
differ from one another. The Committee observe that the criteria of furnishi ng Utilization 
Certificate for the release of second installment of a financial year is both cumbersome 
and time consuming procedure as obtaining and furnishing Utilization Certificate involve 
different authorities, paper work and several formalities.  Thi s invariably leads to delay 
in release of funds and also delay in payments to respective agencies/contractors 
resulting in stalling of ongoing projects and cost escalation. 
Hence, the Committee urge the Ministry to review the aforesaid criteria and bring 
appropriate amendments in the guidelines so as to simplify and expedite the process of 
fund release. The Committee recommend that there should be a mechanism put in 
place to facilitate the process of proposal, its estimates, tender, passing of bills and 
release of payment to contractors within a stipulated time frame which would help in 
smooth implementation of the projects under the MPLAD Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
Simplification of Procedure for release of funds under MPLADS 
The condition of furnishing of Utilization Certificate for release of funds has been 
incorporated in MPLADS Guidelines in consonance with the provisions of GFR. 

16 
 
However, the Ministry is in the process of comprehensive revision of MPLADS 
Guidelines and implementation of Revised Fund Flow Procedure introduced by Ministry 
of Finance vide their O.M., dated 9-3-2022 wherein the Ministry intends to put in place a 
system under which District Authorities will not be required to wait for the actual funds to 
be released by the Ministry as they will be allocated drawing limits for the entire financial 
year and the actual funds will flow to vendors directly on real time basis. Therefore, the 
funds under the Scheme are expected to be released, utilized and monitored in a  more 
efficient manner. 
Implementation of Projects 
As per para 3.3 of MPLADS Guidelines, the District Authority shall identify the 
Implementing Agency capable of executing the eligible work qualitatively, timely and 
satisfactorily. The District Authority s hall follow the established work scrutiny; technical, 
work estimation, tendering and administrative procedure of the State/UT Government 
concerned in the matter of work execution and shall be responsible for timely and 
effective implementation of such work s. Following provisions already exist in extant 
MPLADS Guidelines for expeditious implementation of projects under MPLADS:- 
All recommended eligible works should be sanctioned within 75 days from the date of 
receipt of the recommendation, after completing all formalities. The District Authority 
shall, however, inform MPs regarding rejection, if any, within 45 days from the date of 
receipt of recommendations, with reasons thereof. In case of the time limits mentioned 
in the section falling within the period of operation of model code of conduct notified by 
the Election Commission, then such period as notified by model code of conduct will not 
be included in the reckoning of time limits.  
3.13 The sanction letter/order shall stipulate a time limit for completion of the work to the 
Implementation Agency. The time limit for completion of the works should generally not 
exceed one year. In exceptional cases, where the implementation time exceeds one 
year, specific reasons for the same shall be incorporated in the s anction letter/order. 
The sanction letter/order shall also include a clause for suitable action against the 
Implementation Agency in the event of their failure to complete the work within the 
stipulated time as per the State Government Procedure. A copy of  the sanction 
letter/order shall be sent to the MP concerned. 
3.14 Decision making powers in regard to technical, financial and administrative 
sanctions to be accorded under the Scheme, vest in the district level functionaries. To 
facilitate quick implemen tation of projects under this Scheme, full powers should be 
delegated by the State/ UT Governments to the district functionaries. The District 
Authorities will have full powers to get the works technically approved and financial 
estimates prepared by the c ompetent district functionaries before according the final 

17 
 
administrative sanction and approval. The District Authority should, before sanctioning 
the work, ensure that all clearances for such works have been taken from the 
competent authorities and the work conforms to the Guidelines. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 3) 
 
Suspension of MPLADS Fund  
The Committee note that MPs constantly receive several requests from general 
public/Societies/Trusts from their respective constituencies to carry out vario us 
developmental works/create assets for the welfare of the people. With MPLADS Funds 
having been suspended during COVID -19 pandemic for two years, i.e., 2020 -21 and 
2021-22, MPs have not been able to recommend any new project and thus these 
requests from general public/Societies/Trusts have not been entertained. The 
Committee strongly desire that as COVID 19 pandemic situation in the country has 
eased, for the present M.P.s, the MPLADS Fund of 5th year may be released during 4th 
year, in advance, in order to enable the MPs to recommend/sanction projects on 
aforementioned requests.  
The Committee also recommend that there should be a fixed timeline of half yearly 
release of installments during a financial year. The Committee hope that early release of 
second installment of a particular year would ensure timely remittances to the 
respective company/contractors so that the projects are carried out smoothly.   
As it was decided not to operate MPLADS for FY 2020 -21 and FY 2021 -22, thus there 
was no release of MPL ADS installments  during these two years including the 
unreleased installments on or before 31.03.2020. Annual budgetary outlay for MPLADS 
for FY 2020 -21 was placed at the disposal of D/o Expenditure, M/o Finance for 
managing the health and economic impacts  of COVID-19. However, during the course 
of examination of the subject, the Committee observed that installments for the financial 
year 2019 -20 were also not released for most of the MPs. The Committee note that 
there are certain sanctioned/approved projects which have been completed or are at the 
stage of completion but due to non -release of previous installments, payments for such 
projects/works are still pending which unfortunately resulted in projects being 
abandoned mid-way.  To overcome this, the Comm ittee now call upon the Government 
to make appropriate arrangements to release pending installments of previous years in 
order to clear the committed liabilities under MPLAD Scheme and to help people derive 
benefits from erstwhile dead/abandoned projects under MPLADS.             
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
Release of MPLADS Fund of 5th year in 4th year, in advance 
  
Release of MPLADS Funds of 5th year in 4th year in advance is not feasible as same is 
not in consonance with the provisions of GFR. However, the Ministry is in the process of 
comprehensive revision of MPLADS Guidelines and implementation of Revised Fund 
Flow Procedure introduced by Ministry of Finance vide their O.M., dated 9 -3-2022 
wherein the Ministry intends to put in place a system under which District Authorities will 
not be required to wait for the actual funds to be released by the Ministry as they will be 
allocated drawing limits for the entire financial year and the actual funds will flow to 
vendors directly on real time basis. Therefore, the funds under the Scheme are 
expected to be released, utilized and monitored in a more efficient manner. 
  
Release of instalments of previous years 
  
Release of funds under MPLADS is strictly subject to fulfillment of fund -related criteria 
and submission of fund-related documents and those documents being found in order 
upon scrutiny along with fulfillment of criteria of unspent and unsanctioned balance. 
Delayed submission of requisite fund -related documents like Utilization Certificates, 
Provisional Utilization Certificates and Audit Certificates, by the District Authorities, has 
a cascading effect on release of pending installments. 
  
The Ministry is releasing pending instalments under MPLADS as soon as the fund 
related criteria is fulfilled and the fund  related documents, as provided in MPLADS 
Guidelines, are submitted by the District Authorities. During the FY 2021 -22, 766 
instalments of Rs.1729.5 crore were released including 289 instalments of Rs 722.50 
crore for the FY 2019 -20 and 106 instalments of Rs. 265 crore pertaining to the period 
prior to FY 2019 -20. Similarly, during the FY 2022 -23 (till 31.08.2022), 367 instalments 
of Rs 836.5 crore have been released including 30 instalments of Rs 75 crore for the FY 
2019-20 and 111 instalments of Rs 277.5 crore pertaining to the period prior to FY 
2019-20. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 4) 
 
Delayed Submission of Fund-related Documents 
The release of funds under MPLADS is subject to fulfillment of fund -related criteria as 
mentioned in the Guidelines and submission of fund -related documents and those 
documents being found in order upon scrutiny, along with fulfillment of criteria of 
unspent and unsanctioned balance. Delayed submission of requisite fund -related 

19 
 
documents like Utilization Certificates, Provisional Utilization Certificates and Audit 
Certificates, by the District Authorities, has a cascading effect on release of pending 
installments.  
The Committee, during the course of examination, found certain instances wherein 
funds were not released even though the requisite documents were submitted by the 
concerned District Authorities to the Ministry. The Committee also found that due to  lack 
of coordination between District Nodal Officers and Central Ministry, release of 
installments got delayed. Taking cognizance of this, the Committee would like the 
Ministry to have a re-look into this aspect of documentation so that the issue of delay  in 
release of funds could be minimized. The Committee opine that timely release of funds 
is vital as implementing agencies/contractors will stop work if payment is pending.  The 
Committee reiterate that no work of developmental nature should stand idle.             
Reply of the Government 
The release of funds under MPLADS is subject to not only fulfillment of fund -
related criteria as mentioned in the Guidelines and submission of fund -related 
documents by the District Authorities but also such documents bei ng found in order 
upon scrutiny along -with fulfillment of criteria of unspent and unsanctioned balance. 
Following are the few instances when funds cannot be released by the Ministry even 
after submission of the requisite documents by the concerned District Authorities:-  
 The requisite documents are found not in order upon scrutiny by the Ministry. For 
example, the documents provided by the District Authority may not be in 
prescribed format; the documents provided may not be signed by the competent 
authority or the documents may not be ink -signed; there may be a huge 
difference in the unspent balance shown in MPR and the amount shown in bank 
statement; the Utilization Certificates provided may be incorrect (e.g. unspent 
balance of previous year may not match with submitted UC, installment received 
by District Authority mentioned in the UC may not match with actual release by 
the Ministry); the Audit Certificate may contain observations of Auditors.  
 The MPR provided by the District Authority may be non -eligible, i.e., it may not 
be fulfilling criteria of unspent balance and/or unsanctioned balance.  
The Ministry has been prompt in pursuing such cases with the concerned District 
Authorities so that the requisite documents, duly corrected, are submitted at the earliest 
and the funds are released to the Hon’ble MPs in an expeditious manner. 
 
 
 

20 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 6)   
 
Time-bound settlement  
Under the MPLAD scheme, the funds of predecessor MP cannot be utilized directly by 
successor MP. The Committee are informed that the unspent funds to the tune of ₹ 
1723 crore of the predecessor Members could be put to appropriate use only upon 
completion of all the eligible works of the predecessor Member and closure of the bank 
account of the predecessor  Member and transfer of the balance of funds of the 
predecessor Members to the bank account of the successor Members. The Committee 
note that this entire process of "transfer/distribution of uncommitted balances of funds 
and closure of accounts” is a time consuming process and   ₹ 1723 crore is standing to 
the credit of such cases. The Committee expect the Ministry to identify the problems 
inherent with such huge amount of funds lying idle. They call upon the Ministry to 
ensure that the Saving Bank account of the predecessor  MP linked to MPLADS is 
closed and fund transferred to the MPLADS account of  the successor MP in a time 
bound manner, as prescribed under MPLAD guidelines and the Committee are apprised 
of the progress in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The funds of predecessor Members by successor Members can be utilized only upon 
completion of all the eligible works of the predecessor Members and closure of the bank 
accounts of the predecessor Members and transfer of the balance funds of the 
predecessor Members to the bank account of the successor Members  (sitting) in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Para -4.7 to 4.10 of the MPLADS 
Guidelines.  
Para-4.10.1 of  MPLADS Guidelines stipulates that the work of MPLADS shall be 
completed within 18 months from the date of demitting office in case of Rajya Sabha 
MPs or dissolution of the Lok Sabha. District Authorities shall settle and close the 
account of the concerned MP after completing all other formalities in another 3 months 
time, under in timation to the Govt. of India and with detailed information in the Monthly 
Progress Report (MPR). If the District Authority does not finish the projects within 18 

21 
 
months of demitting of an MP or dissolution of Lok Sabha, the District Authority will be 
required to complete the balance work out of State/District funds. In no case, any 
extension will be given and District Authority shall be held responsible in case of any 
lapse in this regard. 
The Ministry has been regularly pursuing with the District Authori ties for early closure of 
the bank accounts of the predecessor Members and transfer of the balance funds of the 
predecessor Members to the bank account of the successor Members(sitting). Copies 
of instructions issued to States/UTs vide O.M.No.C -38/2015-MPLADS, dated 14 -5-
2020, 16 -7-2020, 31 -8-2020, 1 -1-2021, 23 -4-2021 and 7 -12-2021, are enclosed for 
reference.  
  
Also, the Ministry is in the process of comprehensive revision of MPLADS Guidelines 
and implementation of Revised Fund Flow Procedure introduced b y Ministry of Finance 
vide their O.M., dated 9 -3-2022 wherein the Ministry intends to put in place a system 
under which District Authorities will be allocated drawing limits for the entire financial 
year and the actual funds will flow to vendors directly o n real time basis. Hence, there 
will be no parking of funds in the proposed system. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 7) 
 
Specific Guidelines for educational societies/trust  
The Committee note that as per extant guidelines of MPLAD Scheme, there is a ceiling 
of ₹50 lakh for the lifetime of each Trust/Society from MPLADS funds. The Committee 
have found that some trusts/societies are engaged in community service since long and 
hence operate several institutions.  For instance, there are certain societies which have 
about 100 units/schools  under their purview but due to existing provisions in the 
guidelines, MPs cannot recommend funds for such large number of schools.   The 
Committee view this provision as a hurdle for the development of education 
system/infrastructure in the country.   They, therefore, opine that the Ministry should 
enhance the ceiling of ₹50 lakh, so as to enable the MPs to recommend/sanction 
significant amount of fund for the purpose. The Committee also recommend that in 

22 
 
order to assist more and more schools and for better future of education system in the 
country, the purview of MPLAD Scheme should be expanded and MPLAD Scheme 
guidelines amended in a way so as to allow the MPs to recommend/sanction fund for 
the development/betterment of Government-Aided schools in the country as well. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestion/recommendation of the Committee has been noted and will be 
examined in consultation with the  stakeholders to see its feasibility for inclusion in the 
MPLADS Guidelines. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 8) 
 
Requests from Other Institutes 
During the course of examination, the Committee have found that on various 
occasions, MPs receive requests  from certain institutes, which are not included in the 
extant guidelines, for sanction of MPLAD fund for various developmental works.  In such 
cases, MPs are not in a position to assist them even if the institutes/organizations seem 
deserving. To cite an instance, the Committee are aware of certain Ambulance 
providers where the ownership of the vehicles are with the Zila Parishads/Corporations 
yet their maintenance aspects are better handled by a Non -profit organisation/NGO.   
Since it is the prime responsi bility of the elected representatives to look into such 
grievances/practical difficulties of public/institutes/societies, the Committee feel that the 
MPLADS guidelines should be suitably amended to enable MPs to recommend such 
projects/works or help deserv ing Non -profit organizations/NGOs too under MPLADS 
Scheme. Overall, the Committee recommend that the purview of the MPLAD Scheme 
should be broadened so as to enable the MPs to assist more and more number of 
institutes/recommend works of developmental natur e, thereby, ensuring creation of 
durable community assets for the betterment of education system/infrastructure in the 
country. 
 
 

23 
 
Reply of the Government 
The review and revision of MPLADS Guidelines for inclusion of new areas and sectors 
in the Member of P arliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) Guidelines 
for enabling Hon’ble Members of Parliament to recommend  works of development 
nature, is a dynamic process. In a dynamic environment where the development needs 
of local community keep changing, th e suggestions and inputs of stakeholders for 
revision/modification in MPLADS Guidelines are received on a continuous basis. 
Ministry examines new suggestions and inputs and incorporates the same in the 
Guidelines, if the suggestions are found to be feasibl e and aligned with the objective of 
the MPLAD Scheme. Since the issue of the extant MPLADS Guidelines in June, 2016, 
twenty one amendments have been made in the Guidelines. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 10) 
 
Need for Facilitation Centre  
The Committee note that under the scheme, there is a provision of Facilitation 
Centre at District Collector office. The Capital cost of setting up of such facilities 
including equipment, furniture, etc. is not to exceed ₹5 lakh and will be met from 2% 
Administrative Charges of MPLADS funds. The main function of the Facilitation Centre 
is to provide relevant information to all MPs at one place for the effective 
implementation of the scheme. The Ministry have further apprised the Committee that 
2% administrative expenses from every installment released by the Ministry in respect 
of the Hon’ble Member is shared in such a proportion that 0.2 % is allocated to the State 
Nodal Department, 1 % is allotted to the Implementing District and 0.8 % is retained by 
the Nodal District. 
The Committee are astonished to note that in cases where even an MP is not 
availing the Facilitation Centre, still 2 % administrative expenses continue to be 
deducted from every installment released to the Member. The Committee express their 
dismay as they find the deduction of 2% administrative charges from MPLADS Fund of 
the MP, even though Facilitation Centre is not availed, should not be done. In light of 
this, the Committee urge the Ministry to appropriately amend the provision relating to 

24 
 
deduction of administrative charges from the MPLADS Fund, where the services of 
Facilitation Centre is not availed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In addition to meet expenditure on setting-up of Facilitation Centre, the deduction of 2% 
made towards administrative fund is also utilized for meeting expenses on various 
administrative activities of State Nodal Department, Nodal District and Implementing  
District(s) such as Third party inspection -physical audit and quality check; Monitoring of 
works at State level; Translating and printing of the MPLADS Guidelines in their 
respective regional language; Hiring of services/consultants for handling Data Entr y, 
uploading of data on website, etc.; Creating awareness among public about the 
Scheme and dissemination of information of ongoing and completed works; Purchase 
of stationery; Office equipment including computer hardware/software for MPLADS 
planning/ monitoring (excluding laptop); Telephone/fax/postal charges etc.  
  
That is, setting-up of Facilitation Centre is one of the various administrative activities for 
which 2% Administrative Fund can be used.  
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 12) 
 
Non-Utilization of Funds  
The Committee observe that under MPLADs Scheme large amount of funds remain 
unutilised/lapsed on several occasions as recommended projects could not commence 
due to delay in obtaining technical clearance, financial clearance, admi nistrative 
clearance etc. The Committee expect the Ministry to issue instructions to the Nodal 
District Authorities that all the clearances/formalities involved in obtaining the approval 
for recommended projects/works may be done in a time -bound manner thr ough online 
Single Window System and strict action should be taken against those found guilty of 
deliberately delaying the process since such projects are recommended for the 
welfare/interest of the general public and all round development of their area.  

25 
 
  
The Committee also recommend that in case where certain recommended/sanctioned 
project could not commence on time, there should be a valid reason for the same and it 
should be timely intimated to the concerned MPs so as to enable them re -allocate the 
fund to another/new project/work which would considerably help in appropriate and 
optimal utilization of MPLADS fund.  
Reply of the Government 
To ensure expeditious execution and effective monitoring of progress of works 
recommended by the Hon’ble MPs under MPLAD Scheme, various provisions exist in 
MPLADS Guidelines.  
  
2.       Para-3.12 of MPLADS Guidelines stipulates that all recommended eligi ble works 
should be sanctioned within 75 days  from the date of receipt of the recommendation, 
after completing all formalities. The District Authority shall, however, inform MPs 
regarding rejection, if any, within 45 days from the date of receipt of recommendations, 
with reasons thereof.  
  
3.       Para-3.13 of MPLADS Guidelines provides that the sanction letter/order shall 
stipulate a time limit for completion of the work to the Implementation Agency. The time 
limit for completion of the works should generally not exceed one year. In exceptional 
cases, where the implementation time exceeds one year, specific reasons for the same 
shall be incorporated in the sanction letter/order. The sanction letter/order shall also 
include a clause for suitable action against the Implementation Agency in the event of  
their failure to complete the work within the stipulated time as per the State Government 
Procedure. A copy of the sanction letter/order shall be sent to the MP concerned.  
  
4.       The District Authority would be responsible for overall coordination an d 
supervision of the works under the scheme at the district level and inspect at least 10% 
of the works under implementation every year. The District Authority should involve the 
MPs in the inspections of projects to the extent feasible [Para 6.4(i) of the  MPLADS 
Guidelines]. 

26 
 
  
5.       The District Authority shall review, every month and in any case at least once in 
every quarter, MPLADS works implementation with the Implementing Agencies. The 
District Authority shall invite the MPs concerned to such revie w meetings and send a 
report of such a review meetings to Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation [Para 6.4(vi) of the MPLADS Guidelines]. 
6.       Para 6.5(i) MPLADS Guidelines provides that it will be the responsibility of the 
officers of the  Implementing Agencies to regularly visit the works spots to ensure that 
the works are progressing satisfactorily as per the prescribed procedure and 
specifications and the time schedule. In addition to this, Para 6.5(ii) of the MPLADS 
requires that the Implementing Agencies shall furnish physical and financial progress of 
each work to the District Authority every month with a copy to the concerned State 
Department. The Implementing Agencies should provide the report also in the soft 
format. A work register  should also be maintained by the implementing agencies 
showing details of the physical and financial progress of projects being undertaken by 
them. This register should also contain the details of spot visit made by the 
implementing agencies. Implementing Agency must inspect 100% of the works. 
  
7.       Further, Para 6.5(iii) of the MPLADS Guidelines specifies that the Implementing 
Agencies shall furnish completion report/certificates and utilization certificates to the 
District Authority within one month of completion of the works.  
  
8.       The Facilitation Centers should, inter -alia, provide following information(Para 9.2 
of Annexure-IIA of the MPLADS Guidelines):- 
  
i. Details of works: (a) recommended by the MP (b) pending examination (c) found 
ineligible and rejected (d) sanctioned (e) pending sanction, with reasons 
therefore.  
ii. Details of works under implementation, including their physical and financial 
progress. 
iii. Details of completed works, including total expenditure incurred thereon.  
iv. Latest Monthly Progress Report. 

27 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 13) 
 
Ease in availability of Real Time Data  
The Committee note that the Ministry is maintaining a website/dashboard which 
reflects real -time status/progress of various projects/works being carried out under 
MPLAD Scheme in the country; to enable MPs as well as the general public to check 
the status/progress of these projects/works. But the Committee are astonished to note 
that most of the elected representatives do not get any information regarding the status 
of their recommended works from Zila Parishad/ the District Administration. In order to 
ensure that maximum number of people are aware of this website/dashboard, the 
Committee note that the Ministry have in the past instructed the State 
Government/Nodal District Authorities to take necessary steps/measures in this regard 
along with disseminating information with regard to its features/operations and given 
training too.  However, the desired impact is still not seen. The Committee strongly feel 
that there is an urgent need to review the existing Dashboard on MPLADS of MOSPI 
and develop such an online Portal/web-based MIS which ensures that the information in 
respect of different programmes/projects/works under MPLAD Scheme gets generated 
and updated timely.   It will help the MPs as well as all the stakeholders including 
general public get updated/re al-time information about the status and progress of these 
programmes/projects/works. The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry should 
continue to strive towards developing an elaborate and user friendly dashboard of 
MPLADS Portal for the Members of Pa rliament specifically, wherein they can log into 
their e -account to view the minutes and circulars/notifications with respect to 
developmental works related to their respective constituencies. An automated sms alert 
mechanism should also be put in place so  that the Members of Parliament could get 
notifications related to uploading of circulars etc. on Member’s specific dashboard.   
Also, a copy each of the said notifications should automatically reach all State 
Secretaries/UT administrators, who, thereafter,  can endorse it to all the DMs/DCs 
posted in their State/UT.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in 
this regard.   

28 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
To enable Hon’ble MPs as well as the general public to check the status/progress of 
MPLADS projects/works, the Ministry has made provisions for the District Authorities to 
enter details of works/projects along with financial details on the MPLADS portal 
(www.mplads.gov.in).  Log –in IDs have been given to the District Authorities to enter 
project/work-wise details. The same is visible to the general public through the tab 
“WMS report”. 
2.       A revamped version of MPLADS portal was launched in June, 2019 with 
provisions for Hon’ble Members to make recommendations for works/projects on -line. 
Further, implementing agency as a stakeholder has already been added on the 
MPLADS portal to enlarge granularity of the data, i.e., till the last mile. The integrated 
MPLADS portal has facilities for online submission of Audit Certificates, Utilization 
Certificates, Provisional Utilization Certificates and Monthly Progress Reports. District 
Authorities have been advised to make utmost utilization of these services/facilities on 
the MPLADS portal. 
3.       The Ministry is contemplating to further revamp the exis ting MPLADS Portal after 
the release of revised guidelines. 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 14) 
 
Monitoring Committee  
The Committee note that under the scheme there is a provision of Monitoring 
Committee at District Level to keep a check on release of funds, administrative 
sanction, proper and timely implementation of work, etc. It is the task of the District 
Authority to review MPLAD works implementation with the Implementing Agency every 
month and in any case, at least, once in every quarter. Further, the District Authority is 
to invite the MPs concerned to such review meetings and send report of such review 
meetings to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. In view of this, 
the Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that review meetings are convened regularly 

29 
 
by the Monitoring Committee for effective implementation of the MPLAD Scheme and 
attention be drawn on various lacunae which hinder the implementation/execution of the 
Scheme. Ensuring  that the reports of such review meetings are received within the 
stipulated time would enable the Ministry to take immediate necessary steps based on 
the observations/ recommendations contained in reports and help in addressing the 
issues/lacunae so brought forth.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The scheme has a very robust monitoring mechanism at Central, State/UT, 
District level with well-defined roles and responsibilities.  
  
2.       At District level, the District Authority shall review, every month and in any case at 
least once in every quarter, MPLADS works implementation with the Implementing 
Agencies. The District Authority shall invite the MPs concerned to such review  meetings 
and send a report of such review meetings to Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (Para 6.4 of MPLADS Guidelines). Ministry has been receiving reports 
of such review meetings of Monitoring Committees from some of the District Autho rities. 
However, the suggestion of the Committee has been noted for further necessary action. 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 15) 
 
Third Party Physical Evaluation  
The Committee observe that MOSPI has taken up the task of holistic revision of 
the extant MPLADS Guidelines which would be based upon the findings of the 
proposed third party physical evaluation of MPLADS works in 216 districts during 
financial years 2020 -21 and 2021 -22.  The Committee are further informed that the 
Request for Proposal (RFP) for the third party physical evaluation of MPLADs is 
currently in process wherein an independent third party would evaluate MPLADs work 
through a transparent process.   The Committee are happy to note that MOSPI is 
actively engaged in the up -gradation of MPLADs Scheme via amendments in its extant 
guidelines and till date twenty amendments have been made to improvise works under 
the scheme.  In view of this, the Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that works 

30 
 
sanctioned under MPLADS do not get merely delivered rather stay operational for years 
to come.  The Committee hope that their recommendations would be placed before the 
selected Third Party Evaluator.   They would urge the Ministry to update them also on 
the status of the Third Party physical evaluation done for the works sanctioned under 
the scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised about action taken by MOSPI on 
the report of Third Party evaluation team at the appropriate time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
          The Ministry, through an independent agency, conducted a Third Party Evaluation 
of the MPLADS works/assets created during the period from 01 -04-2014 to 31-03-2019, 
in 216 districts across the count ry. The Evaluation was conducted by a private agency 
in the year 2021 and the agency submitted its final report on 31-8-2021.  
  
The suggestions made in the Evaluation Report are being examined and will be 
incorporated in the revised Guidelines, if found f easible and aligned with the objectives 
of the MPLAD Scheme.  
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No 16) 
 
Full Utilization of Funds for Third Party Evaluation  
The Committee note that the Ministry sets aside ₹ 10 crore annually for the Third 
party evaluation of the developmental works/projects created under MPLAD Scheme. 
The amount of ₹ 10 crore is allocated to the Ministry under the head ‘Professional 
Services’ for selection of an independent agency for third party evaluation through 
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) Process. The Committee observe that the 
Ministry has been irregular in conducting third party evaluation owing to which ₹ 10 
crore (meant for such evaluation) gets surrendered. The Committee take serious note of 
this lapse and urge the Ministry to frame upon a mechanism which would ensure annual 
evaluation for a sample of projects every year. A dedicated unit must be set up in the 
Ministry which  would priorities regular evaluation without any lapse. The Committee 

31 
 
would also like to be apprised of the results of the previous third party evaluations 
conducted by the Ministry and action taken thereof. 
  
Reply of the Government 
Reasons for surrender of Rs.10 crore provided in BE 2020 -21 (reduced to Rs.2 
crore in RE 2020-21) for Third Party Evaluation 
Due to administrative reasons, there was delay in finalization of L -1 and award of the 
contract for evaluation of MPLADS works by a Third Party, hence, the entire amount 
could not be exhausted in the Financial Year 2020 -21, resulting in surrender of saving  
under the head. However, the Evaluation of the Scheme was done in the year 2021 as 
mentioned below.  
 
Third Party Evaluations of MPLADS 
The Ministry has been getting the Evaluation of MPLAD Scheme done through third 
party periodically. In the year 2007 -08, the Ministry engaged National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development Consultancy Services(NABCONS) for conduct of 
third party monitoring of MPLADS works. The monitoring was done of 208 districts in 
four phases spread over four years- 2007-08 to 2010-11.  
  
In the year 2012 -13, the Ministry engaged the Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC) 
Ltd. for the Third Party Monitoring of the MPLADS works in 100 selected districts 
covering 50 Districts each in North Zone and West Zone. 
  
In the year 2021, the Mi nistry engaged an agency, namely M/s Deloitte  Touche 
Tohmatsu India LLP(DELOITTE) for carrying out the monitoring/evaluation of works 
done under MPLADS in selected 216 Nodal Districts during the period from 01.04.2014 
to 31.03.2019.  
  
 
 
 

32 
 
Results of the previous Third Party Evaluations 
Findings: 
  
The NABCONS and AFC, both the monitoring agencies had, inter -alia, found that the 
MPLAD Scheme is a unique Scheme, having the characteristic features of 
decentralized development and has resulted in creation of go od quality assets, which 
have had a positive impact on the local economy, social fabric and the physical 
environment. In its report, NABCONS had specifically mentioned that at the macro level, 
the achievement of the MPLAD Scheme appears to be incomparable with other 
Scheme. It is the only scheme at All India level, involvement of the local communities, 
groups and sections of people is experienced/ ensured for identification of 
works/facilities required as per the “felt needs” and wish list of the local people. 
However, the third party physical monitoring of MPLADS work has revealed a few 
shortcomings/lacunae in the implementation of the scheme; some of which are sanction 
of ineligible works, encroachment of MPLADS assets, non -existence of some MPLADS 
assets, diversion of use of MPLADS assets, delay in financial sanction and completion 
of works and works awarded to ineligible trust/societies. 
The Report of DELOITTE has revealed that out of the total assets assessed and 
verified, 95.9% of assets were found to b e functional and 95.6% of the total sampled 
projects created under MPLADS are found to be immovable/durable. The Report further 
revealed that MPLADS is one of the few multi -sectoral schemes implemented by the 
Govt. of India. Works implemented under MPLADS are impacting achievement of 
Sustainable Development Goals(SDGs) for the country either directly or in other ways 
that have an impact on some of the larger developmental goals. The Report confirms 
that MPLADS is fulfilling its objectives and recommended co ntinuation of MPLADS with 
suitable changes in the Guidelines and Technology.  
Action Taken: 
In all cases of irregularities brought -out in the reports of NABCONS and AFC, the 
Ministry      had     requested     the States/UTs       Government      and      concerned 
District Authorities to initiate suitable action against the erring officials. In other cases, 
suitable rectification measures were suggested such as removal of encroachments, 

33 
 
eviction of unauthorized occupants, restoring the assets to its intended use and erection 
of plaques in all work sites. 
  
Further, directions were issued to the District/State Government for following the State 
procedure for the execution of MPLADS works, taking commitment from the user 
agency for maintenance, furnishing of W ork Completion Report immediately after 
completion of work, maintenance of relevant Registers/records, etc. 
  
In view of the findings of the two agencies, adherence to the provisions of MPLADS 
Guidelines were reiterated in various meetings and State visits made by the officers of 
this Ministry. Also, the Guidelines have been suitably modified like fixing the limit  of 
unspent balance for release of funds so as to ensure optimal utilization of these funds.  
  
The report submitted by the DELOITTE has been circulated among all States/UTs and 
same is also under examination in this Ministry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER III 
 Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER V 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 11) 
 
Need for the audit of Administrative Expenses  
Under the MPLAD guidelines, there is a provision of 2% Administrative Expenses which 
gets deducted for the Facilitation Centre at the District Collector Office. The 2% 
Administrative Expenses, from every instalment released, in respect of Hon’ble Member 
is shared by the Nodal Authority, Implementing District Authority and State Nodal 
Department in the given ratio. The Committee observed that the Administra tive 
Expenses once distributed by the Nodal District would be considered as spent & 
separate Utilization Certificate would not be necessary for those expenses. Taking view 
of the fact that the cost of Facilitation Centre is borne out of 2% administrative expenses 
deducted from the MPLADS Fund allocated to the MPs, the Committee are of the firm 
view that the Ministry should strictly monitor and keep a check on the appropriate 
utilization of these expenses. The Ministry should also ensure that strict action s hould 
be taken against those found guilty of any misappropriation in this regard.  The 
Committee strongly feel that this 2% Administrative Expenses is essentially public 
money and there should be a mandatory audit to ascertain its proper usage. The 
Committee would urge the Ministry to frame guidelines in this regard in consultation with 
District Authorities so that they may get notified from the next financial year onwards. 
The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestion has been noted and same is being examined in consultation with the 
stakeholders to see if it is feasible for inclusion in the MPLADS Guidelines. 
 
Comment of the Committee 
Please see Para 20 of Chapter-I 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
16 March, 2023              
25 Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
GIRISH  BHALCHANDRA BAPAT 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 

42 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES (2022-2023) 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 16 th March, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 
hrs. in Room No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
           PRESENT 
  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan - Convener 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
8. Dr. K.C. Patel 
9. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
12. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
13. Shri Dilip Saikia 
14. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
16. Shri Prathap Simha 
17. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
18. Shri Shyam Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             1. Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda -       Additional Secretary 
           2. Shri Muraleedharan. P     -       Director 
 3. Shri R.C. Sharma  - Additional Director      
         
                 

43 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and briefed them about the agenda of the sitting viz. Consideration and 
adoption of three draft Report(s).  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following draft 
Reports: 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Rec ommendations 
of the Committee contained in their 14 th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘ Review of Funds Allocation and Utilization under MPLAD Fund 
Scheme; 
(ii) Xxx xxx 
(iii) Xxx xxx 
 
4.       The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Action Taken Reports. 
The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
5. xxx  xxx 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  

44 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 14th Report of the Committee on Estimates 
 (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 18 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. NO. 1,2,3,4,6,7,8,10,12,13,14,15,&16) 
13 
 Percentage of total recommendations 72.22% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(SI. No. Nil) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
 
 
0% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(SI. NO. 5,9,17&18) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
04 
 
 
22.22% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
(SI. No. 11) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
 
01 
 
5.56 
 
 
 