35 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
 
 
PROGRESS OF AMRIT BHARAT STATION SCHEME 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
PROGRESS OF AMRIT BHARAT STATION SCHEME 
 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.02.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
             .........February 2024/........... Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

     CONTENTS         Page No. 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2023-24)    (ii) 
Introduction           (iv) 
           
PART-I 
    Introductory               1 
 
   
 
             PART-II 
            Observations/Recommendations    15      
     
           PART-III 
            ANNEXURE      22 
   
  
                     APPENDICES 
(i) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 26.10.2023   31 
(ii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 01.02.2024  34 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Shri Saikia Dilip 
8. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
9. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
10. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
13. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
14. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
15. Shri Pinaki Misra 
16. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
17. Shri Jual Oram 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
20. Dr. K.C. Patel 
21. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
22. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
23. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
24. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
25. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
26. Shri Prathap Simha 
27. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
28. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
29. Shri R. K. Singh Patel* 
30. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati#  
*    Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 7096 dated 28th July, 2023 
#   Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 7764 dated 20th December, 
2023 
 

iii 
 
       Secretariat 
  1. Shri Santosh Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
  3. Dr. (Smt.) Sheetal Kapoor - Committee Officer  
   
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
           I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Thirty Fifth Report on the 
subject ‘Progress of Amrit Bharat Station Scheme.” 
 
2.        Indian Railways, one of the busiest and oldest railway systems in the world, is the lifeline 
of the country. In the past, Railway station infrastructure has experienced strain, giving rise to 
challenges such as congestion, insufficient amenities, and subpar facilities.  To keep this vast 
machine well oiled, Railways launched the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme to redevelop 1309 
stations nationwide. The Amrit Bharat Station Scheme is thus an important  step towards 
increasing customer stickiness in using railways as a preferred mode of travel. This 
infrastructure upgrade, one of the largest of its kind undertaken by the Indian Railways in post -
Independent India, entails developing stations as centres for connecting both sides of a city. 
3.        The Committee on Estimates (2023 -24) selected the subject ‘ Progress of Amrit Bharat 
Station Scheme” for in-depth examination and report to the House.  
 
4.         In this report, the Committee have dealt with va rious issues like budget allocation, inter -
se priority of stations, role of architectures, benchmarking up -gradations, preferential treatment 
for certain stations, stakeholders’ views etc.  The Committee have analyzed these issues/points 
in detail and have made Observations/Recommendations in the report. 
                                                               
5.         The Committee held one sitting on 26.10.2023, to take oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Railways. In connectio n with the examination of this subject, 
the Committee had an on the spot study visit to Chennai, Tamil Nadu on 21.08.2023. The 
Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the subject at their sitting held on  
01.02.2024.              
  
6.         The Committee wish to place on record their sincere thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways, who appeared before them and placed their considered views on the 
subject and furnished the information required in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
 7.        For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
 01 February, 2024              
 12 Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
             DR. SANJAY JAISWAL  
                                   CHAIRPERSON 
                COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES 
  
 

1 
 
PART –I 
INTRODUCTORY 
Indian Railways is one of the world’s largest rail network with 66,030 kilometers of route 
lengths.  With more than seven thousand railways stations, Indian Railways has the 
responsibility to upgrade its network and stations with newer technologies and amenities. 
With its more than 150 year old history, I ndian Railways is a S tate-owned public utility  of 
the Government of India under the Ministry of Railways.  As a national common carrier 
transporting passenger and goods over  its vast network, Indian Railways has always 
played a key role in India’s social and economic development. It is a cheap and afforda ble 
means of transportation for millions of passengers. As a carrier of bulk freight viz. ores and 
minerals, iron and steel, cement, mineral oils, food grains and fertilizers,  containerized 
cargo etc., the importance of Indian Railways for agriculture,  industry and the common 
man is well recognized. 
 AMRIT BHARAT STATION SCHEME (ABSS) -AN INTRODUCTION 
1.1 It has been Ministry of Railways' endeavour to develop/upgrade/modernize railway 
stations to provide enhanced and modern facilities to the passengers. Various 
developmental schemes viz. Model, Modern, Adarsh Station and Umbrelia work 
Schemes have been launched over a period of time. These schemes were small and 
scattered in nature which, generally, did not involve major architectural planning to 
improve the overall aesthetic look of the stations.  Consequently, Railway Board reviewed 
the progress of ongoing works related to Up -gradation/Modernization/Beautification of 
Railway station buildings under various schemes/umbrella. As a parallel measure, it has 
been decided to introduce a new scheme for Major Up-gradation of Railway Stations.  
1.2 Amrit Bharat Station Scheme (ABSS) envisages development of stations on a 
continuous basis with a long -term approach. It involves preparation of Master Plans 
and their i mplementation in phases to improve the amenities at the stations like 
improvement of station access, circulating areas, waiting halls, toilets, lift/escalators as 
necessary, cleanliness, free Wi -Fi, kiosks for local products through schemes like ‘One 
Station One Product’, better passenger information systems, Executive Lounges, 
nominated spaces for business meetings, landscaping etc. keeping in view the 
necessity at each station.  

2 
 
1.3 Under this scheme, priority will be given to those works which improve th e ease of 
movement of passengers, their convenience and integration of station with surrounding 
areas. The development of identified/selected stations will be taken up in phased manner 
over coming years. The scheme will be implemented through Umbrella work s sanctioned 
from time to time.  Presently, the scheme envisages to take -up 1309 stations for up -
gradation/modernization over Indian Railway.  Under this scheme, 18 stations of Sonpur 
Division and 22 stations of Samastipur Division have been identified.   
1.4 The scheme also envisages improvement of building, integrating the station with 
both sides of the city, multimodal integration, amenities for Divyangjans, sustainable 
and environment friendly solutions, provision of ballastless tracks, ‘Roof Plazas’ as per 
necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centres at the station in the long 
term. The details of allocation for development and maintenance of stations 
including for Amrit Bharat Station Scheme are generally funded under Plan Head - 
53 ‘ Customer Amenities’.   The details of funds allocated  and expenditure incurred 
under this Head , since 2014 are as under: - 
(Fig. in Rs. Crore)  
Funds allocated and expenditure incurred by the Indian Railways under Plan 
Head-53 ‘Customer Amenities’  
Year Allocation  Expenditure  
2014-2015 1045.90 858.61 
2015-2016 1200.12 1081.21 
2016-2017 917.91 981.24 
2017-2018 1470.79 1286.80 
2018-2019 2410.72 1585.88 
2019-2020 1881.40 1903.11 
2020-2021 2615.15 2582.92 
2021-2022 2344.55 1995.77 
2022-2023 2897.73 2159.38 
2023-2024 13354.98 2012.07 
(till Sept., 2023)  
  

3 
 
1.5 The Ministry in their submissions  has stated  indicated that need assessment for 
station development projects is an iterative and continuous process. The process has 
been initiated for all 1309 stations identified under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme. The List 
of 1309 stations is at ANNEXURE. 
1.6 On being asked about the parameters for selection/identification of stations under 
the scheme and whether suggestions of the State Governments were taken before 
arriving at the list of station to be up -graded, the Ministry in their written submission stated 
as under: 
“Selection of stations is done based on proposals received from Zonal Railways, 
stations located in major cities and towns  .Proposals/suggestions for improvement 
of railway stations are periodically received from general public, local bodies, Sta te 
Governments, public representatives etc., and action are taken subject to feasibility. 
However, no compendium of the same is maintained.”  
 
1.7 Further, Railway Board  has informed that they had issued instructions to Zonal 
Railways  regarding selection of  Stations as under: 
“It may be done based on suggestion of a committee comprising Sr DEN/Co, Sr 
DCM and Sr DFM with the approval of DRM, and as per the instructions given by 
Railway Board from time to time.” 
1.8 On being asked about the ratio of expenditure among different States from the 
budget to ensure balanced development under the Scheme, the Ministry informed the 
Committee as under: 
“The details of expenditure i ncurred for development and maintenance of 
stations are maintained Zonal Railway -wise under Plan Head -53 'Customer 
Amenities 'and not work-wise or State-wise . 
The works under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme are funded under the 
‘Customer Amenities’ Plan Head. The details of Railway wise budget 

4 
 
allotment/expenditure for the year 2023 -24 (till October 2023) under Plan Head 
‘Customer Amenities’ is as under: 
Railway Allocation 
Expenditure 
Till Oct 23 
(in Cr) 
Central Railway 937.75 228.30 
Eastern Railway 378.52 146.43 
East Central Railway 781.52 151.15 
East Coast Railway 699.66 130.55 
Northern Railway 2799.53 400.14 
North Central Railway 930.40 147.64 
North Eastern Railway 273.50 98.46 
Northeast Frontier Railway 400.91 76.65 
North Western Railway 858.75 240.46 
Southern Railway 1242.58 189.81 
South Central Railway 961.86 213.44 
South Eastern Railway 480.40 82.49 
South East Central Railway 183.11 26.93 
South Western Railway 468.21 94.61 
Western Railway 1540.83 179.53 
West Central Railway 401.41 66.22 
Metro Railway 16.06 3.05 
Total 13355.00 2475.86 
 
OBJECTIVE OF AMRIT BHARAT STATION SCHEME 
1.9 The scheme has following objectives: 
I. The scheme a ims at preparation of Master Plans of the Railway stations and 
Implementation of the Master Plan in phases to enhance the facilities including and 
beyond the Minimum Essential Amenities (MEA) and aiming for creation of Roof 
Plazas and city centres at the station in long run. 
II. The scheme shall aim to meet the needs of the stakeholders, station usage studies 
as far as possible based on availability of funds and inter-se priority.  

5 
 
III. The scheme shall cater for introduction of new amenitie s as well as upgradation 
and replacement of existing amenities. 
IV. This scheme may also cover the stations where detailed techno -economic 
feasibility studies have been conducted or are being conducted but the work for 
construction of Roof Plazas has not been taken up yet, ensuring the phasing of 
Master Plan being suitably implemented and relocation of structures and utilities 
being given more emphasis in the phasing plans. 
SCOPE OF WORK UNDER AMRIT BHARAT STATION SCHEME (ABSS) 
1.10 To meet the objectives of modernization/ up-gradation under ABSS, Railway Board 
came up with following set of pointers to outline the scope of work to be carried out: 
a. Rebuilding/ improvement/ augmentation of station building to provide an iconic structure 
with modern state-of-the-art facilities and futuristic design with a 40-60 year horizon; 
b. Integration with both sides of the city (station buildings on both sides of railway lines) as 
far as possible along with segregation of Arrival and Departure. Inclusion of large space s 
accessible to general public and commercial spaces. Upgradation of connectivity to the 
stations for smooth traffic flow in coordination with the state government/ local bodies for 
widening, strengthening or creating new roads, pedestrian paths, cycle pat hs, skywalks 
and bridges etc. to improve accessibility and modal integration; 
c. Inside the station, passengers shall be provided comfortable minimal queuing, 
movements, waiting and availing facilities like ticketing, tapped potable drinking water, 
toilets and retail etc. Flexible access control provisions. The spaces inside the station and 
traffic circulation/parking facilities shall be well designed and must cater to the current and 
future projected traffic. For this purpose, modularity of construction sh all be ensured such 
that facilities can be further upgraded in future, if required. Full length covered platforms 
shall also be provided for the convenience of the passengers a s per the design of the 
station; 
d. Booking/Reservation Offices should preferabl y be housed inside the main station 
building. In case, due to design limitation, they are placed in a separate building, covered 
pathway in sync with the overall design of the station be provided; 

6 
 
e. Roof plaza/concourse shall be provided wherever possible , such that the passengers 
and other users can wait comfortably and enjoy superior and well -designed amenities for 
passengers like lounges, recreation areas, waiting areas, seating arrangement, shopping 
areas, restaurants/cafeterias, tapped potable drinking water points, restrooms, acoustically 
designed and soothing public announcement system, Wifi, ATMs, Tourist facilitation 
counters, medical facilities, charging points, Help - booths etc. Concourses sha ll be in 
multiples of 12/36/72/108m as far as possible . Departure and arrival passengers shall be 
segregated to the extent possible except at the platforms. As far as possible, Foot Over 
Bridge (FOBs) shall be used to  supplement the concourses to segregate 
arrival/departures; 
 f. Aesthetically appealing solut ions for platform surfaces, covers, furniture, OHE masts, 
through roofs as per need of the architectural scheme etc. shall be provided. Elements of 
local art and culture shall be included in the station's interiors; 
g. The upgraded station complex must foc us on user -experience. Solutions must be 
implemented for good illumination, combination of lift/escalators/travelators for a 
comfortable movement, logical way finding, signages, acoustics, vibration control, 
coverage of entire area by CCTV cameras, and eme rgency evacuation in case of 
fire/other incidences etc. The complete upgraded station co mplex shall be Divyang 
friendly; 
h. Upgraded railway stations shall have elements of sustainability including but not limited 
to efficient energy/water conservation, su perior waste management and shall as far as 
possible be driven through technologies like Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA), Building Management System (BMS) etc.; 
i. Well planned drop -off/pick up for passengers. Pre -defined places for Cabs/A ggregators, 
public transportation etc. Parkings at Station shall have charging points, preferably with 
fast charge facility, for Electric Vehicles for two, three and four wheelers, for pub lic as well 
as private vehicles; 
j. Development of Parcel area with connecting well-lit pathway for cart plying; 
k. Station shall endeavour to optimally utilize the solar energy potential of the location; 

7 
 
l. Special focus may be given on improving tree cover of the station area; 
1.11 In addition to the above enlisted work, Railway Board issued another set of pointers 
to enlarge the scope of work to be carried out under the ABSS as under: 
i. All improvement plans shall be made with help of architects/traffic planners and/or user 
experience consultants as decided by DRMs. The Ma ster Plans should have 
elementary details of the most appropriate location of Roof Plaza to be created in 
future. 
ii. The scheme envisages cost efficient Improvement to facades, provision of wide, well lit 
aesthetically pleasing entrance porches. 
iii.  Existing building usage shall be reviewed and space should be released in favour of 
passengers near the station entrances and the Railway offices should be suitably 
relocated. 
iv. The scheme aims to relocate redundant/old buildings in a cost efficient manner so that 
space is released for higher priority passenger related activities and future development 
may be carried out smoothly. Creation of new buildings should generally be avoided 
other than those required for relocation of old structures or relocation of  structures to 
Improve circulation or provision of structures to Improve the size of waiting halls. 
Decision in this regard shall be taken by DRM considering all relevant factors. 
v.  Attempts shall be made to club different grades/types of waiting halls and provide good 
cafeteria/retail facilities as far as possible. Suitable low level partitions may be done in 
waiting halls if required.  
vi. Provision for minimum two stalls for One Station One Product shall be made.  
vii. Space shall also be created for Executive Lou nges and places for small business 
meetings. 
viii. At least one aesthetically designed hoarding(signage) on each side of the circulating 
area at a prominent location shall be erected for display of important Information etc. 
The size of such hoarding shall not be less than 10ftx20ft. 
ix. Station approaches should be improved to ensure smooth access by widening of roads, 
removal of unwanted structures, properly designed signages, dedicated pedestrian 
pathways, well planned parking areas, improved lighting etc. Necessary liaison should 
be established with local authorities for necessary improvements to be carried out by 
local authorities in their areas. 

8 
 
x. Elements of landscaping, green patches and local art and culture should be used to 
create a pleasant experience for the station users. This should be done with the help of 
suitable professionals. 
xi. Second Entry Station Building and circulating area shall be improved as per the needs 
of the station. Wherever second entry building is not being provided presently, space  
for circulating area will be well planned and a liaison shall be established with the local 
bodies so that approach roads for second entry are kept in the city's Master Plan and 
development around the station is suitably controlled. 
xii. High level platforms  (760-840 mm) shall be provided at all categories of stations. 
Length of the platforms shall generally be 600m. 
xiii. Length, location and phasing of Platform shelters shall be decided by DRM based on 
usage of the station. Generally, 16m long bays at not more than  100 m centre to centre 
distance may be taken as a reference. 
xiv. Ballastless tracks (BLT) should be provided on platform lines and lines with train 
maintenance facilities. Proposals and execution of works should be planned in suitable 
phases. Due care should be taken that provision of BLT on platform lines which are 
also mainlines should not lead to reduction of speed potential or cause Imposition of 
any speed restriction in future. 
xv. Drainage of platform areas is of utmost importance. Special emphasis shall be given to 
achieve self cleansing of drains as far as possible. Suitable cross drains, sump and 
pump arrangement may be provided where natural slopes are not adequate. Drains 
may be covered with aesthetically designed theft resistant covers. 
xvi. Cables should be  laid in aesthetically designed duct or cable trays and should have 
provision for future cables as well. 
xvii. The Master Plan shall mark the space for Parcel handling spurs, storage and handling 
facilities etc. Works should also be proposed and executed in suitable phases. 
xviii. Provisions may be made such that the station provides free WIFI access to its users 
following all guidelines issued by DoT. The Master Plan should have suitable spaces 
earmarked for 5G tower/pole mounts. 
xix. Material finishes of elements, such as flooring, walls, structures, furniture, sanitary 
fittings, etc. within the public areas of the station where surfaces either come in direct 
physical contact of passengers or are visible to them should be highly durable 
(preferably washable), generally dustproof and need low maintenance. 

9 
 
xx. The furniture available on Waiting halls, Platforms, Retiring Rooms, Offices shall be 
reviewed and intervention planned for more comfortable and durable furniture suitable 
to the Railway Stations of that area. In a phased ma nner, it shall be planned to 
eliminate multi-design furniture. Released furniture etc. may be suitably utilized on other 
stations/locations if deemed fit. 
xxi. All signages/display boards Including train Indication boards and coach guidance 
systems/boards shoul d be positioned for intuitive way finding, should have good 
visibility and be aesthetically pleasing. Public announcement system should be 
designed with the help of sultable professionals to ensure quality. 
xxii. Escalators may be provided at NSG/1 -4 and SG/1 -2 category stations irrespective of 
footfall. Mode of procurement (works/stores) may be decided by DRMs. Planning for 
approval of GADS should be done well in advance to speed up the work of installation 
of escalator/lift and optimize the overall time schedule of commissioning.  
xxiii. Amenities for Divyangjan at stations shall be as per guidelines issued by Railway Board 
from time to time. 
xxiv. Ceremonial flags may be provided at appropriate space in the station. 
xxv. At least two station name boards should be LED based with good visibility for the 
passengers of trains passing through the station. 
xxvi. Circulating area boundary wall normally should not block the view of the station from 
outside. Access may be controlled by Iron/steel grill fencing. 
xxvii. Sufficient number of toi lets shall be provided at all categories of stations with separate 
provisions for women and Divyangjan. Location of toilets should be appropriate to 
station usage, easily visible and accessible. 
xxviii. Gradual shift to sustainable and environmental friendly solutions as p er avallability of 
funds and condition of existing assets. 
xxix.  Illumination levels specified vide Railway Board's letter no. 2008/Elect(G)/172/1 dated 
08.03.2019 for the then A1 and A category stations shall be applicable for Amrit Bharat 
Stations (Annexure -I). To further Improve the overall look of a station through  façade 
lighting, the Railways can decide on their own type of façade lighting based upon the 
layout of a particular station. 
xxx.  CCTV surveillance system along with panic button at various location in the stations to 
be provided in consultation with security branch. 
xxxi. Any other item as considered necessary by DRM/GM. 

10 
 
1.12 The scale of amenities and facilities to be provided shall be finalized based on the 
broad guiding principles given above and stakeholder consultations. Further, for 
improvement beyond railway  area, consultations shall be held with local bodies, Urban 
Transportation (Metro), other similar bodies and a comprehensive plan shall be prepared. 
The present Scheme shall also evolve with future instructions issued by Railway Board 
from time to time.     
 
1.13 Chairperson, Railway Board who deposed before the Committee submitted the 
following in response to the query of the Committee about standardization of up-gradation: 
“Regarding the standards for what kind of fittings to be used, what kind of layout for 
designs is needed for toilets, etc., I think we should be issuing a standardization 
document……………..Yes, from the Board itself, we will try and issue some 
templates for the basic amenities.” 
1.14 On being asked about details of international/national in stitute for architectural 
design regarding up-gradation viable for longer period of time, the Ministry of Railways in 
their written reply submitted as under:  
“The Ministry of Railways through Zonal Railways and Rail Land Development 
Authority (RLDA), has engaged various consultants, Engineering institutes, National 
Institute of Design etc., for different design aspects of Railway Stations” 
Amrit Bharat  Station Scheme envisages development of stations as ‘city centres’ 
on a continuous basis with a long -term approach of 40 to 60 years.  It involves 
preparation of Master Plans and their implementation in phases to improve  the 
amenities at the  stations like improvement of station access, circulating areas, 
waiting halls, Executive  Lounges, nominated spaces for business meetings, 
landscaping etc. Keeping in view the  necessity at each station. Accordingly,  
architectural as well as technical co nsultants are being engaged locally by the 
Railways and after conducting detailed studies and analysis of volume of traffic to 
be handled, master plans are prepared duly keeping the local context under 
consideration while conforming to fire/air ports requi rements etc. It is thus 
endeavoured to make the upgradation process, sustainable in the long run. Regular 

11 
 
interactions with Zonal Railways are being carried out to improve the various design 
and execution aspects of the Railway Stations.” 
 
1.15 On further being asked about the products and agencies involved with ‘Kiosks for 
local products through schemes like ‘One Station , One Product’ under ABSS and whether 
clearances have been sought with regard to products sold thereon,  the Ministry of 
Railways in their written submission submitted as under: 
“Ministry of Railways has launched “One Station One Product” (OSOP) scheme 
with objective to promote the ‘Vocal for Local’ vision of the Government of India, to 
provide a market for local/indigenous products and create additional income 
opportunities for the marginalized sections of the society. This scheme aims to 
provide enhanced opportunities for livelihood to local artisans, potters, weavers 
/handloom weavers,  craftsmen etc, through provision of sale outlets at Railways 
Stations across the Country.   
      To fulfill the objective of the scheme and to benefit more and more people, 
individuals, artisans, weavers, craftsmen, etc associated with micro enterprises on 
the Udyam portal of Ministry of MSME and NGOs, PM Vishwakarma scheme, 
Social Organizations , State Govt. bodies etc have been allowed to participate in 
this scheme. 
        Moreover individuals, artisans, weavers, craftsmen enrolled/registered with 
central agencies such as TRIFED (Tribal Cooperative marketing Development 
Federation of India Limited), NHDC (National Handloom Development Corporation), 
KVIC (Khadi and Village Industries Commission), registered Self Help Groups with 
PMEGP (Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme) etc have also been 
considered under this scheme. 
     There is no agency involved in implementation of this scheme. Allotment of 
Kiosks is being done to all applicants on a periodical rotational basis. The 
applications can be directly submitted at stations. 

12 
 
The products category is indigenous/Geographical Indications (GI) 
tagged/local to that place and could include artefacts, handicrafts, textiles and 
handlooms, toys, leather products, traditional appliances/ instruments, garments, 
gems and jewellery, etc made by local artisans, weavers, craftsmen, tribes, etc and 
processed, semi processed and other food products indigenously made/grown in 
the area. Some of the products under OSOP scheme include Warli Painting, 
Bhagaia (Godda) silk, Ilkal sarees, Pattachitra & Pipli Applique, Sambalpuri sarees, 
Pochampally sarees, Tant handloom sarees, Ragi biscuit 
Instructions have been issued to ensure compliance of all statutory 
requirements such as FSSAI, Waste management, Pollution Cont rol etc. These 
instructions are being implemented across all units over Indian Railways.  
   Further, it is intimated that only 24 species of sea shells out of the known 
3400 species require environmental clearance. Divisions under Southern Railways 
are being instructed to obtain an undertaking from outlets, ensuring  that  they do 
not engage in the sale of prohibited items and adhere to all legal regulations.”         
 
1.16 When the Committee raised the concerns about the criteria laid down for  
development, maintenance and other amenities for each station under 'Amrit Bharat 
Station Scheme and consultation with local MP, the Ministry submitted in their written note 
as under: 
‘The criteria for selection of stations under Amrit Bharat Station Schem e are based 
on proposals received from Zonal Railways, stations located in major cities and 
towns . The scale of amenities and facilities to be provided is finalized based on 
broad guidelines of Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, footfall of the station, stakehol der 
consultation etc. 
The Proposals /suggestions for improvement of railway stations are periodically 
received from public representatives such as MPs/MLAs etc., and appropriate 
action is taken subject to site feasibility. However, no compendium of the same  is 
maintained .'  

13 
 
 
1.17 During the examination,  when  the Committee enquired whether  the Ministry had 
taken a view of the stakeholders and Members of Parliament , the  Chairperson, Railway 
Board deposed before the Committee as under: 
“There is clear instruction that the stakeholders and the hon. MPs have to be 
consulted while finalising the designs of the Amrit Bharat stations..” 
1.18 Replying to a specific query as to whether there is any proposal to include local 
bodies (like Municipal Bodies) in the execution of Amrit Bharat Station Scheme (ABSS), 
Ministry furnished the following: 
“Development/redevelopment/up-gradation of Railway Stations is complex in nature 
involving safety of passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances for 
fire safety, heritage, tree cutting, air -port clearance, removal of encroachments, de -
congestion of station approaches, augmentation of wate r/electricity supply, sewerage 
etc. Accordingly, local bodies are consulted as per the need of the project.”  
1.19 When the Committee asked whether stations having  “historical” significance and 
with a place in the world map (like Kali Banga in Rajasthan) is given special consideration, 
the Ministry submitted as under : 
“Up-gradation/modernisation of Railway station is a continuous and ongoing 
process and works in this regard are undertaken as per requirement, subject to 
inter-se priority and availability of funds. However, priority for 
upgradation/modernisation of station is accorded to higher category of station over 
lower category of station while sanctioning and executing the work. “ 
1.20 On being asked as to how the Ministry plan s to roll out platform tickets and other 
toll charges after successf ul completion of ABSS, the Ministry in their written submission 
stated as  
“No change  in existing system of Platform tickets is envisaged in Amrit 
Bharat Scheme.” 

14 
 
1.21 When the Committee asked about the maintenance  of infrastructure/ame nities 
created under ABSS, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“Indian Railways has an inbuilt mechanism to check the maintenance of 
infrastructure, which is being performed at various levels by concerned Railway 
officials as per guidelines laid down in the Indian Railways Engineering Code, 
Indian Railways Works Manual and S pecification etc. This is a continuous process 
and the same mechanism will be applied to stations under Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme. 
1.22 When the Committee further asked as to whether the Ministry has come up with 
guidelines for benchmarking w.r.t. up -gradations/amenities planned (under ABSS) for 
ensuring uniformity across all the Stations in the country, the Ministry informed as under: 
“Ministry of Railways has issued guidelines from time to time for 
implementation of Amrit Bhar at Station Scheme so as to ensure uniformity in the 
proposals. However, designs are prepared as per category of stations, need, 
phasing & feasibility subject to relative importance of other works and as such, 
each station is envisaged to have a unique design.” 

15 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. Need for dedicated Budget  
The allocation for development and maintenance of stations including 
for ABSS are generally funded under plan Head -53 “consumer amenities”. 
The Committee note that Ministry of Railway s do not have an earmarked 
budget allocation for ABSS specifically but utilizes one for the Plan Head -53. 
The Committee further observe that the expenditure , under Customer 
Amenities, as per data furnished by Ministry of Railways , is at a very low 
pace in almost all Zones which indicates slow progress of upgradation work . 
The Committee are of the view that while embarking on the journey of 
modernization and upgradation of the station, Ministry of Railways should 
have created a sub -head under Plan Head -53 so  as not only to make 
demarcation clear but also to map the pace of utilization/surplus -in a given 
year. In view of this, the Committee urge the Ministry to create a Sub -head for 
ABSS along with allocation to each zone earmarked explicitly in a bit to 
ensure balanced development/up -gradation of railway stations across the 
country. As the scheme of ABSS is in its first phase itself, the Committee 
strongly feel that Ministry can allocate the funds for the scheme exclusively 
with strict timelines for physical p rogress of work, which would enable the 
Ministry to evaluate allocation vis-à-vis its utilization zone-wise. 
 
2) Robust selection of Stations 
The up -gradation under ABSS has been planned for a total of 1309 
Railway Stations wherein foundation laying has been done for a total 508 
Railway Stations. In response to the query of the Committee regarding 
criteria for selection of stations, Ministry of Railways has submitted that 

16 
 
selection of stations is done based on proposals received from Zonal 
Railways, stations located in major cities and towns.  .Proposals / suggestions 
for improvement of railway stations are periodically received from general 
public, local bodies, State Governments, public representatives etc., and 
action are taken subject to feasibility. However, no compendium of the same 
is maintained by them .  Further, Ministry  of Railways in one of their internal 
communications had instructed Zonal Railways to identify/select stations 
based on “suggestion of a committee comprising Sr DEN/Co, Sr DCM and Sr 
DFM with the approval of DRM, and as per the instructions given by Railway 
Board from time to time”. Taking cognizance of the dynamics  of selection of 
stations under ABSS, the Committee hold that any Committee looking into 
selection of stations but merely comprising of railways officials can’t serve 
the purpose. They feel that a robust sel ection criteria along with a multi -
faceted Committee comprising of different stakeholders from the same zone 
should be made to deliberate and decide the stations to be upgraded under 
ABSS. The Committee feel that the Ministry can evolve and implement a 
robust selection process by involving different stakeholders with effect from 
the next phase of the scheme.    
3)  Need for inter-se priority 
During the examination of the subject, the Ministry has informed that 
under ABSS, the station s are identified and com municated to them by the 
zonal Railways for up -gradation. Also, there is no priority fixed as to the 
segregation of Stations under different phases. The Committee further note 
that in some States, there are more stations to be upgraded in first phase 
than other smaller States. The Committee are of the strong view that Ministry 
should urge the zonal Railways to identify the Stations to be upgraded under 
ABSS on the basis of laid down criteria for inclusion in each phase.  The 
Committee feel that, since zonal Railways are better equipped with the 
knowledge of developmental needs of each Station  and its potential  

17 
 
expansion into a city centre in long run,  it is the onus of zonal Railways to 
categorize Stations for up -gradation on the basis of priority/sequencing  
assigned.       
 
4) Benchmarking up-gradation 
During the deliberations, the Ministry has informed the Committee that 
they are yet to issue a “standardization document” for the up -gradation for 
stations identified under ABSS. The Committee are of the view that as more 
than 7000 stations are spread acro ss the country, benchmark should be  set 
up  for toilets, platforms, ticket counters etc.  and  installation of fittings  
therein. The Committee, therefore, strongly hold that ABSS being a pan India 
scheme, the up -gradation should align stations in a uniform  way and, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to issue comprehensive guidelines in the matters 
of standardization of fittings, CCTVs,  WiFi, Station access, sound systems, 
furniture etc.   to ensure uniformity across the stations. 
 
5)  Need to rope in architectures  
India is a country of varied cultures where  cultures/values dominate  every 
region in its own unique way. The Committee are of the view that as up -
gradations under ABSS are to stay for years to come, the scheme needs a 
visionary approach in design based on technically sound parameters of 
architecture so that  with these designs at  the stations will  reverberate the 
set of cultures  of the region.  When the Ministry utilizes the services of 
specialists or a pool of architects, th ey can provide the design based on the 
culture of the region , which may be ensured in the  structure of the railway 
stations.  The Committee are also of the view that standardization of design 
and placement of foot-over bridges, escalators, lift and staircase accordingly, 

18 
 
will enable  Zonal Railways  to have uniformity in its implementation. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to come up with certain standardized 
models of designs which can be mapped to stations on the basis of size and 
footfalls.   
 
6)  Special Clause for “Certain Stations” 
The Committee note that Ministry of Railways have not 
identified/classified the Railway Stations based on their eccentric locations 
and all stations are clubbed together for carrying out up -gradation. However, 
there are Stations, in every State, which stand out either for their location or 
geographical proximity to international borders or tourist places or 
archaeological sites etc. The Committee feel that certain stations like Bettiah , 
Jainagar, Attari etc. (the Gateways of Nepal &Pakistan) and Peeli Banga close 
to “Kali Banga”, one of the civilizations of Mohenjo -Daro) are railway stations 
accessed by a large number of passengers including tourists and hence , 
require greater attention for up -gradation in comp arison to other stations of 
these States for coverage under ABSS.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to issue guideline to all Zonal Railways to identify Stations based on 
their strategic locations, archeological importance, tourist visit, proximi ty to 
the borders, etc so that such stations get covered in the next Phase of ABSS. 
The Committee would like to be  apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
7) Provision for Maintenance 
The Committee note that the scheme of ABSS has provisions for 
development of stations on a continuous basis with long -term approach but 
the maintenance contract for “up-gradations” so carried out under the 
scheme is not being done . The Committee observe that as ABSS is a 
comprehensive scheme designed for years , hence maintenance should form 
an integral part of the scheme. The Committee recommend that the Ministry 

19 
 
should revise the Guidelines  as required and  include maintenance as an 
integral part of the up-gradation contract for a minimum period of  five years.   
 
8) Periodic Review/ Midterm Analysis/Vetting 
The Committee observe certain architectural anomalies in the “model 
of upgraded stations” as proposed under the ABSS. The Committee find that 
any “up-gradation model” proposed is not  being sent for scrutiny/feasibility 
study by an independent expert/ body who may analyze the proposals on 
different parameters and suggest improvement/change, if any,  before going 
underway. Taking note of the fact that ABSS is a up -gradation scheme with a 
horizon of 40 to 60 years, encapsulating multi model integration with 
improvisation of passenger amenities, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
include provision of midterm a nalysis/periodic review/vetting, so that 
chances of  anomaly can be ruled out altogether of p roposed up -gradation 
either at concept or execution  stage. If required, t he guidelines may be 
revised to this effect. 
9) Stakeholders View 
 Ministry of Railways has submitted that guidelines of ABSS do have 
provision for  involving local bodies while taking up up -gradation work , 
however, there is no provision for involving local MPs. The Committee note 
that people’s representatives are the fir st stakeholders in the process of 
improving passenger amenities and hence their views should be 
incorporated while finalizing up -gradation/modernization plan for any public 
service. The Committee urge the Ministry that an expert group for every zone 
should be constituted wherein elected representatives , technical experts,  
representatives of local bodies and other stakeholders  should be involved. 
The Committee, therefore,  urge the Ministry to revise ABSS’s guidelines to 
that extent as  it would go a long way  in sorting out issues relat ed to 

20 
 
requirement of land for access road , parking lots , local support etc. in 
upgradation of stations and peripheral work. 
 
10) Need for Automation 
The Scheme of ABSS aims at rebuilding/ improvement/ augmentation of 
railway station to provide an iconic design and structure with modern state -
of-the-art facilities with a 40-60 year horizon. Though the Ministry of Railways 
has informed that there would not be any change in existing system of 
platform tickets even after the roll out of ABSS , the Committee feel that the 
Ministry should consider the change in system of platform tickets  from 
physical to online wherever  implementable as online platform tickets with an 
inbuilt automation  to swip e/scan  QR code  for easy access would b e 
economical and time saving  at one hand .  On the other, there would be no 
unauthorized/unpaid entry to the stations/platforms  besides better safety . 
The Committee , therefore,  urge the Ministry to make sincere efforts in 
imbibing technology with different  aspects/up-gradations under ABSS , 
wherever implementable.  
11) Awareness on “One Station One Product” 
The Ministry of Railways has submitted that allotment of ‘Ki osks’  under ‘One 
Station One Product’ is being done to applicants for a specific  period on 
rotational basis and  t he applications are directly submitted at the stations.   
The Committee note that due to this specific period  application, several 
other artisans willing to participate might not be aware of the theme of 
“Kiosks” & “One Station one Product” and hence would not be able to apply. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry of Railways should make 
sincere efforts to popularize “One Station One Product” drive to the masses, 
especially in the rural areas so that even far located artisa ns can get a 
chance to showcase their product  reflecting their uniqueness in arts/crafts.  

21 
 
For this,  a dedicated hyperlink on its website  may be given where any 
organization/individual can apply for allotment of kiosks and get the benefit 
thereof. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps in this regard. 
12)  Allied facilities such as Medical/Para-Medical facility 
The Committee are of  the considered  view that as the Ministry has 
embarked on the journey of upgrading the passenger amenities on the 
railway’s physical infrastructure, it becomes  imperative  that other allie d 
facilities also get upgraded for  a passenger who uses railway as a mode of 
transport. The Committee urge the Ministry   to identify all such related 
facilities and  issue guidelines to all railway zones to ensure that all such 
facilities including  medical/para-medical, are made availa ble to the 
passengers on every platform/train.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
     February, 2024              
       Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
             DR. SANJAY JAISWAL  
                                   CHAIRPERSON 
                COMMITTEE  ON  ESTIMATES 
  
 
  

22 
 
ANNEXURE 
List of Stations identified under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme 
S.No. State Count Name of Stations  
1 Andhra Pradesh  72 
Adoni, Anakapalle, Anantapur, Anaparthi , Araku, Bapatla , 
Bhimavaram Town , Bobbili Jn, Chipurupalli, Chirala, Chittoor, 
Cuddapah, Cumbum, Dharmavaram, Dhone, Donakonda, 
Duvvada, Elamanchili , Eluru, Giddalur, Gooty, Gudivada , 
Gudur, Gunadala, Guntur, Hindupur, Ichchpuram, Kadiri, 
Kakinada Town , Kottavalasa, Kuppam, Kurnool city , 
Macherla, Machilipatnam , Madanapalli Road, Mangalagiri, 
Markapuram Road, Matralayam Road, Nadikude Jn, Nandyal, 
Narasaraopet, Narsapur , Naupada Jn, Nellore, Nidadavolu, 
Ongole, Pakala, Palasa, Parvatipuram, Piduguralla, Piler, 
Rajampet, Rajamundry, Rayanapadu , Renigunta, Repalle, 
Samalkot , Sattenapalle, Simhachalam, Singaraykonda, Sri 
Kalahasti, Srikakulam Road, Sullurpeta, Tadepalligudem, 
Tadipatri, Tenali , Tirupati, Tuni, Vijayawada, Vinukonda, 
Vishakhapatnam, Vizianagaram Jn 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1 Naharalagun (Itanagar) 
3 Assam 50 
Amguri, Arunachal, Chaparmukh, Dhemaji, Dhubri, 
Dibrugarh, Diphu, Duliajan, Fakiragram Jn., Gauripur, Gohpur, 
Golaghat, Gosai gaon halt, Guwahati, Haibargaon, Harmuti, 
Hojai, Jagiroad, Jorhat Town, Kamakhya, Kokrajhar, , Ledo, 
Lumding, Majbat, Makum Jn, Margherita, Mariani, 
Murkeongselek, Naharkatiya, Nalbari, Namrup, Narangi, New 
Bongaigaon, New Haflong, New Karimganj, New Tinsukia, 
North Lakhimpur, Pathsala, Rangapara North, Rangiya Jn, 
Sarupathar, Sibsagar Town, Silapathar, Silchar, Simaluguri, 
Tangla, Tinsukia, Udalguri, Viswanath Chariali 
4 Bihar 92 
Anugraha Narayan Road, Ara, Arariya Court, Bakhtiyarpur, 
Banka, Banmankhi, Bapudham Motihari, Barauni, Barh, 
Barsoi Jn, Begusarai, Bettiah, Bhabua Road, Bhagalpur, 
Bhagwanpur, Bihar Sharif, Bihiya, Bikramganj, Buxar, Chakia, 
Chausa, Chhapra, Dalsingh Sarai, Darbhanga, Dauram 
Madhepura, Dehri On Sone, Dholi, Dighwara, Dumraon, 
Durgauti, Ekma, Fatuha, Gaya, Ghorasahan, Guraru, Hajipur 

23 
 
S.No. State Count Name of Stations  
Jn, Jamalpur, Jamui, Janakpur Road, Jaynagar, Jehanabad, 
Kahalgaon, Karhagola Road, Khagaria Jn, Kishanganj, Kudra, 
Labha, Laheria Sarai, Lakhisarai, Lakhminia, Madhubani, 
Maheshkhunt, Mairwa, Mansi Jn, Mashrakh, Motipur, 
Munger, Muzaffarpur, Nabinagar Road, Narkatiaganj, 
Naugachia, Nawadah, Paharpur, Piro, Pirpainti, Rafiganj, 
Raghunathpur, Rajendra Nagar, Rajgir, Ram Dayalu Nagar, 
Raxaul, Sabaur, Sagauli, Saharsa, Sahibpur Kamal, Sakri, 
Salauna, Salmari, Samastipur, Sasaram, Shahpur Patoree, 
Shivanarayanpur, Simri Bakhtiyarpur, Simultala, Sitamarhi, 
Siwan, Sonpur Jn., Sultanganj, Supaul, Taregna, Thakurganj, 
Thawe  
5 Chattisgarh 32 
Akaltara, Ambikapur, Baikunthpur Road, Balod, Baradwar, 
Belha, Bhanupratappur, Bhatapara, Bhilai, Bhilai Nagar, Bhilai 
Power House, Bilaspur, Champa, Dallirajhara, Dongargarh, 
Durg, Hathbandh, Jagdalpur, Janjgir Naila, Korba, 
Mahasamund, Mandir Hasaud, Marauda, Nipania, Pendra 
Road, Raigarh, Raipur, Rajnandgaon, Sarona, Tilda-Neora, 
Urkura, Uslapur 
6 Delhi 13 
Adarshnagar Delhi, Anand Vihar, Bijwasan, Delhi, Delhi 
Cantt., Delhi Sarai Rohilla, Delhi Shahadra, Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, Narela, New Delhi, Sabzi Mandi, Safdarjung, 
Tilak Bridge 
7 Goa 3 Madgaon, Sanvordem, Vasco-da-gama 
8 Gujarat 87 
Ahmedabad, Anand, Ankleshwar, Asarva, Bardoli, Bhachau, 
Bhaktinagar, Bhanvad, Bharuch, Bhatiya, Bhavnagar, Bhestan, 
Bhildi, Bilimora (NG), Bilimora Jn, Botad Jn., Chandlodia, 
Chorvad Road, Dabhoi Jn, Dahod, Dakor, Derol, Dhrangadhra, 
Dwarka, Gandhidham, Godhra Jn, Gondal, Hapa, 
Himmatnagar, Jam Jodhpur, Jamnagar, Jamwanthali, 
Junagadh, Kalol, Kanalus Jn., Karamsad, Keshod, 
Khambhaliya, Kim, Kosamba Jn., Lakhtar, Limbdi, Limkheda, 
Mahemadabad & Kheda road, Mahesana, Mahuva, 
Maninagar, Mithapur, Miyagam Karjan, Morbi, Nadiad, 
Navsari, New Bhuj, Okha, Padadhari, Palanpur, Palitana, 
Patan, Porbandar, Pratapnagar, Rajkot, Rajula Jn., Sabarmati 

24 
 
S.No. State Count Name of Stations  
(BG & MG), Sachin, Samakhiyali, Sanjan, Savarkundla, Sayan, 
Siddhpur, Sihor Jn., Somnath, Songadh, Surat, Surendranagar, 
Than, Udhna, Udvada, Umargaon Road, Unjha, Utran, 
Vadodara, Vapi, Vatva, Veraval, Viramgam, Vishvamitri Jn., 
Wankaner 
9 Haryana 34 
Ambala Cantt., Ambala City, Bahadurgarh, Ballabhgarh, 
Bhattu, Bhiwani Jn, Charkhi Dadri, Faridabad, Faridabad NT, 
Gohana, Gurugram, Hansi, Hisar, Hodal, Jind, Kalanwali, 
Kalka, Karnal, Kosli, Kurukshetra, Loharu, Mahendragarh, 
MandiAdampur, Mandi Dabwali, Narnaul, Narwana, Palwal, 
Panipat, Pataudi Road, Rewari, Rohtak, Sirsa, Sonipat, 
Yamunanagar Jagadhari  
10 Himachal Pradesh 4 Amb Andaura, Baijnath Paprola, Palampur, Shimla 
11 Jharkhand 57 
Balsiring, Bano, Barajamda Jn, Barkakana, Basukinath, Bhaga , 
Bokaro Steel City , Chaibasa, Chakradharpur, Chandil , 
Chandrapura, Daltonganj, Dangoaposi, Deoghar, Dhanbad, 
Dumka, Gamharia, Gangaghat, Garhwa Road, Garhwa Town, 
Ghatsila, Giridih, Godda, Govindpur Road, Haidarnagar, Hatia, 
Hazaribagh Road, Jamtara, Japla, Jasidih, Katrasgarh, 
Koderma, Kumardhubi, Latehar, Lohardaga, Madhupur, 
Manoharpur, Muhammadganj, Muri, N.S.C.B. Gomoh, 
Nagaruntari, Namkom, Orga, Pakur, Parasnath, Piska, 
Rajkharswan, Rajmahal, Ramgarh Cant, Ranchi, Sahibganj, 
Sankarpur, Silli, Sini, Tatanagar, Tatisilwai, Vidyasagar 
12 Karnataka 56 
Almatti, Alnavar, Arsikere Junction, Badami, Bagalkot, Ballary, 
Bangalore Cantt., Bangarpet, Bantawala, Belagavi, Bidar, 
Bijapur, Chamaraja Nagar, Channapatna, Channasandra, 
Chikkamagaluru, Chikkodi Road, Chitradurga, Davangere, 
Dharwad, Dodballapur, Gadag, Gangapur Road, Ghataprabha, 
Gokak Road, Harihar, Hassan, Hosapete, Kalaburagi, Kengeri, 
Kopal, Krantivira Sangolli Rayanna (Bengaluru Station), 
Krishnarajapuram, Malleswaram, Malur, Mandya, Mangalore 
Central, Mangalore Jn., Munirabad, Mysore, Raichur, 
Ramanagaram, Ranibennur, Sagar Jambagaru, Sakleshpur, 
Shahabad, Shivamogga Town, Shree Siddharoodha Swamiji 
Hubballi Jn, Subramanya Road, Talguppa, Tiptur, Tumakuru, 

25 
 
S.No. State Count Name of Stations  
Wadi, Whitefield, Yadgir, Yesvantpur 
13 Kerala 35 
Alappuzha , Angadippuram, Angamali For Kaladi , Chalakudi , 
Changanassery, Chengannur , Chirayinikil, Ernakulam, 
Ernakulam Town, Ettumanur, Ferok, Guruvayur, Kannur, 
Kasargod, Kayankulam , Kollam, Kozhikode, Kuttippuram, 
Mavelikara, Neyyatinkara , Nilambur Road, Ottappalam, 
Parappanangadi, Payyanur, Punalur, Shoranur Jn., Thalassery, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Thrisur, Tirur, Tiruvalla , Tripunithura, 
Vadakara, Varkala, Wadakancheri 
14 Madhya Pradesh 80 
Akodia, Amla, Anuppur, Ashoknagar, Balaghat, Banapura, 
Bargawan, Beohari, Berchha, Betul, Bhind, Bhopal, Bijuri, 
Bina, Biyavra Rajgarh, Chhindwara, Dabra, Damoh, Datia, 
Dewas, Gadarwara, Ganjbasoda, Ghoradongri, Guna, Gwalior, 
Harda, Harpalpur, Hoshangabad, Indore, Itarsi Jn., Jabalpur, 
Junnor Deo, Kareli, Katni Jn, Katni Murwara, Katni South, 
Khachrod, Khajuraho, Khandwa, Khirkiya, LaxmiBai Nagar, 
Maihar, Maksi, Mandlafort, Mandsaur, MCS Chhatarpur, 
Meghnagar, Morena, Multai, Nagda, Nainpur, Narsinghpur, 
Neemuch, Nepanagar, Orchha, Pandhurna, Pipariya, Ratlam, 
Rewa, Ruthiyai, Sanchi, Sant Hirdaram Nagar, Satna, Saugor, 
Sehore, Seoni, Shahdol, Shajapur, Shamgarh, Sheopur Kalan, 
Shivpuri, Shridham, Shujalpur, Sihora Road, Singrauli, 
Tikamgarh, Ujjain, Umaria, Vidisha, Vikramgarh Alot 
15 Maharashtra 126 
Ahmednagar, Ajni (Nagpur), Akola, Akurdi, Amalner, Amgaon, 
Amravati, Andheri, Aurangabad, Badnera, Balharshah, Bandra 
Terminus, Baramati, Belapur, Bhandara Road, Bhokar , 
Bhusawal, Borivali, Byculla, Chalisgaon, Chanda Fort, 
Chandrapur, Charni Road, Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj 
Terminus, Chinchpokli, Chinchwad, Dadar, Daund, Dehu 
Road, Devlali, Dhamangaon, Dharangaon, Dharmabad , 
Dhule, Diva, Dudhani, Gangakher , Godhani, Gondia, Grant 
Road, Hadapsar, Hatkanangale, Hazur Sahib Nanded, 
Himayatnagar , Hinganghat, Hingoli Deccan, Igatpuri, Itwari, 
Jalna, Jeur, Jogeshwari, Kalyan, Kamptee, Kanjur Marg, Karad, 

26 
 
S.No. State Count Name of Stations  
Katol, Kedgaon, Kinwat , Kolhapur, Kopargaon, Kurduwadi, 
Kurla, Lasalgaon, Latur, Lokmanya Tilak Terminus, Lonand, 
Lonavla, Lower Parel, Malad, Malkapur, Manmad, Manwath 
Road , Marine Lines, Matunga, Miraj, Mudkhed , Mumbai 
Central, Mumbra, Murtijapur, Nagarsol , Nagpur, Nandgaon, 
Nandura, Nandurbar, Narkher, Nasik Road, Osmanabad, 
Pachora, Palghar, Pandharpur, Parbhani , Parel, Parli 
Vaijnath, Partur, Phaltan, Prabhadevi, Pulgaon, Pune Jn., 
Purna , Raver, Rotegaon , Sainagar Shirdi, Sandhurst Road, 
Sangli, Satara, Savda, Selu , Sewagram, Shahad, Shegaon, 
Shivaji Nagar Pune, Solapur, Talegaon, Thakurli, Thane, 
Titvala, Tumsar Road, Umri, Uruli, Vadala Road, Vidyavihar, 
Vikhroli, Wadsa, Wardha, Washim , Wathar 
16 Manipur 1 Imphal 
17 Meghalaya 1 Mehendipathar 
18 Mizoram 1 Sairang (Aizawl) 
19 Nagaland 1 Dimapur 
20 Odisha 57 
Angul, Badampahar, Balangir, Balasore, Balugaon, Barbil, 
Bargarh Road, Baripada, Barpali, Belpahar, Betnoti, Bhadrak, 
Bhawanipatna, Bhubaneswar, Bimlagarh, Brahmapur, 
Brajrajnagar, Chatrapur, Cuttack, Damanjodi, Dhenkanal, 
Gunupur, Harishanker Road, Hirakud, Jajpur-Keonjhar road, 
Jaleswar, Jaroli, Jeypore, Jharsuguda, Jharsuguda Road, 
Kantabanji, Kendujhargarh, Kesinga, Khariar Road, Khurda 
road, Koraput, Lingaraj Temple Road, Mancheswar, 
Meramandali, Muniguda, New Bhubaneswar, Panposh, 
Paradeep, Parlakhemundi, Puri, Raghunathpur, Rairakhol, 
Rairangpur, Rajgangpur, Rayagada, Rourkela, Sakhi Gopal, 
Sambalpur, Sambalpur city, Talcher, Talcher Road, Titlagarh 
Jn. 
21 Punjab 30 
Abohar, Amritsar, Anandpur Sahib, Beas, Bhatinda Jn, 
Dhandari Kalan, Dhuri, Fazilka, Firozpur Cantt, Gurdaspur, 
Hoshiarpur, Jalandhar Cantt., Jalandhar City, Kapurthala, 
Kotkapura, Ludhiana, Malerkotla, Mansa, Moga, Muktsar, 

27 
 
S.No. State Count Name of Stations  
Nangal Dam, Pathankot Cantt., Pathankot City, Patiala, 
Phagwara, Phillaur, Rup Nagar, Sangrur, SASN Mohali, Sirhind 
22 Rajasthan 83 
Abu Road, Ajmer, Alwar, Asalpur Jobner, Balotra, Bandikui, 
Baran, Barmer, Bayana, Beawar, Bharatpur, Bhawani Mandi, 
Bhilwara, Bijainagar, Bikaner, Bundi, Chanderiya, Chhabra 
Gugor, Chittorgarh Jn., Churu, Dakaniya Talav, Dausa, Deeg, 
Degana, Deshnoke, Dholpur, Didwana, Dungarpur, Falna, 
Fatehnagar, Fatehpur Shekhawati, Gandhinagar Jaipur, 
Gangapur City, Gogameri, Gotan, Govind Garh, 
Hanumangarh, Hindaun City, Jaipur, Jaisalmer, Jalor, Jawai 
Bandh, Jhalawar City, Jhunjhunu, Jodhpur, Kapasan, 
Khairthal, Kherli, Kota, Lalgarh, Mandal Garh, Mandawar 
Mahwa Road, Marwar Bhinmal, Marwar Jn., Mavli Jn., Merta 
Road, Nagaur, Naraina, Nim ka Thana, Nokha, Pali Marwar, 
Phalodi, Phulera, Pindwara, Raisinghnagar, Rajgarh, 
Ramdevra, Ramganj Mandi, Rana Pratapnagar, Rani, 
Ratangarh, Ren, Ringas, Sadulpur, Sawai Madhopur, Shri 
Mahaveerji, Sikar, Sojat Road, Somesar, Sri ganganagar, 
Sujangarh, Suratgarh, Udaipur City 
23 Sikkim 1 Rangpo 
24 Tamil Nadu 75 
Ambasamudram, Ambattur, Arakkonam Jn, Ariyalur, Avadi, 
Bommidi, Chengalpattu Jn, Chennai Beach, Chennai Egmore, 
Chennai Park, Chidambaram, Chinna Salem, Coimbatore Jn, 
Coimbatore North, Coonoor, Dharmapuri, Dindigul, Dr. M.G. 
Ramachandran Central, Erode Jn., Guduvancheri, Guindy, 
Gummidipundi, Hosur, Jolarpettai Jn, Kanniyakumari, 
Karaikkudi, Karur Jn., Katpadi, Kovilpatti, Kulitturai, 
Kumbakonam, Lalgudi, Madurai Jn, Mambalam, Manaparai, 
Mannargudi, Mayiladuturai Jn., Mettupalayam, Morappur, 
Nagercoil Jn., Namakkal, Palani, Paramakkudi, Perambur, 
Podanur Jn., Pollachi, Polur, Pudukkottai, Rajapalayam, 
Ramanathapuram, Rameswaram, Salem, Samalpatti, 
Sholavandan, Srirangam, Srivilliputtur, St.Thomas Mount, 
Tambaram, Tenkasi, Thanjavur Jn, Thiruvarur Jn., 
Tiruchendur, Tirunelveli Jn, Tirupadripulyur, Tirupattur, 
Tiruppur, Tiruttani, Tiruvallur, Tiruvannamalai, Tuticorin, 

28 
 
S.No. State Count Name of Stations  
Udagamandalam, Vellore Cantt., Villupuram Jn., 
Virudhunagar, Vriddhachalam Jn. 
25 Telangana 40 
Adilabad, Basar, Begumpet, Bhadrachalam Road, Gadwal, 
Hafizpeta, Hi-tech city, Huppuguda, Hyderabad, Jadcherla, 
Jangaon, Kacheguda, Kamareddi, Karimnagar, Kazipet Jn, 
Khammam, Lingampalli, Madhira, Mahabubabad, 
Mahbubnagar, Malakpet, Malkajgiri, Manchiryal, Medak, 
Medchal, Miryalaguda, Nalgonda, Nizamabad, Peddapalli, 
Ramagundam, Secunderabad, Shadnagar, Sri Bala 
Brahmeswara Jogulamba, Tandur, Umdanagar, Vikarabad, 
Warangal, Yadadri, Yakutpura, Zahirabad 
26 Tripura 4 Agartala, Dharmanagar, Kumarghat, Udaipur 
27 UT of Chandigarh 1 Chandigarh 
28 UT of Jammu & 
Kashmir 4 Budgam, Jammu Tawi, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra, 
Udhampur 
29 UT of Puducherry 3 Karaikal, Mahe, Puducherry 
30 Uttar Pradesh 156 
Achnera, Agra Cantt., Agra Fort, Aishbagh, Akbarpur Jn, 
Aligarh, Amethi, Amroha, Anand Nagar, Aonla, Ayodhya, 
Azamgarh, Babatpur, Bachhrawan, Badaun, Badshahnagar, 
Badshahpur, Baheri, Bahraich, Balamau, Ballia, Balrampur, 
Banaras, Banda, Barabanki Jn, Bareilly, Bareilly City, Barhni, 
Basti, Belthara Road, Bhadohi, Bharatkund, Bhatni, 
Bhuteshwar, Bijnor, Bulandsahar, Chandauli Majhwar, 
Chandausi, Chilbila, Chitrakut dham karwi, Chopan, Chunar 
Jn., Daliganj, Darshannagar, Deoria Sadar, Dhampur, 
Dildarnagar, Etawah Jn., Farrukhabad, Fatehabad, Fatehpur, 
Fatehpur Sikri, Firozabad, Gajraula, Garhmukteshwar, 
Gauriganj, Ghatampur, Ghaziabad, Ghazipur City, Gola 
Gokarnath, Gomtinagar, Gonda, Gorakhpur, Govardhan, 
Govindpuri, Gursahaiganj, Haidergarh, Hapur, Hardoi, 
Hathras City, Idgah, Izzatnagar, Janghai Jn, Jaunpur City, 
Jaunpur Jn, Kannauj, Kanpur Anwarganj, Kanpur Bridge Left 
bank, Kanpur Central, Kaptanganj, Kasganj, Kashi, Khalilabad, 

29 
 
S.No. State Count Name of Stations  
Khorsanroad, Khurja Jn., Kosi Kalan, Kunda Harnamganj, 
Lakhimpur, Lalganj, Lalitpur, Lambhua, Lohta, Lucknow 
(Charbagh & Jn.), Lucknow city, Maghar, Mahoba, Mailani, 
Mainpuri Jn., Malhaur Jn, Manaknagar Jn, Manikpur Jn., 
Mariahu, Mathura, Mau, Meerut City, Mirzapur, Modi Nagar, 
Mohanlalganj, Moradabad, Muzaffarnagar, Nagina, 
Najibabad Jn., Nihalgarh, Orai, Panki Dham, Phaphamau Jn, 
Phulpur, Pilibhit, Pokhrayan, Pratapgarh Jn, Prayag Jn, 
Prayagraj, Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyay , Raebareli Jn, Raja Ki 
Mandi, Ramghat Halt, Rampur, Renukoot, Saharanpur Jn., 
Salempur, Seohara, Shahganj Jn, Shahjahanpur, Shamli, 
Shikohabad Jn., Shivpur, Siddharth nagar, Sitapur Jn., 
Sonbhadra, Sri Krishna Nagar, Sultanpur Jn, Suraimanpur, 
Swaminarayan Chappia, Takia, Tulsipur, Tundla Jn., 
Unchahar, Unnao Jn, Utraitia Jn, Varanasi Cantt., Varanasi 
City, Vindhyachal, Virangana Lakshmibai, Vyasnagar, 
Zafarabad 
31 Uttarakhand 11 Dehradun, Haridwar Jn., Harrawala, Kashipur, Kathgodam, 
Kichha, Kotdwar, Lalkuan Jn., Ramnagar, Roorkee, Tanakpur 
32 West Bengal 98 
Adra , Alipur duar Jn., Aluabari Road, Ambika kalna, Anara, 
Andal Jn., Andul, Asansol Jn., Azimganj, Bagnan, Bally, 
Balurghat, Bandel Jn., Bangaon Jn., Bankura , Barabhum, 
Barasat, Barddhaman, Barrackpore, Belda, Berhampore 
court, Bethuadahari, Bhaluka Road, Binnaguri, Bishnupur, 
Bolpur Shantiniketan, Burnpur, Canning, Chandan nagar, 
Chandpara, Chandrakona Road, Dalgaon, Dalkhola, Dankuni, 
Dhulian Ganga, Dhupguri, Digha, Dinhata, DumDum Jn., 
Falakata, Garbeta, Gede, Haldia, Haldibari, Harishchandrapur, 
Hasimara, Hijli, Howrah, Jalpaiguri, Jalpaiguri Road, Jangipur 
Road, Jhalida, Jhargram, Joychandi pahar, Kaliyaganj, Kalyani 
Ghoshpara, Kalyani Jn, Kamakhyaguri, Katwa Jn., Khagraghat 
Road, Kharagpur, Kolkata, Krishnanagar City Jn, Kumedpur, 
Madhukunda, Madhyamgram, Malda Court, Malda Town, 
Mecheda, Midnapur, Nabadwip Dham, Naihati Jn., New 
Alipurduar, New Cooch Behar, New Farakka, New Jalpaiguri, 
New Mal Jn., Panagarh, Pandabeswar, Panskura, Purulia Jn., 
Rampurhat, Sainthia Jn, Salboni, Samsi, Sealdah, Shalimar, 

30 
 
S.No. State Count Name of Stations  
Shantipur, Sheoraphuli Jn., Siliguri, Sitarampur, Siuri, 
Sonarpur Jn., Suisa, Tamluk, Tarakeswar, Tulin, Uluberia 
 
 
  

31 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-2024) 
       The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 26 th October, 2023 from 1100  
hrs. to 1235 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New  
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 Members 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
4. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
5. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
6. Shri Srinivas Kensineni 
7. Shri Pinaki Misra 
8. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
9. Shri Prathap Simha 
10. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
11. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
12. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
  
  

32 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Muraleedharan. P  -  Director  
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways 
1.  Smt. Jaya Varma  Sinha                   Chairman & Chief Executive Officer, 
Railway Board & Ex. Officio Principal 
Secretary to the Government of India 
2.  Smt. Uma Ranade  Addl. Member (Budget) 
3.  Shri Dinesh Kumar  Addl. Member (L&A) 
4.  Shri Anil Kumar  
Khandelwal 
 Principal Executive Director (Gati 
Shakti) 
5.  Shri Devendra Kumar  Principal Executive Director 
(Coaching) 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and informed them about the agenda of the Sitting.  
XXX  XXX   XXX 
3. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed  
the Chairman, Railway Board and other senior officials of the Ministry to  the sitting 
of the Committee convened to have  
briefing on the subject ‘Progress of Amrit Bharat Station Scheme’. Their  
attention was also drawn to Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions by the  
Speaker, Lok Sabha’ about confidentiality of the proceedings of the  
Committee. 
4.  A senior representative from the Ministry made a power point presentation 
on the subject. The presentation highlighted inter -alia various issues like 
modernization and up -gradation of passenger amenities with an element of 

33 
 
flexibility, provisi on of master -planning with commercial development as a pre -
requisite, steps for seamless multi -modal connectivity with a focus on long term 
approach (say 40 to 60 years), architectural planning, creation of city centre, 
seamless integration of different mo des of transport within a city, providence of 
CCTV coverage and access control, creation of ‘Roof plaza’, standardization of 
signage, comprehensive facilities for especially -abled passengers with inclusion of 
Braille as well, focus on restoring the heritag e of  a city while executing up -
gradation, element of expansion while creating provision of services,  etc.   
 5. Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised  
several queries on issues related to the subject, viz, status of Phase -I of th e 
scheme, detailed list of stations covered under Phase -II, timeline of inauguration of 
the remaining stations (800 no.) under the scheme, participation of local bodies, 
funds earmarked for the development of every Stations under Phase -I and Phase –
II, det ails of benchmarking w.r.t. up -gradations/amenities planned, proposals to 
deal with congestion at the entrance of railway station, ways to imbibe/traditional 
ethics of a place in the image of railway station under ABSS, roll out platform 
tickets and other toll charges after successfully completion of ABSS, over -lapping 
of ABSS and Model Station Scheme with regard to development of stations, live 
tracking system for all the trains in the country etc.  
6. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the q ueries 
raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the  
representatives of the Ministry and asked them to furnish written replies  
to the queries which remained unanswered, within two weeks. 
7. The witnesses, then, withdrew. 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
  

34 
 
APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
  
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 1st February, 202 4 from 1 000 hrs. to 
1045 hrs in Room No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
3. Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
4. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
5. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
6. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
7. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
8. Shri Pratap Simha 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
10. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
11. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
12. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
13. Kunwar Danish Ali 
14. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Shri Santosh Kumar  -       Joint Secretary 
           2. Shri Muraleedharan. P     -       Director 

35 
 
                              
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up fo r consideration and adoption of the 
following draft Reports: 
(i) Draft Report on the subject “Progress on Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme”; and 
(ii) XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
3.       The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Reports. The 
Committee then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification received from the concerned Ministry and present the 
same to Lok Sabha. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 