37 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 
EMPOWERMENT THROUGH PM MEGA INTEGRATED TEXTILE 
REGION AND APPAREL (PM MITRA) PARKS SCHEME AND REVIVAL 
EFFORTS FOR THE SICK TEXTILE UNITS/PSUs [BIC, NTC, CTL etc .] 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
EMPOWERMENT THROUGH PM MEGA INTEGRATED TEXTILE 
REGION AND APPAREL (PM MITRA) PARKS SCHEME AND REVIVAL 
EFFORTS FOR THE SICK TEXTILE UNITS/PSUs [BIC, NTC, CTL etc]. 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
___February, 2024/___Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

     CONTENTS         Page No. 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2023-24)    (ii) 
Introduction           (iv) 
             PART-I 
Chapter-I                     Introductory                                                                       1 
Chapter-II      Financial Model of the Scheme    11 
Chapter-III      Governance of the Scheme     14 
Chapter- IV     Sickness in the Textile Industry    25 
Chapter-V     Revival Efforts for sick units in the  
             Textile Industry       36 
             PART-II 
               Observations/Recommendations    49    
           PART-III 
               ANNEXURES 
(i) Annexure-I       -     Details of proposals received from State Govts.  
           for PM MITRA Parks Scheme     60 
(ii) Annexure-II      -    Park wise updated status      61 
  (iii)  Annexure III    -    Criteria for release of DCS     63                                               
  (iv) Annexure IV    -    Details of the of sick textiles units nationalized  66 
  (v) Annexure V      -    Details of sick textile mills of NTC closed   71 
 (vi) Annexure VI     -    Details of 23 mills revived and modernized by NTC  75 
 (vii) Annexure VII   -    Details of Mills revived through JV arrangements  77 
 (viii) Annexure VIII -    DPE guidelines for CPSEs in Non-Strategic Sector          78 
 (ix)  Annexure IX    -    Features of revival schemes of NTC approved by BIFR 93 
(x) Annexure X        -    Impact of Revival scheme     99 
    
                     APPENDICES 
(i) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 06.07.2023  101 
(ii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 06.12.2023  104 
(iii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 05.02.2024  107 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Shri Saikia Dilip 
8. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
9. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
10. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
13. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
14. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
15. Shri Pinaki Misra 
16. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
17. Shri Jual Oram 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
20. Dr. K.C. Patel 
21. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
22. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
23. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
24. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
25. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
26. Shri Prathap Simha 
27. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
28. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
29. Shri R. K. Singh Patel* 
30. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati#  
*    Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 7096 dated 28th July, 2023 
#   Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 7764 dated 20th December, 
2023 
 

iii 
 
       Secretariat 
  1. Shri Santosh Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Muraleedharan. P - Director 
  3.  Shri Srikanth Singh R. - Asst. Executive Officer  
   
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
           I, the Chairperson of Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on t heir behalf, do present this 37 th Report on the 
subject “PM Mega Integrated Textile Region a nd Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks Scheme 
and Revival Efforts for Sick Textile Units/ PSUs [BIC, NTC, CTL etc.]’’ 
 
2. The Indian textile industry is one of the largest in the world with a large raw 
material base and manufacturing strength across the value chain . The sector  
contributes to over 15% of the country’s total exports  and employs over 45 million 
people directly and indirectly, making it one of the largest employment generators in the 
country. Government has launched upon an ambitious PM MITRA Parks Scheme in the 
Indian Textile Sector, with a strong emphasis on making the I ndian textile industry 
globally competitive, attracting large investments and boosting employment generation, 
enhancing skills and reducing costs in the sector. These Parks are inspired by the 5F 
vision (Farm to Fiber to Factory to Fashion to Foreign)  of the Hon’ble Prime Minister to 
prophet India into a leading global hub for Textile manufacturing and exports. The 
success of PM MITRA Parks plays a vital role in achieving this ambitious target.  
 
Further, in the 1960s, a crisis emerged in the Indian textil e industry as numerous mills 
became financially unstable, ceased operations, and faced imminent collapse, posing a 
severe economic imbalance and disrupting the employment scenario. To address this 
turmoil, the Government initiated a series of measures for revival of these Sick Textile 
Units including  nationalization of 103 sick textile undertakings in 1974 under the Sick 
Textile Undertaking (Nationalization) Act. Subsequent enactments in 1986 and 1995 
brought the nationalization count to 124 undertakings, a iming at reorganizing and 
rehabilitating the ailing textile sector . In this context, to thoroughly investigate various 
aspects of PM MITRA Parks Scheme and its implementation and performance 
evaluation of measures taken for revival of Sick Textile Units , t he Committee  on 
Estimates for the year 2023 -24, selected this subject for an in -depth examination and 
report to the House.  

v 
 
 
3. In this Report, the Committee have dealt with various aspects of PM MITRA Parks 
Scheme, such as the eligibility and selection cr iteria of Parks, financial m odel of the 
Scheme, Governance structure, monitoring mechanism under the Scheme, present 
status of the Parks etc. Further, the nature of sickness in Textile Industry , reasons for 
sickness, reasons for continuous losses being faced by Textile PSUs such as NTC, BIC 
etc, reasons for delay in implementation of BIFR approved revival package for sick 
Units, r evival efforts for Sick U nits in the Textile Industry  etc. The Committee have 
analysed these issues in detail and made observations/recommendations in the report. 
 
4. Committee on Estimates took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Textiles on the subject on 06th July, 202 3 and 06 th December, 2023 . The Committee 
also held informal discussions on the subject during its study visit on 18th August, 2023 
at Madurai.  The draft Report was considered and adopted by Committee on Estimates 
(2023-24) at their sitting held on 05th February, 2024. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Textiles for furnishing material, written replies to list of points and tendering evidence 
before them. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI            DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
 05 February, 2024       CHAIRPERSON 
  16 Magha, 1945 (Saka)     COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
  
 

1 
 
REPORT 
PART I 
INTRODUCTORY 
PM MITRA Parks Scheme 
1.1 The textile industry is one of the oldest and most important industries in India. The Indian 
textile industry is a key contributor to the country’s economy, with a current contribution of 
around 1% of GDP. The sector  contributes to over 15% of the country’s total exports  and 
employs over 45 million people directly and indirectly, making it one of the largest 
employment generators in the countr y. The sector is also an important source of foreign 
exchange earnings. The Indian Textile Industry renowned for its vast raw material base and 
manufacturing strength, has long been a crucial contributor to the nation’s economy. The 
sector has witnessed strong growth in recent years, driven by factors such as increa sed 
domestic and foreign demand, government initiatives, and improved infrastructure. The 
industry is expected to continue growing at a healthy pace in the coming years, supported by 
positive macroeconomic indicators and growing consumer spending. 
1.2 However, despite the impressive growth, t he Textile industry is currently facing various  
challenges, including competition from cheaper imports, high input costs, and declining 
exports. In a bid to bolster this sector’s global competitiveness, the Government o f India has 
embarked on an ambitious initiative know n as the PM Mega Integrated Textile Regions and 
Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks. These parks, inspired by the 5 F vision (Farm to Fiber to 
Factory to Fashion to Foreign) of the Hon’ble Prime Minister to prophet India into a leading 
global hub for textile manufactu ring and exports. By fostering large scale, integrated 
industrial facilities, the Govt. aims to enhance the industries competitiveness, attract 
substantial investments and generate employment opportunities. The transparent selection 
process, robust governa nce structure and financial support mechanism underscore the 
Government’s commitment to realizing the vision of making India a global hub for textile. As 
these MITRA Parks take shape, they are poised to create a modern, globally competitive 
textile industry, contributing significantly to India’s economic growth and global standing. The 
scheme is designed to addr ess various challenges faced by  the sector and promote the 
development of large scale, integrated industrial facilities for textiles, fostering inno vation, 
upgrading technology and enhancing skills reducing costs.  

2 
 
Objectives of PM MITRA Parks Scheme 
1.3 The primary objectives of the PM MITRA Parks Scheme are as follows: 
(i) The S cheme will develop integrated large scale and modern industrial 
infrastructure facility including plug and play facilities for total value chain of the 
textile industry. 
(ii) It will be reduce logistics costs by housing entire value chain at one location and 
improve competitiveness of Indian Textiles. 
(iii) The Scheme will help India in attr acting investments, boosting employment 
generation and position itself strongly in the global textile market through 
augmentation of export potential. 
(iv) To strengthen the India Textile Industry by way of enabling scale of operation. 
(v) Apart from accommodating the complete value chain of the T&A Industry, MITRA 
Parks will develop and enhance the eco system required to support industry. 
(vi) One completed, each park is expected to lead to creation of 1,00,000 jobs directly 
and 2,00,000 jobs indirectly. It is also esti mated that each PM MITRA Park will 
attract and investment of Rs. 10,000 crore.  
(vii) Help India in achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 9 
(“Build resilient infrastructure, promote sustainable industrialization and foster 
innovation.  
1.4 MITRA Parks will be set up at key locations, as ready to move, ready to start (through plug 
and play facilities), with common industrial infrastructure and facilities, allowing integration of 
supply and value chains in a contiguous area.  It is the intention  of Ministry of Textiles to equip 
it with world -class facilities for both industrial units and workers working and staying in and 
around MITRA Park. 
To enable scale, the minimum estimated area per MITRA Park is 1,000 acres. While 
theparksize of 1,000 acres  will allow large units, both domestic and international to be readily 
located in these MITRA parks, the plug and play concept will significantly cut the time to start 
operations.  MITRA Parks will offer the opportunity to create an Integrated Textiles Val ue 
Chain right from spinning, weaving, processing, and printing to garment manufacturing, 
accessories making at one location reducing logistics & transaction costs.  Man -made Fibre 

3 
 
(MMF) and Technical Textiles are also expected to be a significant componen t of the new 
investment.  
MITRA parks can be either Greenfield or Brownfield. 
(a)   Greenfield Sites:  New independent sites will be developed under this category.   
(b) Brownfield Sites:  Sites with partly developed industrial trunk infrastructure and other 
intended facilities will be taken up for completing the development. 
1.5 Apprising the Committee about the details of the PM MITRA Park Scheme, the Ministry 
of Textiles in their written information submitted as under: 
“The Government has also approved setting up of 7 (Seven) PM Mega Integrated Textile 
Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks in Greenfield/Brownfield sites to develop world class 
infrastructure including plug and play facility with an outlay of Rs. 4,445 crore in a period of 
seven years i.e. up to 2027-28. The scheme is to develop integrated large scale and modern 
industrial infrastructure facility for entire value -chain of the textile industry. It will reduce 
logistics costs and improve competitiveness of Indian Textiles. The scheme will help India in 
attracting investments, boosting employment generation and position itself strongly in the 
global textile market. All states were requested to send proposals to the Ministry under the 
Scheme.  In response, 18 proposals from 13 State Governments for setting up PM MITRA 
Park were received.  Eligible States and sites were evaluated using a transparent challenge 
method based on objective criteria considering a variety of factors.  The 7 sites approved by 
the Project Approval Committee are:- 
Sl. No. State Site Category  
(a) 1 Tamil Nadu Virudhnagar Greenfield 
(b) 2 Telangana Warangal  Brownfield  
(c) 3 Gujarat Navsari Greenfield 
(d) 4 Karnataka Kalaburagi Greenfield 
(e) 5 Madhya Pradesh Dhar Greenfield 
(f) 6 Uttar Pradesh Lucknow Greenfield 

4 
 
(g) 7 Maharashtra  Amravati Brownfield 
  
 So far Memorandum of U nderstandings (MoU) with all 7 S tate Governments have 
been signed. In order to boost export and to make these products cost competitive, 
Government extended continuation of Rebate of State and Central Taxes and Levies 
(ROSCTL) on exports of Apparel/Garments and Made -ups. Further, textiles p roducts not 
covered under the ROSCTL are covered under Remissions of Duties and Taxes on Exported 
Products (RODTEP) along with other products.” 
1.6 When asked about the  facilities that have been considered to be pro vided under the 
each MITRA Park, the Ministry in their written information submitted as under: 
“These parks are envisaged to be located at sites which have inherent strengths for textile 
industry to flourish and have necessary linkages to succeed. These parks are envisaged to 
have good connectivity to the nearest Port / Dedicated Freight Corridor / Industrial 
Corridor/Textiles Cluster, Reliable Power Supply a nd Water availability and Waste Water 
Disposal system which are the key requirements for attracting investors and also desired 
facilities for smooth functioning of the park.” 
1.7 When asked as to how PM MITRA Parks would help India to achieve the United Na tions 
Sustainable Development Goals 9: “Build resilient infrastructure promote sustainable 
industrialization and foster “innovation”, the Ministry stated as under: 
  
“The development of PM MITRA Parks in India can contribute to achieving the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goal 9, which focuses on building resilient infrastructure, 
promoting sustainable industrialization, and fostering innovation by following way:  
  
Infrastructure Development : PM MITRA Parks aim to create world -class infrastructure 
facilities for the textile industry. By establishing well -designed parks with modern amenities, 
transportation networks, and utilities, it enhances the overall infrastructure in the textile 
sector. This development can attract investments, promote industri al growth, and provide a 
conducive environment for sustainable industrialization. 
  

5 
 
Sustainable Industrialization: PM MITRA Parks can encourage sustainable practices in the 
textile industry. It can incorporate eco -friendly technologies, energy-efficient machinery, and 
waste management systems. By promoting sustainable manufacturing processes and 
reducing environmental impacts, these parks contribute to sustainable industrialization. 
  
Innovation and Research : The development of PM MITRA Parks can foster inn ovation in 
the textile sector. These parks can house research and development centers, incubation 
hubs, and testing laboratories. By providing a collaborative ecosystem, they encourage 
research, technological advancements, and innovation in the industry. T his focus on 
innovation helps create new products, processes, and business models that align with 
sustainability goals. 
  
Skill Development : PM MITRA Parks can contribute to skill development initiatives by 
offering training programs and skill enhancement opportunities. This helps in creating a 
skilled workforce capable of adopting new technologies and sustainable practices. By 
improving the skill sets of workers, the parks contribute to building a resilient and competent 
workforce in the textile sector. 
  
Job Creation and Economic Growth : The development of PM MITRA Parks can generate 
employment opportunities, both directly and indirectly. The growth of the textile industry 
supported by these parks can create jobs across various sectors such as manufacturin g, 
logistics, services, and research. Increased employment leads to economic growth, poverty 
reduction, and improved livelihoods, aligning with the broader goals of sustainable 
development.” 
 
1.8 As regards the steps proposed to be taken so that the MITRA Parks will have world – 
class ‘industrial’ infrastructure which would attract cutting -edge technology, boost FDI and 
local investment in the textile sector, the Ministry provided as under:  
  
“To develop MITRA Parks into world -class industrial infrastructure that attracts c utting-edge 
technology, boosts Foreign Direct I nvestment (FDI), and encourages local investment in the 
textile sector, several steps can be taken. Some of steps are as follows:  
  

6 
 
Comprehensive Master Plan : Develop a comprehensive master plan that outlines the 
vision, objectives, and strategies for transforming MITRA Parks into a world -class industrial 
hub. This plan should consider infrastructure development, zoning, environment al 
sustainability, and connectivity. 
  
Infrastructure Development : Invest in high -quality infrastructure to support industrial 
operations. This includes modern factories, warehouses, logistics facilities, power and utility 
infrastructure, roads, ports, and  telecommunications networks. Ensure the availability of 
reliable and uninterrupted utilities like electricity, water, and waste management systems. 
  
Research and Development (R&D) Facilities : Establish state -of-the-art R&D facilities 
within the parks. Encourage collaborations between academic institutions, research 
organizations, and industries to foster innovation and technological advancements in the 
textile sector. 
  
Skill Development: Establish skill development centers and vocational training insti tutes to 
provide specialized training programs for the local workforce. Focus on enhancing technical 
skills and promoting entrepreneurship to meet the industry's evolving demands. 
  
Attracting Cutting -Edge Technology : Create an ecosystem that attracts cutt ing-edge 
technology companies, startups, and research-driven organizations. Offer incentives, grants, 
and incubation facilities to promote innovation and attract companies specializing in 
advanced manufacturing, automation, artificial intelligence, and sustainable practices. 
  
Investment Promotion : Actively promote MITRA Parks through targeted marketing 
campaigns and participation in international trade fairs and exhibitions. Engage with potential 
investors, both domestic and foreign, to showcase the advant ages of investing in the textile 
sector within the parks. Streamline investment processes and provide dedicated support 
services to facilitate investment. 
  
Sustainable Practices : Emphasize sustainable practices within MITRA Parks, such as 
energy-efficient infrastructure, waste management systems, and water conservation 

7 
 
measures. Encourage the use of eco -friendly technologies and promote sustainable 
manufacturing practices to attract environmentally conscious investors. 
  
Infrastructure Connectivity : Improv e transportation and connectivity within and around 
MITRA Parks. Enhance road networks, connect to nearby airports, and establish rail links for 
efficient movement of goods and people. Seamless connectivity will facilitate trade and 
attract businesses. 
  
Industry Clusters : Promote the development of industry clusters within MITRA Parks. 
Create a favorable environment where textile -related businesses can co -locate, fostering 
collaboration, resource sharing, and supply chain optimization.” 
 
1.9 On being asked  about the component -wise break -up of activities proposed in the PM 
MITRA Parks, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“Component-wise break-up: 
(a) 50% area for Manufacturing  – caters to the entire value chain from spinning to RMG / 
Anchor and ancillary units, including plug and play  
(b) 20% area for common utilities and infrastructure – Roads, CETP, STP, WTP, Sub -
station, Boiler units etc. 
(c) 10% area for subsidised housing and associated social infra - schools , hospitals etc  
(d) 10% area for commercial use - hotels, exhibition, convention centres, offices, related 
uses. 
(e) 5% area for specialised activities - Testing Labs, Training Centre, R&D Centre, 
Incubation Labs, Start Ups, Centres of Excellence etc.  
(f) 5% area for logistics zone - multi-modal linkages, bonded areas, storage etc.”  
 Eligibility 
1.10 PM MITRA Parks will be set up on sites selected from amongst the proposals sent in by 
state governments. Each site will have ready availability of a contiguous and encumbrance -
free land parcel of at least 1000 acres.  The selection of MITRA Park sites has bee n done by 
adopting a transparent Challenge Method by evaluating key criteria including good 
connectivity, distances from the nearest Port / Dedicated Freight Corridor / Industrial 
Corridor/Textiles Cluster, Reliable Power Supply and Water availability and Waste Water 

8 
 
Disposal system, Effective single window clearance etc. A conducive and stable 
industrial/textile policy of the State and traditional strengths in the textile sector has also 
been a parameter for selection. 
1.12 The Committee desired to know as  to whether proposals from all State Governments, 
have been received for establishment of MITRA Parks . In response, Ministry has furnished 
the following reply: 
  
“Ministry had requested all the State Governments to submit proposals under PM MITRA 
scheme. I n response, 18 proposals from 13 States were received.  Details are given in 
Annexure-I” 
  
1.13 On being asked as to when 7 PM MITRA Parks  were approved and the latest position 
of setting up of these Parks, the Ministry has stated as under: 
 
“The Government  has finalized 7 sites for setting up of PM MITRA parks on 17 th March 
2023. Currently MoUs with all States have been signed, the State Governments have started 
various activities including initiating process of SPV formation, layout preparation, preparing 
documents for application of environmental clearance, investment meets etc.” 
 
1.14 Further, with respect to latest progress made in each of the 7 sites, the Ministry has 
stated as under:  
“As per scheme guidelines, on 17.03.2023 the Government has announced setting up 
of 7 (Seven) PM Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks under 
Greenfield/Brownfield categories in Tamil Nadu  (Virudhnagar), Telangana  (Warangal), 
Gujarat (Navsari), Karnataka (Kalaburagi), Madhya Pradesh   (Dhar), Uttar Pradesh 
(Lucknow) and Maharashtra  (Amravati ). Park wise updated status as on date is given in 
Annexure-II: 
1.15 Regarding the status of land acquisition in respect of each of the 7 sites, the Ministry 
has stated: 
“Undertaking regarding 100% land acquisiti on for the PM MITRA Park has been received 
from the States.” 
 

9 
 
II. Selection Criteria: 
1.16 Apprising the Committee  about the criteria fixed for selection of States for the PM 
MITRA Parks, the Ministry has submitted the following: 
 “Eligible States and sites were evaluated using a transparent Challenge Method based on 
objective criteria taking into account a variety of factors such as connectivity, existing 
ecosystem, textile/industry policy, infrastructure, utility services etc. PM Gati Shakti - National 
Master Plan for Multi -modal Connectivity was also used for validation. The evaluation of the 
sites was done as per the guidelines approved and issued by the Ministry vide official 
Gazette Notification dated 20 th October 2021 and operational  Guidelines dated 15th January 
2022. The parameters considered while evaluation of the proposals were Site Connectivity, 
Existing Ecosystem & Textile Clusters, Utility Services, State/Textile Policy, and 
Environmental Impact etc. The final selection was done by the desig nated Project Approval 
Committee (PAC) constituted under the guidelines of the scheme.” 
 
1.17 While providing  details about the Gati Shakti tool that was used for validation of the 
proposed sites, Ministry has submitted as under:   
  
“PM Gati Shakti - National Master Plan for Multi -modal Connectivity was also used for 
validation of the proposed sites. Under PM Gati Shakti, all Ministries are on boarded. While 
finalizing sites, various parameters including distance from site to nearest a irport, port, 
railway station etc. and other variables such as infrastructure etc. were cross verified.”  
 
1.18  While providing  the status of incorporation of SPVs in each of the PM PARKS, the 
Ministry has stated the following: 
“The process of incorporati on of SPV for the PM MITRA Park has to be initiated and 
completed by the respective state governments being majority shareholders in the SPV. It 
has been informed that States are at various stages of the process. The Ministry of Textiles 
has impressed upon  the participating states to complete the process of SPV formation by 
August 31, 2023.” 
 
 

10 
 
1.19 When enquired about the process of selection of Master Developer (MD) for the PM 
MITRA Parks, the Ministry has stated:   
“The process of selection of MD has to b e completed by the concerned SPV. It is expected 
that the process of selection of the MD shall be completed within 45 -60 days of the 
incorporation of the SPV by the state governments. 
The Government of India will provide financial support in the form of De velopment Capital 
Support (DCS) to the Park SPV, with a view to make the PM MITRA Parks commercially 
viable. A Competitiveness Incentive Support (CIS) upto₹ 300 crore per Park to the units in 
PM MITRA Park on a first come first serve basis shall be provide d to incentivize speedy 
implementation.”  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

11 
 
Chapter-II 
Financial Model of the Scheme: 
Financial Support 
 
Development Capital Support (DCS) 
 
2.1 For a Greenfield MITRA Park, a Development Capital Support (DCS) of30% of the 
Project Cost, with a cap of ₹ 500 Cr. per park will be offered. In respect of partly developed 
Brownfield sites, an assessment will be made of infrastructure already developed and also 
the textile specific infrastructure yet to be developed. Based on such assessment, 
Development Capi tal Support @30% of project cost of balance infrastructure and other 
support facilities to be developed and restricted to a limit of ₹ 200 Cr. per Brownfield Park will 
be provided by GOI. The DCS will finance the development of Core Infrastructure (CI) 
comprising Incubation Centre, Plug & Play facility, Developed Factory Sites, Roads, Power, 
Water and Waste Water system, Common Processing House & CETP and other related 
facilities e.g. Design Centre, Testing Centres etc. A part of mandatory Support Infrastru cture 
(SI) – comprising facilities such as workers’ hostels & housing, Logistics Park, warehousing, 
medical, training facilities, etc. shall also be supported by the DCS. 
 
Commercial Development (CD)  in a limited area up to 10% of the park area on a self -
financing model will further enhance the viability of the park and the revenue stream from CD 
will help maintenance of common assets and facilities by the SPV even after the completion 
of this scheme. 
 
Competitive Incentive Support (CIS): A competitiveness incentive up to Rs. 300 crores per 
park will incentivize early operationalization and quick scale up. 
 
2.2 As regards, the funding pattern of the PM MITRA Parks, the Ministry in their written 
replies have furnished the following information: 
“The project will be led by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) created for this purpose for each 
MITRA Park with a paid up capital of ₹10 Crore.   It will be a legal entity registered under the 
Companies Act 2013. Government of India will pay for 49% equity of paid up capital of SPV 

12 
 
to be set up under MITRA Park and participating State Government will pay for 51% of the 
paid up capital. 
  
The purpose of the scheme is to develop enabling common infrastructure and common 
facilities into the park through SPV which will provide the required support to the 
manufacturing units which will be setup with in the park and the responsibility of developing 
this will rest with the respective SPV of the park. “ 
 
2.3  While elaborating on the  pre-defined Performance Linked Parame ters that need to 
meet to qualify for DCS funds allocation in different phases under the Scheme, the Ministry 
has stated the following: 
  
“The DCS will be released in two phases and as per pre -defined criteria. A copy of criteria is 
annexed as Annexure-III.” 
 
2.4 On being asked as to how many Parks have been provided the DCS and CIS funds 
for early operationalization of the Parks, the Ministry in their written reply has stated:  
  
“As per the scheme guidelines, the first tranche of grants has to be released  after the 
following activities: (a)Selection of Master Developer (b) Start of planning and development 
work (c) Land Clearance (d) Power & Water (e) Environmental Clearance (f) Mobilization of 
Rs. 50 cr by MD (g) UC of Rs. 25 Cr for CI.  
  
These conditions have not yet been fulfilled by any State/SPV 
 PM MITRA Parks are envisaged to have Commercial Development (CD) in a limited area up 
to 10% of the Park area on a self -financing model will further enhance the viability of the 
Park and the revenue stream from CD will help maintenance of common assets and facilities 
by the SPV even after the completion of this Scheme.” 
 
2.5 Apprising the Committee about the details and components included in the self -financing 
model in the Scheme, Ministry has stated the following: 
  

13 
 
“Under the PMMITRA scheme, preferred mode of development is through Master Developer 
on DBFOT basis. To provide necessary handholding  to Master Developer, the Centre will 
provide uptoRs 500 cr as Development Capital Support. In addition, the land will be provided 
by the state to SPV at nominal cost. All these features make scheme very attractive for 
private investment in development of park. Once fully developed, the Master Developer will 
get right to collect lease rentals from unit holders. Once fully populated, these parks will be 
self sufficient in running its day to day operations.” 
  
2.6 While furnishing the information about the activities that are allowed in the Commercially 
Developed area of the Park and the process of selection of vendors, the Ministry has stated  
as follows:  
  
“Under PM MITRA, 10% area will be reserved for commercial uses such as hotels, 
exhibition, convention centres, offices and related uses.” 
 
  

14 
 
Chapter-III 
Governance of the Scheme 
3.1 The Ministry of Textiles will oversee the e xecution of the  projects. An SPV owned by 
Centre and State Government jointly will be set up for each park which will oversee the 
implementation of the project. The Ministry of Textiles will provide financial assistance up to 
Rs 800 crores per park for Greenfield project s and up to Rs 500 crores per park for 
Brownfield projects. The State Governments will provide land and augmented utility 
infrastructure for the proposed mega textile parks. The parks will offer an excellent 
infrastructure, plug and play facilities as well  as training and research facilities for the 
industry.  
Each MITRA park will be led by a Special Purpose Vehicle created for this purpose for 
the Park. The SPV which will be joint venture between the State and Central Governments 
will be registered under t he Companies Act 2013. Government of India will pay for 49% 
equity of paid up capital of SPV to be set up under MITRA Park and participating State 
Government will pay for 51% of the paid up capital. The Secretary Textiles, Government of 
India will be the Chairperson of the Board of Directors. 
 
The State Government will transfer land to the SPV at symbolic notional price and this 
land asset will be further used to leverage by SPV for investment in the MITRA Park for 
development in construction period and maintenance of the MITRA Park with a high 
standard specification during the concession period. The specific modalities for use of this 
land and lease rentals will be defined in the relevant transaction documents. An inter -
departmental Project Approval Comm ittee (PAC) headed by the Secretary (Textiles) will 
oversee the implementation. The PAC will also fine tune the financial support policies such 
as linking benefits with investment and other objective parameters with aim of earliest 
operationalization of the maximum number of units in MITRA Park. 
 
The Park Special Purpose Vehicle will appoint a Master Developer (MD) selected by a 
transparent process and will engage with them through a Concession Agreement.  The 
Master Developer will be responsible for design ing and master planning, building, financing, 
operating and maintaining the MITRA Park as per the applicable governance and delivery 

15 
 
structure. The Master Developer will develop the MITRA Park and its components e.g. Core 
Infrastructure (CI), Support Infra structure (SI) and Commercial Development (CD) as 
described above. Master Developer will be responsible for operation and maintenance of 
MITRA Park as per minimum prescribed standard during the concession period. 
 
State Governments will not just ensure ava ilability of contiguous and encumbrance -
free land parcel of at least 1000 acres of land but will also facilitate provision of all utilities, 
Reliable Power Supply and Water availability and Waste Water Disposal system, an effective 
single window clearance as well as a conducive and stable industrial/textile policy. 
 
The GoI will provide financial support in the form of Development Capital Support to 
the Park SPV, with a view to make the MITRA Parks commercially viable. A 
Competitiveness Incentive Support (C IS)uptoRs 300 crore per park to the units in MITRA 
Park on a first come first serve basis shall be provided to incentivise speedy implementation. 
The central shall also facilitate convergence with other GOI schemes in order to ensure 
additional incentives to the Master Developer and investor units  “The SPPDs entrusted with 
development of the park will develop the land/water body and provide necessary infrastructure 
like road connectivity, transmission etc. They will also be responsible for operation & 
maintenance of the park.  
            Accordingly, the SPPD prepares an estimate for the cost of development of the park. 
The CFA amount admissible from MNRE is deducted from the estimated cost and the 
balance amount is recovered from the Solar Project Develope rs to whom the plots in the 
park are being allotted.  Charges are also recovered from the Solar Project Developers for 
regular maintenance of the park in the form of Operation and Maintenance charges.” 
3.2 On being asked about the details of the study of such Textile Parks in other developed 
countries been undertaken, the Ministry has stated as follows: 
  
“Countries in our neighborhood and in South East Asia have been successful in attracting 
large investments and have shown robust export growth in this se ctor in recent times. World 
class infrastructure, efficient logistics, low interest rates, competitive input costs, economies 
of scale, higher productivity and Free Trade Agreement (FTA) or GSP benefits are driving 

16 
 
the surge in exports from several of thes e countries. These countries have been very 
successful in attracting large firms. The PM MITRA scheme has been designed keeping 
these facts.” 
  
3.3 While providing information  about the process for maintenance of PM MITRA Parks, the 
Ministry has submitted as under: 
 “ The Special Purpose Vehicle   (SPV), which will be a legal entity with 51% equity 
shareholding of State Government and 49% of Central Government, set up by the State 
Government for the purpose of implementing the PM MITRA Park Project SPV will be 
responsible for overall development, governance and administration of the park. The Master 
Developer/Other Developer under the overall guidance of SPV will be responsible for, 
maintain Core and Support Infrastructure created under this scheme.” 
 
3.4 When asked  about the  Operational model for development of PM MITRA Parks, the 
Ministry has provided: 
“As per the operational model of the PM MITRA advised in the guidelines, the Park will be 
developed in a Public Private Partnership (PPP) based Master Dev eloper (MD) model on 
Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Transfer (DBFOT) format. However, other models such as 
Government SPV led Model or Hybrid model with limited participation of private developer 
can also be considered in exceptional situation with the approval of Government of India. 
Master Developer led model have been adopted in the case of Gujarat and Uttar 
Pradesh where SPV agreements have been signed and EoI for MD has been invited. 
Other State Governments are in the process of finalizing model for its 
implementation. ” 
Monitoring Mechanism: 
 
3.5 On being asked to elaborate on the proposed monitoring mechanism for ensuring proper 
implementation of this Scheme, the Ministry has stated the following: 
  
“The project will be led by a Special Purpose Vehicle created for this purpose for each 
MITRA Park. The Principal Secretary Industry/Textiles for the State will be the Chief 
Executive Officer of the SPV and the Secretary Textiles, Government of India will be the 

17 
 
Chairperson of the Board of Directors.   A Project Approval Committee (PAC) under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary(Textiles), Financial Advisor (MoT), AS/JS (MoT), and 
representatives of DPIIT and NITI Aayog will approve the guidelines for this scheme, 
sanction project activities and monitor the expenditure under DCS and CIS based on 
objective criteria.  The PAC will also fine tune the CIS policies such as linking benefits with 
investment and other objective parameters with aim of earliest operationaliza tion of 
maximum number of units in MITRA Park” 
 
Other initiatives 
 
3.6 When enquired about the various initiatives that are proposed to ensure speedy and 
successful implementation of the PM MITRA Parks, the Ministry has furnished the following 
information: 
“To ensure a speedy and successful implementation of the PM MITRA Park, several key 
initiatives can be undertaken. Some of them are as follows:  
  
(a)      Stakeholder Engagement : Engage all relevant stakeholders, including textile 
industry associations, manufacturers, exporters, and local communities. Seek their input, 
address their concerns, and collaborate with them throughout the implementation process. 
  
(b)      Infrastructure Development:  Develop necessary infrastructure such as industrial 
parks, manufacturing units, warehouses, and logistics facilities. Ensure that the infrastructure 
is equipped with modern technology, utilities, and efficient transportation links to facilitate 
seamless operations. 
  
(c)      Skill Development: Establish skill development programs to train the local workforce 
in specialized textile manufacturing techniques, machinery operation, quality control, and 
other industry -specific skills. Collaborate with vocational training institutes and industry 
experts to design and deliver these programs. 
  
(d)      Investment Promotion : Promote the PM MITRA Park initiative to domestic and 
international investors. Showcase the benefits of investing in the textile sector, such as 

18 
 
government incentives, favorable policies, access to a skilled workforce, and a supportive 
business environment. Organize investment summits and road shows to attract potential 
investors. 
  
(e)      Research and Development : Foster research and development activities in the 
textile sector to drive innovation, enhance product quality, and promote sustainable 
practices. Establish collaborations between textile research institutions, industry players, and 
academic institutions to encourage knowledge sharing and technology transfer. 
  
(f)      Marketing and Promoti on: Develop a comprehensive marketing and branding 
strategy to showcase the products and capabilities of the PM MITRA Park. Participate in 
trade fairs, exhibitions, and buyer -seller meets to attract domestic and international buyers. 
Leverage digital platforms and e-commerce channels to reach a wider audience. 
  
(g)      Sustainability and Compliance: Emphasize sustainability practices and compliance 
with international standards in manufacturing processes. Encourage the use of eco -friendly 
materials, energy -efficient technologies, and waste management systems. Facilitate 
compliance with global certifications and standards to enhance market acceptance and 
competitiveness.” 
 
3.7 When asked about the details of measures initiated towards stakeholders  
engagement, infrastructure development, investment promotion,  
developing a comprehensive marketing and branding strategy under PM  
MITRA Parks, the Ministry in their written submission, stated as under: 
 
“The details of stakeholders engagements held for PM MITRA Parks are as under:- 
(i) A National Conference was organized in New Delhi on 4.5.2022 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary(Textiles) with representatives of respective State 
Government and industry members.  Senior Officers from state governments gave 
detailed presentations of their respective proposals highlighting their strengths & 
opportunities available for setting up PM MITRA parks.    

19 
 
(ii) The first  meeting of Project Approval Committee (PAC) under PM MITRA Parks 
Scheme was held on 24 th May 2022 under the  chairmanship of Secretary(T) to 
discuss proposals of proposed sites on the basis of Preliminary Project Reports 
submitted by State Governments. 
(iii) The second  meeting of Project Approval Committee (PAC) under PM MITRA 
Parks Scheme was held on 7 th march 2023 under the chairmanship of 
Secretary(T) to finalise 7 sites on the basis of the proposals submitted through 
challenge method. 
(iv) In the month of June 2023, A ministerial delegation led by Hon’ble Minster of State 
for Textiles visited ITMA fair at M ilan and held round table conference and one on 
one meeting with various international investors and motivated them to invest in 
upcoming PM MITRA parks. 
(v) A stakeholder’s consultation chaired by Hon’ble Minister for Textiles was held on 
20.6.2023.  During t his meeting, representatives from industry, seven PM MITRA 
states, potential investors (both national and international) and senior officers from 
concerned Ministries participated. 
(vi) Another ‘Stakeholders’ Consultation on PM MITRA Scheme: Park Development 
Perspective’ was held on 25.07.2023 under the chairpersonship of Secretary (T). 
This meeting was attended by the representatives from major infra developers 
across the country, Banks & Financial Institutions, International Institutions like 
UNIDO, ADB and prominent consultants.” 
 
3.8 On being asked about the steps that can be propose d for providing technology support 
to the Parks, the Ministry has stated the following: 
“The following are some of the steps that can be taken/considered for providing technology 
support:  
  
(i)  Establishing robust IT infrastructure for effective technology implementation. This 
includes setting up reliable hardware, networks, and data centers to support the 
scheme's operations. 

20 
 
(ii)  Develop or adopt specialized software solutions tailored to the needs of the textile sector. 
This may include systems for inventory management, supply chain optimization, sales 
tracking, and financial management 
(iii)  data analytics tools to gain insights into revenue patterns, identify potential area s of 
revenue leakage or commercial losses, and make data -driven decisions. Regular 
reporting mechanisms should be put in place to monitor and evaluate the performance 
of the scheme. 
(iv)  comprehensive training programs to textile sector stakeholders, including government 
officials, manufacturers, and employees. These programs should focus on enhancing 
IT literacy, data management skills, and the effective utilization of technology. 
(v)    collaboration between government agencies and IT industry experts to leverage their 
knowledge and expertise. Engage with IT companies, startups and research institutions to 
identify innovative solutions and best practices for the textile sector.” 
 
3.9 The Committee sought to know about  the measures that have been  taken to ease 
implementation of this Scheme and to streamline the procedures and processes . In 
response the Ministry in their written replies stated as under:  
 
“The following measures have been put in place to assist in speedy take off and 
implementation of the proposed Mega Textile Parks  
  
(a)      On boarding of State Government as a partner in implementation of the project.  
  
(b)      Encumbrance free land was a precondition to submit a proposal. 
  
(c)      Commitment from participating states to pro vide Power and Water in addition to trunk 
infrastructure for development of Park. 
  
(d)      Provision of Master Developer for speedy project implementation  
  
(e)      Flexibility for structuring the Park as per the demand assessment. 
  
(f)      Development of Park in Phases for ensuring optimum utilization of land 

21 
 
  
(g)   Robust monitoring mechanism to address any bottlenecks during project 
implementation.  
  
(h)    Scheme aims to provide world class plug and play infrastructure to investors. 
  
(i)      All statutory clearances including Environmental Clearance from single window.  
 
 
3.10 The Committee asked about the measures suggested for welfare of the workers in this 
Sector especially the women and persons with disability. In reply, the Ministry of Textiles has 
stated as under: 
 
“The welfare of workers, including women and persons with disabilities, in the textile sector is 
great importance. There are some suggested measures:  
  
(i)      Prioritize the health and safety of workers by implementing appropriate measures. This 
includes providing protective equipment, regular health check -ups, and training on 
occupational hazards. Establishing a safe and hygienic work environment is crucial to 
prevent accidents and occupational diseases. 
  
(ii)      Create a workplace that is accessible and accommodating for persons with disabilities. 
Install ramps, handrails, and elevators for easy mobility. Provide accessible restroom 
facilities, designated parking spots, and ergonomic workstations to promote inclusivity. 
  
(iii)    Offer training programs to enhance the skills and capabilities of workers, particularly 
women and persons with disabilities. This can include technical training, language skills, and 
managerial development programs. Such initia tives enable workers to advance their careers 
and improve their earning potential. 
  
(iv)    Introduce flexible working hours and arrangements to accommodate the needs of 
women and persons with disabilities. This can include options for part -time work, rem ote 

22 
 
work, or job -sharing arrangements. Flexible policies help workers maintain a work -life 
balance and ensure their well-being. 
  
(v)      Provide appropriate social security benefits, including health insurance, maternity 
leave, and disability benefits. These measures help protect workers and their families during 
times of illness, injury, or other challenging circumstances. 
  
 
3.11 On the issue of ascertaining the quality of products made in PM MITRA Parks, the 
Ministry has clarified the following:  
  
“To ascertain the quality of products made in PM MITRA Parks, several factors can be 
considered: 
  
Compliance with Standards : Products should meet relevant quality standards set by 
national or international regulatory bodies. Compliance with standards ensure s that products 
are safe, reliable, and meet customer expectations. 
  
Testing and Inspection : Regular testing and inspection of products can be conducted to 
check their quality. This can include in -house quality control measures or engaging third -
party testing agencies to validate product quality. 
  
Customer Feedback: Gathering feedback from customers who have used the products can 
provide insights into their quality. Positive customer reviews and testimonials indicate that 
the products meet or exceed expectations. 
  
Supplier Evaluation: Assessing the quality of raw materials and components used in the 
manufacturing process is crucial.  
  
Training and Skill Development : Investing in training and skill development programs for 
workforce as well-trained employees are more likely to produce high-quality products. 
  

23 
 
Market Feedback and Reputation : Monitoring market feedback and reputation is essential 
to ascertain the quality of products. Positive market perception and a good reputation among 
customers and industry peers indicate high-quality products 
  
Using Modern Machinery with latest technology and following best practices – The 
park units will be equipped with modern machinery with latest technology to decrease 
probability of errors in manufacturing process. Best practices will be followed to streamline 
all activities into a manufacturing unit so that quality produced at each level of product is 
been monitored and any defects are reported through modern technologies which will help in 
producing a high quality product”. 
 
3.12 On being enquired as to  how this Scheme would help in Export Promotion in Textile 
Sector, the Ministry has furnished the following:  
  
“Development of MITRA Parks will also help attract foreign investment in the textiles industry 
in India and strengthen domestic industry thereby helping Indian textiles industry to increase 
its production capacity and export competitiveness. The high quality products manufactured 
in the parks will be positioned as export oriented products and underst anding the needs and 
requirements of the foreign brands.  
In addition to above, today country’s textile sector is highly fragmented to the extent 
that fabric woven in southern parts of the country are processed in Gujarat and Rajasthan 
and finally ending up in RMG hubs of Delhi NCR, Punjab, Mumbai, Bengaluru for 
garmenting. In this process, logistic cost increases manifold. To address this problem, PM 
MITRA scheme aims to create integrated set up where every segment of textile value chain 
will be located a t one location thereby reducing logistic costs. All these will help the Indian 
economy to generate additional output, exports and employment opportunities.” 
3.13 When asked about the present status of the d edicated website being created to 
provide Information on the latest developments of the PM MITRA Scheme, the Ministry has 
furnished the following: 

24 
 
“A dedicated portal is being created by the Ministry of Textiles for monitoring progress of all 7 
projects on real -time basis. Dummy version has been created a nd final version will be 
executed soon” 
3.14 On being enquired about the latest position of appointment of Project Management 
Agency (PMA) for execution of PM MITRA Parks, the Ministry has stated: 
“Tender document for selection of PMA was uploaded on GeM p ortal in October 2023.  
However, since there were some changes in the scope of work, the same was called off.  
New tender document shall be uploaded on GeM portal soon.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
Chapter- IV 
Sickness in the Textile Industry 
4.1 In the later part of the year 1960, numbers of textile mills in the country started 
becoming sick and management of many of these mills stopped operations and were on the 
verge of collapse. Such development posed serious imbalance in the economy as well as  
destabilized employment scenario of the country. To overcome this chaotic situation the 
Government decided to step in and nationalize such sick mills to save the employment for 
the workers.  
With the enactment of Sick Textile Undertaking (Nationalization) Act, 1974, 103 sick textile 
undertakings were nationalized followed by enactment of Swadeshi Cotton Mill Company 
Ltd. (Acquisition and transfer of undertaking) Act, 1986 under which 06 sick t extile 
undertakings and the Textile undertaking (Nationalization) Act, 1995 under which 15 sick 
textile undertakings were taken over and nationalized with a view to reorganize and 
rehabilitate such sick textile undertaking.  
The Sick Textile Undertaking (N ationalization) Amendment Act, 1995 was enacted to 
amend Sick Textile Undertaking (Nationalization) Act, 1974 and Swadeshi Cotton Mill 
Company Ltd. (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking Act, 1986 by inserting following 
section: 
“11A: If the National Textile Corporation considers it necessary or expedient for the 
better management, modernisation, restructuring or revival of sick textile undertaking 
so to do, it may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, transfer, 
mortgage, sale or other wise dispose of any land, plant machinery or any other assets 
of any of the sick textile undertakings; provided the proceeds of no such transfer, 
mortgage, sale or disposal shall be utilised for any purpose other than the purpose for 
which the sanction of the Central Government has been obtained”. 
Further, in order to continue with the leasehold right vested in the NTC on completion of the 
leasehold tenure, the Textile Undertaking (Nationalization) Laws (Amendment of Validation) 
Act, 2014 has been enacted a mending Sick Textile Undertaking (Nationalization) Act, 1974 
and Textile Undertaking (Nationalization) Act, 1995.   

26 
 
Beside above, with the view to securing the proper management of the affairs of the 
Company and the continuity and development of the produc tion of goods which are vital 
to the need of the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto, with 
the enactment of The British India Corporation Limited (Acquisition of shares) Act 1981, 
British India Corporation Limited were taken over in June, 1981.   
4.2 Apprising the Committee about the nature of sickness in Textile Industry, the Ministry 
of Textiles has submitted the following written information: 
“The nature of sickness in Textiles Industry is mainly attributed towards technical  
obsolescence; excess manpower and poor productivity.” 
4.3 Further, elaborating on the factors responsible for sickness in Textile Industry, the 
Ministry has stated as under: 
“The mismanagement of the affairs of the Textile undertakings, lack of modernization by the 
textile mill owner, deteriorating financial conditions and a violent labour collectively 
responsible for sickness in textile industry resulted in closure or in -operation of these units 
pan India.” 
4.4 When asked about the monitoring mechanism in the Ministry of Textiles to detect the 
sickness in individual private Textile unit at an incipient stage so that remedial timely 
measures are taken to assist growth of sickness in the initial stages itself, the Ministry has 
submitted as follows: 
“There is no such mechanism in the Ministry to detect the sickness in individual private 
textile unit.” 
4.5 Providing details of the number and names of sick textile units, since when these units 
are sick and steps taken to revive the same, the Ministry h as furnished the following 
information: 
 “The details of the number and names of sick textiles units nationalized through 
promulgation of the Act of 1974, 1986 and 1995 are at Annexure-IV 
The 124 textile mill units nationalized under the three nationalization Acts were sick on the 
date of nationalization. The Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) 

27 
 
sanctioned rehabilitation scheme for NTC in 2002 modified twice in 2006 and in the year 
2008. 
Under the BIFR scheme, 78 sick textile  mills of NTC on account of being unviable as per 
Techno-economic viability study were closed (Details at Annexure-V); 
23 mills revived and modernized by NTC (Details at  Annexure-VI) and 5 Mills revived 
through Joint Venture arrangements and 11 Mills to be  revived through JV arrangement 
(matter under arbitration) (Details at Annexure-VII)”. 
4.6 On being asked the reasons for huge losses being faced by Various Textile PSUs such 
as NTC, BIC etc, Ministry has stated: 
“NTC 
 
The National Textile Corporation Ltd.  (NTC) was established to manage ailing textile mills 
taken over by the Indian government through nationalization acts in 1974, 1986, and 1995. 
These mills had become financially unstable in the late 1960s, affecting the economy and 
employment. NTC managed 124 such mills until 1995. To streamline operations, it created 9 
subsidiary corporations. 
 
By the early 1990s, 8 out of 9 subsidiaries faced issues like obsolescence, excess 
manpower, and poor productivity. The Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstr uction 
(BIFR) was approached in 1993 -94, leading to rehabilitation schemes. In 2002, the first 
sanctioned scheme (SS -02) aimed at modernizing 53 mills. It was later modified in 2006 
(MS-06) and 2008 (MS-08), extending till 2012. 
 
 Under MS-08, NTC closed 78 unviable mills, modernized 23, and revived 5 through joint 
ventures. Assets worth Rs. 6584.08 crore were sold, and 9 subsidiaries merged with the 
Holding Company in 2006. 
 
        After implementing the BIFR revival scheme, NTC's performance improved significantly: 
(i) Capacity utilization increased to over 85%. 
(ii)  Yarn production rose from 375 lakh Kg. per annum to more than 550 lakh Kg 
per annum. 

28 
 
(iii) Cloth production increased from 11 lakh meters per annum to 190 lakh 
meters per annum. 
(iv) Total income nearly doubled. 
(v) Wages & salaries as % to Turnover/Production Value reduced. 
(vi) Cash loss decreased. 
 
However, despite these improvements, NTC mills eventually started making losses due to 
outdated machinery and lack of continual modernization. As of the latest status, production 
in NTC working mills was suspended in 2020 due to the COVID -19 pandemic and 
nationwide lockdowns. While some operations resumed in 2021, another wave of the 
pandemic led to further closures. Currently, due to financial constraints and ec onomic 
viability concerns, all NTC mills are suspended, and future plans are under consideration by 
the Ministry of Textiles (MoT) in consultation with DPE and NITI Aayog. 
Latest status in respect of NTC 
Production activity in NTC working mills (23 mills) was suspended due to Covid-19 pandemic 
and nationwide lockdown imposed by the various State Governments from March, 2020.  
After lifting of the lockdown and as per availability of raw material, NTC restored operations 
in 14 units from January 2021 onwards. The second wave of Covid-19 pandemic again led to 
closure of all NTC mill operations in April, 2021.  Due to unavailability of working capital and 
other financial constraints, operation of all NTC mills is presently under suspension. In the 
light of continued poor economic viability of NTC mills, action plan for way forward in respect 
of all NTC mills is under active consideration in MoT. 
BIC 
BIC is facing the losses due to old/obsolete technology, plant & machinery. Steps for revival 
of Company were taken  by Ministry/ GoI in 2002 and 2011. The revival scheme was based 
on sale of surplus land assets for generation of fund. BIC’s land is leasehold land and the 
conversion from leasehold to freehold could not be obtained from UP Government therefore, 
the land parcels could not be sold and revival scheme could not be implemented.” 
 
 

29 
 
4.7 On being asked about  the criteria that led the Ministry to declare 78 NTC Mills as 
unviable, the Ministry has submitted as under: 
“An analysis of the cost parameters, actually incurred by NTC during subsequent years vis -
à-vis the BIFR projected parameters shows that, whereas the cost of raw materials as a 
percentage of turnover has remained nearby the BIFR projections, there have been large 
variations in respect of other cost pa rameters e.g. Power, wages. Subsequently higher 
inputs costs, over that projected in BIFR Revival plan had resulted in the Company never 
been able to achieve operating profit even after substantial amount of investments during the 
past 10 years.  While the  production cost had substantially increased in actual practice, over 
that of BIFR projection, the sale price of the products of NTC have not increased 
substantially in the market. This has led to continuous increase in losses. The average cost 
of production of yarn over last 3 years has substantially increased mainly due to high labor 
cost and high power cost in metro city like Mumbai & Kolkata, whereas average sale price of 
yarn in the market is much less. Similarly, the average cost price of cloth is hig her against 
the sale price. The sales realization as a percentage of cost price in NTC product is, thus 73 -
78 %, indicating a loss of Rs. 25 per every Rs.100 spent for production. This is not a viable 
commercial operational parameter for any business ventu res, which has completely eroded 
the cash reserves of the company. Hence, as per BIFR approved revival scheme of NTC 
(MS-08), NTC closed 78 Mills declaring these mills as unviable.” 
4.8 On a specific query about the current status of 5 NTC mills revived through Joint Venture 
route, the Ministry has submitted: 
 “BIFR in its meeting dated 28.03.2006 approved NTC revival scheme (MS -06) which 
provided revival of NTC 30 mills through Joint Venture (JV) route.  However, 16 mills were 
finalized to be revived through JV route.  At present NTC have 5 JV companies with 3  
strategic partners.  A special audit on performance of these 5 Joint Venture companies was 
conducted twice in which the auditors pointed out various breaches of contract and non -
transparency in operations in respect of the JV companies.    
Show Cause Noti ce dated 26.07.2018 has been issued to Strategic Partner in case of 3 
JVCs namely Apollo Design Apparel Parks Ltd., Goldmohur Design & Apparel Parks Ltd. 
and India United Textile Mills Ltd. stating that why the appropriate actions as contemplated 

30 
 
under SSSA and other agreements and in law be not taken against them for the breaches 
committed by them as directed by the Board in its 380th meeting held on 23.05.2018  
2 JVCs – NTC Board decided to cancel the JV arrangement on 14.09.2017. Further after 
approval o f Board of Directors of NTC in its 394th meeting held 22.07.2021 regarding 
cancellation of 2 JVCs namely Aurangabad Textiles & Apparel Parks Ltd. and New City of 
Bombay Mfg. Mills Ltd., matter is under examination in the Ministry.  
3 JVCs - Matter regarding the further course of action in respect of JVCs was placed before 
the Board of Directors in its 399th meeting held on 16.06.2022 and Board after protracted 
deliberation and on the basis of opinions of Ld. Solicitor General of India & legal consultant 
decided to recommend the cancellation of 3 JVCs namely India United Textile Mills Ltd., 
Goldmohur Design & Apparel Park Ltd. and Apollo Design Apparel Parks Ltd. to Ministry of 
Textiles, GoI.  
It is to further inform that IBC Proceedings has been initiated ag ainst M/s Future Enterprises 
Ltd. – Strategic Partner in case of Goldmohur Design & Apparel Park Ltd. and Apollo Design 
Apparel Parks Ltd. JVCs have filed their claims with the Insolvency Resolution Professional 
(IRP).   
Strategic Partner in case of one of  the JVC M/s India United Textile Mills Ltd. has invoked 
Arbitration Proceedings. Presently the matter is sub -judice. Presently the matter is pending 
at the stage of claimants’ witness and the next date of hearing is 18 & 19 December, 2023. 
 
Considering the facts that the business plan of JVs had been wrongly used to show some 
marginal activities, and that no investment has been made by the JV partner as projected 
and that no public interest served, it was decided by the Ministry to necessary approval of 
Cabinet to take a final view on cancellation of JVs. In addition, further action on the 
irregularities is being considered out in consultation with Department of Legal Affairs.” 
 
4.9 Further, apprising the Committee about  the reasons for huge losses by NTC, despite 
owning huge parcels of land and the losses faced by NTC during the last 5 years, the 
Ministry has submitted: 

31 
 
(a) “National Textile Corporation was established primarily manage the affairs of the 
Sick Textile Mills/Undertakings taken over by the Govt. o f India under the three 
Nationalization Act of 1974, 1986 & 1995 respectively with a view to reorganize/rehabilitate 
such Textile Undertakings. 
 
On account of obsolete technology; excess manpower; poor productivity, etc. all NTC mills 
were referred to BIFR .  As per BIFR approved revival schemes 78 mills were closed under 
Industrial Dispute Act not found viable as per the Techno -Economic Viability Study.  NTC 
has no mandate to revive these closed mills.  16 NTC mills were slated for revival through 
Joint Venture route.  Out of which, 5 NTC mills have been revived and remaining 11 mills 
MoU of JV was signed were cancelled on review.  Matter in case of these 11 Mills is sub -
judice before Court/Arbitrate Tribunal.  2 mills were transferred to Govt. of Puducherry , 
remaining 23 mills were revived as per BIFR approved scheme and were operational till 
imposition of Nation-wide lockdown in March, 2020 since then operation of these 23 mills is 
suspended due to financial constraints. 
Further, while production cost has s ubstantially increased in actual practice, over that of 
BIFR projection, the same price of product of NTC have not increased substantially in the 
market.  This has led to continuous increase  in losses.  Resultantly, NTC is not a viable 
commercial operational parameter for any business venture which has completely eroded its 
cash reserve.  As per Department of Public Enterprises guidelines contained in their OM 
dated 13.12.2021 for implementation of new PSE policy of CPSEs in the non-strategic sector 
for loss making/sick PSE, the matter is in advance stage in consultation with NITI Aayog and 
DPE under M/o Finance.   
(b) The Net profit / (Loss) of NTC in the last five years is as follows:  (Rs. in Crores) 
 
PARTICULARS 2018-19 
Audited 
2019-20 
Audited  
2020-21 
Audited 
2021-22 
 Provisional 
2022-23 
Provisional 
Net Profit / 
(Loss) 
(310.22) 
 
(350.11) 
 
(343.87) (306.14) 
 
(324.91) 

32 
 
 
4.10 When asked about the challenges being faced by challenges being faced by British 
India Corporation (BIC) units, the Ministry has submitted as follows: 
“(a)Owing to continuous losses, BIC was referred to Board for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR) in 1991 and was declared sick in 1992. The cabinet approved a 
revival scheme on 21.11.2000 at a cost of Rs. 211 crore. The cost of the scheme was to be 
met by sale of surplus land assets. BIFR sanctioned the draft rehabilitation scheme of BIC 
on 18.12.2002, which was to be implemented within a period of two years. However, sale of 
the properties of BIC could not materialize as  permission for conversion of leasehold / nazul 
land into freehold was not granted by the Government of Uttar Pradesh. 
(b)      The Cabinet in its meeting held on 6.10.2005 approved the recommendations of 
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterpris es (BRPSE) for additional allocation of 
Rs. 47.35 crore towards conversion charges for converting BIC lands from leasehold to 
freehold by Government of UP and also approved the leasing of the mills to private partners 
subject to specific conditions. Expres sion of Interest was invited for leasing of two mills of 
BIC to private partners. However, no response was received thereto. The BIFR sanctioned 
scheme of 2002 was declared as a failure in 2005. 
(c)      In 2006, BIFR directed IDBI, the Operating Agency, to formulate a new revival scheme 
which was approved by BIFR on 14.02.2008. The said scheme was submitted to the 
Cabinet. The Cabinet directed that the revival proposal of BIC needs to be placed before 
BRPSE in the first instance. The BIFR approved scheme o f 2008 was modified and updated 
by the BRPSE and the same was placed before the Cabinet. 
(d)      The Cabinet gave “in principle” approval to the revival plan of BIC on 09.06.2011 at a 
total cost of `338.04 crore through infusion of funds to be provided by  the Govt. of India. The 
Cabinet, inter -alia, approved an interest free bridge loan of Rs.128.60 crore to BIC, to be 
repaid from the cash receipts of sale of surplus land of BIC, and an interest free loan of Rs. 
47.35 crore towards conversion charges of le asehold property to freehold. The Cabinet also 
approved conversion of interest bearing loan of Rs. 69.80 crore and the interest free loan of 
Rs. 37.00 crore into grant and also granted waiver of Rs. 2.13 crore of guarantee 
commission against the loans from  SBI. The above ‘in-principle’ approval was subject to the 

33 
 
condition that permission is first obtained for sale of the surplus land from the Government of 
Uttar Pradesh. 
(e)      The matter regarding grant of permission to BIC Ltd. for conversion of surplus 
leasehold/nazul land to freehold has since been under correspondence with the Govt. of 
UP, Rs. 3,13,63,300 deposited in July 2008 for 7 properties and Rs. 7,73,89,507 deposited 
by BIC in March 2012 for 8 unsold properties towards conversion charges  with U.P 
Government is yet to be refunded. 
(f)      To fund BIFR approved revival scheme, BIC has carried out land sale transaction in 
respect of its 27 surplus properties from January 2003 to October 2008 in five phases 
through Asset Sale Committee (ASC) . Due to complaints of irregularities pertaining to those 
land sales, reference of Government of Uttar Pradesh in this regard, an internal enquiry was 
conducted by the Ministry through Textiles Commissioner, Mumbai and based on the 
findings of the enquiry; the matter was referred to CBI for detailed investigation in 2016. The 
matter is under investigation of CBI. Meanwhile, it has been decided to cancel the 
agreement to sale executed in regard to 19 properties of BIC in which 25% advance money 
were taken after obtaining opinion of Department of Legal Affairs. Considering this, provision 
for returning advance received from parties along with simple interest and conversion fees 
taken from the purchasers for conversion charges deposited with U.P. Govt. has been  
sought under immediate fund requirement. 
(g)  BIC mills have stopped significant production since 2009 resulting in  infructuous 
expenditure of Rs. 2.25 crore per month on idle salaries/wages to 695 employees.   The 
company has not been able to pay salary/w ages to its employees since August, 2018.   To 
comply with the orders of Hon’ble Supreme Court and High Courts, Government of India has 
given Rs. 55 crores in 2014-15, Rs. 12 crores in 2017-18 and Rs.17 crores in 2020 to BIC to 
meet out dues of employees. In BE- 2023-24 Rs. 102.57 crores as budgetary support to BIC 
by the Ministry for clearing pending wages, retiral dues and statutory dues of workers and 
employees of BIC up to March, 2022. 
4.11While specifying the reasons that led the Ministry to declare the  BIC Mills unviable and 
recommend closure, the Ministry has submitted as under: 

34 
 
“NITI Aayog’s Committee on sick/loss -making/non-performing Central Public Sector 
Undertakings in its letter dated 12.04.2017 had recommended the closure of British India 
Corporation.   
In view of Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) guidelines contained in their O.M. dated 
13.12.2021 for implementation of New Public Sector Enterprises (PSE) policy for CPSEs in 
Non-Strategic Sector. In the said guidelines, it has been mentioned  that CPSEs in the 
Strategic Sector/ Non - Strategic Sector are to be taken up for privatization, merger, 
subsidiarisation with another CPSE or for closure. Accordingly, DPE constituted a 
Committee of Group of Officers (CGO) under the Chairmanship of CEO, N ITI Aayog for 
identification of CPSEs falling under non-strategic sector on privatization or closure. Detailed 
DPE guidelines contained issued on 13.12.2021 for implementation of New Public Sector 
Enterprises (PSE) policy for CPSEs in Non-Strategic Sector is at Annexure-VIII. 
  
Committee of Group of Officers (CGO), constituted by the DPE,  in its meeting held on 
27.01.2022 recommended for closure of BIC and its subsidiary. 
  
Accordingly, action plan for way forward on BIC, in the light of their continued poor economic 
viability, prepared by the Ministry is in advance stage in consultation with NITI Aayog and 
Department of Public Enterprises under Ministry of Finance.” 
 
4.12 Further, on the issue of non -payment of salaries to employees of various 
textile PS Us/Units and steps being taken to address the issue, the Ministry 
has submitted  the following : 
 
“Production activity in NTC working mills was suspended due to COVID -19 pandemic and 
nationwide lockdown imposed by the various State Governments from March, 2020. After 
lifting of lockdown and as per the availability of raw material, NTC restored operations in 14 
mill units from January 2021 onwards. The second wave of COVID-19 again led to closure of 
all NTC mill operations in April 2021. Due to unavailabilit y of working capital and other 
financial constraints, operation of NTC mills is presently under suspension.  
Due to severe financial constraints  salary and wages  was not paid to its employees for last 
few months. However, the full wages has been paid to al l the workers who are engaged in 

35 
 
essential services upto September, 2023 and 50% wages has been paid to non -essential 
workers upto September, 2023. Further full salaries have been paid to all the staff and 
officers upto August, 2023 and 50% salaries have b een paid to all the staff and officers for 
the month of September 2023.  The salaries and wages for the month of October 2023 are 
due for payment and management is making all the efforts to mobilize the funds to pay the 
salaries and wages to all the employees. 
Ministry is trying to generate funds from all sources including Grants in aid from the 
Government, sale of the Transferrable Development Rights (TDR) acquired against transfer 
of land to Maharashtra Government, and realizing the dues in order to meet the requirement 
of liabilities of NTC including salaries and other dues. 
In the light of continued poor economic viability of NTC mills, action plan for way forward in 
respect of NTC mills is under active consideration in consultation with NITI Aayog & 
Department of Public Enterprises under Ministry of Finance.      
BIC 
The production activities in BIC is NIL / negligible since 2009 and there is no fund generation 
of its own in the Company. The Company is fully dependent upon Budgetary support/ funds 
provided by GoI/Ministry for disbursement of salaries to its employees. The pending salary & 
retiral dues of the employees of the company up to March 2022 have been released from the 
funds Rs.102.57 crore as a budgetary support (in BE 2023 -24), provided by Ministry/Govt. of 
India.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
Chapter-V 
Revival Efforts for sick units in the Textile Industry 
I. Revival Efforts: 
5.1 The Committee sought to know about the measures that have been taken to provide 
assistance/incentives to the sick units for their  revival, the Ministry of Textiles has stated as 
under: 
 
“There is no specific scheme for the revival of the closed textile mills across the country. 
However, to this objective, the Government is continuously working to create a conductive 
policy environme nt and to facilitate creation of enabling conditions for the industry and 
private entrepreneurs to set -up manufacturing units. For the purpose of assisting 
entrepreneurs to set -up textile units, the Government is implementing various 
programmes/schemes inc luding the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme, Pradhan 
Mantri Mega Integrated Textile Region & Apparel Parks (PM -MITRA) Scheme, Integrated 
Processing Development Scheme (IPDS) and Textile Cluster Development Scheme 
(TCDS).” 
5.2  Apprising the Committee about the details of  the steps taken by the Ministry for revival 
of Sick Textiles Units / PSUs (BIC, NTC, CTL etc.),the Ministry of Textiles in their written 
information submitted as under: 
(i)    NTC :As regards NTC, on account of technical obsolescen ce; excess manpower; poor 
productivity, and erosion of net worth 1990s, NTC necessitating reference to Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) under the Sick Industrial Companies (Special 
Provisions) Act in the year 1993 -94.  The original Sanctioned Scheme (SS -02) of 2002 -03 
was to be implemented with total cost of Rs. 3937 crore having a component of Rs. 736 
crore allocated towards modernization of 53 mills. This scheme was modified twice – first in 
the year 2006 (MS-06) at a revised total cost of Rs. 5267 crore which included a component 
of Rs. 530 crore towards modernization of 22 mills and for the second time in the year 2008 
(MS-08) at a revised total cost of Rs. 9102 crore with component of Rs. 1155 crore towards 
modernization of 22 mi lls with extended capacity including setting up of 4 new mills. This 
scheme was extended up to 31.03.2012 by BIFR.  Based on, BIFR approved revival scheme 

37 
 
of NTC (MS -08), NTC has closed 78 mills under Industrial Dispute (ID) Act, 1947, on 
account of being u nviable; modernised its 23 mills on its own; and revived 5 mills through 
Joint Venture (JV) arrangements.   
(ii) BIC :As regards BIC, the cabinet approved a revival scheme on 21.11.2000 at a cost of 
Rs. 211 crore. The cost of the scheme was to be met by sa le of surplus land assets. BIFR 
sanctioned the draft rehabilitation scheme of BIC on 18.12.2002, which was to be 
implemented within a period of two years. However, sale of the properties of BIC could not 
materialize as permission for conversion of leasehol d / nazul land into freehold was not 
granted by the Government of Uttar Pradesh. 
(a)      The Cabinet gave “in principle” approval to the revival plan of BIC on 09.06.2011 
at a total cost of `338.04 crore through infusion of funds to be provided by the Gov t. of 
India. The Cabinet, inter -alia, approved an interest free bridge loan of Rs.128.60 crore 
to BIC, to be repaid from the cash receipts of sale of surplus land of BIC, and an 
interest free loan of Rs. 47.35 crore towards conversion charges of leasehold property 
to freehold. The Cabinet also approved conversion of interest bearing loan of Rs. 69.80 
crore and the interest free loan of Rs. 37.00 crore into grant and also granted waiver of 
Rs. 2.13 crore of guarantee commission against the loans from SBI. Th e above ‘in -
principle’ approval was subject to the condition that permission is first obtained for sale 
of the surplus land from the Government of Uttar Pradesh. 
(b)      The matter regarding grant of permission to BIC Ltd. for conversion of surplus 
leasehold/nazul land to freehold has since been under correspondence with the Govt. 
of UP, Rs. 3,13,63,300 deposited in July 2008 for 7 properties and Rs. 7,73,89,507 
deposited by BIC in March 2012 for 8 unsold properties towards conversion charges 
with U.P Government. 
(iii)      As regards Cawnpore Textiles Ltd. (CTL) , 50.82% shares are held by BIC, 7.03% 
shares held by Banks, 42.15% shares held by other small shareholders. This entity was 
declared sick by BIFR in 1992 and recommended for winding up. Hon'ble All ahabad High 
Court confirmed the winding up on 29.09.1999 and appointed OL, which was challenged 
through a Special Appeal by Workers Union. The winding up order was stayed up to 
18.8.2000. Finally, the Hon’ble Court ordered to OL on 21.10.2011 to take the c harge of the 

38 
 
company.  OL has taken the possession of assets on 25.04.2012. Movable assets disposed 
off by OL.   As per opinion of Department of Legal Affairs, after getting the draft application 
vetted by Ld. ASG, Allahabad, Ministry has filed recall appli cation u/s 466 of Companies Act, 
2013 before Hon’ble Company Court, Allahabad for taking back assets of Cawnpore Textile 
Limited.  OL has invited claims.   Total 10 claims of Rs. 7.90 crore has been received. The 
matter is sub-judice.   
5.3 Providing the details of Revival Scheme recommended by BIFR and its impact on the 
Textile PSUs, the Ministry has submitted as under: 
“(i) National Textile Corporation Ltd. (NTC) was established primarily to manage the affairs 
of the sick textile undertakings taken over by the Govt. of India under three Nationalization 
Acts in the years 1974; 1986; and 1995. On account of obsolete technology; excess 
manpower; poor productivity, etc. 8 of its 9 subsidiaries were referred to BIFR in the year 
1992-93. The BIFR approved Reviv al Schemes for all the 9 subsidiaries – 8 of them in the 
year 2002-03 and 9 th in the year 2005. The Company has been implementing the Revival 
Scheme since then. The original Sanctioned Scheme (SS -02) of 2002 -03 was to be 
implemented at a total cost of Rs. 3,937 crore with a component of Rs.736 crore  allocated 
towards modernization of 53 mills. This scheme was modified twice – first in the year 2006 
(MS-06) at a revis ed total cost of Rs.5,267 crore  which inclu ded a component of Rs.530 
crore for modernization of 22 mills and for the second time in the year 2008 (MS -08) at a 
revised total cost of Rs.9,102 crore with component of Rs.1,155 crore towards modernization 
of 22 mills with extended capacity including setting up of 4 new mills. This scheme was 
extended up to 31.03.2012 by BIFR. A main feature of revival schemes of NTC approved by 
BIFR is enclosed as Annexure-IX. 
(ii) Impact of Revival scheme is enclosed in Annexure-X. 
5.4 On being asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure efficient financial 
management in Textile undertakings, the Ministry has stated: 
“The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE), Ministry of Finance has been assigned the 
objective of formulating policies, fostering transparency, and promoting responsible 
governance to enhance t he competitiveness and social impact of public sector enterprises.  
The Ministry of Textiles takes steps to ensure that the PSUs in the textile sector follow the 

39 
 
general guidelines issued by DPE from time to time in this regard.  In order the address the 
specific issues of textile sector, the Ministry of Textile s continues to play a regulatory role by 
promulgation of Acts, Rules etc. in the specified area.” 
 
5.5 On further being asked about details of Acts/rules/regulations framed, if any, to ensure 
efficient management of affairs of Textile undertakings and the agencies responsible for its 
implementation, the Ministry has submitted: 
 
“A list of Acts / Rules / Regulations framed by the Ministry of Textiles is provided as 
Annexure-XI.  The implementation of these Acts/Rules/Regulations are undertaken by the 
Ministry with the help of attached and subordinate offices of the Ministry such as the office of 
Development Commissioner, Handlooms, Development Commissioner, Handicrafts, Central 
Silk Board, National Jute Board, Textile Committee, office of Textiles Commissioner etc.” 
 
5.6 When asked about the efforts made by the Ministry to resume operation of the 23 Mills of 
NTC suspended due to COVID Lockdown since March 2020, the Ministry has submitted as 
under: 
 
“Due to Covid -19 pandemic and nationwide lockdown imposed by the various State 
Governments, the production activities in all National Textile Corporation (NTC) Limited mill 
units were put on hold since 25.03.2020.  After lifting up of the lockdown and as per 
availability of raw material, NTC restored operation of 14 mill units from January 2021 
onwards. The second wave of Covid -19 pandemic again led to closure of all NTC mill 
operations in April, 2021. Due to unavailability of working capital and other financia l 
constraints, operation of NTC mills is presently under suspension. 
 
In view of Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) guidelines contained in their O.M. dated 
13.12.2021 for implementation of New Public Sector Enterprises (PSE) policy for CPSEs in 
Non-Strategic Sector, DPE constituted a Committee of Group of Officers (CGO) under the 
Chairmanship of CEO, NITI Aayog for identification of CPSEs falling under non -strategic 
sector on privatization or closure.   
 

40 
 
In regard to NTC, the CGO in its meeting dated 2 7.01.2022 recommended that a sub -
committee comprising of Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises, Secretary, Ministry of 
Textiles and Sh. Ajit Pai, distinguished Expert, NITI Aayog shall first analyse the feasibility of 
disinvestment of 12 mills recommended by Ministry of Textiles, taking into consideration their 
location, availability of land and other assets and submit a report to CGO.  Based on the 
report of the said Sub -Committee, the CGO will take a view on the closure or disinvestment 
of 12 mills of NTC Ltd. 
 
The Sub-Committee made the following recommendation – 
“NBCC has done evaluation of all assets of NTC recently.  The Committee while examining 
the feasibility of disinvestment used, market value of land as derived by NBCC for examining 
economic viability of the enterprise post disinvestment. It was felt that even with a double -
digit operating margin on five year peak revenue performance in past, the so called viable 
mills will not be able to return even cost of capital. In this situation, these mills may not find 
any buyer at reserve price. It was also felt that efforts to revive other mills in Joint Venture 
(JV) format by the Ministry have also failed in past.In light of above, the Committee opined 
that there is no advantage in trying for disinv estment of 12 mills once again. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that, it is prudent to close of all the 23 NTC mi1ls.” 
 
The Committee of Group of Officers (CGO) in its meeting dated 4.4.2022 considered the 
report of the Sub -Committee and recommended that after detailed deliberations and based 
on inputs received from Ministry of Textiles, CGO accepted the recommendations of the 
Sub-Committee regarding closure of NTC Ltd. along-with its 23 mills.  
 
Accordingly, action plan for way forward on NTC mills, in the light of their continued poor 
economic viability, prepared by the Ministry is in advance stage in consultation with NITI 
Aayog and Department of Public Enterprises under Ministry of Finance.”  
5.7 As regards to the steps contemplated by the Ministry of Textiles to protect the interest of 
laborers working in these sick units, the Ministry provided as under: 
“The Government has introduced Textile Workers Rehabilitation Funds Scheme (TWRFS) 
w.e.f. 15.09.1986 to provide relief to the workers rendered jobless due to permanent closure 
of Non -SSI textile Mills in private sector. With effect from 01.04.2017, TWRFS has been 

41 
 
merged with Rajiv Gandhi ShramikKalyanYojana (RGSKY) under M/o Labour and 
Employment. The workers rendered jobless can avail benefits under the said scheme.” 
III. Other issues: 
5.8 To a specific query about the reasons for delay of almost 11 years in resolving the matter 
regarding grant of permission to BIC Ltd. for conversion of surplus leasehold/nazul land to 
freehold with the Govt. of UP, Ministry in their written reply submitted as under: 
“This brief outlines a series of actions and discussions regarding the conversion of 
leasehold land to freehold land concerning BIC (Bharat Industrial Corporation) and the Uttar 
Pradesh (UP) Government: 
(i) Background Committee Formation (2015): 
Ministry and BIC raised the issue with the State Govt. regarding the conversion of BIC's 
leasehold land to freehold land. A committee, chaired by the Commissioner of Kanpur, was 
formed in 2015 comprising officials nom inated by the Chief Secretary of Urban Planning 
Housing Department UP Govt., DM Kanpur, and Chairman of Kanpur Development 
Authority. The committee submitted a report on 02.02.2015, but a resolution was not 
reached at that time. 
(ii) Continued Efforts with the State Government: 
Following persistent efforts, a joint meeting chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary of the 
Department of Infrastructure and Industrial Development, UP Govt., took place on 
04.11.2022. DM Kanpur and Commissioner Kanpur were directed in  this meeting to handle 
proceedings under the Housing & Urban Planning Department UP Govt. while designated 
officials from the Ministry of Textiles and ADM Finance Kanpur were tasked with reconciling 
documents. The decision on the matter was deferred until the report's receipt by the Housing 
& Urban Planning Department UP Govt. 
(iii) Monitoring and Joint Group Formation: 
The issue of land conversion by BIC was monitored on the e -Samiksha Portal by the 
Secretary (Coordination) to address coordination issues. Subse quently, a joint group of 
officers, led by the ACS Infrastructure and Industrial Development of the UP Government, 

42 
 
was formed on 31.05.2021 to address lease and land -related issues between BIC and the 
UP Govt. During the meeting held on 10.06.2021, discuss ions took place, highlighting the 
introduction of new legislation by the UP Government for managing Government land, which 
was pending for Presidential assent. 
(iv) Ongoing Efforts and Correspondence: 
Requests were made to convene further meetings of the Joint Group of Officers by the 
Ministry and the UP Govt., emphasizing the need for resolution. Meetings and 
discussions, including one on 4.11.2022, continued to address the pending issues. 
Uttar Pradesh Government Property Bill 2020 was under discussion a t the State level, 
aiming to resolve land-related issues. 
(v) Recent Developments and Actions: 
Requests were made to convene further meetings of the Joint Group of Officers by the 
Ministry and the UP Govt., emphasizing the need for resolution. Meetings and  discussions, 
including one on 4.11.2022, continued to address the pending issues. Uttar Pradesh 
Government Property Bill 2020 was under discussion at the State level, aiming to resolve 
land-related issues. As per the deliberations of the 4.11.2022 meeting , Under 
secretary(PSU), MoT convened a meeting with Addl District Magistrate Finance & Revenue 
at Kanpur. Meanwhile, DM  Kanpur ordered for cancellation of lease of 7 BIC properties in 
which BIC had deposited conversion amount with District Administration in year 2008, the 
matter has been taken up with the Uttar Pradesh Government.” 
 Regarding the revival efforts  of Champaran Sugar Company Ltd. (CSCL), Ministry of 
Textiles submitted as follows:- 
a) Champaran Sugar Company Ltd. (CSCL), an associate company of BIC (41.83% 
shareholding) with head office in Kanpur having two units: 
 
Barachakia Unit - East Champaran, Bihar, Land assets - 1008.20 acres. 
Chanpatia Unit - West Champaran, Bihar, Land assets -174.24 acres. 
 
b) That since Champaran Sugar Company Limited was  running in huge losses and became 
sick, Champaran Sugar Company Limited made an application to the Board of Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction under the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 
1985, for rehabilitation, which was rejected by Board of Industrial and Financial 

43 
 
Reconstruction on 28 -06-1993, with the observation that  there was no possibility of 
rehabilitation of the company - Champaran  Sugar Company Limited and the company - 
Champaran Sugar Company Limited must be ordered to be wound up. 
 
c) That, consequently, the recommendation made by the Board of Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction was accepted by the Hon'ble Court and the Hon'ble Court on 05 -09-1994 
ordered CSCL to be wound up. Consequently, the Official Liquidator was dir ected to take 
charge of the assets of the Company - Champaran Sugar Company Limited. 
 
d) That, thereafter, this Hon'ble Court by its order dated 04 -01-2000 directed the Official 
Liquidator to take appropriate steps for sale of the properties of the company (in liquidation). 
A. BARACHAKIA UNIT, EASTCHAMPARAN (CSCL) 
i. On 01.09.2000, barachakia Unit was put up for sale by the Official Liquidator ad an 
advertisement was issued apropos the same. 
ii. The highest bidder (V.K. Gupta) bid for Rs. 5 crore was accepted by the Court. 
iii. V.K. Gupta failed to deposit sale amount, and the Company Judge vide order 
dated 12.02.2007 ordered revaluation and directed to re-advertise. 
iv. V.K. Gupta filed a Special appeal against the order of company Judge for the re -
advertisement and inviting fresh offers. The appeal was allowed vide Order dated 
21.05.2007. 
v. Vide Order dated 08.08.2008, the Hon’ble Supreme Court directed highest bidder 
(VK Gupta) to deposit an additional amount of Rs. 3 crores. The same was also 
confirmed by the Order of the Hon ’ble High Court vide order dated 16.11.2008. 
(Total Sale consideration is Rs. 8,10,40,000/-) 
vi. On 15.02.2010, the possession of the said Unit was handed over to the Auction 
Purchaser and the sale deed was executed between the OL and the Auction 
Purchaser. 
vii. On 18.12.2013, V.K. Gupta filed a Civil writ in 2013 before High Court of 
Judicature at Patna for a direction to the State to register the sale certificates and 
it was highlighted that post the execution of sale deed  when sale certificates were 
produced bef ore the Registering authority of district of East Champaran for 
registration, the registering authority on various pretexts, refused to register and 
also doubted the valuation and the court vide order dated 18.12.2013 directed the 
Collector to take appropr iate decisions within fifteen days from the date of 
production of copy of this order before him and stated that the responsibility for 
timely compliance would be on the District Collector, East Champaran. 
viii. The sale deed executed between the Auction Purchase r and the OL with respect 
to this Unit states that- 
 
“And whereas the company in liquidation was the absolute owner of the 
immovable properties situated at Chakia and adjacent villages of chakia, East 
Champaran, Bihar having total area 1008.20 acre. Out of  this immovable 

44 
 
property situated at Chakia, thana no. 136, having total area 105.46, the sale 
certificate is now executed for the area of 16.60 acres as requested by the 
Vendee for the sake of convenience” 
 
ix. Vide email dated 23.02.2022 OL was requested to provide the information with 
respect to the sale deed executed by Vishnu Kant Gupta and if not then what is 
the status of the remaining land area. OL vide letter dated 09.03.2022 responded 
with undermentioned information – 
 
“The total immovable properties (land) of Bara -Chakia Unit which contained 
1008.20 acres in various villages put on sale and were sold out under the 
directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and Hon’ble High Court 
Judicature at Allahabad. The 105.46 acre land out of total land (1008.2 0 acres) 
is situated at Thana No. 136 Village Chakia and the sale certificate was issued 
by the office of official liquidator for 12.41 acres of Khata No 17, Khasra No. 
1219(P), Thana No. 136, Village-Chakia on 15.02.2010 is available in the office 
of the Official Liquidator . With regards to other sale certificates/sale deeds for 
remaining area it is stated that the necessary letter has been sent to the 
concerned Sub - Registrar for furnishing the copies of other sale 
certificates/sale deeds provided by the  concerned authorities the same will be 
intimated accordingly.” 
x. In regard to Barachakia Unit, vide letter dated 08.03.2022  , Collector and DM, 
East Champaran was requested to provide status of Assets of Champaran Sugar 
Company at Bara Chakia along with th e details of any Court case pending in 
respect of those Assets. 
xi. In response, DM, East Champaran, Motihari vide letter dated 20.04.2022    
informed that the Circle officer, Chakia in his report has stated that this Sugar Mills 
is non-operational since years  and the land is under ceiling proceedings. Further, 
as per provisions of Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition 
of Surplus Land) Act 1961, in -short, called the Ceiling Act of 1951, the Ceiling 
proceeding was initiated against the lan d-holder i.e. the company namely M/S 
Champaran Sugar Mills Limited, situated at Barachakia. The gazette publication 
under section 15 was also done in the ceiling proceeding. The details of lands of 
M/S Champaran Sugar Company Ltd. is available in the gazet te under section 15 
of Ceiling Act of 1961. The Hon'ble High Court, Patna, in the LPA No -1525/2012, 
in its order dated 9.01.2018 held that order passed by the ceiling authorities in 
ceiling case no. TR-115/1982-83, in the year 1986 in the proceeding under section 
10 of the ceiling Act stood abated by virtue of provisions of section 32A of the 
Ceiling Act of 1961 and therefore quashed all the orders and liberty was made 
available to the state of Bihar to resort to provisions of section 10 in the light of 
liberty available under section 328 of amended provision. Accordingly fresh 
proceeding under section 10 of the ceiling Act was initiated in the year 2018 in 

45 
 
land ceiling case no. 01/2018 against the Land -holder i.e Mr. Vishnu Kant Gupta, 
the Auction Purchaser of M/s Champaran Sugar Company Ltd.  
xii. That as per Official Liquidator letter dated 23.02.2021 for Barachakia Unit of 
CSCL, the matter for release of payment to workmen placed before Hon’ble Court 
and secured creditors have already been paid the interim dividend. 
xiii. Recently, vide e -mail dated 29.11.2023, Shri. J. Nagar (Senior Advocate) has 
been requested to arrange to provide the Sale Certificates, if any, issued by 
Official Liquidator in the matter of Liquidation of Barachakia Sugar Mill and 
Chanpatia Sug ar Mill [Units of Champaran Sugar Company Limited (CSCL), an 
associate company of British India Corporation] and forthwith provide the same to 
this Ministry. 
 
B. CHANPATIA UNIT, WEST CHAMPARAN (CSCL) 
 
i. On 04.01.2000, The Hon’ble Court directed OL to initiate auction proceeding for sale 
of unit properties.  
ii. On 01.09.2000, Official Liquidator invited bids for sale for Chanpatia Unit of CSCL 
with condition of submitting proposal with earnest money of Rs 50 lakh, no offer was 
received for this unit. Official Liquidator re-advertised. 
iii. By order dated 23.5.2001, the Hon’ble Company Judge accepted the highest offer of 
Vishnu Kant Gupta for Rs. 2.01 Crore for the Chanpatia Unit received in response to 
the 2nd adve rtisement and three months’ time was granted to pay the bid money. 
Draft of Rs. 10 lakh submitted by Vishnu Kant Gupta as security for participating in the 
auction process was directed to be encashed. 
iv. On 19.09.2001, Vishnu Kant Gupta moved application seek ing one month’s time to 
make the deposits on the ground that he being a chronic cardiac patient and all his 
bank accounts having been ceased by Income Tax Authorities. By the impugned 
order the learned company Judge, declining to grant time forfeited the security deposit 
of Rs. 10 lakhs and directed the Official liquidator to submit report for re-tender. 
v. That by the order dated 22.11.2002 Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad passed the order 
in favour of the Auction P urchaser directing the Auction P urchaser to r un the 
factory under the supervision of the Official Liquidator and the Official 
liquidator shall hand over possession after completing the inv entory (report) to 
the Auction P urchaser. The Official Liquidator, however, shall remain in symbolic 
possession and the Auction Purchaser shall run the factory in question. The Official 
Liquidator shall be at liberty to supervise the factory, in question, at any time and it will 
not be open to the appellant to sell or dispose of or encumber or alienate the Plants, 
Machinery or movable properties or any portion of the factory fixed to earth and other 
belonging to the factory which forms part of the factory . It was made clear that the 

46 
 
Auction Purchaser shall send Bank Draft for a sum of Rs 25 lakhs and instead of post-
dated cheque of Rs 1.76 crore (dated 22.01.2002) which has been produced in Court   
by the learned   Advocate for the Auction P urchaser on 22.11.2002, he shall send 
cheque for the balance amount within two weeks from 22.11.2002. The Official 
Liquidator upon receipt of the cheque and Bank Draft, as per aforesaid direction was 
directed to immediately hand over physical possession of the factory in question to 
the Auction Purchaser. 
vi. In compliance of the order dated 22.11.2002 passed by Hon’ble Division Bench of t he 
High Court Judicature at Allahabad, on 10.12.2002, Vishnu Kant Gupta deposited Rs 
25 lakhs and also submitted cheque of Rs. 1.76 crore for balance bid amount but did 
not furnish security i.e. bank guarantee or immovable property for the balance amount 
of Rs 1.76 crore however, the A uction Purchaser was handed over the physical 
possession of the factory by OL. Further by order dated 07.03.2003 further time till 
25.03.2003 was allowed to Vishnu Kant Gupta ( Auction Purchaser) for payment. On 
31.03.2003 a we ek’s more time (i.e. 07.04.2003) was granted to him, to make 
payment. 
vii. On 24.05.2006 Vishnu Kant Gupta made payment of Rs. 1,26,00,000/ - to the Official 
Liquidator and on 09.06.2006 he paid rest of the balance i.e. Rs. 50,00,000/ -  to the 
OL making the payment of entire bid money of Rs. 2.01 crores complete. 
viii. On 02.07.2007, Vishnu Kant Gupta filed an application for confirming sale in its favour 
in view of the payment of entire bid money of Rs 2.01 crores and further offered Rs. 
21,88,944/- towards balance of interest amount after adjusting the expenses incurred 
on protection and upkeep of the factory and loss of interest on the money paid by him. 
ix. OL issued a letter dated 23.02.2021 addressed to the Secretary, Ministry of Textile s, 
Govt. of India, stating therein that the possession of Chanpatia Unit of CSCL was 
handed over to the Auction Purchaser for running the factory  as per the order of 
the Hon’ble Division bench dated 22.11.2002. However, he has failed to run the 
factory. The sale was not confirmed in his favour as the payment was not made 
on time. Accordingly, a report has been filed before Hon’ble Division Bench 
apropos the order dated 22.11.2002 and allow official liquidator to revalue the 
property for putting it on sale. 
x. Ministry of Textiles issued a letter dated 09.03.2022  addressed to the District 
Magistrate, West Champaran seeking the status of the assets of the Chanpatia Unit of 
CSCL. In response to the said letter, District Magistrate, West Champaran vide letter   
dated 30.05.2022 informed the Ministry of Textiles that due to unavailability of security 
of the property, the property is being illegally encroached by some local people 
causing damage to the property. Further, he has also informed that the Auction 
Purchaser, Shri Vishnu Kant Gupta was communicated to reply and provide all the 
relevant document to prove his ownership of the mill and its assets and till now no 
reply has been received from him. 
xi. The Auction -Purchaser failed to implement the main objective of the a uction, which 
was to run the factory and retain the employment its employees. 

47 
 
xii. Ministry vide letter dated 13.07.2022 requested OL for providing the complete details 
of Secured and unsecured Creditors of the CSCL (in Liquidation) along with the 
amount payable to them.  In response, OL vide letter dated 20.07.2022 has informed 
Ministry that the Claim Committee had submitted its adjudication report dated 
08.12.2017 to the official Liquidator. Also, as per order dated 17.03.2011, the interim 
dividend amount Rs. 4,00,00,000/- (Rs. Four Crore) paid to three secured creditors. 
 
C.  FILING OF SEC 466 (COMPANIES ACT) RECALL APPLICATION IN CONSONANCE WITH 
THE LEGAL OPINION RECEIVED FROM DoLA & THE LEARNED ASG 
i. Ministry sought legal opinion of Ld. ASG, Allahabad High Court and the Ld. ASG, 
Allahabad High Court vide letter dated 07.09.2022 has opined that that an application 
under Section 466 of the Companies Act, 1956 be filed for recall of winding up order 
dated 05.09.1994 (more specifically the Order dated 22.11.2002 accepting the bid of 
Shree. Vishnu Kant Gupta) passed by the Hon’ble Company Judge in Company 
Application No. 02 of 1993, and further seeking direction for the OL to provide 
complete details of work men and secured & un -secured creditors of the company 
CSCL along with the amount as may legally payable to them, so as the UoI pay all the 
dues to the OL including the expenses incurred by his office in computing the same. 
ii. Ministry vide Note dated 30.09.20 22 requested DoLA for their opinion   with regard to 
the present matter of CSCL before Hon'ble Allahabad High Court for getting the 
existing order vacated and to get control/possession of CSCL (under liquidation) 
Chanpatia Unit located in West Champaran Bihar from the OL and the said Auction 
Purchaser. DoLA has opined  that, 
“Advice/Recommendations : 
We have examined the matter. On perusal of reference note/correspondence 
file, it reveals that the case of the Administrative Ministry are that they want to 
file an application before Company Court, Allahabad for recalling order dated 
22.11.2002 as Hon'ble Court order has not been complied by the Auction -
Purchaser & OL. BIC/ MoT being the largest contributor/ stakeholder should 
stake its claim over the land asset s/properties of Chanpatia Unit of CSCL. 
Further, the main objective of the auction, which was to run the factory and 
retain the employm ent its employees in which the A uction-Purchaser has 
clearly failed to do so, and, the valuable assets are still lying in  the possession 
of the Auction Purchaser, who has not only misrepresented his intention to run 
the factory but has cheated the very idea on which the Hon'ble Court allowed 
him to run the factory. 
ln light of the above, we incline to agree with the views ex pressed by the Ld. 
ASG (as mentioned at Para 13 above) as well as with proposal of the 
Administrative Ministry. However, it may be ensured that the interests of the 

48 
 
Government are to be protected on all available grounds. The same may be 
filed in accordance with the established procedures.” 
iii. Ministry has filed an application on 17.05.2023 under Section 466 of Companies 
Act, 1956 before Company Court, Allahabad for recalling order dated 22.11.2002  
as Hon’ble Court order has not been complied by the Auction - Purchaser & OL.  
MoT being the largest contributor/ stakeholder has made claim over the land 
assets/ properties of Chanpatia Unit of CSCL. 
iv. The Hon’ble Court vide order dated 24.05.2023 has admitted the application filed by the 
Ministry and the matter is bei ng adjudicated by Hon’ble Court . The matter is next listed 
for hearing on 02.02.2024. 
D. PRESENT SCENERIO AND THE WAY FORWARD 
i. A D.O. letter was sent by this Ministry to the Chief Secretary, Government of Bihar 
requesting thereby to provide proper security for the assets and removal of any 
encroachment / misuse of the assets of the Chanpatia unit of CSCL and keep it free 
from any further encroachment/encumbrance. 
ii. The future course of action and progression plan thereto would be determined in 
accordance with the outcome of the legal proceeding(s) and in consonance with the 
directions of the CCEA on the Cabinet Note for In-principle closure of BIC. 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

49 
 
Observations/Recommendations 
I PM MITRA PARKS SCHEME 
1. Need to frame a comprehensive National Textile Policy . 
Indian Textile Industry is facing major problems like technological obsolesce, 
high input cost (power and capital), poor access to credit , fragmented units , absence 
of fiber neutrality, unskilled laboure rs and low investment etc. In order to overcome 
these hurdles, Govt. of India has launched several schemes to support Textile & 
Apparel Sector viz. Knitting and Knitwear Sector scheme, Amended Technology  up -
gradation Fund Scheme (ATUFs), National Handloom  Development programme, 
Integrated Textile Parks Scheme (SITP), PLI Scheme etc. Government has launched 
the ambitious PM Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel ( PM MITRA ) Parks 
Scheme with a strong emphasis on making the Indian textile industry globall y 
competitive by reducing input cost,  increasing  economy of scale, higher productivity 
and Free Trade Agreements (FTA).  Inspired by the 5F vision (Farm to Fiber to Factory 
to Fashion  to Foreign) of the Hon’ble Prime Minister, the PM MITRA Parks are a wa y 
forward in making India a  global hub for Textile manufacturing and exports. These 
Parks are aimed to achieve higher size and scale alongwith creation of modern and 
integrated value chain with world class infrastructure  and plug and  play facilities to 
attract large investment and to boost  employment generation.  The Committee are 
aware that several States have different  textile policies and Schemes to address the 
challenges faced by  Textile Industry   and to  further boost  its growth. The 
Committee are of the view that the successful implementation of PM MITRA  PARK 
Scheme to a large extent  depend on aligning the industry oriented and pro -active 
State Textile Policies/schemes with National Textile Policy.   Therefore, the Committee 
urge the Ministry  to frame a comprehensive National Textile Policy , with a view to 
make Indian textile Industry globally competitive by incorporating  the best 
international practices and industry oriented pro -active aspects of State Textile 
Policies/Schemes. 
 

50 
 
2. Need for review of selection procedure 
PM MITRA Parks are being set up at textile oriented and  strategic locations 
within the country which has the existing favourable environment and ecosystem 
required for its successful implementation. The Ministry , in one of it s written 
submissions, stated that eligible States and sites were evaluated using a transparent 
challenge method based on objective criteria, taking into account a variety of factors 
such as connectivity, existing eco-system, textile industry policy, infrastructure, utility  
services etc. PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan for multi model connectivity was 
also used for validation.  State Govts. were expected to submit Preliminary Project 
Report (PPR) with minimum 1000  acres unencumbered  and contiguous la nd  parcel 
and to confirm permission for industrial and commercial land use for 10% of the area 
and support for environment clearance for the project. The Committee note that out of 
the 18 proposals  received from 13 States, only 7 proposals  received from  States viz. 
Tamil Nadu, Telegana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and 
Maharashtra have been selected by the  Project  Approval Committee (PAC).  The 
Committee are of the view that the huge land bank available with the defunct units of 
NTC, BIC  and others should be utilized for setting up PM MITRA Parks to revive the 
textile sector, instead of selling it for a  meager sum.  The Committee strongly  
recommend that the  Ministry should review  the  selection procedure with a view to  
set up more PM MITRA Parks to enable speedy recovery of the Indian Textile Sector.   
Further, more than 1000 acres of land available with Barachakia Unit  and 17 4 acres 
land available with Cha npatia Unit of Champaran Sugar Company Ltd. can be utilized 
for the purpose.  
 
3. Need for expediting formation of SPVs 
 The Committee note that Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) is a joint venture 
between the State and Central Government, registered under Companies Act, 2013 for 
each PM MITRA Park with a paid up capital  of ₹10 Crore. The Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) will be a legal entity with 51% equity shareholding of State Government and 
49% of Central Government, set up by the State Government for the purpose of 

51 
 
implementing the PM MITRA Park Project. SPV will be responsible for   appointment of 
Master Developer (MD) and to engage them through  a Concession Agreement. The 
Master Developer will be responsible for designing, planning, building, financing, 
operating and maintaining the MITRA Parks. SPV will be responsib le for overall 
development, governance and administration of the Parks. The Committee note  that 
SPV  formation is a crucial stage.  However,  out of the 7 proposals approved, only 2 
States viz. Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh have incorporated SPVs so far and o ther States 
are still in the process. The Committee are informed that review meetings with  State 
Government representatives are being held regularly at the level of Secretary, the 
Chairperson of Project Approval Committee. Besides, a dedicated portal has also 
been created by the Ministry of Textiles for monitoring progress of all 7 projects on 
real-time basis. The Committee , while under lining  the importance of formation of 
SPVs at the earliest for establishing the PM MITRA Parks , desire that  the Ministry 
should adopt a more proactive role particularly in finding out the reasons for delay in  
formation of SPVs in   remaining States and also in assisting them for SPV formation 
at the earliest so that the process of establishing the PM MITRA Par ks is put on fast 
track to attract domestic as well as foreign investments. 
 
4. Need to include State representatives and technical experts in PMA. 
 
Ministry of Textiles, in  their  written reply  has submitted that they will 
periodically monitor the progre ss of th e projects under the scheme. A P roject 
Monitoring Agency (PMA) will be appointed for the purpose, which will act as the 
Technical Arm by providing secretarial, managerial and implementation support  to 
the Ministry  for effective  and timely implem entation of the scheme.  The Committee 
are informed that the process of appointment of PMA is underway. Considering the 
mandate of the Project M onitoring Agency, the Committee  desire that the process of 
appointment of  the PMA should be completed without f urther delay and State 
Government,  being the major  stakeholder in the project, should be given due 
representation in the PMA.  Further, the Committee recommend that the possibility  of 
roping in domestic and international textile experts and technocrats   in PMA should 
be explored.   

52 
 
5. Need to make adequate budgetary provision. 
The Committee have been apprised that Government has approved setting up 
of 7 PM MITRA parks on Greenfield/Brownfield sites to develop world class 
infrastructure including plug and play facility with  an outlay of Rs.4,445 crore during 
the period of 7 year s from 2021 -22 to 2027 -28.  Central Government  will provide 
Development Capital Support (DCS) of Rs.300 crore and  Rs.200  crore in Phase -I and 
II respectively for Greenfield sites and Rs.200 crores and Rs.100 crores in phase -I&II 
respectively for Brownfi eld sites. DCS is given for creation of core infrastructure  for 
plug and play facilities viz. developing factory sites, Incubation Centre, roads, power, 
water etc. In addition, there is a provision for Competitive Incentive Support (CIS) of 
Rs. 300 crore for incentivising manufacturing units get established early in PM MITRA 
park. The Committee observe that the budgetary provision for PM MITRA parks  in  BE 
for 2021 -22 was Rs. 0.50 crore , 2022 -23 was Rs. 15 crore and for 2023 -24 is Rs. 200 
crore.  The Commi ttee recommend that there is a need for  more budgetary provision 
adequate enough for  timely release of DCS for creation of core infrastructure in each 
of the 7 approved MITRA Park so that potential investors are attracted for early 
establishment and production.  
 
6. Need for rationalization of tax regime. 
 PM MITRA Parks are being set up as a joint venture of centre and  State 
Governments  to house the entire value chain at one place, aiming to attract domestic 
and foreign investment, generate employment and augment export potential. During 
the course of examination, Ministry of Textile s  stated before the Committee  that  the 
scheme envisages robust State Govt. Support which includes Stamp Duty exemption 
of 50 -100%, concession on land rates, 3 -8% interest subsidy for 5 -7 years, wage 
subsidy of Rs.3000 -6000/workers/month for 5 -7 years, ESI/EPF reimbursement of 50 -
100% for 3 -5 years and SGST reimbursement  of 60% -100% for 7 -10 years. While 
appreciating the State Govt.  initiatives for  subsidizing, financially supporting and 
providing tax/duty exemptions and reimbursements, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to consider extending similar central tax/duty  exemptions including CGST 

53 
 
reimbursements and import duty  rationalizations to curb low cost/undervalued import 
of Chinese knitted fabric.  
7. Need for special incentives for all women manufacturing units  and female 
workers.  
 Traditionally, Textile Industry has been engaging large number of skilled and 
unskilled workers  and artisans. One of the major  objectives of PM MITRA Park 
Scheme is to generate employment opportunities.  The scheme also provides for huge 
budgetary support for setting up of such parks to attract investments. The Committee 
note that the Indian Textile Industry engages significant female workforce, particularly 
in the handloom/powerloom segment s and production units for ready -made 
Garments. The Committee, therefore, desire that in a scheme like PM MITRA, there 
should be provision for special incentives  to  attract women entrepreneurs and  the 
Ministry should make mandatory provision for basic amenities for f emale workers 
such as  restroom , crèche facility, medical care, options for part -time work,  flexible 
working hours to maintain a work -life balance. Further, they should also be provided 
technical and managerial assistance for setting up all women manufacturing 
units/parks.  
 
8.  Need for robust  IT infrastructure and e-commerce system 
 
 The Committee recognize the crucial role of establishing a robust IT 
infrastructure for PM MITRA Parks, encompassing reliable hardware networks, data 
centers, and specialized software solutions. IT infrastructure is pivotal in providing 
technological supp ort for the PM MITRA Scheme and in effectively managing 
commercial losses within the Textile Sector. The Committee acknowledge the 
Ministry's efforts in this direction, particularly in initiating steps to set up IT 
infrastructure for PM MITRA Parks. Notably, the creation of a dedicated portal for real -
time monitoring of all seven projects is underway, with a trial version already in place 
and the final version slated for imminent execution. T he Committee , therefore,  
strongly urge the Ministry to explore th e possibility of establishing end -to-end  IT 
infrastructure for PM MITRA Parks to create an Integrated textile value chain right 

54 
 
from spinning, weaving, processing to a robust e -commerce system for hassle free 
and cost effective  selling of textile products.  
9. Need to earmark land for safety and security establishment. 
 The Committee note tha t availability of minimum 1000 acres  of unencumbered 
and contiguous land pool is one of the basic requirements for submission of 
proposals by State Government for PM MITRA Park. The scheme also envisages for 
detailed land utilization plan viz. 50% area for manufacturing zone for entire value 
chain including  plug and play,  20% area for  common  utilities and infrastructures,  
10% area for subsidized housing, schools, hospitals etc. 10% area for commercial use 
for hotels, exhibition, convention halls, 5% for specialized and value additives such as 
Testing Labs, Training Centre, R&D, Incubation Labs, startups etc. and 5% area for 
logistic zone and multi -model linkages et c.  The Committee observe that there is no 
land earmarked for common safety and security establishment in the land utilisation 
plan.  Therefore, they are of the view that the MITRA parks being spread over a 
contiguous land mass of 1000 acres, with huge  in frastructure  costing crores of 
rupees,  should have  common safety  and security establishment at a  centre place. 
The Committee urge the Ministry to earmark  requisite percentage of land at a central 
place to establish common safety and security establishm ent and also make  a 
provision for the SPV and Master Developer  to utilize a portion of the CDS for 
meeting the expenditure related to establishment of state -of-the-art fire and safety 
installation.  
 
10. Need for vertical integration in Powerloom Sector. 
 The Committee note that presently the work relating to fibre, yarn, processing 
of cloth, printing, garmenting, etc. is spread over various places across the country. 
The Committee have been apprised that lack of integration decreases 
competitiveness and a lso minimizes diversification, which has direct impact on the 
cost of product. As a result,  apparels   produced by Indian Textile Sector are facing 
tough competition in domestic as well as international markets. The Committee are of 
the considered opinion that establishment of PM -MITRA Parks would address the 

55 
 
issue of lack of vertical integration faced by Powerloom Sector. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to take proactive steps to ensure vertical integration of  
Powerloom Sector beyond the  ambit of  PM MITRA Parks to convert the Indian textile  
and apparel industry from fragmented to integrated   and from unorganised to 
organised so that  Indian  apparel sector  may be able to  face the escalating global 
competition from countries like Bangladesh, China and Turkey.  
 
11. Need for Survey in unorganized Powerloom Sector. 
 The Committee note that the major challenges faced in the u norganized 
Powerloom Sector include inter-alia outdated technology, inadequate capital for 
modernization, less  working capital, fragmentation, fluctuating raw material prices, 
lower productivity  and high cost of products etc. The Committee are aware that there 
are almost 25.74 lakh powerlooms, accounting for 58.54% percent of total cloth 
production in the  country. Ministry of Textile s  stated that they do not mai ntain data 
regarding number of P owerloom owners in the country. The Committee feel that to 
ensure  holistic development of the entire Powerloom Sector, the Ministry needs to 
undertake a fresh base line survey so that actual gaps of the sector are identified and  
the authentic data regarding status of Powerloom Sector is available . The Committee, 
therefore, urge  the Ministry to conduct  a base -line comprehensive  survey covering  
the entire spectrum of Powerloo m Sector inter-alia the number of workers, their  
salary/wage status, units location, owners details, status of functioning etc. so that   
the precious data obtained may be utilised by  policy formulators to foster Research 
and Development activities in the textile sector to derive innovation, modernisation 
and increase productivity.  The Committee also emphasise the need to establish 
collaborations between Textile Sector and academic institutions to encourage start -
ups, knowledge sharing and technology transfer.   
 
12. Need for effective Pollution Control and effluent Management System. 
 Textile industry is known for its sound, air and water pollution.  It uses 
hazardous substances in the process of dyeing and fabric finishing.   These include  

56 
 
acids, ionic chemicals, alkaline solutions and enzymes, which are harmful not only to 
the workers and employees who are directly engaged  in the industry, but also  for the 
eco-system in the surrounding area.  The workers are prone to various chronic illness 
like lung cancer, respiratory, musculoskeletal  and  osteoarthritis. The Textile 
Industry’s  l arge scale usage of solvents and its exposure to harmful substances in 
the water bodies causes Typhoid, Cholera, Jaundice etc. among thos e living near 
textile mills. The Committee u rge the Ministry of Textiles to conduct Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA) of each approved park and put in place adequate  provision 
to make it mandatory for the SPVs and Master Developers (MD)   to ensure that 
Common Effluent  Treatment  Plant (ETP),  Sewage Treatment Plant (STP), Wastewater 
Treatment Plant (WWTP) are made operational along with parks/mills. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
13.       Need for expeditious resolution for revival of sick textile units. 
In the la ter part of 1960, a crisis emerged in the Indian textile industry as 
numerous mills became financially unstable, ceased operations, and faced imminent 
collapse, posing a severe economic imbalance and disrupt ed the employment 
scenario. To address this turmoil, Governme nt intervention led to nationalization of 
103 sick textile undertakings in 1974 under the Sick Textile Undertaking 
(Nationalization) Act 1974. Subsequent enactments viz. Swadeshi Cotton  Mill Co. Ltd. 
(Acquisition and transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1986 an d the Textile Undertakings 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1995   nationalised 6 mills and 15 mills respectively . The 
amendment to the above Acts in  1995 & 2014  respectively empowered the National 
Textile Corporation to transfer or dispose of assets for better manag ement, 
modernization, restructuring, or revival of sick textile undertakings.   Out of these 124 
NTC mills nationalized, 5 mills were closed/merged and  119 mills referred to Board 
for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR).   
British India  Corporation Ltd. (BIC) was acquired by Govt. of India through BIC 
(Acquisition  of Shares) Act, 1981. BIC has two units viz. Cawnpur woolen Mills, 
Kanpur and New Egerton Woolen Mills, Dhariwal, Punjab and three subsidiaries viz. 
Elgin Mills Ltd., Cawnpur T extiles Ltd. and Brushware Lt d. Owing to continuou s 

57 
 
losses, BIC was referred to B IFR in 1991 and was declared sick in 1992. The Cabinet 
approved a revival scheme on 21.11.20 01 (BIFR sanctioned on 18.12.2002) at a cost of 
Rs.211 crore which was to be  met b y sale of surplus land and asse ts. However, the 
scheme was declared as failed in 2005 because BIC could not infuse fund.  The 
Cabinet gave “In principle” approval to the revival plan of BIC on 09.06.2011 at a total 
cost of Rs. 338.04 crore through infusion  of funds to be provided by the Government 
of India subject to the condition that permission is first obtained for sale of surplus 
land from Govt. of UP. This revival  Scheme of BIC  could not take off as UP Govt. is 
yet to convert the land of BIC lease ho ld.  The Committee  observe that the revival 
efforts made by Government  could not produce desired results due to various 
reasons such as prolonged litigations,  technical obsolescence, excess manpower, 
labour issues , high production cost and lack of effective  management, delay in 
implementation of revival plans, delay in resolving land related issues between Centre 
and State Governments etc. The Committee, therefore,  urge the Ministry to prepare  
an  action plan for a time bound resolution of issues  related to each sick  textile units 
across the country by involving all stakeholders.  Steps should be taken  for 
expeditious  settlement of land  related issu es between Centre and State 
Governments. Legal experts should be engaged for settling the disputes through 
Alternate Dispute Resolution mechanism,  wherever possible. Once  Government  has 
obtained the dispute free title of the properties of sick textile undertakings/units, 
which are non -operational, revival  efforts  should be undertaken through private 
investment including establishment of PM MITRA PARKS. The Commi ttee further 
recommend that the Ministry should take effective pro -labour measures for providing 
relief and rehabilitation of workers rendered jobless due to closure of NTC, BIC and 
Non-SSI Textile Mills in private sector. The Ministry  should  maintain online data 
regarding  workers rendered jobless in Textile Sector, details of workmen availed 
relief measures like salary,  VRS package, pension etc. , details of remaining work ers 
and number of workers registered/benefited from Rajiv Gandhi Shramik Kalyan 
Yojana (RGSKY) under Ministry of Labour and Employment etc.   
 
 

58 
 
14. Need to take over control/possession of Champaran Sugar Company Ltd. 
(CSCL) 
 Champaran Sugar Company Ltd.  (CSCL), an associate Company with 41.83% 
share holding with its headquarters at Kanpur has two units in Bihar, i.e. Baracha kia 
Unit with lan d assets of 1008.20 acres and Cha npatia Unit with land assets of 174. 24 
acres.  Since the CSCL w as running in huge losses, Board of Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR) recommend ed for its winding up, which was accepted  by the 
Hon’ble Company Court on 5 September, 1994.    Barachakia Unit was put on sale and 
the Auction Purchaser took over the possession   and the sale  deed was executed 
between the Official  Liquidat or  (OL) and the Auction Purchaser for a total sale 
consideration of Rs.8,10,40,000/-. But the registration process could not be completed 
as the Registering Authorit y had doubt regarding valuation  and the court directed 
Collector  in December, 2013 to take appropriate decision in the matter . Ministry of 
Textiles have requested  their Senior Advocate to arrange for sale certificates issued 
by  OL in the  matter of Barachakia and Chanpatia Sugar Mills.  
OL invited  bids for sale of Chanpatia Unit and Hon’ble Company Ju dge 
accepted the highest offer for  2.01 crore. The Auction Purchaser failed to deposit the 
amount. However, Hon’ble High Court, Allahabad directed the Auct ion Purchaser to 
run the factory  under the supervision of Official Liquidator (OL).  On receipt of Bank 
Draft of Rs. 25 lakh and cheque amounting to Rs.1.76 crore, physical possession of 
the factory was handed over to the Auction Purchaser on 24.5.2006.  However,  OL  
has reported that the Auction Purchaser has failed to implement  the main object of  
the auction, which was to run the  factory and retain the employment of its employees.  
OL further stated that  the sale was not conf irmed in his favour as the payment was 
not made on time. DM, West Champaran, in response to a letter dated 9.3.2022 
informed Ministry of Textiles that due to lack of security, the property has been 
encroached by local people.  The Auction Purchaser has been informed to submit all 
relevant document to prove his ownership of the  mill and its assets. He has not 
responded to it. The Hon’ble Company Court, Allahabad has admitted an application 
filed by  Ministry of Textile s on 17.5.2023 under Section 466 of Com panies Act, 1956 
for recalling its order dated 22.11.2002 as the A uction Purchaser and OL has failed to 
comply with it.  The Committee note that even after more than   20 years, Ministry of 

59 
 
Textiles has given no   solution.   This has resulted not only in n on-operationalisation  
of the mill but also encroachment of the property.  The Committee feel that the land 
available with sugar units at Chanpatia and Barachakia  may be utilized for PM 
MITRA/Mini Textile Park. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Textiles  to 
work for  taking  over control/possession of CSCL with the per mission of concerned  
Court, as the huge land mass of Barachakia and Chanpatia Units of CSC L could be 
considered for development of a PM MITRA/Mini Textile Park without further loss of 
time.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI            DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
 05 February, 2024       CHAIRPERSON 
  16 Magha, 1945 (Saka)     COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 