3

MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS

(DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING)

ESTIMATES AND PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF ALL INDIA SERVICES

[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained
in Twenty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
Estimates]

COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2020-2021)

THIRD REPORT

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


THIRD REPORT

COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES
(2020-2021)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS
(DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING)

ESTIMATES AND PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF ALL INDIA SERVICES

[Action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in
Twenty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates]

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

September, 2020/ Bhadrapada,1942(Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-2021)
INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER Report

CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by Government

CHAPTER II

Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not

desire to pursue in view of Government's replies

CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
Government's replies have not been accepted by the
Committee

CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of Government are still awaited

ANNEXURES
|. Annexures- | to XII
APPENDICES
|. Minutes of 4% Sitting of the Committee on Estimates held on

Zi - 09 - 2020

ll. Analysis of the action taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty Sixth
Report of Committee on Estimates (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

PAGE
tii)
(५)

2.f

BY

a8

oy

ue-TY

ES)

77


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21) OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2020-21

Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat — Chairperson

14,
12:
13.
14.
15.
16.
Wes
18.
19.
20.
2A;
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
2f,
28.
29.
30.

ON ORakR wD

Members

Kunwar Danish Ali

Shri Kalyan Banerjee

Shri Pradan Baruah

Shri Sudharshan Bhagat

Shri Ajay Bhatt

Shri P.P. Chaudhary

Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan

Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal

Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap
Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya
Shri Dayanidhi Maran

Shri K. Muraleedharan

Shri S.S. Palanimanickam

Shri Kamlesh Paswan

Dr. K.C. Patel

Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut

Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat

Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy

Shri Francisco Sardinha

Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma

Shri Prathap Simha

Shri Dharambir Singh

Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
Shri Kesineni Srinivas

Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma


ARONA

SECRETARIAT

Dr. Kavita Prasad -
Smt. B. Visala -
Smt. A. Jyothirmayi -
Shri R.S. Negi -
Shri Rajesh Jinagal -

Joint Secretary
Director
Additional Director
Deputy Secretary
Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates, having been authorized by
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Third Report on the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in the Twenty-Sixth Report of Committee on Estimates(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the
subject ‘Estimates and Performance Review of All India Services’ pertaining to the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions(Department of Personnel
and Training).

2. The Twenty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha
on 21.12.2017. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions(Department of Personnel and Training) furnished their replies indicating
action taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Sixth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 08.05.2018 and 15.01.2019. The Draft Report was
considered and adopted by the Committee on Estimates (2020-2021) at their sitting

heldon 21.097: 2020

3 An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report of the
Committee on Estimates (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT
22 September , 2020. ; Chairperson,

Bhadrapada3)_, 1942 (saka) Committee on Estimates


CHAPTER -।

REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Estimates and Performance Review of All India Services’
Pertaining to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of
Personnel and Training).

(2 The Twenty Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2017. ॥
contained 23 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies on all these
Observations/Recommendations were received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions(Department of Personnel and Training) .

te Replies to the Observations and Recommendations contained in the Report
have broadly been categorized as under:-

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

SI. Nos. 1,6,10,11,13,14,18,19,,22 (Total 9)

(Chapter-Il)

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
ursue in view of Government's reply:
- Nos, 4,15,20,23 (Total 4)

(mel

(Chapter-II|)

iil)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government's replies
have not been accepted by the Committee:

Sl: Nos. 2,3,5,7,8,9,12,16,17,21 (Total 10)

के (Chapter-IV)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of
Government is still awaited:
$

Nos. -Nil- (Total Nil) ‘
पं (Chapter-V)

1.4 The Committee desire that response to the comments contained in
Chapter | of this Report should be furnished expeditiously.
fis


1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on
some of their Recommendations.

AS

H Observations/Recommendations(Para Nos. 2, 3 & 5) Nos. 2, 3 & 5

1.6 5 The Committee noted that the authorised cadre strength of IAS during 1951
was 1232, which grew to 4599 during 1981 and in 2016 the sanctioned strength has
further risen to 6396. With regard to IPS officers, as on 1 January, 2017 total authorised
strength is 4863. Total cadre strength of IFS is 3152. So far as the cost of functioning of
All India Services was concerned, the Ministry was not able to furnish the specific data
with regard to expenditure met on salary, allowances, pension, perks as well as cost
incurred on creating infrastructure like offices, furniture etc. of these Civil Servants.
However, the Government furnished scattered data of salary and allowances of these
officers in respect of some of the Ministries/Departments as well as percentage share of
emoluments (Salary, Pension, Allowances) of Government employees at the Centre
and in the States in GDP at Current Price, according to which the percentage share in
this regard which was 7.97 percent during 2011 increased to 8.15 percent during.
2014-15. From the overall position of expenditure met on Government employees, it
could be stated that huge expenditure was met on wages of All India Services Officers
besides the expenditure that would have ‘been met on other infrastructure like Offices
etc. for bureaucracy. The Committee expressed their strong displeasure for not
providing the details of total expenditure incurred on salary and allowances of the
officers of All India Services in States and Centre. The Committee desired that the
Government should furnish year-wise data with regard to expenditure met on officers of
All India Services by Centre and State Governments within a period of three months.
The Committee were dismayed to note that no efforts on the part of the Government
have been made to assess the contribution of these services as is apparent from the
replies of DoPT wherein it is stated that no such study had been carried out in this
regard. Not only that no study in this regard had ever been made even by some outside
agency. The Committee took exception for not having any mechanism to find out the
expenditure incurred on officers of All India Services by the Central as well as State
Governments and their contribution towards GDP growth of the ‘country
commensurating the cost incurred on their functioning. The Committee were of the
strong view that the officers of All India Services should be fully committed to the
citizens’ concern and public good and reflect the hopes and aspirations of the public
they serve and as such they should be held accountable for accomplishment of the
projects/programmes/policy issues being handled as per their specific assignments
particularly when they were being paid from the exchequer's money. ,The Committee,
therefore, strongly emphasized to evolve an effective mechanism having various
parameters which are primarily outcome oriented and citizen centric so as to assess the
contribution of the All India Services to the extent it has contributed to national growth.

290


They also recommended that if needed, experts from Premier institutions like IIMs, IITs
etc. might either be involved or outsourced to carry out such assessment for evolving
effective mechanism in this regard. The concrete action on the Suggested lines be taken
and the Committee be apprised accordingly.

based on in position data as per Civil List, 2018. The Department vide their subsequent
Action Taken Replies dated 15.01.2019 furnished the updated statements
(Annexure-Il) showing the expenditure incurred on salary & allowances of AIS officers
during the last 03 years and average expenditure on Salary of IPS Officers and IFS
Officers based on in position data as per Civil List, 2018. The Department stated that
this expenditure might be taken into account for calculating the salary and allowances in
respect of AIS officers for a particular period. As regards the evolving of an outcome
oriented and citizen effective mechanism having various parameters which are primarily
citizen centric so as to assess the Contribution of the All India Services to the extent it
has contributed to national growth, the Department of Personnel and Training stated
that with the approval of competent authority, a committee headed by EO & AS has
been constituted to examine this issue and suggest an appropriate course of action.
Further, a Committee of Secretaries (CoS), constituted with the approval of competent
authority will take a final view on the course of action suggested in the report of the
Committee headed by EO&AS.

18 The Committee noted that there are cadre rules to determine the strength and
composition of the cadres and the cadre review is carried out every five years by the
Central Government in consultation with the State Governments (in case of Joint Cadre)
as the case may be, to assess the cadre strength and composition of each cadre and
new encadrement according to the functional requirements of the State and the cadre
strength is notified accordingly. The Committee were also apprised that cadre review is
being done in a transparent and judicious manner through the Cadre Review Committee
(CRC). The Department stated that the cadre review for any specific State is done as
uniformly as possible. As stated in the earlier part of the Report, authorized cadre
strength of the All India Services has grown from 1232 during 1951, at the time of initial
constitution of the service to 6396 during the year 2016. So far as State-wise sanctioned
strength is concerned, the Committee noted that maximum sanctioned strength i.e. 621
is in Uttar Pradesh and minimum i.e. 48 is in Sikkim. The Committee recommended that
they be apprised about the criteria/rationale for enhancement in the cadre strength over
the years. Besides, the Committee liked to be apprised about the State-wise increase in
cadre strength over the years along with the demand/request received from States, so
as to understand the growth Pattern in various States. The Committee also
recommended to explore the feasibility of associating experts from premier institutions
like IIM while undertaking the cadre review study. The cadre review should be
undertaken in an objective and transparent manner and with due consultations with
State Governments and other stakeholders. The Committee further recommended to

=g5


undertake study by some independent agency to review the cadre strength in various
States keeping in view the responsibilities/workload and challenges particularly the
security concerns/difficult terrains in various States.

1.9 The Department of Personnel and Training vide its Action Taken Replies has
also statéd that the strength and composition of each cadre is fixed as per Rule 4(2) of
IAS(Cadre) Rules, 1954 and similar rules for IPS/IFS which specifies that :-

“The Central Government shall ordinarily at the interval of every five years,
re-examine the strength and composition of each such cadre in consultation
with the State Government or the State Governments concerned and may
make such alterations therein as it deems fit.”

DoPT being the nodal agency, after scrutinizing the Cadre Review proposal,
submits the proposal for the approval of Cadre Review Committee Members. The
composition of CRC is as follows: :

(i) Cabinet Secretary - Chairman

(ii) Secretary of the Ministry controlling the Cadre- Member
(iii) Secretary, DoPT - Member

(iv) Secretary, Dept. Of Expenditure - Member

(v) Chief Secretary of the State - Member

The proposal is examined/scrutinized by the Cadre Review Committee keeping
in view the functional requirements, vacant posts, ex-cadre/temporary posts
being operated and factors such as population, area and budget. Further,
yardsticks which are to be followed for encadrement of posts at the time of cadre
review are that there should be a long-term requirement of the post, the post
should carry duties and responsibilities of cadre posts. Further, the increase in
strength should be reasonable i.e. whether it would be reasonably practicable to
fill the vacancies including the authorized vacancies and also the vacancies,
which will arise as a result of proposed additions to the cadre and prevailing
stagnation should not be accepted as a fresh reason.

The Department also apprised about the state-wise increase in cadre strength
over the years (Annexure-lll).

The Department of Personnel and Training in its subsequent Action Taken
Replies informed the Committee that they have constituted a committee headed by EO
& AS to examine this issue of exploring the feasibility of associating experts from
premier institutions like IM while undertaking the cadre review study. The Department

A


TE yy ser

further-stated that a Committee of Secretaries (CoS) constituted will take a final view on
the course of action Suggested in the report of the Committee headed by EO8&AS.

1.10 The AIS Officers are initially posted at the District/Tehsil level to deal with field
assignments. On promotion to Super Time Scale(STS) after completion of 16 years.

completion of 25 years, they are posted as Principal Secretary in the State Government
and as Additional Secretary in the Government of India. Further, they are posted as_
Chief Secretary in the State Government and as Secretary in Government of India on
Promotion to Apex level after completion of 30 years of service. The Committee
understand that despite clear cut uniform rules issued by MoPPGP. (DoPT) in this
regard, there has been instances where violation of promotion rules by many States are
noticed as stated by the representative of he Ministry during the course of oral
evidence. This has led to anomaly in the overall cadre of the same batch. The
Committee are of the view that when the All India Services are recruited through UPSC
under uniform rules framed by the Central Government and their Cadre Controlling
Authority is Union Government, there should not be any violation of promotion rules by
the respective States whatever may be their functional requirement. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Union Government should keep a constant check on
these violations and issue necessary instructions to the concerned State Governments
to invariably adhere to the uniform Promotion rules issued by DoPT.

1.11. The Department of Personnel and Training in its Action Taken Replies has
Stated that with the approval of competent authority, a committee headed by EO&AS
has been constituted for suggesting various ways and means to ensure compliance of
promotion rules by the State Government through various agencies viz. Accountant
General of States. Further, a Committee of Secretaries will take a final view on the
course of action suggested in the report of the Committee headed by EO&AS

1.12 The Committee are dismayed to note from the Action Taken Replies that
the Department of Personnel & = Training (DOPT) being a cadre
controlling/administrative Department has not been able to furnish complete

Though the Department of Personnel & Training have apprised the
Committee about the criteria/rationale for enhancement in the cadre strength over
the years and State-wise increase in cadre strength, but the Committee have
taken a serious view of the fact that they have not been apprised about the
State-wise increase in cadre Strength of IPS & IFS officers as well as
demand/request received from States for All India Service Officers. Further, as

Be


per the reply furnished by the Department, the growth pattern in various States is
not clearly comprehensible.

The Committee also note that the Rule 4 (2) of IAS (Cadre) Rules, 1954 has
not been properly followed and there has been no uniformity in Cadre Review
undertaken,as there are States like erstwhile Jammu & Kashmir and Punjab
where cadre review was undertaken in 15 and 11 years respectively and on the
other side, there are States like Haryana, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Manipur in
which cadre review had been undertaken within 1, 2, and 3 years respectively.

Furthermore, the Committee take serious note that the Department of
Personnel & Training (DOPT) has not informed about the composition, time frame
and terms of reference of the two Committees constituted by them for keeping a
constant check on violations of promotion rules by the State Governments.

In view of the foregoing, the Committee desire that the Department furnish
details about the status including composition, time frame and terms of reference
of the two Committees constituted to examine the aforesaid concerned issues
and also intimate the action taken in the following matters :-

i) Evolving an effective mechanism having various parameters
which are primarily outcome oriented and citizen centric so as
to assess the contribution of the All India Services to the
extent it has contributed to national growth, by .also
considering the involvement of experts from premier
institutions like IIMs, IITs etc. ४

ii) Exploring the feasibility of associating experts from premier
institutions like IIMs while undertaking the cadre review study
of All India Services.

iii) | Keeping a constant check on violations of promotion rules by
the State Governments and issuing necessary instructions to
the concerned State Governments to invariably adhere to the
uniform promotion rules issued by DoPT. :

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.6) No.6

1.13 The Committee noted that the frivolous complaints just before the promotion
lead to unnecessary hardships and delay in the promotion of an officer. To obviate such
a situation, the Committee recommended that such complaints should be examined
judiciously and disposed off expeditiously. if it was found that the complaint had been
made intentionally with the purpose to block the promotion, there should be some
provision for taking action against the complainant which would definitely have a
deterrent effect.

268


18.10.2013. The Department of Personnel and Training also stated that the matter
regarding promotion of [AS Officers is in the domain of the State Governments
concerned and not the Central Government. The Vigilance Clearance in respect of IAS

vigilance clearance in respect of inclusion in the offer list, empanelment, any deputation
for which Central Government clearance is necessary, including deputation,
appointments to sensitive posts, assignments to training programmes (except
mandatory training), and premature repatriation to the cadre. As per the guidelines,
vigilance clearance of an 188 officer shall not be withheld due to filing of a complaint
and if preliminary inquiry takes more than three months to be completed, The
Department of Personnel and Training further stated that as per Central Vigilance
Commission's guidelines, no cognizance Should be taken of any complaint which is
received six months prior to the initiation of selection process for senior post.

1.15 The Committee note from the Action Taken Replies that complaints
against AIS officers working in Central Government are examined as per
complaint handling guidelines issued vide DoPT OM No.104/76/2011-AVD-1 dtd.
18.10.2013 and the matter regarding promotion of IAS Officers is in the domain of
the State Governments concerned and not the Central Government. The

Observations/Recommendations(Para Nos.7 & 8) Nos.7 & 8

1.16 The Committee hoted that AIS cadre rules were violated by respective State
Governments by promoting officers in various scales without the concurrence of
vacancies by Central Government, a mandatory provision, by creating excess ex-cadre

=


posts/temporary posts in State Government and by posting of non-cadre officers against
cadre posts. The Committee had been informed that DoPT took action against such
violations by State Government, whenever such instances come to their notice: The
Committee were dismayed to note that foolproof mechanisms to obviate such instances
did not exist due to lack of transparency and absence of digitised records. To maintain
the independence and objectivity of All India Service, the Committee felt that there was
a need to evolve a system of digitised monitoring by DoPT so that such violations by the
State Governments were immediately noticed and corrective action taken thereon.

1.17 The Committee noted with concern that proper updated records of deployment,
deputation, resignation, retirement, in-service death, switch-over to other service etc.
are neither being maintained at the Cadre Controlling Ministry level nor at the State
level. Due to lack of such integrated and crystal clear record system, it becomes quite
difficult sometimes to assess the actual requirement/vacancy vis-a-vis sanctioned cadre
strength of officers in the respective States/Union Territories. Digital records in this
regard may help to know the exact position of cadre strength. Therefore, the Committee
were of the considered view that a comprehensive digital record of cadre strength of All
India Services State/ UT-wise be maintained invariably to assess actual requirement
and effective deployment, which would go a long way in enhancing the desired level of
efficiency and economy in the administration. The Committee also recommended to
make suitable budgetary support for thé purpose and the action taken in this regard
should be intimated to the Committee within three months from the presentation of this
report to the House.

1.18 The Department of Personnel and Training in its Action Taken Replies stated
that the issue relating to digitization of records/monitoring in real-time .has been
considered and NIC has been entrusted with. the task to evolve a digitized mechanism
to monitor the violations by the State Governments and take corrective action thereon.

1.19 _ The Committee note from the Action Taken Replies that the Department of
Personnel and Training has entrusted NIC the task of digitization of records/
monitoring in real-time for evolving a digitized mechanism to monitor the
violations by the State Governments and for taking corrective action thereon.
However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the Department has not
informed about the time frame within which NIC has to complete the task
assigned to them. The Committee desire that the Department fix a time frame
within which NIC will complete the same and the Committee be apprised of it
within three months from the date of presentation of this Report.

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.9) .

1.20 The Committee noted that officers of All India Services serve the Central
Government on deputation, when their services are borrowed by the Central

aE


+ or

Government. The deputation under Central Staffing Scheme is through open
advertisement wherein nominations for appointment under the scheme are invited from
all State Cadres to have a wider pool of officers. While deputation under Central
Government is voluntary, the States were impressed upon to recommend large number
of officers for deputation under Government of India so that every eligible officer has an
opportultity,to serve at the Centre at least once at the middle management level. It had
come out during the course of deliberations that various Pay Commissions in their
reports had observed that while the Central Deputation Reserve (CDR) was 40% of the
Senior Duty Posts of a State cadre of the AIS, practically CDR utilised by State Cadre
was less than 20%. This was even less for certain bigger cadres where the general
tendency was not to send officers on Central deputation. Further State Civil Service
officers promoted to All India Services by promotion were reluctant to go to Centre,
other States or PSUs on deputation.

1.21 The Department of Personnel and Training in their Action Taken Replies stated
that being general observation, no comments required.

1.22 The Committee note that the Department of Personnel & Training has
considered the recommendation of the Committee as general observation and
have offered no comments. However, the Committee reiterate to impress upon
the State Governments to recommend large number of officers for deputation
under Government of India so that eligible officers get an opportunity to serve at
the Centre at least once at the middle management level.

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.12) No.12

1.23 The Committee noted that despite shortage of Indian Police Service Officers,
they were sent on deputation for postings in Departments like Railway Protection Force,
CRPF, BSF etc. who have their own Cadre. Sometimes IPS Officers were also on
deputation in the Personal Staff of Ministers. The Committee found that with regard to
deputation of IPS to Railway Protection Force, the matter was pending in the Supreme
Court. Besides the Committee under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary had been
formed to look into the matter. While emphasising for early resolution of the dispute with
regard to deputation of IPS with Railways, the Committee recommended to re-look the
tules and guidelines of deputation of IPS Officers to the Offices/Organisations which
have their own cadre as such practices besides squeezing the already scarce resources
invited unnecessary confrontation between the dedicated cadre of an organisation and
the IPS deputationists.

The Committee found that the tenure of deputation of AIS officers was for five
years after which the officer had to go back to State Government. The Committee had
also been apprised that under some circumstances, the deputation period could be upto
7 years. The Committee noted that on the one hand there was general reluctance on

-9-


the part of AIS Officers to go on deputation to the Central Government postings, on the
other hand the officers allocated Cadres of States which were confronting the menace
of insurgency, extremism, terrorism and militancy, sometimes managed their deputation
for their convenient posting at other places. The Committee in this regard recommended
to review the situation and wanted some stringent guidelines for postings in difficult
areas in the country particularly the regions affected by terrorism/militancy.

1.24 The Department of Personnel and Training in its Action Taken Replies has
stated that in order to review the situation and having some stringent guidelines for
postings in difficult areas in the country particularly in the regions affected by
terrorism/militancy, with the approval of competent authority, a committee headed by
EO & AS has been constituted to examine this issue and suggest an appropriate course
of action. Further, a Committee of Secretaries (CoS), constituted with the approval of
competent authority will take a final view on the course of action suggested in the report
of the Committee headed by EO&AS.

1,25 The Committee note from the action taken reply of DoPT that in order to
review the situation and for some stringent guidelines for postings in difficult
areas in the country, 02 Committees (one Committee ‘headed by EO&AS and
another Committee of Secretaries) have been constituted to examine the issue
and suggest an appropriate course of action. The Committee, however, are
dismayed to note that the Department of Personnel & Training (DOPT) has not
furnished details about the Committees so constituted with regard to its
composition, time frame, terms of reference and also the present status thereof.
Hence, the Committee desire the Department to apprise about the composition of
the Committees, time frame, terms of reference, status and also to intimate about
the action taken in the matter within three months of presentation of this Report.

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.13)

1.26 The Committee noted that presently there was a training schedule for IAS, IPS
and IFS Probationers comprising of 103, 104 and 80 weeks respectively. The training
consisted of foundation training at respective Training Institutes and on the job training.
IAS Officers were given training at Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of
Administration(LBSNAA), IPS Officers are trained at National Police Academy,
Hyderabad and IFS Officers are given Training at Indira Gandhi National Forest
Academy, Dehradun. The Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) under various
schemes also provided in-service training to such officers in foreign
Universities/Institutes in the areas of better Governance and Public Policy. The
Committee note that National Training Policy lays down the operational guidelines for
* the development of the human resources of the Government and Training Division of
DoPT was the nodal agency for the implementation of the National Training Policy and
issuing guidelines to amplify and facilitate its implementation. For AIS Officers, the
tespective Training institutes formulated policies and implemented their training
programme
-10-


Government. Such recommendations included mandatory training for all Government
Servants at fnduction Stage as well as at mid-career, to design a plan scheme to
strengthen training institutions, giving autonomy and operational flexibility to National
Training Institutes and setting up a National Institute of Good Governance. The
Committee found from the replies furnished by the Government that on some of the
recommendations action has already been taken. National Centre for Good Governance
had been established in 2014 by upgrading and expanding the mandate of National
Institute of Administrative Research (NIAR), an autonomous society under LBSNAA,
Mussoorie, Besides the national level Strong network of Central Training Institute
already established by the Cadre Controlling Authorities, at the State level, every State
has a State Training Institute at the Apex level. Then there were Regional and District
Training Centres in the States to meet the training needs of all levels of the Government

1.27 The Department of Personnel and Training in its Action Taken Replies has:
Stated that under the scheme “Training for All”, there were seven components for which
the allocations are utilized, However, these seven components are not shown in the
DDG whereunder the alloca ions were available under “Professional Services”. Out of
Seven components, the allocation was utilized for Augmenting the Capacity of Training

Institutes. During the last five years, the money spent on augmenting the Capacity were
as under:- न
AUGMENTATION OF CAPACITY OF TRAINING INSTITUTIONS }
ed Year Financial Deliverable (Expenditure incurred in lakhs)
es 20a | ~ 238.00 |
18000 ee ear | te 400.00
3. 2014-15 388.00
4 | ease | 059 “5
as | कि शक न हाय
Total ene

-11-


As regards other issues of this recommendation, the Department of Personne
and Training vide their Action Taken Replies has furnished following inputs on the
action taken on each of the issues of this recommendation:-

Recommendations made by|

’ Administrative Reforms Action Taken by DoPT
“Commission

Induction Training Foundation Course is!
imparted by LBSNAA, Mussoorie to the

lofficers who are selected by UPSC.

Every government servant should! : Aa Aan
lundergo a mandatory training at हल being Cadre stalning nettles if
induction stage and also periodicall Central Secretariat Service (CSS) and
lduting his/her career Successfull Cental Secretariat Stenographers Service|
completion of these trainings should(CSSS), sonducts Mandatory, Haining 20116
(a) 06 a minimum necessary condition for "Auction stage and also periodically before
Sen friaten ia ४8068 anqPfomotion to the next level. The details are|

subsequent promotions. Mandator at Annexure-lV,

Hemet Pa "Grea Petit alne|Mandatory induction training is also imparted
; . to. Multi Tasking Staff nominated — by|

psiore Win pelerasele ea एक दिए: Department of Personnel & Training.

ISTM is training Institute imparting training
ion National Training Policy (1996). The|
details of the training -programmes|
conducted during last ten years are at
Annexure-V.

he Plan Scheme of Training For All (TFA)
sponsored by DoPT has been in operation
since 1992. The Scheme has been approved
[A monitoring mechanism should belfor the next three years beyond toh Five
b) set up for overseeing _thelYear Plan (31.03.2017). TFA is an umbrella

implementation of the —_ Nationallscheme containing following programmes:-
Training Policy (1996).

. State Category Training Programme.

. Trainer Development Programme.
. ntensive Training Programme.
. nduction Training Programme.
. Faculty Development Scheme.

जा के


Augmentation of Capacity of Training
Institutions,

Comprehensive Online Modified

Modules on Induction Training.

[The practice of having a ‘Common|
Foundation Course’ for all Group ‘A’
Services - generalist, Specialized and
i should continue. For Group]
'B' and ‘C’ Services, the Institute ofj
Secretarial Training and Management
(ISTM) may be developed as the
nodal agency for design and delivery!
lof common Foundation Courses.

(c

=|

Annexure-VII

he Fifteen- week Foundation Course is the
flagship course of Induction training and is|
intended for fresh entrants to the All-India} .
Services, i.e. the Indian Administrative}
Service, the Indian Police Service and the
Indian Forest Service, and the various
Central Services (Group-A) of the Union.

STM conducts foundation courses not only|
for Group B and Group C officers of CSS
land CSSS but also Group ‘A' services. Thel
details of foundation courses for Group '8'
land Group ‘C’ are at (Annexure-Vl). Details
lof foundation courses for Group ‘A’ officers|
of Office of RGI, DGCA, ICAR, etc are at

All civil servants should undergo}
mandatory training before each
promotion and each officer/official
should be evaluated after each
programme. Successful
completion of the training programmes|
should be made mandatory fo!
promotions.

The LBSNAA imparts training to the officers
of different levels of seniority 1.8. Mid-Career|
Training Program for:

IAS (Phase III) for 4 weeks duration
targets the officers of 7-9 years of
seniority

The Phase IV Course targets middle
level officers (of 14-16 years seniority)
with a thrust on Public policy

The Phase V Course alms at
developing strategic leadership skills
in senior level IAS Officers (26-28
years seniority) for effective
inter-sectoral policy formulation and

strategic leadership in government

at3—


ISTM being cadre training institute for
Central Secretariat Service (CSS) and
Central Secretariat Stenographers Service
(CSSS), conducts training courses before
promotion to the next level. The details are
at Annexure-lV.

[The objective of mid-career training
should be to develop domain
knowledge and competence required|
for the changing job profile of the
officer. To this end, mid caree
learning opportunities relevant to
specific domains or specializations|
should be made available for officers.

Annexure-Vill.

Mid-Career training is imparted to the|
officers of 7-9 years of seniority; 14-16 years
lof seniority and 26-28 years of seniority. The
main focus of these is to provide domain]
knowledge.

Session plans of mid-career _ training|
programmes are designed to take care of|
domain specific knowledge requirements as|
ell as competence required for the
changing job profile of the officers. In
addition, theme based training programmes
are regularly conducted by ISTM in. which|
officers working in specific domain areas
participate. ISTM is also proactive tol
introduce new training programmes to cater
10 the continuously changing training needs
of officials. Year-wise details of the new
training programmes introduced are aft

Public servants should be encouraged)
Ito obtain higher academi

qualifications and to write papers fo
reputed and authoritative journals.

ISTM is in the process of launching al
bi-annual journal titled “ISTM Journal o
\Training, Research and Governance” during
the current year. As part of some training}
programmes, participants are required to
prepare Syndicate Reports/Papers on Public
Policy Analysis and Formulation with the
lobjective of developing the analytical and
titing capabilities.

IA. strong network of _ training
institutions at the Union and State}
levels needs to be built up to cater to}

The LBSNAA takes pro-active steps in
forging partnership with institutions of repute
both within and outside the country.

the training requirements of civi
iservants. However, instead off
spreading resources over a_ large
number of institutions, a few
institutions should be identified fo

ISTM has developed a strong network with
other institutes as it collaborates with ATIs
land SIRDs for conducting State Attachment,

illage Attachment of various _ training|
programmes as well as Foundation Training}

capacity building and upgradation.

Programme.

at -



ISTM also conducts Trainer Developmen
Programmes sponsored by DoPT for thel
capacity building of trainers across all
Training establishments, including State/UT|
training establishments.

[A Blended Training programme called
Comprehensive Online Modified Modules on
Induction Training (COMMIT) was launched
by Hon'ble MoS (PP) in June 2017 on pilot}
basis for 6 States of Assam, Haryana,
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and
West Bengal for the capacity building ०
frontline functionaries of these
States. Subsequently, as per the interest!
shown by State ATIs of Gujarat, Jammu &|
Kashmir and Punjab, the COMMIT was|
extended in these three States as
well. Thus currently the programme is
catering to more than 80,000 officials in 9
states as a closed programme.

|The composition of governing bodies|
lof. the national training  institutions|
isuch as

the LBSNAA, svpnpa|| he LBSNAA plays a leadership role with!

respect to Co-ordinating among State ATIs.

upgrading one of the existing
(i) |national/state institutes. This institute|
would identify, document, andi
disseminate best practices and also
conduct training programmes.

IGNFA and also.‘ the___ State

(h) ed a Hero DoPT (TFA) sends the Master Trainers to
eminent experts. The y 18 State Administrative Training Institutes to]
1160158 es : he adequateit’ait the trainers at regular basis under the!
empowered to enable them tol! fainers Development Programme (TDP).

_|discharge their functions efficiently. ;

A national institute of good National Centre for Good Governancel
governance may be set up by|

(NCGG) has been constituted. as an
lautonomous body in February, 2014 under|
the administrative control of Department o'
Personnel & Training which was later]
transferred to DARPG.

1.28 The Committee note that as per the Action Taken Replies, the Department
has taken action on each of the recommendations of ARC. However, the
Department has not mentioned anything about the impact of the action taken on

the recommendations of ARC.

The Committee further

note that the

Department has merely provided the details of year-wise expenditure incurred on

15-


augmentation of the capacity of training institutions from the year 2012-13 to
2016-17 and have not given year-wise budgetary allocations as well as
expenditure met for strengthening the training institutions particularly with
regard téthe plan scheme which was designed to support training organizations.
The Committee desire that the Department furnish complete replies to the
recommendations at the earliest.

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.14)

1.29 The Committee noted from the data furnished in Annual Report (2015-16) of
DoPT that Rs. 95.46 crore under Revenue and Rs. 196.61 crore were allocated under
Capital Head for 12" Plan under the Scheme Improvement of Infrastructure and
upgradation of Essential facilities at LBSNAA and Upgradation of LBSNAA to the Centre
of Excellence respectively. From the data it was noted that the allocations made during
Annual Plan 2015-16 and 2016-17 did not commensurate proportional year-wise
allocation. Not only that the allocations at BE stage were reduced at RE stage but also
that even the reduced allocations could not be utilised fully, With regard to item ‘Setting
up of National Centre for Good Governance’, out of Rs.85 crore of allocations. under
Capital Head for 12" Plan, the expenditure met has been shown as nil. The Committee
failed to understand setting up of National Centre for Good Governance at no cost. The
utilisation of outlay under the aforesaid two programmes indicates dismal financial
performance under the training programmes. The Committee liked the Government to
furnish details of financial and physical achievements under each of the Head of
Training during each year of 12" Plan and under the current year 2017-18 so as to
analyse the position.

1.30 The Department of Personnel and Training in its Action Taken Replies has
stated that the EFC allocation in respect of Capital and Revenue Schemes of LBSNAA
under the nomenclature, upgradation of infrastructure and essential facilities at LBSNAA
containing the allocation as per Revised Estimates and actual expenditure incurred
during the EFC plan period 2012-13 to 2016-17 along with the SFC approval has been
annexed at Annexure-IX.

1.31 The Committee note that although the DoPT has provided information
relating to the EFC allocation in respect of Capital and Revenue Schemes of
LBSNAA under the nomenclature, upgradation of infrastructure and essential
facilities at LBSNAA, but the action taken replies do not have any clarifications
with regard to the item ‘Setting up of National Centre for Good Governance’ at no
cost. The Committee are of the considered view that the Department furnish the
status regarding the ‘Setting up of National Centre for Good Governance’ at no
cost.

-16-


Observations/Recommendations(Para Nos.16 & 17) Nos.16 & 17

1.32 The Committee noted that officers of All India Services were recruited through
competitive examination conducted by Union Public Service Commission. The selected
officers geome from different educational background both technical as well as
non-technical @nd also come from different socio-economic background. With the
growing complexities of law making/policy formulation due to various factors like ever
evolving technologies, competition, globalisation and inter-dependence of countries,
new and emerging fields, there was an urgent need for domain expertise at middle and
higher level and involvement of specialist/technocrats/scientists particularly in the
Ministries involving technical/technology related issues such as Ministries/Departments
of Environment, Forests & Climate Change, Defence, Finance, Health, Power,
Information Technology, Shipping etc.

33 The Department of Personnel and Training in its Action Taken Replies stated
that the Central Staffing Scheme O.M. No. 61/77/194-EO(SM-l) dated 5.1.1996
provides that to the extent possible, postings in Government of India are done keeping
in view the educational qualifications, service, experience and special training required
for effective performance of the job and suggestions of the Ministry/Department as to
the field of consideration of persons for the job. However, the specific technical
expertise which might be required in decision making was provided by technical
units/directorates in vital sectors. The option to engage consultants/experts in the
respective fields for specific time periods and with defined objectives, as per extant
guidelines, is also available. 3

.34 The Committee found that second ARC had recommended that domain should
be assigned by the Central Civil Services Authority to all officers of the All India
Services and the Central Civil Services on completion of 13 years of service. While the
Government had agreed in principle to the recommendation of ARC, it was decided that
domain assignment should be done at completion of 18 years of service as it might not
be possible to identify domains during the first 13 years of service as most of the
officers are on the field assignments in the first 10 years of career. The Committee
noted the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice in their Ninety-second Report as quoted below-

“xxx Government should classify their entire SAG/Joint Secretary level posts
according to their functional domains and officers possessing required domain
knowledge and experience in the field should only be appointed in those
positions. It would be desirable that the empaneiment may be done by inviting
applications for the empanelment at SAG/Joint Secretary and.akove level posts
from interested and eligible persons of AIS and Central Services possessing
domain expertise prescribed for the post. This will also create a healthy
competition among various participating services and will bring best among
them.” :
-17-


The Committee while concurring with the recommendation of the Standing
Committee emphasized for taking urgent steps for classification of various senior posts
according to the requisite domain expertise and empanelment thereto. For developing
the domain expertise of the officers, it is imperative to identify the domains where
specialisation is needed and domain assigned to an officer according to his aptitude and
0908. - % ...

1.35 The Department of Personnel and Training in its Action Taken Replies stated that
the Central Staffing Scheme O.M. No. 61/77/194-EO(SM-l) dated 5.1.1996 provides
that to the extent possible, postings in Government of India are done keeping in view
the educational qualifications, service; experience and special training required for
effective performance of the job and suggestions of the Ministry/Department as to the
field of consideration of persons for the job. However, the specific technical expertise
which may be required in decision making is provided by technical units/directorates in
vital sectors. The option to engage consultants/experts in the respective fields for
specific time periods and with defined objectives, as per extant guidelines, is also
available.

1.36 The Committee note with concern that the action taken replies provided by
the Government merely elaborate the Central Staffing Scheme O.M. No.
61/77/194-EO(SM-1) dated 5.1.1996 which provides for postings of All India Service
Officers in Government of India. Whereas, the thrust of the recommendations by
the Committee was on the following points, for which the Department has not
given any specific reply :-

i) Urgent need for domain expertise at middle and higher level
and involvement of specialist/technocrats/scientists
particularly in the Ministries involving
technical/technology related issues such
as Ministries/Departments of Environment, Forests &
Climate Change, Defence, Finance, Health, Power,
Information Technology, Shipping, etc.

ii) Taking urgent steps for classification of various senior posts
according to the requisite domain expertise and empanelment
thereof. Further, it was also desired that domains where
specialisation is needed be identified and domain assigned to
an officer according to his aptitude and choice.

The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendations and

desire that the Department take action considering these parameters and apprise
the Committee of the action taken thereon.

-18-


Observations/Recommendations(Para No.21) No.21

1.37. The Cammittee noted that there were 4926 IAS officers against the authorised
cadre strength of 6396 during 2016 thus having 1470 vacancies. Besides in IPS there
are 956 vacancies as on 1 January 2017 and in IFS 2591 officers were in position
against the total cadre strength of 3152, thus’ having 561 vacancies. Though the
Ministry had not indicated about the attrition rate of IAS and IPS, under IFS the attrition
rate had been stated as 8 to 10 per cent. The Committee noted from the Annual Report
of the UPSC that there were 349 cases, as on 31 March 2016 where offers of
appointment to the candidates recommended by the Commission on the basis of results
of various Examinations were delayed by the Ministries/Departments for more than one
year. Of these cases, 156 cases were such where offers of appointments were yet to be
made even though period of more than one year had elapsed since the
recommendations were made. Of the remaining 193 cases, 191 were cases where the
offer had been delayed by one year and above but less than two years, one case was
where the offer had been three years and in one case offer had been delayed by three
years and above but less than four years.

The Committee took exception to the manner the offer of appointments by the
Ministries were being delayed to the extent of one to four years even when a number of
vacancies existed in all the three services. The Committee liked
Ministry/Department-wise details in this regard. Besides the concerns of the Committee
adequately be conveyed to the concerned Ministries to expedite offer of appointments,
time limit be fixed within which the offer of appointments should be made to the
candidates.

1.38 The Department of Personnel and Training in its Action Taken Replies: has
furnished the following information :-

Reply i/r/o IAS

The appointment letters to candidates who have been allocated to IAS are
issued within one year from the date of declaration of final result by UPSC.

Reply i/r/o IPS

As per information received from Ministry of Home Affairs, the in-position
strength of Indian Police Service (IPS) officers as on 01.01.2017. is 3905
against authorized cadre strength of 4843. As such 938 posts are vacant
in Indian Police Service. The vacancies in.the service are caused due to
factors such as retirement, resignation, death, removal from service etc.,

-19-


all these factors are recurring in nature and relative with the rate of

recruitment. To fill up the vacant posts in Indian Police Service, the

batch-wise of IPS (direct recruit) has been increased from 88 to 103 from

CSE 2005 to 130 from CSE, 2008 and to 150 from CSE, 2009. Besides

this, the process of appointments to the Indian Police Service by
हक + promotion from State Police Service has been accelerated.

As regards DR officers recruited in the Indian Police service
through Civil Service Examination is concerned, as of now total 150
candidates are being recruited in the Indian Police Service, all the
candidates who are recommended for appointment to IPS by DoP&T are
given offer of appointment before the commencement of the Basic
Training Course at the SVP National Police Academy. There is no delay in
giving offer of appointments to the IPS.

Reply i/r/o IFS

As per information received from MOEF8&CC, there has been no delay in
issue of appointment orders in respect of IFS officers. As soon as all the
pre-appointment requirements are completed, the letters are issued
immediately.

4.39 The Committee note that the Department has merely elaborated on the
offer of appointments being issued to the candidates by the concerned
Ministries for appointment to All India Services. The Department has
not mentioned anything regarding fixing time limit within which the offer of
appointments are to be made to the candidates. The Committee also note that no
specific time period has been prescribed for issuing offer of appointment to the
candidates recommended by DoPT for appointment to All India Services and as
a result of this, the offer of appointments are delayed even when a number of
vacancies exist in all the three services. The Committee further note that the
Department has not furnished the requisite details sought in this regard. The
Committee deprecate such indifferent attitude of the Government and reiterate
their earlier recommendation.

-20-


CHAPTER - Il

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNMENT

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.1)
Introductory to the Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in the
Report.

Reply by the Government
Being introductory part, no action is required.

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.6)

Frivolous complaints just before the promotion leads to unnecessary hardships
and delay in the promotion of an officer. To obviate such a situation, the Committee
would like to recommend that such complaints should be examined judiciously and
disposed off expeditiously. If it is found that the complaint has been made intentionally
with the purpose to block the promotion, there should be some provision for taking
action against the complainant which would definitely have a deterrent effect.

Reply by the Government

Complaints against AIS officers working in Central Government are examined as
per complaint handling guidelines issued vide DoPT OM No. 104/76/2011-AVD-I dtd.
18.10.2013.

The matter regarding promotion of IAS officers is in the domain of the State
Governments concerned and not the Central Government.

The Vigilance clearance in respect of IAS officers working in the Central
Government is examined as per guidelines issued vide DoPT OM No
104/33/2005-AVD.! dated 29.10.2007. These guidelines will apply for vigilance
clearance in respect of inclusion in the offer list, empanelment, any deputation from
which Central Government clearance is necessary, including deputation under Rule 6(1)
and 6(2)(ii) of AIS (Cadre) Rules, appointments to sensitive posts, assignments to
training programmes (except mandatory training), and premature repatriation to the
cadre. As per the guidelines, vigilance clearance of an IAS officer shall not be withheld
due to filing of a complaint and if preliminary inquiry takes more than three months to be
completed.

As per Central Vigilance Commission’s guidelines, no cognizance should be
taken of any complaint which is received six months prior to the initiation of selection
process for senior post.’

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.15 of Chapter-l)

-24-


Observations/Recommendations(Para No.10)

The Civil Servants in their career initially serve in the district and are given field
assignments through their posting in cutting edge posts in the districts starting from
SDM to ADM/PD DRDA/CDO/CEO, Zilla Parishad and finally as DM/CEO, Municipal
Commissioner. During the middle and senior level these officers occupy senior positions
in Centre and States. The Committee observe that the basic idea behind creating the All
ndia Services was to have a pool of officers who during their tenure may work in States
as well as in the Central Government. While being posted at the middle/ senior level in
the Centre, they bring their experience of working at various crucial positions in the
District Administpation and other senior positions in the States and vice-versa thereby
fulfilling the requirement of our federal structure. The Committee are concerned to note
that not only the State Civil Service Officers promoted to AIS, but also the AIS officers
recruited through UPSC are not willing to work in the Centre. In this scenario, the
Committee are unable to judge the effective contribution of All India Services in framing
laws and policy formulation on the subjects listed in Union and Concurrent Lists under
the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. The Committee, therefore, while concurring to
he recommendations made by various Pay Commissions, would like to recommend
that deputation of AIS officers to Central Government from all Cadres should be made
mandatory. Besides the Committee would also like to recommend to have some
mechanism to ensure uniform dispersion of AIS officers across the States at the time of
cadre allocation itself and representation of officers from far flung areas like North East,
in conformity with All India Character of the Services. :

Reply by the Government

The Department of Personnel and Training allocate cadre to IAS officers who are
selected through Civil Services Examination conducted by UPSC and allocated to IAS
based on their merit, preferences. The Central Government has issued revised policy
(Annexure-IX) on 05.09.2017 for the allocation of cadres to the members of All India
Services which will come into effect from Civil Services Examination-2017/ Indian Forest
Service Examination-2017. In this policy, all the cadres have been divided into five
zones and a candidate may give preference for these zones in the order of descending
priority as well as preference for cadres within each Zone in descending order.

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.11)

The Committee further note that under CCS, extension in deputation period may
be considered after an officer receives Proforma promotion in his Cadre. The
Committee have been apprised that there is no such provision for All India Service
officers currently for extension in deputation period after recéiving of Proforma
promotion which is disadvantageous to AIS officers. The matter is being considered for
extending this provision to All India Service officers on par with Central Civil Service *
Officers. The Committee would like to recommend for expeditious decision in this

22:


regard. Besides the Committee would also like the Government to devise some
incentives for posting of AIS officers in the Central Government so as to attract the

talent which is urgently required for sound and effective policy formulation/ programmes
for the Country.

Reply by the Government

Central deputation guidelines have already been issued and proforma promotion
guidelines have been modified for AIS officers in line with CCS.

As regards the recommendation relating to the devising of some incentives for
posting of AIS officers in the Central Government, the major reasons for disinclination of
officers to come to Government of India on posting is majorly due to non availability of
housing and lack of admission in schools of Delhi.

2 Various incentives have recently been provided to members of AIS as well as
Central Group A service coming at cutting edge level of DS/ Director. Some of the
incentives are as indicated belo

(i) Allotment of Car at level of DS/ Director for pickup and drop and use by

Section.

(ii) Priority allotment of accommodation under General Pool Residential
Accommodation in Pragati Vihar hostel immediately on joining Central
Staffing Scheme. :

(iii) Priority for admission to Sanskriti School for members of AlS and Central
Group A service on their posting in Central Staffing Scheme.

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.12)

The Committee note that despite shortage of Indian Police Service Officers, they
are sent on deputation for postings in Departments like Railway Protection Force,
CRPF, BSF etc. who have their own Cadre. Sometimes IPS Officers are also on
deputation in the Personal Staff of Ministers. In this context, the Committee find that
with regard to deputation of IPS to Railway Protection Force, the matter is pending in
the Supreme Court. Besides the Committee under the Chairmanship of Cabinet
Secretary has been formed to look into the matter. While emphasising for early
resolution of the dispute with regard to deputation of IPS with Railways, the Committee
recommend to re-look the rules and guidelines of deputation of IPS Officers to the
Offices/Organisations which have their own cadre as such practice besides squeezing
the already scarced resources invite unnecessary confrontation between the dedicated
cadre of an organisation and the IPS deputationists.

The Committee find that the tenure of deputation of AIS officers 19 for five years
after which the officer has to go back to State Government. The Committee have also
been apprised that under some circumstances, the deputation period can be upto 7

~23-


years, The Committee note that on the one hand there is general reluctance on the part
of AIS Officers to go on deputation to the Central Government postings, on the other
hand the officers allocated Cadres of States which are confronting the menace of
insurgency, extremism, terrorism and militancy, sometimes manage their deputation for
their convenient posting at other places. The Committee in this regard would like to
recommend to review the situation and have some stringent guidelines for postings in
difficult areas in the country particularly the regions affected by terrorism/militancy.

Reply by the Government

In order to review the situation and having some stringent guidelines for postings
in difficult areas in the country particularly the regions affected by terrorism/militancy,
with the approval of competent authority, a committee headed by EO & AS has been
constituted to examine this issue and suggest an appropriate course of action. Further,
a Committee of Secretaries (CoS), constituted with the approval of competent authority
will take a final view on the course of action suggested in the report of the Committee
headed by EO&AS.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of Chapter-l)

QObservations/Recommendations(Para No.13)

The Committee note that presently there is a training schedule for IAS, IPS and
IFS Probationers comprising of 103, 104 and 80 weeks respectively. The training
consists of foundation training at respective Training Institutes and on the job training.
IAS Officers are given training at Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of
Administration, IPS Officers are trained at National Police Academy, Hyderabad and
IFS Officers are given Training at Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy, Dehradun.
The Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) under various schemes also provide
in-service training to such officers in foreign Universities/Institutes in the areas of better
Governance and Public Policy. The Committee note that National Training Policy lays
down the operational guidelines for the development of the human resources of the
Government and Training Division of DoPT is the nodal agency for the implementation
of the National Training Policy and issuing guidelines to amplify and ‘facilitate its
implementation. For AlS Officers, the respective Training institutes formulate policies
and implement their training programme.

The Committee note that for improving the working of all India Services, 2nd
Administrative Reforms Commission has made several recommendations. As per the
information made available, most of the recommendations made by ARC with regard to
capacity building of Officers of All India Services have been agreed to by the
Government. Such recommendations include mandatory training for all Government
Servants at induction stage as well as at mid-career, to design a plan scheme to
strengthen training institutions, giving autonomy and operational flexibility to National

Dae


Training Institutes and setting up a National Institute of Good Governance. The
Committee find from the replies furnished by the Government that on some of the
recommendations action has already been taken. National Centre for Good Governance
has been established in 2014 by upgrading and expanding the mandate of National
Institute of Administrative Research (NIAR), an autonomous society under LBSNAA,
Mussoorie. Besides the national level strong network of Central Training Institute
already established by the Cadre Controlling Authorities, at the State level, every State
has a State Training Institute at the Apex level. Then there are Regional and District
Training Centres in the States to meet the training needs of all levels of the Government
employees. For monitoring the implementation and taking appropriate steps to facilitate
recommendations of NTP, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry
of:Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions has been constituted. The Committee in
this regard would like to be apprised of the action taken on each of the
recommendations of ARC and the impact thereto. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the year-wise budgetary allocations made as well as expenditure met for
strengthening the training institutions particularly with regard to the plan scheme which
was to be designed to support training organisations as stated above.

Reply by the Government

The Department of Personnel and Training have stated that under the scheme
“Training for All’, there are seven components for which the allocations are utilized.
.However, these seven components are not shown in the DDG whereunder the
allocations are available under “Professional Services”. Out of seven components, the
allocation is utilized for Augmenting the Capacity of Training Institutes. During the last
five years, the money spent on augmenting the capacity is as under:-

AUGMENTATION OF CAPACITY OF TRAINING INSTITUTIONS

a Year Financial Deliverable (Expenditure incurred in lakhs)
1 2012-13 238.00
2 2013-14 400.00
3 2014-15 388.00
4 2015-16 160.00
5 2016-17 105.00
1291.00
Total

-25-


Following are the inputs on the action taken on each of the recommendations of

ARC :-

51.
No.

(a)

(b)

Recommendations made by

Administrative Reforms Action Taken by DoPT
Commission

Induction Training Foundation Course is

i NAA, Mussoorie to the
Every government servant should 'MParted by LBS Cc
undergo a mandatory training at the officers woe ale selected by UPSC.
induction stage and also periodically ISTM being cadre training 19108: ‘Tor
during his/her career. Successful Central Secretariat Service (CSS) and
completion of these trainings should Central Secretariat Stenographers Service
be a minimum necessary condition (CSSS), conducts mandatory training athe
for confirmation in service and induction stage and also periodically before
subsequent promotions Mandatory Promotion to the next level. The details are

induction trainings should. be हैं Annexure-Ill.
Prescribed for Group D staff also

before they are assigned postings. Mandatory — induction training is also

imparted to Multi Tasking Staff nominated
by Department of Personnel & Training.
ISTM is training Institute imparting training
on National Training Policy (1996). The
details of the training programmes
conducted during last ten years are at
Annexure-lV.

The Plan Scheme of Training For All (TFA)
sponsored by DoPT has been in operation
since 1992. The Scheme has been
approved for the next three years beyond
née ; 12” Five Year Plan (31.03.2041 7). TFA is an
A monitoring mechanism should be ae ‘
set up for overseeing the umbrella scheme containing — following

P हल 5 ogrammes:-
implementation of the National P!°9 eS

Training Policy (1996). (i) State Category Training Programme.

(ii) Trainer Development Programme

(iii) Intensive Training Programme

Induction Training Programme

(v) Faculty Development Scheme.

(vi) Augmentation of Capacity. of

Training Institutions.

(viil)Comprehensive Online Modified
Modules on Induction Training

Oe a


The Fifteen- week Foundation Course is
the flagship course of Induction training and
is intended for fresh entrants to the All-India
The practice of having a ‘Common Services, ie. the Indian Administrative
Foundation Course’ for all Group ‘A’ Service, the Indian Police Service and the
Services — generalist, specialized Indian Forest Service, and the various
and technical, should continue. For Central Services (Group-A) of the Union,
Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ Services, the
Institute of Secretarial Training and ISTM conducts foundation courses not only
Management (519) may befor Group B and Group C officers of CSS
developed as the nodal agency for and CSSS but also Group ‘A’ services. The
design and delivery of common details of foundation courses for Group ‘B’
Foundation Courses. and Group ‘C’ are at (Annexure-V). Details
of foundation courses for Group ‘A’ officers
of Office of RGI, DGCA, ICAR, etc are at
Annexure-VI.
The LBSNAA imparts training to the officers
of different levels of seniority i.e.
Mid-Career Training Program for:

IAS (Phase Ill) for 4 weeks duration
targets the officers of 7-9 years of
seniority

All civil servants should undergo The Phase IV Course targets middle

mandatory training before each level officers (of 14-16 years seniority)

promotion and each officer/official with a thrust on Public policy

should be evaluated after each

training programme. Successful The Phase V Course aims at

completion of the training developing strategic leadership skills in

programmes should be made senior level IAS Officers (26-28 years

mandatory for promotions. seniority) for effective inter-sectoral

policy formulation जाए strategic,
. leadership in government

ISTM being cadre training institute for
Central Secretariat Service (CSS) and
Central Secretariat Stenographers Service
(CSSS), conducts training courses before
promotion to the next level. The details are
at Annexure-lll.

The objective of mid-career training Mid-Career training is ‘imparted to the

should be to develop domain officers of 7-9 years of seniority; 14-16

knowledge and competence years of seniority and 26-28 years of

required for the changing job profile seniority. The main focus of these is to

of the officer. To this end, mid career provide domain knowledge.

learning opportunities relevant to Session plans of mid-career training

-27-—


specific domains or specializations programmes are designed to take care of
should be made available fordomain specific knowledge requirements
officers. as well as competence required for the
changing job profile of the officers. In
addition, theme based training programmes
are regularly conducted by ISTM in which
officers working in specific domain areas
participate. ISTM is also proactive to
introduce new training programmes to cater
to the continuously changing training needs
of officials. Year-wise details of the new
training programmes introduced are at
Annexure-VIl.
ISTM is in the process of launching a
bi-annual journal titled “ISTM Journal of
Training, Research and Governance”
publi pervanis should ; Be during the current year. As part of some
encouraged to obtain higher + ainin जा ficisante |
academic qualifications and to write 3 PISO मलिक 5 शिमला गिल ale

ou Fequired to prepare Syndicate
Sn nag reputed and authoritative Reports/Papers on Public Policy Analysis

and Formulation with the objective of
developing the analytical and writing
capabilities.
The LBSNAA takes pro-active steps in
forging partnership with institutions of
repute both within and outside the country.
ISTM has developed a strong network with
other institutes as it collaborates with ATls
and SIRDs for conducting State
Attachment, Village Attachment of various
A strong network of training training programmes as well as Foundation
institutions at the Union and State Training Programme.
levels needs to be built up to cater to|STM also conducts Trainer Development!
the training requirements of civil Programmes sponsored by DoPT for the:
servants. However, instead ofcapacity building of trainers across all
spreading resources over a large Training establishments, including State/UT
number of institutions, a few training establishments.
institutions should be identified forA Blended Training programme called
capacity building and upgradation. Comprehensive Online Modified Modules
on Induction Training (COMMIT) was
launched by Hon'ble’ MoS (PP) in June
2017 on pilot basis for 6 States of Assam,
Haryana, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu,
Telangana and West Bengal for the
capacity building of frontline functionaries
of these States. Subsequently, as per the

ser


interest shown by State ATIs of Gujarat,
Jammu & Kashmir and Punjab, the
COMMIT was extended in these three
States as well. Thus currently the
programme is catering to more than 80,000
Officials in 9 states as a closed programme.

The composition of governing

bodies of the national training The LBSNAA plays a leadership role with

institutions such as the LBSNAA, respect to Co-ordinating among State ATIs.

SVPNPA, IGNFA and also the State

(h) Administrative Training Institutes DoPT (TFA) sends the Master Trainers to

should be broadened by inducting the State Administrative Training Institutes

eminent experts. The governing to train the trainers at regular basis under

bodies should be adequately the Trainers Development Programme

empowered to enable them to (TDP).

discharge their functions efficiently.

A national institute of good, ,. . 6
governance may be set up py National Centre for Good Governance

7 10 ४०506) has been constituted as an
upgrading one of the existin :
ie ocean ae institutes. Thig 2utNomous body in February, 2014 under
institute would identify document the administrative control of Department of
and disseminate best practices end Personnel & Training which was latterly
also conduct training programmes. transferred to: DARPG.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.28 of Chapter-!)

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.14) No.14)

The Committee note from the data furnished in Annual Report (2015-16) of DoPT
that Rs. 95.46 crore under Revenue and Rs. 196.61 crore were allocated under Capita’
Head for 12" Plan under the Scheme Improvement of Infrastructure and upgradation of
Essential facilities at LBSNAA and Upgradation of LBSNAA to the Centre of Excellence
Report respectively. From the data it is noted that the allocations made during Annual
Plan 2015-16 and 2016-17 do not commensurate proportional year-wise allocation. No
only that the allocations at BE stage have been reduced RE stage and even the
reduced allocations could not be utilised fully. With regard to item ‘Setting up of Nationa
Centre for Good Governance’ out of Rs.85 crore of allocations under Capital Head for
12" Pian, the expenditure met has been shown as nil. The Committee fail to understand
setting up of National Centre for Good Governance at no cost. The utilisation of outlay
under the aforesaid two programmes indicates dismal financial performance under the
training programmes. The Committee would like the Government to furnish details 0
financial and physical achievements under each of the Head of Training during each
year of 12" Plan and under the current year 2017-18 so as to analyse the position.

-29-



Reply by the Government

The EFC allocation in respect of Capital and Revenue Schemes of LBSNAA
under the nomenclature, upgradation of infrastructure and essential facilities at LBSNAA
containing the allocation as per Revised Estimates and actual expenditure incurred
during the EFC plan period 2012-13 to 2016-17 along with the SFC approval has been
annexed at Annexure-Vill.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.31 of Chapter-!)

Observations/Recommendations (Para No.18 )

Once an officer has acquired domain expertise through rigorous training and
experience, he should be assigned the post for which domain expertise has been
developed. Not only that he should be allowed to continue in the specialised post for a
reasonable period in the interest of the institution as well as the officer,

Reply by the Government

Various ministries/ departments/ state governments have been requested to
ensure that officers having specific domain expertise after undergoing specialised
training should preferably be posted in the areas where the knowledge and skill
acquired is best utilised

Observations/Recommendations (Para No.19 )

The 6" Central Pay Commission has recommended lateral entry at SAG/HAG
levels in identified posts not encadred into any services. Though the DoPT does not
seem to be in agreement with the lateral entry as is indicative in the written reply, the
Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated that under Central Staffing, the
posts can be occupied by officer of any organised service and outsider can also come.
The Committee while considering the issue of lateral entry also take note of the fact that
Civil Services are the elite services of the country and selection is made through a very
tough competition, lateral induction may to some extent affect the promotional avenues
of the officers and demotivate them besides affecting the attraction it has being the top
level career. Taking note of both the sides of issue, the Committee would like to
fecommend for minimal lateral entry at the senior level to meet the need of expertise
besides bringing the freshness and competition in the Services. While recommending
for minimal lateral induction, the Committee take note of the existing rules which do not
permit Civil Servants to go to private sector on deputation. The Committee are of the
view that there is a need to revisit the provision to permit both way$ deputation/lateral
induction so as to bring the experience and professionalism of the private sector in the
Government service and vice-versa. The Committee would like the Government to take
concrete initiatives on the suggested lines and apprised the Committee accordingly.

-30-


Reply by the Government

The Govt. of India (DOPT) has issued notification for lateral entry for 10 posts at
Joint Secretary level in various Ministries / Departments of Govt. of India. The
Consolidated Deputation Guidelines for All India Services, issued vide DOPT’s letter no.
14017/33/2005-AIS-II(Pt.1) dated 28.11.2007, under rule 6(2) (ii) of IAS/IPS/IFS
(Cadre)Rules deals with the deputation to International and to an autonomous body,
trust, society, etc. not controlled by the Government, or a private body.

Relevant provisions are as under:

is

Rule 6(2)(ii)

“A Cadre officer may also be deputed for service under an international
organization, an autonomous body not controlled by the government, or a
private body, by the central Government in consultation with the state
government on whose cadre she/he is borne.”

Deputation under Rule 6(2)(ii) to International Organizations. under Rule 6(2)(ii) to International Organizations.

Posts that are to be covered:

1. UN Organization fe

2. International financial institutions like World Bank IMF, ADB, etc.

3. Multilateral organization, of which India is a member, like IAEA,
WTO, Commonwealth Organization , International Court of justice,
SAARC etc.

4. Bilateral Bodies set up under the Vienna conventioneer Embassies
and Bodies set up under them, like USAID, DFID,NORAD, etc.

5. International NGOS or funding Organization form which India
receives technical/financial assistance like international red cross
society, Action Aid, Aga khan foundation, food Foundation, etc.

Procedure to be followed for appointment: to be followed for appointment:

With The approval of the committee under the chairmanship of the cabinet
secretary compressing secretary (p) and finance secretary (with PM’s
approval for JS and above):

Provided that for appointment to posts listed at (iv), the foreign secretary
to the MEA secretary concerned shall also be a member of the committee.

Provided further that for appointment to posts listed at (v), the
concurrence of MHA shall be taken.

-31-


Tenure to be applicable: Maximum of 5 years at a stretch.

Note: All other conditions laid down in DOPT guidelines contained in F.NO
11144077/33/2005-AlS (Il) Part i) dated 27/12/2006 and PMO ID
dated 01/05/2007 shall be applicable.

Deputation_under Rule 6(2) (ii) to an autonomous or non-profit under Rule 6(2) (ii) to _an_ autonomous or non-profit
organization or controlled by the Government, or a private body. or controlled by the Government, or a private body.

Posts that are to be covered:

. Registered Societies OR Trusts of foundations or non-profit
organization or NGOs or cooperatives;

. Apex bodies of industries and commerce;

Provided that such autonomous or private bodies fulfill all four of the
following criteria:

° They are functionally autonomous of the central and state
Governments
. They are not substantially funded by the central and state
government
° The central or state government of not have powers to give
them directions: and
° They are not companies registered under the Registration of

Companies Act.

Procedure to be followed for appointment:

With the approval of the committee under the chairmanship of the
cabinet Secretary comprising Secretary (p) and Finance Secretary
(With PM's approval for JS and above)

Tenure to be applicable: Maximum of 5 years at a stretch.
Provided that total period of deputation under all categories under

Rule 6(2)(ii) shall not exceed a maximum of .7years in the entries
services. :

32.


Qbservations/Recommendations(Para No.22) No.22

The Committee note that as per Section 34 of ‘The Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016’ made effective on 28" December, 2016, every appropriate
Government shall appoint in every Government establishment, not less than four per

meant to be filled with persons with benchmark disabilities. The Committee in this
regard would like to be apprised as to whether the posts in the All India Services have
been identified as per Section 33 of the Act. The position in this regard may be
intimatéd to the Committee. Besides the Committee would like to emphasize for
expeditious implementation of the provisions contained in Section 34 in the context of
All India Services, after identification of these posts.

Reply by the Government

As per the provisions of RPwD Act, 2016, DoPT has increased the vacancies in
IAS for Physically Handicapped Candidates from 3% to 4% for Civil Services
Examination-2018 for which Rules are Notified on 07.02.2018. Besides this DoPT has
decided to include some new category (ies) of disability (ies) for appointment to IAS as
per the provisions of RPwD Act, 2016 and the recommendations of the Expert
Committee of the Cadre Controlling Authority for IAS. ‘

333:


CHAPTER-III

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.4) No.4

The Committee have been informed that the guidelines for promotion were last
revised in April, 2016 to introduce 360 Degree Feedback i.e. also known as Multi
Source Feedback (MSF) from all the stakeholders (ie. Seniors, Peers, Subordinates,
customers/beneficiaries etc.). The Committee also note that 207 ARC in its 10" report
however cautioned that in the context of India where strong hierarchal structures exist
and for historical and social reasons it may not be possible to introduce this system
unless concerns of integrity and transparency are addressed. Notwithstanding of the
concerns expressed by 274 ARC, the Committee are of the view that there is a need for
periodic evaluation of the performance of the officers. An expert who deposed before
the Committee has suggested that after 20 years of service, the performance of officers
should be reviewed every five years. The Committee recommend the Government to
consider to have some mechanism for having the periodic evaluation as suggested by
the expert. Besides there should be a system of incentives/awards for excellency in
public administration in various areas of governance. *

Reply by the Government

The recommendation regarding periodic revaluation every 5 years after 20 years
of service may not be accepted as Government of India had amended Rule 16(3) of AIS
(DCRB) Rules, 1958, vide notification No.25013/02/2005-AlS-ll dated 31.01.2012 and
had issued detailed guidelines for intensive review of service records of AIS officers
vide OM No.25013/02/2005-AIS-Il dated 28.06.2012. The said rule provides well
defined mechanism to conduct period reviews and State Govt. has to conduct review (i)
on completion of 15 years of qualifying service or (ii) 25 years of qualifying service or on
attaining of 50 years of age. If review is not conduct as stated, Centre Govt. if deems fit
may conduct review at any time after review time limits as mentioned above. Further,
State Govt. shall set committee to be headed by Chief Secretary and four members to
conduct such review. The review is to be carried out twice in a year, i.e. (i) in January to
June in respect of officers who has completed qualify time of review during July to
December of previous year; (ii) July to December in respect of officers who has
completed qualify time of review during January to July of the same year. Thus, the
State Governments are required to carry out periodic evaluation of the performance of
the officers as per aforesaid time schedule.

As regards the recommendation to consider having some mechanism for periodic
evaluation as suggested by the expert, the Department of Personnel and Training
stated that this recommendation is under active consideration of this: Department as
recommended by 7" Central Pay Commission.

34-


Regarding the having of a system of incentives/awards for excellency in public
administration in various areas of governance, the Department of Personnel and
Training stated that as per information received from D/o Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances, they have introduced Prime Minister’s Awards Scheme

in 2007. The purpose of the scheme is to reward the officers of Central, State
Governments, Autonomous Bodies, Urban Local Bodies, Panchayats, Zila Parishads for
their extraordinary and innovative work in implementing the Government policy and
programmes.

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.15) 1०.15

With continuous and rapid change in technology and emerging new fields it is
imperative to continuously review and modify the modules of training imparted by
various training institutes to AlS Officers as per the needs of the country in various
fields. Besides an exercise be undertaken at probation level itself to incorporate
specialised training in different domains to develop domain specific expertise. While
appreciating the need for foreign training of Officers of AIS, the Committee would like to
emphasise for ascertaining the usefulness of these programmes. With regard to domain
specific training, the Committee recommend that an Officer trained in a specific area
should be given the domain specific posting and be retained for reasonably a good
period to take the benefit of his training. For the purpose of transparency, the data of
training should be in public domain. The Committee would also like to know the details
with regard to specialized training given to All India Service Officers during the last five
years and their place of posting after undertaking the training.

Reply by the Government

The curriculum for training of IAS at LBSNAA is governed by IAS (Probation)
Rules. The syllabus for training has also been reviewed by different Committees
appointed by Govt. from time to time and submitted their reports for acceptance. The
committees are as follows:

UC Agarwal Committee(1986), PK Patnaik, S Ramesh and P K Lahiri Committee
(1996), B.N. Yugandhar Committee (2000), RVV Ayyar Committee (2005), Kiran
Aggarwal Committee (2012).

The Training Division, DOPT, implements the scheme of Domestic Funding of
Foreign Training (DFFT), under which eligible officers, including AIS officers, are sent
for foreign training, both under fully funded component and partially funded component.
Under fully funded component, officers are nominated for coursed in thematic areas
namely public policy management, health, urban development, finance, taxation,
international relation, Anti-corruption, Leadership etc. The list of programmes offered
under DFFT during last 5 years is given at Annexure -X.

235.


Since the nominations for foreign training are chosen from among the officers serving in
different cadres and, after completion of training, they report to their respective cadres,
post-training posting of such officers is not available with this Department. However,
various ministries/ departments/ government have been requested to ensure that such
officers are posted in areas where the knowledge and skill acquired through foreign
training are best utilised. Under partial funding, officers are given flexibility. to choose
courses appropriate to their working environment. Details of different training given to
AIS officers in last five years and expenditure incurred is at Annexure -XI.

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.20) No.20

After cadre allocation and completion of training, civil servants are deployed by
State/UT Governments keeping into account their requirement and convenience. The
Committee note that while deploying such officers, their aptitude and academic
background are not accorded due consideration. They also note that these officers are
not allowed to complete their minimum tenure prescribed and frequently transferred
without allowing them to contribute their best. In this regard, the Committee have been
apprised that there is no maximum tenure prescribed for a post. However, in pursuance
of Hon'ble Supreme Court's judgement dated 31.10.2013 in the matter of TSR
Subramanian and Ors Vs. Uol& Ors, amendments were carried out under rule 7 of the
IAS, IPS and IFS (Cadre) Rules vide notification dated 28.01.2014., thereby fixing a
minimum tenure of two years for all cadre posts and: mandating formation of Civil
Services Board. As far as IPS is concerned, the matter is currently sub-judice.

The Committee are of the view that there is an urgent need to prescribe minimum
and maximum period of tenure for each of cadres viz. IAS, IPS & IFS to enable an
officer to give his best without fear of being transferred. To address the issue of frequent
transfers due to various reasons including political interference, the Committee
recommend for having an institutional mechanism by way of forming a Committee of
Secretaries which may be headed by Chief Secretary at State level and Cabinet
Secretary at Centre level, for looking into transfers/postings of AIS officers. Besides as
stated above the Government should consider prescribing some minimum and
maximum period of tenure say two and five years respectively.

Reply by the Government

Hon'ble Supreme Court vide judgment dated 31.10.2013 in the matter of TSR
Subramanian & Ors., issued directions to the Centre, State Governments and the Union
Territories to constitute Civil Services Boards with high ranking serving officers, who are
specialists in their respective fields, within a period of three months, which will take care
of postings/transfers of all civil servants. In compliance of Supreme Court's directions,
relevant amendments have been carried out in rule 7 of the IAS, IPS and IFS (Cadre)
Rules and notified on 28.01.2014, thereby fixing a minimum tenure of two years for all
cadre posts and also mandating formation of Civil Services Board which will take care of
the posting/transfer of AIS officers. All the State Governments/UTs were informed of the

-36-


same for compliance and formation of Civil Services Board accordingly. In respect of
IPS officers, the matter is sub-judice in Apex Court.

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.23)

The Committee are concerned to note the degradation of value system and
corruption at the higher levels of bureaucracy. Although there are provisions in the
service rules, the Committee note that their implementation is the cause of concern.
Experts who deposed before the Committee were of the view that there are too many
rules which have again several provisions which makes the implementation difficult. Not
only that the officers of DoPT are too busy to look into the issue of ethics for the officers.
The expert suggested for having a code of ethics for officers and setting up of Ethics
Commission one each at Central and State level. The Committee while acknowledging
the concerns and concurring with the suggestions of the expert strongly recommend for
setting up of Ethics Commission at Centre and in States to look into the issues of
corruption and malpractices in governance by All India Service Officers.

Reply by the Government

There are provisions already present under AIS (Conduct) and AIS (D&A) Rules
to check the corruption and malpractices wherever present in AIS. The AIS (Conduct)
Rules clearly and objectively defines the conduct of a member of Service in different
scenarios. These rules are also being amended from time to time as per the
requirements. Also, action is initiated against the defaulting officers under AIS (D&A)
Rules. Further, there is already a mechanism in place to deal with complex cases of
corruption and malpractices at the Centre i.e. Central Vigilance Commission (CVC).
Functions of CVC include inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made on a
reference made by the Central Government wherein it has been alleged that public
servant has committed an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or an
offence with which a public servant may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973,
be charged-at the same trial, to inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made
into any complaint received against any official belonging to members of All-India
Services serving in connection with the affairs of the Union, Tender advice to the Central
Government and its organizations on such matters as may be referred to it by them ,
CVC Shall have all the powers of a Civil court while conducting any inquiry. Therefore, it
may not be prudent to setup an alternate mechanism in the form of Ethics Commission,
for the work which is already being done by Administrative vigilance departments where
the officers are posted and CVC. CVC is of the view that setting up of a separate
Central Ethics Commission for AIS officers and the same for every state for issues of
corruption and malpractice through legislative and elaborate administrative study may
not be required. In recent years, CVC has been proactively taking preventive and
participative initiatives through various programmes in order to raise awareness of
citizens to enable them to fight corruption. Steps taken include implementation of value
education and integrity clubs in Kendriya Vidyalayas and CBSE affiliated schools. It has
further been suggested that a separate division within CVC with adequate manpower
and infrastructure could be considered.

-37-


CHAPTER -IV-

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Observations/Recommendations(Para Nos.2,3 & 5)

The Committee note that the authorised cadre strength of IAS during 1951 was
1232, which grew to 4599 during 1981 and in 2016 the sanctioned strength has further
risen to 6396. With regard to IPS officers, as on 1 January, 2017 total authorised
strength is 4863. Total cadre strength of IFS is 3152. So far as the cost of functioning of
All India Services is concerned the Ministry was not able to furnish the specific data with
fegard to expenditure met on salary, allowances, pension, perks as well as cost
incurred on creating infrastructure like offices, furniture etc. of these Civil Servants.
However, the Government furnished scattered data of salary and allowances of these
Officers in respect of some of the Ministries/Departments as well as percentage share of
emoluments (Salary, Pension, Allowances) of Government employees at the Centre
and in the States in GDP at Current Price, according to which the percentage share in
this regard which was 7.97 percent during 2011 increased to 8.15 percent during
2014-15. From the overall position of expenditure met on Government employees, it can
be. stated that huge expenditure is met on wages of All India Services Officers besides
the expenditure that would have been met on other infrastructure like offices etc. for
bureaucracy. The Committee express their strong displeasure for not providing the
details of total expenditure incurred on salary and allowances of the officers of All India
Services in States and Centre. The Committee desire that the Government should
furnish year-wise data with regard to expenditure met on officers of All India Services by
Centre and State Governments within a period of three months. The Committee are
dismayed to note that no efforts on the part of the Government have been made to
assess the contribution of these services as is apparent from the replies of DoPT
wherein it is stated that no such study has been carried out in this regard. Not only that
no study in this regard has ever been made even by some outside agency. The
Committee take exception for not having any mechanism to find out the expenditure
made on officers of All India Services by the Central as well as State Governments and
their contribution towards GDP growth of the country commensurating the cost incurred
on their functioning. The Committee are of the strong view that the officers of All India
Services should be fully committed to the citizens’ concern and public good and reflect
the hopes and aspirations of the public they serve and as such they should be held
accountable for accomplishment of the projects/programmes/policy issues being
handled as per their specific assignments particularly when they are being paid from the
exchequer's money. The Committee, therefore, strongly emphasise to evolve an
effective mechanism having various parameters which are primarily outcome oriented
and citizen centric so as to assess the contribution of the All India Services to the extent

-38-


it has contributed to national growth. They also recommend that if need be experts from
premier institutions like IIMs, IITs etc. may either be involved or outsourced to carry out
such assessment for evolving effective mechanism in this regard. The concrete action
on the suggested lines should be taken and the Committee apprise accordingly.

The Committee note that there are cadre rules to determine the strength and

composition of the cadres and the cadre review is carried out every five years by the
Central Government in consultation with the State Governments (in case of Joint Cadre)
as the case may be, to assess the cadre strength and composition of each cadre and
new encadrement according to the functional requirements of the State and the cadre
strength is notified accordingly. The Committee have also been apprised that cadre
review is being done in a transparent and judicious manner through the Cadre Review
Committée (CRC). ॥ has also been stated that the cadre review for any specific State is
done as ‘Uniformly as possible. As stated in the earlier part of the Report, authorized
cadre strength of the All India Services has grown from 1232 during 1951, at the time of
initial constitution of the service to 6396 during the year 2016. So far as State-wise
sanctioned strength is concerned, the Committee note that maximum sanctioned
strength i.e. 621 is in Uttar Pradesh and minimum i.e. 48 is in Sikkim. The Committee in
this regard would like to be apprised about the criteria/rationale for enhancement in the
cadre strength over the years. Besides, the Committee would also like to be apprised
about the State-wise increase in cadre strength over the years along with the
demand/request received from States, so as to understand the growth pattern in various
States. The Committee would also like to recommend to explore the feasibility of
associating experts from premier institutions like IIM while undertaking the cadre review
study. The cadre review should be undertaken in an objective and transparent manner
-and with due consultations with State Governments and other stakeholders. The
Committee would also like to recommend to undertake study by some independent
agency to review the cadre strength in various States keeping in view the
responsibilities/workload and challenges particularly the security concerns/difficult
terrains in various States.

The AIS Officers are initially posted at the District/Tehsil level to deal with field
assignments. On promotion to Super Time Scale(STS) after completion of 16 years,
they are posted as Commissioner and Secretary of Departments in the State
Government to deal with policies and as Joint Secretary in the Government of India
after empanelment by DoPT. On promotion to higher administrative grade after
completion of 25 years, they are posted as Principal Secretary in the State Government
and as Additional Secretary in the Government of India. Further, they are posted as
Chief Secretary in the State Government and as Secretary in Government of India on
promotion to Apex level after completion of 30 years of service. The Committee
understand that despite clear cut uniform rules issued by MoPPGP (DoPT) in this
regard, there has been instances where violation of promotion rules by rhany States are
noticed as stated by the representative of the Ministry during the course of oral

-39-


evidence. This has led to anomaly in the overall cadre of the same batch. The
Committee are of the view that when the All India Services are recruited through UPSC
under uniform rules framed by the Central Government and their Cadre Controlling
Authority is Union Government, there should not be any violation of promotion rules by
the respective States whatever may be their functional requirement. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Union Government should keep a constant check on
these violations and issue necessary instructions to the concerned State Governments
to invariably adhere to the uniform promotion rules issued by DoPT.

Reply by the Government

The Department of Personnel & Training have furnished a statement of average
expenditure on Salary of IAS Officers based on in position data as per Civil List, 2018
as annexed at Annexure-l. The Department of Personnel & Training have also
furnished updated statements showing the expenditure incurred on salary & allowances
of AIS officers during the last 03 years and average expenditure on Salary of IPS
Officers and IFS Officers based on in position data as per Civil List, 2018 as annexed at
Annexure-ll. It has been stated that this expenditure may be taken into account for
calculating the salary and allowances in respect of AIS officers for a particular period.
As regards the evolving of an outcome oriented and citizen effective mechanism having
various parameters which are primarily centric so as to assess the contribution of the Alll
India Services to the extent it has contributed to national growth, a committee headed
by EO & AS has been constituted to examine this issue and suggest an appropriate
course of action. Further, a Committee of Secretaries (CoS), constituted with the

_approval of competent authority will take a final view on the course of action suggested
in the report of the Committee headed by EO&AS.

The strength and composition of each cadre is fixed as per Rule 4(2) of
\AS(Cadre) Rules, 1954 and similar rules for IPS/IFS which specifies that :-

“The Central Government shall ordinarily at the interval of every five years,
re-examine the strength and composition of each such cadre in consultation
with the State Government or the State Governments concerned and may
make such alterations therein as it deems fit.”

DoPT being the nodal agency, after scrutinizing the Cadre Review proposal,
submits the proposal for the approval of Cadre Review Committee Members. The
composition of CRC is as follows:

(i) Cabinet Secretary - Chairman

(ii) Secretary of the Ministry controlling the Cadre- Member.
(iii) | Secretary, DoPT - Member ae

(iv) | Secretary, Deptt. Of Expenditure - Member

(५) Chief Secretary of the State - Member

-40-


The proposal is examined/scrutinized by the Cadre Review Committee keeping
in view the functional requirements, vacant posts, ex-cadre/temporary posts being
operated and factors such as population, area and budget. Further, yardsticks which are
to be followed for encadrement of posts at the time of cadre review are that there should
be a long-term requirement of the post, the post should carry duties and responsibilities
of cadre posts. Further, the increase in strength should be reasonable i.e. whether it
would be reasonably practicable to fill the vacancies including the authorized vacancies
and also the vacancies, which will arise as a result of proposed additions to the cadre
and prevailing stagnation should not be accepted as a fresh reason.

State-wise increase in cadre strength over the years is in Annexure-lll.

A Committee headed by EO & AS has been constituted to examine this issue of
exploring, the feasibility of associating experts from premier institutions like IIM while
undertaking the cadre review study. Further, a Committee of Secretaries (CoS)
constituted will take a final view on the course of action suggested in the report of the
Committee headed by EO&AS.

With the approval of competent authority, a committee headed by EO&AS has
been constituted for suggesting various ways and means to ensure compliance of
promotion rules by the State Government through various agencies viz. Accountant
General of States. Further, a Committee of Secretaries will take a final view on the
course of action suggested in the report of the Committee headed by EO&AS.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para No.1.12 of Chapter-!)

Observations/Recommendations(Para Nos.7 & 8) Nos.7 & 8

The Committee further note that AIS cadre rules are being violated by respective
State Governments by promoting officers in various scales without the concurrence of
vacancies by Central Government, a mandatory provision, by creating excess ex-cadre
posts/temporary posts in State Government and by posting of non-cadre officers against
cadre posts. The Committee have been informed that DoPT takes action against such
violations by State Government, whenever such instances come to their notice. The
Committee however are dismayed to note that foolproof mechanisms to obviate such
instances do not exist due to lack of transparency and absence of digitised records. To
maintain the independence and objectivity of All India Service, the Committee feel that
there is a need to evolve a system of digitised monitoring by DoPT so that such
violations by the State Governments are immediately noticed and corrective action
taken thereon.

The Committee note with concern that proper updated records of deployment,
deputation, resignation, retirement, in-service death, switch-over to other service etc.

-41-


are neither being maintained at the Cadre Controlling Ministry level nor at the State
level. Due to lack of such integrated and crystal clear record system, it becomes quite
difficult sometime to assess the actual requirement/vacancy vis-a-vis sanctioned cadre
strength of officers in the respective States/Union Territories. Digital records in this
regard may help to know the exact position of cadre strength. Therefore, the Committee
are of the considered view that a comprehensive digital record of cadre strength of All
ndia Services State/ UT-wise be maintained invariably to assess actual requirement
and effective deployment, which would go a long way in enhancing the desired level
efficiency and economy in the administration. The Committee also recommend to make
suitable budgetary support for the purpose and the action taken in this regard should be
intimated to the Committee within three months from the presentation of this report to
he House

Reply by the Government

The issue relating digitization of records / monitoring in real-time has been
considered and NIC has been entrusted with task to evolve a digitized mechanism to
monitor the violations by the State Governments and take corrective action thereon.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter-l)

Observations/Recommendations(Para No.9)

The Committee note that officers of All India Services serve the Central
Government on deputation, when their services are borrowed by the Central
Government. The deputation under Central Staffing Scheme is through open
advertisement wherein nominations for appointment under the scheme are invited from
all State Cadres to have a wider pool of. officers. While deputation under Central
Government is voluntary, the States are impressed upon to recommend large number of
officers for deputation under Government of India so that every eligible officer has an
opportunity to serve at Centre at least once at the middle management level. It has
come out during the course of deliberations that various Pay Commissions in their
reports have observed that while the Central Deputation Reserve (CDR) is 40% of the
Senior Duty Posts of a State cadre of the AIS, practically CDR utilised by State Cadre is
less than 20%. This is even less for certain bigger cadres where the general tendency is
not to send officers on Central deputation. Further State Civil Service officers promoted
to All India Services by promotion are reluctant to go to Centre, other States or PSUs on
deputation.

Reply by the Government

Being general observation, no comments required.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter-l)

Aes


Observations/Recommendations(Para No.12) No.12

The Committee noted that despite shortage of Indian Police Service Officers,
they are sent on deputation for postings in Departments like Railway Protection Force,
CRPF, BSF etc. who have their own Cadre. Sometimes IPS Officers are also on
deputation in the Personal Staff of Ministers. The Committee found that with regard to
deputation of IPS to Railway Protection Force, the matter was pending in the Supreme
Court. Besides the Committee under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary had been
formed to look into the matter. While emphasising for early resolution of the dispute with
regard to deputation of IPS with Railways, the Committee recommended to re-look the
tules and guidelines of deputation of IPS Officers to the Offices/Organisations which
have their own cadre as such practice besides squeezing the already scarced
resources invite unnecessary confrontation between the dedicated cadre of an
organisation and the IPS deputationists.

The Committee found that the tenure of deputation of AIS officers was for five
years after which the officer had to go back to State Government. The Committee had
also been apprised that under some circumstances, the deputation period could be upto
7 years. The Committee noted that on the one hand there was general reluctance on
the part of AIS Officers to go on deputation to the Central Government postings, on the
other hand the officers allocated Cadres of States which were confronting the menace
of insurgency, extremism, terrorism and militancy, sometimes manage their deputation
for their convenient posting at other places. The Committee in this regard recommended
to review the situation and had some stringent guidelines for postings in difficult areas in
the country particularly the regions affected by terrorism/militancy.

Reply by the Government

The Department of Personnel and Training in their Action Taken Replies dated
15.01.2019 have stated that in order to review the situation and having some stringent
guidelines for postings in difficult areas in the country particularly the regions.affected by
terrorism/militancy, with the approval of competent authority, a committee headed by
EO & AS has been constituted to examine this issue and suggest an appropriate course
of action. Further, a Committee of Secretaries (CoS), constituted with the approval of
competent authority will take a final view on the course of action suggested in the report
of the Committee headed by EO&AS.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of Chapter-l)

-43-


Observations/Recommendations(Para Nos.16 & 17) Nos.16 & 17

The Committee note that officers of All India Services are recruited through
competitive examination conducted by Union Public Service Commission. The selected
officers come from different educational background both technical as well as
non-technical and also come from different socio-economic background. With the
growing complexities of law making/policy formulation due to various factors like ever
evolving technologies, competition, lobalization and inter-dependence of countries, new
and emerging fields, there is an urgent need for domain expertise at middle and higher
level and involvement of specialist/technocrats/scientists particularly in the Ministries
involving technical/technology related issues such as Ministries/Departments of
Environment, Forests & Climate Change, Defence, Finance, Health, Power, Information
Technology, Shipping etc.

The Committee find that second ARC had recommended that domain should be
assigned by the Central Civil Services Authority to all officers of the All India Services
and the Central Civil Services on completion of 13 years of service. While the
Government has agreed in principle to the recommendation of ARC, it has been
decided that domain assignment should be done at completion of 18 years of service as
it may not be possible to identify domains during the first 13 years of service as most of
the officers are on the field assignments in the first 10 years of career. In this context
the Committee take note of the recommendation made by the Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in their Ninety-second Report as quoted
belo-

"xxx Government should classify their entire SAG/Joint Secretary level posts
according to their functional domains and officers possessing required domain
knowledge and experience in the field should only be appointed in those
positions. It would be desirable that the empanelment may be done by inviting
applications for the empanelment at SAG/Joint Secretary and above level posts
from interested and eligible persons of AIS and Central Services possessing
domain expertise prescribed for the post. This will also create a healthy
competition among various participating services and will bring best among
them.”

The Committee while concurring with the recommendation of the Standing
Committee would like to emphasize for taking urgent steps for classification of various
senior posts according to the requisite domain expertise and empanelment thereto. For
developing the domain expertise of the officers, it is imperative to identify the domains
where specialisation is needed and domain assigned to an officer according to his
aptitude and choice. .

-44-


Reply by the Government

The Central Staffing Scheme O.M. No. 61/77/194-EO(SM-I) dated 5.1.1996
provides that to the extent possible, postings in Government of India are done keeping
in view the educational qualifications, service, experience and special training required
for effective performance of the job and suggestions of the Ministry/Department as to
the field of consideration of persons for the job. However, the specific technical
expertise which may be required in decision making is provided by technical
units/directorates in vital sectors. The option to engage consultants/experts in the
respective fields for specific time periods and with defined objectives, as per extant
guidelines, is also available.

है

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para No.1.36 of Chapter-l)

Observations/Recommendation (Para No.21)

The Committee note that there are 4926 IAS officers against the authorised
cadre strength of 6396 during 2016 thus having 1470 vacancies. Besides in IPS there
are 956 vacancies as on 1 January 2017 and in IFS 2591 officers are in position against
the total cadre strength of 3152, thus having 561 vacancies. Though the Ministry have
not indicated about the attrition rate of IAS and IPS, under IFS the attrition rate has
been stated as 8 to 10 per cent. The Committee note from the Annual Report of the
UPSC that there were 349 cases, as on 31 March 2016 where offers of appointment to
the candidates recommended by the Commission on the basis of results of various
Examinations were delayed by the Ministries/Departments for more than one year. Of
these cases, 156 cases were such where offers of appointments were yet to be made
even though period of more than one year had elapsed since the recommendations
were made. Of the remaining 193 cases, 191 are where the offer has been delayed by
one year and above but less than two years, one case is where the offer has been three
years and in one case offer has been delayed by three years and above but less than
four years.

The Committee take exception to the way the offers of appointments by the
Ministries are being delayed to the extent of one to four years even when a number of
vacancies exists in all the three services. The Committee would like
Ministry/Department-wise details in this regard. Besides the concerns of the Committee
should adequately be conveyed to the concerned Ministries to expedite offers of
appointments. Besides there should be some time limit within which the offers of
appointments should be made to the candidates.

-45-


Reply by the Government
The Department of Personnel and Training have furnished following information

Reply i/r/o LAS

The appointment letters to candidates who have been allocated to IAS are
issued within one year from the date of declaration of final result by UPSC.
Reply i/r/o IPS

As per information received from Ministry of Home Affairs, the
in-position strength of Indian Police Service (IPS) officers as on
01.01.2017 is 3905 against authorized cadre strength of 4843. As such
938 posts are vacant in Indian Police Service. The vacancies in the
service are caused due to factors such as retirement, resignation, death,
removal from service etc., all these factors are recurring in nature and
relative with the rate of recruitment. To fill up the vacant posts in Indian
Police Service, the batch-wise of IPS (direct recruit) has been increased
from 88 to 103 from CSE 2005 to 130 from CSE, 2008 and to 150 from
CSE, 2009. Besides this, the process of appointments to the Indian Police
Service by promotion from State Police Service has been accelerated.

As regards DR officers recruited in the Indian Police service
through Civil Service Examination is concerned, as of now total 150
candidates are being recruited in the Indian Police Service, all the
candidates who are recommended for appointment to IPS by DoP&T are
given offer of appointment before the commencement of the Basic
Training Course at the SVP National Police Academy. There is no delay in
giving offer of appointments to the IPS.

Reply i/r/o 175
As per information received from MOEF&CC, there has been no delay in
issue of appointment orders in respect of IFS officers. As soon as all the
pre-appointment requirements are completed, the letters are issued
immediately.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.39 of Chapter-l)

-46-


CHAPTER - ४

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

-Nil-
NEW DELHI GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT
22._September , 2020_ Chairperson,

Bhadrapada 2] _, 1942 (saka) Committee on Estimates


Annexure -| (Revised) (annexed with OM No. 14062/08/2018-AIS-II|_ dated

25.08.2020)

Current pay : No. of officers in
scale | | the scale

Average Pay(Basic, DA-7 +HRA-
BULDA7):

4 2350 |

130089 ,
1501

225906 |

292597 | .

>+५१-

284454

Average Expenditure on Salary of IAS Officers Based on in position Data as:per Civil List, 2018
i arg Ue i oe ete La

‘ i
: ae Total |
ni oO RE

198797280 |
fhe 146001066 4

104

5
933327786 |
(Per month) |
ee a
771199933432

(per annum


ANNEXURE-II

Statement of Expenditure incurred on Salary and AYowances Oro of Expenditure incurred on Salary and Allowances for AIS officers
during last three years in respect of Ministries / Depar=nem 0° Son न दा three years in respect of Ministries / Department of Govt. of India/

State Governments/ Union Territories Territories
Ministries / Department of Govt. of India Govt. of India

Name of Ministry /

Department/ State Expenditure incurred on Salary and Allowances for AIS officers

during last three years

\Govt.

: 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
DOPT Rs, 23783332/- Rs. 21955990/- Rs. 27109470/-
MHA Rs. 4,48,24,049 Rs. 4,60,39,583 Rs. 4,61,88,168
MHA(IPS in Rs; 37.83,46,311/- Rs. 42,83,71,090/- Rs. 49,22,84,853/-
‘CPOs/CAPFs) OES ५७७४७ spe pt

12० ARPG 88.65 lakh 96.26 lakh 89.78 lakh
‘Vice President's = ut Y
Secretariat

Cabinet Secretariat Rs, 23283497/- Rs. 31326483 Rs. 40934218/-
PMO Rs. 24402905/- Rs. 24156425/- Rs. 31943573/-
MEA Rs. 5768183/- Rs. 5322956/- Rs. 10905544/-
cB Rs, 135351371/- Rs. 129914552/- Rs, 149610985/-*
M/o Defence Rs. 311114 16/- Rs. 35906657/- Rs, 43884195/-
MOEF (Budgetary

provisions for salary of Rs. 13.11 Crore Rs, 12.58 Crore Rs. 13.63 Crore
IFS officers) 5

M/o Corporate Affairs Rs. 6781918/- Rs. 8363829/- Rs. 8624012/-
DiolGhemiualeend Rs, 5791219/-~ Rs. 7015288/- Rs, 9029785/-
Petrochemicals. |! क

1७९४९ Rs. 1,68,80,421/- Rs. 2,41,16,297/- f Rs, 3,13,19,465/-
iM/o Culture Rs. 93,53,074/- Rs. 1,00,50,960/- Rs, 99,83, 102/-
Dio Industrial Policy Rs, 1,57.77,748/- Rs. 1,74,25,863/- Rs. 1,79,74,134/-
& Promotion

D/o Agriculture,

Cooperation & Family — Rs. 2.81.13.608/- Rs. 3,13,54,713/- Rs. 4,02,54,208/-
Welfare

D/o Space Rs. 7,29, 128/- Rs. 18,40,120/- Rs. 46,83,380/-
M/o Power Rs. 1,57,96,167/- Rs. 1,96,88,301/- Rs. 4,57,05,701/-
D/o Consumer Affairs Rs. 59,54,324/- Rs. 51,85.985/- Rs. 62,27,379/-
Mio Youth Affairs 6... 1६, 54.33,332/- Rs. 96.57.612/- Rs, 1,75,01,320/-
Sports

D/o Commerce Rs. 3.28.57.872/- Rs. 3,36,03.123/- Rs. 4,31,09,351/-

M/o Human Resource - Rs. 2,00,91,316/- Rs. 2,67,32,333/-


Development
(Department of Higher
Education)

M/o Human Resource
Developiitent, _
(Department of School
Education & Literacy)
D/o Food & Public
Distribution

M/o Drinking Water &
Sanitation

 D/o of Biotechnology
D/o Heavy Industry
M/o Women & Child
Development

D/o Agriculture
Research & Education
cvc

D/o Investment &
Public Asset
Management

Bureau of Civil
Aviation, M/o Civil
Aviation

Secretariat, M/o Civil
Aviation

President's Secretariat
M/o Food Processing
Industries

D/o Rural
Development, M/o
Rural Development
Ministry of Railways
D/o Animal
Husbandry Dairying &
Fisheries

D/o Social Justice &
Empowerment, M/o
Social Justice &
Empowerment

M/o Micro Small &
Medium Enterprises
M/o AYUSH

Rs. 2,07,59.115/- Rs,

Rs. 75,63,427/-

Rs. 37,24,356/-
Rs, 54.41 ,422/-

Rs. 1,18,66,304/-
Rs. 35,23,693/-
Rs. 123.13 lakhs

Rs. 2.78.83,578/-

Rs. 71,30,264/-

-50-

Rs. 1,46,33,827/-

1,95,44,995/-

Rs. 1,10,03,800/-

Rs, 30,61,173/-
Rs. 79,09,054/-

Rs. 1,36,75.285/-

Rs, 79,42,434/-
Rs. 36,59,409/-

Rs. 47,96,697/-

Rs. 47,10,300/- .

Rs. 1.18, 14,285/-
Rs. 48,01,835/-
Rs. 110.67 lakhs
Rs, 2.78.84,634/-
Rs. 63,38,745/-

Rs. 4.31,664/-

Rs. 79,21,374/-

Rs. 52,88,715/-
Rs. 1,79,05,976/-

Rs. 1,59,43,773/-

Rs. 2,40,59,997/-

Rs, 1,19,81,524/-

Rs. 25,76,680/-
Rs. 1,56,78,459/-

Rs. 1,83,14,270/-

Rs. 81,69,402/-
Rs, 47,35,240/-

Rs. 49,54,616/-

Rs, 88,48,516/-

1२5. 1,62,09,512/-
Rs. 54,71,582/-
Rs, 134.73 lakhs
Rs. 3,31,06,795/-
Rs. 73,60,632/-

Rs. 6.73,828/-

Rs. 1,22,49,656/-

Rs. 47,58,777/-
Rs. 1,99,31,265/-


D/o Justice >
D/o Fertilizers. M/o
Chemicals & -
Fertilizers
Department of,
Telecommunications
Department of Posts -
D/o Pension &
Pensioners’ Welfare
M/o Petroleum &
Natural Gas
M/o Science &
“Technology D/o of
Science & Industrial
Research
M/o Road Transport &
Highways
State Governments/ Union Territories

Government of Goa
Govt. of Puducherry Rs. 1.96,72,923/-
Government of Gujarat -

Daman & Diu Rs. 1,20,35.915/-
Govt. of Kerala Rs. 3,38,06,874/-
Govt. of

‘Meghalaya(Forest Rs. 14,70,28,246/-
‘Dept.-IFS)

Govt. of

Meghalaya(Personnel Rs, 8,21,15.273/-
Dept.-IAS)

Govt. of
Maharashtra(lAS)
Govt. of NCT of Delhi
(IAS)

Government of
Jharkhand
Government of West
Bengal

Chandigarh -

Rs. 19.42,66,280/-

Government of Assam -
Andaman & Nicobar Rs. 618.72 lakh

Rs. 41.39.459/-

Rs. 99.36.462/-

Rs. 20,97,600/-

Rs. 44.40.998/-

Rs. 1.43.48,095/-

Rs. 28,35,600/-

Rs. 1,57,64.623/- Rs. 1,96,48,487/-

Rs. 15,512,365/-

Rs. 2,22,75,392/-

Rs. 16,58,99,298/-
Rs. 1,18,88,012/-
Rs. 2,58,69,167/-

Rs. 7,43,75,443/-

Rs 185.74 (Crore)

Rs 9,82,14,080/-
Rs 49.90 (Crore)
Rs. 607.33 Lakh

-$|-

Rs, 23,405,048/-

Rs. 2,09,22,499/-
Rs. 18,72,91,303/-
« Rs. 1,29,63,653/-

Rs. 2,65,46,853/-

Rs. 9,46,66,3 | 3/-

Rs. 36,02,45.464/-

Rs 259.10 (Crore)

Rs 10,07,62,274/-
Rs 38.26 (Crore)
Rs 551.60 Lakh


Rs
थे Rs. 295954485/-
Govt. of Punjab 11,32,88,054/-(Calendar (Calendar year-2016)
year-2015)
Govt. of Nagaland Rs 4.80,72.296/-
ie


Annexure-Ill

Annexure-"*

Indian Administarive Service

. last Cadre Reviow Cadre Review | spp after |Percentege increas
[| ५ < Carried out in year a Carried out in | Cadre Review ae os aah ee
year

No.

4 Andhra Pradesh 2014 211 | 2017 | 2017 239 किक: |
ex lacmuT | [2004 | 132 [2010 | [488 | 38.64
3 |Assam-Meghalaya 2008 135 | 2014 | PaaS: | Sec ee
[ 4 | [Bihar 2008 177 [2014 | [186 | (= eee: |
[5 | Chhattisgarh [2010 | 97 [2016 | 1 108. | 1 8201 =|
[6 | [Gujarat -॥ 1 6. ॥ [ 182 | | 205 ॥ 162 i 14.08
7 Haryana | [2009 | ote | 2010 112 f= 000 |
[8 | Himachal Pradesh [2007 | SBA rami: । 2 शक सा 12.68

Jammu & se
a Kashmir 1994 15 2009 75 हि कक
10 \Jharkhand 2010 114 [2015 | (Adee | 18 21080 5 ॥
41 |Karnataka 2008 | 163 | [2014 | a 171 ee a a
[12 | Kerala (een | (esis | 1 20105 ॥ 126 8.62
43 |Madhya Pradesh 2011 227 | 2016 ॥ 6 (fe ee [485
414 |Maharashtra 2007 | 190 | 1. 2015 | [196 | Baral
—

15 [Manipur | 2013 | | 60 | fants: | 63 हि की ||
16 |Nagaland Santo] [| 50. | heater | [ei] iene |
47 |Odisha 2008 123 2014 | 129 4.88
18 [Punjab | 1998 105 [2010 | ara) fe dae |
[19 | Rajasthan 2010 161 [2016 ॥ 1 1 0 | चित 8899 |
| 20 | lsikkim | 2000 | 27 2015 Raa 2 000 |
21 |TamilNadu | _—_—2008 [493 [ 2014 | +} 204 5 810, |
22 |Telangana - [2014 | | 89 | [2016 | 114 28.09
23 \Tripura 2013. ॥ 53 1 2017 [ee | [see |
| 24 |Uttarakhand [20104] [ 66 | 2015 EXGSt Pee ¥
| 25 | Uttar Pradesh (8 2010: | 0 (neem. | 2014 eal 4.98
26 |West Bengal ic 2012 195 हे || हिआ डक 205 eens.

eS 2



i हि Annexure-lV
Cadre Training Plan Courses
(2007-2018) (upto 30" November, 2018)

हे

Category. Year No. of Courses Training Weeks No. Trainees
CSs-CTP 2007 - 2018 415 3028 14853
CSSS-CTP 2011-2018 118 413 4134

Number of CSS-CTP Courses Conducted (2007 to Nov. 2018)

Level No. of Courses Training Weeks Trainee Population

Level ‘A’ [SSAs] 83 372 2715
* Level '8' [ASO] 75 375 2302
Level ‘C’ [SOs] 5 15 132
Level ‘D’ [SOs] 80 884 2289
Level 'E’ [USs] ; 52 335 1538
Level 'F’ [DSs] 12 36 349
ASODR [7] 78 949 4526
BTC- Asst./UDC 15 30 547
BTC- SOs 13 26 391
CSCS-MTS 2 pet i) 64

Total 415 3028 14853

Number of CSSS-CTP Courses Conducted (Sep. 2011 to Nov. 2018)

Level No. of Courses Training Weeks Trainee Population
SDR [7] 6 weeks (8

Weeks at present) a tee Tene
Level-I [3 weeks] 10 30 a 291
Level-I | [2 weeks] 35 70 1116
Level-lll [3 weeks] 29 87 965

els


Level-| V [3 weeks] 12 38 409

CSSS-RTP
[2 weeks]
Now senamed as 3 6 53
Level-V (3 Weeks)
Total 118 413 4134

Group ‘A’ Officers
(2007 — 2018 upto November, 2018)

Category Year No. of Courses No. of Trainees
Calendar Courses 2007 - 2018 472 9984

Non-Calendar

Oourses 2007 - 2018 271 5072

ae


Annexure-V

National Training Policy (from 2008-2018)

|Name of the Courses

(upto 307 November, 2018)

2008 - 2018

National Training Policy 13:

Year
2008-2009
2009-2010
2010-2011
2012-2013
2013-2014
2015-2016
2016-2017
2017-2018

Total

National Training Policy

No. of Courses ‘No. of Participants

246

No. of Courses | No. of Participants |

2

13

36

16

16

62

65

30

11

10

246


Annexure-VI

« | Foundation Training Courses
“(2007 - 2018 upto November, 2018)

| Category Year No. of Courses _| No. of Trainees
|

ASODR 2007 - 2018 78 | 4526

SDR gn07—=2018 =. = S 28 1300


Induction

'.

Annexure-VIl

Training Programmes for Group ‘A’ Services

SI. No. Name of Organisation/Service

41:

2

3.

Indian Cost Accounts Service(ICoAS)
Directorate General of Civil Aviation(DGCA)

Office of the Registrar General of India(ORGI)

Induction Training Component for Group ‘A’ Services

SI. No.

4

10.

Shue

12.

Name of Organisation/Service

Officer of NER States Secretariat Service
‘Indian Statistical Service(ISS)

Group “A” Officers of Indian Railways
indian Revenue Service(IRS)

ndian Information Service(IIS)

ndian Railways Traffic Service (IRTS)
fageland Secretariat Service

ndian Defence Estate Service(IDES)
ndian Trade Service(ITS)

ndian Economic Service(IES)

ndian Revenue Service(IRS)

Indian Administrative Service(IAS)


Annexure-Vill

New Courses Introduced during 2008-2018

Years

2008-2009

2009-2010

2010-2011

2011-2012

2012-2013

2013-2014

Name of Courses
Knowledge Management
Workshop on Emotional Intelligence
Public Financial Management
Right to Information Courses
Problems of the Muslim Community
Creativity Reinvention
Workshop on Preparing Cabinet Note
Workshop on Assured Carrier Progression ;
Computer Courses
Finance for Non-Financial Officers
Workshop for Officers of Integrated Finance Division
Backlog Courses for Section Officers/Assistants :
Workshop on Public Private Partnership sis
Workshop on Outcome Budget
Workshop on Analysis of Financial Statements
Workshop on Project Formulation and Appraisal
Workshop on Financial Rules for Head of Department +
6598-07 हि

Workshop on Project Management Evaluation System

Pavel


Workshop on Formulation of Budget
Workshop on Income Tax
a Human Resource Management

Workshop on Financial Effect of Penalties ३
रा 2014-2015

Inter Personal Effectiveness — | & II
Principles of Natural Justice /
Workshop on Citizen Centric Service Delivery Approach;
न 1
Workshop on Liaison Officer (SC/ST) '
“8 2015-2016
E-Governance

Workshop for Internal Finance Officers

Workshop on Sexual Harassment at Work place
9 2016-2017 Workshop on e-Procurement

Workshop on Gender Budgeting

Workshop on Big data Analytics (Basic & Advanced) !

Orientation Programme for Retiring Officials ४

Workshop on e-Office

Government e-Market Place
he

B Workshop on Goods and service Tax
40 2017-2018
Orientation Programme on GFR 2017
Workshop on Swachh Bharat Abhiyan
Workshop on Public procurement under GFR 2017
MS Access aoe
MS-Excel (Advanced)

41 2018-2019 Special Workshop on Public Policy Formulation for


Government Officials
Workshop on Process from Policy to Legislation

Training Programme on Supervisory & Managerial
Skills

Workshop on Strategic Planning

Orientation Training Programme on Drafting of Charge
Sheet in Disciplinary Matters.

Workshop on Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC)/Standing Finance Committee(SFC)

Orientation Training Programme on Preventive
Vigilance


y completed under 12" EFC scheme (Revénue)

DG Set for Silverwood and Steplton

Replacement/ enhancement capacity of sub-station at Indira Bhawan & Stapleton
Renovation of Indira Bhawan Old Hostel.

Upgradati¢n of ground floor of Director's office’

Purchase of Vehicles

ule [५० (० |e

“Figures up to 07.02.2018 .

In respect of observations regarding allocation made during 2015-16 and 2016-17 not being.

commensurate to the proportional

year wise EFC allocation, it is submitted that deviation from EFC
figures was on account of : ; aaa

1, Some of the projects were not taken.up as they were found to have limited utility
* during subsequent cost benefit analysis, For example badminton court’at Indra Bhavan
Hostel, Solar water heating system in mess and hostels etc,-
2s

Monitoring.
It is added here that the SFC approval of the ongoing proj

uation of EFC
was accorded vide DoPT letter dated 30.09.2017,-as detailed below: SCS

cts/schemes in conti

{Rupees in lakhs)

2017-18 | 2018-19 [2019-20 [Total Sid
[CAPITAL _—_| 2184.30 | 2433.00 [1976.57 6593.87 2
cr [333029 7 J
REVENUE 1591.29 | 873.00 __ | 866.00 3330.29 t
[TOTAL «| 3775.59 | 3306.00 [284257 | 9924.16

Therefore, 100% completion of the several sanctioned works was achieved during the 12" EFC,

The works which have not been completed are being taken, up and will completed during the period
2017-18 to 2019-20 after having been approved by the SFC. 4

EFC. figures were tentative year-wise cost estimates and some of the projects were
completed at lesser cost than estimated ‘due to competitive bidding and proper



No. 13013/2/2016-AIS.I
Government of India
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions
Department of Personnel & Training

North Block, New Delhi
Dated 05° . 09.2017.

OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Cadre Allocation Policy for the All India Services-IAS/IPS/IFoS — Reg.

The undersigned is directed to say that the Central Government, after consultation
with State Governments, has revised the policy for cadre allotment for the All India
Services-Indian Administrative Service (IAS)/Indian Police Service (IPS)/Indian Forest
"Service (IFoS)- as follows:

is The Cadre Controlling Authorities, namely, the Department of'Personnel and
Training (DoPT) / Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) / Ministry of Environment, Forests
and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) shall determine the vacancies including the break-up
sifito Unreserved (UR)/ Scheduled Caste (SC) / Scheduled Tribe (ST) / Other Backward
Classes (OBC) Insider / Outsider vacancies for each of the cadres as per the established
procedure. :

2. The States/Joint Cadres shall be divided into the following five Zones:
i Zone-I (AGMUT, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Punjab, Rajasthan and Haryana)
ii. Zone-II (Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Odisha)
iii,  Zone-III (Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh)
iv. Zone-TV (West Bengal, Sikkim, Assam-Meghalaya. Manipur, Tripura and
Nagaland) }

v, Zone-V (Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala)

3: The candidates shall first give their choice in the descending order of preference

from amongst the various Zones. Thereafter the candidates will indicate one preference of


CO

2.

cadre from each preferred zone. The candidates will indicate their second cadre preference
for every preferred zone thereafter. Similar process will continue till a preference for all
the cadres is indicated by the candidate. It is to be noted that preference for the zones will
remain in the same order and no change in the order of preference for the zones/ cadres
will be permitted.

4, Ifa candidate does not give any preference for any of the Zones/Cadres, it will be
presumed that he has no specific preference for those Zones/cadres. Accordingly, if he is
not allocated to any one of the cadres for which he has indicated the preference, he shall
be allotted along with other such candidates in the order of rank to any of the remaining
cadres, arranged in an alphabetical order, in which there are vacancies in his category after
allocation of all the candidates who can be allotted to cadres in accordance with their
preference.

5, However a candidate claiming benefit of reservation under Physically Disabled
quota shall have an additional option to indicate his preference (at the time of indicating
preferences for various Zones and Cadres thereunder) for any one state/cadre (other than

‘Home cadre) of his first preferred zone. In case he is found eligible as a Physically

disabled candidate and accordingly he has been allocated to any of the All India Service
then he shall be allocated to that cadre as per the modalities explained in para 8.

6. A candidate shall be allotted to his Home cadre, on the basis of his merit,
preference and vacancy available at his turn in his category. For allocation to Home cadre
against an Insider vacancy, a candidate will be required to express his first preference to
the Zone in which his Home cadre falls as well as first preference to the Home cadre
within that relevant Zone, otherwise he shall not be considered for his Home cadre at all.

fi The mechanism for filling up of an Insider vacancy belonging to a particular
category for which a candidate is not available shall be as following:

(a) [fan Unreserved candidate is not available to fill UR Insider vacancy, then it would
be filled by an Insider ST candidate provided there is an ST Outsider vacancy
available in that cadre to facilitate exchange. If ST Insider candidate is not available

or ST Outsider vacancy is not available in that cadre, then the Unreserved vacancy


8.

oe s

would be filled by Insider SC candidate with the same condition that there must be
an Outsider SC vacancy to facilitate the exchange. If SC Insider candidate is also
not available or SC Outsider vacancy is also not available in that cadre, then the
Unreserved vacancy would be filled by Insider OBC candidate with the same
condition that there must be an Outsider OBC vacancy to facilitate the exchange.

(b) Similarly, the Insider OBC vacancy, if not filled due to non-availability of Insider
OBC candidate, then it would be first filled by an Insider ST candidate and then by
an Insider SC candidate and then by an Insider Unreserved candidate with the same
conditions mutatis mutandis as per para 7 (a) above.

(c) The Insider SC vacancy, if not filled due to non-availability of Insider SC
candidate, then it would be first filled by an Insider. ST candidate and then by an
Insider OBC candidate and then by an Insider Unreserved candidate with the same
conditions mutatis mutandis as per para 7 (a) above.

(d) The Insider ST vacancy, if not filled due to non-availability of an Insider ST
candidate, then it would be first filled by an Insider SC candidate and then by an
‘Insider OBC candidate and then by an Insider Unreserved candidate with the same
conditions mutatis mutandis as per Para 7 (a) above.

Provided that in every such case listed in clause (a), (b), (०) and (d) above, #
Insider-physically-disabled-candidate(s) of the relevant community is/are available,
such physically disabled candidate (senior most in the merit list) shall be so
adjusted. In other words, a physically disabled candidate would have a higher claim
for being adjusted as compared with non-physically disabled candidates of his
community.

The cadre allocation shall consist of three steps as follows:

(i) First, all those candidates who can be allocated against the Insider vacancies

available in their category would be so allocated.


Ca

@)

(iii)

-4-

Second, the candidates who are eligible for allocation to their Home cadre as
per Para 7 above will be allocated first as per clause(s) of Para 7 above.
Even after this exchange as per para 7 above, if an Insider vacancy cannot be
filled, it would be converted to Outsider vacancy and filled as such and it
would not be carried forward to next examination year. हि
Finally, the allocation against Outsider vacancies (including the Outsider
vacancies, which remained eventually unfilled after the allocation as per
clause (i) and (ii) of para 8 above) would commence. Allocation against
Outsider vacancies to candidates in respective categories shall be done in the
following manner: ४

(a) The first choice for the Cadre in the first preferred Zone
would be considered in the order of merit.

(b) If the candidate does not get allocated to the 1 preferred
Cadre of his 1* preferred Zone, then he would be
considered for the first preferred cadre of his 2" preferred
Zone and so on till the 1४ preferred cadre of the 5”
preferred Zone.

(c) If the candidate does not get allocated to the 1* preferred
cadre(s) of any Zone, then he would be considered for the
and preferred cadre of the 1* preferred Zone and so on.

(d) However, in this process, if the cadre for which allocation
is being considered is the Home cadre of the candidate,
then that preference for Home Cadre in the Zone would
be ignored and would be considered for next zone.
Notwithstanding this, however, if during the course of
allocation against the Outsider vacancies as above a
candidate is going to be allocated to his own Home cadre
because there are no other vacancies left for allocation
other than those in his Home cadre, an ‘exchange’ would
be tesorted to whereby the allocation of such candidate
would be swapped with the cadre allotted to the first


ae

candidate above him in the list whose Home state and
allotted cadre are different.

Provided that at the time of allocating candidates as per para 801)
above, a Physically Disabled candidate (who could not be allocated to his
Home Cadre) shall be considered only for his preferred cadre given as an
additional option mentioned in para 5 above and if an outsider vacancy is
available in that cadre in his category at his turn, he shall be allocated to
that cadre. In case he could not be allocated to that cadre due to non
availability of vacancy, then he shall be allocated to that cadre under the
Outsider quota by creating an additional vacancy in that cadre. Consequent
upon the application of this provision for the Physically Disabled
candidates, if any cadre(s) is not getting requisite number of officers as per
the determined vacancies, then their requirement for the additional
officer(s) will be duly kept in mind while distributing the vacancies among
various cadres for the subsequent Civil Services Examination.

9. A reserved category candidate selected on general merit standards shall be eligible
for allgcation against the available unreserved vacancy as per his merit and preference.
But if he cannot be allocated against such vacancy, for he is lower in rank as compared
with other general category candidates, he shall be considered for allocation as per his
merit and preference against the available vacancy of his category.

10 Allocation with reference to limited preference candidates shall be governed in
accordance with the procedure outlined in para 4. Normally, limited preference candidates
are assigned cadre in the end. However, policy also lays down allocation of such
candidates in their respective category. Therefore, because of migration of general merit
candidates to their own category, a situation may arise where both reserved category and
general category vacancies are left unfilled. As general candidates cannot be allocated
against reserved vacancies, it is mandatory to first allocate cadres to these general category
limited (equal) preferences candidates. In order to ensure that adjustment of unallocated
reserved category candidates does not result into higher ranked candidates being allocated
to lower preferred cadre within a particular Zone vis-a-vis lower ranked candidates, it is
stipulated that Cadre Controlling Authority (CCA) would:

=bt-


47.

(a) pool together all reserved category candidates (except general merit
candidates) who have been already allocated cadre plus unallocated reserved
candidates;

(b) pool together all the cadres allocated to reserved candidates against Outsider
vacancies plus unutilized UR vacancies; and >

(c) thereafter, all reserved category candidates will be arranged according to their
rank and cadres will be allocated keeping in view the provisions as mentioned
in para 8 (iii).

The Cadre allocation exercise for the IAS shall be done as early as possible and

before the commencement of the Foundation Course in the LBSNAA. The Cadre
allocation exercise for the IPS/IFoS shall also be done immediately after the
appointments have been made.

12.

This cadre allocation policy issues in supersession of the existing cadre allocation

policy and comes into effect with the Civil Services Examination — 2017/ Indian Forest
Service Examination - 2017.

है (Kavitha a

Deputy Secretary to the Government of India
Telefax: 23092483

1. The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, North Block, New Delhi,

[ey

The Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change, Indira
Paryavaran Bhawan, Ali Ganj, Jor Bagh Road, New Delhi,

The Secretary, Union Public Service Commission, Dholpur House, Shahjahan
Road, New Delhi

The Chief Secretaries of All State Governments/Joint Secretary (UTs), Ministry of
Home Affairs

Copy for kind information to:-

lL

Deputy Secretary(PMO) (Smt. Nandini Paliwal)

FA.


Short term programmes

[2 selnepiaten कह

Programe

Harvard University, USA.

Leaders in Development: Managing Change in a Dynamic World
Infrastructure in a Market Economy: Public - Private Partnerships in a
Changing © *

Senior Managers in Government»
Leading Successful Social programs: using Evidence to Assess

ffectiveness यो | कि
ae for 21st Century: Chaos, Conflict and Courage
Rethinking Financial inclusion
Créating Collabrative Solutions
Leadership Decision Making
Leadership Decision Making
Leadership for 21st Century: Chaos, Conflict and Courage

”| Emerging Leaders?—< =

Applying behavioral Insights to the design of Public Policy.
A Cutting Edge of Development Thinking
Innovation in Economic Development

Duke University

Project Apprisal and Risk Management

Tax Analysis and Revenue

Budgeting & Financial Management in Public Sector -
Fiscal Decentralization and Local Government Financial
[Management

OPM -USA

Collaborative Potential Seminar
Executive Development Seminar

_ \Netherlands

है

पिता 1 ween Seg

1793 Washington

Governance, Democratization and Public Policy
Universaitzing Socio-economic Security for the poor
WTO 2

Managing Global Governance Br

Structuring and Negotiatite Legal Agreements for PPP
PPP Contract Procurement, Implementation

Creating Anti-Corruption Measures to Improve Govt
Legal Aspects of Project Finance Documenting, Drafting
Public Sector management Governance

London School of Economics

Power
-|The Political ecoriomy public policy

(ES a ea ae IEE ay
Managerial Accounting & Financial Control
Bargaining and Negotiation: Interests, Information, Strategy and

a

the International organisation: the Institutions Global governance

ENA Paris

Managernent in the Public Sector
Fighting Corruption’
Local government x

AIT Bangkot

Urban Environmental Management
Leadership Development Programme for Public utility Managers‘in As
Governance and Anti Corruption Eradication Strategy programme

AIM Manila

Basic Management Programme

t


RIPA, London Improving Local Public Service -
: Gender Mainstreaming
LKY Singapore -__|Essentials of Policy Deyelopment
Syracuse University, USA Certificate Programame in Public Administtation
Certificate Programame in Public Administration

University of California, Berkeley 2 Re
; ; Certificate Programame in Public Policy
न : : “~~ [Certificate Programame in Public Policy
Cambridge University. U.k. Leadership & Strategic Thinking

ied 4 Leadership & Strategic Thinking
Pr a Leadership & Strategic Thinking ७

University of California, Berkeley
(Negotiations for Public Leaders

: Ethics and Governance
sn | ooo ANZS OG Advance-leadership-program— SS लक ला:

Managing Complexities

Long Termprogrammes

MPA in Public Administration and Management
MA Development Studies -
EMPA

University college London

IDS, Sussex, U.K: *. :;
Syracuse University, USA :

University of Duke, USA Master of International Development Policy
Minnesota, USA‘ ; Master in Public Administration
Netherlands M. A in Public Policy and Management
Australian National University Master in Public Policy -

Natiorial University of Singapore,
ie 7... Singapore 1. Master in Public Management “
te age She ak gee S 2. Master in Public Administration
AIM, Manila. ‘i Master in Development Management rect
London School of Economics, U.K : “yf : : ve
M.Sc in Public policy &‘administration
M. Sc in Public Management and Governance
Princeton University, USA Master in Public Policy (Direct Adminission) «
Harvard University, USA Mason Programme (Direct Adminission)
King's College, London, U.K. _|M.A. in South Asia and Global Security
ols “set E In Public Services Policy & Management .
University of Manchester, U.K. . _|M.Sc. in Global Urban Development ~*~ * a
John Hopkins Univérsity, USA Mater in Public Health (Direct Adminission)

Oxford University, U.K. Master in Public Policy (Direct Adminission) ’ .
University of California, Berkeley, a fa 4
fee MPA i 4s
Cambridge University, U.K. MPA (Direct Adminission)

IACA, Viena, Austria Masters in Anti Corruption Studies (Direct Adminission)



12,202 5272
#॥९/श्हव्ण््ब्ला

Number of Participants of All India Services in In-Service Training Programme during las

years
Year IAS IPS IFS
2017-18 332 23 34
2016-17 - ere eae 37
2015-16 251 दा [Spee eee शी 9
2014-15 331 61 5 50
2013-14 386 » 19 25

Number of Participants of All India Services in Advanced Professional Programme in Public
Administration (APPPA) during last 5 years

Year TAS ] IPS Ee, See
437 APPPA 5 ij
2017-18 ‘

[43° APPPA 2 a 0
2016-17 |
415 APPPA 1 =r 0 a

2015-16 pa
~ 40" APPPA 1 ie 2 2
2014-15 3
39" APPPA 2 2 eS ae
2013-14 i

Expenditure incurred by DoP&T in respect of Officers of All India Services in Advanced
Professional Programme in Public Administration (APPPA) & In-Service Training

Programme during 2017-18

Training Programme

Expenditure (RS.)

43 APPPA 2017-18 |

cs

Rs. 19,60,000/-*

In-Service Training 2017-18

Rs. 73,18,630/-#

* DoP&T is liable to pay the Course Fee in respect of IAS/CSS/CSSS Officers only.

# DoP&T is liable to pay the Course Fee in respect of All Services Officers.



My

Training Programme during last 5 years

Cin wastes of (०८ (a)

“Number of Participants of All India Services in Long Term Domesti

gyre oe IAS | IPS | IFoS | - Total No. of AIS
Name of Programme & Batch with Year Bein, 7 जज
.क़ढ्फात्त at Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore हे हे 1
~_12® Batch 2013-14 Sere Bi 2
13" Batch 2014-15 हि o | O
147 Batch 2015-16 a | 2 | Zz 3
15" Batch 2016-17 £21285 See) seuag
=f Batch 2017-18 [ars ts बे 5 aa
2. PGD-PPM at Management Development Institute, Gurgaon i
7&8" Batch 2013-14 हि गाता छा
Combined, : :
97 Batch 2014-15 | 9. | ak 2
40" Batch 2015-16 ee Loe oe |
i” Batch 7 2017-18 CSL ca ee
3. PPP&SD at TERI University, New Delhi Sc ete eee eee,
55 Batch 2012-13 ] | ° | | ° | 1 1
;50 Batch 2013-14 : i Es ee 1
ci a ee मजा कि ee ee,
8" Batch 2015-16 (eo! 1 ges al
9 Batch 2017-18 | oT [०] i im
4. MPPP at Indian School of Business at Hyderabad/ Mohali
15 Batch 2015-16 1 pace 5
217 Batch 2017-18 Boy 4
Total 12 | 9 | 8 | 29 i



5 =xpenditure incurred by DoP&T in respect of Officers

th

Of All India Services in Long
Term Domestic Training Programme durin 2017-18 ae
६०-४४ ९०७९ Pe \ 4

Sr. Name of Programme & Batch with Year Expenditure in Rs,
No.

te PG-PPM at Indian Institute of Management,

Bangalore Rs. 29,01,856/-
16" Batch ee कर il
25 PGD-PPM at Management Development Institute,
Gurugram No 245 Officer*
|__ 31" Batch ~ ] Batch ~ Sie | Saas
ca PPP&SD at TERI University, New Delhi
9 Batch ee eon
. 8. | MPPP at Indian School of Business at Hyderabad/ _ CSS REG: md
Mohali Rs. 29,73,600/-
20% Batch ss ae

fe er oe Rs. 58,75,456/-

* DoP&T is liable to pa y the Course Fee, in respect of JAS/CSS/CSSS Officers only,

20 1



AbPENSIX - 2

MINUTES OF 4" SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES

(2020-21)

The Committee sat on Monday, the 217 September, 2020 from 1200
hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New

Delhi.

से

At
डे.
13.
14.
15.
16.
1%.

eT 30 3725

(os की पका: को 88. कल

PRESENT

Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat - Chairperson

Members
Kunwar Danish Ali
Shri Sudharshan Bhagat
Shri Ajay Bhatt
Shri P.P. Chaudhary
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan
Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap
Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya
Shri Dayanidhi Maran
Shri K. Muraleedharan
Dr. K.C. Patel
Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
Shri Francisco Sardinha
Shri Prathap Simha
Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo

SECRETARIAT
Dr. Kavita Prasad - Joint Secretary
Smt. B. Visala - Director
Smt. A. Jyothirmayi - Additional Director
Shri R.S. Negi - Deputy Secretary

pays eq


WITNESSES

1. XXX XXX XXX

pa XXX XXX XXX

3. XXX XXX XXX
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee and briefed them about the agenda of the sitting viz. (i)
Consideration and adoption of the draft report(s) xxx XXX XXX
3 The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the

following draft Reports:

(i) Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the 26th Report (16" Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
Estimates on the subject ‘Estimates and Performance Review of All
India Services’ pertaining to Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
& Pensions(Department of Personnel & Training);

(ii) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(iii) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
4. The Committee after due deliberations adopted the above 03 draft

Action Reports without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson
to finalize them in the light of the factual verification by the concerned
Ministry and present the same to Lok Sabha.

5. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX

XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX

8. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
9. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX

The Committee, thereafter, adjourned.

TH *


APPENDIX-II

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT 010 THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON ESTIMATES (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i) Total number of observations/recommendations 23
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 09

the Government

(SI. Nos. 1,6,10,11,13,14,18,19,22)

Percentage of total recommendations 39.13%
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 04

» desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply

(SI Nos. 4,15,20,23)

Percentage of total recommendations 17.39%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 10

Government's replies have not been accepted by the Committee
(SI. Nos. 2,3,5,7,8,9,12,16,17,21)

Percentage of total recommendations 43.48%
(v) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies Nil

of Government is still awaited.

(SI. No.Nil)

Percentage of total recommendations Nil