30 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Review of role and performance of DISHA Committee in various 
Schemes 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 19th 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 

THIRTIETH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
REVIEW OF ROLE AND PERFORMANCE OF DISHA COMMITTEE IN 
VARIOUS SCHEMES 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 19th 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on _________) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
.........August 2023/........Sravana 1945 (Saka)

i 
 
     CONTENTS          Page No. 
    
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2023-24)         (ii) 
Introduction           (iv) 
           
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the 7th Sitting of the Committee on Estimates held on 
07.08.2023 
 
32 
II. Analysis Of Action taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 19th Report of 
 the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
34 
 
CHAPTER-I Report  01 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government         
08 
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
24 
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
28 
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final reply of Government is still awaited 
31 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Shri Saikia Dilip 
8. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
9. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
10. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
13. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
14. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
15. Shri Pinaki Misra 
16. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
17. Shri Jual Oram 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
20. Dr. K.C. Patel 
21. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
22. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
23. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
24. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
25. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
26. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
27. Shri Prathap Simha 
28. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
29. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
30. Shri R. K. Singh Patel * 
 
*    Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 7096 dated 28 th 
July, 2023. 

iii 
 
 
Secretariat                            
  
1. Smt.  Anita Bhatt Panda Additional Secretary 
2. Shri.  Muraleedharan. P Director 
3. 
4.       
Smt. Anju Kukreja 
Shri. Srikanth Singh R 
 
Deputy Secretary 
Assistant Committee Officer 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2023 -24) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Thirtieth Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 1 9th Report of the Committee (2022-23) on the subject ‘ Review of role and 
performance of DISHA Committee in various Schemes.’ 
 
2.  The 19th Report of the Committee on Estimates (2022-23) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 20 th December, 2022. The Government furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in the 1 9th Report on 19  June, 2023. 
The draft Report was considered and approved on 7 August, 2023 by the Committee. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 19th Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
  
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
7 August, 2023         
16 Sravana,1945 (Saka) 
 
                            DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
                            CHAIRPERSON 
                 COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I  
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee on Estimates  deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the 
Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review Of The Role And 
Performance Of DISHA Committee In Various Schemes’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Rural Development. 
 2.       The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.12.2022. It contained 
21 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry 
of Rural Development and these are broadly categorized as under:-  
 
  
3.  
(i)       Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation. Para No. 1,2,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,16,18,19 and 20  
   
      Total 15 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
 
Recommendation. Para No. 3,4,15,17      
           Total: 
04  
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)     Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation. Nos. 5 and 21      
           Total-02  
(Chapter-IV) 
 
(iv)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:  
 
 Recommendation. No.  NIL                                                                                      
                 Total: 00 
(Chapter-V) 
  

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which require 
reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
(Recommendations Para No. 5) 
5.  In their recommendation contained in the original 19 th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
‘The Committee note that taking in view the success of District Level DISHAs, 
State level DISHAs under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Chief Ministers of States were 
constituted in May, 2019, to facilitate resolution of the issues of important and emergent 
nature which have remained unattended for want of attention and coordination, at the 
apex level. T he State level DISHAs have been reconstituted on 17th February, 2021 
with the nomination of 199 Hon’ble MPs. Besides, DISHA in Urban Districts viz. District 
level Vigilance and monitoring Committees (DLVMC) which were not fully operational in 
urban distric ts have also been made functional as DISHAs to monitor the Schemes 
which are implemented in both rural and urban areas. Therefore, DISHAs have been 
constituted in urban districts of Delhi, Mumbai, Chandigarh, Chennai and Kolkata. It is 
unfortunate that so far State level DISHAs have been formed in only 10 States/UTs and 
only 12 meetings have been held since their inception. The position with regard to 
number of meetings of DISHAs in urban districts is no different. The Committee are of 
the view that the who le purpose of formation of DISHAs is defeated; if the Committees 
so constituted with a larger purpose to monitor the implementation of Government 
Schemes fail to function as per the prescribed Guidelines. The Committee thus 
recommend that such ambiguities and lacunae whether it is in respect of constitution of 
State Level DISHAs or non convening of DISHA meetings and other related issues 
should be resolved without further loss of time. The Committee further urge the 
Government to take Parliament into confid ence over the issue of underperformance of 
DISHA and consider bringing legislation for empowering DISHA.’ 
6.  The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, stated as follows: 

3 
 
‘Ministry of Rural Development is actively pursuing on daily basis with the State 
Governments and the District administrations to convene meetings as per the 
Guidelines. Recently, letters have been written from Secretary (RD) to the Chief 
Secretaries of the States on 31.08.2022 and 07.12.2022 to constitute State level DISHA 
Committees where they have not yet been constituted and also to increase the 
frequency of DISHA meetings at both State and District levels. Also letters to the 
Hon’ble MPs, who have not c onducted any meeting during 2021 -22 and 2022-23, have 
been written by Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development on 16.11.2022 and 15.02.2023 
to hold District level DISHA meetings. In April 2023, Ministry has also written to States 
to issue advisory to schedule  DISHA meeting on non -sitting day of Parliament so that 
Hon’ble MPs can attend the Parliament during Session. Recently, Ministry also modified 
the Guidelines for increasing the participation of public representative in DISHA 
Committees. Also, vide letter d ated 8th February, 2023, Hon’ble Minister of Rural 
Development has nominated Chairpersons in District level DISHA Committees in 53 
newly formed districts.  
In addition, follow -up action with States/Districts has also been undertaken at 
other levels such as  reminding nodal officers at district level about overdue DISHA 
meetings through social media groups, message services and phone calls. As a result, 
the frequency of DISHA meetings has improved, which is highest number of meeting in 
2022-23 (i.e. 1095 DISHA meetings in districts) since 2016.  
As per DISHA Guidelines, DISHA Committees are mandated to monitor non -
statutory Schemes of the Govt. of India. Hence, ipso facto it can not be made statutory. 
DISHA is an effort to improve development process through c oordination and 
monitoring within the constitutional framework of responsibilities assigned to Central, 
State and Local Governments. Any legislation to empower DISHA Committee should 
therefore, be consistent with constitutional division of powers among Cen tre, State and 
Local Government. This Department took up the matter of granting statutory status of 
DISHA with Department of Legal Affairs (DoLA) in Sept, 2021. DoLA vide its Note dated 
14.07.2022 has agreed to the above response of this Department.’ 
 

4 
 
7.  The Committee are glad to  note that the Ministry of Rural Development is 
actively pursuing , on daily basis , with the State Governments and the District 
administrations to convene meetings as per the Guidelines and letters were 
written by Secretary (RD) to the Chief Secretaries of the States on 31.08.2022 and 
07.12.2022 to constitute State level DISHA Committees, where they have not yet 
been constituted and also to increase the frequency of DISHA meetings at both 
State and District levels. Also letters to the Hon’ble MPs, who have not conducted 
any meeting during 2021-22 and 2022-23, have been written by Hon’ble Minister of 
Rural Development on 16.11.2022 and 15.02.2023 to hold District level DISHA 
meetings. The Committee have been further informed that, in A pril 2023, Ministry 
has also written to S tates to issue advisory to schedule DISHA meetings on non-
sitting day of Parliament so that Hon’ble MPs can attend the Parliament during 
session. Ministry has also statedly modified the Guidelines for increasing the  
participation of public representative in DISHA Committees. Also, vide letter 
dated 8th February, 2023, Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has nominated 
Chairpersons in District level DISHA Committees in 53 newly formed districts. 
While appreciating th e aforesaid measure s taken to ensure regular DISHA 
meetings at State/District levels, the Committee feel that the desired result will be 
seen once the instructions are complied with , in letter and spirit. The Committee 
would like to emphasize that stringent measures are required  to be taken to fix 
responsibility against the officials concerned , if they don’t abide  by those 
instructions issued by the Ministry  and hence they also desire to know as to 
whether the Annual Performance Reports of the offic ials are being reflected with 
any lapse on their part on this account, as was agreed to earlier. 
 
(Recommendations Para No. 13) 
8.  In their recommendation contained in the original 19 th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
‘The Committee are apprised that once DISHA meeting is held, its proceedings have to 
be circulated within  10  days  and action taken report within 30 days. The Ministry of 
Rural Development has contended that as the follow-up action on the recommendations 

5 
 
made by DISHA is to be taken by the respective State Governments, Ministry is unable 
to ensure follow-up action of DISHA recommendations. Expressing a deep concern on 
the ineffective functioning of DISHA so far, the Committee are of the opinion  that there 
should  be  a mechanism at the Centre also to ensure that action is taken on the 
recommendations  of DISHA so that the purpose of setting up of DISHA is not defeated. 
Hence, The Committee are of the view  that  a representative of Central 
Ministries/departments may be deputed on roster basis for attending DISHA meetings at 
district and State level for  better  co-ordination  and follow-up  action on time.’ 
9.  The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, stated as follows: 
‘There is provision under para 3(xiv) in State DISHA Guidelines to nominate one 
representative (area officer) for the respective State/UTs of the Ministry of   Rural 
Development and this Ministry has nominated area officers for the purpose.’ 
10. The Committee are informed that State DISHA Guidelines have a provision for 
nomination of one representative (area officer) of the Ministry of Rura l 
Development for each State/UTs  and the same has been nominated  for all 
States/UTs. The Ministry , in their reply,  is silent on the Observation of the 
Committee about evolving a m echanism in the DISHA Monitoring Cell, at the 
Centre level, for ensuring that action is taken on the recommendations of DISHA 
and have merely stated that they have nominate d area officers, who  are State 
Government officers . The Ministry need to, at least, have a continuous link 
established to interact with the area officers since past experience points towards 
State Government officers’ laxity on the matter . Hence, the Commit tee reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and  suggest that Ministry of Rural Development 
should entrust the monitoring task to an officer in their DISHA Project 
Management Unit at Delhi  to follow-up with the area officers on  action taken on 
the recommendations of DISHA regularly and upload the same on the website of 
the Ministry. 
 
 

6 
 
(Recommendations Para No. 21) 
11. In their recommendation contained in the original 19 th Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
‘The Committee note to their dismay that there is no separate nodal 
officer/designated staff of the level of Block Development Officer as a project Director 
and also no technically/professionally sound supporting staff for the office of DISHA at 
State Government level. The Committee apprehend that the absence of a nodal 
officer/designated staff in the office of DISHA is one of the various reasons for abysmal 
performance of DISHA so far as convening meetings and follow up action as per DISHA 
Guidelines. While considering lack of required human resources as one of the factors 
the functioning of DISHAs, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should explore 
the possibility of appointing Consultants/Contractual Staff in consultation with State 
Governments at the earliest.’ 
12. The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, stated as follows: 
‘In order to address the issue related to conducting regular DISHA meetings in 
State, submission of proceeding of meetings and follow up action on the decision taken 
in the meeting, Principal Secretary/Secretary Rural Development Department of the 
State  have been designated as State Nodal Officer for DISHA related matters (vide this 
Ministry’s letter dated 21.10.2019). Further, on the basis of feedback from the Hon’ble 
Members of Parliament during Orientation Programme held on 3rd December 2019, 
DISHA Monitoring Cell at National Level had been formed on 27th January 2021  to 
ensure effective, time -bound and result -oriented work of the DISHA Committees. The 
Monitoring Cell at National Level is coordinating with State Nodal officers for regular 
conduct of DISHA meetings and follow up of action items decided in the DISHA 
meetings and to submit report to the Ministry on the working of DISHA system. The 
State Monitoring Cell is yet to be formed and the Ministry is contemplating the possibility 
of extending some budgetary support to States to create its own monitoring arrangement 
based on their need.’ 
 

7 
 
13. The Committee had felt the need for separate nodal officer/designated staff of 
the level of Block Development Officer as a project Director and also 
technically/professionally sound supporting staff for the office of DISHA at State 
Government level. The Ministry, in the Action Taken reply, have stated that to 
address the issue , since the State Monitoring Cell is yet to be formed, they are 
contemplating the possibility of extending some budgetary support to States to 
create thei r own monitoring arrangement. The Committee appreciate that the 
Ministry is finally trying to handhold the States to strengthen their mechanism 
and desire that they should sincerely take up the matter on a priority basis  and 
finalize such an arrangement without further delay. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
 
Chapter – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 1) 
 
The Committee note that until 2016, the Ministry of Rural Development had a system 
of vigilance and Monitoring Committee at District level under the Chairmanship of 
Hon’ble Members of Parliament (MPs) to monitor Rural Development programme. The 
system was, however, converted into District Development Coordination and Monitoring 
Committee (DISHA w.e.f. June 27, 2016 with the enhanced mandate of monitoring and 
guiding the implementation of development programmes of various Ministries/ 
Departments of the Government of Indi a. The Committee are made to understand that 
the monitoring mechanism envisaged under DISHA strengthens the idea of cooperative 
federalism with the participation of Hon’ble MPs, Members of State Legislature, 
representative of Panchayat Raj Institutions (PR Is) and officers of Administrative 
Departments as members. DISHA meetings provides a platform where discussion on 
development programmes can be held in detail and further course of actions may be 
decided in the meeting taking valuable views from MPs and ML As. In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee are of the opinion that DISHA can definitely serve as an 
effective tool for implementing the various Schemes of Government of India while 
bringing together the executive, people’s representatives and other stakeh olders to 
forge development works of the Government. The Committee, however, would like the 
Government to ensure that besides monitoring of financial aspects of various Schemes 
in DISHA meetings, equal emphasis is laid on qualitative aspects of the work do ne 
under the Schemes. In Committee’s view inclusion of objectives, measurable targets 
and achievements would certainly help in evaluating the implementation of the 
Schemes in a better way. At the same time, to get the desired results, DISHA need to 
function in an effective manner and as per the Guidelines. The Committee are aware 
that the Ministry of Rural Development has been taking several measures for effective 

9 
 
conduct of the DISHA meeting and advisories in this regard are being issued from time 
to time.  The Committee trust that the Government would continue their efforts to 
address the prevailing issues relating to DISHA as per the mandate and DISHA 
Guidelines so that the purpose of formation of DISHA is well served. 
Reply of the Government 
DISHA Committees are mandated to monitor implementation of the programmes 
(both physical as well as financial aspects) in accordance with prescribed procedure 
and Guidelines and promote synergy and convergence for greater impact. These 
meetings not only help to effectively monitor development programmes but can also 
serve as feedback loop for suitable corrections at the policy planning level taking 
valuable inputs from all stakeholders. 
  
Ministry of Rural Development is actively pursuing on daily basis with the State 
Governments and the District administrations to convene meetings as per the 
Guidelines. Recently, letters have been written from Secretary (RD) to the Chief 
Secretaries of the States on 31.08.2022 and 07.12.2022 to constitute State level DISHA 
Committees where they have not yet been constituted and also to increase the 
frequency of DISHA meetings at both State and District levels. Also letters dated 
16.11.2022 and 15.02.2023 have been written by Hon’ble Minister of Rural 
Development to the Hon’ble MPs, who have not conducted any meeting during 2021 -22 
and 2022 -23, to hold District level DISHA meetings. In April 2023, Ministry has also 
written letters to States/UTs to issue advisory to schedule DISHA meeting on non-sitting 
day of Parliament so that Hon’ble MPs could attend the Parliament even during session. 
Recently, Ministry has also modified the Guidelines to increase the participation of 
public representatives in DISHA Committees at both State Level and District Level.  
  
In addition to these steps, follow -up action with States/ districts has also been 
undertaken at other levels such as reminding nodal officers at district level about 
overdue DISHA meetings through social media groups, message services and phone 
calls. As a result, the frequency of DISHA meetings has been improved, which is 

10 
 
highest number of meeting in 2022 -23 (i.e. 1095 DISHA meetings in districts) since 
2016. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 2) 
 
The Committee note that DISHAs have the mandate of monitoring all non -
statutory Schemes of the Government of India as prescribed in the DISHA Guidelines. 
Initially, 28 Schemes were included in the list of Schemes to be monitored by DISHAs, 
however, presently 76 Schemes are on boarded in DISHA Dashboard. As the Ministry is 
coordinating with all other Ministries/Departments of the Government of India for 
seeking the feasibility of integrating their non -Statutory Schemes to the DISHA 
Dashboard, the Committee are hopeful that many more Schemes would soon be added 
to the DISHA Dashboard. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry had targeted to on -board 75 Schemes on DISHA Dashboard by 15th 
August 2022. Against this, as on 14 th June 2023 77 Schemes have been on -boarded. 
Few more Schemes are in pipeline of integration such as National Clean Air 
Programme (NCAP), Ayushman Bharat - Health and Wellness Centre (AB HWC), 
Namami Gange, Nasha Mukt Abhiyan, PM SvaNidhi, Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY), etc.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 6) 
 
The Committee note that DISHA Monitoring and Coordination mechanism has 
two tiers, at National and State Level. DISHA Monitoring Cell at National Level has been 
formed on 27th January 2021 with  one Principal Consultant and five Consultants, to 
ensure effective, time-bound and result-oriented work of the DISHAs. Monitoring cell at 
national Level is mandated to coordinate with State Nodal Officers for regular conduct of 
DISHA meetings and follow u p of action items decided in the DISHA meetings and to 
submit report to the Ministry on the working of DISHA system. The Committee are, 
however, unhappy to note that the resource persons/Consultants for State level DISHA 

11 
 
Monitoring Cells which would consist of one consultant for smaller States and up to four 
consultants for larger States, are yet to be appointed. The Committee urge the Ministry 
to expedite the formation of State level DISHA Monitoring Cells with all seriou sness for 
ensuring effective and efficient conduct of DISHA meetings and follow -up actions for 
close monitoring of implementation of the Government Schemes/programmes. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to address the issue related to conducting regular DISHA meetings in State, 
submission of proceeding of meetings and follow up action on the decision taken in the 
meeting, Principal Secretary/Secretary Rural Development Department of the 
State  have been designated as State Nodal Officer for DISHA related matters. Further, 
on the basis of feedback from the Hon’ble Members of Parliament during Orientation 
Programme held on 3rd December 2019, DISHA Monitoring Cell at National Level had 
been formed on 27th January 2021 to ensure effective, time -bound and result -oriented 
work of the DISHA Committees. The Monitoring Cell at National Level is coordinating 
with State Nodal officers for regular conduct of DISHA meetings and follow up of action 
items decided in the DISHA meetings and to submit report to the Ministry on the 
working of DISHA system. The State Monitoring Cell is yet to be formed and the 
Ministry is contemplating the possibility of extending some budgetary support to States 
to create its own monitoring arrangement based on their need. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 7) 
 
The Committee observe that in DISHA meetings only Junior officers remain 
present and in the absence of the senior officers, the Chairpersons are not able to 
provide the information/figure s/facts/survey/statistics related to the Central Government 
Schemes. This is when DISHA Guidelines provide for attendance of officers in -charge-
of implementing Department at District level. The Ministry though its letter dated 3rd 
March, 2021 had requested the Chief Secretaries of States to ensure full attendance of 
all heads of departments at the dis trict level in the DISHA meetings. In another letter 
dated May 06, 2022, the Ministry has advised the States to ensure maximum 
participation of the members in the DISHA meetings. Again through its letter dated June 

12 
 
06, 2022, the Ministry has requested the Chief Secretaries of States to ensure DISHA 
meetings as per Guidelines and to ensure full attendance of all heads of departments 
within the district in the meetings. The Committee gather that though the Ministry has 
been taking various measures to make the  DISHA work in an effective manner, these 
have proved ineffective to get the desired result. The Committee trust that as assured, 
the Ministry would soon evolve a mechanism of digitizing the attendance system and 
uploading it in DISHA portal in real time. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of 
Rural Development should ensure presence of all the MLAs from the district Scheme 
related stakeholders viz. Zila Panchayat CEOs and President of Zila Panchayat, Block 
Level pradhans, representatives of the depar tments/agencies whose Schemes are 
being reviewed by DISHA, for instance representatives from Railways, Telecom, NHAI, 
Banks including NABARD, as well as PSUs having headquarters in the district and the 
district Superintendent of Police, in case a law and o rder situation is to be discussed 
etc. Also the Committee recommend that a mechanism to digitize the attendance 
system viz Software/App having advanced features such as secure log -in credentials, 
face detection/recognition, time stamping of the live GPS lo cation, etc. This would 
definitely send a clear message and would go a long way in ensuring accountability of 
the officials of the district and would help in ensuring that mandate and Guidelines of the 
DISHA are followed in letter and spirit. 
Reply of the Government 
DISHA Guidelines provide for attendance of Officers in -charge-of implementing 
Departments at District level. Hence, attendance by junior officers is not prescribed in 
the Guidelines. Ministry of Rural Development through several communications has 
requested the Chief Secretaries of States to ensure full attendance of all heads of 
departments at the district level in the DISHA meetings. Along with these, Helpdesk Cell 
in the Ministry  on daily basis interacts with all the stakeholders through multiple 
channels. Whatsapp group have been created for all the  States/UTs having updated 
numbers of all concerned districts officials, DRDA,  CEO Zilla Parishad & District 
Magistrates. Information  regarding meetings is sought & shared in these groups. DO 
letters regarding meetings or other concerned information is shared through these 
groups. And there is a dedicated helpline number published to assist stakeholders for 

13 
 
any type of queries regarding  DISHA meetings. The Helpdesk Cell also assists 
stakeholders to upload meeting details & proceeding of meetings on DISHA portal. 
Automated reminder messages are being sent to DM’s/CEO’s Zila Parishad after every 
quarter where DISHA meeting or uploading of minutes is pending. 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 8) 
 
  The Committee note that Chairman of State level DISHAs is Chief Minister of the 
State and Co -chairperson is the Minister of Rural Development of the State. The 
Member Secretary is secretary in charge of rural development programmes in the State. 
The members of the Committee include 4 MPs of Lok sabha, 1 MP o f Rajya Sabha, 6 
MLAs representative of SC/ST/Women, 4 Non -officials, 2 NGOs and officials and Chief 
post master general of the postal circle. All the MPs non -officials, NGOs and 
representatives of KVIC are nominated by Ministry of Rural Development. Consi dering 
that the objective of DISHA is the implementation of various Central Government 
Schemes to serve laudable public objectives, it would be worth if the Ministry increases 
the representation of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Memebers in the State level DISHA 
depending upon the area of the State for effective functioning of DISHA. Besides, while 
nominating MPs to these State level DISHA, preference should be given to the Member 
of Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural Development and MPLADS Committee. 
The Committee hope that the Ministry after examining their suggestions will take 
appropriate action accordingly.  
Reply of the Government 
This require in depth analysis of the profiles of MPs while nominating MPs to 
State Level DISHA Committees. As the 17 th Lok Sabha is ending in 2024, therefore 
after formation of 18 th  Lok Sabha, this recommendation may be considered on priority. 
After formation of 18 th Lok Sabha, all MPs will be nominated a fresh to all State Level 
DISHA Committees.  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 9) 

14 
 
 
The Committee learn that as per the DISHA Guidelines, State Level DISHA 
should meet once in every six months and District level DISHA in every quarter of the 
Year.  The Committee find that performance of DISHA in some States are good while in 
some Stats the DISHA has performed badly. While the States of Kerala, Uttarakhand, 
Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and Mizoram have been able to hold 40 percent 
of  the  prescribed  number  of  meetings,  with  Kerala  remained  at the top by 
organizing  67 per cent meetings,  during  the  last  five  years, the States/ UTs like 
Nagaland, West Bengal, Lakshadweep,  A & N  Islands,  Dadra  &  Nagar Haveli  didn’t 
fare  well  during  the same  period and convened  as  low  as 6 per cent  of the 
prescribed number of DISHA meetings. This is a poor commentary on the 
functioning of  DISHA.  Although  it  is  worthwhile  that  the  above  mentioned   5 
States held 40 percent of the  prescribed  number  of  meetings  during  the  last  5 
years and Kerala among them held 67 percent of meetings,  yet  their  performance 
does not deserve much credit in view that 4 out of 5 States held even less than 50 
percent of  the  total  prescribed  meetings.  The Committee desire  that  in  order  to get 
the Central Government Schemes/Programmes implemented evenly in all States/UTs, 
utmost focus is required to be given on the functioning of  DISHA. Therefore, in 
the  emerging  scenario,  it  would  all  depend  upon  the  ability  of Ministry of Rural 
Development to extract performance from the  State  Level  and  District Level DISHA 
failing which, the  Committee  hope  that  the  Ministry  would initiate steps to make 
DISHA Guidelines binding on the States and Districts through enactment of an 
appropriate Act in Parliament. After all, the Ministry has to ensure that the 
resources deployed over various Schemes of the Government of India are optimally 
utilised and the Schemes are implemented without registering delays. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Rural Development is actively pursuing on daily basis with the State 
Governments and the District administrations to convene meetings as per the 
Guidelines. Recently, letters have been written from Secretary (RD) to the Chief 
Secretaries of the States on 31.08.2022 and 07.12.2022 to constitute State level DISHA 
Committees where they have not yet been constituted and also to increase the 

15 
 
frequency of DISHA meetings at both State and District levels. Also letters to the 
Hon’ble MPs, who have not conducted any meeting during 2021 -22 and 2022-23, have 
been written by Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development on 16.11.2022 and 15.02.2023 
to hold District level DISHA meetings. In April 2023 , Ministry has also written to S tates 
to issue advisory to schedule DISHA meeting on non -sitting day of Parliament so that 
Hon’ble MPs can attend the Parliament during session. Recently, Ministry also modified 
the Guidelines for increase the participation of public representative in DISHA 
Committees. Also, vide letter dated 8th February, 2023, Hon’ble Minister of Rural 
Development has nominated Chairpersons in District level DISHA Committees in 53 
newly formed districts. 
  
In addition, follow -up action with States/ districts has also been undertaken at 
other levels such as reminding nodal officers at district level about overdue DISHA 
meetings through social media groups, message services and phone calls. As a result, 
the frequency of DISHA meetings has improved, which is highest number of meeting in 
2022-23 (i.e. 1095 DISHA meetings in districts) since 2016.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 10) 
 
The Committee take note of the measures taken by the Ministry of Rural  
Development to make DISHA effective such as DISHA Guidelines have been revised 
making Member-Secretary personally responsible for convening the meetings at 
stipulated intervals; State Governments have been advised to give concerted attention 
to conduct meetings at State and District levels.  Besides, Chief Secretaries of all the 
States have been requested vide its letter dated 06.06.2022 to issue necessary 
directions to the District Collectors/ Magistrates for timely convening of DISHA meetings 
and advised APAR recording authorities to incorporate their comments on the APAR of 
the officials with regard to their performance in conducting regular DISHA meetings. 
Also, DISHA members can send their recommendation to Chief Secretary of the 
State/competent authority, which may be taken into account at the time of 
formal  assessment  of performance of the officer. The Committee note that as per 
DISHA  Guidelines, State level DISHA with the CM as the Chairperson and State 

16 
 
Minister of Rural Development as Member Secretary play a vital role in ensuring 
efficiency and coordination between district level DISHAs. However, the Committee are 
made to understand the limitations of the Central Governments   with  regard  to 
enforcing the measures so taken to make DISHA effective as Chief Secretaries are not 
accountable to the Ministry and is administratively under the control of State 
Government. Considering the fact that holding of DISHA meetings is in the larger public 
interest and would have a great impact on the effective implementation of the Central 
Government Schemes/programmes, the Committee trust that much more initiatives will 
be devised by the Ministry to improve the performance of DlSHAs. Besides, in case of 
non-attendance by officers/stakeholders without seeking exemption within the district, 
and non compliance of directions of Chairperson/Co-Chairperson, the Member 
Secretary viz.  District  Magistrate should report it in writing to Chief Secretaries of the 
States for stringent  action. State Governments should be impressed upon to take 
stringent  measures  to make DISHA meaningful. The Committee would like to 
emphasise that seeking of exemption should be only on exceptional circumstances. 
Reply of the Government 
DISHA Guidelines provide for attendance of Officers in -charge-of implementing 
Departments at District level. Hence, attendance by junior officers is not prescribed in 
the Guidelines. Ministry of Rural Development through several communications has 
requested the Chief Secretaries of States to ensure full attendance of all heads of 
departments at the district level in the DISHA meetings. Along with these, Helpdesk Cell 
in the Ministry on daily basis interacts with all the stakeholders through multiple 
channels. Wha tsapp group have been created for all the  States/UTs having updated 
numbers of all concerned districts officials, DRDA,   CEO Zilla Parishad & District 
Magistrates. Information regarding meetings is sought & shared in these groups. DO 
letters regarding meet ings or other concerned information is shared through these 
groups. And there is a dedicated helpline number published to assist stakeholders for 
any type of queries regarding DISHA meetings. The Helpdesk Cell also assists 
stakeholders to upload meeting de tails & proceeding of meetings on DISHA portal. 
Automated reminder messages are being sent to DM’s/CEO’s Zila Parishad after every 
quarter where DISHA meeting or uploading of minutes is pending. 

17 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 11) 
  
The DISHA Guidelines inter-alia provide that the Ministry of Rural Development 
would reimburse the amount claimed by the District administration based on the actual 
expenditure incurred within the overall ceiling of 2.0 lakh per meeting and bills should be 
cleared by the concerned State Government/ District Rural Development 
Agency(DRDA)(or Zilla Panchayat). The Committee note that Non-official members of 
DISHA are entitled for reimbursement of expenditure for local travel 
within  the  district  for  attending  the  Meetings  as  applicable  to  Group 'A’ Officers of 
the State. The Committee recommend that DA may be allowed to Non-Official members 
at the State Government DA rate as applicable to Group 'A’ Officers of the State. The 
Committee hope that Ministry do take into account  the current inflationary trends while 
deciding TA/DA to be given to the Non-Officials attending the   DISHA meeting.  This 
could be linked to consumer price index. The Committee would desire the Ministry to 
regularly review the existing financial limits  for holding DISHA meetings and make 
necessary amendments in the Guidelines to increase existing ceiling of Rs 2 lakh per 
meeting, in case the meeting is spilled over to the second day in continuation. 
Reply of the Government 
As per DISHA Guidelines, non -official members, other than MPs and Members of 
State Legislative Assembly, shall be entitled for reimbursement of ex penditure on travel 
within the S tate for attending the meetings as applicable to Group A officers of the 
State. Similarly, Daily Allowances (DA) may be allowed to non -official members at the 
State Govt. DA rate applicable for Group A officers of the State.  
There is a ceiling of Rs.2 lakh per meeting for District level DISHA Committee 
meetings and Rs.3 lakh per meeting for State level DISHA Committee meetings. It is 
seen that the bills received till date for reimbursement of expenses for holding district 
level meetings are not exceeding the existing financial ceiling, while no bills ha ve so far 
been received from any State for reimbursement of expenses on holding State level 
meetings.  

18 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 12) 
 
As per DISHA Guidelines, Notice for the meeting has to be circulated 15 days and 
Agenda about 10 days before the meeting. Action taken report needs to be circulated 
30 days after the meeting. The Member-Secretary of DISHA is expected to finalize the 
agenda in consultation with the Chairperson and the same has to be circulated to the 
members of DISHA 10 days before the meeting. The Committee are unhappy to note a 
clear violation of the Guidelines as agenda for the meeting is either received late or 
made available only a t the time of meeting. The Committee hope that the Ministry’s 
request vide its letter dated 27.06.2022 to all the States/ UTs to strictly adhere to the 
modalities prescribed in the Guidelines with respect to meeting notice, agenda notes, 
uploading of proceedings of meetings and action taken report, would get 
the  required  attention. Acknowledging the fact that success of DISHA depends upon 
the conduct o f the DISHA and all the above pre -requisites are necessary to ensure 
greater participation of the Members of the DISHA, the Committee desire that State 
authorities should be impressed upon to undertake adequate measures to make DISHA 
function as per the Guidelines. Besides, a suitable mechanism needs to be developed 
at the Centre in this regard to oversee and regulate the strict adherence of DISHA 
Guidelines. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to address the issue related to conducting regular DISHA meetings in State, 
submission of proceeding of meetings and follow up action on the decision taken in the 
meeting, Principal Secretary/Secretary Rural Development Department of the 
State  have been designated as State Nodal Officer for DISHA related matters (vide this 
Ministry’s letter dated 21.10.2019). Further, on the basis of feedback from the Hon’ble 
Members of Parliament during Orientation Programme held on 3rd December 2019, 
DISHA Monitoring Cell at National Level had been formed on 27th January 2021 to 
ensure effective, time -bound and result -oriented work of the DISHA Committees. The 
Monitoring Cell at National Level is coordinating with State Nodal officers for regular 
conduct of DISHA meetings and follow up of action items decided in the DISHA 
meetings and to submit report to the Ministry on the working of DISHA system. The 

19 
 
State Monitoring Cell is yet to be formed and the Ministry is contemplating the possibility 
of extending some bud getary support to States to create its own monitoring 
arrangement based on their need. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 13) 
 
The Committee are apprised that once DISHA meeting is held, its proceedings have 
to be circulated within 10 days and action taken report within 30 days. The Ministry of 
Rural Development has contended that as the follow-up action on the recommendations 
made by DISHA is to be taken by the respective State Governments, Ministry is unable 
to ensure follow-up action of DISHA recommendations. Expressing a deep concern on 
the ineffective functioning of DISHA so far, the Committee are not of the opinion  that 
there should  be  a mechanism at the Centre also to ensure that action is taken on the 
recommendations  of DISHA so that the purpose of setting up of DISHA is not defeated. 
Hence, The Committee are of the view  that  a representative of Central 
Ministries/departments may be deputed on roster basis for attending DISHA meetings at 
district and State level for  better  co-ordination  and follow-up  action on time. 
Reply of the Government 
There is provision under para 3(xiv) in State DISHA Guidelines to nominate one 
representative (area officer) for the respective State/UTs of the Ministry of   Rural 
Development and this Ministry has nominated area officers for the purpose.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no.10 of Chapter I) 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 14) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has set up a Helpdesk Cell 
that interacts with all the stakeholders on daily basis through  multiple  channels and 
assists stakeholders to upload meeting details & proceedings of meetings on  DISHA 

20 
 
portal. Whatsapp group have been created of all concerned districts officials, District 
Rural Development Agency (DRDA), CEO Zila Parishads & DMs for all the States/UTs 
to share information regarding  DISHA meetings.  A dedicated helpline number has 
been published to assist stakeholders for any queries regarding DISHA meetings and 
automated reminder messages are being sent to DM’s/CEO’s Zilla Parishad after every 
quarter where uploading of minutes of DISHA meeting is pending. The Committee hope 
that measures so taken by the Ministry, if implemented in right perspective would 
definitely improve the functioning of DISHAs. The Committee would desire the Ministry 
to explore the feasibility to undertake field visits by the DlSHAs or duly appointed sub- 
Committees to get first hand information of the various Schemes being implemented by 
the Central Government. 
Reply of the Government 
The terms of reference of State and District DISHA Committee are given in para 
4 of Guidelines. However, State DISHA Committee may refer any matter pertaining to 
the programmes monitored under DISHA, if felt necessary, to Ministry of Rural 
Development which in turn coordinate with the concerned ministry   for appropriate 
action and inform the concerned DISHA Committee accordingly. 
The District DISHA Committee have the authority to summon and inspect any 
record for this purpose. The Committee may refer any matter for enquiry to the District 
Collector/CEO of the Zila Panchayat/Project Director of DRDA  (or Poverty Alleviation 
Unit) or suggest suitable action to be taken in accordance with the rules which should 
be acted upon by him within 30 days.  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 16) 
 
The Committee are informed that an Orientation Programme for the Hon’ble 
Members of Parliament was held on 3rd December 2019 to educate them about the 
objectives, working and relevance of the DISHAs. In this regard, the Committee would 
desire that the orientation programmes/seminars/conferences etc. for MPs/MLAs, 
representatives of PRls of State and District level DISHAs should be conducted at 
regular intervals of time to create awareness about the working and importance of 

21 
 
DlSHAs to get their full cooperation and participation. Recalling that Para 7 and 10 of 
DISHA Guidelines mention that the Member Secretary of District DISHA is personally 
responsible for convening DISHA meetings as well as timely follow up on the 
recommendation of the DISHA, the Committee would further desire that Orientation 
Programmes ought to be conducted from time to time, for Member Secretaries of the 
State and District level DISHAs.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry will plan accordingly to conduct orientation programmes. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 18) 
 
The Committee are apprised about the practical difficulties coming in the way of 
smooth functioning of DISHA in different States/UTs which inter-alia include, delay in 
indicating date of meeting, postponement of meetings, inability of Chairman to attend 
meetings, preoccupation of Member Secretary, lack of proper  follow up action on 
decision taken in the DISHA meetings and limitation in taking action against erring 
employees of the State Governments. The Committee desire that Department should 
make concerted efforts to resolve/overcome these difficulties by taking suitable 
remedial  measures/amendments in  the  Guidelines so as to ensure smooth functioning 
of the DISHAs. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Rural Development is actively pursuing on daily basis with the State 
Governments and the District administrations to convene meetings as per the 
Guidelines. Recently, letters have been written from Secretary (RD) to the Chief 
Secretaries of the States on 31.08.2022 and 07.12.2022 to constitute State level DISHA 
Committees where they have not yet been constituted and also to increase the 
frequency of DISHA meetings at both State and District levels. Also letters dated 
16.11.2022 and 15.02.2023 ha ve been written by Hon’ble Minister of Rural 
Development to the Hon’ble MPs, who have not conducted any meeting during 2021 -22 
and 2022 -23, to hold District level DISHA meetings. In April 2023, Ministry has also 

22 
 
written letters to States/UTs to issue advisory to schedule DISHA meeting on non-sitting 
day of Parliament so that Hon’ble MPs could attend the Parliament even during session. 
Recently, Ministry has also modified the Guidelines to increase the participation of 
public representatives in DISHA Committees at both State Level and District Level.  
In addition to these steps, follow -up action with States/ districts has also been 
undertaken at other levels such as reminding nodal officers at district level about 
overdue DISHA meetings through social media groups, message services and phone 
calls. As a result, the frequency of DISHA meetings has been improved, which is 
highest number of meeting in 2022 -23 (i.e. 1095 DISHA meetings in districts) since 
2016. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 19) 
 
The Committee learn that meetings of DISHAs are invariably postponed due to 
elections such as General Election, State Assembly Election and Panchayat Elections 
etc. since it attracts the model code of conduct. The Ministry  in  its recent letter dated 
May 06, 2022 has issued an advisory to avoid DISHA meetings during the sessions of 
Legislative Assemblies ; however States/ districts need to schedule quarterly meetings 
as per the Guidelines. The Committee note that the Ministry has so far not issued any 
advisory to States with regard to the DISHA meetings when model code of conduct is in 
force. The Ministry is considering consultation with the Election Commission of India 
and the State Election Commissions in this matter very shortly. The 
Committee  are  of  the  concerted view that such advisory should have been the part of 
the DISHA at the conception level. Acknowledging the role of DISHA in the 
implementation of various Government Schemes/Programmes, the Committee feel it is 
high time that necessary advisory is issued to make DISHAs function effectively, except 
during General Elections and State Assembly elections since MPs and MLAs are the 
office holders in DISHA Committees. The Committee further emphasise that since 
DISHA meetings are meant for monitoring of projects and Schemes etc., it is imperative 
that their functioning is not hampered at least during elections below  the General 
Elections and State Assembly elections. 
 

23 
 
Reply of the Government 
  The Ministry has sought the advice on applicability of Model Code of Conduct in 
respect of DISHA meetings to Chief Election Commissioner of India and State Election 
Commissioners of all States/UTs   vide DO letters dated 19.10.2022 and 20.10.2022. In 
response, the Election Commission of India has not given any clear view/comments on 
conduction of DISHA meetings during the enforcement of MCC. Instead the ECI has 
provided the extract of MCC, which does not give clear view over holding of meetings. 
Some State E lection Commissions like Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Mizoram, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Puducherry etc have responded that there is no objection to conduct 
DISHA Committee meetings during elections unless Model code Guidelines are not 
violated during the meeting as it includes elected representatives. 
  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 20) 
 
The Committee recognize that DISHA is a unique and excellent platform for multiple 
Government Departments to co -ordinate and bring synergy in the implementation of 
their Schemes. It not only institutionalizes the co -ordinated action of Departments but 
also does so with the active involvement of elected representatives. The Committee, 
however, find the Department does not undertake any publicity campaigns to make 
public aware of formation and working of DISHAs. Since the position of release of funds 
to the State and Districts under various programmes is uploaded on the DISHA 
Dashboard of the Ministry of Rural Development for information of general public, the 
Committee find it imperative that adequate publicity is given through Department’s 
publicity campaign to make general public aware of the role and functioning of DISHAs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry is planning Public launch of the DISHA DASHBOARD for public soon. The 
information relating to DISHA meeting schedule, agenda, venue etc. will be readily 
available to general public on DISHA DASHBOARD. 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER III 
 Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 3) 
 
The Committee are told that purview of the DISHA is confined to monitoring of the 
non-statutory Schemes of the Government. The monitoring of statutory Schemes is kept 
beyond the purview of DISHA, in line with the advice of Department of Legal Affairs as 
the implementation processes of statutory Schemes are guided by its statutes. 
However, considering the fact that the statutory Schemes involves large public fun ds 
and the same are being transferred to different districts for implementation of the 
Schemes, the Committee would suggest that the Government should engage the same 
monitoring mechanism for all their Schemes, be it statutory or non-statutory in nature for 
their effective and timely implementation so that public funds are utilised in an effective 
and a transparent manner. Hence, the Committee recommend that the Government 
should take effective steps in bringing their statutory as well as non -statutory Schemes 
under the purview of DISHA, so that Members of Parliament get an opportunity at 
grassroots level to monitor and ensure timely implementation of all central 
Schemes/programmes/projects. 
Reply of the Government 
DISHA covers all non-statutory Scheme of Government of India that are administered 
in general. However, the functions of Schemes that have specifically assigned under a 
statute cannot be assigned to any other Committee for monitoring. In such cases, the 
extant statutory provision will prevail.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 4) 
The Committee are not impressed by the reasoning put forth by the Ministry for 
not giving statutory status to DISHA. According to the Ministry, DISHA are mandated to 
monitor non -statutory Schemes of the Governmen t of India and providing executive 

25 
 
powers to DISHA may have legal implications as it may attract the provisions of office of 
profit under Article 102(1) of the Constitution, which may lead to disqualification of the 
sitting Members of Parliament. Any legis lation to empower DISHA should therefore be 
congruous with constitution, division of powers among Centre, State and Local 
Governments. The Committee hold the view that disqualification of the sitting Members 
of Parliament under Article 102(1) is attracted only if he holds any office of profit under 
the Government of India or the State Government, and/or exercises any executive 
power by virtue of being appointed to an Office. The Chairperson of DISHA being Ex -
Officio member of the Committee is not appointed either by State/Central Government 
and thus does not fall under the criteria of holding any office of profit under the 
Government. Furthermore, the post of chairperson of DISHA would derive its mandate 
and power from the law to be made by an Act of Parliament in this regard and cannot be 
considered as a post exercising executive power under the ambit of any State/Central 
Government. 
It is pertinent to mention that the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 
1959, declare that a large numbers of off ices of profit under the Government shall not 
disqualify the holders thereof for being chosen as, or for being, Members of Parliament. 
The Committee are of the strong opinion that the post of Chairperson of DISHA should 
be included under Section 3 of the P arliament (prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1959 
which excludes large number of offices form the ambit of office of profit. The Committee 
recommend enactment of a dedicated/delegated Legislation to empower DISHA with 
Member of Parliament as Chairman an d District collector as Member Secretary at 
district level, while ensuring that it is consistent with constitution division of powers 
among Centre, State and Local Governments and upholding the spirit of Cooperative 
federalism. The suitable provisions in t he law so enacted may take care of the 
irregularities in holding DISHA meetings. 
Reply of the Government 
As per DISHA Guidelines, DISHA Committees are mandated to monitor non-statutory 
Schemes of the Govt. of India. Hence, ipso facto it can not be made statutory. DISHA is 
an effort to improve development process through coordination and monitoring within 
the constitutional framework o f responsibilities assigned to C entral, State and L ocal 

26 
 
governments. Any legislation to empower DISHA Committee should therefore, be 
consistent with constitutional division of powers among Centre, State and Local 
Government. This Department took up the matter of granting statutory status of DISHA 
with Department of Legal Affairs (DoLA) in Sept, 2021.   DoLA vide its Note dated 
14.07.2022 has agreed to the above response of this Department.  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 15) 
  The Committee note that the Ministry of Rural Development has created a Help 
Desk in DISHA Project Management Unit in Delhi and all stakeholders including 
Hon’ble Member of Parliament may communicate the issues pertaining to functioning of 
DISHA for their resolution. The Committee, however, feel that  DISHA being a 
monitoring mechanism to ensure that resources deployed for various Schemes  of the 
Government  of India are being utilized optimally, there is a need to have a mechanism 
through which common man can lodge their complaints with DISHAs in case of any 
delay/irregularities in the implementation of  the Government programmes /Schemes. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Government to take suitable action in this 
regard on an urgent basis. 
Reply of the Government 
The terms of reference of State and District DISHA Committee are given in para 4 of 
Guidelines. The Committee also 
looks    into    complaints/alleged    irregularities    received    in    respect    of    the 
implementation of the programmes, including complaints of wrong selection of 
beneficiaries, mis -appropriation / diversion of funds and recommend follow -up action. 
The Committee have the authority to summon and inspect any record for this purpose. 
The Committee may refer any matter for enquiry to the District Collector/CEO of the Zila 
Panchayat/Project Director of DRDA (or Poverty Alleviation Unit) or sugges t suitable 
action to be taken in accordance with the rules which should be acted upon by him 
within 30 days. 
 
 

27 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 17) 
The Committee are aware that DISHA looks into the complaints/alleged 
irregularities/misappropriation of funds received for implementation of the programmes 
and also recommend follow up action. In this context, DISHA may refer any matter for 
enquiry to the District Collector/Chief Executive Officer/Project Director, which shall be 
acted upon by him and an Action Taken Report needs to submitted within 30 days. The 
Committee would recommend that the Ministry should consider withholding of the funds 
in cases where a concrete evidence with regard to improper utilization of programme 
funds is found, till the position is clarified. If it is not to the satisfaction of the Ministry, in 
that case, action, if any, taken against any official must be followed up on continuous 
basis as corrective/punitive action needs to be taken by the State Governments. The 
Committee would like the Ministry of Rural Development to examine this matter afresh 
for amending DISHA Guidelines appropriately. 
Reply of the Government 
The terms of reference of State and district DISHA Committee are given in para 4 of 
Guidelines. However, State DISHA Committee may refer any matter pertaining to the 
programmes monitored under DISHA, if felt necessary, to Ministry of Rural 
Development which in turn coordinate with the concerned ministry  for appropriate action 
and inform the concerned DISHA Committee accordingly. 
The District Committee has the authority to summon and inspect any record for this 
purpose. The Committee may refer any matter for enquiry to the District Collector/CEO 
of the Zila Panchayat/Project Director of DRDA (or Pov erty Alleviation Unit) or suggest 
suitable action to be taken in accordance with the rules which should be acted upon by 
him within 30 days.              
  

28 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 5) 
The Committee note that taking in view the success of District Level DISHAs, 
State level DISHAs under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Chief Ministers of States were 
constituted in May, 2019, to facilitate resolution of the issues of important and emergent 
nature which have remained unattended for want of attention and coordination, at the 
apex level. T he State level DISHAs have been reconstituted on 17th February, 2021 
with the nomination of 199 Hon’ble MPs. Besides, DISHA in Urban Districts viz. District 
level Vigilance and monitoring Committees (DLVMC) which were not fully operational in 
urban distric ts have also been made functional as DISHAs to monitor the Schemes 
which are implemented in both rural and urban areas. Therefore, DISHAs have been 
constituted in urban districts of Delhi, Mumbai, Chandigarh, Chennai and Kolkata. It is 
unfortunate that so far State level DISHAs have been formed in only 10 States/UTs and 
only 12 meetings have been held since their inception. The position with regard to 
number of meetings of DISHAs in urban districts is no different. The Committee are of 
the view that the who le purpose of formation of DISHAs is defeated; if the Committees 
so constituted with a larger purpose to monitor the implementation of Government 
Schemes fail to function as per the prescribed Guidelines. The Committee thus 
recommend that such ambiguities and lacunae whether it is in respect of constitution of 
State Level DISHAs or non convening of DISHA meetings and other related issues 
should be resolved without further loss of time. The Committee further urge the 
Government to take Parliament into confidence over the issue of underperformance of 
DISHA and consider bringing legislation for empowering DISHA. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Rural Development is actively pursuing on daily basis wi th the State 
Governments and the District administrations to convene meetings as per the 
Guidelines. Recently, letters have been written from Secretary (RD) to the Chief 

29 
 
Secretaries of the States on 31.08.2022 and 07.12.2022 to constitute State level DISHA 
Committees where they have not yet been constituted and also to increase the 
frequency of DISHA meetings at both State and District levels. Also letters to the 
Hon’ble MPs, who have not conducted any meeting during 2021 -22 and 2022-23, have 
been written b y Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development on 16.11.2022 and 15.02.2023 
to hold District level DISHA meetings. In April 2023 , Ministry has also written to S tates 
to issue advisory to schedule DISHA meeting on non -sitting day of Parliament so that 
Hon’ble MPs can attend the Parliament during session. Recently, Ministry also modified 
the Guidelines for increase the participation of public representative in DISHA 
Committees. Also, vide letter dated 8th February, 2023, Hon’ble Minister of Rural 
Development has nom inated Chairpersons in District level DISHA Committees in 53 
newly formed districts. 
  
In addition, follow -up action with States/ districts has also been undertaken at other 
levels such as reminding nodal officers at district level about overdue DISHA meetings 
through social media groups, message services and phone calls. As a result, the 
frequency of DISHA meetings has improved, which is highest number of meeting in 
2022-23 (i.e. 1095 DISHA meetings in districts) since 2016.  
As per DISHA Guidelines, DISHA Committees are mandated to monitor non -statutory 
Schemes of the Govt. of India. Hence, ipso facto it cannot be made statutory. DISHA is 
an effort to improve development process through coordination and monitoring within 
the constitutional framework o f responsibilities assigned to C entral, State and L ocal 
governments. Any legislation to empower DISHA Committee should therefore, be 
consistent with constitutional division of powers among Centre, State and local 
government. This Department took up the matte r of granting statutory status of DISHA 
with Department of Legal Affairs (DoLA) in Sept, 2021. DoLA vide its Note dated 
14.07.2022 has agreed to the above response of this Department.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no.07 of Chapter I) 

30 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 21) 
The Committee note to their dismay that there is no separate nodal 
officer/designated staff of the level of Block Development Officer as a project Director 
and also no technically/professionally sound supporting sta ff for the office of DISHA at 
State Government level. The Committee apprehend that the absence of a nodal 
officer/designated staff in the office of DISHA is one of the various reasons for abysmal 
performance of DISHA so far as convening meetings and follow up action as per DISHA 
Guidelines. While considering lack or required human resources as one of the factors 
the functioning of DISHAs, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should explore 
the possibility of appointing Consultants/Contractual Staff in consultation with State 
Governments at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to address the issue related to conducting regular DISHA meetings in State, 
submission of proceeding of meetings and follow up action on the decision taken in the 
meeting, Principal Secretary/Secretary Rural Development Department of the 
State  have been designated as State Nodal Officer for DISHA related matters (vide this 
Ministry’s letter dated 21.10.2019). Further, on the basis of feedback from the Hon’ble 
Members of Parliament during Orientation Programme held on 3rd December 2019, 
DISHA Monitoring Cell at National Level had been formed on 27th January 2021  to 
ensure effective, time -bound and result -oriented work of the DISHA Committees. The 
Monitoring Cell at National Level is coordinating with State Nodal officers for regular 
conduct of DISHA meetings and follow up of action items decided in the DISHA 
meetings and to submit report to the Ministry on the working of DISHA system. The 
State Monitoring Cell is yet to be formed and the Ministry is contemplating the possibility 
of extending some budgetary support to States to create its own monitoring 
arrangement based on their need. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no.13 of Chapter I) 
 

31 
 
CHAPTER V 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
07 August, 2023         
16 Sravana,1945 (Saka) 
 
                            DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
                            CHAIRPERSON 
                 COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
  

32 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-2024) 
  
The Committee sat on Monday, the 7 th August, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs 
in Room No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
 3. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
 4. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
 5. Shri Dilip Saikia 
 6. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
 7. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
 8. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
 9. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
10. Dr. K.C. Patel 
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
12. Shri Jual Oram 
13. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
14. Shri Pratap Simha 
15. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
16. Smt Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
17. Shri R.K.Singh Patel 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
           1. Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda -       Additional Secretary 
           2. Shri Muraleedharan. P     -       Director 

33 
 
                              
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following 
three draft Reports: 
(i) XXX 
 
(ii) XXX 
 
 
(iii) Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 19 th Report(17th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
on the subject ‘Review of role and performance of DISHA Committee in 
various Schemes’. 
 
3.       The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Reports. The 
Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and present 
the same to Lok Sabha. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
APPENDIX II 
Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 19th Report of the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 21 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. NO. 1,2,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,16,18,19 and 20) 
15 
 Percentage of total recommendations 71.43% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(SI. NO. 3, 4,15, 17) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
4 
 
19.05% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(SI. NO. 5 and 21) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
2 
 
 
09.52% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:    Nil 
Percentage of total recommendations 
Nil 
 
0% 
 