34 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
 
 
Evaluation of Electric Vehicle (EV) Policy 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the 26th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
THIRTY- FOURTH  REPORT 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

THIRTY-FOUR REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
 
Evaluation of Electric Vehicle (EV) Policy 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the 26th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 02 February 2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2024/   Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 

i 
 
     
CONTENTS 
                              Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2023-24)      ii 
 
Introduction           iv 
           
CHAPTER-I  Report         1 
 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted     23 
 by the Government         
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not   58 
 desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply  
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which    59 
 Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee  
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies   68 
 of Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the 16th Sitting of the Committee on estimates  
held on 24.01.2024 
 
  70 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 26th Report of 
the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
  72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2023-2024) 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
5. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Shri Saikia Dilip 
8. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
9. Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar 
10. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
11. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
12. Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
13. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
14. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
15. Shri Pinaki Misra 
16. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
17. Shri Jual Oram 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
20. Dr. K.C. Patel 
21. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
22. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
23. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
24. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
25. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
26. Shri Prathap Simha 
27. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
28. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
29. Shri R. K. Singh Patel *  
30. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati # 
 
*   Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 7096 dated 28th July, 2023 
#  Elected as Member of the Committee vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 7764 dated 19th    
    December, 2023 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat                            
  
Shri Santosh Kumar                             Joint Secretary 
Shri  Muraleedharan. P 
Smt. Anju Kukreja                                                                                                    
Director 
                Deputy Secretary  
Shri  Balram Sahu              Deputy Director 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2023 -24) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 34th 
Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
26th Report of the Committee (2022-2023) on the subject “Evaluation of Electric Vehicle 
(EV) Policy” pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries.  
2.  The 26th Report of the Committee on Estimates  (2022-2023) was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 24th March 2023 . The Government furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in the 26th Report on 10th October, 
2023. The draft Report was considered and approved on 24 th January, 2024, by the 
Committee.  
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 26th Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI             DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
24 January  2024        CHAIRPERSON 
 4 Magha 1945 (Saka)     COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty -Sixth  
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Evaluation of Electric Vehicle (EV) 
Policy” pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
2. Twenty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 24 March 2023. It 
contained 20 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have  been received 
from the Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation. Para No.  1,3,5,7,8,9,10,12,13,14,15,17,18,19,20 
 Total -15 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation. Para No. 11 
                     Total -1 
(Chapter-III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation. Para No. 2, 6,16             Total -3 
(Chapter-IV) 
 
(vi) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
Recommendation. Para No. 4                             Total -1 
(Chapter-V) 

 
 
2 
 
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final Action Taken 
Notes in respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter –V of this Report 
may be furnished to them at the earliest. 
5. The Committee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments.  
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 2) 
 
6. In their recommendation contained in the original Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
Need for National Policy on EVs 
“Government of India launched the National Electric Mobility Mission Plan 
(NEMMP) 2020 in 2013.  The NEMMP 2020 is a National Mission document 
providing the vision and roadmap for the faster adoption of EVs (full range of 
hybrid and electric vehicles) and t heir manufacturing in the country. It was 
believed that with the commitment and support of all stakeholders, 6 -7 million 
units of new vehicle sales of EVs, could be achieved by 2020. The Committee 
note with regret that the target of 6-7 million units of EVs was not achieved as 
only around 1.4 million Electric Vehicles were being used on the roads of India as 
on 3rd August,2022.It  has been a decade since MHI  had launched the NEMMP 
2020. The Committee are of the view that since transport, being State subjec t, 
some States have formulated an EV policy for themselves, still a strong National 
Policy framework on EVs is required which should incorporate the experience 
and feedback of NEMMP 2020, which can serve as a guiding policy to all 
States/UTs and ensure a comprehensive and uniform growth of the EV Sector. A 
National Policy on EVs should have realistic goals and strategies and it should 
be commensurate with India’s commitment to the Paris Agreement on climate 
change to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Com mittee, therefore, urge 
the Government to frame a comprehensive National Policy on EV by 

 
 
3 
 
incorporating the elements of successful State models and international best 
practices on charging infrastructure, battery swapping, battery waste 
management/ recycling, public awareness in addition to the demand and supply 
side incentives such as lower GST, waiving road tax, registration fee, hire -
purchase scheme at discounted interest rates by Financial Institutions for buying 
EVs etc.” 
7. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Heavy Industries has submitted as 
under: 
“Niti Aayog inputs:  National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP) was 
formed in 2020. It is a National Mission document providing the vision and the 
roadmap for the faster adoption of electric vehicles and their manufacturing in the 
country. As part of the NEMMP 2020, the M inistry of Heavy Industries formulated 
a Scheme namely Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehicles in India (FAME India) Scheme in 2015 to promote adoption of electric/ 
hybrid vehicles (xEVs) in India. The Phase -1 of the scheme was av ailable up to 
31.03.2019 with budget outlay of ₹895 crore. This phase of FAME India Scheme 
had four focus areas i.e., technological development, demand generation, pilot 
project and charging infrastructure components.  
The following three schemes have been  formulated by the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries for providing facilities and incentives to the EV Manufacturing Industry: 
i) The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in 
India (FAME India) Scheme in 2015 with an aim to reduce dependency of 
fossil fuel and to address issues of vehicular emission.  At present, Phase-
II of FAME India Scheme is being impl emented for a period of 5 years 
w.e.f. 01.04.2019 with a total budgetary support of ₹10,000 crore.  
ii) Government has approved the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme 
for Automobile and Auto Components Industry in India to boost domestic 
manufacturing of  Advanced Automotive Technology products and attract 
investments in the automotive manufacturing value chain with a budgetary 
outlay of ₹25,938 crore over a period of five years.  
iii) The Government on 12.05.2021 approved a Production Linked Incentive 
(PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advanced C hemistry Cell (ACC) in the 

 
 
4 
 
country in order to bring down prices of battery in the country. Drop in 
battery price will result in cost reduction of electric vehicles and increase in 
their sales. 
The FAME India Scheme -II mainly focuses on supporting electrification of public & 
shared transportation and aims to support through demand incentive 7090 e -buses, 
5 lakh e-3 Wheelers, 55000 e-4 Wheeler Passenger Cars and 10 lakh e-2 Wheelers.  
Under Phase -II of FAME India Scheme 9, 44,567 Electric Vehicles have been 
supported till 04.09.2023.  
Charging Infrastructure  
In addition, creation of charging infrastructure is also supported under the Scheme.  
The Ministry of Power has allowed sale of electricity as ‘service’ for charging of  
electric vehicles  and has Notified Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Guidelines and 
Specifications in October 2019.  
i) As mentioned above, a total outlay of ₹1000 crore in FAME II has been allocated 
to setting up dense charging infrastructure.  
ii) 396 EV PCS will  be installed in cities through Govt. entities with a total outgo of 
₹39 crore. MHI has sanctioned ₹800 crore as capital subsidy to the three OMCs 
of MoPNG for establishment of 7,432 EV PCS.  
iii) OEMs like Ather and Ola are also in the process of setting up th eir own charging 
infrastructure.  
Battery Swapping Policy 
National Institute for Transforming India (NITI Aayog) has prepared a draft Battery 
Swapping Policy. Further, Energy Storage Systems including dense charging 
infrastructure and grid-scale battery systems is under consideration to include in the 
harmonized list of infrastructure.  
Battery Waste Management  
As per the information received from Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, Government of India published the Battery Waste Management Rules, 
2022 on 24.08.2022 for environmentally sound manag ement of waste batteries, 
including EV batteries.  
The rules provide Extended Producer Responsibility framework for producers of 
batteries to recycle/ refurbish the waste batteries as per the prescribed timelines. 

 
 
5 
 
Further, the rules mandate the recyclers t o recover the minimum percentage of 
materials from waste batteries. 
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1854433  
The Battery-Waste Management rule 2022 link is 
https://cpcb.nic.in/uploads/hwmd/Battery-WasteManagementRules-2022.pdf 
Public awareness  
Further, following initiatives have been taken to create awareness on E -Mobility by 
ICAT in collaboration with MHI: 
i) Conference & Exposition “Panchamrit ki Aur” on 04.02.2023 at ICAT 
ii) Seminar of EV “How is EV Driving India’s Green Mobility Mission on 
29.03.2023 at ICAT 
iii) Seminar on “Can the EV sector be India’s next growth engine” on 
28.04.2023 at ICAT 
iv) MHI organized a conference to review the performance and addressed the 
concerns and challenges faced by the industry with regard to PLI auto 
scheme on 29.08.2023. Link for the same is 
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1952861 
Supplier side incentives like Lowering of GST etc. (As per inputs from Ministry 
of Finance)  
a) As per the recommendation of the GST Council in its 36 th Meeting held on 
27.07.2019, Electric Vehicles already attached GST at a concessional rate of 
5% (S. No. 242A of Schedule I of notification No. 01/2017 -CT Rate dt. 
28.06.2017) with Nil compensation Cess (S. No. 44 of notification No. 
01/2017-Compensation Cell Rate dt. 28.06.2017). 
b) Even, prior to this the GST rate on Electric Vehicles was 12% with Nil 
compensation cess as per S. No. 206 of Schedule II of notification No. 
01/2017-CT Rate dt 28.06.2017.  Since inception of GST Electric Vehicles 
have been exempt from compensation cess.  
c) Generally, motor vehicles are kept at 28% of GST and 15 -22 % of cess, 
whereas EVs are kept at lowest slab of 5% with Nil compensation cess.  The 
following table shows a comparison of GST rates and compensation cell on 
various types of vehicles. 

 
 
6 
 
Vehicle Type GST Rate Comp Cess Rate 
Electric Vehicles  5% Nil 
Fuel Cell Motor Vehicles 12% Nil 
Specific Motor vehicles not exceeding 4,000 
mm in length  
18% Nil 
Specific Motor vehicles exceeding 4,000 mm in 
length 
28% Nil 
Motor vehicle not exceeding 1,500 CC 28% 17% 
Motor vehicle exceeding 1,500 CC 28% 20% 
SUVs exceeding 1,500 CC 28% 22% 
 
Ministry of Power input 
Comparison on International Best Practices for EV Charging Infrastructure, State EV 
Policies and salient features of  MoP revised Guidelines for EV Charging 
Infrastructure. The same are being followed.” 
 
8.   In their Original Report t he Committee highlighted the disparity between the 
target and actual sales under the National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP) 
2020, initiated in 2013. Despite aiming to sell 6-7 million electric vehicle (EV) units 
by 2020, only 1.4 million were sold by August 3, 2022.  The Committee, therefore, 
stressed the need for a robust National Policy Framework on EVs, drawing on the 
decade-long experience and feedback from NEMMP 2020. This framework should 
serve as a guiding policy for all States/Union Territories, ensuring a uniform 
growth of the EV sector with realistic goals aligned with India's commitments to 
the Paris Agreement.  The Committe e had also  urged the Government to 
incorporate successful State models and international best practices on charging 
infrastructure, battery swapping, battery waste management/recycling, and public 
awareness into the comprehensive National Policy. It called  for demand and 
supply side incen tives, such as lower GST, waiving  road tax, registration fees, 
and discounted interest rates for EV purchases through Financial Institutions. 
In response, in their Action Taken Notes,  the Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) 
outlined various policy measures, including the  Scheme of Faster Adoption and 

 
 
7 
 
Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India (FAME ) India  I and FAME 
India II. The ongoing Phase -II of FAME India, operational since April 1, 2019, with 
a budgetary sup port of ₹10,000 crore, has supported 9,44,567 EVs. MHI also 
highlighted policy initiatives on charging infrastructure, Battery Swapping Policy, 
Battery Waste Management, Public Awareness Campaigns, Supplier side 
incentives like Lowering of GST, and the ado ption of International Best Practices 
on EVs. 
While acknowledging the Ministry's aforesaid efforts, the Committee  find the 
production of EV even after 2020 could  not match those as envisaged in  NEMMP, 
2020 and a lot needs to be done for charging infrastructure, battery swapping and 
battery waste management and therefore  a comprehensive National Policy on EV 
is very much required for harnessing the potential by all stakeholders' inputs for 
a broader vision, realistic goals, and concerted efforts to ensure the success of a 
Electric Vehicle in India . The Committee also u rge that the effectiveness of the 
Schemes particularly FAME India and PLI should be reviewed to ensure that the 
said schemes align with the evolving need s of the EV Industry . Periodic 
adjustments and adaptations to the Schemes can make them more responsive to 
market dynamic s, technological advancements and changing consumer 
preferences. In addition, a robust charging network is essential for widespread 
EV adoption, and encouraging private and Public investments in charging 
stations overall growth of EV industry, innovation, job creation and increased 
competitiveness on a global scale. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 3) 
9. In their Original Report, the Committee had stated as under: 
Upfront cost of EV Four Wheelers 
“The Committee note that there were total 18,02,967 Electric Vehicles (EVs) being used 
on the roads of India as on 30 November, 2022. Out of which maximum number of 
vehicles (9,19,025) are u nder three wheeler category and 8,13,431 are under two 
wheeler category.  The Committee are somewhat perturbed to note that under four 

 
 
8 
 
wheeler category, there were only 70,511 vehicles on the road in November, 2022. 
They are of the view that lower number o f EVs under four wheeler category is due to 
huge gap between the upfront cost of EV four wheelers and ICE four wheelers of similar 
specifications as well as driving range anxiety among the vehicle users. The Committee 
strongly hold that sale of  EV four wh eelers  would pick up if the upfront cost could be 
further brought down by offering incentives such as tax breaks, waiving registration fee 
etc. as well as if other major concerns of range anxiety, lack of network of EV charging 
facility, longer time for c harging etc. are addressed urgently. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should consider remodeling the subsidy on electric 
four wheelers similar to that of electric two wheelers i.e. demand incentive may be 
increased to @ Rs. 15000/ - per KWh from @ Rs. 10000/ - per KWh and the cap on 
incentives for Electric 4 Wheelers may be increased to 40% of the cost of vehicles from 
20% cost of vehicles. The Government may also consider incentivizing the range of the 
vehicle in addition to the subsidy  being given on per unit power of the battery. This 
would push the OEMs to produce more efficient EVs which would provide greater range 
per unit power of the battery.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the view of the 
Ministry on these measures.  
10. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Heavy Industries has submitted as 
under: 
“The FAME-II scheme has had positive impact on the e -mobility sector and a steady 
increase in demand for EVs is observed. Data showing increase in sale of 4W since 
launch of FAME-II scheme is tabulated below: 
Description(In Lakh) FY 19-20 FY 20-21 FY 21-22 FY 22-23 
ICE vehicles 43.8 38.03 42.2 50.64 
Registered EVs 0.025 0.053 0.199 0.48 
Vehicles under 
FAME-II 
0.01 0 0.01 0.04 

 
 
9 
 
Description(In Lakh) FY 19-20 FY 20-21 FY 21-22 FY 22-23 
% of EV sold 0.057 0.14 0.46 0.93 
 
a. There has been a slow off -take of e -4W as subsidy is available for vehicles for 
commercial use and not for personal use and there is a price cap of ₹15 lakh. As 
on 31.07.2023, out of demand incentive of ₹250 crore, claims of ₹236 crore have 
been received.   Out of which approximately of ₹142 crore have already been 
disbursed till 31.07.2023. The second reason for upfront cost of EV four wheelers 
is high cost of battery. Further,  Government has taken  following steps for 
incentivizing Electric Vehicles users/consumers:  
Further, Government has taken following steps  for incentivizing  Electric Vehicles 
users/consumers: 
b. GST on EV has been reduced from 12 to 5%. Compensation cess has b een kept 
NIL for EV. 
c. GST on chargers / charging station for electric vehicles has been reduced from 
18% to 5%.  
d. Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) announced that battery -
operated vehicles will be given green license plates and be exempted from 
permit requirements. 
e. Ministry of Power (MoP) has released a notification on charging infrastructure 
standards permitting private charging at residences and offices. 
f. Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) amended the Model Building 
Byelaws 2016 to estab lish charging stations and infrastructure in private and  
commercial buildings. 
g. Creation of charging infrastructure is also supported to address range anxiety 
among users of electric vehicles. 

 
 
10 
 
h. Ministry of Road Transport & Highways issued a notification advi sing states to 
waive Road Tax on Electric Vehicles, which in turn will help reduce the initial cost 
of EVs. 
The suggestion for e4W is noted.” 
11. Expressing concern over the low presence of EVs in the four -wheeler 
category, the Committee recommended to reduce upfront costs through 
incentives like tax breaks, registration fee waivers, an d increasing demand 
incentives, raising incentives limits Rs. 10,000 per KWh to Rs. 15,000 per KWh for 
electric four-wheelers and increasing the cap finance to 40% of the vehicle cost. 
The MHI has provided data indicating the registration of four -wheeler EVs, 
increasing from 2,500 in FY19 -20 to 48,000 in FY22 -23, with EVs constituting 
0.93% of total sales in 2022 -23. The slow uptake of e -4Ws is due to subsidies 
limited to c ommercial use, a ₹15 lakh price cap . A s of 31.07.2023, out of ₹236 
crore claims with a demand incentive of ₹250 crore , around ₹142 has been crore 
disbursed. The Ministry has taken various steps, including reduced GST on EVs 
and chargers, green license plates, permitting exemptions, private charging 
standards, amended building byelaws, support for charging infrastructure, and 
advice to states to waive Road Tax on EVs for cost reduction.  The Commi ttee 
would like to apprised of the actions taken in this regard. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 4) 
12. Considering the need of plying electric buses i n Cities having less than 4 Million 
population, in addition to existing scheme, the Committee had observed as under: 
Remodelled Scheme for Electric Buses 
“The Committee observe that nine 4 million plus cities (Mumbai, Delhi, Bengaluru, 
Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Chennai, Kolkata, Surat, and Pune) were targeted under 
remodelled FAME II scheme for electric buses. EESL has undertaken aggregation of 
demand in these cities for remaining e-buses under the Scheme on OPEX basis. It was 
aimed to bring electric mobility in public transportation in these cities which would 

 
 
11 
 
inspire other cities too. However, the Committee are concerned to note that only five of 
the nine targe ted cities namely Kolkata, Delhi, Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Surat have 
opted for it.  They would like to be apprised of the reasons for other four cities declining 
this scheme, and alternate schemes, if any, opted by those cities. The Committee are 
further of the view that cities which have less than 4 million population also use 
considerable number of buses for inter -city and intra -city transport hence those should 
also be considered under the remodelled FAME II scheme for electric buses so that e -
mobility could pick up its momentum on Pan India basis.  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken in this regard.” 
13. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Heavy Industries has submitted as 
under: 
“Yes, the Cities which have less than 4 mi llion plus population have also been 
considered under the remodelled FAME II scheme for electric buses.  
E-Buses - At a glance  
i. Budgeted No. of e-buses – 7,090 
ii. Actual allotted No. of e-buses 7,210  
Out of 7,210, a total of 3,738 e -buses are allotted to STUs for mix of all cities and3,472 
e-buses are allotted through CESL/EESL for 9 cities of 4 million plus.  
Out of 3,738 allocated to STU’s, the total no. of e -buses allocated for cities less than 4 
million population = 1,898  
Details of 1898 e-buses: 
This includes both Intercity operation in various states and as well as for intra -city 
operations.”  
14. The Committee is pleased to note  that the Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) 
has also considered cities with less than 4 million population under the 
remodelled FAME-II scheme. However, the information as to why electric mobility 
has not been adopted in the remaining four cities with a popul ation of 4 million , 
has not been provided.  The Committee would like to be  informed of the reasons 
in this regard. 
 

 
 
12 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 6) 
 
15. Finding lapses in scrutiny of bid documents , the Committee had recommended 
as under: 
Need for robust mechanism for bidding process 
“The Committee were informed that bidding process for award of the 
Government approved the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 
'Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) Battery Storage’ for achieving manufacturing 
capacity of 50 GWh for enhancing India’s Manufacturing Capabilit ies with a 
budgetary outlay of ₹ 18,100 crore has been undertaken and MHI has issued 
Letters of Award for 50 GWh of battery capacity to 4 successful bidders namely:- 
Rajesh Export Ltd. -  5GWh 
Ola Electric Mobility -  20 GWh 
Hyundai Global Motoras Co Ltd. – 20 GWh 
Reliance New Energy Ltd.-  5 GWh.  
However, it is distressing to note that Hyundai Global Motors did not sign 
Programme Agreement.  Consequently, they had to be disqualified from the 
scheme due to misrepresentation of facts in their bid documents and MHI 
reportedly initiated necessary action for re -tendering of the unallocated 20 GWh 
capacity in consultation with NITI Aayog. The Committee note with concern that 
proper scrutiny of bid documents was not done before the bidding process 
reached the sta ge of Letters of Award  and signing of Programme Agreement, 
which has resulted in wastage of precious time and resources.  Hence, the 
Committee are of the view that appropriate action should be taken against those 
who are found accountable for the lapse. T he Committee strongly hold that a 
robust mechanism should be developed for all such bidding processes so that 
incomplete/frivolous applications can be rejected summarily at pre -bid/technical 
bid stage in future.”     

 
 
13 
 
16. In their Action Taken Note, the M inistry of Heavy Industries has  submitted as 
under: 
 “Proposal is to carry out sufficient due diligence by Ministry of Heavy Industries 
(MHI) / Project Management Agency (PMA) to verify legality of applicant 
companies in the pre -bid / technical bid stage i tself so that incomplete / frivolous 
applicants can be rejected summarily at pre-bid / technical bid stage in future. 
Thorough scrutiny of bids was done based on the documents furnished by the 
bidders and eligibility of the bidders were determined on the b asis of the 
information/ documents as per the RFP furnished by the applicants. 
Out of 4 (four) selected bidders, allocated a total ACC manufacturing capacity of 
50 GWh, M/s. Hyundai Global Motors Co. Ltd. (HGM) was disqualified from the 
scheme (due to mate rial misrepresentation / concealment of facts for 
unauthorised use of “Hyundai” trademark by violating Court Order of Seoul 
District Court, South Korea on 24.08.2022 and violation of various terms & 
conditions of the RFP and Lo) and their bid security was forfeited.  Thus, it has 
resulted in a reduction of total allocated capacity to 30 GWh i.e., 20 GWh is now 
available for fresh allocation.” 
17. The Committee  had expressed serious concern regarding the bidding 
process for Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Advanced Chemistry 
Cell (ACC) Battery Storage, aimed at achieving a manufacturing capacity of 50 
GWh to enhance India's Manufacturing Capabilities.  Due to improper scrutiny of 
bid documents, Letters of award and programmme agreement were issued. Later 
on M/s Hyundai Global Motors was disqualified due to misrepresentation of facts 
in their bid documents and therefore  the Committee recommended that 
appropriate action should be taken against those who were found accountable for 
the lapse and a robus t mechanism should be developed for all such bidding 
processes so as to avoid such incidents in future. However, the Action Taken 
Note of the Ministry is completely silent about the action taken on this 
recommendation.   

 
 
14 
 
The Committee , therefore, while reiterating their earlier recommendation s urge 
the Ministry to strengthen screening process  of bids. For this, issues for request 
for proposed (RFP) should be made crystal clear. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 8) 
18. Considering the need of reductions of waiver of Road Tax, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
“The Committee note that Ministry of Road transport and Highways (MoRTH) had 
issued a notification, advising States to  waive road tax on EVs,  which, in turn, will hel p 
reduce the initial cost of EVs. The Committee also note that Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, 
Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Haryana, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Assam, Bihar, 
Telangana, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, 
Chandigarh, U ttarakhand, Puducherry, Odisha and Delhi have waived off or reduced 
the road tax on EVs and these States are not getting any compensation for the loss of 
revenue arising on account of waiver/reduction of road tax on EVs from the Union 
Government. The Commi ttee are of the view that  some compensation  to the States,  
which have waived off or reduced the road tax on EVs, may be provided so that these 
States do not find it financially burdensome to continue such waiver  or reduction on 
road tax to promote and popl ularise EVs. The Committee believe that this will 
encourage all the States to provide such waiver on road tax on EVs, which will result in 
faster adoption of EVs all over the Country. 
19. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Heavy Industries has submitted as 
under: 
“Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) issued a notification advising states 
to waive road tax on EVs, which in turn will help reduce the initial cost of the EVs. 
The efforts of the central government to promote e -mobility need supplemental support 
from State Governments. States need to offer bouquet of fiscal and non-fiscal incentives 
to be notified separately in order for entities dependent on State support to be eligible 
for central assistance under this scheme. Some such non  fiscal incentives include 

 
 
15 
 
waiver / concessional road tax, exemption from permit, waiver / concessional toll tax, 
waiver / concessional parking fees, concessional registration charges etc. States would 
be encouraged to expand these incentives”. 
20.  The Committee acknowledged the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways' 
notification advising states to waive road tax on Electric Vehicles (EVs) which has 
been complied by many States and road taxes, tolls, parking fees, and 
registration charges  have been waived . The Committee, therefore , has 
emphasized the need for compensating states for the potential revenue loss due 
to such waiver . However, nothing has furnished about this. The Committee is 
keen on being apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this direction. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 10) 
21. With a view to continuing production of Automobile and Auto Components of EVs 
beyond 2027-28, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that PLI for automobile and auto component Scheme provides 
incentive up to 18 per cent to overcome disabilities in respect of manufacturing of 
Advance Automotive Technology so that it can catch up with the world.  It has a 
budgetary outlay of ₹25,938 crore, spread over a period of five years from 2022 -2023 to 
2026-2027.  The scheme consists of two parts.  The first part is Champion OEM 
Incentive Scheme and the second part is Component Champion Incentive Scheme. It 
incentivises various adv anced technology products, dealing with emission, electronics, 
safety, CNG, LNG, flex fuel and clean fuels.  The Committee take note of the fact that 
19 applications under Champion OEM scheme and 67 applications under Component 
Champion Scheme have been ap proved. Apart from Indian business groups, approved 
applicants include groups from countries such as Japan, Germany, USA, UK, Republic 
of Korea, Ireland, France, Belgium, Netherlands and Italy.  The Committee are of the 
view that for the benefit of domesti c economy, the beneficiaries of the scheme need to 
continue their production, even after the conclusion of the scheme.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should make such a provision applicable to 

 
 
16 
 
the beneficiaries of the scheme to ma ke it mandatory for them to continue their 
production till 2030 at least.” 
22. The Ministry of Heavy Industries , in their Action Taken Note, have submitted as 
under: 
“Scheme period is 2021 -22 to 2027 -28. It is expected that the PLI Auto 
beneficiary firms will continue their operations even after the subsidy under the 
scheme ends.” 
23.  The Committee desire that Ministry, in this regard, should work as incentive 
provider as well as facilitator  of production of Automobile and Auto Components 
by domestic and foreign companies by coordinating in solving their issues with 
all concerned. Assessments for working of the scheme should be made promptly 
bi-annually and, may consider to extend facility beyond 2027-28.       
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 13) 
24. Regarding reuse/disposal of EV batteries , the Committee had recommended as 
under:  
 Strategy for reuse or disposal of EV Batteries  
“The Committee find that presently penetration of EVs across all segments 
continues to remain upward.  As per VAHAN portal, a total of 4.29 lakh EVs were 
sold in FY 2022 as compared to 1.34 lakh EVs in FY 2021, a n increase of about 
220%.  The same is expected to rise further as the adoption of EVs pick up.  As 
the number of EVs being used in the country will be continuously rising, safe 
disposal and / or reuse of batteries and requirement for skilled manpower for 
undertaking this job needs to be addressed.  A proper disposal plan and 
dedicated recycling units would ensure a truly sustainable ecosystem of EVs.  E -
waste (management) rules may suitably be modified and elaborated further to 
facilitate processes for disp osal and/or reuse of EV batteries. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should develop a national strategy to 
facilitate processes for disposal and/or re -use of such batteries and to ensure 

 
 
17 
 
trained manpower for the same to reduce the env ironmental impact of EV 
production/manufacturing.” 
 
25. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Heavy Indust ries has  submitted as 
under: 
“As per the information received from Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India notified the Battery Waste Management 
Rules, 2022 on 22.08.2022 to ensure environmentally sound management of 
waste batteries.  The rules cover all type of batteries, viz. Electric Vehicle (EV) 
batteries, portable batteries, automotive batteries and industrial batteries. 
The rules provide  Extended Producer Responsibility framework for producer of 
batteries to recycle/ refurbish the waste batteries as per the prescribed timelines.  
Further, the rules mandate the recyclers to recover the minimum percentage of 
materials from waste batteries. 
The Battery-Waste Management rule 2022 link is given below: 
https://cpcb.nic.in/uploads/hwmd/Battery-WasteManagementRules-2022.pdf” 
26. The Committee are pleased to note that in pursuance of their 
recommendation, Government of India notified the Battery Waste Management 
Rules, 2022 on 22.08.2022 to ensure environmentally sound management of 
waste Batteries. The Committee are of the view that besides strictly complying 
the aforesaid Rules, the  Ministry should coord inate with  Battery producers to 
develop some comprehensive plans for the implementation of the Extended 
Producer Responsibility framework which includes establishing efficient systems 
for the collection, recycling and refurbishment of waste batteries with the 
prescribed timelines and  also to train the requisite manpower for the same. 
 
 
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1854433 

 
 
18 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 16) 
27. Feeling need of charging Stations for EV,  the Committee had recommended as 
under: 
 Need for Increase in Public Charging Network 
“The Committee note that as per the Ministry of Power guidelines, there shall be 
at least one charging station at every 25 kms on both sides of the Highway and 
also at least one Charging Station for long Range/Heavy Duty EVs at every 100 
kms on both sides of the Highway. For the city at least one charging station will 
be set up in a grid of 3km x 3km.  The Committee also find that MHI had 
sanctioned 520 Charging Stations/ Infrastructure under the Phase -I of FAME 
India Scheme. It has also sanctioned 2,877 El ectric Vehicle Charging Stations in 
68 cities across 25 States/UTs and 1576 charging stations across 9 Expressways 
and 16 Highways under Phase II of FAME India Scheme. The Committee regret 
to note that only 479 charging station out of 520 charging station sanctioned 
under FAME phase I and merely 50 out of 2877 charging station sanctioned 
under FAME phase II could be installed till December 2022.   Various Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs) have also planned to set up 22,000 charging 
stations by 2024 and NHAI is  also setting up charging stations. At present, the 
number of EV charging stations sanctioned under FAME is very meager as India 
has about 63.73 lakh km of road network, which is the second largest in the 
world. The Committee are of the view that reason fo r slow pace of installation of 
the sanctioned charging station under FAME should be examined.  Further it is 
learnt that a pilot programme namely ‘National Highways for EVs’ has been 
framed lately by the Government of India under which a new model for upgr ading 
some existing highways into ‘electric’ highways with adequate charging 
infrastructure at regular intervals, has been created, and trial report on the same 
is awaited.  As more and more EVs show up on the road, frequently placed smart 
charging stations would make movement for long distance smoother and faster.  
Hence existing highways or expressways would be ultimately required to become 
e-highways.  The Committee recommend that MHI should coordinate with other 

 
 
19 
 
Ministries and charging infrastructure op erators to frame a comprehensive plan 
for rollout of a nationwide public charging network.” 
 
28. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Heavy Industries has submitted as 
under: 
“Ministry of Power input 
As per information available on https://nhev.in/about-us-ev/this programme 
is supported by Ministry of Commerce & Industry.  NH  for EV intends to 
cover 2 pilot corridors, namely Delhi -Agra Yamuna Expressway and Delhi-
Jaipur NH48, out of the 12 N ational corridors proposed by the Ministry of 
Power for electrification in its Guidelines and standards dated 14.12.2018. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) input 
MoPNG has planned to establish 22,000 EV PCS at their ROs. MHI has 
sanctioned ₹800 crore as capital subsidy to the three OMCs of MoPNG for 
establishment of 7,432 EV PCS, the remaining EV PCS will be established 
by OMCs by using funds from their own resources.  
The OMCs have sufficient land in the premises of their ROs which 
can be utilized for the setting up of the charging stations. Details are given 
below: - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S. 
No. Category IOC HPC BPC Total  
1 4 Million + (9 cities) 434 27 220 681 
2 
Million + (44 cities) other than 
(1) 292 39 232 563 
3 
Smart Cities, Cities in Hilly 
States (other than 1&2) 106 109 109 324 
4 
Highways connecting adjoining 
major cities (Expressway) 14 40 25 79 
5 Major Highways 2,592 1,445 1,748 5,785 
  Total  3,438 1,660 2,334 7,432 

 
 
20 
 
29. The Committee note that, out of the total 22,000 Electric Vehicle (EV) Power 
Charging Stations (PCS)  planned to be set  up by 2024 , only 7,432 have been 
sanctioned at the Retail Outlets of Oil Marketing Companies. The number of 
actual PCSs set up has not been furnished. Further, nothing has been stated how 
the remaining PCS s would be installed by 2024.  The Comm ittee, therefore,  
strongly urge the Ministry to prioritize the setting up of PCSs for EVs and actively 
pursue the same with the MoPNG for the timely installation of the remaining PCS. 
Updated action taken note in this regard may be furnished within six months. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 18) 
30. Regarding Cost Escalation of Charging Stations , the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
 “The Committee note that the MHI had sanctioned 520 Charging Stations/ 
Infrastructure for ₹ 43 Crore (approx.) under Phase -I of FAME-India Scheme launched 
in year 2015  and under phase -II of FAME-India Scheme launched in year 2019, ₹1000 
Cr. has been allocated for supporting charging infrastructure for electric vehicles in the 
country. MHI sanctioned 2,877 electric vehicle charging stations in 68 cities and 1576 
charging stations across 9 Expressways and 16 Highways under phase -II of FAME 
India Scheme. The Committee are concerned to note that charging stations sanctioned 
under phase I of  FAME India Scheme were much cheaper with an average cost of 
₹8.27 lakh per station than the charging stations sanctioned under phase II of FAME 
India scheme, which has an average cost of ₹22.45 lakh per station. The Committee 
would like to know the reasons for such cost escalation of charging stations under 
Phase-II of FAME of India Scheme and also recommend that Government should 
conduct an audit to avoid any inefficient use of funds.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.” 
31. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Heavy Industries has submitted as 
under: 
“Ministry of Power inputs: 

 
 
21 
 
The probable reasons for escalation in cost of EV charging stations proposed to 
be deployed by FAME-II scheme are as follows: 
a. Inclusion of high -capacity fast DC EV chargers (CCS / CHAdeMO, 
minimum 50 kW capacity) under FAME-II scheme to cater to fast charging 
requirement of high performance EVs within short duration.  
b. Specifying minimum requirement of 50% domestic value addition under 
Phased Manufacturing Programme for EV chargers eligible for grant of 
subsidy under FAME-II scheme.  
c. Disruptions in Global supply chain of charger components due  to COVID-
19 pandemic.  
The MHI under FAME II scheme, nominated DG -BEE to finalize the benchmark 
price for all types of Electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) / EV charger 
categories and for seeking financial assistance to setup public EV PCSs in 
various cities.  
Accordingly, DG BEE discovered the benchmark price of various categories of 
EV chargers in June 2020 which was approved in 4 th PISC meeting dated 
31.08.2020.   
The objective of benchmarking prices of EV chargers was to provide ceiling limits 
while sanctioning subsidy amounts to various agencies deploying EV chargers 
across states.  The actual disbursement amount will be calculated based on the 
price discovered or the benchmark prices for EV chargers as per the report.”   
32. The Committee expressed a need for clarification on the proposed 
approximately threefold increase in infrastructure development charges for PCS 
(Power Charging Stations) under the FAME -II scheme, in comparison to FAME -I. 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries (M HI) in their Action Taken Note  shared insights 
into the escalated cost of Charging Stations, attributing it to factors such as high -
capacity Fast EV Chargers and the mandatory 50% domestic value addition under 
the Phased Manufacturing Programme for EV char gers eligible for FAME -II 

 
 
22 
 
subsidies. MHI presented the benchmark price sanctioned by DG, BEE in June 
2020. The Committee would like to be apprised of the actual disbursement 
amount and parameters/benchmarks adopted for the same.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
23 
 
CHAPTER - II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 1) 
An overview 
 India is currently the world's fifth largest automobile market, and the largest  
3 Wheeler, 2nd largest 2 Wheeler and 3rd largest passenger vehicle manufacturer. 
However, the country's heavy reliance on imported oil, with a staggering USD 119.2 
billion spent on crude oil imports in FY 2021 -22, coupled with the alarming pollution 
levels in many Indian cities, calls for urgent action towards green mobility. The shift of  
Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles, being the significant contributor to the 
pollution levels, towards electric vehicles (EVs) to curb the pollution and to reduce oil 
imports is a need of the hour. The tr end has stared since at present 1.8 million EVs ply 
on the roads, majority of which are 2 wheelers and 3 wheelers. The Committee note 
with satisfaction that since 2013 the Government has taken several steps to promote 
the adoption of EVs through various sc hemes such as FAME  I&II, ACC PLI, AAT PLI, 
and incentives such as lower GST etc. However, the higher upfront cost of EVs 
compared to ICE vehicles, inadequate charging infrastructure, range anxiety, 
dependence on imported e -vehicle components, lack of dome stic lithium, need for a 
scraping policy for EVs, skilling of labour for servicing and repair of EVs, and fast -
changing EV technology are some of the impediments hindering the faster adoption of 
EVs. Hence efforts are required at all levels to increase pub lic confidence on EVs.  As 
regards prices, the Committee acknowledge that once the volume of sales of EVs 
increases, the cost of EVs and their components will come down due to the economics 
of scale. Therefore, the Committee urge the Government to bring mo re vigour into their 
efforts,  increase incentives on EVs further and address the challenges faced by EV 
industry with a view to bring down upfront cost of EVs and  accelerate the transition 
towards green mobility so that India could become a leader in the global EV market. 
 
 

 
 
24 
 
         Reply of the Government 
The Government is vigorously making efforts to increase uptake of EVs. The following 
three schemes have been formulated by the Ministry of Heavy Industries for promoting 
and incentivising to the EV Manufacturing: 
i) The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in 
India (FAME India) Scheme in 2015 with an aim to reduce dependency of 
fossil fuel and to address issues of vehicular emission.  At present, Phase -II 
of FAME India Schem e is being implemented for a period of 5 years w.e.f. 
01.04.2019 with a total budgetary support of ₹10,000 crore.  
ii) Government approved the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 
Automobile and Auto Components Industry in India to boost domestic 
manufacturing of Advanced Automotive Technology products and attract 
investments in the automotive manufacturing value chain with a budgetary 
outlay of ₹25,938 crore over a period of five years. 
iii) The Government on 12.05.2021 approved a Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme for manufacturing of Advanced chemistry cell (ACC) in the country in 
order to bring down prices of battery in the country. Drop in battery price will 
result in cost reduction of electric vehicles and increase in their sales. 
Further, followi ng steps have been taken by the Government for adoption of electric 
vehicles in the country: 
i. The demand incentive for electric two wheelers has been increased to 
₹15,000/KWh from ₹10,000/KWh with an increase in cap from 20% to 40% of the 
cost of vehicle fr om 11.06.2021, thus enabling cost of Electric two wheelers at 
par with that of ICE two -wheeler vehicles. Recently, in order to reach maximum 
number of users in same budget, the incentive was reduced on 01.06.2023 from 
₹15,000/KWh to ₹10,000/KWh. 
ii.    The Gov ernment of India on 12.06.2021 approved a Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme for manufacturing of Advance Chemistry Cell (ACC) in 
the country in order to bring down prices of battery in the country.  Drop in battery 

 
 
25 
 
price will result in cost reduction of electric vehicles.  
iii. GST on electric vehicles has been reduced from 12% to 5%; GST on chargers/ 
charging stations for electric vehicles has been reduced from 18% to 5%. 
iv. Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) announced that battery -
operated vehicles will be given green license plates and be exempted from 
permit requirements. 
v. MoRTH issued a notification advising states to waive road tax on EVs, which in 
turn will help reduce the initial cost of EVs. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 3) 
Upfront cost of EV Four Wheelers 
 The Committee note that there were total 18,02,967 Electric Vehicles (EVs) 
being used on the roads of India as on 30 November, 2022. Out of which maximum 
number of vehicles (9,19,025) are under three wheeler category and 8,13,431 are under 
two wheeler category.  The Committee are somewhat perturbed to note that under four 
wheeler category, there were only 70,511 vehicles on the road in November, 2022. 
They are of the view that lower number of EVs under four wheeler category  is due to 
huge gap between the upfront cost of EV four wheelers and ICE four wheelers of similar 
specifications as well as driving range anxiety among the vehicle users. The Committee 
strongly hold that sale of  EV four wheelers  would pick up if the upfr ont cost could be 
further brought down by offering incentives such as tax breaks, waiving registration fee 
etc. as well as if other major concerns of range anxiety, lack of network of EV charging 
facility, longer time for charging etc. are addressed urgent ly. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should consider remodeling the subsidy on electric 
four wheelers similar to that of electric two wheelers i.e. demand incentive may be 
increased to @ Rs. 15000/ - per KWh from @ Rs. 10000/ - per KWh and the cap on 
incentives for Electric 4 Wheelers may be increased to 40% of the cost of vehicles from 
20% cost of vehicles. The Government may also consider incentivizing the range of the 
vehicle in addition to the subsidy being given on per unit power of  the battery. This 
would push the OEMs to produce more efficient EVs which would provide greater range 

 
 
26 
 
per unit power of the battery.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the view of the 
Ministry on these measures.  
Reply of the Government 
The FAME-II scheme has had positive impact on the e-mobility sector and a steady increase 
in demand for EVs is observed. Data showing increase in sale of 4W since launch of FAME-II 
scheme is tabulated below: 
Description(In Lakh) FY 19-20 FY 20-21 FY 21-22 FY 22-23 
ICE vehicles 43.8 38.03 42.2 50.64 
Registered EVs 0.025 0.053 0.199 0.48 
Vehicles under FAME-
II 0.01 0 0.01 0.04 
% of EV sold 0.057 0.14 0.46 0.93 
 
a. There has been a slow off -take of e -4W as subsidy is available for vehicles for 
commercial use and not for personal use and there is a price cap of ₹15 lakh. As on 
31.07.2023 out of demand incentive of ₹250 crore, claims of ₹236 crore have been 
received.  Out of which approximately of ₹142 crore have already been disbursed till 
31.07.2023. The second reason for upfront cost of EV four wheelers is high cost of 
battery. Further, Government has taken following steps for incentivize for Electric 
Vehicles users/consumers:  
Further, Government has taken following steps for incentivize for Electric Vehicles 
users/consumers: 
b. GST on EV has been reduced from 12 to 5%. Compensation cess has been kept NIL 
for EV. 

 
 
27 
 
c. GST on chargers / charging station for electric vehicles has been reduced from 18% 
to 5%.  
d. Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) announced that battery-operated 
vehicles will be given green license plates and be exempted from permit 
requirements. 
e. Ministry of Power (MoP) has released a notification on cha rging infrastructure 
standards permitting private charging at residences and offices. 
f. Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) amended the Model Building Byelaws 
2016 to establish charging stations and infrastructure in private and commercial 
buildings.  
g. Creation of charging infrastructure is also supported to address range anxiety among 
users of electric vehicles. 
h. Ministry of Road Transport & Highways issued a notification advising states to waive 
Road Tax on Electric Vehicles, which in turn will help reduce the initial cost of EVs. 
 
The suggestion for e4W is noted. 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I 
        Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 5) 
Extension of FAME-II Scheme 
 As per the Ministry, the FAME II scheme will be phased out on March 31, 2024 
under which a significant subsidy amount is provided on EVs. Incentives under this 
Scheme are linked to power of the battery of all EVs @ Rs.10,000/kWh except for  
2 wheelers @ Rs .15,000/kWh and buses @ Rs. 20,000/kWh. The Committee are 
concerned that removal of Government support would result in price escalation of EVs 
significantly. The Committee find that a large number of Start -Ups are also involved in 
this field, which may have to shut down once the scheme is closed.  It will, therefore, be 
detrimental for long -term growth that EVs can achieve in the Indian market. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should extend the FAME -II 
scheme beyond its current March 31, 2024 timeline by an additional two years to allow 

 
 
28 
 
more time to evaluate the effectiveness of the scheme and to make necessary 
adjustments/modifications to promote the electric vehicles (EVs). Further, a 
comprehensive FAME -III scheme should be introduce d once the extended period of 
FAME-II is over, based on the experience gained from FAME I and FAME II to continue 
the momentum till the desired level is achieved. This will help increase the penetration 
of EVs in the market and allow them to compete with I nternal Combustion Engine (ICE) 
vehicles, especially in terms of upfront costs, without requiring high incentives. 
Reply of the Government 
Niti Aayog inputs: National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP) was formed in 
2020.It is a NationalMission documen t providing the vision and the roadmap for the 
faster adoption of electricvehicles and their manufacturing in the country. As part of the 
NEMMP 2020, the Ministry of Heavy Industries formulated a Schemenamely Faster 
Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &)  Electric Vehicles in India (FAMEIndia) 
Scheme in 2015 to promote adoption of electric/ hybrid vehicles (xEVs) in India. 
ThePhase-1 of the scheme was available up to 31.03.2019 with budget outlay of ₹895 
crore.This phase of FAME India Scheme had four focus  areas i.e., technological 
development, demand generation, pilot project and charging infrastructure components.  
The following three schemes have been formulated by the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
for providing facilities and incentives to the EV Manufacturing Industry: 
iv) The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in 
India (FAME India) Scheme in 2015 with an aim to reduce dependency of 
fossil fuel and to address issues of vehicular emission.  At present, Phase -II 
of FAME In dia Scheme is being implemented for a period of 5 years w.e.f. 
01.04.2019 with a total budgetary support of ₹10,000 crore.  
v) Government has approved the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 
Automobile and Auto Components Industry in India to boost d omestic 
manufacturing of Advanced Automotive Technology products and attract 
investments in the automotive manufacturing value chain with a budgetary 
outlay of ₹25,938 crore over a period of five years.  

 
 
29 
 
vi) The Government on 12.05.2021 approved a Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme for manufacturing of Advanced chemistry cell (ACC) in the country in 
order to bring down prices of battery in the country. Drop in battery price will 
result in cost reduction of electric vehicles and increase in their sales. 
The FAME India Scheme -II mainly focuses on supporting electrification of public & 
shared transportation and aims to support through demand incentive 7090 e -buses, 5 
lakh e -3 Wheelers, 55000 e -4 Wheeler Passenger Cars and 10 lakh e -2 Wheelers.  
Under Phase-II of FAME India Scheme 9,44,567 Electric Vehicles have been supported 
till 04.09.2023. 
Charging Infrastructure  
In addition, creation of charging infrastructure is also supported under the Scheme. 
The Ministry of Power has allowed sale of electricity as ‘se rvice’ for charging of 
electric vehicles  and has Notified Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Guidelines and 
Specifications in October 2019. 
iv) As mentioned above, a total outlay of ₹1000 crore in FAME II has been allocated to 
setting up dense charging infrastructure.  
v) 396 EV PCS will be installed in cities through Govt. entities with a total outgo of ₹39 
crore. MHI has sanctioned ₹800 crore as capital subsidy to the three OMCs of 
MoPNG for establishment of 7,432 EV PCS.  
vi) OEMs like Ather and Ola are also in the pro cess of setting up their own charging 
infrastructure. 
Battery Swapping Policy 
National Institute for Transforming India (NITI Aayog) hasprepared a draft Battery 
Swapping Policy. Further, Energy Storage Systems including dense charging 
infrastructure and grid -scale battery systems is under considerationto include in the 
harmonized list of infrastructure.  
Battery Waste Management  
As per the information received from Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 

 
 
30 
 
Change, Government of India published the Battery Waste Management Rules, 2022 
on 24.08.2022 for environmentally sound managem ent of waste batteries, including EV 
batteries.  
The rules provide Extended Producer Responsibility framework for producers of 
batteries to recycle/ refurbish the waste batteries as per the prescribed timelines. 
Further, the rules mandate the recyclers to recover the minimum percentage of 
materials from waste batteries. 
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1854433 
The Battery -Waste Management rule 2022 link is 
https://cpcb.nic.in/uploads/hwmd/Battery-WasteManagementRules-2022.pdf 
Public awareness  
Further, following initiatives have been taken to create awareness on E-Mobility by ICAT 
in collaboration with MHI: 
v) Conference & Exposition “PanchamritkiAur” on 04.02.2023 at ICAT 
vi) Seminar of EV “How is EV Driving India’s Green Mobility Mission on 
29.03.2023 at ICAT 
vii) Seminar on “Can the EV sector be India’s next growth engine” on 28.04.2023 
at ICAT 
viii) MHI organized a conference to review the performance and addressed the 
concerns and challenges faced by the industry with regard to PLI auto 
scheme on 29.08.2023. Link for the same is 
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1952861 
Supplier side incentives like Lowering of GST etc.(As per inputs from Ministry of 
Finance)  
d) As per the recommendation of the GST Council in its 36 th Meeting held on 
27.07.2019, Electric Vehicles already attached GST at a concessional rate of 5% 
(S. No. 242A of Schedule I of notification No. 01/2017 -CT Rate dt. 28.06.2017) 
with Nil compensation Cess (S. No. 44 of notification No. 01/2017 -Compensation 

 
 
31 
 
Cell Rate dt. 28.06.2017). 
e) Even, prior to this the GST ra te on Electric Vehicles was 12% with Nil 
compensation cess as per S. No. 206 of Schedule II of notification No. 01/2017 -
CT Rate dt 28.06.2017.  Since inception of GST Electric Vehicles have been 
exempt from compensation cess.  
f) Generally, motor vehicles are kept at 28% of GST and 15-22 % of cess, whereas 
EVs are kept at lowest slab of 5% with Nil compensation cess.  The following 
table shows a comparison of GST rates and compensation cell on various types 
of vehicles. 
Vehicle Type GST Rate Comp 
Cess 
Rate 
Electric Vehicles  5% Nil 
Fuel Cell Motor Vehicles 12% Nil 
Specific Motor vehicles not exceeding 4,000 mm in length  18% Nil 
Specific Motor vehicles exceeding 4,000 mm in length 28% Nil 
Motor vehicle not exceeding 1,500 CC 28% 17% 
Motor vehicle exceeding 1,500 CC 28% 20% 
SUVs exceeding 1,500 CC 28% 22% 
 
Ministry of Power input 
Comparison on International Best Practices for EV Charging Infrastructure, State EV 
Policies and salient features of MoPrevised Guidelines for EV Charging Infrastructure.  
The same are being followed. Relevant 
Link:https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/Final_Consolidated_EVCI_Guidelin

 
 
32 
 
es_January_2022_with_ANNEXURES.pdf 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 7) 
Promotion of other technologies along with EVs 
 EVs are charged at Charging Stations by using supply of electricity from the Grid 
and the power is supplied to grid from both Non -Renewable and Renewable Sources.  
In the foreseeable future, coal is projected to remain an important source of electricity 
generation. This means that vehicles are being switched from petrol and diesel to coal, 
which may not assist in meeting the aggregate pollutio n targets. Also, in electric 
vehicles, major expensive component is Lithium -Ion battery (approx. 30% to 40% cost 
of electric vehicle is battery). Currently Lithium -Ion cells are imported and further 
manufacturing / assembly of battery pack is done domestic ally. Globally, prices of 
Lithium-Ion cells and battery pack are higher and the rising global demand for certain 
minerals would make coasting  and importing them difficult. The Committee observe 
that Battery Electric Vehicle and Strong Hybrid vehicles are supported under the FAME-
II Scheme, whereas hydrogen fuel cell based vehicles, which are Zero Emission 
Vehicles (ZEVs), are covered under Auto and Auto component PLI Scheme. It is 
possible that EVs will continue to dominate the mobility transition because other 
alternatives require more research and development, but it is prudent to keep options 
open and the Government should also promote other technology such as flex fuel 
vehicles, Hydrogen ICE , Hydrogen fuel cell vehicles etc. with greater emphasis. The 
Committee also recommend that a roadmap for setting up of Solar charging stations 
should be prepared in a time bound manner to reduce the depen dence on electricity 
generated by using coal, to remain true to the green mobility objective of the 
Government.  
Reply of the Government 
The Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Automobile and Auto Component 
Industry with a total budgetary outlay of ₹25,938 crore for a period of 5 years 
incentivizes Electric Vehicles and Advanced Automotive Technology product s. The list 
of Advanced Automotive Technology products includes Flex Fuel Engine and its 
components as under: - 

 
 
33 
 
i. BS6 compliant Flex Fuel Engine capable of running upto Ethanol 85 (E85) fuel,  
ii. Heated Fuel Rail for Flex Fuel Engine,  
iii. Heating Element for Flex Fuel Engine,  
iv. Heating Control Unit for Flex Fuel Engine, 
v. Electronic Control Unit (ECU) for Flex Fuel Engine (Processor minimum 32 bits) and 
vi. Ethanol Sensor for Flex Fuel Engine.  
The Flex Fuel Vehicles (FFVs) have an internal combusti on engine and can operate on 
a blend of gasoline and ethanol.The following steps have been taken by Government to 
encourage ethanol, flex engine, CNG, LPG, green hydrogen and electric vehicles: 
i. Incentives under PLI Scheme for Automobiles and Auto Component s for flex fuel 
engine and components. 
ii. Incentives under PLI Scheme for Automobiles and Auto Components for CNG 
and LPG parts and components. 
iii. Incentives under PLI Scheme for Automobiles and Auto Components for 
Hydrogen Fuel Cell Vehicles and their components. 
For Solar charging stations, Ministry of Power inputs: 
To promote green energy in charging infrastructure, following provisions have been 
made in the revised guidelines issued by Ministry of Power: 
i) A ceiling of ₹2.5 per unit and ₹3.5 per unit o f electricity used for slow AC 
charging of EVs at PCS during the solar and non -solar hours respectively has 
been specified. 
ii) A ceiling limit of ₹10 per unit and ₹12 per unit of electricity used for DC Fast 
charging of EVs at PCS during the solar and non -solar hours respectively has 
been specified. 
A discount of 20% in the electricity supply Tariff to PCS (i.e., Average cost of supply of 
Electricity (ACoS) from a DISCOM to EV charging station in the solar hours i.e., 

 
 
34 
 
between 9:00 am to 4:00 pm and a 20% surcharge in the electricity supply Tariff (ACoS) 
for EV charging at PCS during all other periods in the day has been made.   
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 8) 
Waiving of Road Tax on EVs 
 The Committee note that Ministry of Road transport and Highways (MoRTH) had 
issued a notification, advising States to waive road tax on EVs, which, in turn, will help 
reduce the initial cost of EVs. The Committee also note that Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, 
Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Haryana, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Assam, Bihar, 
Telangana, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, 
Chandigarh, Uttarakhand, Puducherry, Odisha and Delhi have waived off or reduced 
the road tax on EVs and  these States are not getting any compensation for the loss of 
revenue arising on account of waiver/reduction of road tax on EVs from the Union 
Government. The Committee are of the view that some compensation to the States, 
which have waived off or reduced  the road tax on EVs, may be provided so that these 
States do not find it financially burdensome to continue such waiver  or reduction on 
road tax to promote and poplularise  EVs. The Committee believe that this will 
encourage all the States to provide suc h waiver on road tax on EVs, which will result in 
faster adoption of EVs all over the Country.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) issued a notification advising states to 
waive road tax on EVs, which in turn will help reduce the initial cost of the EVs. 
The efforts of the central government to promote e -mobility need supplemental support 
from State Governments. States need to offer bouquet of fiscal and non-fiscal incentives 
to be notified separately in order for entities  dependent on State support to be eligible 
for central assistance under this scheme. Some such non fiscal incentives include 
waiver / concessional road tax, exemption from permit, waiver / concessional toll tax, 
waiver / concessional parking fees, concessi onal registration charges etc. States would 
be encouraged to expand these incentives. 
Comments of the Committee 

 
 
35 
 
Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter – I 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 9) 
Need for Review of GST on EVs 
The Committee are glad to note that GST on electric vehicles has been reduced from 
12% to 5%; and GST on chargers/ charging stations for electric vehicles has been 
reduced from 18% to 5% to promote the electric mobility in the country. The Committee 
are of the view that the Government should make a comparative study on GST rate on 
EV vis -à-vis ICE vehicles and their components/ spare parts for rationalizing GST on 
EVs and their components. The Committee strongly hold that for e -two wheelers, being, 
the  common man’s vehicle, the MHI should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance 
at the appropriate level to further reduce or waive off GST, so that their upfront cost may 
be reduced further to make it more affordable to the common man. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Finance Inputs are given below:  
a) As the GST rates and exemptions are notified on the recommendation of the 
GST Council, the issue of reducing GST rate on EV was placed before the 
Council in its 36 th Meeting, wherein, after detailed deliberations, it has been 
recommended to reduce the rate of GST on EV from 12 to 5%.  Thus, after July 
2019, Electric Vehicles (EV) including two -wheeler EVs attract GST at a 
concessional rate (lowest slab) of 5%.  Compensation cess has been kept NIL for 
EV.  
Exempting two -wheeler electric vehicles from GST would lead to blockage of input 
credit in terms of Section 17(2) of the GST Act, 2017, which does not allow for input tax 
credit for inputs used in the supply goods exe mpt from GST.  This would be detrimental 
to the interests of the domestic manufacturers of such goods. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 10) 
PLI Scheme for automobile and auto components 

 
 
36 
 
The Committee note that PLI for automobile and auto component Scheme provides 
incentive up to 18 per cent to overcome disabilities in respect of manufacturing of 
Advanced Automotive Technology so that it can catch up with the world. It has a 
budgetary outlay of Rs. 25,938 crore, spread over a period of five years from 2022-2023 
to 2026 -27. The scheme consists of two parts. The first part is Champion OEM 
Incentive Scheme and the second part is Component Champion Incentive Scheme. It 
incentivises various adva nced technology products, dealing with emission, electronics, 
safety, CNG, LNG, flex fuel and clean fuels. The Committee take note of the fact  that 
19 applications under Champion OEM scheme and 67 applications under Component 
Champion Scheme have been app roved. Apart from Indian business groups, approved 
applicants include groups from countries such as Japan, Germany, USA, UK, Republic 
of Korea, Ireland, France, Belgium, Netherlands and Italy. The Committee are of the 
view that for the benefit of domestic economy, the beneficiaries of the scheme need to 
continue their production, even after the conclusion of the scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should make such a provision applicable to 
the beneficiaries of the scheme to make it mandatory for them to continue their 
production till 2030 at least.  
Reply of the Government 
Scheme period is 2021-22 to 2027-28. It is expected that the PLI Auto beneficiary firms 
will continue their operations even after the subsidy under the scheme ends. 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter – I 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 12) 
Guarantee for EV Batteries’s life 
 In the wake of certain incidents of fire in electric two wheelers in the past, the 
Committee note that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways had constituted a 
Committee of Experts to suggest safety standards for Battery, BMS, and related 
components in electric vehicles. The Expert Committee, in its report, suggested some 
additional requirements to be incorporated in the existing testing standards for battery 

 
 
37 
 
and related components of L, M, and N category vehicles. Incorporating the suggestions 
of the Expert Committee and inputs from the stakeholders, amendment to the 
Automotive Industry Standards (AIS) 156 [Specific requirements for L category electric 
power train vehicles] and AIS 038 (Rev 2) [Specific Requirements for M, N Category 
Electric Power Tra in Vehicles] were notified. The said Amendments have reportedly 
been made applicable from 1st December, 2022 and some clauses of these AIS 
standards would be effective from 31st March, 2023. The Committee expect that these 
specific requirements would help in improving the safety standards of the battery. The 
Committee further hold that in addition to the safety standards, there should be a 
minimum guarantee for batteries’ life.  Longer battery life of EVs would instill confidence 
among potential EV buyers a s the price of the battery in the EVs constitutes major part 
of the cost of the vehicle.  The Committee also recommend that the Government should 
work closely with Bureau of Indian Standards  (BIS) to establish a series of national 
standards in relation to EVs and its various components.  
Reply of the Government 
ARAI Inputs: 
1. One of the eligibility criteria under FAME -II Scheme is 3 years battery warranty 
for electric vehicles. OEM of electric vehicle is required to provide minimum 3 
years warranty for battery to purchasers of vehicles. 
Additional inputs: 
1. The revised and improved safety standards as mentioned below are introduced 
pan India effective from 30.03.2023: 
a. AIS 156 - SpecificRequirements for L Category Electric Power Train 
Vehicles Part I: Requi rements of a Vehicle with Regard to its Electrical 
Safety Part II: Requirements of a Rechargeable Electrical Energy Storage 
System (REESS) with Regard to its Safety  and;link for standard 
AIS_156_with_Amd3_85f86844-9e4f-4e9d-8d41-f2c0aaf93ae0.pdf 
(araiindia.com) 
b. AIS 038 (Rev2) - Specific Requirements for Electric Power Train of 

 
 
38 
 
Vehicles Part I: Requirements of a Vehicle with Regard to Specific 
Requirements for the Electric Power Train Part II: Requirements of a 
Rechargeable Electrical Energy Storage System (REESS) with Regard to 
its Safety  link for standard AIS_038_Rev2_Amd3_8901e84b-5482-4e84-
ae7b-c53508a57822.pdf (araiindia.com).  
The safety norms are tested, and compliances are achieved down to the cell level. This 
will not only enhance the confidence among the users in areas of saf ety, range anxiety, 
maintenance, but also increase the life and warranty of cells and in turn the battery 
packs. MHI is closely associated with TED 27 committee of BIS for establishing National 
standards on EV parts, components and sub-systems. 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 13) 
Strategy for reuse or disposal of EV Batteries 
 The Committee find that presently penetration of EVs across all segments 
continues to remain upward. As per VAHAN portal, a total of 4.29 lakh EVs were sold in 
FY 2022 as compared to 1.34 lakh EVs in FY 2021, an increase of about 220%. The 
same is expected to rise further as the adoption of EVs pick up. As the number of EVs 
being used in the country will be continuously rising, safe disposal and /or reuse of 
batteries and requirement for skilled manpower for undertaking this job needs to be 
addressed.  A pr oper disposal plan and dedicated recycling units would ensure a truly 
sustainable ecosystem of EVs. E -waste (management) rules may suitably be modified 
and elaborated further to facilitate processes for disposal and/or re -use of EV batteries. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should develop a national 
strategy to facilitate processes for disposal and/or re -use of such batteries and to 
ensure trained manpower for the same to reduce the environmental impact of EV 
production/manufacturing.   
Reply of the Government 
As per the information received from Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, Government of India notified the Battery Waste Management Rules, 2022 on 
22.08.2022 to ensure environmentally sound management of waste batteries.The rules 

 
 
39 
 
cover all t ype of batteries, viz. Electric Vehicle (EV) batteries, portable batteries, 
automotive batteries and industrial batteries.  
The rules provide Extended Producer Responsibility framework for producer of batteries 
to recycle/ refurbish the waste batteries as per the prescribed timelines.  Further, the 
rules mandate the recyclers to recover the minimum percentage of materials from waste 
batteries.   
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1854433 
The Battery-Waste Management rule 2022 link is given below: 
https://cpcb.nic.in/uploads/hwmd/Battery-WasteManagementRules-2022.pdf 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter – I 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 14) 
Need for apprenticeships and traineeships  
 The Committee are of the view that scheme such as FAME India, Advance Cell 
Chemistry (ACC) PLI Scheme and PLI for automobile and au to component Scheme 
would not only promote adoption of EVs but would also give a major boost to the 
manufacturing of EVs, batteries and automobiles sector. As the manufacturing in these 
areas  grow further, it would lead to creation of a large number of employment.   Though 
repair and maintenance in EVs is statedly minimum compared to ICE vehicles, yet lack 
of skilled manpower in EV repair, maintenance and scrapping is one of the major 
concerns as well as challenges for universal adoption of EVs. Keeping th is in view, the 
Committee recommend that the Government, in conjunction with industry stakeholders, 
should frame new courses for specialization in EVs in ITIs, other Industrial Training 
Centres and Skill D evelopment Centres, as well as fund apprenticeships  and 
traineeships in the local EV and associated manufacturing sector so that a pool of 
trained and skilled workforce can be created.    
Reply of the Government 
Steps taken by Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) to promote skilling 

 
 
40 
 
I. MoU has been signed between Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) and Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) on 29.06.2022 in the presence of 
Hon’ble Ministers of both the Ministries focusing on facilitating strategic partnership 
between MH I and MSDE for imparting skilling in several engineering trades through 
Qualification Packs developed by MHI Skill Councils under MHI Scheme for 
Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Capital Goods Sector Phase II. 
II. MHI has notified the Scheme for “Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian 
Capital Goods Sector - Phase II” on 25.01.2022. The Scheme has a component for the 
“Promotion of skilling in Capital Goods Sector through creation of Qualification 
Packs for Level  6 and above” . Under this component, the Ministry shall promote 
skilling in the Capital Goods sector by creation of Qualification packages (QPs) for skill 
levels 6 and above.  
Under the Phase II of the Scheme, MHI has sanctioned following projects for prom otion 
of Skilling: 
(A) A project of ₹2.838 crore for the development of 23 Qualification Packs by 
Automotive Skills Development Council (ASDC) for the automotive sector. ASDC 
has already developed 6 QPs out of the 23 QPs to be developed. 
(B) A project of ₹2.99 crore for the development of 23 Qualification Packs by Capital 
Goods Skill Council for the Capital Goods sector.  
(C) Under the Common Engineering Facilities Centre (CEFC) component, MHI has 
sanctioned a CEFC at WRI, Trichy- BHEL for imparting skilling in Advanced Welding 
Technologies. The total project cost is ₹87.06 crore out of which sanctioned MHI 
grant is ₹69.648 crore BHEL is targeted to impart skilling to approx. 5000 candidates 
per year through 6 of its centres under hub and spoke mod el at Trichy, Varanasi, 
Haridwar, Ranipet, Bhopal and Jhansi.  
III.  Under the Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Capital Goods 
Sector- Phase I, Common Engineering Facility Centres(CEFCs) established under the 
Scheme, have imparted skilling as per the following details: 

 
 
41 
 
S. N. CEFC Skilling  Trainees 
1. CEFC at HMT MTL, 
Bangalore  
for Skill Development in various 
engineering trades 
849 
2. CEFC at HEC, Ranchi  For training of heavy fabrication 
and steel making technologies  
120 
3. CEFC at Bardoli, Surat by 
SETU Foundation:  
Designing and common 
manufacturing of Textile Engg 
components 
CAM/ CAD 
training- 
877  
CNC 
diploma 
training- 
689 
4. KORUS – CEFC on Training 
Facility  
Design engineers for steel 
making 
650  
 
 Total  3195 
 
IV. Internships by Samarth Udyog Centres and Technology Innovation Platforms 
set up under MHI CG Scheme Phase I: 
Total internships offered by Samarth Udyog Centres and Technology Innovation 
Platforms set up under MHI CG Scheme Phase I: 
(i) Internships offered by Samarth Udyog Centres 
S. N. Centre No. of Internships 
  Completed till now Ongoing 

 
 
42 
 
1. Samarth Centre at C4i4 Lab, 
Pune 
67 - 
2. Samarth Centre at IIT Delhi 143 8 
3. Samarth Centre at IISc 194 - 
4. Samarth Centre at CMTI 153 - 
 Total        565 
(ii) Internships offered by Technology Innovation Platforms 
S. No. TIP No. of Internships 
  Completed till 
now 
Ongoing 
1. DRISHTI- TIP by CMTI 125 45 
2. SURGE- TIP by HMT and IISc 31 - 
3. KITE- TIP by IIT Madras 308 - 
4. Technovvus TIP by ARAI 183 28 
5. ASPIRE- TIP by iCAT 23 17 
6. Sanrachna- TIP by BHEL 1617  
 Total       2377 
 
V. Apprenticeship training courses offered to the eligible youths in the 
country, during the last two years by PSUs and Autonomous bodies under MHI: 

 
 
43 
 
Name of PSU/ AB ITI Trade 
Apprentice/ 
Training 
Diploma 
Engineer 
Apprentice/ 
Training 
Graduate 
Engineer 
Apprentice/ 
Training 
Others 
 2022-
23 (till 
date) 
2021-
22 
2022
-23 
(till 
date) 
2021
-22 
2022-
23 (till 
date) 
2021
-22 
2022-
23 (till 
date) 
2021
-22 
Central Manufacturing 
Technology Institute 
NIL NIL 01 02 28 14 -- -- 
Cements Corporation of 
India Ltd. 
124 150 10 5 5 1 -- -- 
Fluid Control Research 
Institute 
5 11 3 5 11 18 05 NIL 
Instrumentation Limited,  
Palakkad 
71 61 30 34 28 25 6 -- 
Bridge and Roof Co.(I). Ltd 12 4 0 0 0 8 NA -- 
Rajasthan Electronics and 
Instruments Limited 
62 57 0 0 0 0 -- -- 
Andrew Yule and Co. Ltd. 44 39 6 2 0 0 0 5 
Hindustan Salts Limited 2 4 0 1 2 0 0 0 
Sambhar Salts Limited 5 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 325 333 50 49 64 76 11 5 

 
 
44 
 
I. Geological Survey of India (GSI), an attached Office of Ministry of Mines, carries out 
systematic mineral exploration activities for various mineral commodities including 
lithium, in different parts of the country with an aim to find out potential mineral ized 
locales as well as to augment mineral resource. Further,  
a. GSI has carried out 40 nos. of projects on lithium and associated mineral in last 5 
years (2018-19 to 2022-23) (attached as Annexure-I).  
b. Till date, GSI could establish lithium resource only in  Reasi area of Jammu & 
Kashmir. The exploration report of Salal-Haimna was handed over to the Govt. of 
UT: J&K (attached asAnnexure-II). 
c. Based on the GSI findings of lithium occurrences in FS 1995 -96 and 1996-97 in 
Reasi area, a G3 stage (UNFC) project for  bauxite, REE & lithium was taken up 
during FS 2020-21 and 2021-22 in SalalHaimna areas of Reasi district, Jammu & 
Kashmir. An inferred resource (G3) of 5.9 million tonnes of lithium ore was 
established in Bauxite.  
d. Recently, following the MEMC Amendment R ule 2021 (Amended MMDR Act 
2021) GSI has handed over two geological memorandum on lithium to the 
Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh state governments for auctioning as 
composite license (attached as Annexure-III). 
e. The geoscientific activities of GSI are aimed  to explore prospective mineralized 
zones having potential to be converted into indicated resource, which can be 
further developed into a mineable reserve by other agencies post auction.  
f. The details of lithium exploration programme taken up in FY 2023 -24 is given in 
(attached as Annexure-IV).  
II.Mineral Exploration & Consultancy Limited [MECL] , a CPSE under Ministry of 
Mines, carries out systematic mineral exploration activities for various mineral 
commodities including lithium, in different parts of the country with an aim to find out 
potential mineralized locales as well as to augment mineral resource.  
a. MECL is carrying out G -4 level of exploration of Lithium and Potassium in Merak 
Village, UT of Ladakh through National Mineral Exploration Trust [NMET] 

 
 
45 
 
funding. NMET has approved the proposal in the month of March 2022 with 
estimated cost of ₹2.13 crore having timeline of 24 months.  
b. MECL commenced the exploration work in June 2022 and completed Geological 
Mapping of 86.00 Sq. km out of total 114.19 sq. km area and collection of 
Surface samples.  
c. Due to extreme field conditions, exploration work  is being carried out in summer 
windows only. Phase -I of mapping has been carried out during FY 2022 -23 
during June-2022 to October 2022. 
Recently,Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Amendment Bill 2023 was 
passed by the Lok Sabha on 28.07.2023, the link is given below: 
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1945102 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 15) 
Expediting extraction of Lithium 
 The Committee note that in electric vehicles, major expensive component is the 
Lithium-Ion battery (approx. 30% to 40% cost of electric vehicle). Currently Lithium -Ion 
cells are imported and further manufacturing / assembly of battery pack is done 
domestically. Globally, prices of Lithium-Ion cells and battery pack are higher.  As per a 
think tank, EV manufacturing in India will raise reliance on China since China processes 
more than 60% of Lithium globally.  In this regard, the Committee are glad to learn that 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) has, for the first time, established Lithium inferred 
resources (G3) of 5.9 million tonnes in Salal-Haimana area of Reasi District of Jammu & 
Kashmir (UT). In view of the recent discovery of Lithium reserves the Govern ment 
should expedite the process for its extraction and further processing/refining so that 
import of Lithium can be cut down. Reducing the import dependency of Lithium would 
help produce cheaper Lithium -ion batteries to bring down the upfront cost of EVs.  
Hence the Ministry should follow the developments closely in coordination with the 
Ministry of Mines and other agencies to make full use of the opportunity and strive to get 
domestically manufactured Lithium -ion batteries for EVs in the times to come.  Th e 

 
 
46 
 
Committee are also of the view that Government should accelerate further exploration 
of Lithium reserves in other parts of the country.      
Reply of the Government 
Inputs received from Ministry of Mines are as below:  
I. Geological Survey of India (GSI) , an attached Office of Ministry of Mines, carries out 
systematic mineral exploration activities for various mineral commodities including 
lithium, in different parts of the country with an aim to find out potential mineralized 
locales as well as to augment mineral resource. Further,  
a. GSI has carried out 40 nos. of projects on lithium and associated mineral in last 5 
years (2018-19 to 2022-23) (attached as Annexure-I).  
b. Till date, GSI could establish lithium resource only in Reasi area of Jammu & 
Kashmir. The exploration report of Salal-Haimna was handed over to the Govt. of 
UT: J&K (attached as Annexure-II).  
c. Based on the GSI findings of lithium occurrences in FS 1995 -96 and 1996-97 in 
Reasi area, a G3 stage (UNFC) project for bauxite, REE & lithium was ta ken up 
during FS 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 in Salal Haimna areas of Reasi district, Jammu 
& Kashmir. An inferred resource (G3) of 5.9 million tonnes of lithium ore was 
established in Bauxite.  
d. Recently, following the MEMC Amendment Rule 2021 (Amended MMDR Act 
2021) GSI has handed over two geological memorandum on lithium to the 
Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh state governments for auctioning as 
composite license (attached as Annexure-III). 
e. The geoscientific activities of GSI are aimed to explore prospective mineralized 
zones having potential to be converted into indicated resource, which can be 
further developed into a mineable reserve by other agencies post auction.  
f. The details of lithium exploration programme taken up in FY 2023 -24 is given in 
(attached as Annexure-IV).  

 
 
47 
 
II.       Mineral Exploration & Consultancy Limited [MECL], a CPSE under Ministry of 
Mines, carries out systematic mineral exploration activities for various mineral 
commodities including lithium, in different parts of the country with an aim to find out 
potential mineralized locales as well as to augment mineral resource.  
a. MECL is carrying out G -4 level of exploration of Lithium and Potassium in Merak 
Village, UT of Ladakh  through National Mineral Exploration Trust [NMET] 
funding. NMET has approved the proposal in the month of March 2022 with 
estimated cost of ₹2.13 crore having timeline of 24 months.  
b. MECL commenced the exploration work in June 2022 and completed Geologica l 
Mapping of 86.00 Sq. km out of total 114.19 sq. km area and collection of 
Surface samples.  
c. Due to extreme field conditions, exploration work is being carried out in summer 
windows only. Phase -I of mapping has been carried out during FY 2022 -23 
during June-2022 to October 2022. 
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1945102 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 17) 
Charging Infrastructure 
 The Committee note that Ministry of Power (MoP) issued a clarification on 
13.04.2018 to the effect that charging EVs is consider ed a service, not a sale of 
electricity and dispensed with the license required to operate EV charging stations.  
Accordingly, any individual/entity is free to set up public charging stations as per extant 
guidelines. Model Building Bylaws 2016 was amended  to establish charging stations 
and infrastructure in private and commercial buildings. However, people living in tall 
apartments who do not have designated parking spots would find it difficult to install 
their own charging points. To solve such difficult ies, the Government need to modify the 
Building Bylaws suitably to make provision for personal charging points at the 
designated parking spots or at a designated location for the benefit of EV users residing 
Recently, Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Amendment Bill 
2023 was passed by the Lok Sabha on 28.07.2023, the link is given below: 

 
 
48 
 
in apartments. The Committee are of the view tha t If some form of incentives/subsidy 
can be provided to private persons/builders to set up charging stations, it would boost 
the network of charging infrastructure. This would help solve the problem of range 
anxiety of EVs and would further boost faster ad option of EVs. The Committee desire to 
be apprised of the action taken on the matter.  
Reply of the Government 
As on date there are 10,184 Operational Public Charging Stations in India. ( BEE | 
Homepage (beeindia.gov.in)) 
Ministry of Power on 14.01.2022 has issued the revised consolidated Guidelines & 
Standards on ChargingInfrastructure for Electric Vehicles and it has been clarified that 
any individual/ entity is free to set up public charging stations s hall be a de -licensed 
activity and provided that, such stations meet the technical, safety as well as 
performance standards and protocols and norms/ standards/ specifications decided by 
Ministry of Power, Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) and Central Elect ricity Authority 
(CEA) from time to time. Revised guidelines are given on the following website:  
https://evyatra.beeindia.gov.in/central-govt-initiative-details/amendment-in-revised-
consolidated-
guidelines/#:~:text=Amendment%20in%20revised%20consolidate%20guidelines%3A&t
ext=2022.,and%20discount%20for%20solar%20hours. 
To facilitate the establishment of Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehiclesfollowing 
actions have been taken by the Government of India: 
i.     FAME -India Scheme: Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) has  launched Phase -II 
ofFAME India Scheme which provides for ₹1,000 crores for installation of 
ChargingInfrastructure for Electric Vehicles. 
ii.   Grid Connectivity and Safety regulations: Central Electricity Authority (CEA) 
hasissued amendments in the regula tions regarding Technical Standards pertaining 
toGrid Connectivity and Safety of supply for Charging Stations. 
iii. Go Electric Campaign: Ministry of Power along with Ministry of Road Transportand 
Highways, Ministry of Heavy Industries and NITI Aayog have launched anationwide “Go 

 
 
49 
 
Electric” Campaign on 19.02.2021 to educate the general public onthe benefits of e -
mobility, inform the potential EV owners about the Governmentincentives for EV 
adoption, generate curiosity and transform the same into demand. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) input 
MoPNG has planned to establish 22,000 EV PCS at their ROs. MHI has sanctioned 
₹800 crore as capital subsidy to the three OMCs of MoPNG for establishment of 7,432 
EV PCS, the remaining EV PCS will be establish ed by OMCs by using funds from their 
own resources.  
The OMCs have sufficient land in the premises of their ROs which can be utilized for the 
setting up of the charging stations. Details are given below: - 
S. N. Category IOC HPC BPC Total  
1 4 Million + (9 cities) 434 27 220 681 
2 Million + (44 cities) other than (1) 292 39 232 563 
3 Smart Cities, Cities in Hilly States (other than 1&2) 106 109 109 324 
4 
Highways connecting adjoining major cities 
(Expressway) 14 
40 
25 79 
5 Major Highways 2,592 1,445 1,748 5,785 
  Total  3,438 1,660 2,334 7,432 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 18) 
Cost escalation of Charging Stations  
 The Committee note that the MHI had sanctioned 520 Charging Stations/ 
Infrastructure for Rs. 43 Crore (approx.) under Phase -I of FAME -India Scheme 
launched in year 2015  and under phase -II of FAME -India Scheme launched in year 
2019, Rs. 1000 Cr. has been a llocated for supporting charging infrastructure for electric 

 
 
50 
 
vehicles in the country. MHI sanctioned 2,877 electric vehicle charging stations in 68 
cities and 1576 charging stations across 9 Expressways and 16 Highways under phase-
II of FAME India Scheme. The Committee are concerned to note that charging stations 
sanctioned under phase I of  FAME India Scheme were much cheaper with an average 
cost of Rs.8.27 lakh per station than the charging stations sanctioned under phase II of 
FAME India scheme, which ha s an average cost of Rs.22.45 lakh per station. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons for such cost escalation of charging stations 
under Phase-II of FAME of India Scheme and also recommend that Government should 
conduct an audit to avoid any ineffi cient use of funds.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Power inputs: 
The probable reasons for escalation in cost of EV charging stations proposed to be 
deployed by FAME-II scheme are as follows: 
a. Inclusion of high-capacity fast DC EV chargers (CCS / CHAdeMO, minimum 50 
kW capacity) under FAME -II scheme to cater to fast charging requirement of 
high performance EVs within short duration.  
b. Specifying minimum requirement of 50% domestic value addition under Phased 
Manufacturing Programme for EV chargers eligible for grant of subsidy under 
FAME-II scheme.  
c. Disruptions in Global supply chain of charger components due to COVID -19 
pandemic.  
The MHI under FAME II scheme, nominated DG -BEE to finalize the benchmark price 
for all types of Electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) / EV charger categories and 
for seeking financial assistance to setup public EV PCSs in various cities.  
Accordingly, DG BE E discovered the benchmark price of various categories of EV 
chargers in June 2020 which was approved in 4th PISC meeting dated 31.08.2020.   

 
 
51 
 
The objective of benchmarking prices of EV chargers was to provide ceiling limits 
while sanctioning subsidy amounts to various agencies deploying EV chargers across 
states.  The actual disbursement amount will be calculated based on the price 
discovered or the benchmark prices for EV chargers as per the report.    
The details of proposed benchmark price of EV charger is attached as ANNEXURE - 
V 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter – I 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No.19) 
Cash Incentive Scheme on Exchange/Scraping of  ICE Vehicles for EVs 
 India’s Vehicle Scrappage Policy took effect in April  2022. The objective of this 
Government-funded programme is to phase out old passenger and commercial vehicles 
and thereby reduce urban air pollution, increase passenger and road safety, and 
stimulate vehicle sales. The policy requires passenger vehicles o lder than 20 years and 
commercial vehicles older than 15 years to pass a “fitness and emissions test” to keep 
their registration.  The Committee notice that some countries are providing additional 
purchase subsidies and cash -incentive schemes for scrapping  petrol/diesel vehicles for 
electric vehicles. They, therefore,  are of the view that similar purchase subsidies and 
cash-incentive schemes for scrapping/exchanging petrol/diesel vehicles for electric 
vehicles can be considered here too as it would lead no t only to faster adoption of EVs 
but also have a major impact on controlling CO2 emissions. The Committee believe that 
many ICE vehicle owners, who may be willing to change their vehicle to EV, would feel 
encouraged if such incentives are provided.  They recommend an early consideration of 
the matter. 
Reply of the Government 
Inputs from Ministry of Road Transport & Highways: 
The Voluntary Vehicle -Fleet Modernization Program (V -VMP) or “Vehicle Scrapping 
Policy” is aimed at creating an eco-system for phasing out of unfit and polluting vehicles 

 
 
52 
 
in an eco -friendly manner. The policy targets voluntary scrapping of unfit commercial  
and personal vehicles strictly based on their fitness, irrespective of vehicle age. In order 
to incentivise the owner of the vehicles for scrapping their vehicles, Concession in motor 
vehicle tax of up to 25% for non -transport vehicles and up to 15% for t ransport vehicles 
which are purchased against a Certificate of Deposit, has been announced vide GSR 
720(E), 05.10.2021 to incentivize upgradation to new, safer and fuel -efficient vehicles. 
The Certificate of Deposit obtained on scrapping of a vehicle can b e used to avail the 
concessions on purchase of ICE or Electric vehicles. 
a) Policy of Voluntary vehicle scrappage policy, which is aimed at phasing out cars 
and commercial vehicles which are older than 20 or 15 years, respectively. 
(February 2021 / MoRTH) 
b) Deregistration and scrapping of vehicles owned by Government department and 
PSU, which are above 15 years in age (January 2021/ MoRTH) 
A. Maharashtra State Electric Vehicles draft Policy-2021 is as under: - 
c) All the EVs sold in the state shall be exempted f rom road tax till the duration of 
the policy.  
d) All government office complexes shall convert 100% of their total parking spaces 
to be EV ready at the earliest, but not later than 2025.  
e) An awareness program will be designed and implemented by the state 
government in partnership with industry players and civil society organizations. 
The program will aim to create awareness on EVs, their benefits and incentive 
support available under state and central government policies.  
f) The vehicles eligible for demand inc entives under this policy will be eligible for 
the scrappage incentive. Vehicle segment -wise scrappage incentives are 
described in Table 3. Scrappage incentive shall be reimbursed by the 
Government of Maharashtra provided:  
i. Evidence of matching contribution from the dealer or OEM  
ii. Confirmation of scrappage of the ICE vehicle in the same vehicle 
category.  

 
 
53 
 
Sr. No. Vehicle Segment Scrappage incentive 
01 e-2W Upto INR 7,000 
02 e-3W Upto INR 15,000 
03 e-4W Upto INR 25,000 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 20) 
Awareness for promotion of EVs 
 The Ministry of Power along with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, MHI 
and NITI Aayog had launched a nationwide “Go Electric” Campaign on 19.02.2021 to 
educate the general pu blic on the benefits of e -mobility, inform the potential EV owners 
about the Government incentives for EV adoption, generate curiosity and transform the 
same into demand, discredit misinformation against Electric Vehicles and bring together 
multiple stakeholders on single platform. The Committee are of the view that the said 
campaign could not fulfill its objective to the required extent. In spite of various 
concessions and benefits, EV sales’ penetration is very low. In the absence of 
widespread marketing strategies concerning the impact and importance of EVs, Indian 
consumers have limited awareness of EVs as alternative to traditional fossil fuel engine -
based vehicles. The Committee are of the view that to  further promote EVs,  
Government in collaboration  with EV manufacturers should organize 
exhibitions/consumer education campaign, especially in colleges, corporate offices, 
institutions, motor race events like  formula race in various parts of the country to  make 
people aware of the capabilities and bene fits of EVs such as low operating cost, low 
maintenance, benefit in income tax on interest on loans for EVs, low GST, road tax, 
registration  fee, lesser pollution etc and various concessions being given on EVs to  
promote adoption of EVs as well as to cle ar doubts  to dispel any inhibition in the minds 
of potential buyers.  
 
 

 
 
54 
 
Reply of the Government 
NITI Aayog inputs 
A. India launched ‘ E-AMRIT’ (Accelerated e -Mobility Revolution for India's 
Transportation), a web portal on electric vehicles (EVs), at the COP26 
Summit in Glasgow, UK. E-AMRIT is a one-stop destination for all information 
on electric vehicles -busting myths around the adoption of EVs, their 
purchase, investment opportunities, policies, subsidies, etc. The portal has 
been developed and hosted b y NITI Aayog under a collaborative knowledge 
exchange programme with the UK government and as part of the UK –India 
Joint Roadmap 2030, signed by the Prime Ministers of the two countries. 
B. The Ministry of Power launched “Go Electric” Campaign  to spread 
awareness on the benefits of e -mobility and EV Charging Infrastructure as 
well as electric cooking in India.  Common Services Centre (CSC) scheme 
has launched a rural e-mobility campaign in February 2021. 
C. NITI Aayog launched a corporate and consumer -facing awareness campaign, 
“Shoonya – Zero pollution Mobility" to accelerate the deployment of EVs 
for ride hailing and deliveries. The campaign aims to convert all urban 
commercial vehicles to EVs by building awareness and facilitating bold 
corporate action on zero -pollution mobility. Since the launch of the Shoonya 
campaign in India, more than 145 corporate partners have joined the 
campaign, collectively completing 40 million Shoonya deliveries and 70 
million Shoonya rides . Moreover, a consumer awareness brand film 
launched as part of the Shoonya campaign received over 65 million views  
across social media platforms.  
Research and Development of EVs (NITI Aayog) 
Consultations with IITs were organised to introduce New M. Tech Programmes to 
promote research on energy st orage & battery chemistry. Various R&D initiatives have 
been taken up by 16 of IITs out of 23. 
I. IIT Kanpur  established a new Department of Sustainable Energy Engineering, 
aligned along energy sustainability paradigm.  

 
 
55 
 
II. IIT Delhi  has a dedicated Centre for Automotive Research and Tribology (CART) 
that does R&D works on EVs and Battery Storage. The Centre currently has MSR 
and PhD program in EV domain.  
III. DST and IIT Bombay as a joint initiative have setup a Centre on Energy Storage 
Platform on Hydrogen for extensive research in the field of hydrogen energy. 
IV. IIT - Guwahati, Kanpur, Roorkee, Hyderabad, Mandi, Jammu, Jodhpur, Indore, 
Dharwad, Varanasi, Kharagpur, Bhubaneswar have started the Masters Program 
in EV. 
V. IIT Madras  has two cen tres of excellence: Centre for Battery Engineering (CoBE) 
and Centre for Electric Vehicles (CoEV). Major focus areas of these excellences are 
Cell Battery Pack Designs, Battery Life Cycle, EV infrastructure Management and 
Second use of Batteries etc. 
VI. Multiple collaborative initiatives between Industry and Academia have also been 
established to setup Centres of Excellence (CoE) to promote cutting edge and next 
generation technologies focused on clean mobility. 
Circular Economy of Li-ion Batteries (NITI Aayog) 
NITI has drafted a Circular Economy Action Plan for Li -ion Batteries. The action plan 
with take into accord the various lifecycles of battery from manufacturing, usage, 
collection, dismantling, reuse and recycling of the batteries. This further mitigates  the 
hazardous environmental impact of battery waste, ensure supply chain security of raw 
materials and reduce our dependence on the import of the raw materials through 
regulatory norms and other measures. Further, Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change (MoEFCC) has notified the Battery Waste Management Rules 
2022. 
e-FAST India India’s  (Electric Freight Accelerator for Sustainable Transport – 
India) (NITI Aayog) 
This platform aims to focus on three key areas – Awareness & Capacity building, 
Enabling technology innovation and Supporting innovative financing 
mechanisms. It will catalyze learning by bringing together a wide range of stakeholders 
in the freight sector, including policy makers, freight manufacturers, logistics companies, 
financiers, and customer industry representatives. 

 
 
56 
 
International Engagements (NITI Aayog) 
EV Mission in NITI Aayog is collaborating with institutions across the globe for 
knowledge transfer in skill and expertise. It is a part of the EV mission’s continuous 
effort to e ncourage knowledge transfer and learning from best institutions worldwide. 
The idea is to collaborate with international institutions of repute specific to each sector 
and build short/ long term partnerships which can help India to provide best possible 
solutions to the issues and challenges faced in EV ecosystem.  
Key Policy Initiatives by Other Central Ministries: 
a. The Goods & Services Tax (GST) Council reduced the tax on EVs from 12% 
to 5%, and on chargers or charging stations from 18% to 5%. 
b. Ministry of Finance committed to income tax deduction of ₹1.5 lakh on the 
interest paid on the loans taken to purchase EVs. 
c. Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) announced that battery -
operated vehicles will be given green license plates and be exempted from 
permit requirements. 
d. MoRTH issued a circular asking states to reduce or waive road tax on EVs, 
which in turn will help reduce the initial cost of EVs. 
e. MoRTH released a notification on 12.08.2020 that e -2Ws and e -3Ws can be 
sold without a battery pack. 
f. MoRTH issued a notification in 2016 permitting the retrofitting of hybrid 
electric systems or electric kits to vehicles. 
g. The Government of India has enabled the import and registration of vehicles 
complying with equivalent foreign national standards. 
h. Voluntary vehicles scrappage policy, which is aimed at phasing out cars and 
commercial vehicles which are older than 20 or 15 years, respectively. 
(February 2021 / MoRTH) 
i. Policy of deregistration and scrapping of vehicles owned by Government 
department and PSU, whic h are above 15 years in age (January 2021/ 
MoRTH) 
j. Green Tax: Vehicles older than 8 years could be charged a green tax, when 
renewing their vehicle’s certificate of fitness. (January 2021 / MoRTH). 

 
 
57 
 
k. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has issued a no tification dated 
02.08.2021 to exempt Battery-Operated Vehicles from the payment of fees for 
the purpose of issue or renewal of registration certificate and assignment of 
new registration mark-in order to encourage e- mobility. 
Further, following initiatives have been taken to create awareness on E-Mobility by ICAT 
in collaboration with MHI: 
i. Conference & Exposition “PanchamritkiAur” on 04.02.2023 at ICAT 
ii. Seminar of EV “How is EV Driving India’s Green Mobility Mission on 29.03.2023 
at ICAT 
iii. Seminar on “Can th e EV sector be India’s next growth engine” on 28.04.2023 at 
ICAT 
iv. MHI organized a conference to review the performance and addressed the 
concerns and challenges faced by the industry with regard to PLI auto scheme 
on 29.08.2023. Link for the same is            
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1952861 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
58 
 
CHAPTER - III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 11) 
Export of ACC Batteries 
 Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) 
envisages to enhance India’s Manufacturing Capabilities and  Exports of ACC in India 
with a budgetary outlay of  Rs. 18,100 crore. The Committee are aware that the 
Government of India intends to optimally incentivize potential investors, both domestic 
and overseas, to set - up Giga -scale ACC manufacturing facilities with emphasis on 
maximum value addition and quality  output. The Committee are perturbed to note that 
the ACC battery produced with the incentive under the PLI  scheme would be exported 
apart from domestic consumption. The Committee are of the view that while export of 
ACC batteries produced with the incent ive under PLI scheme will boost the ‘Make in 
India’  initiative, it is equally important to ensure enough production of ACC for domestic 
EV Sector too. The steps taken in this regard may be furnished to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In the PLI ACC Scheme approved by the Union Cabinet, there is no restriction on 
selling the production of ACC Battery in domestic market as well as for export market. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
59 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies have 
not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 2) 
 Need for National Policy on EVs 
 Government of India launched the National Electric Mobility Mission Plan 
(NEMMP) 2020 in 2013. The NEMMP 2020 is a National Mission document providing 
the vision and roadmap for the faster adoption of EVs (full range of hybrid and electric 
vehicles) and th eir manufacturing in the country. It was believed that with the 
commitment and support of all stakeholders, 6 -7 million units of new vehicle sales of 
EVs, could be achieved by 2020. The Committee note with regret that the target 6 -7 
million units of EVs wa s not achieved as only  around 1.4 million Electric Vehicles were 
being used on the roads of India as on 3rd August, 2022.  It has been a decade since 
MHI had launched the NEMMP 2020. The Committee are of the view that  since 
transport, being State subject , some States have formulated an EV policy for 
themselves, still a strong National Policy framework on EVs is required which should 
incorporate the experience and feedback of NEMMP 2020, which can serve as a 
guiding policy to all States/UTs and ensure a co mprehensive and uniform growth of the 
EV Sector. A National Policy on EVs should have realistic goals and strategies and it 
should be commensurate with India’s commitment to the Paris Agreement on climate 
change to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Comm ittee, therefore, urge the 
Government to frame a comprehensive National Policy on EV by incorporating the  
elements of successful State models and international best practices on charging 
infrastructure, battery swapping, battery waste management/ recyclin g, public 
awareness in addition to the demand and supply side incentives such as lower GST, 
waiving road tax, registration fee, hire -purchase scheme at discounted interest rates by 
Financial Institutions for buying EVs etc.  
 
 

 
 
60 
 
Reply of the Government 
Niti Aayog inputs:  National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP) was formed in 
2020. It is a National Mission document providing the vision and the roadmap for the 
faster adoption of electric vehicles and their manufacturing in the country. As part of the 
NEMMP 2020, the Ministry of Heavy Industries formulated a Scheme namely Faster 
Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India (FAME India) 
Scheme in 2015 to promote adoption of electric/ hybrid vehicles (xEVs) in India. The 
Phase-1 of the  scheme was available up to 31.03.2019 with budget outlay of ₹895 
crore. This phase of FAME India Scheme had four focus areas i.e., technological 
development, demand generation, pilot project and charging infrastructure components.  
The following three sch emes have been formulated by the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
for providing facilities and incentives to the EV Manufacturing Industry: 
vii) The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in 
India (FAME India) Scheme in 2015 with an aim t o reduce dependency of 
fossil fuel and to address issues of vehicular emission.  At present, Phase -II 
of FAME India Scheme is being implemented for a period of 5 years w.e.f. 
01.04.2019 with a total budgetary support of ₹10,000 crore.  
viii) Government has appro ved the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 
Automobile and Auto Components Industry in India to boost domestic 
manufacturing of Advanced Automotive Technology products and attract 
investments in the automotive manufacturing value chain with a budg etary 
outlay of ₹25,938 crore over a period of five years.  
ix) The Government on 12.05.2021 approved a Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme for manufacturing of Advanced chemistry cell (ACC) in the country in 
order to bring down prices of battery in the c ountry. Drop in battery price will 
result in cost reduction of electric vehicles and increase in their sales. 
The FAME India Scheme -II mainly focuses on supporting electrification of public & 
shared transportation and aims to support through demand incenti ve 7090 e -buses, 5 
lakh e -3 Wheelers, 55000 e -4 Wheeler Passenger Cars and 10 lakh e -2 Wheelers.  

 
 
61 
 
Under Phase-II of FAME India Scheme 9,44,567 Electric Vehicles have been supported 
till 04.09.2023.  
Charging Infrastructure  
In addition, creation of charging infrastructure is also supported under the Scheme.  
The Ministry of Power has allowed sale of electricity as ‘service’ for charging of 
electric vehicles  and has Notified Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Guidelines and 
Specifications in October 2019.  
vii) As mentioned above, a total outlay of ₹1000 crore in FAME II has been allocated to 
setting up dense charging infrastructure.  
viii)396 EV PCS will be installed in cities through Govt. entities with a total outgo of ₹39 
crore. MHI has sanctioned ₹800 crore as capital subsidy to the three OMCs of 
MoPNG for establishment of 7,432 EV PCS.  
ix) OEMs like Ather and Ola are also in the process of setting up their own charging 
infrastructure.  
Battery Swapping Policy 
National Institute for Transfo rming India (NITI Aayog) has prepared a draft Battery 
Swapping Policy. Further, Energy Storage Systems including dense charging 
infrastructure and grid -scale battery systems is under consideration to include in the 
harmonized list of infrastructure.  
Battery Waste Management  
As per the information received from Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, Government of India published the Battery Waste Management Rules, 2022 
on 24.08.2022 for environmentally sound management of waste batteries, incl uding EV 
batteries.  
The rules provide Extended Producer Responsibility framework for producers of 
batteries to recycle/ refurbish the waste batteries as per the prescribed timelines. 
Further, the rules mandate the recyclers to recover the minimum percenta ge of 
materials from waste batteries. 

 
 
62 
 
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1854433  
The Battery -Waste Management rule 2022 link is 
https://cpcb.nic.in/uploads/hwmd/Battery-WasteManagementRules-2022.pdf 
Public awareness  
Further, following initiatives have been taken to create awareness on E-Mobility by ICAT 
in collaboration with MHI: 
ix) Conference & Exposition “Panchamrit ki Aur” on 04.02.2023 at ICAT 
x) Seminar of EV “How is EV Driving India’s Green Mobility Mission on 
29.03.2023 at ICAT 
xi) Seminar on “Can the EV sector be India’s next growth engine” on 28.04.2023 
at ICAT 
xii) MHI organized a conference to r eview the performance and addressed the 
concerns and challenges faced by the industry with regard to PLI auto 
scheme on 29.08.2023. Link for the same is 
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1952861 
Supplier side incentives like Lowering of GST etc. (As per inputs from Ministry of 
Finance)  
g) As per the recommendation of the GST Council in its 36 th Meeting held on 
27.07.2019, Electric Vehicles already attached GST at a concessional rate of 5% 
(S. No. 242A of Schedule I of notification No. 01/2017 -CT Rate dt. 28.06.2017) 
with Nil compensation Cess (S. No. 44 of notification No. 01/2017 -Compensation 
Cell Rate dt. 28.06.2017). 
h) Even, prior to this the GST  rate on Electric Vehicles was 12% with Nil 
compensation cess as per S. No. 206 of Schedule II of notification No. 01/2017 -
CT Rate dt 28.06.2017.  Since inception of GST Electric Vehicles have been 
exempt from compensation cess.  
i) Generally, motor vehicles are kept at 28% of GST and 15-22 % of cess, whereas 
EVs are kept at lowest slab of 5% with Nil compensation cess.  The following 

 
 
63 
 
table shows a comparison of GST rates and compensation cell on various types 
of vehicles. 
Vehicle Type GST Rate Comp Cess Rate 
Electric Vehicles  5% Nil 
Fuel Cell Motor Vehicles 12% Nil 
Specific Motor vehicles not exceeding 4,000 
mm in length  
18% Nil 
Specific Motor vehicles exceeding 4,000 mm in 
length 
28% Nil 
Motor vehicle not exceeding 1,500 CC 28% 17% 
Motor vehicle exceeding 1,500 CC 28% 20% 
SUVs exceeding 1,500 CC 28% 22% 
 
Ministry of Power input 
Comparison on International Best Practices for EV Charging Infrastructure, State EV 
Policies and salient features of MoP revised Guidelines for EV Charging Infrastructur e. 
The same are being followed. 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 6) 
Need for robust mechanism for bidding process 
 The Committee were informed that bidding process for award of the Government 
approved the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 'Advanced Chemistry Cell 
(ACC) Battery Storage’ for achieving manufacturing capacity of 50 GWh for enhancing 

 
 
64 
 
India’s Manufacturing Capabilities with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 18,100 crore has been 
undertaken and MHI has issued Letters of Award for 50 GWh of battery capacity to  
4 successful bidders namely:- 
i. Rajesh Export Ltd. -  5GWh 
ii. Ola Electric Mobility -  20 GWh 
iii. Hyundai Global Motoras Co Ltd. – 20 GWh 
iv. Reliance New Energy Ltd.-  5 GWh.  
However, it is distressing to note that Hyundai Global Motors did not sign Programme 
Agreement.  Consequently, they had to be disqualified from the scheme due to 
misrepresentation of facts in their bid documents and MHI reportedly initiated necessary 
action for re -tendering of the unallocated 20 GWh capacity in consultation with NITI 
Aayog. The Committee note with concern that proper scrutiny of bid documents was not 
done before the bidding p rocess reached the stage of Letters of Award  and signing of 
Programme Agreement, which has resulted in wastage of precious time and resources.  
Hence, the Committee are of the view that appropriate action should be taken against 
those who are found accoun table for the lapse. The Committee strongly hold that a 
robust mechanism should be developed for all such bidding processes so that 
incomplete/frivolous applications can be rejected summarily at pre -bid/technical bid 
stage in future.  
Reply of the Government 
Proposal is to carry out sufficient due diligence by Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) / 
Project Management Agency (PMA) to verify legality of applicant companies in the pre -
bid / technical bid stage itself so that incomplete / frivolous applicants can be rejected 
summarily at pre-bid / technical bid stage in future. 
Thorough scrutiny of bids was done based on the documents furnished by the bidders 
and eligibility of the bidders were determined on the basis of the information/ documents 
as per the RFP furnished by the applicants. 
Out of 4 (four) selected bidders, allocated a total ACC manufacturing capacity of 50 
GWh, M/s. Hyundai Global Motors Co. Ltd. (HGM) was disqualified from the scheme 

 
 
65 
 
(due to material misrepresentation / concealment of facts for unauthorised use of 
“Hyundai” trademark by violating Court Order of Seoul District Court, South Korea on 
24.08.2022 and violation of various terms & conditions of the RFP and Lo) and their bid 
security was forfeited.  Thus, it has resulted in a reduction of total allocated capacity to 
30 GWh i.e., 20 GWh is now available for fresh allocation. 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 16) 
Need for increase in Public Charging Network 
 The Committee note that as per the Ministry of Power guidelines, there shall be 
at least one charging station at every 25 kms on both sides of the Highway and also at 
least one Charging Station for long Range/Heavy Duty EVs at every 100 kms on both 
sides of the Highway. For the city at least one charging station will be set up in a grid of 
3km x 3km.  The Committee also find that MHI had sanctioned 520 Charging Stations/ 
Infrastructure under the Phase -I of FAME India Scheme. It has also sanctioned 2,877 
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in 68 cities across 25 States/UTs and 1576 charging 
stations across 9 Expressways and 16 Highways under Phase II of FAME India 
Scheme. The Committee regret to note that only 479 charging station out of 520 
charging station s anctioned under FAME phase I and merely 50 out of 2877 charging 
station sanctioned under FAME phase II could be installed till December 2022. Various 
Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have also planned to set up 22,000 charging stations 
by 2024 and NHAI is al so setting up charging stations. At present, the number of EV 
charging stations sanctioned under FAME is very meager as India has about 63.73 lakh 
km of road network, which is the second largest in the world. The Committee are of the 
view that reason for s low pace of installation of the sanctioned charging station under 
FAME should be examined.  Further it is learnt that a pilot programme namely ‘National 
Highways for EVs’ has been framed lately by the Government of India under which a 
new model for upgrading some existing highways into ‘electric’ highways with adequate 
charging infrastructure at regular intervals, has been created, and trial report on the 
same is awaited.  As more and more EVs show up on the road, frequently placed smart 

 
 
66 
 
charging stations would make movement for long distance smoother and faster.  Hence 
existing highways or expressways would be ultimately required to become e -highways.  
The Committee recommend that MHI should coordinate with other Ministries and 
charging infrastructure opera tors to frame a comprehensive plan for rollout of a 
nationwide public charging network.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Power input 
As per information available on https://nhev.in/about-us-ev/this programme is supported 
by Ministry of Commerce & Industry.  NHforEV intends to cover 2 pilot corridors, namely 
Delhi-Agra Yamuna Expressway and Delhi -Jaipur NH48, out of the 12 National 
corridors proposed by the Ministry of Power for electrification in its Guideline s and 
standards dated 14.12.2018. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) input 
MoPNG has planned to establish 22,000 EV PCS at their ROs. MHI has sanctioned 
₹800 crore as capital subsidy to the three OMCs of MoPNG for establishment of 7,432 
EV PCS, the remaining EV PCS will be established by OMCs by using funds from their 
own resources.  
The OMCs have sufficient land in the premises of their ROs which can be utilized for the 
setting up of the charging stations. Details are given below: - 
S. 
No. Category IOC HPC BPC Total  
1 4 Million + (9 cities) 434 27 220 681 
2 
Million + (44 cities) other than 
(1) 292 
39 
232 563 
3 Smart Cities, Cities in Hilly 106 109 109 324 

 
 
67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter – I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
States (other than 1&2) 
4 
Highways connecting adjoining 
major cities (Expressway) 14 
40 
25 79 
5 Major Highways 2,592 1,445 1,748 5,785 
  Total  3,438 1,660 2,334 7,432 

 
 
68 
 
CHAPTER - V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 4) 
Remodelled Scheme for Electric Buses 
 The Committee observe that nine 4 million plus cities (Mumbai, Delhi, 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Chennai, Kolkata, Surat, and Pune) were targeted 
under remodelled FAME II scheme for electric buses. EESL has undertaken 
aggregation of demand in these cities for remaining e -buses under the Scheme on 
OPEX basis. It was aimed to bring electric mobility in public transportation in these cities 
which would inspire other cities too. However, the Committee are concerned to note that 
only five of the nine targeted cities namely Kolkata, Delhi, Bengaluru, Hyderabad and 
Surat have opted for it.  They would like to be apprised of the reasons for other fo ur 
cities declining this scheme, and alternate schemes, if any, opted by those cities. The 
Committee are further of the view that cities which have less than 4 million population 
also use considerable number of buses for inter-city and intra-city transport hence those 
should also be considered under the remodelled FAME II scheme for electric buses so 
that e-mobility could pick up its momentum on Pan India basis.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Yes, the Cities which have less than 4 million plus population have also been considered 
under the remodelled FAME II scheme for electric buses.  
E-Buses - At a glance  
iii. Budgeted No. of e-buses – 7,090 
iv. Actual allotted No. of e-buses 7,210  
Out of 7,210, a total of 3,738 e-buses are allotted to STUs for mix of all cities and3,472 e-
buses are allotted through CESL/EESL for 9 cities of 4 million plus.  

 
 
69 
 
Out of 3,738 allocated to STU’s, the total no. of e-buses allocated for cities less than 4 million 
population = 1,898  
Details of 1898 e-buses: 
This includes both Intercity operation in various states and as well as for intra-city operations.  
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI             DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
  24 January 2024         CHAIRPERSON 
 04 Magha 1945 (Saka)     COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 

70 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
(2023-24) 
The Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee was held on Wednesday, 24 January, 2024 from 
1245 hrs. to 1305  hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House  Annexe, New Delhi -
110001 
PRESENT 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Dharmendra Kumar Kashyap 
4. Shri Kesineni Srinivas 
5. Shri Pinaki Mishra 
6. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
7. Shri Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy 
8. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
9. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
10. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Santosh Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Muraleedharan.P - Director 
                              
 
 
 
 

71 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following 
two draft Reports: 
(i) xxxx 
(ii) Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 26th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Evaluation of Electric Vehicle (EV) Policy’ 
3.       The Committee after due deliberations adopted the draft Reports. The 
Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
present the same to Lok Sabha.  
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 

 
     APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 26th Report of the Committee on Estimates 
 (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
(i)       Total number of recommendations/observations                    20 
 (ii)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted         15 
by the Government: 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 5, 7,8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14,15, 17, 18, 19 & 20) 
          Percentage of total recommendations                  75% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not         1 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(Sl. No.  11) 
 
Percentage of total recommendations     5% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government’s         3 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee:   
(Sl. Nos. 2, 6 & 16) 
 Percentage of total recommendations  15% 
 
 
 (v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of           1  
Government is still awaited: 
(Sl. Nos. 3 & 4)  
Percentage of total recommendations     5% 
 