 
9 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION)  
 
 
Promotion of Climate Resilient Agriculture, Natural and 
Organic Farming through KVKs 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the 6th Report ( Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2026-27) 
 
 
 
NINTH REPORT  
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

 
NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2026-27) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & 
EDUCATION) 
 
Promotion of Climate Resilient Agriculture, Natural 
and Organic Farming through KVKs 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the 6th Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Estimates] 
 
( Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.08.2026 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
3 August, 2026 / 12 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)

i 
 
CONTENTS 
                            Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2026-27)      (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iv) 
           
CHAPTER-I  Report          1 
 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted                 20 
 by the Government         
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not               67 
 desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply  
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which                68 
 Government’s replies have not been accepted by the Committee  
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies               74 
 of Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. *Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee on Estimates  
held on 03.08.2026 
 
 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 6th Report of 
the Committee on Estimates (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
75 
     * Not appended in the report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2026-27) 
 
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson  
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4. Shri Pradan Baruah 
5. Shri Charanjit Singh Channi 
6. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
7. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
8. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
9. Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
10. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
11. Shri Anil Yeshwant Desai 
12. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
13. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
14. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
15. Shri Naveen Jindal 
16. Shri Jugal Kishore 
17. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
18. Shri P. C. Mohan 
19. Smt. Pratima Mondal 
20. Shri B. K. Parthasarathi 
21. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
22. Shri M. K. Raghavan 
23. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
24. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Kumari Selja 
27. Dr. Bhola Singh 
28. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
29. Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
30. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 
 
 
 

iii 
 
SECRETARIAT                            
  
1. Smt.  Juby Amar - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Sumesh Kumar - Director 
3. Dr. (Smt.) Sheetal Kapoor                                                                                                    - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Pravesh Kumar Hariyal - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
  

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2026-27) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Ninth Report on action taken by the Government on the recom mendations contained 
in the 6th Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject “Promotion of 
Climate Resilient Agriculture, Natural and Organic Farming through KVKs” pertaining 
to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research & Education).  
2.  The 6th Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd July, 2025. The Government furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in the 6th Report on 10th 
December, 2025. The draft Repo rt was considered and approved by the Committee 
at their sitting held on 3rd August, 2026.  
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 6th Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II.  
 
 
  
 
 
NEW DELHI  
3 August, 2026              
12 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
                      DR. SANJAY JAISWAL  
                               CHAIRPERSON 
                COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 

CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Sixth Report  
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Promotion of Climate Resilient Agriculture, 
Natural and Organic Farming through KVKs” pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research & Education).  
2.       The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.07.2025. It contained 1 9 
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect to 
all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research & Education). 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have 
broadly been categorized as under:-   
  
 (i)    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
  Recommendation. Para No 1,2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,17,18,19 
    
Total: 16 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii)     Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s reply:  
  Recommendation Para Nos. NIL        
                                    Total: 00 
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Para Nos. 5, 6 & 16        
                                                               Total:03 
(Chapter-IV) 
  
 
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of Government   is 
still awaited:  
Recommendation Para No. NIL                                                                          
                                          Total: 00 
(Chapter-V) 

2 
 
4.     The Committee desire that  Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them within 
six months of the presentation of the Report to the House. 
 
5.       The Committee will now deal with the Observations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 5) 
 
Support Mechanism and Incentives for Organic Farming Transition 
6. In their recommendation contained in the original Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: - 
 
“The Committee observe that the Ministry has taken several commendable steps 
to support farmers transitioning from conventional to organic farming, such as the 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), the Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development for the Nort h Eastern Region (MOVCDNER), the PM -PRANAM 
scheme, and the Financial Assistance through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
scheme. While these initiatives have yielded positive results, the Committee feel 
that a more robust and expanded support system is required to make the shift from 
conventional to organic farming more feasible and sustainable for farmers, 
particularly during the critical transition period. The current financial support of 
₹31,500 to ₹46,500 per hectare over three years, although a step in th e right 
direction, might not be sufficient to fully alleviate the financial strain farmers 
experience during the first three to four years, a period in which yields tend to be 
lower and the economic burden heavier. 
To address this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry must increase 
the direct financial incentives under DBT for organic inputs and consider extending 
the support period beyond the current three years. This extended financial security 
will help ensure that farmers remain economically stable throughout the transition 
period. Moreover, to further strengthen market linkages, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry invest in improving local marketing channels, 
enhance digital outreach, and establish premium pricing for organic products to 
make them more attractive to consumers and help farmers secure better returns 
for their produce. Strengthening platforms like the Jaivik Kheti portal, which has 
already benefited over 6.22 lakh farmers, would be an important step in this 
direction. The Committ ee also recommend reviewing and increasing the current 
subsidy of ₹1,500 per metric ton (MT) under the Market Development Assistance 

3 
 
(MDA) scheme to ensure that small and marginal farmers also benefit from this 
support. 
The Committee are also of the view t hat the PM-PRANAM scheme, which 
provides 50% of fertilizer subsidy savings to states that reduce chemical fertilizer 
use, should adopt a performance -based grants incentive structure. This would 
offer increased grants to states that make significant and sus tained reductions in 
chemical fertilizer use, motivating a stronger shift toward sustainable farming 
practices. These performance -based grants should be allocated to capacity 
building, developing organic farming infrastructure, and creating local organic 
markets. The Committee believe that this strategy will not only accelerate the 
adoption of organic farming but also promote long-term soil health, environmental 
sustainability, and economic stability for farming communities.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) submitted as under: 
“Organic farming is being promoted through Paramparagat  Krishi Vikas Yojana 
(PKVY) in all the States/UTs except North Eastern States and Mission Organic 
Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) for the North 
Eastern States. Both schemes stress on end -to-end support to farmers engaged 
in organic farming i.e. from production to processing, certification and marketing. 
Primary focus of the schemes is to form organic clusters, with preference to small 
and marginal farmers, to create a supply chain. Both the schemes are 
implemented through States /UT Governments.  
Under PKVY, assistance of Rs. 31,500 per ha in 3 years is provided for promotion 
of organic farming. Out of this, assistance of Rs. 15,000 per ha is provided to 
farmers through Direct Benefit Transfer for on - farm /off –farm organic input s 
including organic compost. Financial assistance of Rs. 4,500/ha in 3 years is 
provided for marketing, packaging, branding, value addition etc. Rs. 3,000/ha for 
3 years is provided for certification and residue analysis. Assistance is also 
provided @Rs. 9,000/ha in 3 years for training, awareness & capacity building. 
Under MOVCDNER, assistance of Rs. 46,500 per ha in 3 years is provided for 
creation of Farmers Producer Organization, support to farmers for organic inputs 
etc. Out of this, assistance @ Rs. 32500 per ha is provided to farmers for off -farm 
/on –farm organic inputs under the scheme including Rs. 15,000 as Direct Benefit 
Transfer to the farmers. Financial assistance of Rs 10000 per ha in 3 years is 
provided for activities of Internal Control Sys tem (ICS) management, training and 
certification [National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP)]. Financial 

4 
 
assistance of Rs 4000 per ha in 3 years is provided for value chain marketing at 
state level. 
All 8 NER states have established dedicated organic  agencies to implement 
organic farming initiatives: 
State Organic Agency 
Manipur MoMA 
Mizoram MoM 
Assam ASOMA 
Meghalaya MEGNOLIA 
Tripura TSOFDA 
Sikkim SOFDA 
Nagaland NagaOrganic 
Arunachal Pradesh APAMB 
 
Support Mechanism and Incentives for Organic Farming Transition – Actions 
 Manipur (MoMA): Implemented organic value chain projects across key districts 
and facilitated marketing through dedicated organic outlets and e -commerce 
platforms. 
 Meghalaya (MEGNOLIA): Magnolia has planned to bring 24,000 hec tares of 
land under organic certification, with an additional 8,000 hectares in the 
conversion phase for organic pineapple and turmeric cultivation, and facilitated 
institutional linkages for FPOs. 
 Tripura (TSOFDA): Tripura is actively promoting organic fa rming through 
various initiatives, including the development of Bio -Villages and enabled 
aggregation of tribal FPOs and facilitated organic supply of its scented rice & 
pineapple to national buyers.” 
 
 
8. While acknowledging the positive impact of  steps taken by the Government 
to support farmers transitioning from conventional to organic farming through 
schemes such as Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana, Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development for North Eastern Region, PM -PRANAM Scheme and financial 
assistance through Direct Benefit Transfer for organic inputs,  the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry  to increase the direct financial incentives provided 

5 
 
through DBT for organic inputs and consider extending the support period beyond 
the existing three years under so as to provide greater financial stability to farmers 
during the transition phase. The Committee had also recommended the Ministry to 
strengthen market linkages for organic produce by improving local marketing 
channels, enhancing digital outreac h and promoting premium pricing for organic 
products including strengthening platforms such as the Jaivik Kheti Portal. The 
Committee had further recommended to review  and enhance existing Market 
Development Assistance (MDA) of ₹1,500 per metric tonne  so that small and 
marginal farmers can derive greater benefits. In addition, the Committee had 
suggested to adopt a performance -based grant incentive structure  under PM-
PRANAM Scheme to encourage States to reduce chemical fertilizer use and 
promote sustainable farming practices. 
The Committee note that Ministry In their Action Taken Reply, ha s re-submitted 
already known information about features of Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana 
(PKVY) and Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region  
(MOVCDNER). The Ministry has not specifically replied to the recommendation of 
the Committee regarding enhancement of financial assistance during the transition 
period, extension of the support period beyond three years, review of Market 
Development Assis tance and strengthening of market mechanisms including 
digital platforms and premium pricing for organic produce. The Committee are of 
view that the transition from conventional to organic farming involves significant 
initial costs and possible yield reduc tions and requires sustained financial and 
institutional support to ensure that farmers remain economically secure during the 
transition phase.   Shift to natural farming also has potential to reduce fertilizer 
import, thereby saving valuable foreign curren cy, t he Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to take effective steps 
as recommended earlier.   
 
 
 
 

6 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 6) 
 
Sikkim Model of Organic Farming 
9. In their recommendation contained in the original 6th Report, the Committee 
had stated as under :- 
 
“The Committee acknowledge the success of the Sikkim model, which highlights 
the potential of organic farming when supported by comprehensive strategies 
focused on increasing yield s, reducing costs, improving market access, and 
securing better pricing for organic produce. Notable successes of this model 
include stable productivity, improved soil health, and a shift towards high -value 
crops like cardamom, ginger, turmeric, and orange s. The emergence of "Organic 
Tourism" has also created new income opportunities for farmers. However, 
challenges such as high labour costs, difficult terrain, limited market access, and 
the shortage of essential organic inputs, particularly bio -fertilizers, continue to 
hinder profitability. The scarcity of quality bio -fertilizers remains a significant 
concern, as it affects both productivity and the long -term sustainability of organic 
farming. 
To overcome these challenges and replicate the Sikkim model to o ther 
regions, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should enhance financial 
support for organic inputs, certification, and infrastructure development under 
schemes like the Mission Organic Value Chain Development for the North Eastern 
Region (MOVCDNER). The Ministry should focus on subsidizing labor -intensive 
processes and addressing the shortage of bio-fertilizers. They should also provide 
logistical support to overcome the challenges posed by difficult terrain, ensuring 
more efficient and reliable su pply chains. In addition, the Committee also 
recommend the establishment of local bio -fertilizer production units to ensure a 
consistent and affordable supply of organic inputs. This would reduce reliance on 
external sources and help lower overall farming costs. The Ministry should also 
focus on strengthening market linkages, both online and offline, and create 
dedicated organic retail outlets in urban centers to improve market access and 
ensure fair pricing for organic produce. To formalize fair pricing, t he Committee 
recommend that the existing 20–30% premium for organic products be 
institutionalized through a system of minimum support prices (MSP) for key organic 
crops, ensuring that farmers are adequately compensated for their efforts. 
The Committee feel  that eco-tourism is a valuable opportunity to support 
organic farming by giving farmers extra income. Adding organic farm visits to 
tourism packages could attract tourists, both local and international, and raise 
awareness about organic farming. This would help farmers earn more money and 

7 
 
create greater demand for organic products. The Committee are of the view that 
linking farming with tourism, organic farming can gain more recognition and benefit 
both farmers and the local community.” 
Reply of the Government 
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) submitted as under: 
“While Sikkim remains the only fully certified organic state, several NER states 
have initiated similar organic zone -based approaches and are gradually 
implementing certification and area expansion models inspired by Sikkim.” 
 
11. While acknowledging the success of the Sikkim model in increasing yields, 
reducing costs, improving market access, securing better pricing for organic 
produce, the Committee in their original report had observed challenges such as 
high labour costs, difficult terrain, limited market access and shortage of essential 
organic inputs particularly bio -fertilizers in hindering profitability. Along with 
replicating the Sikkim model  in other regions , the Committee had recommended 
the Ministry to enhance financial s upport for organic inputs, certification and 
infrastructure development under schemes like Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development for the North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER). Further, the Committee 
had also recommended the establishment of local bio-fertilizer production units to 
ensure a consistent and affordable supply of organic inputs.  
 
The Committee observe that t he Ministry, in their action taken reply , have merely 
mentioned about implementation of Sikkim model of organic zone-based 
approaches including certification and area expansion by other NER states. 
However, the Committee find that the reply of the Ministry does not adequately 
address the specific recommendations made in the original Report  and are silent 
on various issues such as measures proposed for enhancing financial support for 
organic inputs and certification , addressing shortage of bio -fertilizers through 
establishment of local production units, strengthening market linkages and retail 
infrastructure or promoting organi c tourism as recommended by the Committee. 
The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation, would like the 
Ministry to take concreted steps in establishing local biofertilizer production units, 
establishment of  dedicated organic retail outlets in urban centers to improve 
market access and ensure fair prices for organic products , institutionalize the 
current 20 -30% premium for organic products through a system of Minimum 
Support Prices (MSPs) for major organic crops and report to the Committee within 
six months of presentation of the report. 

8 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 7) 
 
Strengthening Organic Certification and Market Access for Farmers 
 
12. In their recommendation contained in the original Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
 
“The Committee recognize the significant role played by the Ministry in 
implementing two key certification systems  the National Programme for Organic 
Production (NPOP) and the Participatory Guarantee System (PGS -India) to 
promote organic food quality in India. NPOP, managed by the Ministry of 
Commerce, is aimed at both domestic and export markets with third -party 
certification, while PGS -India, managed by the Ministry of Agriculture, is a 
decentralized, cost -effective, fa rmer-centric system tailored to the domestic 
market. Together, these systems have contributed greatly to the growth of organic 
agriculture in India, ensuring compliance with organic standards and increasing 
transparency in the market. 
However, the Committe e feel that there are opportunities to improve the 
certification processes, especially to make them more accessible for small -scale 
farmers. While NPOP and PGS -India have proven effective, the certification 
procedures can be complex and expensive, posing a significant barrier for smaller 
farmers. The Committee recommend that the Ministry must explore ways to 
simplify the certification process, including reducing paperwork, lowering 
certification costs, and providing financial assistance or subsidies, partic ularly for 
farmers using the PGS -India system. PGS-India, being designed for small -scale 
producers, can benefit from these adjustments, but NPOP also needs to be made 
more accessible for smaller operations. The Ministry should consider introducing 
tiered c ertification models under NPOP, which would make it easier for small 
farmers to access markets and receive premium prices for their organic products. 
To further improve the organic certification process, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to establish a unified organic label for both NPOP and 
PGS-India certified products. This would create consistency in marketing, enhance 
consumer confidence, and simplify the identification of authentic organic products. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should  focus on simplifying the 
certification procedure, by reducing costs, and exploring digital solutions to 
streamline the application process and monitoring, ensuring accessibility for small 
farmers. The Committee feel that this comprehensive approach would not only 
improve the certification process but also promote transparency and foster greater 
trust in India’s organic products. 

9 
 
The Committee also feel that, despite the availability of these certification 
systems, many farmers may still not fully understan d their benefits or the 
certification process itself. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to 
increase awareness campaigns to educate farmers particularly in rural areas about 
the importance of certification and its long -term advantages. Furthe r, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should explore the possibility of fully digitizing 
the certification process for both NPOP and PGS -India. An online platform could 
streamline the application process, reduce paperwork, increase transparency, and 
make it easier for farmers to track their certification status. A digital system could 
also facilitate remote inspections or audits, especially in areas with limited access 
to certification bodies, enabling more efficient and cost-effective monitoring.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) submitted as under: 
“India has two certification systems in place (a) National Programme  for Organic 
Production (NPOP) for export and domestic market, managed by APEDA (Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry) and (b) Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) -India 
limited to domestic market, Implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare.   
PGS India Certification System is paperless, with less documentation and low cost. 
The dedicated portal is already their where farmer can track their applications. The 
inspections are also being tracked through digital solutions like mobile app for LG 
and RC inspection. The unification of PGS India with FSSAI is going on and 
Ministry is exploring ways for harmonization of PGS India with NPOP. 
States have undertaken efforts to build institutional linkages with APEDA, TRIFED, 
and private buyers to improv e access to markets, along with support for 
traceability, branding, and participation in national-level organic trade events.” 
 
14. While examining National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) and the 
Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) -India in promo ting organic agriculture and 
ensuring compliance with organic standards , t he Committee had  recommended the 
Ministry to simplify certification procedures, reduce paperwork and certification costs and 
provide financial assistance to farmers adopting organic certification. The Committee had 
also recommended the Ministry to explore the feasibility of introducing tiered certification 
models under NPOP, establishing a unified organic label for products certified under 

10 
 
NPOP and PGS-India and adopting digital solutions to streamline certification procedures 
and monitoring mechanisms. The Committee had further emphasized the need to  
strengthen awareness campaigns among farmers particularly in rural areas to improve 
understanding of certification systems and their benefits. 
The Ministry , i n their Action Taken Reply, have informed that PGS -India certification 
system is largely paperless with minimal documentation and lower costs, supported by a 
dedicated online portal through which farmers can track certification applications. The 
Ministry have further stated that inspections under the PGS system are monitored through 
digital tools such as mobile applications and efforts are underway to harmonize PGS-India 
with NPOP including alignment with standards of the Food Safety and Standards Authority 
of India. The Ministry have also indicated that States are strengthening institutional 
linkages with organizations such as APEDA, TRIFED, and private buyers to improve 
access to markets, along with support for traceability, branding, and participation 
in national-level organic trade events. 
The Committee observe that the reply does not adequately address the recommendation 
regarding reduction of certification costs, introduction of tiered certification models, 
establishment of a unified organic label and strengthening of awareness programmes. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the Ministry to take 
appropriate action in this regard. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 8) 
 
Cold Storage infrastructure for perishable Crops 
 
15. In their recommendation contained in the original Report, the Committee had 
stated as under: 
 
“The Ministry has made notable progress in addressing storage losses, particularly 
for perishable crops like onions, through the development of controlled atmosphere 
storage facilities under the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model. The Controlled 
Atmosphere Onion and Multi -Product Storage Facility has proven successful, 
maintaining optimal conditions (temperature at 27 ± 2°C and relative humidity at 
60-65%) and significantly reducing storage losses to less than 15%, compared to 
the 40-60% losses typically seen with traditional storage methods. The Committee 
also note that CONCOR (Container Corporation of India) has been involved in 

11 
 
improving the transportation of perishable goods by providing refrigerated 
container logistics. This partnership has increased the efficiency of moving stored 
products to market while preserving quality. However, the Committee note that the 
adoption and availability of such facilities for other perishable crops, such as fruits, 
vegetables, and high -value crops like tomatoes, pot atoes, and leafy greens, 
remain limited. 
The Committee recommend that the successful model of the onion storage 
facility developed by ICAR -DOGR and Kala Biotech be replicated and scaled up 
for a wider range of perishable crops. The Committee feel that expanding 
controlled atmosphere storage for various crops would help reduce post -harvest 
losses significantly. The Committee desire that the Government should work 
closely with the private sector to expand these facilities, prioritizing high-production 
areas where storage losses are the most significant. 
To further encourage private sector participation in building cold storage 
infrastructure, the Committee desire that the Government should explore the 
possibilities of providing financial incentives, such as subsidies, tax breaks, or low-
interest loans, specifically aimed at the establishment of controlled atmosphere 
storage facilities. These incentives would help reduce the financial burden on 
private stakeholders and encourage them to build more storage un its in rural and 
peri-urban areas, thereby benefitting small farmers who currently lack adequate 
storage options. 
The Committee also acknowledge that different crops have varying 
requirements when it comes to temperature and humidity for optimal storage. T o 
address this, the Committee recommend the Ministry to initiate research into crop-
specific controlled atmosphere storage technologies that are required to the unique 
needs of various fruits, vegetables, and grains. This would ensure that cold storage 
facilities are designed for maximum efficiency and quality preservation across 
diverse crops. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry must prioritize cold storage 
infrastructure development in rural and remote areas, especially in regions with 
high horticultural production. These units should be specifically designed as net 
zero controlled cold storage atmosphere houses. This will not only save carbon 
emission but will reduce the cost of storage of perishable goods. This will help 
small scale farmer by red ucing post-harvest losses. The Ministry also needs to 
collaborate with Ministry of New and Renewable under PM Surya Ghar Scheme 
for energy solutions and other related benefits. Further, the Committee recommend 
the Ministry to expand the PPP model used for onion storage to include multi-crop 
storage facilities. In this model, the Government could act as a facilitator by 

12 
 
providing land, subsidies, and technical support, while the private sector manages 
the operations. This partnership approach would help maxi mize resource 
utilization and ensure the availability of efficient cold storage facilities across the 
country, ultimately benefiting both farmers and consumers by reducing food 
wastage and improving market access.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) submitted as under: 
“To assist creation of Scientific Storage include cold storage and other than storage 
infrastructure, the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India is 
implementing “Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) ” sub-scheme of 
Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing (ISAM) across the country through 
its attached office Directorate of Marketing & Inspection (DMI). One of the main 
objectives of the scheme is to promote creation of scientific storage capacity for 
storing farm produce, processe d farm produce and agricultural inputs etc. to 
reduce post-harvest & handling losses and market access in the country and to 
improve the marketability of agricultural produce through value addition, etc.  
AMI is a capital investment, open ended, demand dri ven, credit linked, subsidy 
scheme, wherein back ended subsidy @25% and 33.33% is available based on 
the eligible category of beneficiary.  Assistance is available to Individuals, Farmers, 
Group of farmers/growers, Agri -pruners, Registered Farmer Produce 
Organizations (FPOs), Cooperatives, and state agencies etc. 
Under AMI stand-alone standardized cold storage units as per standards promoted 
by NCCD up to 1000 MTs are eligible for subsidy as per the MIDH cost norms.  
However, the allocated budget under Agri cultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) 
Sub Scheme of ISAM, has been fully utilized, and no further funds are available. 
Hence the implementation of AMI sub-scheme of ISAM has been kept in abeyance 
with effect from 10.06.2025. 
In order to address the exist ing infrastructure gaps and mobilize investment in 
agriculture infrastructure, Agri Infra Fund (AIF) was launched under Aatmanirbhar 
Bharat Package. AIF was introduced with a vision to transform the agriculture 
infrastructure landscape of the country. The Fund of Rs. 1 lakh crore under the 
scheme will be disbursed from FY 2020 -21 to FY 2025-26 and the support under 
the scheme will be provided for the duration of FY2020 - 21 to FY2032-33. Under 
the scheme, Rs. 1 Lakh Crore will be provided by banks and financ ial institutions 
as loans with interest subvention of 3% per annum and credit guarantee coverage 

13 
 
under CGTMSE and NAB Sanrakshan for loans up to Rs. 2 Crores. Further, each 
entity is eligible to get the benefit of the scheme for up to 25 projects located i n 
different LGD codes. 
 The Agriculture Infrastructure Fund is a medium - long term debt financing facility 
for investment in viable projects for post -harvest management infrastructure and 
viable farming assets through 3% interest subvention and credit gua rantee 
support. The post-harvest management projects also include warehouse & silos, 
cold stores and cold chain, supply chain services including e -marketing platforms 
among others. Viable farming assets include organic inputs products e.g. bio -
pesticides, bio-fertilizers, vermin -composts and bio -stimulants production units 
among others. 
The projects are eligible for all beneficiaries including private entities as well as 
groups such as FPOs, PACS, SHGs, JLGs, Cooperatives, National and State 
Level Federatio ns of Cooperatives, FPOs federations, Federations of SHGs, 
National and State Level Agencies.  
Progress under the scheme:  
As on 03 rd July 2025, Rs.66,736 Crores have been sanctioned for 1,14,011 
projects under AIF These sanctioned projects have mobilized an investment of Rs 
108,073 Crores in agriculture sector. Major projects sanctioned under AIF include 
30,404 custom hiring centres, 22,925 processing units, 16,017 warehouses, 3,712 
sorting & grading units, 2,471cold store projects, around 38,482 other kinds of 
post-harvest management projects and viable farming assets." 
During the last five years, the following projects have been undertaken in focusing 
on various agricultural commodities storage -related activities aimed at improving 
the efficiency and quality of stored products. These projects comprehensively 
address different aspects of post -harvest storage management under varying 
environmental conditions, focusing on minimizing storage losses and improving 
shelf life for horticultural/agricultural commodities: 
 Development of photoreactor for ethylene degradation during storage of 
banana and guava to extend the shelf life; 
 Development of solar operated low-cost onion storage structure; 
 Microwave-assisted disinfestation non -chemical method for effective and 
safe storage of pulses from insect pests and pulse beetles. 
 Study on determining storage losses of wheat and paddy stored in cap 
system; 
 Storage study on performance evaluation of hermetic bags on selected 
commodities (ongoing);  

14 
 
 Study on determination of storage losses for mustard oilseeds in bag and 
silo storage systems (ongoing); 
 Determining storage losses of pulses stored in warehouses and to 
recommend norms for long-term storage funded by Department of Consumer 
Affairs (India) (ongoing). 
 
The Department appreciates the views of the Honourable Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on R&D of onion storage technology. 
Yes, ICAR-DOGR has developed a technology under Public Private Partnership 
mode with Kala Biotech Pvt. Ltd., Pune to reduce the storage losses in onion. This 
can be constructed anywhere in India right from extreme temperature to tropical 
dry or coastal humid regions as t he temperature and humidity are controlled. 
Construction cost varies from Rs.50,000 -60,000/ton depending upon storage 
capacity. It can be constructed with varying capacities (50, 100, 1000, 2000 MT or 
more.) During off season, this structure can be utilize d for storage of other crops 
with provision of temperature and humidity modifications between 4-40°C & RH 55 
- 95 % as per the requirement of commodity. ICAR-DOGR has given wide publicity 
on the advantages of this technology and has further commercialized through 
Agrinnovate India with exclusive licensing to Kala Biotech Pvt. Ltd. Kala Biotech 
constructed one 2,300 MT capacity storage structure to Central Warehousing 
Corporation at Ambad, Nasik. 
Further, R& D in other horticultural crop produce has also bee n taken up and 
Department would like to bring it to the notice of the Honourable Parliamentary 
Standing Committee as detailed below- 
Spices: The optimal storage condition for enhanced shelf life of fresh ginger 
coupled with use of a surface coating formulation made from natural lac resin has 
revealed the possibility of storing fresh ginger up to four months without losing the 
firmness under optimised sub-ambient conditions (20 degree Celsius and 60-65% 
relative humidity). The technology was successful in si gnificantly decreasing the 
rate of storage related disease inoculum build -up in ginger rhizome, decreased 
sprouting percentage and reduction in essential oil content during four -month 
storage.  
 
Mushrooms:  
Cleaning and Packaging: Mushrooms are best marketed unwashed to prevent 
accelerated spoilage but if washing is required for button mushrooms to remove 
casing soil, technology comprising dipping in 0.05% Potassium meta -bi-sulphite 
(KMS) followed by thorough surface drying before packing has been standardized 

15 
 
to maintain quality. The technology for packing of Oyster mushrooms (no washing) 
into ventilated punnets or polyethylene (PE) bags has been standardized by using 
in 200 g capacity PET punnets covered with 12-micron antifogging PVC/cling film 
or 150-gauge PE bags with 0.5% ventilation (200-400 g capacity), which preserve 
freshness and minimize moisture loss. 
Storage of mushrooms: At ambient temperature (25°C), shelf life is limited to 3 
days for button mus hrooms and 2 days for oyster mushrooms. A technology for 
storage (4–6°C with 90–95% relative humidity) button mushrooms (shelf life 10-12 
days) and oyster mushrooms (5 -6 days) standardized and successfully 
demonstrated.  
Paddy straw mushrooms being highly perishable and sensitive to chilling; they 
cannot be stored below 12°C for more than 1 day but the shelf life could be 
extended to 2 days at 12–15°C when packed in brown paper bags.  
Similarly, for mushrooms such as Ganoderma, Shiitake, Turkey tail, Shizophyllum 
and Cordyceps drying (10 -12% moisture) technologies have been standardized 
for extended period of storage (up to six months).  
Potato: In India, with large -scale potato production (approximately 60 million 
tonnes/ year), seasonal harvests, and prono unced seasonal fluctuations (harvest 
in winter, hot summers ahead); CIPC (Isopropyl N -(3-chlorophenyl) carbamate) 
has been the most widely used sprout suppressant in India ’s potato storage 
industry. Storage evaluation studies of different potato varieties have been 
conducted under elevated temperature storage for enhancing their keeping and 
processing quality. The recommendations are issued and consultancies provided 
on regular basis for enhanced adoption of the technology. This resulted in 
increasing the number of cold storages from 6000 to about 8400, and under this 
technology from around 1000 in 2021 to (1500 in 2025). Presently, all the 
processing industries are using this technology for long term storage of processing 
grade potatoes and it is also being  used for supplying low sugar potatoes in for 
fresh consumption. 
CIPC-enabled storage has facilitated a practical, cost-effective way to reduce post-
harvest losses and ensure steady supply of potato throughout the year.  This helps 
stabilize prices (less gluts and distress sales), ensures availability for fresh markets 
and processors, and supports value -addition (chips, fries, other processed 
products).  By reducing wastage and supporting longer shelf -life, CIPC -based 
methods contribute to better returns fo r farmers and more efficient supply chain 
overall a key aspect given limited cold-storage infrastructure. 

16 
 
Impact: It has successfully enabled safe storage of potatoes for 6–7 months when 
used at elevated temperature condition. Further, CIPC allows storage at 10 -12 °C, 
preventing “cold-induced sweetening" and maintains low reducing sugar, 
improving colour and crispness of fried products such as chips and French fries. 
Further R&D on lab-scale, herbal-based sprout suppressant formulation in potato 
is in progress.  
The Department further assures the Honourable Parliamentary Standing 
Committee of its commitment to come up with science -based technology solution 
for storage of horticulture produce for larger benefit of the society.” 
 
17. While examining the issue of post -harvest losses and storage infrastructure for 
perishable agricultural produce, the Committee in their original Report had appreciated the 
progress made in developing controlled atmosphere storage model particularly for onions 
under PPP and recommended scaling up such models for a wider range of perishable 
crops. The Committee had also emphasized the need for expanding Public -Private 
Partnership (PPP) models, promoting crop -specific storage technologies, incentivizing 
private sector participation, strengthening cold storage infrastructure in rural and remote 
areas and exploring integration with renewable energy solutions. 
The Ministry , i n their Action Taken Reply, have submitted that Agricultural Marketing 
Infrastructure (AMI ) sub -scheme and Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) have been 
implemented to promote scientific storage infrastructure, including cold storage and 
supply chains with financial assistance in the form of subsidies, interest subvention and 
credit guarantees. The Ministry have further informed that substantial investments have 
been mobilized under AIF for post -harvest infrastructure projects including cold storage 
units. Regarding onion storage technology developed by ICAR -DOGR under PPP mode  
have been given wide publicity and are available for wider use. The Ministry have informed 
that this technology can  be adapted for multi -crop usage  with slight temperature and 
humidity variation.  The Ministry have also highlighted various research and development 
initiatives undertaken for improving storage technologies across different commodities  
such as spices, mushroom and potato and assured the Committee about their commitment 
to come up with science -based technology solution for storage of horticulture 
produce for larger benefit of the society. 
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry in promoting storage 
infrastructure and undertaking research initiatives. The Committee, further, desire that the 

17 
 
Ministry should encourage and fund more research by ICAR and other leading agricultural 
institutes and Startups so that cost effective and environment friendly storage model can 
be developed for varied agri-climatic zones in the Country.  
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 16) 
 
Standardization of Service Conditions across all KVKs 
 
18. In their recommendation contained in the original 6th Report, the Committee 
had stated as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the service conditions of KVK employees are determined 
by the respective employer/host organizations as per the approved KVK Scheme 
by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for a period of five years 
(or Plan period) through the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The ICAR 
serves as the nodal agency f or the implementation of the KVK Scheme. The 
guidelines of the KVK Scheme are strictly implemented as per the Memorandum 
of Understanding (MoU) and the sanction order issued by ICAR, in compliance 
with the Rules and Bye-Laws of ICAR. 
The Committee further note that ICAR does not directly pay the salary and 
allowances of KVK employees. There is no employer -employee relationship 
between ICAR and the employees of non -ICAR KVKs. The limited connection is 
that the host organizations, other than ICAR, which are t he actual employers of 
KVK employees in non-ICAR KVKs, pay the salaries and allowances through the 
grant-in-aid received from ICAR, as per the terms of the MoU, the sanction order, 
and the guidelines under the KVK Scheme and Government of India Rules. 
The Committee expressed serious concerns about the lack of 
standardization in the service conditions and operational guidelines across Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) due to the varying host organizations. This inconsistency 
in service conditions has led to dispa rities in employee benefits and operational 
procedures, which, if left unaddressed, could negatively impact the morale and 
effectiveness of KVK employees. The service conditions for employees in ICAR 
KVKs differ from those in non-ICAR KVKs, creating an unequal work environment. 
The Ministry, during their oral submissions, have also assured the Committee that 
the issue of disparities in service conditions among KVKs is being actively 
addressed, and necessary corrective measures are being incorporated.  
The C ommittee are of the view that the disparities between the service 
conditions and benefits offered to employees of ICAR and non -ICAR KVKs have 

18 
 
created a significant divide, leading to potential dissatisfaction and a decrease in 
employee morale. These discre pancies have the potential to hinder the 
productivity and success of KVKs across the country. The absence of uniformity in 
employee benefits, staff roles, promotion policies, and other critical aspects 
reflects a lack of coherence in the operation of the K VK Scheme. This 
inconsistency not only affects employee satisfaction but also raises concerns 
about the overall efficiency of KVKs in fulfilling their objectives. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must urgently 
address these disparities and establish standardized service conditions across all 
KVKs. To resolve this issue, the Committee recommend revising the terms of the 
MoU governing non -ICAR KVKs, particularly those hosted by State Agricultural 
Universities (SAUs) and other organization s. These revisions should ensure that 
service conditions and benefits are brought in line with those provided to ICAR 
KVK employees. SAUs should extend the same benefits to KVK employees as 
those provided to state government employees, and other host organ izations 
should be required to provide same service conditions accordingly. The Committee 
also recommend that the uniformity in service conditions be made a mandatory 
pre-condition for any host organization to receive grant -in-aid from ICAR. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should take swift and decisive action to create 
a fair, consistent, and cohesive working environment for all KVK employees across 
the country.” 
Reply of the Government 
19. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) submitted as under: 
“At the time of establishment of a KVK, a MoU is signed between the ICAR and 
the Host Organisations. As per this MoU, the staff of the KVK are the employees 
of the respective Host Organisations. This has been reiterated in the Council. 
Circular no. Agri. Extn. 1/2/2015/AE. -I dated 17.06.2015 which says that “as per 
the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) /Agreement signed between the ICAR 
and the host institutions, all staff of KVK shall be borne on the establishment of 
grantee (host institutions) only. The administrative control over the staff employed 
under the scheme, therefore, shall vest in the host institution. The ICAR is liable to 
pay only the salary in respect of office staff required for running the scheme and 
the cost of approved recurring and non -recurring items as per the pattern of 
financial assistance approved by the Government of India. All the service 
conditions including recruitment, appointment etc. of the staff of the KVK shall be 
regulated as per the relevant rules and regulation of the host institutions subject to 
the terms and conditions provided in the MoU/ Agreement. It is therefore 

19 
 
categorically stated that the staff of the KVK functioning under SAUs, CAUs, 
NGOs, CUs, Deemed Universities, PSUs, OEI are not the employees of ICAR. 
They are the employees of the respective host institutions”. 
 
20. While noting lack of standardization in the service conditions across Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) leading to disparities in employee benefits and operational 
procedures between ICAR KVKs and non-ICAR KVKs,  the Committee , in their 
original Report, desired the Ministry to revise terms of MoUs governing non-ICAR 
KVKs. The Committee while stressing on need of standardized service conditions 
across all KVKs  had desired to make mandatory prerequisite for receiving ICAR 
grants. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, submitted that  as per the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)/Agreement signed between the ICAR and 
the host institutions, all staff of KVK shall be borne on the establishment of grantee 
(host institutions) only. The administrative control over the staff employed under 
the scheme, th erefore, shall vest in the host institution. Further, the service 
conditions including recruitment, appointment etc. of the staff of the non -ICAR 
KVKs shall be regulated as per the relevant rules and regulation of the host 
institutions subject to the terms  and conditions provided in the MoU/ 
Agreement.Therefore, employees of KVKs run by State Agricultural Universities 
(SAUs), Central Agricultural Universities (CAUs), non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs), etc., are not considered ICAR employees and their se rvice conditions are 
determined by the regulations of the respective organizations.  
Taking cognizance of the fact that the scheme of KVK is a national program funded 
by the central government, the Committee find no justification in the reply of the 
Ministry. The Committee are of the view that as only a handful of non -ICAR KVKs 
are functional, a significant difference in conditions of services could impact 
employee morale, efficiency, and effective implementation of the scheme in the 
long run.  The Committee , therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
urge the Ministry to take concrete steps to bring greater uniformity in service 
conditions across KVKs, including appropriate revision of MoU guidelines and 
ensuring parity in benefits and service structures.  The Committee believe that the 
concrete steps in this direction will ensure a fair, uniform and cohesive working 
environment for all KVK employees across the country. The Committee may be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard.  

20 
 
Chapter – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 1) 
 
Financial Allocation and Expenditure under NICRA 
The Committee observe that over the past five years, the National Innovations in 
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project has seen a steady increase in both funding 
and spending for its demonstration and research activities. This shows the Government’s 
growing commitment to strengthening agricultural resilience against climate change. The 
Committee note that during 2019-2024, the total allocation for NICRA was ₹231.85 crore 
and the total expenditure was ₹219.25 crore, which thus has been an impressive 
utilization rate of about 95%. While there were some small gaps between allocated  and 
used funds in the early years (88.2% in 2019–20 and 89.8% in 2020–21), the program 
has significantly improved, with utilization consistently exceeding 95% in recent years. 
This suggests that the planning, monitoring, and execution processes are gettin g better. 
The Committee also note that spending on research has consistently outpaced spending 
on demonstrations, which reflect a scientific and research -driven approach to building 
resilience. However, despite this efficiency, the limited budget has restricted the scope of 
adaptation efforts, particularly in regions most vulnerable to climate change. 
 Further, the Committee observe that risk and vulnerability assessments have been 
conducted for 573 of the 651 agricultural districts in the country, as per t he guidelines of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The assessments reveal that 
109 districts are categorized as "very highly vulnerable" and 201 as "highly vulnerable," 
indicating that 310 districts are at significant risk from climate change. However, due to 
budget constraints, NICRA ’s adaptation activities have only been implemented in only 
151 of these high-risk districts, leaving a large number of vulnerable areas unaddressed. 
The Committee express their concern to note that so many regions are being neglected 
due to financial constraints, particularly when the very survival of agricultural livelihoods 
in these areas is at risk. This is a glaring shortfall, considering the scale of the challenges 
that these districts face.  
Given these limitations, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare adopt a phased and rotational approach to extend 
climate adaptation support to all 310 vulnerable districts. This approach would involve 
regularly reassess ing climate risks and ensuring that resources are directed to areas 
where they are most needed. Districts that show significant improvement in resilience 
could gradually transition out of the program, freeing up resources to focus on newly 
identified high-risk areas. The Committee feel that this phased approach would ensure 

21 
 
that adaptation support is dynamic and can adjust to changing climatic conditions and 
evolving challenges over time. 
The Committee further recommend a substantial increase in funding for NICRA to 
effectively meet the scale of the challenges it seeks to address. The current budgetary 
allocation is woefully insufficient to address the scale of the crisis, and restrict the 
effectiveness of the program. Increased funding would not only allow for more region -
specific interventions but would also enable the increase in of community -based 
resilience programmes, which are crucial for building long -term climate resilience at the 
grassroots level.  
The Committee also desire that the Ministry must ensure that funds are disbursed 
in a timely manner, with careful planning and active involvement from all relevant 
stakeholders. Inefficient fund distribution and delays in implementation can undermine 
the effectiveness of such programmes, limiting their potential impact. The Committee feel 
that, by ensuring prompt disbursement and active participation from local communities, 
the Ministry can significantly enhance the efficacy of NICRA and ensure that the 
programme delivers tangible benefits to farmers facing  climate-related challenges. 
Further, the Committee feel that, while the NICRA project has made commendable strides 
in strengthening agricultural resilience, the Ministry must address the glaring gaps in its 
reach and funding. A more comprehensive, well-funded, and dynamic approach with clear 
road map is needed to ensure that all vulnerable districts are supported and that climate 
resilience efforts are truly inclusive. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The budget allocated during 2019-24 phase of NICRA was 231.85 crore and the proposed 
budget for the next phase i.e., 2026-31 is 326.96 crore. The enhanced budget proposed 
will be utilized to expand the project activities in other vulnerable districts. The districts 
where significant progress is observed will be phased out by adding new risk prone 
districts which were not included in the earlier phase. Due care will be taken in selection 
of the new districts, considering the risk proneness and availability o f man power in the 
KVKs to implement NICRA activities. 
Presently, NICRA project is operational in 35 aspirational districts of Prime Minister Dhan 
Dhaanya Krishi Yojana (PMDDKY) and it is planned to expand to cover 50 aspirational 
districts of PMDDKY. The villages selected under these districts remain as the model 
villages to implement climate resilient technologies. NICRA project will also contribute in 
knowledge sharing and capacity building in the PMDDKY aspirational districts. 
Basic and strategic resear ch of NICRA will continue to provide backstopping to develop 
new and innovative climate resilient technologies. High throughput screening of 
germplasm helps to identify elite genotypes tolerant to climatic stresses and will be further 

22 
 
used in breeding prog rammes to develop new climate resilient varieties. Resource 
conservation technologies and resilient livestock production practices will further 
complement in achieving climate resilience.  
Community based resilient programs involving FPOs, CBOs, SHGs will be given priority 
in the next phase of NICRA to effectively meet the scale of the challenge to be addressed. 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 2) 
 
Adoption of Climate-Resilient Seed Varieties 
The Committee are aware with the increasing frequency of droughts and floods, 
developing and disseminating climate -resilient seed varieties is important for helping 
farmers adapt to these changing conditions. Through the NICRA initiative, drought - and 
flood-resistant varieties for crops such as rice, wheat, and maize have been developed 
and introduced to farmers through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). However, the 
Committee note that significant challenges remain, including low farmer awareness, slow 
adoption of new seed varieties, limited distribution networks, ga ps in coordination at the 
state level, and the lack of large-scale assessments to measure the true impact of these 
efforts on agricultural resilience. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should prioritize improving 
seed distribution systems to ensure timely and easy access for farmers. The Committee 
feel that one effective way of doing this could be the establishment of decentralized seed 
hubs and the promotion of seed village programmes. These initiatives would improve the 
availability of  climate-resilient seeds at the local level, making it easier for farmers to 
access them when needed most. In addition, the Committee are of the view that the 
Ministry should step up efforts to increase awareness among farmers regarding the 
benefits of the se new seed varieties. This could be achieved through hands -on 
demonstrations, field trials involving farmers, and localized training programmes 
designed to suit specific climate conditions and farming practices.  
The Committee also feel that there is a ne ed for increasing coordination between 
important stakeholders, such as the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), state 
governments, seed companies, and other relevant agencies. Increased cooperation will 
ensure that climate-resilient seed varieties reach a wider group of farmers. Further, the 
Committee recommend that large -scale assessments must be conducted to see how 
widely these varieties are being used and how they affect productivity and resilience and 
to identify if there are problems with i mplementation which can readily be addressed. To 
help farmers adopt these changes, the Committee also recommend that the Ministry 
should use digital tools to share information more easily. Mobile apps, SMS updates, 
community radio, and Agri -tech platforms can all help send important and timely 
information to farmers. Digital platforms can also provide valuable updates on seed 

23 
 
availability, best practices for crop management, and current weather forecasts, all of 
which are crucial for farmers to adapt to the changing climate. The Committee are of the 
view that by implementing the aforementioned measures more farmers will adopt climate-
resilient seeds. 
Reply of the Government 
The steps taken by Seeds Division, DA&FW to ensure availability of seeds including High 
Yielding/Climate Resilient Varieties of various crops is as under: 
 Seeds Division, DA&FW reviews the requirement and availability of certified /quality 
seeds crop and State wise during Zonal Seeds Review Meetings with States and 
ICAR etc. organized pr ior to each sowing seasons i.e. Kharif and Rabi season. As 
reported by the States, the sufficient seeds were available including seeds of Climate 
Resilient Varieties in the country. The requirement and availability of certified /quality 
seeds during last f our years and current Kharif -2025 season in the country is as 
under: 
 
S. 
No. 
Year 
 
Requirement 
/Demand 
Availability 
/Production 
Surplus Status 
1. 2021-22 465.36 498.83 33.47 
2. 2022-23 464.14 514.26 50.12 
3. 2023-24 462.31 508.60 46.29 
4. 2024-25 482.01 531.51 49.50 
5. Current 
Kharif -2025 
164.05 178.64 14.59 
 
 Seeds Division, DA&FW advises the States from time to time to include newly 
released High Yielding Varieties (HYVs), stress tolerant varieties (drought, flood and 
salinity) and short and medium duration varieties of various agricultural crops in their 
State Seed Plan.  
 In order to face the challenges of climate changes, the ICAR Institutes, SAUs. etc 
have developed total 2,661 Climate Resilient Varieties of various crops (including 128 
varieties of wheat and 640 varieties of paddy) during the years 2014 to 2024.   
 Seeds Division, DA&FW advises the States and seed producing agencies from time 
to time to place the breeder seeds indents of newly released High Yielding Varieties 
(HYVs), stress tolerant varieties (drought, flood and salinity) including stress tolerant/ 
climate resilient /smart varieties (to tackle the challenges of climate changes more 
effective way) of different crops developed by ICAR Institutes /State Agricultural 
Universities (SAUs) etc. for further multiplication into foundation and certified  seeds, 
so as to make available required seeds of these crops varieties to the farmers to 

24 
 
enhance agricultural production, productivity and also to help farmers ’ profitability in 
the Country.  
 State Department of Agriculture through its extension machineri es organizes the 
training sessions, workshops, and demonstrations etc.  to teach farmers about the 
importance of using seeds of High Yielding Varieties (including Climate Resilient and 
bio-fortified varieties),  
 Seeds Division DA&FW is implementing Sub -Mission on Seeds & Planting Materials 
(SMSP) from the year 2014 -15 to promote production and multiplication of quality 
seeds of agricultural crops, so that the required quantities of seeds could be made 
available to farmers in the country. SMSP has now been m erged with National Food 
Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) since the year 2023-24.  
 Under this, the financial assistance is available/ provided for different seed related 
activities including for purchase of breeder seeds, distribution of seeds (found ation/ 
certified seeds at 50% subsidy for various crops including climate resilient seeds). 
 In order to meet the requirement seeds of short and medium duration crops varieties 
during natural calamities and unforeseen conditions i.e. drought and flood etc.,  the 
implementing agencies made available the seeds to the farmers maintained for this 
purpose for re-sowing at reasonable cost Under National Seed Reserve (NSR). There 
are 22 agencies implementing NSR including one at the national level with National 
Seeds Corporation and 21 in different States. 
 
SATHI Portal (Seed Authentication, Traceability & Holistic Inventory) 
 In order to promote digitization in Seed sector, the DA&FW, Ministry of Agriculture & 
F W has launched the SATHI portal on 19th April 2023, aims to ensure effective 
monitoring of seed production and distribution by maintaining transparency, and 
efficiency across ' the seed value chain -from Nucleus to Breeder, Foundation, and 
Certified Seeds. It has since achieved significant progress and has b een effectively 
implemented across various States and UTs. 
 Phase I is operational in 23 States/UTs, covering the complete seed production chain.  
 Phase II, focusing on real -time supply chain tracking and end -to-end seed bag 
Traceability-from retailer to th e national level-has been successfully rolled out in the 
states such as Maharashtra, Assam, Punjab, Odisha, Rajasthan, and West Bengal 
etc. 
The promotion of climate resilient seed varieties has been initiated on a limited scale in 
previous phase of NICRA t hrough seed banks. However, to augment the demand for 
resilient varieties in identified crops, the seed village concept will be promoted by 
providing required technical knowledge and skills through KVKs, ICAR institutes and 
State Agriculture Universities.  

25 
 
More number of field demonstrations and focused training programs on cultivation of 
climate resilient seed varieties will be taken up to enhance the adoption of resilient 
varieties in the district. 
The impact assessment of climate resilient seed varieties  developed under NICRA for 
yield benefits, resilience, area spread along with adoption gaps will be carried out through 
farmer field surveys and quantity of breeder seed/certified seed produced in the district 
during the past five-year period.  
Digital tools will be developed to assess the demand for seeds of resilient varieties in 
different crops, their availability and also the information on best crop management 
practices. 
Stakeholder consultation workshops will be conducted with the National Seed 
Corporation, State Seed Corporations, ICAR institutes, State Agriculture Universities and 
private seed companies for assessing the demand, production and distribution of climate 
resilient seed varieties and their widespread across the region. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 3) 
 
Standardizing and Expanding Natural Farming 
The Committee note that Natural Farming (NF) is a chemical -free agricultural 
practice rooted in traditional Indian farming knowledge, integrating livestock with diverse 
crop systems. NF focuses on improving soil health, reducing input costs, and enhancing 
climate resilience. It relies on locally available on -farm resources, such as livestock and 
plants, without the use of purchased bio-fertilizers or mined minerals. The Committee also 
note that National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) is a centrally spons ored initiative 
that collaborates with States and Union Territories to identify districts for implementation. 
The mission targets regions with varying levels of input use and areas where NF is already 
being practiced. Special priority is given to the 5 km corridor along the Ganga under the 
Namami Gange program, as well as areas with strong traditional NF practices, 
experienced farmers, and supporting institutions like State Rural Livelihood Missions 
(SRLMs), Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), and Primary  Agricultural Credit 
Societies (PACS). To help in the adoption of NF, model farms will be set up for training, 
demonstrations, and documentation, all tailored to local agro -ecological conditions. 
States actively involved in NF include Andhra Pradesh, Himac hal Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Kerala, Jharkhand, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, and Tamil Nadu. 
Given the diverse agricultural conditions across the country, the Committee feel 
that the Ministry must focus on standardizing NF while ensuring it r emains adaptable to 
regional variations. The All India Network Programme on Organic Farming, which began 
in Kharif 2020, is testing NF practices across different agro -ecological settings in 16 

26 
 
states. The programme is focused on key NF techniques, such as concoctions (e.g., 
jeevamrit, beejamrit, and ghanjeevamrit), intercropping, mulching, and multi-variate crop-
based green manuring during fallow periods. However, regional -specific factors such as 
crop selection, varieties, mulching materials, trap crops, a nd traditional inputs  must be 
carefully evaluated to ensure the practices are effective in local contexts. The Committee 
recommend that, based on the results of these experiments, a standardized yet flexible 
NF protocol should be developed in consultation with stakeholders, including farmers, 
agricultural experts, and local institutions. 
The Committee feel that the Ministry need to expand NF efforts beyond the 5 km 
Ganga corridor. While this area is of significant importance, NF should be promoted in 
ecologically sensitive zones and areas facing high -input farming practices. Introducing 
NF in regions affected by soil degradation, water scarcity, and excessive chemical use 
can further enhance agricultural sustainability and climate resilience. The Committee are 
of the view that expanding NF to areas where soil health is compromised and where 
agricultural systems are heavily dependent on chemical inputs would be a transformative 
step toward sustainable farming. 
The Committee also feel that focusing on regions w ith a solid foundation of NF 
practices, active farmer involvement, and strong local institutions is crucial for 
accelerating NF adoption. Strengthening training programmes and raising awareness 
through traditional and digital platforms will help farmers be tter understand the benefits 
of NF and encourage them to adopt which will improve agricultural productivity and 
environmental health. Collaboration with local farmers' organizations, rural development 
agencies, and other stakeholders will ensure the transi tion to NF is inclusive and 
sustainable.  Further, the Committee are of the view that increasing the reach of NF, 
adapting it to local needs, and providing more resources and training will enable the 
Ministry to drive a nationwide shift toward more resilient, sustainable farming. 
The Committee also observed that KVKs in certain parts of country are primarily 
engaged in chemical farming, utilizing all available land, with little or no demonstrations 
on natural farming.  The Committee believe that farmers can  truly understand the 
significant advantages of natural farming only if the KVKs take the initiative in promoting 
it. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry issue instructions to all KVKs 
to encourage natural farming in order to effectively c ommunicate its benefits to the 
farming community. 
Reply of the Government 
Natural Farming (NF) is a chemical free farming, involving livestock (preferably local 
breeds) integrated farming methods and diversified crop systems rooted in the Indian 
traditional knowledge. Natural farming involves use of on -farm inputs, multi -cropping 

27 
 
systems, pre-monsoon dry sowing, biomass based mulching, use of traditional varieties 
of seeds, integration of trees on buffer zones of farm, etc. 
The National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) was approved by the Government to 
promote Natural Farming as a mass movement across the country. The overall financial 
outlay is ₹2481 crore (Central share of ₹1584 crore & States ’ share ₹897 crore) till 15th 
Finance Commission period till March 2026. 
The Mission aims to reduce input cost of production to the farme rs & dependence of 
farmers with the external markets, rejuvenate soil health & fertility, build resilience of the 
farm and farmers against climate risks, and provide safe, healthy & nutritious food for the 
farmers, their families & the consumers. 
NMNF is targeted to be implemented in 15,000 clusters to initiate NF in 7.5 Lakh Ha area 
with 18.75 lakh farmers. For easy availability of natural farming bio -inputs, 10,000 need-
based Bio-input Resource Centres (BRCs) are to be set up. Further, 1 crore farmers are 
to be made aware of Natural Farming.  
The Mission is to be implemented in districts within priority regions such as 5 km corridor 
along river Ganga (Namami Gange region), banks of major rivers, high fertilizer input 
sale, low fertilizer input sale, blocks  under Tribal Sub plan and regions with strong State 
Rural Livelihood Missions (SRLMs)/ Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS)/ Farmer 
Producer Organizations (FPOs)/ other Community Based Organizations (CBOs) and 
presence of practicing natural farmin g farmers. As informed by States/UTs, NMNF is 
being implemented in 622 out of 789 districts in the country (78%). Out of 229 districts 
with high fertilizer input sales more than the country average of 139.13 kg/Ha, NMNF is 
being implemented in 206 district s (90%). Further, NMNF is also being implemented in 
417 districts with low fertilizer sale out of 543 districts (76%) and 317 districts with blocks 
under Tribal Sub Plan out of 385 districts (82%). In the 136 districts in the Namami Gange 
region (5 km corr idor along river Ganga), NMNF is being implemented in 124 districts 
(91%). 
Under the Mission, Scientists, Farmer Master Trainers (FMTs) and trained Community 
Resource Persons (CRPs) shall undertake awareness generation, training & on -field 
demonstration and provide continuous handholding support to farmers to practise Natural 
Farming. In this regard, 806 training institutions (530 Krishi Vigyan Kendras, 82 
Agricultural Universities/ Research Stations and 194 Local Natural Farming Institutions) 
have been ide ntified by the States/UTs. Local Natural Farming Institutions (LNFI) are 
fields of practicing NF farmers with prior experience and infrastructure for conducting NF 
training. 
In order to impart training to Scientists, FMTs and State/ District/ Block officia ls, 18 
Centres of Natural Farming have been identified which are institutions with prior 

28 
 
experience and engaged in Natural Farming training). More than 4,200 Scientists, FMTs 
and State/ District/ Block officials have been trained. 
Two trained CRPs are to b e deployed in each natural farming cluster to generate 
community-wide awareness, conduct on -field demonstration and handhold farmers to 
practice natural farming. These CRPs must preferably be Krishi Sakhis or practicing NF 
farmers, residing in the same clu ster and themselves practice NF. They must also be 
associated with Community Based Organization such as Self-Help Group (SHG), Farmer 
Producer Organisation (FPO), etc. Under the Mission, 28,779 CRPs have been identified 
till date, out of which 18,344 CRPs have been trained at the linked training institution 
(KVK/ Agricultural University/ LNFI). 
In order to develop a research ecosystem for Natural Farming, all training institutions 
including KVKs and Agricultural Universities identified under the Mission are mandated to 
develop Natural Farming Model Farm, in their own campus as well as on farmers ’ fields. 
These Model Farms shall act as sites for research and knowledge documentation of local 
agroecology based NF practices. A NF Model Farm guideline has been ci rculated to 
ensure minimum standards are maintained while developing these Model Farms. About 
1,100 NF Model Farms have been established, out of which more than 800 Model Farms 
are on farmers’ fields. 
The NF Cell at Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare has developed the Technical 
Manual on Natural Farming with ICAR, based on the various NF package of practices 
across the country as shared by State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) and Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research (ICAR). The Technical Manual provides a detailed understanding 
of NF principles and their application through various region -specific NF package of 
practices, as documented by SAUs and ICAR. 
Further, Competitive Research Grants (CRGs) are being provided under the Mission for 
evolving location & landscape specific NF package of practices and contribute to the 
overall research capacity in agroecology based NF. Natural Resource Management 
(NRM) Division, ICAR is the Nodal Division for coordination and Indian Institute of 
Farming System s Research (IIFSR), Modipuram is the Nodal Institute. So far, 467 
proposals have been received from ICAR institutions, Universities, Educational Institutes, 
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), FPOs, etc. and are currently under review. 
Research on Natural Farming is being carried out under All India Network Programme on 
Natural Farming (previously AINP -Organic Farming) with regional context specific 
cropping systems along with all the components of Natural farming including 
intercropping, mulching, bio-concoctions etc. Based on the results of the network study 
as well as in consultation with stakeholders from different States, generic protocol having 
local flexibility and options are prepared and shared with all the ICAR institutes, SAUs 
and also included in the Technical Manual on Natural Farming by DA&FW and circulated 

29 
 
to all States. Further, under National Mission on Natural Farming, model farms are also 
being established for research as well as training purpose. Farmers and Farmer Master 
Trainers are actively involved in the establishment of model farms and training. 
Collaborating with National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE), 
Hyderabad, Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC) on Natural farming developed with 
the active involvement o f AINP -Natural Farming partner institutions and is used for 
training on Natural Farming. In addition, need based training programmes are also 
organized by AINP-NF centres. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 4) 
 
Enhancing Natural Farming Adoption 
The Committee note that the project "Out -Scaling of Natural Farming through 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)" has made commendable progress by conducting 11,341 
awareness programs that reached 11.37 lakh farmers and stakeholders. It also organised 
2,476 training sessions for 1.02 lakh farmers and 7,592 field demonstrations, providing 
valuable insights into the preparation of natural inputs like Beejamrit, Jeevamrit, and 
Ghanjeevamrit. These efforts have contributed to reduced cultivation costs (ranging from 
3% to 55%), improved soil health, and better water retention in the soil. However, despite 
these promising results, concerns regarding stable income persist. While awareness and 
adoption have increased, financial security remains a significant barrier to the widespread 
adoption of Natural Farming (NF). 
To address this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should conduct a 
more detailed study among NF practitioners to track adoption rates, crop yields, and 
profitability. This study should gather data on the long-term financial sustainability of NF, 
including cost savings, potential income improvements, and any challenges faced by 
farmers. The Committee feel that the results will provide a clearer understanding of the 
financial benefits of NF, helping to guide future initiatives and ensure that the benefits of 
NF are both practical and financially viable for farmers. 
Further, the Committee recommend that the Ministry must focus on strengthening 
market linkages and developing premium pricing mechanisms for natural produce. As the 
demand for organic and natural produce is growing, and the Ministry should capitalize on 
this by connecting NF farmers with market players that are willing to pay a premium for 
their produce. Introducing support schemes, including fina ncial incentives and risk 
mitigation measures such as crop insurance or price guarantees, will help ease the 
financial risks involved in transitioning to NF. 
The Committee also recommend providing financial support, such as subsidies for 
input costs or low -interest loans for farmers transitioning to NF, to encourage wider 

30 
 
adoption. These measures will help reduce the financial barriers that farmers face when 
shifting from chemical-based farming to natural farming. The Committee feel that with a 
clearer pathway to financial security, more farmers are likely to adopt NF, ultimately 
leading to more sustainable and resilient farming systems across the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) was launched by the Government of 
India as a Centrally sponsored standalone scheme to promote Natural Farming (NF) as 
a mass movement across the country. The Mission has a target to initiate NF in 7.5 Lakh 
Ha area in 15,000 NF clusters with 18.75 lakh farmers. Each cluster shall be of contiguous 
areas cumulative to 50 Ha and have approximately 125 farmers. Also, 1 crore farmers 
are to be made aware of NF under the Mission. 
The enrolled & tra ined farmers at each natural farming cluster are to initiate natural 
farming in small landholding.  An output based incentive of ₹4000/- per acre per year per 
farmer for 2 years is to be provided to the farmers to practice natural farming, train more 
farmers, upkeep of livestock (preferably local breed of cow)/ preparation of natural 
farming inputs including purchase of mixing & storage containers, etc./ purchase of 
natural farming inputs from Bio-input Resource Centres (BRCs). 
For ensuring easy availabilit y of NF bio -inputs for farmers practicing NF, 10,000 BRCs 
are to be set up under NMNF. A BRC is a cluster level enterprise that provides ready to 
use NF bio -inputs to local farmers who may not themselves be making on -farm inputs. 
BRC will also disseminate knowledge, training and demonstration on these NF bio-inputs 
to farmers. These BRCs may be set up by practicing natural farming farmers, Primary 
Agriculture Credit Society (PACS)/ Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Self Help 
Groups (SHGs), local rural entrepreneurs etc. 2045 BRCs have been set up till date. 
For providing better marketing opportunities for NF produce, Natural Farming Certification 
System (NFCS) is under implementation by National Centre for Organic & Natural 
Farming (NCONF), Ghaziabad und er Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) - India 
certification structure. NFCS follows the National Standards for Natural Farming (NSNF) 
and shall provide certification under the “PGS-INDIA NATURAL” logo. States/UTs have 
also been requested to develop & promote dedicated brand for NF produce and converge 
with Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) for better price realization for the farmers. 
Natural Farming (NF) is a knowledge and local agro -ecology based farming practice, 
rooted in local knowledge and locati on specific technologies. In order to evolve location 
& landscape specific NF package of practices and contribute to the overall research 
capacity in agroecology based NF, Competitive Research Grants (CRGs) are being 
provided under the National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF). The thematic areas of 
research for CRG are as follows: 

31 
 
a) Crop Productivity, Quality & profitability 
b) Soil health and fertility 
c) Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services 
d) Climate Change mitigation and adaptation 
e) Multivariate cropping & Round the year green cover 
f) Socio-economic and policy 
The Natural Resource Management (NRM) Division, Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) is the Nodal Division for coordination and Indian Institute of Farming 
System Research (IIFSR), Modipuram is the Nodal Institute. So far, 467 proposals have 
been received from ICAR institutions, Universities, Educational Institutes, Non -
Governmental Organization (NGOs), Farmer Producer Organization (FPOs), etc. and are 
currently under review. 
Under All India Network Programme on Natural Farming, characterization of Natural 
farming farmers is being undertaken which includes practices and productivity. The model 
farms being developed under NMNF will also be utilized for tracking the important 
parameters of natural farming. Further, a deep insights study on natural farming involving 
NF practitioners is also initiated under AINP-Natural Farming. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 7) 
 
Strengthening Organic Certification and Market Access for Farmers 
The Committee recognize the significant role played by the Ministry in 
implementing two key certification systems the National Programme for Organic 
Production (NPOP) and the Participatory Guarantee System (PGS -India) to promote 
organic food quality in India. NPOP, managed by the Ministry of Commerce, is aimed at 
both domestic and export markets with third-party certification, while PGS-India, managed 
by the Ministry of Agriculture, is a decentralized, cost -effective, farmer-centric system 
tailored to the domestic market. Together, these systems have contributed greatly to the 
growth of organic agriculture in India, ensuring compliance with organic standards and 
increasing transparency in the market. 
However, the Committee feel that there are opportunities t o improve the 
certification processes, especially to make them more accessible for small-scale farmers. 
While NPOP and PGS -India have proven effective, the certification procedures can be 
complex and expensive, posing a significant barrier for smaller farm ers. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry must explore ways to simplify the certification process, 

32 
 
including reducing paperwork, lowering certification costs, and providing financial 
assistance or subsidies, particularly for farmers using the PGS-India system. PGS-India, 
being designed for small-scale producers, can benefit from these adjustments, but NPOP 
also needs to be made more accessible for smaller operations. The Ministry should 
consider introducing tiered certification models under NPOP, which would make it easier 
for small farmers to access markets and receive premium prices for their organic 
products. 
To further improve the organic certification process, the Committee recommend 
the Ministry to establish a unified organic label for both NPOP and PGS-India certified 
products. This would create consistency in marketing, enhance consumer confidence, 
and simplify the identification of authentic organic products. The Committee also desire 
that the Ministry should focus on simplifying the certification procedure, by reducing costs, 
and exploring digital solutions to streamline the application process and monitoring, 
ensuring accessibility for small farmers. The Committee feel that this comprehensive 
approach would not only improve the certification process but also promote transparency 
and foster greater trust in India’s organic products. 
The Committee also feel that, despite the availability of these certification systems, 
many farmers may still not fully understand their benefits or the certification process itself. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to increase awareness campaigns to 
educate farmers particularly in rural areas  about the importance of certification and its 
long-term advantages. Further, the Committee desire that the Ministry should explore the 
possibility of fully digitizing the certification process for both NPOP and PGS -India. An 
online platform could streamline the application process, reduce paperwork, increase 
transparency, and make it easier for farmers to track th eir certification status. A digital 
system could also facilitate remote inspections or audits, especially in areas with limited 
access to certification bodies, enabling more efficient and cost-effective monitoring. 
 
Reply of the Government 
India has two ce rtification systems in place (a) National Programme for Organic 
Production (NPOP) for export and domestic market, managed by APEDA (Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry) and (b) Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) -India limited to 
domestic market, Implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.   
PGS India Certification System is paperless, with less documentation and low cost. The 
dedicated portal is already their where farmer can track their applications. The inspections 
are also being tracked through digital solutions like mobile app for LG and RC inspection. 
The unification of PGS India with FSSAI is going on and Ministry is exploring ways for 
harmonization of PGS India with NPOP. 

33 
 
States have undertaken efforts to build institutional linkag es with APEDA, TRIFED, and 
private buyers to improve access to markets, along with support for traceability, branding, 
and participation in national-level organic trade events. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 8) 
 
Cold Storage infrastructure for perishable Crops 
The Ministry has made notable progress in addressing storage losses, particularly 
for perishable crops like onions, through the development of controlled atmosphere 
storage facilities under the Public -Private Partnership (PPP) model. The C ontrolled 
Atmosphere Onion and Multi-Product Storage Facility has proven successful, maintaining 
optimal conditions (temperature at 27 ± 2°C and relative humidity at 60 -65%) and 
significantly reducing storage losses to less than 15%, compared to the 40 -60% losses 
typically seen with traditional storage methods. The Committee also note that CONCOR 
(Container Corporation of India) has been involved in improving the transportation of 
perishable goods by providing refrigerated container logistics. This partners hip has 
increased the efficiency of moving stored products to market while preserving quality. 
However, the Committee note that the adoption and availability of such facilities for other 
perishable crops, such as fruits, vegetables, and high -value crops li ke tomatoes, 
potatoes, and leafy greens, remain limited. 
The Committee recommend that the successful model of the onion storage facility 
developed by ICAR -DOGR and Kala Biotech be replicated and scaled up for a wider 
range of perishable crops. The Committe e feel that expanding controlled atmosphere 
storage for various crops would help reduce post -harvest losses significantly. The 
Committee desire that the Government should work closely with the private sector to 
expand these facilities, prioritizing high -production areas where storage losses are the 
most significant. 
To further encourage private sector participation in building cold storage 
infrastructure, the Committee desire that the Government should explore the possibilities 
of providing financial incent ives, such as subsidies, tax breaks, or low -interest loans, 
specifically aimed at the establishment of controlled atmosphere storage facilities. These 
incentives would help reduce the financial burden on private stakeholders and encourage 
them to build more storage units in rural and peri -urban areas, thereby benefitting small 
farmers who currently lack adequate storage options. 
The Committee also acknowledge that different crops have varying requirements 
when it comes to temperature and humidity for optima l storage. To address this, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to initiate research into crop -specific controlled 
atmosphere storage technologies that are required to the unique needs of various fruits, 

34 
 
vegetables, and grains. This would ensure that cold  storage facilities are designed for 
maximum efficiency and quality preservation across diverse crops. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry must prioritize cold storage 
infrastructure development in rural and remote areas, especially in regions with  high 
horticultural production. These units should be specifically designed as net zero controlled 
cold storage atmosphere houses. This will not only save carbon emission but will reduce 
the cost of storage of perishable goods. This will help small scale farmer by reducing post-
harvest losses. The Ministry also needs to collaborate with Ministry of New and 
Renewable under PM Surya Ghar Scheme for energy solutions and other related 
benefits. Further, the Committee recommend the Ministry to expand the PPP model used 
for onion storage to include multi -crop storage facilities. In this model, the Government 
could act as a facilitator by providing land, subsidies, and technical support, while the 
private sector manages the operations. This partnership approach wou ld help maximize 
resource utilization and ensure the availability of efficient cold storage facilities across the 
country, ultimately benefiting both farmers and consumers by reducing food wastage and 
improving market access. 
Reply of the Government 
To assist creation of Scientific Storage include cold storage and other than storage 
infrastructure, the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India is 
implementing “Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) ” sub-scheme of Integrated 
Scheme for Agricultural Marketing (ISAM) across the country through its attached office 
Directorate of Marketing & Inspection (DMI). One of the main objectives of the scheme is 
to promote creation of scientific storage capacity for storing farm produce, processed farm 
produce and agricultural inputs etc. to reduce post-harvest & handling losses and market 
access in the country and to improve the marketability of agricultural produce through 
value addition, etc.  
AMI is a capital investment, open ended, demand driven, credit linked, subsidy scheme, 
wherein back ended subsidy @25% and 33.33% is available based on the eligible 
category of beneficiary.  Assistance is available to Individuals, Farmers, Group of 
farmers/growers, Agri -pruners, Registered Farmer Produc e Organizations (FPOs), 
Cooperatives, and state agencies etc. 
Under AMI stand -alone standardized cold storage units as per standards promoted by 
NCCD up to 1000 MTs are eligible for subsidy as per the MIDH cost norms.  
However, the allocated budget under A gricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) Sub 
Scheme of ISAM, has been fully utilized, and no further funds are available. Hence the 
implementation of AMI sub-scheme of ISAM has been kept in abeyance with effect from 
10.06.2025. 

35 
 
In order to address the existing infrastructure gaps and mobilize investment in agriculture 
infrastructure, Agri Infra Fund (AIF) was launched under Aatmanirbhar Bharat Package. 
AIF was introduced with a vision to transform the agriculture infrastructure landscape of 
the country. The Fund of Rs. 1 lakh crore under the scheme will be disbursed from FY 
2020-21 to FY 2025-26 and the support under the scheme will be provided for the duration 
of FY2020- 21 to FY2032-33. Under the scheme, Rs. 1 Lakh Crore will be provided by 
banks and fin ancial institutions as loans with interest subvention of 3% per annum and 
credit guarantee coverage under CGTMSE and NAB Sanrakshan for loans up to Rs. 2 
Crores. Further, each entity is eligible to get the benefit of the scheme for up to 25 projects 
located in different LGD codes. 
 The Agriculture Infrastructure Fund is a medium - long term debt financing facility for 
investment in viable projects for post -harvest management infrastructure and viable 
farming assets through 3% interest subvention and credit guarantee support. The post -
harvest management projects also include warehouse & silos, cold stores and cold chain, 
supply chain services including e -marketing platforms among others. Viable farming 
assets include organic inputs products e.g. bio -pesticides, bio -fertilizers, vermin -
composts and bio-stimulants production units among others. 
 The projects are eligible for all beneficiaries including private entities as well as groups 
such as FPOs, PACS, SHGs, JLGs, Cooperatives, National and State Level Federations 
of Cooperatives, FPOs federations, Federations of SHGs, National and State Level 
Agencies.  
Progress under the scheme:  
As on 03rd July 2025, Rs.66,736 Crores have been sanctioned for 1,14,011 projects under 
AIF These sanctioned projects have mobili zed an investment of Rs 108,073 Crores in 
agriculture sector. Major projects sanctioned under AIF include 30,404 custom hiring 
centres, 22,925 processing units, 16,017 warehouses, 3,712 sorting & grading units, 
2,471cold store projects, around 38,482 other kinds of post-harvest management projects 
and viable farming assets." 
During the last five years, the following projects have been undertaken in focusing on 
various agricultural commodities storage -related activities aimed at improving the 
efficiency and quality of stored products. These projects comprehensively address 
different aspects of post -harvest storage management under varying environmental 
conditions, focusing on minimizing storage losses and improving shelf life for 
horticultural/agricultural commodities: 
 Development of photoreactor for ethylene degradation during storage of banana 
and guava to extend the shelf life; 
 Development of solar operated low-cost onion storage structure; 

36 
 
 Microwave-assisted disinfestation non -chemical method for effective  and safe 
storage of pulses from insect pests and pulse beetles. 
 Study on determining storage losses of wheat and paddy stored in cap system; 
 Storage study on performance evaluation of hermetic bags on selected 
commodities (ongoing);  
 Study on determinatio n of storage losses for mustard oilseeds in bag and silo 
storage systems (ongoing); 
 Determining storage losses of pulses stored in warehouses and to recommend 
norms for long -term storage funded by Department of Consumer Affairs (India) 
(ongoing). 
 
The Depa rtment appreciates the views of the Honourable Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on R&D of onion storage technology. 
Yes, ICAR-DOGR has developed a technology under Public Private Partnership mode 
with Kala Biotech Pvt. Ltd., Pune to reduce the storage loss es in onion. This can be 
constructed anywhere in India right from extreme temperature to tropical dry or coastal 
humid regions as the temperature and humidity are controlled. Construction cost varies 
from Rs.50,000-60,000/ton depending upon storage capacity. It can be constructed with 
varying capacities (50, 100, 1000, 2000 MT or more.) During off season, this structure 
can be utilized for storage of other crops with provision of temperature and humidity 
modifications between 4 -40°C & RH 55 - 95 % as per th e requirement of commodity. 
ICAR-DOGR has given wide publicity on the advantages of this technology and has 
further commercialized through Agrinnovate India with exclusive licensing to Kala Biotech 
Pvt. Ltd. Kala Biotech constructed one 2,300 MT capacity s torage structure to Central 
Warehousing Corporation at Ambad, Nasik. 
Further, R& D in other horticultural crop produce has also been taken up and Department 
would like to bring it to the notice of the Honourable Parliamentary Standing Committee 
as detailed below- 
Spices: The optimal storage condition for enhanced shelf life of fresh ginger coupled with 
use of a surface coating formulation made from natural lac resin has revealed the 
possibility of storing fresh ginger up to four months without losing the fi rmness under 
optimised sub-ambient conditions (20 degree Celsius and 60-65% relative humidity). The 
technology was successful in significantly decreasing the rate of storage related disease 
inoculum build-up in ginger rhizome, decreased sprouting percentag e and reduction in 
essential oil content during four-month storage.  
 
 

37 
 
Mushrooms:  
Cleaning and Packaging: Mushrooms are best marketed unwashed to prevent 
accelerated spoilage but if washing is required for button mushrooms to remove casing 
soil, technology comprising dipping in 0.05% Potassium meta-bi-sulphite (KMS) followed 
by thorough surface drying before packing has been standardized to maintain quality. The 
technology for packing of Oyster mushrooms (no washing) into ventilated punnets or 
polyethylene (PE) bags has been standardized by using in 200 g capacity PET punnets 
covered with 12 -micron antifogging PVC/cling film or 150 -gauge PE bags with 0.5% 
ventilation (200-400 g capacity), which preserve freshness and minimize moisture loss. 
Storage of mushrooms: At ambient temperature (25°C), shelf life is limited to 3 days for 
button mushrooms and 2 days for oyster mushrooms. A technology for storage (4–6°C 
with 90–95% relative humidity) button mushrooms (shelf life 10 -12 days) and oyster 
mushrooms (5-6 days) standardized and successfully demonstrated.  
Paddy straw mushrooms being highly perishable and sensitive to chilling; they cannot be 
stored below 12°C for more than 1 day but the shelf life could be extended to 2 days at 
12–15°C when packed in brown paper bags.  
Similarly, for mushrooms such as Ganoderma, Shiitake, Turkey tail, Shizophyllum and 
Cordyceps drying (10-12% moisture) technologies have been standardized for extended 
period of storage (up to six months).  
Potato: In India, with large -scale potato production (approximately 60 million tonnes/ 
year), seasonal harvests, and pronounced seasonal fluctuations (harvest in winter, hot 
summers ahead); CIPC (Isopropyl N -(3-chlorophenyl) carbamate) has been the most 
widely used sprout suppressant i n India ’s potato storage industry. Storage evaluation 
studies of different potato varieties have been conducted under elevated temperature 
storage for enhancing their keeping and processing quality. The recommendations are 
issued and consultancies provided  on regular basis for enhanced adoption of the 
technology. This resulted in increasing the number of cold storages from 6000 to about 
8400, and under this technology from around 1000 in 2021 to (1500 in 2025). Presently, 
all the processing industries are using this technology for long term storage of processing 
grade potatoes and it is also being used for supplying low sugar potatoes in for fresh 
consumption. 
CIPC-enabled storage has facilitated a practical, cost -effective way to reduce post -
harvest losses and ensure steady supply of potato throughout the year. This helps 
stabilize prices (less gluts and distress sales), ensures availability for fresh markets and 
processors, and supports value -addition (chips, fries, other processed products). By 
reducing wa stage and supporting longer shelf -life, CIPC-based methods contribute to 

38 
 
better returns for farmers and more efficient supply chain overall a key aspect given 
limited cold-storage infrastructure. 
Impact: It has successfully enabled safe storage of potatoes  for 6–7 months when used 
at elevated temperature condition. Further, CIPC allows storage at 10 -12 °C, preventing 
“cold-induced sweetening" and maintains low reducing sugar, improving colour and 
crispness of fried products such as chips and French fries. 
Further R&D on lab -scale, herbal-based sprout suppressant formulation in potato is in 
progress.  
The Department further assures the Honourable Parliamentary Standing Committee of 
its commitment to come up with science -based technology solution for storage of 
horticulture produce for larger benefit of the society. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 9) 
 
Promoting Efficient Fertilizer Use and Distribution Systems 
The Committee note the adverse effects of excessive and imbalanced fertilizer use 
on soil health, crop productivity, and livestock nutrition. The Committee also note about 
the Ministry's ongoing efforts to address these issues, through research and the 
promotion of integrated nutrient management (INM). The use of soil test based nutrient 
application and a mix of organic and inorganic sources has been found to help maintain 
soil fertility and improve sustainability. 
In their submission, the Ministry explained that fertilizer distribution from 
manufacturers to farmers is monitored through an onlin e process. The system will soon 
be fully digitized, including the sale of fertilizers from licensed manufacturers to retailers, 
to increase transparency. Efforts are also being made to generate online receipts, which 
will address issues like missing receip ts due to GST -related problems, making the 
process smoother for both retailers and farmers. Any transaction that occurs outside of 
this system will be considered unauthorized, ensuring stricter control over fertilizer 
distribution. 
In order to increase efficiency in fertilizer use, the Committee feel that the Ministry 
must intensify efforts to promote soil test -based nutrient management, and advocate for 
balanced fertilizer use, incorporating organic matter, and improving nutrient delivery 
methods. Modern approaches like precision nutrient management should be encouraged 
to make fertilizer use more efficient and reduce dependency on chemical fertilizers. 
Further, the Ministry should focus on developing and promoting climate -resilient crop 
varieties that requ ire fewer nutrients, ensuring more sustainable agricultural practices. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry should develop a clear action plan, with specific 

39 
 
timeframes to promote the large -scale adoption of these practices, and regular impact 
assessments should be conducted to evaluate their effectiveness in improving soil health, 
sustaining crop yields, and minimizing environmental harm. 
The Committee appreciate the Ministry ’s move towards an online system for 
fertilizer distribution, which enhances tra nsparency and helps prevent unauthorized 
transactions. However, considering the challenges in areas with limited internet access 
and among marginal farmers who may lack digital literacy, the system may face obstacles, 
cause delays or errors in fertilizer d istribution in such areas.  The Committee therefore 
urge the Ministry to put in place contingency plans to manage potential technical issues 
and ensure the continuous flow of fertilizer distribution. Capacity-building initiatives should 
also be rolled out to help farmers, retailers, and other stakeholders to better navigate the 
online system. In addition, a real-time monitoring and grievance redressal system should 
be set up to address any issues related to fertilizer transactions and ensure quick 
resolution of any discrepancies. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
DA&FW implementing the soil Health Card scheme since 2014-15 with objective to assist 
states in promoting Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) through judicious use of 
chemical fertilizers including secondary and micro nutrients in conjunction with organic  
manures & bio-fertilizers for improving soil health and its productivity. This scheme has 
sub- components like, setting up/ strengthening of Soil Testing, Fertilizers/ Bio -fertilizers 
& Organic fertilizers Quality Control Labs, promoting Micro - nutrients, and testing soil 
samples to issue Soil Health Cards. Soil Samples are processed following standard 
procedures and analyzed for various parameters viz, pH, electrical conductivity (EC), 
Organic Carbon, available Nitrogen, Phosphorous, Potassium, Sulphur an d 
micronutrients (Zinc, Copper, Iron, Manganese & Boron). Soil Health Card provides 
information to farmers on soil nutrient status of their soil and recommendation on 
appropriate dosage of nutrients to be applied for improving soil health and its fertility . 
Under the scheme, more than 25 crore soil health cards have been issued to farmers. 
93781 farmer’s trainings, 6.80 lakh demonstrations, 7425 farmer’s melas/ campaigns on 
soil health card recommendations have been organized across the country. Further, 
Government of India also encourages the use of organic fertiliser under the PKVY 
Scheme and MOVCDNER the funds are provided to farmers for purchase of organic 
Inputs. The Government of India encouraging the use of Fermented Organic Manure and 
Liquid Fermented Organic Manure. Further, the Government of India is also promoting 
site specific Nutrient management by notifying the various grades of Customized fertilizer. 
 
 
 

40 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 10) 
 
Promotion and Adoption of Nano Fertilizers  
The Committee note that the promotion of Nano Fertilizers is actively being 
pursued through various initiatives aimed at reducing the reliance on traditional fertilizers 
while improving agricultural productivity. These efforts include awareness campaigns, 
webinars, street plays ( nukkad nataks ), field demonstrations, Kisan Sammelans, and 
regional-language films, all designed to educate farmers about the benefits of Nano 
Fertilizers. These fertilizers are available at Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samridhi Kendras 
(PMKSKs) and are included in the monthly supply plan issued by the Department of 
Fertilizers. The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has also conducted a 
national campaign on the "Efficient and Balanced Use of Fertilizer," which highlights Nano 
Fertilizers. This campaign is supported under the Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra (VBSY), 
launched in November 2023. 
The Committee appreciate the innovative efforts to facilitate the use of Nano 
Fertilizers, including the use of agricultural drones operated b y women from Self -Help 
Groups (SHGs) and battery -operated sprayers, available at retail points. The Central 
Sector Scheme "NAMO Drone Didi," approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA), has provided 1,094 drones in its first phase to women in SHGs, enabling 
a broader application of Nano Fertilizers using drone technology. This initiative has the 
potential to make Nano Fertilizers more accessible and practical for farmers, especially 
in rural areas. 
In response to the Committee ’s concerns ab out reducing reliance on traditional 
fertilizers, the Ministry shared results from field studies conducted by ICAR -IARI, which 
showed that Nano Fertilizers can reduce nitrogen use by up to 25%. The study 
demonstrated that two sprays of Nano -N could achieve  the same results as the 
recommended nitrogen dose, pointing to potential cost savings. However, the Ministry 
also acknowledged the need for further research to fully understand the long -term 
benefits of Nano Fertilizers, particularly in terms of nutrient budgeting. 
The Committee feel that Nano Fertilizers can offer substantial savings for farmers. 
Since only half a litre of Nano Fertilizer can deliver the same results as five kilograms of 
traditional fertilizer, farmers can significantly reduce costs. This also has the added benefit 
of reducing India ’s dependence on fertilizer imports, contributing to national savings. 
However, the Committee feel that the message about the potential savings and 
environmental benefits of Nano Fertilizers has not been adequat ely communicated to 
farmers. Much more needs to be done to raise awareness about these advantages. 
To address this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry take urgent action to 
improve outreach and communication about Nano Fertilizers. This should inclu de 

41 
 
expanding awareness campaigns, creating clear and easy -to-understand educational 
materials in local languages, and conducting hands-on training programmes that directly 
engage farmers, especially in rural and remote areas. The Ministry should also focus  on 
establishing more local distribution channels for Nano Fertilizers, ensuring that they are 
easily accessible to farmers. Further, the Ministry must intensify efforts to communicate 
the cost-saving potential of Nano Fertilizers, ensuring that farmers fu lly understand how 
they can lower their fertilizer expenses. The Committee feel that these efforts are crucial 
not only for maximizing the benefits of Nano Fertilizers but also for achieving long -term 
agricultural sustainability and reducing India’s reliance on imported fertilizers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government of India notified Nano Urea on 24th Feburary,2021. In order to regulate 
the Nano fertilizer, the Govt of India incorporated clause 20 D and also Schedule VII in 
FCO. In the said schedule the general specification of Nano Nitrogen, Nano N &P are 
provided. Every manufacturer are required to formulate their product within the frame 
work of General specification. Latter in the said schedule the General specification of 
Nano Zinc, Copper and Nano Phosphorus were also introduced. So far 11 nano fertilizers 
have been notified till date. The Extension Division of DA&FW may conduct awareness 
campaign through ATMA to promote the use of Nano fertiliser and also on its cost 
effectiveness.    
In-addition to the promotion efforts as already stated in the statement mentioned in Para-
10 as above, it is further to inform that the Department of Fertilizers, in collaboration with 
fertilizer companies, is already undertaking extensive outreach campaigns and 
promotional activities to enhance the adoption of nano fertilizers and raise awareness 
among farmers. To this effect, Department of Fertilizers, in collaboration with fertilizer 
companies has initiated a Maha Abhiyan for adoption of Nano DAP in all 15 agro-climatic 
zones of the country through consultations and field level demonstrations. Further, DoF 
in collaboration with fertilizer companies has also launched campaign for field level 
demonstrations and awareness programs of Nano Urea plus in 100 districts of  the 
country. Nevertheless, the Committee’s recommendation to further strengthen outreach 
and communication efforts regarding nano fertilizers has been duly noted. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 11) 
 
Safe Pest Management Practices and Promoting Non-Chemical Alternatives 
 
The Committee expressed serious concerns about the excessive use of pesticides 
and sought clarification from the Ministry on the measures being taken to ensure their 

42 
 
safe and responsible use. In response, the Ministry explained t hat pesticide 
recommendations, approved by the Central Insecticide Board & Registration Committee 
(CIB&RC), are based on extensive multi -year trials conducted through the All India 
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRP). These trials focus on specific pest -crop 
combinations across different regions. The resulting recommendations are incorporated 
into state specific agricultural practices after being validated through Adaptive Trials on 
farmers' fields. The Ministry also highlighted efforts to promote registe red bio-pesticides 
as safer alternatives to chemical pesticides. However, the Committee expressed 
dissatisfaction with the Ministry's inability to effectively implement these 
recommendations, leading to continued overuse of pesticides, which remains a significant 
issue. 
The Committee are of the view that an effective and coordinated approach, 
involving state governments and other stakeholders, is crucial to curbing the widespread 
and often irresponsible use of pesticides. The Committee believe that this req uires not 
only stricter implementation of CIB&RC recommendations but also a concerted effort to 
raise awareness among farmers about the safe application of pesticides. Regular training 
sessions, television broadcasts, and radio programmes could help dissem inate this 
knowledge more widely. 
The Committee are also of the view that there is an urgent need to increase 
adoption of biological pest management technologies developed by the ICAR -National 
Bureau of Agricultural Insect Resources (NBAIR) as a sustainable alternative to chemical 
pesticides. The Committee are concerned about the persistently high levels of pesticide 
residues found in various food products like vegetables, grains, fruits, and animal feed, 
which pose serious health risks, including cancer an d other life -threatening diseases. 
While the Ministry acknowledged the need for promoting good agricultural practices, 
educating farmers about recommended pesticide dosages, encouraging bio -pesticide 
use, and integrating pest management practices, the Comm ittee feel that these efforts 
have not been effective in reducing harmful pesticide residue levels. 
The Ministry also informed the Committee about the Monitoring of Pesticide 
Residues at the National Level (MPRNL) project, which has been running since 2005-06. 
This project monitors pesticide residues through 35 participating laboratories across 
multiple institutions, including the Ministry of Agriculture, ICAR, Ministry of Health, Ministry 
of Environment, CSIR, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, and Sta te Agricultural 
Universities. The data generated from this project is shared with state agriculture 
departments to guide farmers in the safe use of pesticides. However, the Committee 
expressed disappointment that despite these initiatives, pesticide residues continue to be 
detected in various food products such as vegetables, fruits, spices, cereals, meat, eggs, 
milk, fish, tea and marine products. 

43 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take immediate and 
effective action to ensure that the recommendations of CIB&RC are better implemented, 
with visible results on the ground. It is essential to reduce harmful pesticide residues and 
protect both public health and agricultural produce from contamination. To this end, the 
Committee recommend that th e Ministry review and strengthen the enforcement of 
provisions under the Insecticides Act, 1968. The Committee feel that a more robust 
enforcement mechanism is needed to prevent the excessive and harmful use of 
pesticides, ensuring compliance with safety g uidelines and mitigating associated health 
risks. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is highly concerned about the 
excessive pesticide use in agricultural commodities and is committed to promoting safe 
and sustainab le pest management practices though various plant protection 
programs/initiatives. It is to inform that all pesticide recommendations given for crop use 
are developed based on extensive multi -location, multi-year field evaluations under the 
All India Coord inated Research Projects (AICRPs), ensuring scientific validation before 
approval by the Central Insecticides Board & Registration Committee (CIB&RC). ICAR, 
through National Research Institute for Integrated Pest Management (NRIIPM) and crop-
based institut es and AICRPs, have developed and validated Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) modules for more than 100 major crops, including rice, cotton, pulses, 
oilseeds, and vegetables., emphasizing biological control, bio -pesticides, cultural and 
mechanical measures, pest monitoring, and need-based pesticide application. These IPM 
modules are continuously refined and disseminated through Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
(KVKs), State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), and extension networks 
Besides, there is a specific All India Network Project on Pesticide Residues and 
Contaminants (AINP-PR&C) of ICAR is monitoring and managing pesticide residues and 
other contaminants across the food chain. The project serves as a scientific backbone for 
national efforts on pesticide residue surveillance and food safety It is also associated with 
imparting training programmes, giving lectures as well as radio and television broadcasts 
to promote safe and judicious use of pesticides among the farmers. Various crop -wise 
technical bulletins on Good Agricultural Practices are being published in various 
languages to create awareness among all the relevant stakeholders.  
Another flagship programme “The Monitoring of Pesticide Residues at the National Level 
(MPRNL)” of the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW), Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India, is also monitoring and assessing 
the levels of pesticide residues in agricultural commodities and the environment to ensure 
food safety, consumer health protection, and promotion of Good Agricultural Practices 
(GAPs). Based on the monitoring reports of Monitoring of Pesticide Residues at National 

44 
 
Level (MPRNL) project, the DA&FW has directed the State Agriculture Departments to 
constitute state level Pesticide Residues Monitoring Committees under the chairmanship 
of Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary, State Agriculture Department for 
preparation of action plan for effective implementation of Good Agricultural Practices 
(GAP) among all stake holders to redu ce/ avoid pesticide residue issue in various 
agricultural commodities with the state agriculture departments. 
1. The Government of India regulates the manufacture, sale and the use of pesticides 
in the country through comprehensive legislation known as Ins ecticides Act, 1968 and 
Insecticides Rules, 1971 and pesticides are allowed for use in the country only after 
ensuring the efficacy and safety of the pesticides to prevent risk to human beings or 
animals or environment and for matters connected therewith. Registration Committee 
(RC), constituted under section 5 of the Insecticides Act, 1968 while registering the 
pesticides for use in the country evaluates their safety and efficacy based on the field 
trials conducted at State Agriculture Universities/ICAR in stitutes and lab studies 
conducted at NABL /ISO:17025/ and GLP accredited laboratories. Based on the studies, 
Registration Committee approves the details of doses, crops, precautionary measures, 
antidotes etc. on Label and Leaflets. The registered pesticid es if used as per Label and 
Leaflets do not pose any harm to human beings, animals, environment and living 
organisms other than pests.  
2.   Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare through its Central Integrated Pest 
Management Centers (CIPMCs), Krishi  Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) and State Agriculture 
Department create awareness among farming community through various training 
programmes such as Farmers Field Schools (FFS), two days and five days HRD 
programmes and 30 days ’ Season Long Training Programmes (SL TP) and educate & 
train farmers and state agriculture extension functionaries as well as pesticide dealers 
about safe, judicious & need based use of pesticides and promoting use of bio-pesticides 
to manage the crop pests. The details of training programs conducted in years 2024-2025 
is attached at Appendix-A. 
In addition to the above, Central government from time to time issues advisories to all 
State Governments to ensure the availability of quality insecticides for use of farmers and 
also stepped up vigil on the manufacturer premises and storage and sale point of dealers/ 
retailers to check the sale of spurious pesticide through joint inspection of central and 
state govt. enforcement agencies to ensure that genuine and quality pesticide are 
available in th e market at reasonable price. Central government has conducted special 
campaigns/joint inspection with States/UTs to check the availability of spurious and 
duplicate pesticides.  
3. Further, RC accords high priority to the registration of new and safer mol ecules of 
pesticides, which have a lower risk profile for human health and the environment. 

45 
 
Applications for such molecules are processed on priority basis to enable their early 
availability to farmers. Moreover, the concept of “crop grouping ” with referen ce to 
maximum residue limits (MRLs) of pesticides in agricultural produce has been approved 
by the RC. This approach may prove helpful in reducing redundancy in testing, saving 
resources, and speeding up registration, particularly for minor and specialty crops. It also 
aligns with international practices and Codex guidelines, thereby strengthening 
agricultural trade and simplifying regulation under the Insecticides Act, 1968. 
 
FFS Conducted by CIPMCs/LCIPMCs during 2024-25 
S. 
No. States CIPMCs 
2024-25  
No. of 
FFS 
No. of 
farmers 
trained 
1 Haryana Faridabad 14 490 
2 Himachal Pradesh Solan 7 245 
3 J&K Jammu 7 245 
4 Srinagar 2 70 
5 Punjab Jalandhar 7 245 
6 Rajasthan Sriganganagar 7 245 
7 Jaipur 8 280 
8 Uttar Pradesh Lucknow 20 700 
9 Gorakhpur 9 315 
10 Agra 8 280 
11 Uttarakhand Dehradun 6 210 
12 West Bengal Kolkata 12 420 
13 Odisha Bhubaneswar 8 280 
14 Bihar Patna 9 315 
15 Jharkhand Ranchi 6 210 
16 Andaman and 
Nicobar 
Port Blair 2 70 
17 Assam Guwahati 9 315 
18 Arunachal Pradesh Itanagar 3 105 
19 Meghalaya Shillong 4 140 
20 Manipur Imphal 3 105 
21 Mizoram Aizwal 3 105 
22 Nagaland Dimapur 4 140 
23 Tripura Agartala 4 140 
24 Sikkim Gangtok 4 140 

46 
 
25 Karnataka Bangalore 18 630 
26 Telangana Hyderabad 10 350 
27 Andhra Pradesh Vijayawada 5 175 
28 Kerala Ernakulum 7 245 
29 Tamil Nadu Trichy 7 245 
30 Maharashtra Nagpur 18 630 
31 Nasik 6 210 
32 Madhya Pradesh Indore 9 315 
33 Morena 8 280 
34 Gujarat Vadodara 5 175 
35 Chhattisgarh Raipur 9 315 
36 Goa Madgaon 3 105 
37 Rajasthan RLCIPMC Jodhpur 5 175 
38 Rajasthan Jalore 2 70 
39 Rajasthan Nagore 2 70 
40 Gujrat Palanpur 2 70 
41 Gujrat Bhuj 2 70 
42 Rajasthan Phlodi 2 70 
43 Rajasthan Churu 2 70 
44 Rajasthan Bikaner 1 35 
45 Rajasthan Barmer 1 35 
46 Rajasthan Jaisalmer 2 70 
47 Rajasthan Suratgarh 2 70 
Total 294 10290 
 
Two-days Conducted by CIPMCs/LCIPMCs during 2024-25 
S. 
No. 
States CIPMCs 2024-25 
No. of 2 Days 
HRD 
No. of Farmers 
Trained 
1 Haryana Faridabad 6 316 
2 Himachal 
Pradesh 
Solan 3 156 
3 J&K Jammu 5 256 
4 Srinagar 3 156 
5 Punjab Jalandhar 3 144 
6 Rajasthan  Sriganganagar 4 216 
7 Jaipur 4 230 
8 Uttar Pradesh Lucknow 9 470 
9 Gorakhpur 6 273 

47 
 
10 Agra 3 223 
11 Uttarakhand Dehradun 3 158 
12 West Bengal  Kolkata 5 245 
13 Odisha  Bhubaneswar 4 220 
14 Bihar Patna 4 223 
15 Jharkhand  Ranchi 4 186 
16 Andaman and 
Nicobar 
Port Blair 1 32 
17 Assam  Guwahati 8 401 
18 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Itanagar 2 91 
19 Meghalaya Shillong 2 91 
20 Manipur  Imphal 2 115 
21 Mizoram  Aizwal 2 123 
22 Nagaland  Dimapur 2 92 
23 Tripura  Agartala 1 53 
24 Sikkim  Gangtok 4 202 
25 Karnataka  Bangalore 7 405 
26 Telangana  Hyderabad 5 372 
27 Andhra 
Pradesh  
Vijayawada  3 255 
28 Kerala  Ernakulum 4 183 
29 Tamil Nadu Trichy 4 199 
30 Maharashtra  Nagpur 9 531 
31 Nasik  5 309 
32 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Indore 3 130 
33 Morena 6 287 
34 Gujarat  Vadodara 3 225 
35 Goa Madgaon 2 99 
36 Chhattisgarh Raipur 5 304 
37 Rajasthan  Jodhpur 3 148 
38 Barmer 1 56 
39 Phalodi 1 53 
40 Churu 2 101 
41 Nagaur 2 101 
42 Jaisalmer 1 41 
43 Bikaner 2 123 
44 Gujarat  Bhuj 1 40 
45 Palanpur 1 40 

48 
 
46 Rajasthan  Jalore 1 40 
47 Suratgarh 1 44 
Total  162 8758 
 
Five-days Conducted by CIPMCs/LCIPMCs during 2024-25 
States CIPMCs 
2024-25 
No. Participants 
Haryana Faridabad 1 40 
Himachal Pradesh Solan 1 40 
J&K Jammu 1 40 
  Jaipur 1 40 
Uttar Pradesh Lucknow 2 80 
Bihar Patna 1 40 
Karnataka  Bangalore 1 42 
Andhra Pradesh  Vijayawada  1 40 
Kerala  Ernakulum 1 40 
Maharashtra  Nagpur 2 83 
Chhattisgarh 
Raipur 1 41 
Morena 1 40 
    14 566 
 
Seed Treatment Campaigns Conducted by CIPMCs/LCIPMCs during 2024-25 
State CIPMCs 2024-25 
No. of seed 
treatment 
campaigns 
No of farmers 
participated 
Haryana Faridabad 23 808 
Himachal Pradesh Solan 3 75 
J&K Jammu 1 30 
Srinagar 1 21 
Punjab Jalandhar 52 2009 
Rajasthan  Sriganganagar 25 536 
Jaipur  42 673 
Uttar Pradesh Lucknow 47 1690 
Gorakhpur 36 1002 
Agra 27 471 
Uttarakhand Dehradun 17 455 

49 
 
West Bengal  Kolkata 19 425 
Odisha  Bhubaneswar 14 546 
Bihar Patna 16 365 
Jharkhand  Ranchi 48 817 
Andaman and 
Nicobar 
Portblair 2 41 
Assam  Guwahati 40 1060 
Arunachal Pradesh Itanagar 39 353 
Meghalaya Shillong 5 131 
Manipur  Imphal 4 147 
Mizoram  Aizwal 7 268 
Nagaland  Dimapur 6 254 
Tripura  Agartala 10 204 
Sikkim  Gangtok 1 50 
Karnataka  Bengaluru 10 350 
Telangana  Hyderabad 16 691 
Andhra Pradesh  Vijayawada 10 477 
Kerala  Ernakulam 15 494 
Tamil Nadu Trichy 64 2017 
Maharashtra  Nagpur 15 779 
Nasik 6 210 
Madhya Pradesh Indore 7 180 
Morena 14 612 
Gujarat  Vadodara 3 152 
Goa Madgaon 3 85 
Chhattisgarh Raipur 7 287 
Rajasthan Jodhpur 0 0 
Rajasthan Jalore 0 0 
Rajasthan Nagore 0 0 
Gujrat Palanpur 0 0 
Gujrat Bhuj 0 0 
Rajasthan Phlodi 0 0 
Rajasthan Churu 2 70 
Rajasthan Bikaner 0 0 
Rajasthan Barmer 1 35 
Rajasthan Jaiselmer 0 0 
Rajasthan Suratgarh 3 75 
TOTAL 661 18945 
 

50 
 
Safe & Judicious Use of pesticides awareness campaigns Conducted by 
CIPMCs/LCIPMCs during 2024-25 
 
State Name of CIPMC 2024-25 
          No.      Participants 
Haryana Faridabad 19 666 
Himachal Pradesh Solan 3 55 
J&K Jammu 6 231 
Srinagar 4 164 
Punjab Jalandhar 52 1134 
Rajasthan  Sriganganagar 18 299 
Jaipur  38 761 
Uttar Pradesh Lucknow 60 1976 
Gorakhpur 20 1340 
Agra 25 600 
Uttarakhand Dehradun 17 455 
West Bengal  Kolkata 19 425 
Odisha  Bhubaneswar 15 576 
Bihar Patna 16 365 
Jharkhand  Ranchi 48 817 
Andaman and Nicobar Portblair 2 41 
Assam  Guwahati 41 1173 
Arunachal Pradesh Itanagar 39 353 
Meghalaya Shillong 8 231 
Manipur  Imphal 8 289 
Mizoram  Aizwal 14 419 
Nagaland  Dimapur 9 317 
Tripura  Agartala 7 170 
Sikkim  Gangtok 0 0 
Karnataka  Bengaluru 24 1093 
Telangana  Hyderabad 35 842 
Andhra Pradesh  Vijayawada 11 493 
Kerala  Ernakulam 20 594 
Tamil Nadu Trichy 64 2017 
Maharashtra  Nagpur 22 787 
Nasik 11 519 
Madhya Pradesh Indore 5 160 
Morena* 15 857 

51 
 
Gujarat  Vadodara 3 143 
Goa Madgaon 1 48 
Chhattisgarh Raipur 15 613 
Rajasthan Jodhpur 0 0 
Rajasthan Jalore 0 0 
Rajasthan Nagore 0 0 
Gujrat Palanpur 0 0 
Gujrat Bhuj 0 0 
Rajasthan Phlodi 0 0 
Rajasthan Churu 4 178 
Rajasthan Bikaner 0 0 
Rajasthan Barmer 1 35 
Rajasthan Jaiselmer 0 0 
Rajasthan Suratgarh 1 35 
TOTAL 720 21271 
Note: 
Two nos. of Season Long Training Programmes were conducted during 2024-25. 
• 01 during Kharif season in Apple crop at Jammu & Kashmir by CIPMC Srinagar 
• 01 during the Rabi Season in Vegetables at Lucknow by RCIPMC Lucknow. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 12) 
 
Preventing the Use of Fake Pesticides and Insecticides 
The Committee raised serious concerns about the widespread issue of counterfeit 
pesticides and their harmful effects on agriculture. They sought clarification from the 
Ministry on the measures being taken to address this problem and protect agricultural 
produce from the damage caused by fake pesticides.   In response, the Ministry outlined 
the existing regulatory framework under the Insecticides Act, 1968, where the Registration 
Committee (RC), a technical body, evaluates the safety and effectiveness of pesticides. 
The RC has established comprehensive gui delines covering chemistry, bio -efficacy, 
toxicity, packaging, and legal standards to ensure the quality of pesticides. The Ministry 
also informed the Committee that there are 11,080 state -level Insecticide Inspectors 
across 25 states and 2 Union Territori es, with an annual testing capacity of 77,040 
samples. The Central Government deploys 207 Central Insecticide Inspectors, and there 
are two Regional Pesticide Testing Laboratories in Chandigarh and Kanpur with a 
combined annual capacity of 3,100 samples. A ny disputed samples are sent to the 
Central Insecticides Laboratory (CIL) in Faridabad, which processes 1,600 samples 
annually. If samples fail to meet the required standards, prosecution is initiated. 

52 
 
 The Committee are of the view that there is a need to  increase the number of 
Insecticide Inspectors at the state level and strengthening the capacity of overseeing 
officers at the central level. They also emphasized the need to expand and improve 
testing facilities, both in terms of quantity and quality, to ensure better monitoring and 
control of pesticide quality. 
The Committee also note that the penalties for offences related to "misbranded" 
insecticides under Section 29 of the Insecticides Act, 1968, are insufficient to deter 
offenders. The Committee find that, between 2019-2020 and 2023-2024, out of 3,60,614 
samples analyzed, 9,233 were found to be misbranded, leading to 2,588 prosecutions 
and only 185 convictions. The Committee are very concerned over the low conviction rate 
and stressed the urgent need f or stronger regulations to tackle violations under the 
Insecticides Act. The Committee recommend tightening regulations to curb the 
production, distribution, and use of counterfeit pesticides by amending the Insecticides 
Act, 1968 to include provisions for stringent penalties to ensure repeat offenders are held 
accountable. 
Reply of the Government 
1. DA&FW implements various provisions of the Insecticides Act, 1968 to ensure supply 
of quality pesticides to farmers in the manufactured or imported in the coun try. Rule 9 of 
the Insecticides Rules, 1971 provides that no insecticide can be manufactured, stocked, 
sold or exhibited for sale without a license granted by the licensing officer appointed by 
the State Governments, who grants the licence after satisfying  the availability of 
necessary plant and machinery, safety devices, first aid facility, in the premises where the 
insecticides is proposed to be manufactured or sale or distribution. 
2. There are more than twelve thousand Inspectors across the States and t o increase 
their numbers, State government have to notify a greater number of inspectors either from 
the existing strength or by creating new posts which may have financial implications. 
Further, Insecticide cases are non-cognizable offences and these are filed as a complaint 
case under which the prosecution evidence is to be laid pre charge stage and post charge 
stage, which takes a considerable amount of time. The States have reported that 
Insecticides case are not conducted as fast track court cases, the se cases often have 
lower priority and are treated as routine matter, due to priority given to other cognizable 
offence, leading to the lengthy legal procedure. Further, conviction rate for most of the 
cases depends on performance of the State Prosecution Authorities, their infrastructure 
as well as infrastructure of the Courts. 
3. Further, as per the provisions of Section 29 of the Insecticides Act, 1968, any violation 
of the provision of Act and Rules made thereunder, may attract punishment with fine of 
5000/- to 75000/- or punishment of imprisonment of six months to 2 years or both. 

53 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 13) 
 
District-Wise Ranking of KVKs 
The Committee note that in 2018, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare 
(MoA&FW) commissioned a third -party evaluation of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
through the National Institute of Labour Economics Research and Development 
(NILERD), an autonomous organization of NITI Aayog. This evaluation focused on KVKs 
established during the X II Five -Year Plan (2012 -2017), examining factors like 
infrastructure, impact, and the quality of activities. The findings show that 43% of KVKs 
were placed in the A category, 48% in the B category, while 8% and 1% were in the C and 
D categories, respectively. The underperformance of KVKs in the C and D categories was 
attributed to challenges like vacant staff positions and incomplete infrastructure, 
particularly in newly established centers that were still under development. 
The Committee also note that the last ranking of KVKs was conducted during the 
XII Five-Year Plan, and no subsequent evaluations have been done. This has created a 
gap in tracking KVK performance and providing appropriate support. Without regular 
updates, it is difficult to assess whethe r KVKs in lower categories have improved or 
continue to face the same challenges. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must implement a district-
wise ranking system for KVKs periodically for a more precise and effective performance 
assessment. The Committee desire that this system should categorize KVKs not just 
based on overall performance but also evaluate them according to specific subject areas, 
productivity, and impact on local farming communities. The Committee feel that a district-
wise approach is important as it helps provide help based on each KVK ’s unique needs 
and strengths. It will allow for better tracking of region -specific issues and ensures that 
the Ministry can respond to the unique needs of farmers in different areas.  
The Committee also feel that district -wise ranking system will also help identify 
high-performing KVKs, which can then be incentivized for their success, further motivating 
them to maintain their standards and share best practices with other centers. It will a lso 
highlight underperforming KVKs, particularly those in the C and D categories, so they can 
receive focused support, whether it's through staffing, infrastructure, or training. The 
ranking system would also allow for continuous monitoring, making it easi er to track 
improvements and assess whether the resources allocated are being effectively utilized. 
The Committee are of the view that regular rankings will ensure accountability, 
providing greater transparency and enabling the Ministry to assess KVK perfo rmance 
over time. This will create a system of healthy competition among KVKs and offer a clear 
picture of where further improvements are needed. This will not only help the Ministry 

54 
 
monitor and support KVKs more effectively but also empower farmers to access the most 
relevant, timely, and effective support available. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Independent evaluation of KVK is a priority of ICAR to strengthen the extension system. 
Consequently, Third party evaluation of KVKs was done by National Institute of Labour 
Economics Research and Development (NILERD), an autonomous organization of NITI 
Aayog in 2015, followed by International Food Policy Research Institutes in 2019 and by 
Indian Society of Agribusiness Professionals (ISAPs) in 2021-22.  
Further, all KV Ks were ranked in four categories for the purpose of strengthening and 
improving the performance of KVKs in poor category. 
Currently, the evaluation of KVK scheme is in process by Development, Monitoring and 
Evaluation Office (DMEO), Niti Aayog.  
Recently, the ranking of 100 NGO KVKs was done by a committee constituted for the 
same. Regular monitoring mechanism with a structured framework is in place. The 
ranking of all KVKs will be done similarly based on the identified Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs) and structured framework.  
Apart from ranking the Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) has established a robust monitoring and review mechanism to ensure 
that KVKs function as vibrant and effective institutions for  technology assessment and 
transfer at the district level. Evaluation and monitoring of KVKs is done by three tier 
system at National Level Workshops, State Level Workshops and Zonal Level 
Workshops. The performance of KVKs is regularly monitored and revie wed at the three 
levels by the Agricultural Extension Division of ICAR Headquarters, Agricultural 
Technology Application Research Institutes (ATARIs), Agricultural Universities, and the 
Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) of each KVK, respectively. 
In addi tion, the Government periodically evaluates the overall performance and 
functioning of KVKs through Quinquennial Review Teams (QRTs) and independent Third-
Party Reviews, ensuring accountability, transparency, and continuous improvement in 
their operations. 
The Research Advisory Council (RAC) of Agricultural Extension Division also reviews 
periodically the research in Extension being undertaken by the KVKs and Agricultural 
Technology Application Research Institutes (ATARIs) and provide guidance to strengthen 
extension research on national priority in the thrust areas and also global context. 
 
 

55 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 14) 
 
Ensuring Effectiveness of KVKs through Regular Performance Reviews 
The Committee appreciate the periodic third-party evaluations of KVKs conducted 
by various institutions such as the High -Level Committee (2015), NITI Aayog, NILERD 
(2017-18), IFPRI (2019), and ISAPs (2021 -22). These evaluations have shown positive 
results, including an additional net farm income of Rs. 5, 752 per hectare and a benefit 
cost ratio of 11.78, as reported by IFPRI. The ISAPs evaluation highlighted the success 
of on-farm trials, frontline demonstrations, and Integrated Farming Systems (IFS) models. 
The Committee note that feedback from farmers po inted to a strong demand for more 
demonstrations of precision agriculture, improved farm tools, and technologies to reduce 
drudgery. There was also a call for KVKs to play a more prominent role in promoting 
entrepreneurship through Agri-clinics and agri-business supply systems. 
In the light of these findings, the Committee recommend that KVK performance 
may be regularly evaluated to ensure that their programmes remain relevant and effective 
in addressing the evolving challenges of agriculture. These evaluat ions should not only 
focus on quantitative outcomes, like net farm income and benefit-cost ratios, but also on 
qualitative aspects such as the impact on sustainability, soil health, and climate -resilient 
practices. The Committee feel that KVKs should place  greater emphasis on showcasing 
innovative technologies, such as precision farming, climate smart agriculture, and tools 
that reduce farm labour. The Committee also stress the importance of promoting 
entrepreneurship, especially in Agri-clinics and agri-business ventures, and encourages 
stronger collaboration with local research institutions, NGOs, and farmer producer 
organizations (FPOs) to ensure the programs meet the real needs of the farming 
community. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The ICAR has established a  robust monitoring and review mechanism to ensure that 
KVKs function as vibrant and effective institutions for technology assessment and transfer 
at the district level. The performance of KVKs is regularly monitored and reviewed at 
multiple levels National , Zonal, University, and District by the Agricultural Extension 
Division of ICAR Headquarters, ATARIs, Agricultural Universities, and the SAC of each 
KVK, respectively. 
The Agricultural Extension Division of ICAR Headquarters assesses and reviews the 
performance of KVKs through multiple mechanisms, including the analysis of monthly 
progress reports and action plans of KVKs; meetings of Directors of ATARIs; National 
Conferences on KVKs; Regional Committee M eetings of ICAR; and reviews conducted 
by DDG/ADGs during Zonal Workshops of KVKs. Performance assessment is further 

56 
 
strengthened through visits of DDG/ADGs to KVKs and ATARIs, budget meetings chaired 
by the Deputy Director General (Agricultural Extension) , and meetings held by the 
Director (Agricultural Extension) and Director (Finance) of ICAR. In addition, reports of 
the Quinquennial Review Teams (QRTs) and reviews of externally funded projects 
implemented by KVKs are also considered in the overall evaluation process. 
SAUs also organize regular monthly monitoring meetings, organize State Extension 
Councils, University-State Government Interface etc., to review the performance of KVKs. 
The ATARIs assess and review the performance of KVKs within their respe ctive zones 
through regular analysis of monthly progress reports, action plan meetings, annual review 
meetings, and project- or scheme-specific planning and review meetings. ATARI officers 
also participate in the meetings of Scientific Advisory Committee ( SAC) of KVKs, 
undertake field visits for on -the-spot valuation of activities, and conduct performance 
reviews during the preparation of budget proposals and fund releases. 
At the Agricultural University (AU) level, the Directorate of Extension Education (DEE) 
in each AU is responsible for monitoring and evaluating the KVKs under its administrative 
control. The DEE convenes monthly review meetings of all KVK Heads to assess 
progress and re -plan activities based on the outcomes. Heads of Departments and 
Extension Specialists of the University also participate in these meetings to provide 
technical inputs. Additionally, DEE officers regularly visit KVKs to monitor field -level 
implementation and provide necessary guidance for effective functioning. 
At the district level , each KVK is guided by a Scientific Advisory Committee ( SAC) 
responsible for planning, monitoring, and evaluating its activities for the district. The SAC 
comprises both official and non -official members representing key stakeholders in 
agricultural development within the district. The Committee, in its meeting, reviews 
progress, finalizes future actions plans for mandated activities, and serves as an effective 
platform for fostering functional linkages and coordination among related organizations 
and institutions. 
To bridge knowledge and capacity gaps and incorporate farmers’ feedback for Demand-
driven Research, ICAR, in collaboration with the Department of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare (DA&FW), State Government Departments, Agricultural Universities, and Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), organized a nationwide campaign titled Viksit Krishi Sankalp 
Abhiyan (VKSA) from May 29 to June 12, 2025. Under this campaign, direct 
communication was established with more than 1.35 crore farmers from over 1.40 lakh 
villages through 6 0,917 programmes held in 728 districts. The campaign witnessed 
widespread participation from 11 Chief Ministers, 16 Central and State Ministers, 73 State 
Ministers, 52 Members of Parliament, 230 MLAs, and more than 1,000 other public 
representatives. This initiative created a strong platform for disseminating agricultural 

57 
 
innovations, gathering farmers ’ feedback, and reinforcing collaborative action for 
agricultural development. 
Besides, the mandated activities, KVK also impact other projects and programmes  of 
various instituions like DAFW, MoEFCC, JSM, MoRD.  
Over the past decade, KVKs have implemented the Cluster Frontline Demonstration 
(CFLD) programme to enhance pulse productivity and production for which 95 Pulses 
Seed Hubs have been established for mak ing available climate resilient carieties of 
pulses. Besides, a total of 7.16 lakh demonstrations were conducted on various pulse 
crops. Total 2.86 lakh quintals of quality seed were produced and distributed to farmers. 
To further strengthen pulses product ion, 130 Model Pulses Village clusters have been 
established in 65 districts across 13 major pulse-growing states. These clusters serve as 
field-level hubs for demonstrating improved varieties, seed systems, and best agronomic 
practices. The CFLDs achieved an average yield increase of 40% over farmers’ traditional 
practices and contributed to nitrogen enrichment in the soil valued at approximately USD 
12 million. As a result, India ’s pulses production rose from 17.70 million tonnes (three -
year average durin g 2013–2016) to 27.80 million tonnes in 2022–23 — a 57.06% 
increase. 
A total of 64 Integrated Farming System (IFS) models were developed for 26 States and 
Union Territories, while 31 bankable IFS models were demonstrated in 22 States. The 
adoption of these models led to a 39% increase in net household income and a significant 
improvement in dietary diversity among beneficiary families.  
Collaborative efforts of KVKs, ICAR Institutes, SAUs, State Departments, Agro -industry 
and farmers resulted in significant development in Crop Residue Management (CRM) in 
60 Districts of 4 States. Reduction of 95% cases of stubble burning since 2020 through 
efforts of 60 KVKs of Punjab, Haryana, Delhi and Western Uttar Pradesh. 
KVKs organized 1,975 skill development training programmes, benefitting 40,141 
participants. These initiatives led to the establishment of 14,878 entrepreneurial units, 
generating employment and promoting innovation-driven rural entrepreneurship. 
Efforts for Community Mobilization and Institutional Innovations resulted in establishment 
of 299 Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs), 82 Seed Banks, 34 Fodder Banks. 
Under the National Mission on Natural Farming, 530 KVKs are establishing demonstration 
plots on institutional farms and farmers’ fields to promote natural and eco-friendly farming 
practices. Capacity-building programmes are being conducted for farmers, Krishi Sakhis, 
and Community Resource Persons (CRPs) to enhance adoption and awareness of 
sustainable agricultural techniques. 

58 
 
KVKs are also providing technology backstopping and mentoring of FPOss, Agri Startups 
in close collaboration with civil society organisations, NGOs and others. ICAR registered 
the “Kisan Samriddhi” brand to provide marketing support for Self -Help Groups (SHGs), 
Farmer Producer Organiz ations (FPOs), and entrepreneurs promoted by KVKs. This 
unified branding initiative enhances product visibility and facilitates access to larger 
markets for rural entrepreneurs. 
In addition, the Government periodically evaluates the overall performance and  
functioning of KVKs through QRTs and independent Third -Party Reviews, ensuring 
accountability, transparency, and continuous improvement in their operations and budget 
utilization. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 15) 
 
Need for Adequate and Consistent Funding for KVKs 
 The Committee observed from the Revised Estimates (RE) provided by the 
Ministry for Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) over the last five years that while the budget 
allocation has seen an increase, the funding trajectory remains insufficient for the growing 
demands and challenges KVKs face. The budget allocation increased from Rs. 22,298.47 
lakhs in 2019-20 to Rs. 28,400.00 lakhs in 2021-22. However, this increase was followed 
by a slight decrease to Rs. 24,372.00 lakhs in 2022 -23 and only a marginal rise to Rs. 
25,000.00 lakhs in 2023-24. While the Ministry highlights this as a positive movement, the 
reality is that the funding still falls short of what is needed to meet the evolving demands 
of KVKs, especially as they continue to  face pressure for improved infrastructure, 
technology, and capacity-building to support farmers effectively. 
 Despite this gradual increase, the Ministry ’s proposal for a one -time grant of Rs. 
2,500 crores to address capital expenditure and staff enhancem ent needs seem to 
indicate ongoing challenges KVKs face in securing sufficient funds for infrastructure 
development and other essential. The Committee feel that this one -time grant is merely 
a short -term patch and does not address the underlying issue of u nderfunding. The 
resources currently available are clearly insufficient to meet the growing needs of KVKs 
to modernize their infrastructure and adopt new technologies. 
 The Committee feel that the Ministry need to establish a robust and consistent 
funding strategy with long-term vision for the development of KVKs. While the proposed 
one-time grant of Rs. 2,500 crores may provide some immediate relief, it cannot serve as 
a substitute for predictable, annual funding increases that reflect the evolving needs o f 
KVKs. The current funding model appears to be reactionary rather than proactive, and 
the Committee are concerned that such piecemeal increases will leave KVKs unable to 
keep pace with infrastructure and technological demands, as well as their increasing 
responsibilities in supporting farmers. 

59 
 
 The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry move beyond short -term 
fixes and commit to a sustainable, long-term funding plan for KVKs. The funding increases 
must be substantial, consistent, and in tune with t he evolving needs of KVKs. This 
approach is essential to ensure that KVKs remain viable, effective, and relevant as 
centers of agricultural innovation and training. 
    The Committee also recommend that a significant portion of the funding should be 
allocated to infrastructure development, including modernizing laboratories, procuring 
advanced agricultural technologies, and establishing digital platforms for efficient 
knowledge dissemination.  Further, the Committee also desire that a robust monitoring 
mechanism should be established to ensure that allocated funds are used efficiently and 
transparently. Regular audits, progress reviews, and impact assessments will enable the 
Ministry to track the effectiveness of the funds, ensuring they have the desired impact on 
KVK operations. The Committee feel that, this oversight is crucial to maintain 
accountability and ensure that the funding is being utilized to meet the growing needs of 
agricultural development. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KV Ks), since the time of inception in 1974, are devoted to 
build capacity of farmers and extension workers to address their immediate agricultural 
problems, develop competence and confidence for practicing modern farming, and 
strengthen scientific information support to the rural community. At present there are 731 
KVKs working under administrative control of State/Central Agricultural Universities (509), 
NGOs (101), ICAR Institutes (66), State Governments (38), Deemed Universities (7), 
Central Universities ( 3), and other educational institutions (7). The KVKs are currently 
carrying out On -Farm Trials (OFTs); Frontline Demonstrations (FLDs); training and 
capacity development of farmers, farm women, rural youth and extension personnel; 
promoting natural farming , and integrated farming systems; producing and providing 
quality seeds, planting materials, fingerlings and quality inputs for plant and livestock; 
providing diagnostic services and testing of soil, water and plant samples; and supporting 
the startups and  FPOs. The KVKs are also working in convergence with other 
Departments of Govt. of India in different flagship programs such as Viksit Bharat Sankalp 
Yatra, Vibrant Village Program, PM Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PMJANMAN), 
Agri-Drone, etc. 
Total allocation of funds for KVK Scheme was Rs. 1202.45 crore during 2021 -26. The 
same has been proposed to be Rs. 1788.09 crore during 2026-31. The allocated budget 
also include budget for laboratories, advanced agricultural machines and technologies, 
digital platforms, etc. which will facilitate efficient diffusion of agricultural technologies. 

60 
 
KVKs also supported by the other schemes of ICAR e.g., by Natural Resource 
Management Division of ICAR under National Innovations on Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (NICRA) for developing Climate Resilient Villages in cluster mode. KVKs 
under ICAR Institutes and Central Agricultural Universities as Host organizations are also 
supported financially by the respective ICAR Institutes and Central Agricultural 
Universities. 
In addition to the fund allocation by ICAR, KVKs are also working in close collaboration 
with other Government departments like Department of Agriculture and Farms Welfare, 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of Fisheries, Department of 
Fertiliser, Department of Rural Development, Department of Skiil Development and 
Entrepreneurship, IMD and other related departments. 
KVKs are also supported by the respective State Governments through Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana (RKVY) for building i nfrastructure and KVK development. KVKs build 
functional linkage and strong convergence with Agricultural Technology Management 
Agency (ATMA) at district level, by developing joint action plan, and carryout joint capacity 
building interventions with funding support. 
KVKs also foster alliance with private partners through signing MoU under Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR) mode and also carryout technology dissemination 
interventions in collaboration with the private industry. 
 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 17) 
 
Need for Staff Augmentation at KVKs 
 The Committee are deeply concerned about the critical staff shortages at Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), with approximately 30% of positions unfilled, totaling around 
3,500 vacancies. This staff shortfall is significantly impairing the KVKs' ability to effectively 
carry out their core functions, which include providing expert guidance, conducting 
training programmes, supporting research, and facilitating the adoption of new agricultural 
technologies.  The Committee note that the Ministry has proposed to increase staff 
numbers from 16 to 20 per KVK. The Committee feel that while this is a welcome step, it 
will not be effective unless vacancies are filled promptly.  
 The Committee strongly recom mend that the Ministry must initiate an immediate 
recruitment drive to fill the existing vacancies with a focus to hiring qualified professionals, 
such as Subject Matter Specialists (SMS) and Technical Assistants (T -3), who are 
essential for providing farmers with expert advice on a range of agricultural issues, from 
crop management to soil health. These professionals are also crucial for facilitating the 
transfer of technology from research to practical applications on the ground.  

61 
 
In addition to filling v acancies, the Committee feel that KVKs need staff with 
expertise in emerging agricultural technologies. Positions such as Precision Agriculture 
Specialists, Agricultural Data Analysts, and Tech Support Staff are essential for helping 
farmers adopt tools li ke AI, remote sensing, and precision farming. Multi -skilled roles 
should also be created to allow staff to address a wider range of challenges, from 
research to farmer outreach. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should undertake a review of the 
current staff roles to enhance efficiency. There may be areas of overlap or tasks that can 
be streamlined to help KVKs operate more effectively with the existing workforce. For 
example, scientists could take on additional responsibilities, such as creating digital 
content for online training, as virtual platforms become more prevalent.  Further, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should create a long term staffing plan that 
anticipates the evolving needs of KVKs. This plan should be based on workload data, 
technology adoption, and regional challenges. Regular reviews of staffing levels will also 
ensure that KVKs are adequately equipped to meet both current and future demands. 
Further, the Ministry should explore the possibility of associating expert st aff, research 
fellows, and senior students from Central and State Agricultural Universities to assist in 
imparting trainings at KVKs. This approach could not only address the issue of staff 
shortages at KVKs but also ensure that the training programmes remain aligned with the 
latest trends and advancements in sustainable agriculture. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Filling up of vacancies in the KVKs is a continuous process and is the responsibility of the 
respective Host Organisation. As per the KVK scheme, the a pproved posts of the KVKs 
are filled as per the recruitment policies and procedures of the respective Host 
Organisation with the educational qualifications as laid down by ICAR. All the Host 
Organizations have been instructed to fill up the vacant posts immediately. The disciplines 
of Subject Matter Specialists vary from area to area as per need of the locality.   
Further, KVKs also engage project based contractual staff in the projects funded by 
Central Government Departments, Agro-industry etc. 
In order to enhance the efficiency of KVK staff, use of ICT tools and digital technologies 
are being emphasised. About 3 crores farmers are registered on Kisan Sarathi portal, 
which is a two -way connectivity between the KVKs and the farmers and other 
stakeholders for dissemination of improved technology information and customised agro-
advisories. About 4.2 crores advisories are sent o the farmers by the KVKs catalysing 
technology dissemination and decision making. The Kisan Sarathi Mobile application is 
being launched to make the knowledge dissemination further effective and efficient. 
Demonstration of precision agricultural technologies are also a priority. It is planned to 

62 
 
train rural youths and engage them for extension services in Public Private Partners hip 
and these utilise manpower for making extension delivery more effective. Critical inputs 
production for catalysing adoption is also planned to be undertaken in public private 
partnership to extend the outreach of the KVKs.   
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 18) 
 
Harnessing AI and digital Tech in Agriculture 
The Committee commends the Ministry ’s efforts through NICRA (National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture) in addressing the challenges climate change 
poses to agriculture. Through the development of climate -resilient crop varieties, 
comprehensive risk assessments, and capacity -building programmes, NICRA has 
significantly enhanced farmers' ability to adapt to changing climatic conditions. Further, 
the Ministry's commitment to integrating digital technologies, particularly AI -driven 
predictive model s, is a significant step forward and should be further supported and 
expanded to maximize its potential benefits. 
 The Committee are of the view that using AI and machine learning in agriculture 
can greatly benefit farmers by providing real -time information on weather patterns, pest 
outbreaks, and crop health. AI-based early warning systems can help farmers prepare for 
extreme weather events like floods or droughts, and quickly respond to pest issues, 
reducing losses and improving resilience.  AI can also w ork with precision farming to 
optimize resource use, such as water, fertilizers, and pesticides, leading to better 
sustainability and higher productivity. 
 As AI technology continues to evolve, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should explore partnerships with tech companies, agricultural universities, and research 
institutions. These collaborations could help make AI tools more accessible to farmers in 
remote and disadvantaged areas, ensuring that all farmers, regardless of location, can 
benefit from these innovations. It is essential for Ministry to ensure that AI tools are both 
affordable and user-friendly to increase their adoption. The Ministry should also focus on 
providing training programmes to equip farmers with the skills needed to effectiv ely use 
AI technologies. This will empower farmers to make the most of these advancements, 
ensuring they can improve their farm practices. Further, the Committee feel that it is 
important to ensure that the necessary infrastructure, such as reliable internet and mobile 
connectivity, is available in rural areas to support these technologies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Integration of digital tools like AI and ML to provide real time information on crop health, 
pest and disease outbreak in crops and livestock and solutions to address these 
challenges will be given priority in the next phase of NICRA. In this endeavor, partnership 

63 
 
with premier government institutes like IITs, C -DAC and other tech companies will be 
established to promote startups in developing AI enabled decision making tools. 
1. The Committee recommended to step -up and strengthening the Ministry 's initiati ves 
towards integrating AI -driven technologies to enhance climate resilience and improve 
crop productivity. The Department of Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare has undertaken 
following major digital initiatives which are in alignment with Committee's 
recommendations for Harnessing AI and Digital Tech in Agriculture. 
Ministry Initiative Alignment with Recommendation 
Agri Stack/ DCS (Digital Crop 
Survey) 
AgriStack serves as the foundational base for the 
creating the Digital ecosystem. It is an umbrella 
initiative to create a unified, federated database of 
farmers, land records, and crop sown registry. Digital 
crop survey under the umbrella of Agristack focuses 
on collecting high-quality, real-time ground truth data 
on crops and fields. This data is essential for  the 
various digital initiative of the ministry i.e Krishi -DSS, 
YESTECH(PMFBY), CROPIC(PMFBY), VISTAAR 
and other AI/ML models, making the entire digital 
ecosystem highly flexible and adaptable to provide 
real-time information for agricultural operation. 
Krishi-DSS (Decision Support 
System) 
Krishi-DSS is a Geo -Spatial platform enabling direct 
application of AI and data analytics through specific 
modules. It integrates variety of data sources (like 
weather, soil, in -situ field information and satellite 
data) to generate location -specific, actionable 
insights for various stakeholders. Krishi -DSS also 
incorporates various AI/ML driven models/algorithms 
for field parcel extraction, yield estimation, crop 
identification and ultimately will be utilized for 
generating farm level advisories for farmers. 
YESTECH (Yield Estimation 
System using Technology) 
This utilizes advanced technology (satellite remote 
sensing, AI/ML) for accurate and timely predictive 
modelling of crop yields. This is crucial for risk 
assessment and insurance payout directly supporting 
the livelihood of the farmers. 
CROPIC (Collection of Real 
Time Observations & Photo of 
Crops) 
The CROPIC initiative, under the PMFBY, is 
developing a system that allows farmers to capture 
geotagged and time -stamped photos of their crops. 
These images provide real -time information on crop 

64 
 
health and the presence of pests or diseases, forming 
a national database. This rich data will power AI 
models to precisely and early identify outbreaks or 
stress. By combining CRO PIC's crop stage and 
condition data with weather and soil information, the 
Department will be able to issue highly specific and 
timely risk advisories instead of generic warnings. 
 
2. Institutional Mechanism: An AI Cell has been established within the Dep artment to 
identify, design, and implement AI-based applications in agriculture. The Cell coordinates 
with ICAR, State Agricultural Universities, and private technology partners to develop 
scalable AI based digital solutions for the sector. 
3. Pilot on AI -Enabled Early Warning Systems: The Department is strengthening the 
National Pest Surveillance System (NPSS) by integrating AI -based image analytics and 
predictive models for pest and disease forecasting. The system combines satellite data, 
field observations from KVKs, and weather inputs to issue timely pest advisories through 
mobile platforms and extension networks. This initiative will help reduce crop losses and 
improve preparedness against biotic stresses. 
4. Public –Private Partnerships: To accelerate i nnovation and ensure inclusivity, the 
Ministry is working to establish partnerships with reputed organizations such as IIT Ropar, 
EkStep Foundation, Gates Foundation, Wadhwani Foundation, and VASAAR Lab. These 
collaborations aim to co -develop open -source, affordable, and farmer -centric AI tools 
focused on natural farming, soil health, and localized pest and weather advisories. 
5. Infrastructure Enablement: The Ministry is coordinating with the Department of 
Telecommunications and the Ministry of Electronics  & IT to strengthen rural digital 
infrastructure, including procurement of GPU’s to design and execute AI based solutions 
for farmers. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 19) 
 
“Lab to Land” Initiatives 
 The Committee are happy to note that the “Lab to Land” initiatives under ICAR and 
the Central Agricultural Universities (CAUs) have made a significant impact in improving 
agricultural productivity and promoting climate -resilient farming practices.  Institutions 
such as the Central Agricultural Univers ity (Imphal), RPCAU (Pusa) and Rani Lakshmi 
Bai Central Agricultural University (Jhansi) have successfully translated research into 
practical solutions that directly benefit farmers.  Through field trials, demonstrations and 
localized adaptations of research, these initiatives have contributed to increasing farmers’ 
access to modern technologies and improved farming methods. 

65 
 
 However, the Committee are of the view that, while the initial demonstrations and 
trials have shown positive outcomes, consistent fol low-up support is important for the 
long-term adoption of these new practices.  Many farmers face challenges when 
transitioning to new technologies and without continuous support, they may struggle to 
fully implement or maintain these practices.  The Committee recommend that there must 
be regular follow -ups by extension officers, Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) staff and field 
experts who can address the issues farmers might be facing such as pest control, 
weather-related challenges and technological difficultie s.  The Committee feel that 
establishing a system where farmers can access continuous guidance, through in-person 
visits, phone consultations or digital platforms, would significantly enhance the 
effectiveness of the “Lab to Land ” initiatives.  Such a syst em will help build farmers ’ 
confidence and ensure the continuity of the new practices being introduced. 
 The Committee also recommend that successful pilot projects and innovations 
resulting from these initiatives must be augmented to reach a large number of farmers.  
Expanding the scope of these trails and rolling out innovations on a broader scale will 
maximize their impact and benefit a greater number of agricultural communities.  For 
augmenting these innovations, the Committee feel that it is essential to foster stronger 
collaboration between research institutions, government bodies, and the private sector.  
Public-Private Partnerships can facilitate the wider dissemination of research outcome 
and help integrate innovative technologies into farming systems more effectively. 
 The Committee are of the view that promoting farmer -to-farmer knowledge 
exchange is a valuable way to strengthen the impact of these initiatives.  Farmers who 
have successfully adopted new technologies can serve as mentors or lead 
demonstrations for others in their communities, promoting a grassroots approach to 
adoption and adaption.  The Committee feel that peer -learning model will be effective in 
rural areas, where trust and community-based collaboration are strong. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Recognizing the importance of sustained follow-up support for the long-term adoption of 
new technologies and practices, as well as addressing challenges faced by farmers 
during the transition period, the Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) organize various capacity-
building and extension activities. These include Ex-Trainees Sammelans, scientists’ visits 
to farmers ’ fields, diagnostic visits, and the provision of timely advisories on diverse 
agricultural issues. 
During 2024–25, the KVKs organized 1,293 Ex -Trainees Sammelans, involving 24,652 
ex-trainees. In addition, 75,441 scientists ’ visits were made to the fields of 6,17,754 
farmers, while 33,388 diagnostic visits were conducted to address field -level problems. 

66 
 
Moreover, KVKs provided 2,71,619 advisories to farmers on various aspects such as 
weather, pests and diseases, markets, and other relevant issues. 
To strengthen digital agricultural extension, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR), in collabo ration with the Digital India Corporation of the Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology (MeitY), has developed Kisan Sarathi  - a digital platform 
designed to empower farmers across India. Kisan Sarathi enables farmers to directly 
interact with agricultural scientists and KVK experts through mobile and web-based tools, 
receiving real -time, location -specific, and need -based advisories related to crops, 
livestock, fisheries, and allied sectors. Supporting multiple Indian languages, the platform 
promotes smart and digital agriculture, facilitating informed decision -making to enhance 
productivity, profitability, and sustainability. Presently, 2.75 crore farmers are registered 
on the Kisan Sarathi portal and are availing its benefits. 
Furthermore, ICAR is collaborating with several private sector partners such as Amazon, 
Bayer, Dhanuka, Krishi Jagaran, and Common Service Centers (CSCs) to enhance the 
outreach of KVKs and ensure wider dissemination of agricultural research outputs. 
KVKs are also developi ng a cadre of Community Resource Persons and Champion 
Farmers, whose services are utilized in the dissemination of innovations and the 
promotion of improved agricultural practices at the grassroots level. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

67 
 
CHAPTER III 
 Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government’s replies 
 
NIL 
  

68 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 5) 
 
Support Mechanism and Incentives for Organic Farming Transition 
The Committee observe that the Ministry has taken several commendable steps 
to support farmers transitioning from conventional to organic farming, such as the 
Paramparagat Krishi  Vikas Yojana (PKVY), the Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development for the North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER), the PM -PRANAM scheme, 
and the Financial Assistance through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) scheme. While these 
initiatives have yielded positive result s, the Committee feel that a more robust and 
expanded support system is required to make the shift from conventional to organic 
farming more feasible and sustainable for farmers, particularly during the critical transition 
period. The current financial support of ₹31,500 to ₹46,500 per hectare over three years, 
although a step in the right direction, might not be sufficient to fully alleviate the financial 
strain farmers experience during the first three to four years, a period in which yields tend 
to be lower and the economic burden heavier. 
To address this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry must increase the 
direct financial incentives under DBT for organic inputs and consider extending the 
support period beyond the current three years. This extend ed financial security will help 
ensure that farmers remain economically stable throughout the transition period. 
Moreover, to further strengthen market linkages, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry invest in improving local marketing channels, enhanc e digital outreach, and 
establish premium pricing for organic products to make them more attractive to 
consumers and help farmers secure better returns for their produce. Strengthening 
platforms like the Jaivik Kheti portal, which has already benefited over 6.22 lakh farmers, 
would be an important step in this direction. The Committee also recommend reviewing 
and increasing the current subsidy of ₹1,500 per metric ton (MT) under the Market 
Development Assistance (MDA) scheme to ensure that small and margina l farmers also 
benefit from this support. 
The Committee are also of the view that the PM-PRANAM scheme, which provides 
50% of fertilizer subsidy savings to states that reduce chemical fertilizer use, should adopt 
a performance -based grants incentive struct ure. This would offer increased grants to 
states that make significant and sustained reductions in chemical fertilizer use, motivating 
a stronger shift toward sustainable farming practices. These performance -based grants 
should be allocated to capacity bui lding, developing organic farming infrastructure, and 

69 
 
creating local organic markets. The Committee believe that this strategy will not only 
accelerate the adoption of organic farming but also promote long -term soil health, 
environmental sustainability, and economic stability for farming communities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Organic farming is being promoted through Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) in 
all the States/UTs except North Eastern States and Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) for the North Eastern States. Both 
schemes stress on end -to-end support to farmers engaged in orga nic farming i.e. from 
production to processing, certification and marketing. Primary focus of the schemes is to 
form organic clusters, with preference to small and marginal farmers, to create a supply 
chain. Both the schemes are implemented through States /UT Governments.  
Under PKVY, assistance of Rs. 31,500 per ha in 3 years is provided for promotion of 
organic farming. Out of this, assistance of Rs. 15,000 per ha is provided to farmers 
through Direct Benefit Transfer for on - farm /off –farm organic input s including organic 
compost. Financial assistance of Rs. 4,500/ha in 3 years is provided for marketing, 
packaging, branding, value addition etc. Rs. 3,000/ha for 3 years is provided for 
certification and residue analysis. Assistance is also provided @Rs. 9 ,000/ha in 3 years 
for training, awareness & capacity building. 
Under MOVCDNER, assistance of Rs. 46,500 per ha in 3 years is provided for creation 
of Farmers Producer Organization, support to farmers for organic inputs etc. Out of this, 
assistance @ Rs. 3 2500 per ha is provided to farmers for off -farm /on –farm organic 
inputs under the scheme including Rs. 15,000 as Direct Benefit Transfer to the farmers. 
Financial assistance of Rs 10000 per ha in 3 years is provided for activities of Internal 
Control System (ICS) management, training and certification [National Programme for 
Organic Production (NPOP)]. Financial assistance of Rs 4000 per ha in 3 years is 
provided for value chain marketing at state level. 
All 8 NER states have established dedicated organic  agencies to implement organic 
farming initiatives: 
State Organic Agency 
Manipur MoMA 
Mizoram MoM 
Assam ASOMA 
Meghalaya MEGNOLIA 
Tripura TSOFDA 

70 
 
State Organic Agency 
Sikkim SOFDA 
Nagaland NagaOrganic 
Arunachal Pradesh APAMB 
 
Support Mechanism and Incentives for Organic Farming Transition – Actions 
 Manipur (MoMA): Implemented organic value chain projects across key districts and 
facilitated marketing through dedicated organic outlets and e-commerce platforms. 
 Meghalaya (MEGNOLIA): Magnolia has planned to bring 24,000 hec tares of land 
under organic certification, with an additional 8,000 hectares in the conversion phase 
for organic pineapple and turmeric cultivation, and facilitated institutional linkages for 
FPOs. 
 Tripura (TSOFDA): Tripura is actively promoting organic fa rming through various 
initiatives, including the development of Bio-Villages and enabled aggregation of tribal 
FPOs and facilitated organic supply of its scented rice & pineapple to national buyers. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 6) 
 
Sikkim Model of Organic Farming 
The Committee acknowledge the success of the Sikkim model, which highlights 
the potential of organic farming when supported by comprehensive strategies focused on 
increasing yields, reducing costs, improving market access, and secu ring better pricing 
for organic produce. Notable successes of this model include stable productivity, 
improved soil health, and a shift towards high -value crops like cardamom, ginger, 
turmeric, and oranges. The emergence of "Organic Tourism" has also creat ed new 
income opportunities for farmers. However, challenges such as high labour costs, difficult 
terrain, limited market access, and the shortage of essential organic inputs, particularly 
bio-fertilizers, continue to hinder profitability. The scarcity of quality bio-fertilizers remains 
a significant concern, as it affects both productivity and the long -term sustainability of 
organic farming. 
To overcome these challenges and replicate the Sikkim model to other regions, the 
Committee recommend that the Minis try should enhance financial support for organic 
inputs, certification, and infrastructure development under schemes like the Mission 
Organic Value Chain Development for the North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER). The 
Ministry should focus on subsidizing labor -intensive processes and addressing the 
shortage of bio -fertilizers. They should also provide logistical support to overcome the 
challenges posed by difficult terrain, ensuring more efficient and reliable supply chains. 

71 
 
In addition, the Committee also recomme nd the establishment of local bio -fertilizer 
production units to ensure a consistent and affordable supply of organic inputs. This would 
reduce reliance on external sources and help lower overall farming costs. The Ministry 
should also focus on strengtheni ng market linkages, both online and offline, and create 
dedicated organic retail outlets in urban centers to improve market access and ensure 
fair pricing for organic produce. To formalize fair pricing, the Committee recommend that 
the existing 20–30% premium for organic products be institutionalized through a system 
of minimum support prices (MSP) for key organic crops, ensuring that farmers are 
adequately compensated for their efforts. 
The Committee feel that eco -tourism is a valuable opportunity to suppo rt organic 
farming by giving farmers extra income. Adding organic farm visits to tourism packages 
could attract tourists, both local and international, and raise awareness about organic 
farming. This would help farmers earn more money and create greater de mand for 
organic products. The Committee are of the view that linking farming with tourism, organic 
farming can gain more recognition and benefit both farmers and the local community. 
Reply of the Government 
While Sikkim remains the only fully certified or ganic state, several NER states have 
initiated similar organic zone -based approaches and are gradually implementing 
certification and area expansion models inspired by Sikkim. 
 
Observations / Recommendations (Para No. 16) 
 
Standardization of Service Conditions across all KVKs 
The Committee note that the service conditions of KVK employees are determined 
by the respective employer/host organizations as per the approved KVK Scheme by the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for a period of five years (or Plan period) 
through the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The ICAR serves as the nodal 
agency for the implementation of the KVK Scheme. The guidelines of the KVK Scheme 
are strictly implemented as per the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and  the 
sanction order issued by ICAR, in compliance with the Rules and Bye-Laws of ICAR. 
The Committee further note that ICAR does not directly pay the salary and 
allowances of KVK employees. There is no employer -employee relationship between 
ICAR and the em ployees of non -ICAR KVKs. The limited connection is that the host 
organizations, other than ICAR, which are the actual employers of KVK employees in 
non-ICAR KVKs, pay the salaries and allowances through the grant-in-aid received from 
ICAR, as per the terms of the MoU, the sanction order, and the guidelines under the KVK 
Scheme and Government of India Rules. 

72 
 
The Committee expressed serious concerns about the lack of standardization in 
the service conditions and operational guidelines across Krishi Vigyan Ke ndras (KVKs) 
due to the varying host organizations. This inconsistency in service conditions has led to 
disparities in employee benefits and operational procedures, which, if left unaddressed, 
could negatively impact the morale and effectiveness of KVK emp loyees. The service 
conditions for employees in ICAR KVKs differ from those in non-ICAR KVKs, creating an 
unequal work environment. The Ministry, during their oral submissions, have also assured 
the Committee that the issue of disparities in service condit ions among KVKs is being 
actively addressed, and necessary corrective measures are being incorporated.  
The Committee are of the view that the disparities between the service conditions 
and benefits offered to employees of ICAR and non-ICAR KVKs have created a significant 
divide, leading to potential dissatisfaction and a decrease in employee morale. These 
discrepancies have the potential to hinder the productivity and success of KVKs across 
the country. The absence of uniformity in employee benefits, staff  roles, promotion 
policies, and other critical aspects reflects a lack of coherence in the operation of the KVK 
Scheme. This inconsistency not only affects employee satisfaction but also raises 
concerns about the overall efficiency of KVKs in fulfilling their objectives. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must urgently address 
these disparities and establish standardized service conditions across all KVKs. To 
resolve this issue, the Committee recommend revising the terms of the MoU govern ing 
non-ICAR KVKs, particularly those hosted by State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) and 
other organizations. These revisions should ensure that service conditions and benefits 
are brought in line with those provided to ICAR KVK employees. SAUs should extend the 
same benefits to KVK employees as those provided to state government employees, and 
other host organizations should be required to provide same service conditions 
accordingly. The Committee also recommend that the uniformity in service conditions be 
made a mandatory pre -condition for any host organization to receive grant -in-aid from 
ICAR. The Committee desire that the Ministry should take swift and decisive action to 
create a fair, consistent, and cohesive working environment for all KVK employees across 
the country. 
Reply of the Government 
At the time of establishment of a KVK, a MoU is signed between the ICAR and the Host 
Organisations. As per this MoU, the staff of the KVK are the employees of the respective 
Host Organisations. This has been rei terated in the Council. Circular no. Agri. Extn. 
1/2/2015/AE. -I dated 17.06.2015 which says that “as per the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU)/Agreement signed between the ICAR and the host institutions, all 
staff of KVK shall be borne on the establishmen t of grantee (host institutions) only. The 
administrative control over the staff employed under the scheme, therefore, shall vest in 

73 
 
the host institution. The ICAR is liable to pay only the salary in respect of office staff 
required for running the scheme and the cost of approved recurring and non -recurring 
items as per the pattern of financial assistance approved by the Government of India. All 
the service conditions including recruitment, appointment etc. of the staff of the KVK shall 
be regulated as per the relevant rules and regulation of the host institutions subject to the 
terms and conditions provided in the MoU/ Agreement. It is therefore categorically stated 
that the staff of the KVK functioning under SAUs, CAUs, NGOs, CUs, Deemed 
Universities, PSUs, OEI are not the employees of ICAR. They are the employees of the 
respective host institutions”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
 
CHAPTER V 
Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
3 August, 2026              
12 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
                      DR. SANJAY JAISWAL  
                               CHAIRPERSON 
                COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
 
 
 
 
 
  

75 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 6th Report of the Committee on Estimates (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 19 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. No. 1,2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,17,18,19) 
16 
 Percentage of total recommendations  84.21% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(NIL) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
   00 
 
 
   00 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(SI. No. 5, 6 & 16) 
Percentage of total recommendations   
   03 
 
 
 15.79% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
(NIL) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
   00 
 
 
   00 
 
 
 