4 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
Progress of Amrit Bharat Station Scheme 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 35th 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  

FOURTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES  
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
Progress of Amrit Bharat Station Scheme 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 35th 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Estimates] 
 
(Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
......... December 2024/........ Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
 

     CONTENTS          Page No. 
 
      
Composition of the Committee on Estimates (2024-25)          (ii) 
 
Introduction           (iii) 
      
             
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee on Estimates held on 
16.12.2024 
 
28 
II. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 35 th Report of 
 the Committee on Estimates (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I Report  1 
CHAPTER-II    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government         
14 
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply 
22 
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government’s replies have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
23 
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply 
of Government is still awaited 
27 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2024-25) 
1.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiwal- Chairperson 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banjerjee 
5.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
6.  Shri Charanjit Singh Channi 
7.  Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
8.  Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
9.  Ms. Iqra Choudhary 
10.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
11.  Shri Sudheer Gupta 
12.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
13.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
14.  Shri Naveen Jindal 
15.  Shri Jugal Kishore 
16.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
17.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
18.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
19.  Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
20.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
21.  Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
22.  Shri Y.S. Avinash Reddy 
23.  Shri Pratap Rudy 
24.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
25.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
26.  Kumari Selja 
27.  Dr. Bhola Singh 
28.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
 
  

iii 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  Lalkithang Director 
3. Dr. (Smt.) Sheetal Kapoor  Under Secretary 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
            I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Estimates (2024 -25) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Fourth Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the 35 th Report of the Committee (2023 -24) on the subject ‘Progress of Amrit Bharat 
Station Scheme’. 
 
2.  The 35th Report of the Committee on Estimates (2023 -24) was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 6 th February, 2024. The Government furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in the 35 th Report on 5 th August, 2024. The 
draft report was considered and approved on 16th December, 2024 by the Committee. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 35th Report of the Committee on Estimates is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
16 December, 2024 
Agrahayana 25, 1946(Saka) 
 
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL 
CHAIRPERSON 
COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES 
  
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Progress of Amrit Bharat Station Scheme” 
pertaining to the Ministry of Railways.  
2.       The Thirty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 06 .02.2024. It contained 
12 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect to all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry 
of Railways. 
 
3. Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report hav e 
broadly been categorized as under:-   
  
(i)       Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation Para No 2,5,6,7,8,9,10,11 and 12 
    
      Total: 09 
(Chapter-II) 
  
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the  Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
Recommendation NIL         
       Total: 00 
(Chapter-III)  
  
(iii)     Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s replies 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation   Para No 1, 3 and 4       
        Total:03 
(Chapter-IV) 
  
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited:  
   Recommendation NIL              
   Total: 00 
(Chapter-V) 
  
 

2 
 
4.       The Committee desire that  Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them 
within six months of the presentation of the Report to the House. 
 
5.       The Committee will now deal with the Obs ervations/Recommendations which 
require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
 Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 1) 
 
Need For Dedicated Budget 
6. The Committee in their Thirty Fifth Report, recommended as under: - 
 “The allocation for development and maintenance of stations including for ABSS 
are generally funded under plan Head -53 “consumer amenities”. The Committee note 
that Ministry of Railways do not have an earmarked budget allocation for ABSS 
specifically but ut ilizes one for the Plan Head -53. The Committee further observe that 
the expenditure, under Customer Amenities, as per data furnished by Ministry of 
Railways, is at a very low pace in almost all Zones which indicates slow progress of 
upgradation work. The C ommittee are of the view that while embarking on the journey 
of modernization and upgradation of the station, Ministry of Railways should have 
created a sub -head under Plan Head -53 so as not only to make demarcation clear but 
also to map the pace of utilization/surplus-in a given year. In view of this, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to create a Sub -head for ABSS along with allocation to each zone 
earmarked explicitly in a bit to ensure balanced development/up -gradation of railway 
stations across the countr y. As the scheme of ABSS is in its first phase itself, the 
Committee strongly feel that Ministry can allocate the funds for the scheme exclusively 
with strict timelines for physical progress of work, which would enable the Ministry to 
evaluate allocation vis-à-vis its utilization zone-wise.” 
7. The Ministry of Railways have in their Action Taken Reply, submitted as under: 
“In regard to the Committee’s observation regarding slow progress of 
upgradation work under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, it is important to note that 
there have been significant developments since the preparation of the 
observation/recommendations of th e committee. Initially, there were 1309 railway 

3 
 
stations identified for development under this scheme.  However, the current number of 
identified stations has increased to 1324. Out of 1324 stations, tenders have been 
awarded for 1178 stations and works are in progress.  The remaining 146 stations are in 
different stages of master planning and tendering.  The initial period for stations is 
generally taken for preliminary works like master planning, design/drawings and 
enabling works to commence. Hence the p hysical progress is sometimes not very 
prominently visible in some cases at initial stages. The scheme is steadily gaining 
momentum and progressing towards its targeted goals. 
 
As regard to create a Sub -Head for Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, it is submitted  
that expenditure under PH -53-Customer Amenities over last 3 years and Budget outlay 
for 2024-25 (Budgetary Sources) is indicated below:- 
(₹ in crores) 
Actual 2020-21 2582.92 
Actual 2021-22 1995.75 
Actual 2022-23 2159.40 
Actual 2023-24 (Prov.) 8121.73 
BE 2024-25 15510.75 
 Ministry of Railways has conventionally followed the Plan Head wise budget 
allocation process to ensure wholesome development of various customer amenities 
which has worked satisfactorily so far.  Railway follows standard nomenclature for the 
Heads and subheads for diffrent activities. 
 Thus, creating a separate sub -head to capture the expenditure booked for Amrit 
Bharat Station Scheme works for identical activities is not required. 
Further, Development/redevelopment/upgradation of Railway Stations is complex 
in nature involving safety of passengers & trains and requires various statutory 
clearances such as fire clearance, heritage, tree cutting, air -port clearance etc. The 
progress also gets affected due to brown field related challenges su ch as shifting of 
utilities, (involving water/sewage lines, optical fibre cables, gas pipe lines, power/signal 
cables etc.,) infringements, operation of trains without hindering passenger movement, 
speed restrictions due to works carried out in close proximity of high voltage power lines 

4 
 
etc. and these factors affect the completion time. Therefore, no time frame can be 
indicated at this stage.” 
 
8.  The Committee in their original report have observed that allocations and 
maintenance of stations including f or Amrit Bharat Station Scheme (ABSS) are 
funded under Plan Head - 53 "Customer Amenities", and that there is no 
earmarked budgetary allocation for ABSS. The Committee had also observed that 
as per the data provided by the Ministry, the expenditure incurred under 
'Customer Amenities' is at a very low pace in most Railway Zones indicating slow 
progress of upgradation work. The Committee had, therefore, urged the Ministry 
of Railways to create a dedicated 'sub -head' under Plan Head 53 (Customer 
Amenities) and allocate funds exclusively for ABSS with strict timelines to ensure 
clear demarcation of funds, effective tracking of expenditure and balanced 
upgradation of stations nationwide. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken 
reply have submitted that the current system of budget allocation under Plan 
Head 53 - Customer Amenities has been satisfactory so far, and that creating a 
separate sub -head for ABSS is not necessary. They have also highlighted the 
challenges associated with s tation redevelopment which have impacted the pace 
of physical progress and emphasized that no fixed timeline could be provided a t 
this stage. The Committee do  not accept the reply provided by the Ministry and 
reiterate their earlier recommendation to estab lish a separate sub -head for ABSS 
under Plan Head -53 to enhance transparency and allow for more effective 
tracking of funds and progress. The Committee, while acknowledging the 
challenges faced by the Ministry with regard to slow progress of upgradation 
works, reiterate the need for clearer and more realistic timelines for each phase of 
the project to ensure accountability. The Committee find the claim of the Ministry 
that 'no time frame can be indicated at this stage' as concerning, especially given 
the su bstantial budgetary a llocation for “Consumer Amenities” in the last four 
years (Rs.15510.7 crore for Financial Y ear 2024 -25). The Committee desire that 
the Ministry take the recommendation and observation of the Committee with the 
seriousness it deserves a s it would help them in achieving the goals of station 

5 
 
modernization and also address concerns over slow progress of fund utilization. 
The Committee would await the action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 2) 
 
Robust selection of Stations 
9. The Committee, in their Thirty Fifth Report, recommended as under :- 
“The up -gradation under ABSS has been planned for a total of 1309 Railway 
Stations wherein foundation laying has been done for a total 508 Railway Stations. In 
response to the query of the Committee regarding criteria for selection of stations, 
Ministry of Railways has submitted that selection of stations is done based on proposals 
received from Zonal Railways, stations located in major cities and towns.  .Proposals / 
suggestions for improvement of railway stations are periodically received from general 
public, local bodies, State Governments, public representatives etc., and action are 
taken subject to feasibility. However, no compendium of the same is maintained by 
them.  Further, Ministry of Railways in one of their internal communications had 
instructed Zo nal Railways to identify/select stations based on “ suggestion of a 
committee comprising Sr DEN/Co, Sr DCM and Sr DFM with the approval of DRM, and 
as per the instructions given by Railway Board from time to time ”. Taking cognizance of 
the dynamics of selec tion of stations under ABSS, the Committee hold that any 
Committee looking into selection of stations but merely comprising of railways officials 
can’t serve the purpose. They feel that a robust selection criteria along with a multi -
faceted Committee compr ising of different stakeholders from the same zone should be 
made to deliberate and decide the stations to be upgraded under ABSS. The 
Committee feel that the Ministry can evolve and implement a robust selection process 
by involving different stakeholders with effect from the next phase of the scheme.”    
10. The Ministry of Railways have in their Action Taken Reply, submitted as under: 
“Ministry of Railways has a robust selection process for inclusion of stations 
under Amrit Bharat Station scheme.  The pro cess involves deliberations at the 
Divisional level, Zonal Headquarter level and finally at the level of the Railway Board in 
the Ministry of Railways. The process involves appropriate consultations with the 

6 
 
stakeholders and the various inputs received from general public, local bodies, State 
Governments and public  representatives are suitably incorporated in the planning as 
per feasibility, requirements etc.” 
11.   The Committee in their Report observed that the selection of railway 
stations for upgrad ation under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme (ABSS) lacked a 
comprehensive and inclusive approach. Noting that the selection was primarily 
driven by p roposals from Railways comprising of  railway officials, with little 
involvement of external stakeholders, the C ommittee had recommended that a 
more robust, selection process should be establish ed involving a multi -faceted 
committee that includes stake holders from the  local zone. The Ministry of 
Railways, in th eir Action Taken Reply have asse rted that a ‘robust sele ction 
process’ is already in place and the process including del iberations at multiple 
level-divisional, zonal, headquarters and prima rily at the Railway Board. The 
Ministry also submitted that consultations with stakeholders, including the 
general public,  local bodies , state government and public representatives, and 
inputs received from them are incorporated into the planning process. The 
Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s submission that a selection process for 
stations under the scheme, involving del iberations at multiple levels within the  
Railway hierarchy and other stakeholders is in place. However, the Committee are 
of  the view that  the response given by the Ministry still places significant weight 
on internal Railway deliberations. According ly, the Committee reiterate their  
earlier recommendation that a mor e inclusive and transparent approach be 
adapted for station selection and encourage more active consultation with 
stakeholders. The Committee strongly urge  the Ministry to implement this 
approach for the next phase of the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme to make the 
selection process more comprehensive and participatory.  The Committee also 
desire to be apprised about the details on how inputs from external stakeholders 
are collected, evaluated and in corporated into the decision -making process, 
including zone -wise list of those stations identified/selected by Ministry on the 
basis of inputs/suggestions received from local bodies, general public and public 
representatives.  

7 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 3) 
Need for inter-se priority 
12. Noting the lack of well laid down criteria for selection of Stations for upgradation, 
under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme (ABSS), the Committee in this Thirty Fifth 
Report have recommended as under:- 
“During the examination of the subject, the Ministry has informed that under 
ABSS, the stations are identified and communicated to them by the zonal Railways for 
up-gradation. Also, there is no priority fixed as to the segregation of Stati ons under 
different phases. The Committee further note that in some States, there are more 
stations to be upgraded in first phase than other smaller states. The Committee are of 
the strong view that Ministry should urge the zonal Railways to identify the S tations to 
be upgraded under ABSS on the basis of laid down criteria for inclusion in each phase. 
The Committee feel that, since zonal Railways are better equipped with the knowledge 
of developmental needs of each Station and its potential expansion into a  city centre in 
long run, it is the onus of zonal Railways to categorize Stations for up -gradation on the 
basis of priority/sequencing assigned.” 
 
13. The Ministry of Railways have in their Action Taken Reply, submitted as under: 
“Upgradation/development/redevelopment of stations on Indian Railways is a 
continuous and on -going process and works in this regard are undertaken as per 
requirement, subject to inter -se priority and availability of funds. However, priority for 
upgradation/development/redevelopment of stations is accorded to higher category of 
station over lower category of station while sanctioning and executing the work. The 
spatial distribution of stations across States is reasonably uniform and the Scheme 
covers all States and Union Territories with Rail connectivity.”  
 
14.   Expressing concern over the  lack of clea r priority system for the selection  
of stations under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme (ABSS) and the fact that the 
selection p rocess is not based on any fixed criteria, the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry of Railways urge zonal Railways to identify and 

8 
 
categorize stations for upgradation  based on clea r set of criteria, ensuring that 
stations are appropriately prioritized and sequence d for development. The 
Committee emphasiz ed that zonal Railways, due to their local knowledge and 
understanding of regional needs, should be responsible for this process. The 
Committee had also raised their concerns about the uneven distribution of 
stations selected for the first phase of upgrada tion across states. The Ministry of 
Railways in their action taken reply have submitted that, station upgradation is an 
ongoing process subject to inter -se priority and fund availability with priority 
given to higher -category stations. The Committee do not  accept the reply of the 
Ministry as it does not provide clear criteria or systematic approach for 
categorizing and sequencing stations for upgradation, nor it addresses the 
Committee’s concerns about the distribution of stations across states or the  
involvement of zonal railways in setting criteria for selection. The reply of 
Ministry is general and lack clarity on how its priority system is being applied in 
practice. It is also not clear how the Ministry ensure equitable treatment of states 
of different s izes and developmental needs. The Committee, therefore, reiterate  
their earlier recommendation and desire that they may be  apprised about the 
concrete action taken in this regard. The Committ ee would also like to be 
apprised about details of higher category and lower category station on the basis 
of which priority for upgradation of stations is accorded.  
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 4) 
 
 Benchmarking up-gradation 
15. In their recommendation contained in the Thirty Fifth Report, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
“During the deliberations, the Ministry has informed the Committee that they are 
yet to issue a “standardization document” for the up -gradation for stations identified 
under ABSS. The Committee are of the view that as more than 7000 stations are 
spread across the country, benchmark should be  set up  for toilets, platforms, ticket 
counters etc. and  installation of fittings therein. The Committee, therefore, strongly hold 
that ABSS being a pan India scheme, the up -gradation should ali gn stations in a 

9 
 
uniform way and, therefore, urge the Ministry to issue comprehensive guidelines in the 
matters of standardization of fittings, CCTVs, WiFi, Station access, sound systems, 
furniture etc.   to ensure uniformity across the stations.” 
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have submitted as under: 
“Standardisation and benchmarking is a continuous and on -going process on 
Indian Railways. Ministry of Railways has issued model documents for Engineering 
Construction and Procureme nt contracts, General Conditions of Contract, Project 
Management Supervision, Technical and General consultants, guidelines for standard 
signages etc. Further, Ministry of Railways also has a specialized organisation viz, 
Research Design and Standards Orga nisation (RDSO) for issue of standards and 
specifications from time to time.   Recently RDSO has issued designs for foot over 
bridges, OHE arrangements etc. Schedule of rates and corresponding specifications 
have also been issued to Zonal Railways.”  
 
17.  Noting that the Ministry of Railways was yet to issue a ‘standardization 
document’ for the upgradation of stations identified under Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme (ABSS), the Committee in their Thirty Fifth Report had recommended that 
the Ministry should issue a comprehensive set of guidelines to ensure uniformity 
across the country. Given the vast number of stations involved, the Committee 
emphasized the need for standaradized benchmarks for essential station facilities 
such as toilets, platforms, ticket coun ters, CCTVs, Wifi, Station access, sound 
systems and furniture. The Committee felt that, as Amrit Bharat Station Scheme 
is a pan -India initiative, it was crucial for the Ministry to align the upgrades in a 
consistent and standaradized manner across all sta tions. The Ministry, in their 
Action Taken Reply, have submitted that standardization is an ongoing process 
within Indian Railways, and various model documents and guidelines have 
already been issued covering engineering construction, procurement contracts , 
project management and other areas. The Ministry also pointed out the role of the 
Research Design and Standards Organisation (RDSO) in issuing standards and 
specifications, Overhead Equipments (OHE) arrangement etc. While the 

10 
 
Committee acknowledges the o ngoing standardization processes and the 
involvement of RDSO in issuing guidelines and specification, the Committee do 
not accept the reply furnished by the Ministry as it does not explicitly address the 
need for a comprehensive station -specific standardiz ation document for Amrit 
Bharat Station Scheme. The recommendation of the Committee was for unified 
and comprehensive set of guidelines that would apply across all stations covered 
in the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, covering a wide range of station facilities in a 
uniform manner. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and desire to be apprised about specific actions taken on the issue raised by the 
Committee. The Committee also desire to be apprised about how the existing 
RDSO sta ndards will be applied to the stations under ABSS, ensuring that all 
relevant aspects are covered in this upgradation process and that the stations 
meet the required standards. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 6) 
Special Clause for “Certain Stations” 
18. In their Thirty Fifth Report, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that Ministry of Railways have not identified/classified the 
Railway Stations based on their eccentric locations and all stations are clubbed together 
for carrying out up -gradation. However, there are Stations, in every State, which stand 
out either for their location or geographical proximity to international borders or tourist 
places or archaeological sites etc. The Committee feel that certain stations like Bett iah, 
Jainagar, Attari etc. (the Gateways of Nepal &Pakistan) and PeeliBanga close to “Kali 
Banga”, one of the civilizations of Mohenjo -Daro) are railway stations accessed by a 
large number of passengers including tourists and hence, require greater attenti on for 
up-gradation in comparison to other stations of these States for coverage under ABSS. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to issue guideline to all Zonal Railways to 
identify Stations based on their strategic locations, archeological importa nce, tourist 
visit, proximity to the borders, etc so that such stations get covered in the next Phase of 
ABSS. The Committee would like to be  apprised of the steps taken in this regard.” 
19. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have submitted as under: 

11 
 
“Upgradation/modernization of stations on Indian Railways is a continuous and 
on-going process and works in this regard are undertaken as per requirement, inter -se 
priority, availability of funds etc. and local and strategic relevance is an important part of 
this process. Further, historical, tourist, geographical and strategic importance etc. are 
considered in the master planning, design, layouts etc. The footfalls in the stations are 
considered for the design of layout and deciding the scale of the amenities.” 
 
20.  The Committee, in their Thirty Fifth Report, had recommended that the 
Ministry of Railways issue specific guidelines to all  zonal Railways to prioritize 
stations for upgradation based on their st rategic locations, historical or  
archaeological significance, tourist importance and proximity to international 
borders. The Committee identified stations like Bettiah, Jainagar, Attari and Peeli 
Banga, which serve as gateways to neighbouring countries or are located near 
important touri st or archaeological sites and emphasized that such stations 
require greater attention in the upgradation proc ess under the Amrit  Bharat 
Station Scheme (ABSS). The Committee had urged the Ministry to ensure that 
these strategically important stations are given priority in the next phase of ABSS 
and requested an update  on the steps taken in this regard. The Ministry of 
Railways, in their action taken reply , have submitted that the upgradation of 
stations is an ongoing process, taking into account local and s trategic relevance. 
The Ministry also submitted that factors such as historical, geographical and 
strategic importance are considered i n the planning , design and layout of 
stations. While the Ministry has acknowledged the importance of these  factors in 
the planning process, t he Committee are not satisfied with the response of the 
Ministry as it did not specifically address the Committee’s concern about issuing 
explicit guidelines  for prioritizing stations with unique strategic, historical or 
tourist signif icance. The Ministry did not outline clea r steps or measures for 
prioritizing  stations like Bettiah, Jainagar, Attari and Peeli Banga fo r upgradation 
under ABSS in future phases. The Committee reiterate their recommendation and 
once again urge the Ministry to develop guidelines and issue the same  to all 
zonal Railways to ensure that those stations identified by the Committee and 

12 
 
others stations , which have national and international significance, are given 
priority in the next phase of ABSS. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
provide an update on the steps taken and the progress made in this regard, 
ensuring that strategically important stations are adequately covered in the 
scheme’s development process.   
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 7) 
Provision for Maintenance 
21. The Committee in their Thirty Fifth Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the scheme of ABSS has provisions for development 
of stations on a continuous basis with long -term approach but the maintenance contract 
for “up-gradations” so carried out under the scheme is not being done. The Committee 
observe that as ABSS is a comprehensive scheme designed for years, hence 
maintenance should form an integral part of the scheme. The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should revise the Guidelines as required and include maintenance as 
an integral part of the up-gradation contract for a minimum period of five years.” 
22. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways submitted as under: 
“Ministry of Railways is exploring various options of improving maintenance of 
stations including specialized agencies for different tasks, general operation and 
maintenance etc. Ministry of Railways has various provisions for defect liability period in 
its contracts. However, inclusion of maintenance as integral part of construction projects 
for a long period might have a repercussion of too conservative bidding and the best 
value for money may not be achieved. However, the suggestion of the Committee is  
noted for further exploration.” 
 
23.  The recommendation made by the Committee in their Thirty -Fifth Report 
had envisaged that the maintenance of upgraded stations under the Amrit Bharat 
Station Scheme (ABSS) should be made an integral part of the up -gradation 
contracts for a minimum period of five years. In their reply, the Ministry of 
Railways acknowledged the recommendation of the Committee and indicated that 
they are exploring various options and specialized agencies. The Ministry also 

13 
 
raised concerns that  inclu ding long-term maintenance in contracts might lead to 
conservative bidding, potentially impacting value for money. The Committee are 
not convinced with the response of the Ministry, as the primary issue raised by 
the Committee remains unaddressed. The Ministry also mentions the existence of 
a defect liability period but does not explain how it could ensure comprehensive 
maintenance post-construction, which the Committee highlighted. The Committee 
reiterate their original recommendation and urge the Ministry  to revise the 
guidelines to incorporate “maintenance” as a mandatory component of the up -
gradation contract for a minimum period of five years, ensuring that the long term 
performance and quality of stations upgraded under ABSS do not get 
compromised. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard.  
 
  

14 
 
Chapter – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 2) 
 
 Robust selection of Stations 
The up -gradation under  ABSS has been planned for a total of 1309 Railway 
Stations wherein foundation laying has been done for a total 508 Railway Stations. In 
response to the query of the Committee regarding criteria for selection of stations, 
Ministry of Railways has submitted that selection of stations is done based on proposals 
received from Zonal Railways, stations located in major cities and towns.  .Proposals / 
suggestions for improvement of railway stations are periodically received from general 
public, local bodies, State Governments, public representatives etc., and action are 
taken subject to feasibility. However, no compendium of the same is maintained by 
them.  Further, Ministry of Railways in one of their internal communications had 
instructed Zonal Railways to identif y/select stations based on “ suggestion of a 
committee comprising Sr DEN/Co, Sr DCM and Sr DFM with the approval of DRM, and 
as per the instructions given by Railway Board from time to time ”. Taking cognizance of 
the dynamics of selection of stations under ABSS, the Committee hold that any 
Committee looking into selection of stations but merely comprising of railways officials 
can’t serve the purpose. They feel that a robust selection criteria along with a multi -
faceted Committee comprising of different stak eholders from the same zone should be 
made to deliberate and decide the stations to be upgraded under ABSS. The 
Committee feel that the Ministry can evolve and implement a robust selection process 
by involving different stakeholders with effect from the next phase of the scheme.    
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways has a robust selection process for inclusion of stations under 
Amrit Bharat Station scheme.  The process involves deliberations at the Divisional level, 
Zonal Headquarter level and finally at the level of the Railway Board in the Minis try of 
Railways. The process involves appropriate consultations with the stakeholders and the 

15 
 
various inputs received from general public, local bodies, State Governments and public  
representatives are suitably incorporated in the planning as per feasibil ity, requirements 
etc. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 5) 
 Need to rope in architectures 
India is a country of varied cultures where cultures/values dominate every region 
in it s own unique way. The Committee are of the view that as up -gradations under 
ABSS are to stay for years to come, the scheme needs a visionary approach in design 
based on technically sound parameters of architecture so that  with these designs at  
the stations will reverberate the set of cultures of the region. When the Ministry utilizes 
the services of specialists or a pool of architects, they can provide the design based on 
the culture of the region, which may be ensured in the structure of the railway stat ions.  
The Committee are also of the view that standardization of design and placement of 
foot-over bridges, escalators, lift and staircase accordingly, will enable Zonal Railways 
to have uniformity in its implementation. The Committee, therefore, urge the  Ministry to 
come up with certain standardized models of designs which can be mapped to stations 
on the basis of size and footfalls.   
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of railway has issued detailed instructions for planning and executing 
development of stations under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme. The facilities at stations 
are based on category of stations keeping into consideration the size and footfall.   There 
are guidelines available for hiring Technical consultants to assist with Master Planning 
and the development of tender schemes. Divisions have been granted permission to 
handle specific tasks internally if they possess the necessary expertise. This is bei ng 
done by taking inputs from the Architects hired for the purpose both at planning, 
design/drawing and implementation stage. They are mandated to adopt local themes 
and conditions. However, standard model of design is not possible to adopt as each 
station is different which requires a customized approach. Therefore,  Divisions have the 

16 
 
authority to adapt the execution plan to suit their local requirements. The aim is to 
suitably incorporate the local requirements into the design for each station. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 6) 
 Special Clause for “Certain Stations” 
The Committee note that Ministry of Railways have not identified/classified the 
Railway Stations based on their eccentric locations and all stations are clubbed together 
for carrying ou t up-gradation. However, there are Stations, in every State, which stand 
out either for their location or geographical proximity to international borders or tourist 
places or archaeological sites etc. The Committee feel that certain stations like Bettiah, 
Jainagar, Attari etc. (the Gateways of Nepal &Pakistan) and Peeli Banga close to “Kali 
Banga”, one of the civilizations of Mohenjo -Daro) are railway stations accessed by a 
large number of passengers including tourists and hence, require greater attention f or 
up-gradation in comparison to other stations of these States for coverage under ABSS. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to issue guideline to all Zonal Railways to 
identify Stations based on their strategic locations, archeological importance,  tourist 
visit, proximity to the borders, etc so that such stations get covered in the next Phase of 
ABSS. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard 
Reply of the Government 
Upgradation/modernization of stations on Indian Railways is a continuous and on-
going process and works in this regard are undertaken as per requirement, inter -se 
priority, availability of funds etc. and local and strategic relevance is an important part of 
this process. 
  Further, historical, tourist, geo graphical and strategic importance etc. are 
considered in the master planning, design, layouts etc. The footfalls in the stations are 
considered for the design of layout and deciding the scale of the amenities.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

17 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 7) 
Provision for Maintenance 
The Committee note that the scheme of ABSS has provisions for development of 
stations on a continuous basis with long -term approach but the maintenance contract 
for “up-gradations” so carried out under the scheme is not being done. The Committee 
observe that as ABSS is a comprehensive scheme designed for years, hence 
maintenance should form an integral part of the scheme. The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should revise the Guidelines  as required and  include maintenance as 
an integral part of the up-gradation contract for a minimum period of  five years. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways is exploring various options of improving maintenance of 
stations including specialised agencies for different tasks, general operation and 
maintenance etc. Ministry of Railways has various provisions for defect liability period in 
its contracts. However, inclusion of maintenance as integral part of construction projects 
for a long period might have a repercussion of too conservative bidding and the best 
value for money may not be achieved. However, the suggestion of the Committee is 
noted for further exploration.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 8) 
 Periodic Review/ Midterm Analysis/Vetting 
The Committee observe certain architectural anomalies in the “model of 
upgraded stations” as proposed under the ABSS. The Committee find that any “up -
gradation model” proposed is not  being sent for scrutiny/feasibility study by an 
independent expert/body who may analyze the proposals on different parameters and 
suggest improvement/change, if any,  before going underway. Taking note of the fact 
that ABSS is a up -gradation scheme with a horizon of 40 to 60 years, encapsulating 
multi model integration with im provisation of passenger amenities, the Committee urge 
the Ministry to include provision of midterm analysis/periodic review/vetting, so that 

18 
 
chances of anomaly can be ruled out altogether of proposed up -gradation either at 
concept or execution stage. If required, the guidelines may be revised to this effect. 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways has an inbuilt mechanism to check the quality of works, which is 
being performed at various levels by concerned Railway officials as per guidelines laid 
down in the Indian Railways Engineering Code, Indian Railways Works Manual and 
Specification etc. and the works meeting the laid down standards only are accepted. 
Regular assessments of the progress of work at each station are being carried 
out at Division/HQ and Ministry levels. Bottlenecks, if present, are being addressed 
during these meetings with amicable solutions approved by the Board.  
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 9) 
 Stakeholders View 
Ministry of Railways has submitted that guidelines of ABSS do h ave provision for 
involving local bodies while taking up up -gradation work, however, there is no provision 
for involving local MPs. The Committee note that people’s representatives are the first 
stakeholders in the process of improving passenger amenities and hence their views 
should be incorporated while finalizing up -gradation/modernization plan for any public 
service. The Committee urge the Ministry that an expert group for every zone should be 
constituted wherein elected representatives, technical exper ts, representatives of local 
bodies and other stakeholders should be involved. The Committee, therefore,  urge the 
Ministry to revise ABSS’s guidelines to that extent as it would go a long way in sorting 
out issues related to requirement of land for access  road, parking lots, local support etc. 
in upgradation of stations and peripheral work.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways has a robust selection process for inclusion of stations under 
Amrit Bharat Station scheme.   The selection  is based on req uirement of a particular 
station, priority, availability of funds etc and after obtaining valuable inputs from different 
stakeholders of that region.  

19 
 
  Local bodies are consulted for access roads, local support etc. wherever 
required. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 10) 
Need for Automation 
The Scheme of ABSS aims at rebuilding/ improvement/ augmentation of railway 
station to provide an iconic design and structure with modern state -of-the-art facilities 
with a 40 -60 year horizon. Though the Ministry of Railways has informed that there 
would not be any change in existing system of platform tickets even after the roll out of 
ABSS, the Committee feel that the Ministry should consider the change in system of 
platform tickets from physical to online wherever  implementable as online platform 
tickets with an inbuilt automation to swipe/scan  QR code  for easy access would be 
economical and time saving at one hand.  On the other, there would be no 
unauthorized/unpaid entry to the stations/platforms besides better safety. The 
Committee, therefore,  urg e the Ministry to make sincere efforts in imbibing technology 
with different aspects/up-gradations under ABSS, wherever implementable.  
Reply of the Government 
The facility to book platform tickets online through UTS on mobile app is already 
available. 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 11) 
 Awareness on “One Station One Product” 
The Ministry of Railways has submitted that allotment of ‘Kiosks’  under ‘One 
Station One Product’ is being done to applicants for a specific period on rotational basis 
and  the  applications are directly submitted at the stations.  The Committee note that 
due to this specific period  application, several other artisans willing to participate might 
not be aware of the theme of “Kiosks” & “One Station one Product” and hence would not 
be able to apply. The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry of Railways should 
make sincere efforts to popularize “One Station One Product” drive to the masses, 
especially in the rural areas so that even far located artisans can get a chance to 
showcase their product reflecting their uniqueness in arts/crafts.  For this, a dedicated 

20 
 
hyperlink on its website may be given where any organization/individual can apply for 
allotment of kiosks and get the benefit thereof. The Committee would like to be app rised 
of the steps in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 “One Station One Product” (OSOP) scheme aims to provide enhanced opportunities to 
local artisans, potters, weavers, craftsmen etc, through provision of sales outlets at 
Railway Stations across the country. 
  To fulfill the objective of the scheme, individual artisans, weavers, craftsmen, etc 
associated with registered micro enterprises on the Udyam portal of Ministry of MSME 
and NGOs, PM Vishwakarma scheme, Social Organizations, State Govt. bodies,  etc 
have been allowed to participate in this scheme. In addition to this, individual artisans, 
weavers, craftsmen enrolled/registered with central agencies such as TRIFED (Tribal 
Cooperative Marketing Development Federation of India Limited), NHDC (Nation al 
Handloom Development Corporation), KVIC (Khadi and Village Industries Commission), 
registered Self Help Groups with PMEGP (Prime Minister’s Employment Generation 
Programme) etc. have also been considered under this scheme. 
 All efforts are being made to  ensure that the benefits of this scheme reach the 
target groups i.e., those at the bottom of the pyramid. To achieve this objective, various 
public outreach measures including advertising in newspapers, social media, public 
announcements, press notificati ons, interactions with artisans, outreach programmes at 
Panchayat, Block and District levels, etc. have been adopted by the Railway Authorities 
for maximum proliferation of OSOP scheme at the ground level. 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 12) 
Allied facilities such as Medical/Para-Medical facility 
The Committee are of the considered view that as the Ministry has embarked on 
the journey of upgrading the passenger amenities on the railway’s physical 
infrastructure, it becomes  imperative  that other allied facilities also get upgraded for a 
passenger who uses railway as a mode of transport. The Committee urge the Ministry  
to identify all such related facilities and  issue guidelines to all railway zones to ensure 

21 
 
that all such facilities including  medical/para -medical, are made available to the 
passengers on every platform/train.  
  Reply of the Government 
The need and extent of providing medical facilities at railway stations and in trains was 
examined by Hon’ble Supreme Court. In compliance of the orders, a committee of 
experts was constituted at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi. As 
recommended by Committee of experts, instructions have been issued to provide a 
Medical Box containing life saving medicines, equipment, oxygen cylinder etc. at all 
Railway stations and passeng er carrying trains. Front line staff i.e Train Ticket 
Examiner, Train Guards/Superintendents, Station Master etc. are trained in rendering 
First Aid. Regular refresher courses are conducted for such staff. List of near -by 
hospitals and doctors along with t heir contact numbers is available at all Railway 
Stations. Ambulance services of Railways, State Government/Private Hospitals and 
ambulance service providers are utilized to transport the injured/sick passengers to the 
hospitals/doctor’s clinics. 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER III 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
NIL 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 1) 
 
 Need For Dedicated Budget 
 The allocation for development and maintenance of stations including for ABSS 
are generally funded under plan Head -53 “consumer amenities”. The Committee note 
that Ministry of Railways do not have an earmarked budget allocation for ABSS 
specifically but utilizes one for the Plan Head -53. The Committee further observe that 
the expenditure, under Customer Amenities, as per data furnished by Ministry of 
Railways, is at a very low pace in almost all Zones which indicates slow progress of 
upgradation work. The Committee are of the view that while embarking on the journey 
of modernization and upgradation of the station, Ministry of Railways should have 
created a sub -head under Plan Head -53 so as not only to m ake demarcation clear but 
also to map the pace of utilization/surplus-in a given year. In view of this, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to create a Sub -head for ABSS along with allocation to each zone 
earmarked explicitly in a bit to ensure balanced develo pment/up-gradation of railway 
stations across the country. As the scheme of ABSS is in its first phase itself, the 
Committee strongly feel that Ministry can allocate the funds for the scheme exclusively 
with strict timelines for physical progress of work, which would enable the Ministry to 
evaluate allocation vis-à-vis its utilization zone-wise. 
Reply of the Government 
In regard to the Committee’s observation regarding slow progress of upgradation 
work under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, it is important to note that there have 
been significant developments since the preparation of the 
observation/recommendations of the committee. Initially, there were 1309 railway 
stations identified for development under this scheme.  However, the current number of 
identified stations has increased to 1324. Out of 1324 stations, tenders have been 
awarded for 1178 stations and works are in progress.  The remaining 146 stations are in 

24 
 
different stages of master planning and tendering.  The initial period for stations is 
generally taken for preliminary works like master planning, design/drawings and 
enabling works to commence. Hence the physical progress is sometimes not very 
prominently visible in some cases at initial stages. The scheme is steadily gaining 
momentum and progressing towards its targeted goals. 
As regard to create a Sub -Head for Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, it is submitted 
that expenditure under PH -53-Customer Amenities over last 3 years and Budget outlay 
for 2024-25 (Budgetary Sources) is indicated below:- 
                            (₹ in crores) 
Actual 2020-21 2582.92 
Actual 2021-22 1995.75 
Actual 2022-23 2159.40 
Actual 2023-24 (Prov.) 8121.73 
BE 2024-25 15510.75 
 Ministry of Railways has conventionally followed the Plan Head wise budget 
allocation process  to ensure wholesome development of various customer amenities 
which has worked satisfactorily so far.  Railway follows standard nomenclature for the 
Heads and subheads for diffrent activities. 
 Thus, creating a separate sub -head to capture the expenditure  booked for Amrit 
Bharat Station Scheme works for identical activities is not required. 
Further, Development/redevelopment/upgradation of Railway Stations is complex 
in nature involving safety of passengers & trains and requires various statutory 
clearances such as fire clearance, heritage, tree cutting, air -port clearance etc. The 
progress also gets affected due to brown field related challenges such as shifting of 
utilities, (involving water/sewage lines, optical fibre cables, gas pipe lines, power/signal  
cables etc.,) infringements, operation of trains without hindering passenger movement, 
speed restrictions due to works carried out in close proximity of high voltage power lines 
etc. and these factors affect the completion time. Therefore, no time frame c an be 
indicated at this stage. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 08 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

25 
 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No 3) 
Need for inter-se priority 
During the examination of the subject, the Ministry has informed that under 
ABSS, the stations are identified and communicated to them by the zonal Railways for 
up-gradation. Also, there is no priority fixed as to the segregation of Stations under 
different phases. The Committee further note that in some States, there are more 
stations to be upgraded in first phase than other smaller states. The Committee are of 
the strong view that Ministry should urge the zonal Railways to identify the Stations to 
be upgraded under ABSS on the basis of laid down criteria for inclusion in each phase. 
The Committee feel that, since zonal Railways are better equipped with the knowledge 
of developmental needs of each Station and its potential expansion into a city centre in 
long run, it is the onus of zonal Railways to categorize Stations for up -gradation on the 
basis of priority/sequencing assigned. 
Reply of the Government 
Upgradation/development/redevelopment of stations on Indian Railways is a 
continuous and on -going process and works in this regard are undertaken as per 
requirement, subject to inter -se priority and availability of funds. However, priority for 
upgradation/development/redevelopment of stations is accorded to higher category of 
station over lower category of station while sanctioning and executing the work. The 
spatial distribution of stations across States is reasonably uniform and the Scheme 
covers all States and Union Territories with Rail connectivity.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Observations/Recommendations(Para No. 4) 
 
 Benchmarking up-gradation 
During the deliberations, the Ministry has informed the Committee that they are 
yet to issue a “standardization document” for the up -gradation for stations identified 
under ABSS. The Committee are of the view that as more than 7000 stations are 

26 
 
spread acro ss the country, benchmark should be  set up  for toilets, platforms, ticket 
counters etc. and  installation of fittings therein. The Committee, therefore, strongly hold 
that ABSS being a pan India scheme, the up -gradation should align stations in a 
uniform way and, therefore, urge the Ministry to issue comprehensive guidelines in the 
matters of standardization of fittings, CCTVs, WiFi, Station access, sound systems, 
furniture etc.   to ensure uniformity across the stations. 
Reply of the Government 
Standardisation and benchmarking is a continuous and on -going process on 
Indian Railways. Ministry of Railways has issued model documents for Engineering 
Construction and Procurement contracts, General Conditions of Contract, Project 
Management Supervision, Technic al and General consultants, guidelines for standard 
signages etc. Further, Ministry of Railways also has a specialised organisation viz, 
Research Design and Standards Organisation (RDSO) for issue of standards and 
specifications from time to time.   Recently RDSO has issued designs for foot over 
bridges, OHE arrangements etc. Schedule of rates and corresponding specifications 
have also been issued to Zonal Railways.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
16 December, 2024              
Agrahayana 25, 1946 (Saka) 
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL, 
  CHAIRPERSON, 
COMMITTEE ON  ESTIMATES 
 
 
  

28 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON ESTIMATES (2024-2025) 
  
The Committee sat on Monday, the 16th December, 2024 from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in 
Room No. ‘52-B’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  - Chairperson  
  Members 
2.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3.  Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
4.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
5.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
6.  Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
7.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
9.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
10.  Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
13.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
15.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16.  Kumari Selja 
17.  Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
18.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
19.  Shri Ve Vaithilingam 
 
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
                                   1.      Shri Y. M. Kandpal      -      Joint Secretary 
                             2.      Shri Lalkithang           -       Director 
                              

29 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the following 
draft Reports: 
(i) XXX    XXX     XXX 
(ii) XXX    XXX     XXX  
(iii) XXX    XXX     XXX 
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 35th Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on the subject “Progress of Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme”; and 
 
(v) XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
 
3.        Thereafter, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without any modifications. 
The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and 
present the same to Lok Sabha. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
  

30 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
APPENDIX II 
Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Thirty-Fifth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  
(i) Total number of recommendations/observations 12 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
 the Government: 
(SI. NO. 2,5,6,7,8,9,10,11 and 12) 
09 
 Percentage of total recommendations 75% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: 
(NIL) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
00 
 
 
00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government’s 
replies have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(SI. No. 1,3 and 4) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
03 
 
 
    25% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of 
Government is still awaited: 
(NIL) 
Percentage of total recommendations 
00 
 
 
00% 
 
 